
      
         
            
            
            A Rich
Store-houſe or Treaſury
for the Diſeaſed.
            
               Wherein, are many approued
Medicines for diuers and ſundry
Diſeaſes, which haue been long hidden,
and not come to light before
this time.
            Now ſet foorth for the great benefit
and comfort of the poorer ſort of people
that are not of abillitie to go
to the Phyſitions.
            Rebus aduerſis conſtans.
            AT LONDON,
Printed for Thomas Purfoot,
and Raph Blower, Ann. 1596.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the Right Honorable
Thomas Skinner, Lord Mayor
of the City of London.
            
               IT hath been, and is (right
Honorable) a lawdable
cuſtome in this Citie, that
at the entring of any Lord
Maior into his Office, not
onely his familiar friends
and acquaintance, but alſo
of euery fraternitie, ſome ſelected men should
preſent his Lordship with one gift or other:
Whereby they do not only congratulate with
him his late increaſe of honor; but alſo thoſe
preſents are as tokens, or earneſt pence of
their yeelding dutie and obedience vnto his
Lordship, during his office. In like ſort, I my
ſelfe (though one of the pooreſt, yet a Citizen,
and none of the leaſt, in humble obedience,
and dutifull good meaning towardes your
honor, am imboldened to preſent your Lordship

with this Booke, intituled, A rich Storehouſe
or Treaſury for the Diſeaſed, A Booke
(Right Honorable) very neceſſary, and conuenient
to bee vſed of the poorer ſorte of
people (for the preſeruation of their health)
that are not of abilitie to go to the Phiſitions,
and I aſſuring my ſelfe, that your Lordship
will vouchſafe to be a protector of the poore
peoples profit and good, both in health and
wealth, (the ſame comming by chaunce into
my hands) haue thought it good to publish it
vnder your honorable name, whoſe Authority
may beſt countenance the ſame, and
whoſe curteous admittance shall be a ſufficient
guerdon of my dutifull good meaning
heerein. If my worth were greater, my dutie
would shew greater: in the meane time,
as it is, it is bound to your Lordship,
To whome I wish long life,
ſtill lengthened with
all happineſſe.
            
               Your Lordſhips in all duty
Raph Blower.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ DIVERS & SVNDRYE GOOD
Inſtructions & Rules for all ſuch as are the
true Practiſers of Phiſick and Chirurgerie, which are
very meete and conuenient to be obſerued and knowne
vnto them, And alſo concerning Bloud-letting, Purging,
and of the vſe and commoditie that often times
commeth thereof.
            
               
                  FOR AS MVCH as Health is profitable
and pleaſant to all men, ſince
that all men do continually wiſh, and
pray eyther for the reſtitution or cō
               tinuance
of the ſame, and how that
it is the propertie of nature, onely to
fighte and ſtriue againſt diſeaſes,
and alſo that the Phiſition is but the
miniſter and ſeruant of nature, either
to apply ſuch thinges to her, as may be vſed to diſtroy the diſeaſe
withall, or els by taking away the greateſt parte of the
ſame matter which cauſeth and mainteyneth the ſickenes,
and therefore it is very meete & neceſſarie for euery Phiſition,
before ſuch time as he doe miniſter any thinge at all to the ſick
perſon, diligentlie to learne, and to ſearch out perfectly the
principall cauſe of the diſeaſe, in the which 
                  ••
               be be ignorant,
it is more by good fortune, then by any cunning or ſkill, that he
doe euer cure any diſeaſe at all. For how is it poſſible to helpe
nature, with that which ſhe hath neede of 
                  •
                except it be firſt
knowne, what ſhe needeth, which none can knowe, except the
cauſe of the diſeaſe be firſt manifeſtly knowne vnto him, ſoe y•
he may miniſter thinges directly, contrary to the cauſe of the
ſame diſeaſe. And therefore I doe moſt greatelye lamente

the ignorance of the common ſort of People, who for the moſte
parte are perſwaded, that one medicine is ſufficient for one
diſeaſe, & not regarding that one diſeaſe may come of ſundrye
cauſes, and therefore it doth neceſſarilie require diuers medicines,
as for example, weaknes of the ſtomacke (that it cannot
digeſt well, or that it hath no good Appetite) is one diſeaſe,
which neuertheleſſe may come a dozen ſundrie waies at the
leaſt. Therefore the cure of it cannot be alwaies with one medicine,
As if weakenes of the ſtomacke, doe come of a weake
diſtempure of it ſelfe onely, then it muſt of neceſſitie be made
hotte by ſome meanes, but if heate be the cauſe of weakenes,
then it muſt needes be cooled, Likewiſe you muſt moiſten drynes,
and drye moiſture, But if the weakenes doe come of ſome
ſuperfluous humour that both abound, which hath flowed into
the ſtomacke, or hath been there ingendred, then muſt that ill
humour, of neceſſitie be purged out, eyther by a vomite, or els
a purgation with a meeke medicine for it, And if it be fleame,
then with a medicine that expelleth ſleame, But if choller be
abounding there: then muſt it be ſuch a medicine as doth purg
choller, And likewiſe for melancholy, a meete Purgation
muſt be vſed to expell the humour, But if the imbecillitie of the
ſtomacke, be cauſed by a diſtillation and Rewme, that falleth
out of the head into it, then is the cure to be remedied in y• head,
and not in the ſtomacke, Likewiſe if diſtempure of the liuer
or ſpleene, doe weaken the ſtomacke, then the cure conſiſteth
in the healing of thoſe members, and not in miniſtring of any
thinge for the ſtomacke.
            Therefore let no man thinke it ſufficient for the Phiſition,
if he knowe that a man hath ſuch a diſeaſe, as the Ague, the
Collick, the Flix, or ſuch other like &c. that then hee maye
ſtraighte way (if he be ſkillfull) miniſter a medicine meet for
it▪ Noe not foe, but he muſt firſt ſearch by all meanes poſſible,
the very cauſe it ſelfe of ye diſeaſe, which many ignorant People
doe perſwade themſelues, that a ſkilfull Phiſition may doe

in all diſeaſes, by the onely ſight & inſpection of the Vrine, But
alas they are altogether deceiued, and for to come to y• knowledg
of the cauſe of ſome inward diſeaſe, the Vrine profiteth nothing
at all, for in moſte inwarde diſeaſes of the bodye, there
ought as greate a regard to be had and taken to the Pulſes,
and to the diſpoſitions & ſtate of the Braine, of him that is ſick,
as there ſhould be had of the Vrine. Alſo the Egeſtions, Sweat,
Spettle, and other Excrements, are not to be neglegted, in ſoemuch,
that at ſome time they do declare y• cauſe of the diſeaſe,
and the ſtate thereof, when the Vrine doeth not ſhewe any
thinge at all.
            Likewiſe for example, in a Pluriſie, or an inflamation of the
Lunges, or in a Squinancie, or ſuch like, there is more to be
knowne by Spettle, then there is by Vrine.
            
            Alſo in a Laſke, or a bloudye Flixe, or in a Collicke, or Iliake,
there is more certaintie of Iudgment, to be geuen by Egeſtion
or Ordure, then there is by Vrine: Which thinges,
thoſe that are not altogether addicted to their owne fantaſies,
may eaſely by good reaſon, be perſwaded to credite, for Vrine
is nothing elſe, but the watrie and waſhie parte of the bloude,
for it is ſeperated from bloud in the Liuer, and ſucked from
thence into the Raines, from whence it diſtilleth downe into y•
               Bladder, and ſoe paſſeth foorth. Seeing therefore that Vrine
is the excrement that is ſeperated from y• bloud: there is good
cauſe why it ſhould ſhew the ſtate of the Liuer, & of the Bloud,
in all partes of the body, and it can alſo declare the ſtate of all
ſuch members as it paſſeth by, as of the Raines, the Bladder,
and ſuch like.
            But certainely in other diſeaſes that be out of the Vaines, &
be diſtant from the places, by which the Vrine paſſeth, there is
no certaine iudgment to be geuen by the Vrine vnleſſe the vehemencie
of the diſeaſe hath infected the bloud or the Liuer after
ſome ſort, Neuertheles ſuch is y• ignorāce of many people,
that they thinke him woorthye of noe eſtimation in Phiſicke,

which cannot at the firſt ſighte of the Vrine (although it hath
been carried xx. Miles) tel whether it be the water of a man
or a woman, and how the diſeaſe greeueth the patient better
then himſelfe, & alſo whether he ſhall liue or dye, what diſeaſe
ſoeuer it be, which thinges vndoubtedly in diuers diſeaſes are
impoſſible to be knowne by the onely ſight and inſpection of
the Vrine.
            
            Therefore it is very neceſſarie for him that will miniſter
Phiſicke, duly and rightfully to obſerue theſe 4. rules following
(That is to ſay) firſt to ſee the ſick Perſon, & to conferre
with him or her, which ſoeuer it be, for there is none that can
ſoe well declare any griefe (whatſoeuer it be) as he can that is
troubled therewith. Secondly to view and feele the Pulſes,
and to obſerue well the ſtate of them. Thirdlye to view very
diligently all the excrements, not onely the vrine, but alſo the
Spettle, Sweat and Ordure. Fourethlie and laſt of all, to haue
a reſpect to the place where the griefe is, and to conſider well
the accidents that doe ariſe thereof, not omitting to know the
former diet and trade of life, which the ſicke perſon hath vſed,
Theſe thinges then being diligentlie & ſeuerally marked, the
Phiſition may more certainly learne the chiefeſt cauſe of the
diſeaſe, the ſtrength thereof, and to what ende it will come
vnto, then by ſeeing the Vrine onely, and alſo by what meanes
he may miniſter a meete medicine for it, whereby the ſick perſon
may ſoone finde eaſe, and purchaſe vnto himſelfe exceading
greate fame.
            
               Thus haue I partely declared, what thinges oughte to be
knowne of euery Phiſition, that thereby he might withdraw, &
take awaye the fonde and fooliſh opinion, that a greate
number of people do deeme to be true, that is, that the ſight of
the Vrine is ſufficient ynough, for a cunning Phiſitiō, perfectlie
to know the diſeaſe of the ſicke, and the true cauſe thereof,
& to miniſter apt medicines for it. And now I ceaſe to ſpeake
any more hereof, but I will as briefly as I may entreate ſomwhat
of the vſe and benefit that doth ariſe & come of Purging,
               
and Bloud-letting, & I would wiſh all thoſe that do practiſe
the ſame, to be carefull thereof.
            
               Note alſo that if the bodye of a manne, doe abound with
humours, which are ready to oppreſſe nature, then whether
there be any ſicknes in the body preſent, by meanes of them, or
if there be but daunger of ſicknes, thoſe humours muſt be euacuat
out of the bodie, eyther by Bloud-letting, Purging, vomit,
Sweating Bathes, or elſe by ſome other kind of euacuation.
But I will ſpeake here onely of euacuation by Bloud-letting
and Purging, and firſt of all of Bloudletting.
            
            There be diuers thinges to be conſidered of, before Bloud-letting,
as the age of the patient, the complexion, the time of
the yeare, the region, the cuſtome, the ſtrength, and the vehemencie
of the diſeaſe.
            The age muſt be conſidered, becauſe Children vnder 14.
yeares of age, and old folke may not be let bloud, vnleſſe great
neceſſitie require it.
            The complexion is to be noted, becauſe a hote complexion
hath large vaines, and aboundeth with much bloud, and they
may therefore forbeare a good quantitie of bloud; But colde
complexions haue narrow vaines and litle bloud, and therfore
theire euacuation muſt be ſmall.
            The time of the yeare muſt be very well marked, that the
weather be not too hote nor too colde, and therefore the ſpring
time is the moſt apteſt time for bloud-letting, becauſe that
then it is temperate.
            The Region and Cuntrey, is to be ſpoken of, becauſe it is
to be noted, that if the Region be very hote, or elſe very colde,
it is not good to let bloud, but a temperate Region is moſte
meeteſt of all for it.
            Cuſtome is not to be neglected, for thereby we may knowe
that they that haue bene accuſtomed to bleede, may better
ſuffer bloud-letting, then thoſe that were neuer letten bloud
at any time before.
            The ſtrength of the Perſon muſt be regarded, for if there be

greate weakenes, then is it very daungerouſe to let bloude at
all, except great neceſſitie compelleth.
            Alſo the vehemencie of the diſeaſe is worthie to be marked:
for if it be a vehemente diſeaſe, then you muſt let bloud foorthwith,
if the former circumſtances will permit it.
            Theſe thinges being conſidered, if they will permit bloud-letting,
and if it be in a needefull cauſe, then it ſhalbe very neceſſarie
to knowe in what ſigne the Moone is in, for you muſte
take heed that ſhe be not in the ſigne that gouerneth that member,
wherein you intend to open the vaine, & alſo to forſee that
ſhee be in ſuch a ſigne, as is good to let bloude in.
            The vſes and commodities of bloud-letting, are theſe that
are here expreſſed.
            
               Firſt, This is a generall rule, that bloud-letting is a very
good remedie for all diſeaſes that be engendred of aboundance
flowing or eruption of bloud, as be chieflie the Feuers called
Sinochy.
            
            Alſo the Phreneſie, Squinancie, Pluriſie, Peripnewmony,
Opthalmie, and againſt all inflamatious, and impoſtumatiōs
engendred of bloude in the Lyuer, the Spleene, the Raines, the
Wombe, the Share, the Arme-holes, the Armes, the Legges:
and to conclude, in all inwarde or outwarde partes, whereſoeuer
the inflamation bee: bloud-letting is good for it, whether
it be now preſent; or that there be any danger, that it wil
ſhortely engender.
            Alſo Bloud-letting is good in Feuers, whether they be continuall
or intermittent, inſomuch that the obſtructions & ſtoppinges
of the Vaines, be cauſed of immoderate repletion of the
humoures.
            
               Note alſo that Bloud-letting doth emptie aud euacuat from
the bodie, all humours alike, as well the good as the bad.
            And therefore it is chieflie to be vſed, when there is to great
an ab
                  ••
               dance of bloude in the bodie & other humours, which
doe ſtraine the vaines, and that there is greate daunger & ieopardie
in breaking of ſome vaines, or the bruſing out of ſome

fluxe of bloude, or of choking, and to extinguiſh naturall heate.
And therefore in ſuch caſes, you muſt let bloud with all ſpead,
although the ſicknes be not already preſent.
            For by letting of bloud in due ſeaſon, the ſuperfluous fullnes
of the vaines, is brought into a meane ſtate againe, and the
paines that came of the fulnes and ſtretching of the veſſels, beeaſed:
And the heauines that was felte in the bodie, is cleane
taken away, and the bodie is lightened, and made more quick
and nimble, to doe all ſuch actions as nature hath ordeyned it
to doe. Alſo it cauſeth nature, to haue a larger ſcope, & a free
paſſage by opening & emptying of the ſtraight waies & paſſages,
of the vaines and Arteries.
            
            Laſt of all, if it be done in time, it preuenteth diuers and
ſundrie diſeaſes, into which the bodie was both apt and readie
to haue fallen into.
            Many more commodities might here be rehearſed as concerning
bloud-letting, which is done when neceſſitie requireth,
and as it ought to be done, but to conclude (omitting all
other) Note this for a generall rule, that bloud-letting is very
good againſt all kinde of diſeaſes, which be cauſed and engendred
of bloude, and not onely when the diſeaſes are preſent,
but alſo it is good letting of bloude, to preuent any ſuch diſeaſes,
if they be forſeene or feared, alwaies regarding that there
be none of theſe impediments aforeſaid, which doe prohibite &
forbid bloud-letting, except it be in great neceſſitie and extremitie,
for then as the common prouerbe is, Neceſſitas non habet
legem, that is: Neceſſitie hath noe lawe.
            Heere would I leaue of to ſpeake of bloud-letting, but that
there commeth into my minde, the common opinion of the ignorant
people, which doe certeinly beleeue, that if any perſon
be let Bloud one yeare, y• he muſt likewiſe be let bloude euery
yeare, or els he is in (I cannot tell) how great danger, which
fond opinion of theires (whence ſoeuer it ſprong at the firſt) is
noe more like to be true, then I ſhoulde ſay, when a man hath
a greate wounde by chaunce, in any part of his body, whereby

he loſeth much bloud, and that after it is healed, he muſt of
neceſſitie haue the like wounde againe the next yeare, to auoide
as much bloud, or els he is in daunger of greate ſicknes
or of death, Which opinion, if I my ſelfe did affirme it to be
true (although it be moſt falſe) yet I might vſe the like reaſō
and aucthoritie to defende it, that the common people doe vſe
for theires: for they can ſay nothing if they be aſked why they
thinke ſoe, bnt that they haue heard many ſay ſoe, Therefore
I would wiſh that noe man ſhould credite any longer this fond
and fooliſh opinion, being moſt falſe, vnleſſe he can ſhewe good
reaſon for it, which I ame very well aſſured of, noe man can
doe. Mary this I thinke, that like as bloud-letting is not good
againſt all diſeaſes, ſoe alſo it is not good in all perſons, but
onely in thoſe that will be content to vſe afterward a moderate
and conuenient diet.
            Thoſe therefore that doe abound with bloud, and will be let
bloud to preſerue themſelues, from the daunger of any diſeaſe,
which is like ſhortely to enſue and moleſt them, They muſt for
a long time after, be content to vſe a moderat and conuenient
diet, For thoſe that be vntemperat & gluttonous in meates, or
are great drinkers, & wine-bibbers, they doe not onely receiue
no commoditie at all by bloud-letting: but alſo often times,
they catch more hurt by it, then they ſhould haue had without
it, for in 3. or 4. daies ſpace after, they fill & ſtuffe themſelues
with more raw iuices and humours (by meanes of vnmeaſuſurable
diet) then they had before, and often times they do dye
through connulcion.
            And therefore note that there is ſuch force and vertue in a
moderate diet, to eſchue and decline diſeaſes, that without the
due obſeruation of it, bloud-letting is to noe purpoſe at all.
And therefore if the common ſaying of the people be true in any
body, that they muſt of neceſſitie be let bloud often, it is verie
true, but it is in ſuch as keepe an immoderat diet, preſently
after Bloud-letting, and therefore I do aduertiſe all men,
to beware of exceſſe in eating & drinking after bloud-letting.
            
            
               
               Note alſo y• after bloud-letting, none ought to walke very
faſt, or to runne, or to vſe any vehement exexciſe, but let him
be quiet and reſt himſelfe, vntill ſuch time as his ſpirites ſhall
be wel refreſhed and quieted againe.
            
               Note alſo, that no perſon being let blood, ought to ſleepe
immediatly after bloud-letting, but let him keepe himſelfe
both quiet and wakinge, and auoiding all contention and exerciſe
of body and minde, and about two houres after lettinge
of bloud, there may a litle foode be taken, but let it be ſuc
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
will make good iuice and nouriſh apace, and within 4. or 5.
houres after bloud-letting or ſome what afore, the patient may
be permitted to ſleepe, ſoe that it be prouided for, & taken heed
of, that he doe not turne himſelfe vpon that Arme, where the
vaine was opened, and let him alſo take good heede that he do
not looſen the band, and ſoe let the bloud flowe out againe, and
let him afterwardes vſe a ſparing diet, dayly increaſing it by
little and litle, vntill ſuch time as he be come to his accuſtomed
or ordinarie diet againe.
            
               And note that the morning is the moſt meeteſt time of all for
bloudletting,
when euery digeſtion is perfectly finiſhed, & the
ſuperfluities and excrements of ech of them fully auoided out,
which thinges of neceſſitie muſt be foreſeene, that they bee ſo,
Or at the leaſt in a time of great extremitie, the next apt time
to let blood in, is when the ſtomacke is ſomewhat emptie, and
that is about ſixe or eight houres after meate. Thus much I
haue entreated of as concerning blood-letting, and now I
am purpoſlie minded to ſpeake ſomewhat of the vſe and commodities
that come of Purging.
            
            
               Firſt it is to be vnderſtood, that euery kinde of Purgation,
hath that ſecret vertue and propertie in it ſelfe, that when it is
receiued into a mans body, and prouoked to exerciſe the vertue
that it hath by naturall heate labouring to digeſt it, then doth
it draw vnto it all ſuch humours, as it hath vertue and power
to Purge.
            
            And therefore a Purgation is an euacuation of vicious and

corrupt humours, which doe oftentimes trouble and moleſt y•
body, but not of all corrupt and bad humours alike.
            For euery Purging medicine, doth drawe vnto it ſelfe, one
peculier and proper humour (that is) eyther Hegme or choller,
or elſe melancholie or watery humours.
            And therefore thoſe perſons that be perfectlie in health,
ought not to take a Purgation, ſince they doe not abound with
corrupt humours, wherefore in thoſe, when the medicine find
                  •••
               
no ſuch ſuperfluous humours as it hath vertue to drawe,
it conſumeth and waſteth the bloud and the fleſh. And for that
cauſe, whole folkes are not purged by purgations, but rather
conſumed and waſted, for it is manyfeſt hereby, that Purgatiōs
be very daungerous to them that are in perfect health, which
thinge is teſtified alſo of Hippocrates in the 37. Aphoriſme, of
his ſecond booke, where he ſaieth after this ſort, Qui corpore
bene ſe habent hos purgare periculoſū eſt, (that is) it is dangerous
purging of thoſe that be in perfect health.
            Alſo becauſe euery purging medicine hath vertue to drawe
one peculier homour, there is good heede and care to be taken,
that ſuch a medicine be miniſtred as hath vertue to drawe out
the humour abounding, and none other, or elſe in ſtead of much
good, that of it ſelfe it would doe, if it were conueniently miniſtred:
it may contraryewiſe doe exceading great hurte, and
woorke many inconueniences to the body. And accordinge to
to the ſaying of Hipocrates in the laſt Aphoriſme of his firſte
book
                  •
               , in this maner. Si qualia oportet purgari purgentur, cō
                  fert,
et facile ferunt, ſi contra, difficulter, that is, yf ſuch things
be purged as ought to be, it profiteth, and may eaſily be ſuffered,
but if it be contrarywiſe, it hurteth and may ſcarcely bee
borne. Therefore there ought diligent care and heed to be taken
in the receiuing of a purgation, that it be miniſtred by a
ſkilfull Phiſition, that hath certainly found out what humour
it is that aboundeth. But alas the greateſt number of the cō
               mon
ſort of people, do, hould an opinion that if they may haue
a medicine for a little money, which will poruoke them often

to the ſtoole, what humour ſoeuer it be, and purgeth out, they
are ſafe ynough: howe be it, I would wiſh them hereafter alwaies
to haue in minde this ſaying of the moſt excellent Phiſition
Hipocrates in the xxxii. Aphoriſme of the firſt booke,
Deiectiones non multitudine ſunt eſtimandae, ſed ſi talia deijciantur,
qualia conueniunt, that is: Egeſtions are not to bee
eſteamed for their great quantitie, but if ſuch bad humours be
purged out as they ought to be (that is) ſuch vicious & corrupt
humours as doe abound and bee ſuperfluous in mans bodye,
then is the bodie quieted for a long time after, if it be dieted as
aforeſaid.
            There be diuers thinges chiefly to be conſidered of by euerye
Phiſition before ſuch time as he doe miniſter any Purgation
to the ſicke perſon: as the qualitie and quantitie of the humour,
the ſtrength of him or her that is ſicke, the age, the time
of the yeare, and laſtly the diſeaſe.
            The qualitie of the homour is greatly to be conſidered, that
thereby he may perfectly knowe what kinde of humour is to be
euacuate, & purged out, for it muſt be onely that which troubleth
the bodie, with ſuperfluous aboundance thereof.
            As if great aboundance of fleame doe moleſt and trouble the
bodie, then hee muſt of neceſſitie miniſter a medicine whiche
purgeth fleame, and ſo likewiſe for all other humours what ſoeuer
abounding in any part of the bodie.
            Alſo he that doth vndertake the miniſtring of any medicine,
ought to haue great reſpect to the ſtrength of the ſicke or diſeaſed
perſon: for if he be very weake and feeble, there ought
no purgation at all to be miniſtred vnto him, becauſe all maner
of purgations doe both weaken nature & diminiſh ſtrength,
and the ſtronger the ſicke perſon is, the more he is weakened
thereby. Let all men therefore beware of vehement & ſtrong
purgations, leaſt they put their liues in hazard & danger. By
the age of the Patient. the Phiſition is put in minde that children
and old men ought not to receiue any Purgations, except
maruailous great neceſſitie doe require it. The time of the

yeare is not to be neglected, for there be ſome times of the yeare
wherein Purgations ought not to be miniſtred, as in Sommer,
and eſpecially during the time of the Dogge daies, as they are
moſt commonly called, and alſo during all the time, that the
Sunne is in Leo, for then is nature burnt vp, and made ſoe
weake withall, that ſhe is not able to ſuffer the force and violence
of a Purgation, but the Spring time is the moſt meeteſt
and principaleſt time in all the yeare, for the taking of Purgations,
becauſe it is then temperate.
            Laſt of all, the Phiſition ought diligently, to behould & contemplate
the diſeaſe, that he knowing certainly what kind of
diſeaſe it is, may the more better finde out of what humour, it
is cauſed, As for example.
            
            
               Yf the Phiſition do perceiue y• diſeaſe to be a tertian Feuer,
ſtraightway he knoweth that it is cauſed of great aboundance
of choller, and therefore he muſt of neceſſitie miniſter a meete
medicine to purge choller, withall, and ſo likewiſe in all other
diſeaſes.
            
               Note likewiſe, that if there be none of the impediments aboue
named, a Purgation is good to be miniſtred to all ſuch as
haue aboundance of euill iuice or corrupt humours in the
body, for it draweth out all the bad humours that doe moleſt y•
body, and thereby doth reſtore it to his owne ſtate againe.
            But if a Purgatiō
                be raſhly miniſtred eyther to one that needeth
it not, or at an inconuenient time, or that it be ſuch a medicine,
as draweth no
                  •
                out the humour which then aboundeth,
or if the medicine be vehement and very ſtrong, it will ſurely
put the Patient in great daunger of his life.
            Theſe thinges therefore ought to be well taken heede of by
all menne, leſt they catch great hurt when they hope for ſome
great profite.
            
               But if a Purgation be diſcreetly miniſtred to him that hath
need of it in due time, and by an apt and meet medicine, which
is of that force and abillitie, to drawe out the abounding humours
in ſufficient quantitie, then doth the medicine purchaſe

moſt ſinguler great commodties to the body, for it euacuateth
and emptieth out all the chiefeſt cauſes of the diſeaſes and ſickneſſes,
eyther preſent or els to come, being ingendred of any
ſuperfluous or corrupt humour, as are moſt commonly Feuers,
tercians, quartaines, quotidians, or Fluxes, and are cauſed of rawe
humours or ſharpe choller, Dropſies, Goutes, Palſies, Litargies,
and diuers other &c.
            
               Note alſo that before a Purgation be miniſtred, there ought
a medicine to be taken, which ſhould prepare the body, & make
it apt to purge, and therefore it is called a preparatiue, it is
geuen for two cauſes, eyther to deuide, extenuat, & make them
groſſe and clammy humours, that they may be ready to flowe
out, when the medicine draweth them, or elſe it is geuen to open
and vnſtoppe the conduits & veſſels of the body, by which
the Purgation muſt drawe the ſuperfluous humour to it.
            And this is that which Hipocrates doth counſaile in the firſt
Aphoriſme of his ſecond booke, where he ſaith, Corpora cum
quiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   purgare voluerit, opportet fluuia facere, that is, when
any man will purge the body, he muſt make it flowing, by opening
and vnopening of the veſſels.
            The moſt meeteſt time of al to receiue a Purgation is in the
morning, for then are all the digeſtions perfectly finiſhed, and
the ſtomacke is without meate, There is alſo great heede to be
taken in what ſigne the moone is in, before ſuch time as any
Purgation be miniſtred, for ſome ſignes are very good for it, &
other ſome are euill, Therefore I would wiſh all ſuch as doe
take vpon them the miniſtring of any Purgation, to haue great
regard before they do miniſter it, of the ſicke perſon, the time,
and the place greeued, and alſo to marke wel all ſuch thinges
as are before rehearſed, leaſt that they doe more hurt thereby
in one day to ye ſicke perſon, then they are able to doe him good
in a whole yeare, and yet they may doe it of meere ſimplicite,
not knowing themſelues what they haue done, neyther are
they able to cure the ſame wound which they themſelues haue
made.
            
               
A Purgation muſt be taken hote, for ſoe it offendeth the
ſtomacke leaſt, and it will worke the ſooner.
            Alſo thoſe that are apt to vomite, and are not able to endure
the ſmell of the Purgation, let them ſtoppe their noſethrills, or
elſe let them ſmell to ſome odorifferous thinge, when they are
about to take it, and aſſoone as it is taken, it is good for the
Patient, to ſmell to a toſte of browne bread dipped in vineger,
and to applie warme clothes to the ſtomacke, and to waſh the
mouth preſently after that it is taken, with ſome odoriferous
wine, or els to chew ſome ſweete and pleaſant thing to take away
the bitter taſte or ſmell of the medicine, & by this meanes
vomiting ſhal be eſchewed.
            Likewiſe for the ſpace of one houre after that the Purgation
is taken, let the Patient ſit ſtill and keepe himſelfe quiet, and
without any ſleepe at all, that the ſtrength of the medicine may
paſſe into all partes of his body, but if the Purgation do worke
ſlowly, let him walke vp and downe for a good ſpace after, if he
can, and when it worketh, in any caſe there muſt be great care
taken, that the Patient do not ſleepe, for ſoe the operation of y•
medicine would be ſtopped.
            Alſo in the time of Purging immoderate heate and cold are
to be eſchewed, and therefore a very great fier, and the cold &
open ayre are both hurtefull, for the body muſt be kept in a tē
               perate
heate.
            After that the Purgation hath done workinge, the Patient
muſt be nouriſhed with a meane quantitie of ſome broth, that
will breede good iuice, and be eaſelie digeſted, and afterwards
by little & litle, returne to his accuſtomed diet againe.
            
               Thus haue I as brieflye as I could, declared the commodities
which doe come of bloud-letting and Purging, being wel
and duely miniſtred and vſed, and alſo of the diſcommodities
that will euſue both of bloud-letting and Purging if they be at
any time miſuſed, wiſhinge all men as they doe tender theire
health and liues, to beware of thoſe ignorant perſons, who doe
moſt commonly vſe to open but one kinde of vaine, for all maner

of diſeaſes, and doe occupie but one kinde of Purgation againſt
all humours, not conſidering at all, the ſtrength and
the age of the Patient, neyther the time, nor the chiefe cauſe
of the comminge of the diſeaſe whatſoeuer it bee, nor of any
other of the circumſtances afore named, but let them alwaies
ſeeke for the counſaile and aide of one that is
knowne to be ſkilfull in Phiſicke and Chirurgerie,
and is circumſpect in his doinges.
Who can conſider what neede they
haue, & what is moſt meete
to be miniſtred vnto
them for y• ſame
diſeaſe.
⸫
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Cap. 1. ¶An approued Medicine for an Ache
or ſwelling.
            
               TAKE Time, Lauender cotten,
Knotty Strawberies, of ech of thē
one handfull, then cut them and
beate them in a Morter, & when
you haue ſoe done, then take 4. or
5. Swallowes out of a Neſte, being
ripe, and beate thē in y• Morter
with the Hearbes, vutill you
cannot perceiue the feathers, and
then take halfe a pounde of freſh
Butter vnſalted, and mingle them altogether, and let them
ſtand for the ſpace of 24. houres, then ſeeth and ſtraine them
into a gally pot, or elſe into ſome earthen veſſell. And ſo vſe
it twice a day, in anointing of the place where the griefe is,
and in fiue or sixe dayes it will be whole. This hath bene often
proued.
         
         
            Cap. 2. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE of Sage, & Rue, otherwiſe called hearb-grace,
of ech of them one pounde, and halfe a pound of wormwood,
and halfe a pound of Bay leaues, beate them altogether
in a Morter: then take three pounde of Sheepes
ſuet, and cut it very ſmale, and put it to the hearbes, then
put it into a Morter, and beat it with the hearbes, vntill y•
               ſuet cannot be perceiued: then take it out, and put thereto a

pottle of Sallet oyle, and ſoe worke them altogether with
your handes, vntill ſuch time as they be very well ſteeped in
the Oyle, then keepe it cloſe in an earthen pot, for the ſpace
of eight or nine daies, then ſeethe it in a braſſe Pot, with a
ſofte Fire, vntill y• ſtrength of the hearbes be gone (to trie
it, take a ſpoonefull of it and put it into a linnen cloth, and ſo
ſtraine it, and if there be any iuice left in it, then is it not
boyled to his perfection, but if you find none therein, then is
it well boyled, And thus muſt you prooue all good oyntments
made with hearbes.) then ſtraine it and annoint the
place grieued, often therewith.
         
         
            Cap. 3. ¶A preſent Remedy for an ould Ache.
            TAke very ſtrong Aquauitae, and two ſpoonefuls of the
water of Arſtmart, and annoint the place where the
Ache is, euery day two or three times, and it will ſpedily
heale it.
         
         
            Cap. 4. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAke Aquacompoſita and the oyle of Netes feet luke
warme, and annoint the Patient vpon the place of the
griefe, laying warme clothes thereon.
         
         
            Cap. 5. ¶A Medicine for an Ache, or ſhrinking
of any Sinewes.
            
            TAke the tenderings of Roſemary, & marſh mallowes,
by as euen portions as you can geſſe, and gather your
hearbes when they be drie, from any raine and dewe:
Beate them in a morter very ſmall, then take Maie butter
well clarified, and put it to the hearbes, and mingle it in a
veſſell, and then let it ſtand foure daies, then ſet it ouer the
fier and let it ſeeth till all the ſtrength of the hearbs be gone,
then take a little of it in a ſpoone, and let it drop vpon your
naſle, and if it be greene as the Emerauld, it is perfect, and
then put it into an earthen pot, and when you will vſe it, you
muſt warme it.
         
         
            Cap. 6. ¶A perfect Medicine for an ache
or Sciatica.
            TAKE Oyle of Netes feete and Aqua compoſita, and
mingle them both together, and ſet the Patient anoint
the place where the paine is: then let him take Wooll
which is newly plucked from the Sheepes backe, and let
him lay it thereupon, & let him wrappe it well with warme
clothes.
         
         
            Cap. 7. ¶A preſent remedie for all maner of aches,
and bruſes in the bones.
            TAKE a good quātitie of Wall-woort, and a certaine
quantitie of Balme, and Smallege, and ſtampe them,
then take a pounde of May butter, & temper them very
well together, then make them into round balles, and let
them lye for the ſpace of eight daies after, and then ſtampe

them againe as you did before, then take it and frye it, and
ſtraine it, and put it into an earthen pot, and ſoe vſe it, and
this will helpe the bruiſe if it bee neuer ſoe blacke. Probatum
eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 8. ¶An approued Medicine for an ache
or ſwellinge.
            TAKE the flowers of Camamill, and Roſe-leaues,
of ech of them a like quantitie, and ſeeth them in white
wine, and make a plaiſter thereof, and let it be laide as
hote as may be ſuffered to the place greeued, and this will
both eaſe the paine, and aſſwage the ſwelling. D. Bartlet.
            
         
         
            Cap. 9. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE a ſmale quantitie, of oyle de ay, & Aquauitae,
and mingle them both together, and let the Patient anoint
the place which is greeued and it helpeth him.
         
         
            Cap. 10. ¶A ſoueraigne Medicine for an ache in the
ſhoulder or elſe where.
            TAKE Reiſons of the ſunne, and Figges, of ech of them
a like quantitie, and halfe as much Muſtard-ſeede, and
beate them very ſmale, then take it and grinde it in a
Muſtard Querne, with the beſt white wine vineger y• may
he had, then take it and ſpread it vpon a lambes ſkinne, and

lay it to the place greeued, and this will by gods grace help
you, Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 11. ¶A precious Ointement or Oyle, for all maner
of Aches or ſwellinges in the Armes, Knees,
Legges, or Feete, being taken with Colde.
            TAKE a gallon of Sallet Oyle, and of Sage, Lauender,
Southernewood, Wormewood, and Camamill,
ech of them a like quantitie, then cut the Hearbes very
ſmale, and put them into the Oyle, & ſtirre it well together,
& let them ſtand in a baſon of Latten, or elſe ſome other like
thing, for the ſpace of a full moneth (but you muſt be ſure to
put as many Hearbes into the Oyle, as will make it very
thicke) and ſoe let it ſtand vntill the hearbes be rotten, then
make a fire of coales, and ſet the baſon thereon, and ſo let it
boyle for the ſpace of three houres, or ſome what more, then
take it from the fire, and let it coole ſomewhat, and when
you ſee that it is but Milke warme or ſomewhat better, then
take a bag made of ſtronge Canues, & with a ſtaffe, ſtraine
out all the ſubſtance, as cleane as you may, and then put it
into a glaſſe or gallypot, or elſe into ſome earthen veſſell, and
ſtoppe it very cloſe, and it will continue in his vertue very
longe. This is good for any Wounde or old bruſe, and alſo
for the ſhrinking of any Sinewes, and all maner of ſores.
            
         
         
            Cap. 12. ¶An Excellent good and approued Oyntement, for
all maner of Aches, Agues, Bruſes, Goutes, Cankers,
Lamenes, Stitches, or hardenes of the Spleene, and
for all maner of paine in the Heade and Eares.
            
            TAKE Sage & Rue, of ech of them one pound, Wormwood,
and Bay leaues, of ech of them halfe a pound, of
Sheepes ſuet cleane picked from the ſkinne, the quantitie
of three pound, and a pottle of Oyle oliffe, & choppe the
hearbes very ſmalle, and then ſtampe them as ſmall as may
be, then ſhredde the ſuet very fine, and put them alltogether,
and then ſtampe the hearbes and the ſuet, vntill ſuch time,
as the ſuet cannot be perceiued, then take it foorth, and put
it, into a faire panne, and put the Oyle therein, and couer it
cloſe, and ſoe let it ſtand for the ſpace of twelue daies: then
take it foorth and breake it with your handes into a braſſe
panne, and ſet it vpon a ſoft fire, and you muſt be alwaies
ſtirring of it, vntill ſuch time as the hearbes be cracklinge,
then take it of and ſtraine it thorough a canues cloth, into an
earthen pot, and ſo keepe it. For thoſe vehement aches, whē
you ſhall lay any of this oyntement vpon the place greeued,
you muſt take Wooll that groweth between the ſheeps legs,
or elſe of the longeſt of the Wooll, & let it be carded in broad
flakes, and baſted vpon a linnen cloth, and ſoe keepe that alwaies
to it.
         
         
            Cap. 13. ¶An approued Medicine for an ach in any
of the Huckle bones, Thighes, Armes,
Shoulders &c. which commeth by
taking of Colde or &c.
            TAKE a Kettle of faire running Water, and boyle 3.
or fower woodden Diſhes therein (which Potage
are vſually eaten in) and let them boyle a good ſpace
ouer the fire, then take one of the ſame Diſhes, and with a
linnen cloth, wipe of the water which is within, and vpon ye
ſide of it, then take the ſame Diſhe and whelue it vpon the
Ioint, Sinew, or place greeued, as hote as it may poſſiblie

be ſuffered, and ſo keepe it thereon vntill it be cold, then take
an other of the diſhes and doe as aforeſayd, and ſo the thirde
or fourth, and let the partie greeued vſe this for a certaine
ſpace both morning & euening. And this without all doubt
will help hi
                  •
               , for this hath holpen many that their ſinewes
were ſhronke vp, but the partie greeued muſt applie hoce
Woollen Clothes or elſe ſome Lambs-ſkinne, or the ſkinne
of a Hare, or Conny, to kepe in the heate when he taketh in y•
diſhes from it.
         
         
            Cap. 14. ¶A medicine for an ache.
            TAKE Perſly, and Wormewood, of each of them one
handfull, and ſeeth them in a quart of Ale, with ſweete
Butter, & waſh the place well therewith that akes, and
alſo binde the hearbes to y• place as hote it may be ſuffered.
         
         
            Cap. 15. ¶Another medicine for an ache.
            TAKE Sowthiſtle, Chickweede, Elder-leaues, Groūdſell,
and Cleauers, of each of them a handfull, drye all
theſe together betwene two tiles, then lay theſe hearbs
to the place where the griefe is, but let the hearbs be waſhed
before it be dried, and this helpeth.
         
         
            Cap. 16. ¶For aches and ſwellinges in the knees.
            TAke a quart of Malmſey, & a handfull of Tyme, boyle
them together a good ſpace, and whē it is halfe boyled,
put into it a good peece of newe freſh Butter, and let
them boyle together from a Quart to a Pynt, and when

you goe to bedde, bathe your knees therewith, and wette a
cloth three or fower times double therein, and lay it to your
knees as hote as you can ſuffer it, and ſoe let it continue all
night, and in this ſort let him vſe this ſix or ſeauen times, &
doubtles it will helpe you. This hath been well proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 17. ¶A very good Medicine for any maner
of aching ſores.
            TAKE the iuice of Smallage, of Sorrell, of Waybred,
of ech of them like much: take Hunny, and the white
of a newe layde Egge, of either of them a like quantitie
alſo, and mingle all theſe together till they thicken, let
it come neere no fier but all rawe & could, lay it on the ſore.
         
         
            Cap. 18. ¶A plaiſter for an Ache.
            TAKE ſtone Pitch, to the quantitie of a tennis ball, a
ſpoon
                  •
               full of Tarre, a peny worth of Treacle, the quā
               tieye
of a tennis ball, of Roſſin, & a ſpoonefull of Hun
                  
                     •
                  ye,
boyle it ouer the fier in a kettle, and ſtirre it well together,
vntill it be well melted, then take a ſheepes ſkinne that
is newe killed, and make holes in it with a bookyn, & ſpread
the fleſhye ſide of the ſkinne, and lay it to the ache as hote as
you may ſuffer it, for it hath been prooued.
         
         
            Cap. 19. ¶An excellent good oyle, for all manner of aches,
bruſes and ſtraininges of the ſinewes.
            
            TAKE a pottle of Neates foote oyle, and a quarte of
an Oxe gall, a pinte of Aqua-vitae a pinte of Roſe water,
Bay leaues, Roſemarie ſtripped from the ſtalkes,
Strawberie leaues, rootes and ſtringes, Lauender-cotten, of
euerie of theſe a handfull beate them ſmall, and put them into
the foreſayd ſtuffe, & ſeeth it ouer a fire of coles, in a pan of
Two gallons, and at your owne perrill, let not the flame
touch the ſtuffe, let it ſeeth verie well, and then take it of, &
let it ſtand vntill it be almoſt could, then ſtraine it through a
courſe linnen cloth, (but not the bottome of the ſayd licquor)
then put it into a glaſſe, and ſo keepe it, and when you are
payned, anoynt your place where your griefe commonlye
vſeth.
         
         
            Cap. 20. ¶A ſoueraigne oyntment for any manner
of ache or Swelling.
            TAKE two pound of Boares greaſe, one pound of freſh
Butter, & a good quantity of ſmalage, & malowes, and
a good quantitie of oyle of neates feete, then take thē,
and ſtampe them verie well altogether, then frye them, and
ſtrayne them in a earthen veſſell that is cleane, and when
the Patient will vſe it, let him anoynt himſelfe therewith,
before a good fire, and let him take heede that hee doe not
take could vpon it.
         
         
            Cap. 21. ¶An oyntment for all manner.
of Aches.
            TAKE a good quantitie of Smalage, and put thereto
ſome Aquauitae, then ſtraine it, and put thereto a good

quantitie of Boares greace, and temper them verie well together,
and let the patient be anoynted therewith both morning
and euening before the fire, for the ſpace of 5 or 6 days
together if the paine doe continue ſo long. This hath been
well prooued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 22. ¶For an Ague.
            TAke of red Sage, of Smalage, of ground Iuie, of Bay
Salt, of Plantine leaues, of greene Glaſſe, of each of
theſe a handfull, and put therein a little Roſe vineger
to make it moyſt, and with a linnen cloth bind it to both the
wriſtes of the Patient. For this hath been an approued
medicine.
            
         
         
            Cap. 23. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAke the greaſe or fat that is vnder the manes of horſes,
and melt the ſame in a newe earthen pot, and ſtraine it
into a gallypot or ſome ſuch thing, and when the Patient
feeleth the Ague comming, let the Thine of his Back
be anoynted therewith, and within Nine dayes he ſhall bee
hole, keeping in the meane ſpace a reaſonable diet.
         
         
            Cap. 24. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAke the yolke of an Egge, and put thereto a quantitye
of groſſe beaten Pepper, and two ſponefull of Aqua-vitae,
               
and drinke it could, and after you haue taken this drink
walke for the ſpace of an houre, and forbeare other drinke
as much as poſſible you may.
         
         
            Cap. 25. ¶A verie good medicine for an Ague.
            TAKE a handfull of Harts-horne, that groweth in the
field, and a handfull of Bay-ſalt, and beate them both
together in a morter and lay this to both your wriſtes
and this will helpe you.
         
         
            Cap. 26. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE Bay ſalte, Smallege, white Frankencenſe and
Plantine leaues, of each of them a handefull, beate them
in a Morter vntill they be very ſmalle, then take them
and deuide them into fower partes, and then lay two partes
thereof vnto your breaſtes, and the other two partes to the
boughte of your Armes: and an houre before your fitte doth
come, then take a pinte of good ſtale Ale, and ſeethe it from
a quarte, to a pinte, and continually as any froth doth ariſe,
ſkome it of, then put into it, a cruſte of white bread, and let
it ſeeth in the Ale, & whē you perceiue your fit coming, drink
it warme, and eate the cruſte, you muſt vſe this drinke dueringe
all the time of your ſicknes, for it is very holeſome and
good.
         
         
            Cap. 27. ¶An other for the ſame.
            
            TAKE three pintes of Ale, Bay leaues, and Red Sage,
of each of them one ounce, fine Sugar three ounces, and
a ſpoonefull of Pepper, ſeeth all theſe together, in the
Ale, from the quantitie aforeſayd till it come to a pinte, then
take it and ſtraine it through a fine cloth, and let the Patient
drinke a good draught of it as hote as hee maye abide to
drinke it, a little before his fit commeth.
         
         
            Cap. 28. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE a Pinte of Malmſey, and a handfull of May
Weede, bruiſe the May-weede, and put the iuyce therof
into the Malmſey, and let the Patient drinke thereof,
as often as he ſhall thinke good, and this will help him.
This is alſo good againſt the Plague, and good to comfort
nature, being dronke as aforeſayd.
         
         
            Cap. 29. ¶Another for the same.
            TAKE a good quantitie of the blades of Daffadillies,
and bruiſe them, and ſeeth them in a pinte of Ale, or
Wine, and put into it a ſponefull of Graines bruiſed,
and let the patient drinke thereof, halfe an hower before his
fit doth come, and this will help him.
         
         
            Cap. 30. ¶A verie good drinke for an Ague.
            
            TAKE Bay leaues, and Sage leaues, of each of them a
like quantitie, then take Bay-berries and bruiſe them
verie groſlye, and mingle theſe all together, and put
thē into a quart of White-wine, & ſeeth them for a good ſpace
then ſtraine it through a fine cloth, and a little before the fitt
commeth let the Patient drinke thereof.
         
         
            Cap. 31. ¶An proued medicine for an Ague.
            TAKE three quartes of faire Runing water, and put
it into an earthen pot, and put thereto a good handfull
of Violet leaues, and Flowers, boyle them for the ſpace
of a quarter of an houre together, then take it of the fire, and
put thereto a ſawcerfull of Wheaten branne, and couer the
pot a good while, then ſtraine it through a fine linnen cloth,
and when it is could put thereto a good quantitie of fine Sugar,
then let the partie greeued drinke thereof, both morning
and euening faſting, alſo let him before he eate any meate in
the morning eate 6 or 7 Damaſins, and at night let him eate
roſted Apples with Sugar, & at Dinner let him drinke white
wine, with the water aboueſayd mixed. This hath been
much prooued.
         
         
            Cap. 32. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE a quart of newe Milke, as new as you can get
it from the Cowe and ſeeth it, and when it doth ſeeth,
put into it a good lumpe of Roch Allum, and ſtirre it
vntill it hath a good Curde on it, and when it is verie well
Curded, ſcumme of the curde cleane, and when you haue ſo

done, then take the ſame drinke & drinke it, as often as you
thinke conuenient, and as hote as it may poſſiblie be ſuffered,
but put away the curde for it is not good.
         
         
            Cap. 33. ¶An excellent remedie for an Ague.
            TAke Burre rootes, and red Nettle crops, & ſeeth them
in ſtale Ale, and clarifie it, and giue the ſicke thereof
to drinke, about ſuch time as the could fit beginneth
to come, & after the heate be paſt, when you ſee that he beginneth
to ſweate, giue him to drinke Poſſet-ale made with marigold
and Fennell, but ſee that the Poſſet-ale bee well clarified:
vſe this medicine for it will take away the Ague within
three or foure fitts at the vttermoſt.
         
         
            Cap. 34. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAke Nettles, Cobwebbs, and Salt, and beate them together
in a woodden diſh, and lay it to the left arme of
the ſicke, and it will take away the heate of the Ague.
         
         
            Cap. 35. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE a toſt of Bread, and ſpeade it ouer with Treacle,
and let the patient eate it, before the fit commeth,
at the leaſte three ſeuerall times, for the ſpace of iii.
dayes, Probatum eſt. Per Guilielmum Lenthell, Oxon
Armig.
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 36. ¶An other preſent remedie for an Ague.
            TAKE two ounces of bay ſalt, Two ounces of white
Frankenſence, a handfull of Smalage, beate them altogether
& lay them to your wriſtes of both your hands,
and to the bowes of your armes let this be done, 2 houres before
the fit doth come, this hath been proued.
         
         
            Cap. 37. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAke two or three cloues of Garlike and bruiſe them, a
penyworth of Aqua-vitae, halfe a pynt of Ale, and ſeeth
them altogether, and drinke it as hote as you may ſuffer
to drinke it a little before the fit commeth.
         
         
            Cap. 38. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAke Soote, yolkes of Egges, bay ſalt, and Pepper, and
mingle them together, and lay it to the wriſtes of the
Patient, doe this twice a day for the ſpace of Three or
Foure daies and it will take away the Ague. For this hath
been often proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 39. ¶An approoued medicine for a
burning Ague.
            
            TAke the quantitie of a quart of Runing water, and halfe
a Dozen of Orenges, and then pill awaye both the vpper
rinde, and the white ſkinne and picke out the Kernels
out of them, then take and ſtirre them, and ſeeth them
in the ſayd water, vntill the water be conſumed halfe away,
then take the quantitie of 4 ounces of Sugar, and boyle it a
little ſpace therein, and when you perceiue that it is ſodden
inought, then ſtraine it and when it is colde, drinke it and
ſo vſe it for the ſpace of three dayes, and if neede require vſe
it oftener, but if your burning bee vehement, when your ſtomake
will ſerue, ſtampe ſome Sorrell & eate the iuyce thereof
with your meate, this doe and it will helpe you.
         
         
            Cap. 40. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAke Smalage, Sheapheards-purſe, and Liuerwort, of
euerie of them a like quantitie, Bay-ſalt and Frankencence
as much as you ſhall thinke needefull, beate all
theſe together, and lay it vpon a linnen cloth and binde it to
the inſide of the wriſte of your left arme, vſe this for the ſpace
of 9 dayes together, and it will helpe this diſeaſe for it hath
been often prooued.
         
         
            Cap. 41. ¶An excellent remedie for a quotidian Ague.
            TAke a quart of ſtale Ale, a handfull or ſomewhat more
of red Sage, a penyworth of vnbeaten Pepper, take and
boyle theſe altogether, from a quart to a pynt, & when
it is ſod clarifie and ſtraine it, and halfe an houre before the
fit commeth drinke a good draught thereof and walke theron,

and it will preſently helpe you. This hath beene often
proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 42. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE Fetherfewe and Smallege, of eyther of them to
the quantitie of a good handfull, ſtampe them both together
in a Morter vntill ſuch time as they are beaten
very ſmale, and ſtraine it, then take halfe as much as the
iuice of the ſame is, of ſmall Ale, and mingle them together,
and then let the Patient drinke the ſame warme, a litle before
ſuch time as his fitte doeth come (that is to ſay) when
he perceiueth any grudging vppon him. This muſt be vſed
three or fower ſeuerall times at the leaſt, and let the Patiēt
goe to bedde, and haue as many clothes layde vppon him, as
he is able to beare or ſuffer, and ſoe let him bee continually
kepte, vntill his fitte be ouerpaſt, and thus in three or fower
times doing, he ſhall be holpen by gods help, This hath been
diuers and ſundrie times well proued. D. H.
            
         
         
            Cap 43. ¶A very good Drinke to be vſed
for any maner of Ague.
            TAKE a quarte of Ale that is not ouer-ſtronge, and
bayle therein a good quantitie of Centorie, and let the
Patient drinke it luke warme.
         
         
            Cap 44. ¶An approued Medicine for a tercian ague.
            
            TAKE of Dragon Water, and Aqua compoſita, to y•
quantitie of a quarter of a pinte, or eyther of them, and
put thereto a penyworth of Ieane Tr
                     •
                  eacle, and halfe a
quarter of an ounce of groſe beaten Pepper, warme all theſe
together, & be ſtill ſtirring it with a knife or els with ſome
other Inſtrument, and giue it to the Patient to drinke, as
hote as he may poſſiblie ſuffer to take it, a litle before the fitt
commeth, and let him lye in his bedde and ſweate very well.
This hath holpen many.
            
         
         
            Cap. 45. ¶A Medicine For a tercian Ague.
            TAKE Nine leaues of white ſtocke Gillie flowers, &
fiue or ſixe croppes of Roſemarie, and ſtampe them altogether,
and take the iuice thereof and drink it in Ale
luke warme, a litle before ſuch time as the fitte doth come.
         
         
            Cap. 46. ¶An Excellent Remedie for a Quartaine Ague.
            TAKE an Oxe Gall, and as much Aqua compoſita,
and put thereto a quarter of an ounce of Pepper, bruſed
but a very litle, and two penyworth of Trieacle, &
annointe the handes ſtomacke & wriſtes, with the aforeſaide
thinges, being all mingled together, halfe an houre before y•
fitte commeth, but let it be laide too, as hote as the Patient
may ſuffer it, and let him ſweate well vpon it, and this will
ſpeedely helpe him, Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 47.
            
            ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE Snailes which be in ſhells, to the quantitie of
two handefulls, Bay ſalte, and Mallowes, of ecahe one
of them a handefull, beate all theſe together, and lay it
to the Soles or bottomes of your feete, before y• fit cōmeth.
         
         
            Cap. 48. ¶An other preſent remedie for a Quartaine
Ague, and for the drought that commeth
thereof.
            TAKE Redde wine and new Milke, of a Cowe that is
all of one collour, of ech of them a pottle, then take three
or fower handfulls of Mouſe-eare, well picked & waſhed,
ſtrippe it into the Wine and Milke, & temper them altogether,
& let them ſtande ſoe, for the ſpace of one nighte, &
then put them into a faire Still, & ſoe diſtill them with a ſoft
fier, then take the water and put it into a Glaſſe, and ſet it
where it may ſtande in the Sunne, for the ſpace of fiue daies,
& let the Patient when he is drye in his Ague, drinke thereof
three or fower times, & he ſhall be rid of his Ague, and this
drinke will quench his thirſt if he be neuer ſoe drye.
         
         
            Cap. 49. ¶A very good Medicine for an Ague.
            TAKE a ſpoonefull of greene Glaſſe beatē to powder,
& 3 ſpoonefulls of Stone honny, a handfull of red Sage,
mingle theſe with a head of Garlicke, & put thereto, as
many Cob-webbes as will temper the ſame: & let it be in
bignes, to the quātitie of an egg ſhell full in all, & then take
the aforeſaide thinges and binde them about both the wriſts
of the Patient, and this will helpe him. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 50. ¶A Remedie to take away the drought in an Ague.
            
               
TAKE Sorell and Borrage, of each of them a like quā
               titie,
and a certaine quantitie of Strawberrie leaues, &
Violet leaues, boyle them altogether in a pottle of very
faire Running water, vntil it be conſumed from a pottle to
a quarte, then take the Hearbes and ſtraine them, and then
take halfe a pound of good Almondes, and blaunch them, &
beate and ſtraine them with the ſaide water, and put Suger
therein, and drinke it warme, doe this for the ſpace of fiue or
ſixe daies, and it will helpe him.
         
         
            Cap. 51. ¶An excellent Rule to be obſerued in the
makinge of Drinke and Pottage, for
them that are infected with an ague.
            TAKE Bugloſſe Borrage, Endiue, Fennell Rootes,
redſage, Lettice, Pruines, Parſly rootes, greate Reiſōs,
Sinckefoile, Sorrell, and Succorie, of each of them a like
quantitie, and put all theſe into his pottage, and likewiſe in
Poſſet ale, and Almond Milke and this is very good.
         
         
            Cap. 52. ¶A very good remedie againſt corrupt ayres
wherein the agues are firſt engendred and
gotten.
            TAKE Bettony, Centory and Egremony, of each of
thém one handefull, then take them, and ſtampe them
and ſtraine them with ale, and with a Liquorice ſticke
bruſed, and then boile it, and clarifie it very well, and make
it pleaſant with Suger; and drinke thereof, euery morninge
luke warme 3. ſpoonefulls, for the ſpace of 3. or 4. daies, &
it will preſerue one from all corrupt aires and infection.
         
         
            
            Cap. 53. ¶An approued Medicine to coole the heate
of the Backe, and alſo to cure the diſeaſe
called Gomoria Paſsio.
            
               
                  TAKE Water-creſſets, and Colombines,
of each of them a good
quantitie, and ſeeth them in Cow
Milke, and if it be for a man, thē
let it be the femalle Creſſet, and
if it be for a woman, then take y•
Male Creſſet, and whē y• hearbs
are well boyled in the Milke, then
take it from the fire, and let the
Patient eate thereof, with a litle
white Breade therein, and let him drinke it alſo both Morning
and e
                  •
               ening, for a certaine ſpace, and by gods grace it
will helpe him. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 54. ¶A Soueraigne Medicine for the weaknes
of the Backe.
            TAKE Daiſie rootes, plantine, Burſa paſtoris, Centū
                  modie,
croppes of Acornes, of ech of them a 
                  •
               andfull, &
as much of Bole armoniacke, and the powder of a Harts
horne, then take a Bucke Cony that is fatte, and boyle all
theſe together in white wine, and water, and let the water &
the wine be of equall-porcions, and let them boyle vntill the
fleſh of the Conny be ſeparated from the bones, then take y•
               Conny and the other ſtuffe out of the broath, and ſtraine the
broath into a cleane veſſell, and let it ſtande vntill it be turned

to a Iellye, and when you are in your bedde, cauſe your
Backe to be anointed therewith, by a Chafing-diſh of coles,
for the ſpace of three Nightes together, & lay thereon a linnen
cloth warme (but in any wiſe chafe not your backe ouer
much) and this will helpe you. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 55. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE fower or fiue Cape Dates, and peele them very
cleaue, and let them be ſtamped ſmall in a Morter, and
put vnto them the Yolke of a new laide Egge, and the
quantitie of a quarter of a pinte of Muſkadine, and let the
Patient drinke thereof both Morninge and Euening, and it
will helpe him.
         
         
            Cap. 56. ¶A preſent remedie for a heate
and paine in the Backe.
            TAKE Roſe-leaues and Roſe-water, of ech of them a
like quantitie, & put thereto as much Saunders, as you
ſhall 
                  •
               hinke good, and let them be ſteeped in your Roſewater,
for the ſpace of 24. houres, then waſhe your Back as
often as you can cōueniētly euery day, for y• ſpace of ſixe or
ſeauen daies, and this will both aſſwage the paine, and take
away the heare, and much comforte the Raines.
            
         
         
            Cap. 57. ¶Another medicine for the paine
in the Backe.
            
            TAke Sage, Roſe-mary, Camamill, & Maudiyn, 
               
                  〈◊〉
               
theſe a handful then ſtampe them altogether in a morter,
or other ſtone veſſell, and let it be tryed 
                  •••
               h May
Butter, and anoint your backe with it warme, but in any caſe
beware of taking cold thereon.
         
         
            Cap. 58. ¶A medicine to clenſe the backe and purge the reines.
            TAKE 2 Pa
                     •
                  ſy rootes, & picke out the 
                  〈◊〉
                of them,
and a Fennell roote, and put to it Peliitory of y
                  •
                wall, &
waſh them cleane, & boyle them in Poſſet-ale, & drinke
thereof when you goe to bed, and as often as you wake euery
night doe the like.
         
         
            Cap. 59. ¶A good medicine for the reines of the backe.
            TAke halfe an ounce of Venice Turpentine, and let it be
very well waſhed in Plantine water, or in Roſe-water,
and then mixe it with fine white Sugar, and make therof
4 or fiue balles, of the which you muſt eate three in a morning
faſting, and dayly drinke a litle white-wine, or renniſh
wine ymmediatly after.
         
         
            Cap. 60. ¶An excellent good medicine for the weaknes in the
Backe, and alſo to reſtore nature.
            TAke a quart of Sacke, a top of Roſemary, Succory, Peny
royall, of ech a like quantitie, Ginger & Nutmeggs,
as much as will burne the wine, thē take 2 newe laide
Egges, yolkes & all, & temper them with 3 or 4 ſpone
                  •
               ulls of
Red-roſe-water, & put thereto a good peece of fine Sugar, thē
take the burnt ſacke, & burne it againe with the eggs, & put
into it a litle Mace, & it wil be in maner of a caudle, thē put
to it ſome ſalet oyle, & mixe it with the burnt ſeeke, & let the
patient drinke this thriſe a day, (that is to ſay) in y• morning

after dinner, and when you goe to bedde, and this will helpe
you in a ſhort ſpace, for it hath beene proued.
         
         
            Cap. 61 ¶A very good Medicine to ſtrengthen
the backe.
            TAKE a quarte of Ale, & three or fower whole Maces,
and as many Dates the ſtones picked out, & the
Pith alſo, then take a good handeful of the toppes of
Roſemarie, and let all theſe be boyled together, vntill it be
confumed from a quarte to a pinte, then take the Oyle of two
or three new laide Eggs, and take of the ri
                  •
               de that is aboute
the yolkes, and then put the yolkes into the Ale, & boyle them
well together, and ſtirre them, and ſoe let the Patiēt-drink
hereof, both Morning and Euening, for the ſpace of fiue or
ſix daies, and this will ſtrngthē his backe maruelous much,
Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 62. ¶A Medicine for the heate of the backe.
            TAKE Vnguentum frigidum Galeni. 
               ʒ iii. and ſpread
this Oyntement vpon a fiue lynnen cloth, but you muſt
firſt dippe it in Roſe-water, and then warme it againſt
the fire, and lay it vppon the Ridneies, and when it waxeth
hotte take it of, and lay it to an other place
         
         
            Cap. 63. ¶An other for the ſame.
            Take the water of Plantine, diſtilled, or els the iuice thereof,

and put to the leaues, and the leaues of Red-roſes diſtilled,
and alſo the water of Red-roſes, and the water of Red-roſe
vineger, then put all theſe together into an earthen pot,
and put into the water, a fine linnen cloth to ſteepe, then take
it forth againe, and with a fewe leaues of a Red-roſe, cake,
lay it to the backe of the Patient, and when it wareth hote,
vſe another cloth dipped therein, as aforeſayde. This hath
been often prooued by Doctor Huicke.
            
         
         
            Cap. 64. ¶A verie good medicine for one that
hath a weake Backe.
            TAKE fiue, or ſix croppes of red Neepe, and two ſponefull
of Archangell flowers, and ſhread verie fine, then
take two or three new layde Egges, and temper al theſe
thinges together, then take a little ſweete butter, (that is
but litle ſalted,) and make three or foure fritters, and lett
them be fryed in ſome litle earthen pan, and let the Patient
eate them, without eyther bread or ſalt, but onely with a litle
fine Sugar ſtrawed vppon them. This hath been proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 65. ¶A verie good plaiſter to eaſe any
paine or cricke in the Backe.
            TAKE white Archangell flowers and leaues a good
quantitie, and of Cumfrey leaues and rootes, 1 ounce
of Plantine and Burſa Paſtoris, Ana 1 ounce beate them
al together verie fine, and put to them a ſpoonefull of
Honny, and then frye them in a frying Panne, and

deuide it into tower partes; and make of euery parte thereof,
a Plaiſter, and ſo lay to the backe of the Patiēt euery night
when he goeth to bedde, one of them, and by gods grace this
will ſpeadely helpe him.
         
         
            Cap. 66. ¶A very good Oyntement for the backe.
            TAKE fower ounces of Vnguentum frigidum Galeni,
and an ounce of the iuice of Houſleeke, two drams of
Mirtle, and as much of burned Leade, & one drame of
Camphire, halfe a drame of Red-roſe leaues, and as much
red Currall, and according to arte, make all theſe into an
Oyntement, in a Morter of lead or Stone, and let the Patient
annointe his backe often therewith. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 67. ¶A very good reſtoratiue for the backe.
            TAKE a quarter of ſtale Ale, halfe a handefull of Germaunder,
a handefull of Clarie, a handfull of vnſet Hiſop,
a handefull of vnſet Time, one braunch of Roſemarie,
a good quātitie of engliſh Saffron, a diſhe of ſweete Butter,
and a good peece of Suger, then boyle all theſe together,
vntill the one halfe be conſumed then ſtraine it, and let the
Patient take it both Morning and Euening, and this will
helpe him. This hath beene proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 68. ¶An other good reſtoratiue for the backe.
            
            TAKE new Milke and ſet it one the fire, & when you
ſee that it is readie to ſeeth, take the quantitie of a Nut
of Roch Allum, and ſtampe it ſmall, and put it into y•
               Milke, and ſtirre it with a ſpoone, and couer it cloſe, & when
the Curde doth ariſe, take it of, and let the Patient drinke
thereof morning and euening, for y• ſpace of fiue or ſix daies
together, and it helpeth him very much.
         
         
            Cap. 69. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE a quarte of Goates Milke if it may be gotten,
if not, then take a quarte of Cowe Milke which is new,
& a handfull of Otemeale, & a good deale of the Pith of
an Oxe backe, & ſtampe them together, & put them into the
Milke, and when it is ſodden ſtraine it through a fine linnen
cloth, and let the Patient drinke it Morninge and Eueninge
and this will helpe him. Probatum eſt.
            
            This is alſo good for them that are in a Conſumption.
         
         
            Cap. 70. ¶A good Medicine for the Raines of a mans backe.
            TAKE Aquauitae, & put therein, a litle Hempe-ſeede
finely beatē, & let it ſoke in the Aqua-vitae 7 or 8 daies
together, then ſtraine it, & let y• Patient drinke it, & it
will help him. Yf you cānot get Aqua-vitae, thē take good
white wine, or elſe ſtale Ale, any of theſe will ſerue.
            
         
         
            Cap. 71. ¶A good Medicine for the weakenes of the backe.
            
            TAKE a pinte of Claret wine, and put therein a good
quantitie of fine Suger, and Red-roſe water, Bugloſſe
water, and Borrage water, of euery one of them a good
quantitie, and mingle them together, and let the Patient
drinke two or three good draughtes thereof, and a litle Diaſaturion,
This is a very comfortable Drinke to coole the Stomacke
and the Raines, and it will ſtrengthen the backe very
much.
            
         
         
            Cap. 72. ¶A Marueilous good Oyntement for the backe.
            TAKE fower ounces of Vnguentum frigidum Galeni,
an ounce of the iuice of Houſleeke, two drams of Mirtle,
and as much of burned Lead, one dram of Camphire,
halfe a dram of Red-roſe leaues, and as much red Currall,
and according to Arte, make theſe into an Oyntement, in a
Morter of Leade, and when the partie greeued will vſe it let
him annoint himſelfe before the fire, and this will preſentlye
helpe him.
         
         
            Cap. 73. ¶A Medicine for the heate of the Raines,
and to auoide bliſtering in the mouth.
            TAKE Liuerwoort, Sorell, Balme, and Succory, Ana,
one ounce and ſeeth theſe in quart of Whay, hauing
been well clarified, and let the Patient Drinke halfe
a pynt thereof at the leaſt, euery morning. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 74.
            
            ¶A preſent remedie to ſtay the running of
the Raynes.
            TAKE a good quantity of Otemeale, and beate it verie
ſmale, and put it into a quart of new milke, & ſeeth
it, and put therein a good quantitie of Sugar, and whē
it is wel boyled, ſtraine it, and let the Patient eate the milk,
and this will helpe him without all doubt.
         
         
            Cap. 75. ¶A preſent remedie to helpe the running
of the Raynes.
            TAke Venice Turpentine, and waſh it cleane, in theſe
waters following, Viz. in Plantine water, in Red-roſe
water, and in water of Licquorice, and when you haue
waſhed it verie well, then take the Turpentine, and ſeeth it
with as much white Maſticke, & when it is ſodden inough
it will breake to a powder, it is eaſily perceiued vppon a
kniues poynt, then take halfe an ounce of Nutmegs beaten
to pouder, & put to it the like quantitie of the pouder of Venice
Turpentine, and halfe an ounce of white Sugar, and
mingle them verie well together, then let the Patient put a
quantitie of this pouder into an Egge or two which muſt bee
but reare roſted, and ſo let him ſupp it of, and let him eate nothing
for the ſpace of an houre after, but if hee eate twoo or
three of theſe Egges euerie morning ſo dreſſed, it will bee the
better, vntill ſuch time as he be whole, & then let him drink
halfe an ounce of Red-roſe water, & halfe an ounce of Plantine
water, after ſuch time as he hath eaten his laſt Egge.
            
            Note that hee muſt eate Two of theſe Egges aforeſayde
in his bed before hee doe ariſe in the morning, and the third

one houre after that he is riſen vp out of his bedde, and after
the ſpace of one houre more, he muſt drinke the water aboueſaide,
and then he muſt walke a good while after it.
         
         
            Cap. 76. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE a quātitie of y• Stones of the rootes of Stockflowers
(viz) Diaſaturion, and the rootes that lye like
beades in barren groundes, and preſerue them as you
doe Cherries, or other thinges, then make a Caudle of Muſcadine,
and bayle the ſame rootes therein, with a Nutmegge
grated, and a litle white Maſticke, then let the partie greued
eate of the rootes, and drinke of the ſame Caudle, of Muſcadine,
and this will preſently helpe him.
         
         
            Cap. 77. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE two new laide Eggs, & put the whites of them
awaye cleane, and ſet them in the fire, vntill they bee
bloud warme, then take halfe a Nutmegge, & a good
peece of Suger Candie, & a pretty quantitie of Currall finely
beaten to powder, then take a litle Cinamon & Amber, of ech
of them a like quātitie, & mixe all theſe together, & put them
into the Egge, and let the Patient ſuppe it of, or elſe let him
toſte a peece or two of fine white breade, and powre thereon
the yolkes of the eggs, and then ſtraw the aforeſaid powder
vppon it, and ſoe eate it, and this will preſently helpe him,
This hath beene proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 78.
            
            ¶Another maruelous good remedie for the
runninge of the Raines.
            TAKE three Kernells of Piſtia, which are not old, then
take a drame of cleare Maſticke, and a drame of Mirre,
and three ſcruples of Camphire, of y• Cuppes of Acorns
and yellow Amber, of ech of them a like quantitie, & let the
Patient vſe this firſt with a quantitie of Uenice Turpentine,
cleane waſhed in Plantine water, & afterwardes in the yolke
of an Egge, which is reare roſted: But if the cauſe be hote,
then take three drams of Bole armoniack, and put it thereto,
Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 79. ¶An Excellent good and an approued Medicine,
for the running of the Raines.
            TAKE May-weede, Plantine, Neepe, Clarie, Balme,
and Dayſie rootes, of ech of them a good handefull, and
boyle them all in a quarte of pure Malmeſie, and boyle
it vntill the one halfe be conſumed, & let the Patient drinke
thereof Morning & Euening, and this will ſtay the Runing
of the Raines, although y• Patient hath bene long troubled
therewith, This hath beene often proued. D. L.
            
         
         
            Cap. 80. ¶An other preſent remedie for the
runninge of the Raines.
            TAKE a good quantitie of Uenice Turpentine, and a
Nutmegge or two beaten ſmall, and a good quātitie of
Cinamon ground to powder, then take fiue or ſix Date
Stones, & grind thē alſo vntill they be come to a fine powder,

and mixe all theſe verie well together, and then make it into
bullets pellet like, and wrape it in white Sugar, and let ye
Patient ſwallow downe three or foure of theſe pellets euery
morning next his hart, and let him walke halfe an houre after
it, before he doe either eate or drinke, and it will ſpeedily
helpe him. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 81. ¶Another principall medicine for the
runing of the Raines.
            TAke a ſhiue of fine Manchet, and toſt it at the fler vntill
it be browne one both ſides, then take Two newe
layd Egges, and deuide the whites from the yolkes as
cleane as you can, then take the two yolks, and ſpread them
vpon the toſt of bread, then take two penyweath of white
Sugar Candie, and beate it verie ſmall in a morter, and
ſtrawe it vpon the yolkes of the Egges, as they lye vpon the
toſte, and let the Patient eate it in the morning faſting, and
let him faſt an houre or two after he hath taken it, and ſo let
him continue this for the ſpace of fiue or ſix mornings together,
and by Gods grace it will helpe him, although he hath
been greeued therewith 7 yeares before. Probatum eſt.
Per maiſter Iames.
            
         
         
            Cap. 82. ¶Another medicine for the ſame.
            TAke a toſt of fine Manchet, and toſt it on both the ſides,
and ſtrawe vpon it Sugar Candie, Nutmegs, Amber,
and Currall, of each of them equall portions, being all
finely beaten into pouder, & a little grated Sinamon, mingle
all theſe together, and ſtrawe vppon the toſted bread and let

the Patient eate this faſting euery Morning, for the ſpace
of three or fower daies together, and by gods helpe he ſhall
be cured. This hath holpen many that haue been ſore trowbled
with this diſeaſe.
            
         
         
            Cap. 83. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE Pellitorie of the wall, Wilde Time, and Paſly,
of ech of them a good handefull, & boyle them in a quart
of ſtronge Ale, and let it boyle, vntill the one halfe bee
conſumed, and let the partie greeued drink the quantitie of
halfe a pinte thereof at a time, euery Morning and Euening
for the ſpace of Nine or tenne daies together, & it helpeth.
         
         
            Cap. 84. ¶A very good water to waſhe the Yarde, of one
that hath lately had the running of the raines,
and hath beene cured thereof.
            TAKE Woodbinde, Dayſies and Plantine leaues, of
ech of them three good handefulls, and a good quantitie
of the beſt engliſh Honny that you can get, and a peece
of Roch Allum as bigge as a Wallnut, then put all theſe together,
in a quart of faire running water, and a good quantitie
of Red-roſe Water, and boyle them in an earthen pot,
or Pipkin, and let it be cloſe couered, for the ſpace of halfe
an houre, and then ſtraine it through a fine linnen cloth, and
then take of this water being luke warme, & with a ſearinge
ſquirte it vp into the Yarde of the Patient, and let the Pipe
be put in, an inch or ſomewhat more, and let it be alwaies
very ſtronglye ſpouted vp, whereby the Water may goe beyonde

the ſore place, and ſoe vſe it euery day three times for
the ſpace of one whole Moueth together, and then he ſhall be
quite ſound from this diſeaſe for euer after.
         
         
            Cap. 85. ¶Another eaſie Medicine to helpe the
runninge of the Raines, and alſo to
ſcoure the Yarde.
            TAKE Plantine water, and Wood-binde water, and
mingle them both together, and with a ſearing, let the
Partie greeued ſquirte himſelfe as aboue ſaide, both
Morning and Euening, and as often as he ſhall thinke good
and doubtles this will helpe him. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 86. ¶A Medicine to take away the paine
or gripinge in the Belly.
            
               TAKE Sothernwood, and lay it againſt y• place
on the contrary ſide where the paine is, and it
will driue it out: and if it be laide to the Nauill
of the Patient, it will take the paine cleane away,
This hath holpen many.
            
         
         
            Cap. 87. ¶A very good Medicine for one that is hard
bounde in the Belly.
            TAKE a good quantitie of Hempe-ſeede, and ſeeth
it in faire running Water, and when it is well ſodden

ſtraine it thorough a fine cloth, and let the Patient drinke a
good draught thereof when he goeth to bedde, and this will
make him Laxatiue, For it hath beene proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 88. ¶An approued Medicine for a Laske
or loſenes in the belly.
            TAKE Aquacompoſita, and a new layde Egge, and
boyle the Aquacompoſita with the Egge, vntill ſuch
time as it be drye, then take Suger and Cinamon, of
ech of them a like quantie, and let the Patient eate it with y•
               Egge, and this will helpe him. probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 89. ¶A very good Medicine for any maner
of Byle, Fellyne or vncome.
            
            
               TAKE Smallege, Rue, and red
Sage, of ech of them a handefull,
and a peece of Wheaten Leuen,
and a quantitie of the groundes of
ſtronge Ale, and mingle all theſe
together, and make a Plaiſter
thereof, and let the Patient applie
it oftentimes to the place greued,
and this will preſently helpe
him, For this hath holpē them that
were in greate ieopardie to haue loſt a ioynte thereby. T. H.
            
         
         
            Cap. 91. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE Red Sage, and Rue, of ech of them a like qaā
               titie,
and choppe them very ſmall, then take groundes
of ſtronge Ale, and a good peece of browne Leuen, &
a fewe Crumes of browne bread, and mingle them all together,
and put them into the ſaide, groundes of Ale, then ſeeth
it vntill it be thicke, and then make a Plaiſter thereof, and
lay it warme to the ſore place, and you ſhall finde great eaſe
thereby Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 92. ¶An other Medicine for a Fellyn or Vncome.
            TAKE a good quantitie of ſower Leuen, and crume
it into a litle Pypkinne, then take halfe a peny diſhe of

ſweete butter, and fower or fiue ſpoonefulls of Roſe vineger,
the leaues and all, and boyle them altogether, and lay it to
the place greeued, as hote as it may be ſuffered, and this will
ſpeadely helpe it, for it hath beene often proued.
         
         
            Cap. 93. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE to the number of xx. Garden Snailes, & beate
them ſhells & all in a Morter, vntill you ſee them come
to a Salue, then ſpread a litle thereof, vppon a linnen
cloth, & lay it to y• ſore, and when one Plaiſter is drye, then
applye an other to the place againe, & it will kyll the felline,
& it will both heale it and drawe it, Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 94. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE Rue otherwiſe called Hearbe grace, and let it
be gathered in March, and white woortes, of ech of thē
a like quantitie, then take Ruſty Bacon, a litle Butter,
and a houſe Snaile, and mingle them very well together, and
make a Plaiſter thereof, and lay it to the ſore, and this will
helpe him.
         
         
            Cap. 95. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE Red Sage, Rue, Snailes, Bay Salte, & Bacon,
of euery of them, what quantitie you ſhall thinke good,
and then temper and beate them well together, and

then lay it to the Fellyn, and this will preſently helpe you,
Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 97. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE red Sage, Rue, and Houſloeke of ech of them an
ounce, waſh them altogether, and drye out the water,
with a cleane cloth, and choppe them very ſmall, then
take the quantitie of a Tennis ball of ſower Leuen, & two
ſpoonefulls of Tarre, and a ſpoonefull of blacke ſope, then
ſtampe them altogether in a woodden Diſh, with a Peſtle of
wood, and make a Plaiſter of it, and lay it an Inche thicke
vppon a peece of linnen cloth, or elſe vpon a peece of leather,
and euery Morning & Euening, apply it to the ſore, and this
will both drawe it and heale it. This is alſo good for any maner
of Byle Fellyn or vncome.
            
         
         
            Cap. 98. ¶An Excellent good and approued Medicine
for any Fellyn, old ſore, or any other maner
of Vncome whatſoeuer.
            TAKE a quarte of Ale, and put therein a race of Ginger,
beaten to powder, and ſeeth y• 
               Ale, vntill ſuch time
as the Ale be halfe conſumed away, then put into it a
good peece of Suger, to the quantitie of a quarter of a pound,
or ſomewhat more, then take it from the fire and let it coole,
then take a fine linnen cloth and then put the thinges aforeſaid
into it and then let them ſoke well, and ſoe lay it vppon
the place greeued, and this will helpe it, if it be neuer ſo ſore,
Probatum eſt, per M. L.
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 99. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE fine Wheate Flower boulted, and temper it
very well with white Wine, & boyle it vntill ſuchtime
as it be thicke, then take it and lay it vpon the ſore, as
hote as you can ſuffer it, and this will both open the hole, and
drawe out the venome or filth, and eaſe the Akinge, & it will
alſo cloſe and heale it vp againe, & for wante of white wine,
you may take eyther Ale or Beere, This Medicine will alſo
heale the pricking of any Thorne or Needle in any ioynte, &
yf the hole be neuer ſo cloſe ſtopped vp againe.
            
         
         
            Cap. 100. ¶An Excellent good Medicine for any maner
of Biles, White blowes, Fellyns of Vncomes.
            TAKE Bores greaſe, Wheaten Flower, Sage, & May
butter, and ſtampe them in a Morter altogether, and
make a Plaiſter thereof, and lay it to the place which
is greeued, and it will both ripen it and drawe it, and if you
doe frye it in a ſyringe Panne, it will worke much more the
better. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 101. ¶An other Experienced Medicine for to
ripen any Byles, Whiteblowes, Fellyns,
or any other Vncomes whatſoeuer.
            
               
TAKE a pinte of ſweete Milke, and put thereunto,
a good quantitie of Sheepes ſuet, and cut and ſhredde
it very ſwall, then take a handefull or two of Otemeale
beaten very ſmall, then ſet it ouer the fire, and ſeeth it vntill
it wax thicke, ſo that you may ſpread it vpon a faire linnen
cloth, and lay it to the ſore, as hote as euer you can poſſibly
ſuffer it, and this will quickly ripen it and breake it, without
any greate paine, and when it is broken, then lay a litle
Turpentine vppon a peece of whit Leather, and pricke it full
of holes, and it will both draw and heale the ſore, This hath
beene often proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 102. ¶An Excellent good Medicine to purge the
Bladder of one that cannot Piſſe.
            
               TAKE Parſlye, Red Fennell, the rootes of Eliſaunders,
the rootes and leaues of Hartes-toung,
and a quantitie of Mayden-heare, of ech of them
a like quantitie, and ſeeth them in white Wine, &
then ſtraine it and giue it to the Partie greeued, to drinke
firſt and laſt, and it will purge the Bladder, in a ſhorte time.
Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 103. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE Rue, otherwiſe called Hearbe grace, Gromel
and Parſlie, of ech of them a like quantitie, and ſtampe
them very well together, and temper them with white
Wine, and giue it to the Patient luke warme, and this will
helpe him.
         
         
            
            Cap. 104. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE Berries of Iuy, and beate them into powder, and
put it into White wine, or elſe into ſtale Ale, and let y•
Patient drinke it as hote as he is able to ſuffer it, and
it will doe him much good, Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 105. ¶A very good Medicine to cauſe one to make
Water that cannot, & alſo againſt the Stone.
            TAKE a New laide Egge, and in the greateſt ende
thereof, make a hole, and take out both the Yolke, and
the white of it, and lay the hole of the ſame Egg, downwardes,
vppon a hate Bricke-ſtone, and ſoe let it remaine,
vntill it be we
                  •
               l purged, ſoe that you may make pouder therof,
then take it and drinke it with White wine, twice euery
day firſt and laſt▪ and it will helpe you. M. Roſe.
            
         
         
            Cap. 106. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE a quarte of very ſtronge Ale, and ſet it vppon
the fire, then take a good handefull of Time, and binde
it vp very faſt into a litle bunch, and ſoe ſeethe it in the
Ale, vntill ſuch time as you doe perc
                  •
               iue the ſtrengthe th
                  •
               ereof
to be cleane gone into the Ale, and let the Partie greeued
drinke a good draughte thereof euery day both in the Morninge
and Eueninge, for the ſpace of fiue or ſixe dayes together,

and it will helpe him. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 107. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAke a good quantitie of the ſeedes of red Nettles, and
put them eyther into your Ale, or elſe into your Pottage,
and ſo drinke or eate often thereof, and this will
helpe you preſently. R. Cox, This is alſo good againſt the
Stranguarie.
            
         
         
            Cap. 108. ¶A medicine for one that cannot piſſe.
            TAke a flint ſtone, and lay it in the fier, and there let it
remaine vntill it be red hotte, and then put it into the
Ale that the partie grieued doth drink and then let him
drinke a good draught thereof whileſt it is warme, and hee
ſhall finde marueilous great eaſe thereby.
         
         
            Cap. 109. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAke a quarter of a handfull of Parſly, and as much red
Fennell, and waſh and ſhredde them verie ſmall, & put
them into a cup of ſtale Ale, and make a poſſet therwith,
and drinke the Ale and it helpeth.
         
         
            Cap. 110. ¶An other medicine for one that piſſeth Bloud.
            
            TAke Burſa Paſtoris, Parſly-ſeede, and Ambros, of each
of them a handfull, ſtampe them altogether, & ſoke them
verie well with Goates milke, and then ſtraine it thorough
a fine linnen cloth and giue it to the Patient to drinke
and this will helpe him. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 111. ¶verie good medicine to cauſe one
to piſſe that cannot.
            TAke a verye good quantitie of the beſt Engliſh Saffron,
that you can poſſiblye get, and beate it into
fine powder, and then take the like quantitie
of pure Black Sope, and mingle them both verie well
together, and ſpreade them vppon the fleſhye ſide of a
peece of fine Sheepes leather, and then laye it vpon the
Nauill of the partie greeued, and it will procure Vrine
within one houre, or a little more. Probatum eſt
per I. I.
            
         
         
            Cap. 112. ¶A medicine to prouoke vrine.
            TKke a good handfull of red Nettle rootes, & ſeeth them
in a quart of good Ale, and let them ſeeth vntill the one
halfe thereof be conſumed then put into it halfe a Two-Peny-diſh
of ſweete Butter, and let it be cleane ſkommed,
before ſuch time as the Butter bee put into it, and alſo
ſeethe therein a verye good Quantitye of Eliſaunder
               
ſeedes, Parſlie ſeedes, and Gromell ſeedes, being all very
well beaten into a fine pouder, and then ſtraine this through
a fine linnen cloth, and let all theſe thinges aforeſaide, be of
equall porcions, and let the Patient vſe to drinke often therof,
and eſpecially firſt and laſt, and this will helpe him without
all doubt.
         
         
            Cap. 113. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE three quartes of Ale, and ſeeth it, and let it be
three or fower times ſkommed, then put into it Roſemarie,
Time and Peny-royal, of ech of them one handfull,
and let them boyle altogether, vntill ſuch time as one
quarter thereof be conſumed, or ſomewhat more, then take
it and ſtraine the hearbes from the Ale, and let the Patient
drinke a good draught of the Ale, luke warme, euery Morning
and Euening, and this will eaſe him very much,
            This is alſo good againſt the Stone, and it hath been very
well proued.
         
         
            Cap. 114. ¶A very good Medicine to cauſe one
to piſſe that cannot.
            TAKE Horſe-dounge out of the ſtable, new Butter &
Aqua-vitae, of ech of them equall porcions, & frye them
all together, and make thereof a Plaiſter, and applye
it to the patient, from the Nauill, to the Fundament, as hote
as euer he may poſſiblie ſuffer it: But let not the Patient
be afraide, although it cauſe bloud to iſſue foorth, for ſuch is
the nature of the Medicine, Alſo it cauſeth the Stone ſpeadily
to auoide. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 115. ¶An other Medicine to prouoke Vrine
very ſpeadely.
            TAKE Betony, that groweth in Woodes, both roots
and leaues, waſh them very cleane, and then put them
to drye into an Ouen, in a Siue, or elſe ſome other like
thinge, and let it be in an Ouen where browne breade hath
beene newly drawne foorth of it, then take the leaues and
rootes aforeſayde, out of the Ouen, and beate them into pouder,
and let the Patient vſe halfe a ſponefull of the ſame pouder
eyther in White Wine, Poſſet drinke, Portage, or elſe into
your ordinarie drinke.
         
         
            Cap. 116. ¶A Medicine to heale a Canker vpon
the Yarde.
            TAKE an ounce of Roch Allum, and halfe an ounce
of Verdygreaſe, and mingle it with Smithes water, &
and put them all together, into ſome veſſell of glaſſe, &
boyle it, for the ſpace of two houres together, then ſtraine it,
and vſe it as you ſee occaſion.
         
         
            Cap. 117. ¶A very good Medicine for the ſwellinge
of the Yarde or Coddes.
            TAKE the Water of Egrimony diſtilled, & put thereto
a good quantitie of Roch Allum, and ſet them ouer y•
fire to ſoke, vntill they are ready to boyle, then take a

fine linnen cloth, and annoint the Yarde vnder the ſkinne,
with the ſame Water, and let it be warme when you doe vſe
it, and it will abate the extreame paine of the Yarde, & alſo
of the Coddes, if they be waſhed with the ſame.
            Alſo to incarnate the ſkinne, of the Yarde within, take y•
water of Fumitorie, & lay a quantitie of Licquorice, which
is pared, to ſteepe therein, for the ſpace of one Night, & then
put of the ſame water, into the Yarde with a ſpunge, or elſe
with a Tente, made of Linnen cloth.
         
         
            Cap. 118. ¶An Excellent good remedie for the burning &
intollerable heate of Vrine.
            TAKE the ſeedes of Purſlane, the ſeedes of Lettice,
the ſeedes of Endiue, the ſeedes of white poppie, of ech
of them two ounces, then take the weyghte of halfe a
dramme of He
                     •
                  bane ſeedes, and two ounces of Saffron, fiue

                  •••
               mms of Licquorice, x. drammes of Pine-Apple Kernells,
two ounces of Sebaſtian, the quantitie of ſix poundes of faire
ſpringinge Water, Mingle all theſe very well together, and
boyle them vntill ſuch time, as the full thyrde parte thereof,
bee conſumed, then take it and ſtraine it, and let the Partie
greeued, take euery Morninge one ounce thereof, & mingle
it with one ounce of of the iuice of Violets, and let him
vſe it for the ſpace of three daies together, and the fowerthe
day you ſhall ſee marueilous ſtraunge varieties in y• 
               Vrine,
This hath beene very well proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 119.
            
            ¶A Maruelous good Water for to breake
the Stone in the Bladder.
            TAKE Two Pintes of the iuyce of Saxifrage, of
Grommell and of the iuyce of Parſly, or eyther of
them one Pinte, and of the beſt Vineger that is made
of a pleaſant wine, the quantitie of 8 or 9 ounces, diſtill
all theſe together, and put the diſtilled water into ſome
glaſſe which hath a narrowe mouth, and let the Patient
take an ounce of it in the Morning, an other at Noone,
and as much when he goeth to bed, and this will helpe
him. This hath been truely prooued.
         
         
            Cap. 120. ¶A marueilous good drinke to clenſe the Bladder
which muſt bee drunke after the
ſtone is diſperced, and to cauſe
it to be done away by
Shieuers.
            TAKE Roſe-marie, and wild Time, of each of them
a handfull, ſeeth them in a quart of raine water, and
let it ſeeth vntill the one halfe thereof be conſumed, then
put into it as much Suger as will make it ſweete, and let
the partie greeued vſe to drink often of it, vntill hee doe perceiue
his water to be cleare, and vnleſſe his water be thick,
let him not drinke thereof.
         
         
            
            ¶A good Medicine to helpe the ſwellinge
of the Yarde.
            TAKE Waxe and Oyle, and the iuice of Purſ
                     •
                  ane, and
mingle them all together, and ſoe lay it to the Yarde,
that is ſwollen, and this will helpe it.
            
               
                  MANY thinges more, might haue beene
he are ſpoken of, as concerning all ſuch diſeaſes
as come of the Bladder, as the Sone
and ſuch like &c. but as concerning y• ſtone
it ſelfe, Looke in the Title of Collick and
Stone, and therein you ſhall finde thinges
aunſwearable to expectation, Therefore I will now omitt
to ſpeake any more at this time of the Bladder, hopeing that
there is none that doe take vppon them the practiſe either
of Phificke or Ceirurgery, but are of themſelues ſufficient inough
to iudge thereof, and to miniſter apt Medicines for it,
& for thoſe that are vnſkillfull in the Sciences aforeſaide, I
woulde wiſhe them to haue a greate rare & reſpect, to y• Medicines
that they do miniſter for diuers diſeaſes comming of
the Bladder, & they not knowing the cauſes thereof, wherein
yf they be not ſkillfull, they doe very much hurte, Therefore
I would wiſh them firſt to learne of thoſe which are ſkilfull,
before they attempt any ſuch thinge themſelues, & to knowe
perfectly the principall cauſe of the diſeaſe, whereby they
may more eaſily of themſelues afterwardes, Miniſter Medicines
accordingly, & as they haue occaſion, & not any way
preiudice or hurte the Partie greeued any thing at all, but
purchaſe to them ſelues euerlaſting fame
         
         
            
            Cap. 122. ¶A very good Medicine to ſtaunch bloud.
            
               TAKE White wine Vineger, of
the beſt that may be had, and the
Water of Plantine, of ech of them
the quantitie of two poundes, and
mingle them together, then take
diuers lynnen clothes, and we
                  ••
               e
them therein, and then lay ſome
to the ſoles of the feete of the partie
greeued, and ſome againſt the
Liuer, and ſome to the Palme of
his handes, and this will ſtaunch the bloude foorthwith▪ 
               For
this hath beene truely proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 123. ¶An other Medicine of ſt
                  •••
               ch 
                  •
               e
bleeding at the Noſe.
            TAKE Inckle, and binde the partie that bleedeth about
the Temples of the Heade very harde, and knit the
Knot thereof in the Necke, and this will preſentely
ſtaunche the bleedinge.
         
         
            
            Cap. 124. ¶An Excellent remedie for to ſtaunch the
bleeding at the Noſe, yf bleede neuer
ſoe freſhlie.
            TAKE an egge and breake it one the top, that all the
white and yolke may iſſue cleane foorth of it, then fill
y• egge-ſhel with the blood of the partie, that doth bleed,
an dput it in the fire, & there let it remaine vntill it be harde
then burne it to aſhes, and it ſtauncheth the bleeding.
         
         
            Cap. 125. ¶A ſinguler medicine for to ſtaunch the
bleeding at the noſe.
            TAKE a linnen cloth, and wet in vineger and wrap
it about the priuie members of the patient & hee ſhall
ceaſe bleeding. Quod probatum eſtper Iohannem
Linſell clericum Maieſtri Anthonij Bronwne in Eſſex.
            
         
         
            Cap. 126. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE Centory, greene Rue, and red Fennell, ſtampe
all theſe together and ſtraine them and drinke them
warme, and this will ſtoppe any manner of wound cut,
bruiſe, or otherwiſe hurt.
         
         
            Cap. 127.
            
            ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE Burſa paſtoris, Iſope, and Plantine, of each of
theſe a like quantitie, and bruiſe them in a morter, and
warme them as hot as you can againſt the fire, and lay
them to the noſe of him that bleedeth, and bind ſome of the
hearbes to the Temples of his head as hot as hee can ſuffer
them.
         
         
            Cap. 128. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE an old linnen cloth, and wet it wel in vineger,
then burne it to pouder, then take the pouder thereof,
and if it be a wound caſt it therein, and it will ſtop the
bleeding immediately, but if the noſe bleede then ſnuffe the
aforeſaid pouder into thy noſe, and it will ceaſe bleeding.
         
         
            Cap. 129. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE Betony, and ſtampe it with a little ſalt, the
quantitie of both muſt be as much as thou canſt take
vp with thy Twoo fingers and put it into thy noſe, and
it will preſently ſtaunch the bleeding.
         
         
            Cap. 130. ¶Another approued medicine
for the ſtaunching
of blood.
            
            TAKE Linnen cloth and burne it, and take the pouder
thereof, and put it into an other cloth, and ſhe lay it
to the Wounde, and this will ſtaunch the bleedinge of
any Cut or Wounde. Alſo take an Hearbe that is called by
the name of Pimpernell, and holde it betwene your teeth, &
you ſhall not bleede whileſt you doe holde it there.
         
         
            Cap. 131. ¶A very good Medicine to ſtaunch bloud, when
noe thinge elſe will ſtoppe it, by reaſon that the
vaines are cut, or that the wound is greate.
            TAKE a peece of Salt Biefe, (the leane onely) as
much as will lye in the Wound, and lay the biefe in the
Embres of the fire, and let it be thorough hote, and whē
it is hote, thruſt it into the Wounde, and binde it faſt, and it
will foorthwith ſtaunch the bloud, & let it lye for a good ſpace
after in the Wounde, for the ſtopping of the bloud. This is
a preſent remedy, and hath beene often proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 132. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE a Toade, and dry him in the Sunne very drye
then put him into a linnen bagg, and hange him about
your Necke with a ſtringe, ſoe lowe that it may touch
your breaſte, vpon the lefte ſide neare vnto your Harte, and
moſt commonly it ſtayeth all kinde of bleeding at the mouth,
Noſe, or Wounde.
         
         
            Cap. 133.
            
            ¶An other Medicine to ſtoppe bloud.
            YF your Noſe doe b
                  •
               eede vnmeaſurablie, thē tye your
litle finger very harde about the lower ioynte, and for
the moſt parte commonly, it fayleth not, but ſtayeth
the ſame.
         
         
            Cap. 134. ¶A very good Medicine to ſtaunch the
bleeding at the Noſe.
            TAKE the White of an Egge, and a litle red Oker, otherwiſe
called Bole armoniack, and a litle Dragons
bloud, bray all theſe together very ſmall, then take a
litle Flaxe, and wet it therein, and make it like a Fillet, &
lay it vpon the foreheade of the Patient, from the one eare to
the other, but be ſure that it lye vppon the Temples, and this
will preſently ſtaunch the bloud. This hath beene ſufficiently
Proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 135. ¶A preſent remedy to ſtaunch the bleeding
of any Cut or Wounde.
            TAKE a good quantitie of Vine leaues, and drye them
and beate them into pouder, and put it into the wound,
and it will ceaſe bleedinge preſently. This is an aproued
Medicine.
            
         
         
            Cap. 136.
            
            ¶A medicine for one that bleede thin wardly.
            TAKE a good quantitie of the iuice of Neepe, and let
the partie grieued drink it, and it will cauſe him to caſt
vp blood preſently. This hath been truely proued.
         
         
            Cap. 139. ¶An excellent remedie for one
that ſpitteth blood.
            TAKE the doung of miſe, and beate it into pouder, (as
much as will lye vpon a groate) and put it into a Pint
of the iuice of Plantine, and put thereto a little Sugar,
and let it be finely beaten to pouder, before you put it into y•
iuice, and let the partie greeued drinke of it morning & euening,
vntill he perceiue this infirmitie to be cleane gone.
         
         
            Cap. 133. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE the iuice of Betony, and temper it with Goates
milke, and giue the ſame to the patient to drinke, and
let him vſe it for the ſpace of three daies together, and
this will doubtles help him.
         
         
            Cap. 141. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE Betony, Mintes, Smalege, and Rue, of each of
them a like quantitie, and ſeeth them together in newe
Milke, and let the partie greened ſuppe it of as hot as
he is able to ſuffer it, and this helpeth. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 142. ¶A Medicine for the byting of any Venemous
beaſt.
            
               
                  TAKE Plantine, and drinke the
iuice thereof, and likewiſe take
Selandine and Plantine, of ech of
them a like quantiitie, Stampe
then very well together, & temper
them with ſtale Piſſe, and lay
the ſame to the place greeued, and
yt will preſentlye both aſſwage
the Swellinge, and drawe out
the Venome thereof, and yf yt be
neuer ſoe much For this hath beene often tymes proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 143. ¶A Medicine for the biting of a madde Dogge.
            TAKE Nyght-ſhade, Betony and Wilde Sage, of ech
of them one handefull, and a pince of faire running Water,
then ſtampe the hearbes, and ſtraine them with the
ſayd Water, and put thereto a Penyworth of Triackle, and
giue it to the Patient to drinke, for the ſpace of two or three
morninges of faſting, one after an other And yt helpeth, Probatum
eſt.
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 144. ¶A Rule to knowe what thinges are good and
holoſome for the Braine.
            
               
                  To ſmell to Camamill or Muſke,
                  To eate Sage, but
not ouermuch,
                  
                     ✚ To drinke Wine meaſurablie,
                  
                     ✚ To
keepe the Head warme,
                  
                     ✚ To waſhe your Hands often,
                  
                     ✚ To walke meaſurablie,
                  
                     ✚ To ſleepe meaſurablie,—
                  
                     ✚ To heare litle noiſe of Muſicke or 
                        •
                     ingers,
                  
                     ✚ To eate
Muſtarde & Pepper,
                  
                     ✚ To ſmell the ſauour of Red-roſes,
                  & to waſhe the Temples of your Heade often with Roſe-Water.
               

            
         
         
            Cap. 145. ¶Theſe Thinges are ill for the Braine.
            
               ✚ All maner of Braines, 
                  
                     ✚ Gluttony,
                  
                     ✚ Drunkennes,
                  
                     ✚ Late Suppers,
                  
                     ✚ To ſleepe much after meate,
                  
                     ✚ Anger,
                  
                     ✚ Hauines of minde,
                  
                     ✚ To ſtande much bare-headed
                  
                     ✚ Corrupt Aires,
                  
                     ✚ To eate ouermuch or haſtely,
                  
                     ✚ Ouermuch heate in Trauaylinge or Labouringe,
                  
                     ✚ Ouermuch
Watching,
                  
                     ✚ Ouermuch Colde,
                  
                     ✚ Ouermuch
Bathing,
                  
                     ✚ Milke,
                  
                     ✚ Cheeſe,
                  
                     ✚ Garlicke,
                  
                     ✚ Oynions
                  
                     ✚ Ouermuch Knocking or Noiſe,
                  & to ſmell to a white
✚ Roſe.
               



            
         
         
            
            Cap. 146. ¶A very good Medicine for to be vſed
of one that hath a ſtinking breath.
            
               TAKE the ſeedes of Coriander, and boyſe yt
in white Rumney or Sacke, and let the Partie
grieued drinke three ſpoonefulls thereof in the
Morninge, and as much in the Eueuinge, but
note that, y• which he taketh in y• morning muſt be cold, & the
other hotte, but he muſt vſe to take noe exceſſe of meates, nor
drinkes, nor let him not vſe to ſitte vp late at night, but riſe
vp earlie in the morninge, and it will him Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 147. ¶An other approued Medicine for a ſtinking
Breath.
            TAKE a very good quantitie of Roſmarie leaues
and flowers, and boyle them in white Wine, and with a
litle Cinamon and Benieamin beaten to pouder, & put
therein, and let the Patient vſe to waſh his mouth very often
therewith, and this will preſently helpe him. Probatum eſt
per M. Gatticars.
            
         
         
            Cap. 148. ¶An other for the ſame.
            
            TAKE of Cummin ſeede ana. iij. and beate yt to pouder,
and ſeeth it in a pottle of white Wine, and let yt
ſeeth vntill ſuch time, as the one halfe of it be cōſumed
away, then take it and ſtraine it, and let the Patient drinke
thereof, twice euery day at the leaſt, for the ſpace of ſixe or
ſeauen dayes, together, and let him vſe to drinke a quarter
of a Pint thereof at a time, and this will helpe him without
all doubt For yt hath beene often proued. I. B.
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 149. ¶A medicine for the Tiſicke, and ſtopping in the
Breaſt, and to open the Pipes.
            
               
                  TAKE Parſly-rootes, Fennell-rootes, and
Succory rootes, and take all the Pithes out
of them, and ſeeth them in White Wine, til
they be ſofte, and yf you can get any Ginger
Berries, ſeeth them therein, with the reſt, &
then ſtraine it, when you ſee that it is well
ſodden, then put thereto a litle Pellitorie of Spaine, to the
Wine, and let the Patient drinke of yt both Morninge and
Eueninge, for the ſpace of eighte or nine dayes, and yt will
help him, by Gods gr
                  •
               ce, For yt hath holpē many that could
fearce fetch theire breath at all.
         
         
            Cap. 150. ¶A good Medicine for the ſtopping in the breſte.
            TAKE Rue, and ſeeth yt in Eyſell, and ſo let the Patient
drinke yt: Let him alſo drinke Nettle-ſeede
brayed, and yt will cauſe him, to auoide great ſtore of
Grauell from the ſtone, in the Raine of the backe.
         
         
            Cap. 151. ¶An excellent Medicine for all maner of diſeaſes in
the breſte, & againſt all Impoſtumes, Coughes,
and Pluriſies.
            
               
TAKE a good handfull of Scabious, and let yt bee
very well dried, then take Anniſe-ſeed & Fennell-ſeed,
of ech of them one ounce, then take an ounce of Licquorice,
and pare it cleane, and cut it very ſmale. and twelue
Figges, and halfe an ounce of Erins, then take all theeſe, and
put them all together, eyther in a quarte of faire runninge
Water, or elſe a quarte of pure White Wine to ſoke, for the
ſpace of one Night, then let them boyle vntill ſuch time, as
the one halfe or ſomewhat more be conſumed, then ſtraine yt
thorough a fine linnen cloth, and when yt is ſtrayned, put
into it, a little fine Suger, to make it ſweete, and let the Patient
vſe to drinke this both Morninge and Eueninge, for the
ſpace of eyghte or nine dayes together, and by gods grace,
this will helpe him in a ſhort time, For this hath beene ſufficientlye
proued.
         
         
            
            Cap. 152. ¶A very good Medicine for to increaſe
Milke in a Woemans breaſtes.
            
               
                  TAKE Fennell Rootes, and Parſneepe
Rootes, and let them be boyled in Broth,
which muſt be made of Chickins, & then
let the Patient eate the ſame rootes mixed
with freſh Butter, which muſt bee as
new made, as poſſiblie it may be gotten,
and this will cauſe greate ſtore of Milke to increaſe in any
Woemans breaſtes, This hath beene often proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 153. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE Rice and ſeeth it in Cowe Milke, and crume
ſome Wheatē bread therein (it muſt be ſuch as is cleane
without Rie) and put into the ſaid Mylke, ſome Fenell
ſeede beatē to fine pouder, and a litle Suger to make it ſweet,
and this is knowne to be exceading good.
         
         
            Cap. 154. ¶An other for the ſame.
            
            TAKE a good quantitie of greene Wheate, which
groweth vppon the Grounde, betweene Michaelmas &
Eaſter, you muſt take both of the Blades and Rootes,
and ſtampe it very well and ſtraine it through a fine Linnen
cloath, into ſome Poſſet Ale, and put therein a litle fine Suger,
to ſweeten yt withall, and this will increaſe great ſtore
of Milke in a Womans breaſtes, within the ſpace of three
or fower dayes, by vſinge of yt, This hath beene proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 155. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE Chriſtall, and beate it into a very ſine pouder,
and Mingle yt with as much Fennell ſeed, likewiſe
beaten into fine pouder, and a ſmall quantitie of Suger,
and let the Patient vſe oftentimes, to drinke it warme, with
a litle White Wine, and this reſtoreth her Milke againe, yf
it be gone cleane away from her, For this hath beene ſufficientlye
proued.
         
         
            Cap. 156. ¶An excellent good Medicine, for a Woman
that hath a ſore or ſwellinge breſte.
            TAKE a Colewoort-leafe, and cut away the vaine
of yt, and then annoint the leafe yt ſelfe, with May Butter,
boyled with Roſe-water, and then lay yt to the womans
breſte that is ſore, and yt will aſſwage the ſwellinge
and paine thereof, in a ſhort tyme, This hath beene oftentimes
proued and founde to bee good.
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 157. ¶An other approued Medicine to breake the
ſore of a womans breſt.
            TAKE a good handfull of Figges, and ſtampe them
in a Morter, vntill ſuch time as all the R
                  •
               ruells be all
broken▪ then take them and temper them very well with
a litle Swines Greaſe that is freſh, and make a Plaiſter
thereof, and lay yt to the Womans breſt that is ſore, as here
as euer ſhee can poſſiblie abide yt, and yt will take away the
ſwellinge, and alſo the paine thereof, and yf yt be readie to
breake, yt will helpe yt forwardes foorthwith to breake, or

                  •
               lſe not, This is an approued Medicine.
            
         
         
            Cap. 158. ¶A Medicine for the ſwelling of a Womans
breaſt, after the wayning of a Childe.
            TAKE Red Sage, Camamill, and whitewine Vin
                     •
                  
                  ger,
and applye yt often to the Womans breſt tha
                  •
                is
ſore and yt helpeth her. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 158. ¶An approued Medicine for an old
Sore or Bruſe.
            
               TAKE Selandine, red Sage, and Sorell, of
euery one of them a good handefull, two
handefulls of Woodbinde leaues, halfe a
handefull of Rue, otherwiſe called Hearbe
grace, and a good handefull of the Topps
of Roſemarie, bayle all theſe together, in a
Pinte of good white Wine, and a Pinte and an halfe of
faire running Water, and let them boyle, vntill you perceiue
that they looke yeallow, and before ſuch time as they are altogether
ſodden, and put as much Honnie into it, as you doe
thinke will ſweeten it, and then put into it, halfe a quarter of
a pounde of Roch Allum, and when the Allum is molten,
then take yt from the fire, and ſtraine it through a Coulender,
or elſe thorough ſome courſe linnen cloth, and put yt
into a Gallypot or Glaſſe, and ſtoppe it very cloſe, and let y•
Patient vſe this to the ſore, and it will helpe him, probatum
eſt per D. S.
            
         
         
            Cap. 159. ¶An Excellent good Medicine for a bruſe.
            TAKE Brooke-Lime, Smallage and Browſe-woorte,
and frye them altogether in ſheepes Suet, & then take

it and ſtraine it thorough a fine linnen cloth, and it will preſently
become an Oyle, then put thereto a quantitie of Spermaceti,
and mixe them very well together, and ann oynte y•
place grieued often therewith, Probatum eſt. per M. Cox.
            
         
         
            Cap. 160. ¶A good Medicine for any maner of bruſe
in the Armes, Legges, or elſe where.
            TAKE a good quantitie of the Suet, of an Hart, Buck▪
or ſheepe, which is new killed (if it may be had) & put
thereto ſome Lees of Wine, and Wheaten branne, then
take Water-creſſes, and waſh them very cleane, and boyle
them in faire runninge Water, and let them boyle vntill ſuch
tyme as they be ſofte, then put them into a Morcer, and beate
them, and then put them into a cleane Panne, then mixe all
theſe thinges together, and frye them, and make a Plaiſter
thereof, and lay it warme to the Sore place, and ſoe vſe iiii.
or fiue Plaiſters, or more as neede ſhall require, probatū eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 161. ¶An approued Medicine for any Bruſe or
other ſore, which is vnriped.
            TAKE Otemeale Grotes, & ſeeth them in Cow Milke
which is new, and let them ſee the vntill they bee very
thicke, and then put it into a Panne, and mixe it with
a good quantitie of ſheepes Tallowe, and then boyle them very
well, and ſturre them continually, and then make a Plaiſter
thereof, and lay it to the ſore, as hotte as it may bee ſuffered.
This hath beene proued.
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 162. ¶A Medicine for a bruſe or ſtraine.
            TAKE Chickweede, Wheate branne, & the groundes
of ſtronge Ale or Beere, and mingle them very well together,
and lay yt to the place greeued, three or fower
tymes a day, yt being ſpread vppon a red Cloath, but not ouer
thinne, and this will helpe yt, Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 163. ¶A Medicine for a bruſe.
            TAKE a quarte of Claret wine Vineger, and voyle it
very well with Leauened bread, and then put into yt, a
a good quantitie of Deeres Suet, and a good quantitie
of Otemeale, & ſeeth yt vntill ſuch time as it be very thicke,
then take a linnen Cloath, and double yt, and ſpread yt thereon
very thicke, and lay yt to the ſore, But you muſt chaunge
the Plaiſters two or three times in a day, Vſe this for the
ſpace of three dayes together, and yt will helpe you.
         
         
            Cap. 164. ¶A Moſt ſinguler good Oyle made of Camamill,
which is good for all maner of bruſes, Splenes,
and Swellinges.
            TAKE a Pinte of good Sallet Oyle, or ſomewhat
more, and bruſe a good quantitie of Camamill, and put
therein, then put yt into a Glaſſe, and ſet it to ſtande in
ſome place in the Sunne, where yt may ſtande ſafe, for the

ſpace of tenne or twelue dayes together, and when it hath
ſtoode there for the ſpace of fiue daies then ſtraine your Oile
through a fine linnen cloath, and ſoe ſet yt againe in y• ſunne,
and at the end of the aforſayd tenne or twelue dayes, then you
muſt ſtraine yt againe, and then ſet yt in the Sunne to ſtand
in the Sunne for ſoe longe time as you ſhall thinke yt to bee
purified very cleane, and ſoe ſtraine yt the thirde tyme, and
when you perceiue that yt is cleane purified from the drugs,
then put yt into a cleane Glaſſe, & ſtoppe yt cloſe, vntill ſuch
tyme as you haue occaſion to vſe yt, and when you will vſe yt
annointe the place greeued, twice or thrice euery day, chafinge
yt before the fixe, and this will help you. This Oyle yf
you will keepe yt cloſe ſtopped, it will continue good for the
ſpace of two yeares and more, For yt hath been oftentimes
ſufficiently proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 165. ¶An excellent good Medicine for to be
drunke of one that is burſt in the
Belly, or Coddes.
            TAKE a handefull of Camfrey, a handfull of Polypodium,
otherwiſe caled Oke-fearne, a handfull of Sparakinge,
otherwiſe called Knotwort, a Potle of white
Wyne, a Knuckle of Veale, halfe a pounde of Reſons of the
Sunne, halfe an ounce of Mace, and halfe ſo many Dates, &
then take all theſe and put them into an earthen Potte, then
take a Ketle of fiue or ſixe gallons, and fill yt with Water,
and ſet yt ouer the fire, then take the ſayd Potte and ſtoppe
yt very cloſe, with a litle Paſte, and then put yt into the aforeſayde
Kettle of faire Water, and ſoe let the ſame

water ſeeth continuallye for the ſpace of fiue or ſixe houres
with the earthen Pot therein, and keep the Rettle ſtill ſeethinge
with other ſeething water, then take out the ſaide earthen
Pot, and take foorth thereof, all other thinges, & beate
them in a Morter, add ſtraine it, and giue the Patient of y•
ſame Licquor to drinke both firſt and laſt, and in ſoe doinge
hee ſhall bee by gods helpe cured.
         
         
            Cap. 166. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE the Call of an Oxe and Oynions, and fry them
with a quantitie of ſheepes Suet, and with a fine linnen
cloth, put it to the ſore, and this will preſently help you,
For it hath beene well proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 167. ¶A very good Plaiſter for a bruſe.
            TAKE Wormewood and Cummin, of ech of them a
like quantitie, and put thereunto, a litle roſe Vineger,
then lay it to the bruſe, like a Playſter, before that the
ſkynne be any thinge at all broken.
         
         
            Cap. 168. ¶A Medicine for a bruſe or cut.
            TAKE rootes of Louage, Ale-hofe, Parſlie, & Anniſſeedes,
and beate them in a Morter very fine, then take
Barrowes greaſe, and boyle them together, then ſtraine
foorth the iuice thereof, then take as much vnwrought Wax,
               
as a Wallnute, and halfe as much Roſine, & let them boyle
together, and when you haue ſoe done, then ſtraine it through
a fine linnen cloth into a litle Panne of water, and then let it
ſtande vntill it be colde, then take it in your handes and labour
it, vntill it be ſomewhat ſhorte, and then wrappe it in a
peece of Leather, and ſoe vſe it as you ſhall haue occaſion.
         
         
            Cap. 169. ¶An Excellent good Drinke to heale all
maner of bruſes.
            TAKE Egremony, Betony, Plantine, Sage, Roſes,
luie leaues, and Parſlie, of ech of them a like quantitie,
and ſtampe them all together, and mingle them with
a quarte of good White wine, and let the Patient vſe oftentimes
to drink thereof, vntill ſuch time as he be whole, which
will bee by gods grace in a ſhorte ſpace, Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 170. ¶A very good Medicine to ſkinne any old
Sore or bruſe.
            TAKE Red bramble Buddes, Selfe-heale, & Sinckfoile,
of ech of them a good handfull, & a litle water-betony,
and boyle them all very well together, with Barrowes
greaſe, then let the Patient apply it to the ſore as hote
as poſſiblie may be ſuffred, and this will help him without
all doubt. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 171.
            
            ¶An approued Medicine, for any burning
with fire, or Scaulding with Water.
            TAKE a good handfull of Houſleeke, & a handfull of
Hemlockes, and beate them both together, then take a
quarter of a pounde of Bores Greaſe, and feeth both
the Hearbes and yt together, vntill ſuchtime as they come
to an Oyntement, and then ſtraine, them into a Boxe, & let y•
Patient annointe the place greeued, therewith, twice euery
daye vntill ſuch time as he bee hole, which will be in a ſhort
tyme by gods helpe, Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 172. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE Iuy leaues, but they muſt bee of thoſe that grow
next the ground, and the leaues of Marigolds, of Woodbinde
leaues, and Plantine, of euery one of them a like
quantitie, and choppe them very ſmall, and boyle them in
Bores Greaſe, or elſe Hogges Greaſe, & then ſtraine them
into ſome earthen veſſell, or elſe a Gallypot, & let the Patient
annoint the place where the griefe is often therewith,
and yt helpeth, This hath beene well proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 173. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE a brake-roote, and ſtampe yt very well in a
Woodden Diſh, or in a Morter, and then ſtraine out
the iuice thereof cleane, and let the Patient annointe
the place that is burned often therewith, & it will help him

For this hath beene ſufficiently proued.
         
         
            Cap. 174. ¶A very good Oyntement for any maner of
Burning of Gunnpoweder, or Scauldinge
with Water.
            TAKE two or three handfulls of Houſleek, a handfull
of Baroes Greaſe, and two handfulls of Groundſell,
ſtampe all theſe together, & put thereto, two handfulls
of Sheepes Dounge, that is new fallen, & as much Gooſe
Dounge, and ſtampe them altogether as aforeſaide, & then
boyle them all very well together, and ſtraine them through
a fine Linnen Cloath, into an earthen Pot, and with the Liquor
that commeth thereof, annoint the place that ys burned
and yt will help yt foorthwith.
         
         
            Cap. 175. ¶An other very good Oyntemente for any
maner of burning with fire, or otherwiſe
Whatſoeuer.
            TAKE Dayſie rootes, Plantine, Waybroad leaues,
Greene gooſe Donnge, and the Greene Barke of an
Elder Tree, of ech of them a like quantitie, and a
quattitie, of Oyle Olyffe, ſtampe them all very well together,
and ſtraine them thorough a fine Linnen Cloath, and
with a Feather let the Partie greeued annointe him ſelfe
therewith, as often as hee ſhall thinke good, and this will
helpe him without all doubt, Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 176. ¶A very good Medicine for any maner of Burning
with Fire, or Scalding with water.
            
            TAKE a Brake roote, and ſtampe it in a Diſhe, and
then ſtraine ont the iuice, and put into it, a good quantitie
of Creame, and let the Partie greeued, annointe
the place which is burned or ſcaulded therewith, and
this will both fetch out the heate, and aſſwage the paine: For
yt hath beene truely proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 177. ¶A very good remedie for any burning or ſcaldwith
a Handegunne, or otherwiſe.
            TAKE a good quantitie of the Dung of Geeſe, which
is of one Nightes making, & a good quantitie of Butter
vnſalted, or elſe Clarified Sheepes Suet, and fry them
in a frying Panne for ye ſpace of a quarter of an houre, or vntill
your Butter or Suet, be almoſt conſumed, then put them
into a courſe linnen Cloath which is cleane, & ſtraine them
into a Gally-pot, or els ſome ſmall earthen veſſell: then take
a feather, and dip it in the ſame Liquor, & annoint the place
therewith, which is burned or ſcaulded, and when you haue
ſoe done, then take a fine Linnen cloath, and wet it well in y•
ſame Liquor, and lay it vppon the ſore place to couer it withall,
& ſoe doe this twiſe or thriſe euery day vntill it be whole,
and this by Gods grace, will ſpeadely help you, probatū eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 178. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE a good quantitie of Mayden-woort, & ſtamp it,

and ſeeth yt in freſh Butter, and ſtraine yt, and let the Patient
anoynt the place greeued often therewith, and yt will
ſpeadely helpe him. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 179. ¶A Medicine to take away a heate or burning
with Gun-pouder.
            TAKE a good quantitie of of Houſleeke, and ſtampe
yt, and wring out the iuice cleane, then take the whites
of fiue or ſixe New laide Egges, and beate them in a
Dyſhe, vntill ſuch time as they be Thinne, and then take
of the ſkumme of yt, and put the reſt together, and waſh the
ſore place with a Linnen cloath, and lay the cloath aloft vpon
the ſore wette.
         
         
            Cap. 180. ¶An other Medicine for Burning or Scaulding.
            TAKE Blacke Sope, or Gray Sope, and lay it ymmediatlye
to the place which is burned or ſcaulded, and yt
will ſpeadely helpe yt, For yt hath beene truely proued.
         
         
            Cap. 181. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE a good handfull of Auans, & as much Sheepes
Dunge, and ſoe fry them in May-Butter, and ſtraine it,
aud let the Patient annoint the place greeued, with a
litle of the ſame ſtuffe yt being told, twiſe or thrife a day, and
let yt be annointed firſt, eyther with Gray or blacke Sope, &
yt will help yt, But the Oyntement muſt be ſpread vppon a
fiue 
                  〈◊〉
                Cloath, yf that yt may be gotten, probatū eſt.
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 182. ¶A Medicine for burning or ſkalding
in what place ſo euer it be.
            TAKE the white of an Egge, and put it into a pewter
diſh, and then labor it with an Allome ſtone, vntill
it be like a Poſſet curde: then take a fine peece of
Linnen cloth, and wet it in Oyle Oliffe, or in ſome other
Oyle then lay the ſayde cloath vppon the ſoare, and aboue
it lay the aforeſayd curde made of the white of an Egge, and
that ſhall doth drawe out the fire, and heale the ſoare.
         
         
            Cap. 183. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            TAKE foure Egges and roſt them, and then take out
the yolkes of them, and frie them in a pan ſoftly vpon
the Embers, till they be blacke, and thereof will come
an Oyle, the which you muſt ſaue, and put it into a Gallie
pot, and ſo vſe it when they haue neede thereof.
         
         
            Cap. 184. ¶A good Medicine for a burning, for lacke
of other thinges.
            TAKE the verries of the Elder-tree, and lay them vnto
the ſoare, and they will preſently helpe you.
         
         
            
            Cap. 185. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            TAKE Oyle Olife, and beate it with faire water,
vntill it waxe very white, and then annoynt the place
greeued, and it ſpeedely helpeth.
         
         
            Cap. 186. ¶An other approued Medicine, for any
burning or ſcalding.
            TAKE a dozen Egges, and let them be as new as you
can haue them, and lay them in the fire, and roſt them
as hard as you can take the yolkes, and choppe them
as ſmall as you can, and put them into an earthen pot, and
ſet it ouer the fire, and ſtirre it with a ſticke, and let it boyle
vntill you ſee it consumed in a maner to nothing: Then
take it from the fire and ſet it in the ayre a quarter of an
houre, or more, and there will come an Oyle thereof, then
take a feather and annoynt the griefe with the ſame Oyle,
and take Hartſtong leaues, and lay vppon the griefe, and
that will gather the ſkinne, then you may binde a cloth
thereto.
         
         
            Cap. 187. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE a Henne Egge, and roſt it vntill it be very
hard; then take foorth the yolke, and bruiſe it with
freſh Butter that is cleane without any ſalt, and annoynt
the place greeued therewith, and by Gods helpe it
will be whole.
         
         
            
            Cap. 188. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE a Pounde of Waxe, a pounde of Roſme, and
halfe a pounde of May-butter, and boyle all theſe very
well together, and ſtirre yt continually as yt doth ſeeth,
and then let yt coole againe, and when you will vſe yt, make
yt Plaiſter-wiſe, and this will helpe you. probatū eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 189. ¶A very good Medicine for any burninge
with fire.
            TAKE Blacke Verniſh, and with a Feather, anoint
the place well which is burned, and yt will aſſwage y•
heate thereof, and yt will heale yt as faire as euer did
any other Medicine, and ſoe vſe yt continually, vntill
ſuch time as you bee perfect whole. This hath beene truely
and ſufficiently proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 190. ¶An approued Medicine for any maner of burning
or Scauldinge, be yt with fire, Oyle, or with
Gunpowder.
            TAKE Salt diſſolued in Water, or elſe Brine, which
the ſtrength of yt ſelfe, doth take away the paine, and y•
heate of 
                  〈◊〉
                burning, and eſpecially yf yt bee bat
                  •
               ed
with linnen clothes wette, or dipped in the ſame, and afterwardes
applyed to the place which ys burned or ſcaulded,
and this will preſentlie helpeyt. Probatū eſt.
            
            
               
Cankers in the mouth.
         
         
            Cap. 191. ¶An excellent remedy for a Canker.
            
               TAKE Peny-royall, red Fenell, red Sage,
Roſemary toppes, Mayden-heare, of each of
them a good handfull, and a little Iſope, boyle
all theſe well together in a qua
                  •
               e of white Wine,
and put thereto as much as two Walnuts of Roch Alum,
and as much Hony as will make it ſweete, then take it and
ſtraine it through a fine cloth, and let the patient waſh his
mouth often therewith.
         
         
            Cap. 192. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE the Wheaten flower, new Milke, Tarre,
and Coleworts, of each of them as much as you ſhall
thinke good, and boyle them altogether and make a
playſter thereof, and apply it to the ſore place, and this
helpeth.
         
         
            Cap. 193. ¶A very good water to kill the Canker and
Scurfe in the mouth.
            
            TAKE a quarte of white Wine, Sclandine, red Sage,
Roſemary ſtripped, Hiſope, and Woodbinde leaues,
of euery of them halfe a handfull, boyle them in the
white Wine, vntill the one halfe be conſumed, then ſtraine
them, and wring foorth the iuyce, then put thereto halfe an
ounce of Allom, a quarter of an ounce of white Coporas,
and two or three ſpoonefuls of Honny, and then ſet it to the
fire againe, and let it ſeeth but a little: then take it and
ſtraine it againe, and put it into a Viall, and when the partye
greeued, will vſe it, let him waſh the Canker with
this water, beeing luke warme, three times a day at the
leaſt, eyther with a linnen cloth vpon his finger, or elſe
vpon a ſtickes end if he cannot come to it with his finger.
This hath holpen many.
            After the patient hath waſhed his mouth, let him take
Sandeferd beaten very ſmall, and (the patients mouth being
opened) eyther with a Reede or a quill, blowe a little
of the powder vppon the ſore. This water will in a ſhort
tyme heale anye olde ſore, beeying waſhed therewith,
and a fine linnen cloth dipped in it, and layde vppon
the ſore.
         
         
            Cap. 194. ¶A Medicine for a Canker in the mouth,
both white and red: the white Canker will breake
out, but the red will not: Alſo this Medicine
is very good for any ſore lips,
ſore legges, or any other
ſores.
            TAKE two handfulls of Woodbinde leaues, and a
handfull of Sage, ſhread them fine, and beate them
very ſmall in a Morter: Then take two ſpoonefulls

a Honny, and Roch Allum to the quantitie of halfe an
Egge: then take a quarte of faire running water, and
ſeeth theſe alltogether, vntill they be thicke, then ſtrayne
it through a fine linnen cloth, and put the licquor into a
faire earthen potte, and couer it very cloſe: then annoynt
the gummes of the patient therewith, within his
mouth, on the ſore ſyde, or elſe if neede require, you may
annoynt your whole mouth therewith: And if it bee a
white Canker, then annoynt the vtter ſide of your mouth,
and then wet a cloth in the liquor, and lay it thereunto,
on the out ſide of the ſore, and vſe this three or foure times
in a day, and when you are dreſſed, then lay your face to
a warme chafingdiſh of coles, and then you ſhall ſee the
water runne foorth of your mouth in great quantities.
And if the Canker bee in the noſe, or in any other place
where it can not bee touched, then ſpout some of thys
liquor with a quill, and this will heale you within a
ſhort ſpace. This liquor will be kept well one and twentie
dayes, in his vertue and no more. This hath bene often
prooued.
         
         
            Cap. 195. ¶An excellent Remedie for a Canker in
the mouth or throate, or elſe to waſh your
teeth that be hollow and
ſtinke.
            TAKE a quantitie of red Sage, and twelue crops
of Roſemary, and a quantitye of Hony-Suckles,
and wilde Dayſies, and Sinkefoyle: Boyle them
all together in a pinte of verye faire runnyng water,
vntill it bee halfe conſumed: Then take a little Roch-Allum,
and burne it to powder, and halfe a ſpoonefull

of Hony, and put therein: then take and ſtraine it through
fine linnen cloth, and when it is cold; put it into glaſſes, and
let the patient waſh his mouth therewith, as often as hee
ſhall thinke good.
         
         
            Cap. 195. ¶A very good Medicine for a Cankar
in the mouth.
            TAKE white wine Vinegar, and Honny, of each of
them a like quantity, and boyle them altogether with
a little Roch-Allum, and let the patient, waſh his
mouth therewith as often as neede ſhall require, and this
cureth the Canckar.
            Alſo the iuice of Plantine, Vinegar, and Roſe water, is
very good for the Canker, or a ſtinking breath.
         
         
            Cap. 196. ¶An other Medicine to drie vp the Canker
and to ſtay it.
            TAKE the iuyce of Woodbine, and the iuice of Marygolds,
and a quantitie of Honny, and a quantitie of
powder of Cannell, and as much powder of Coporas,
aud the powder of wilde Sage (burnt and mingled all together)
then lay them on the place where the Canker is, and
it will drie it vp. But to ſlea the Cankers, take a red
Onion and lay it thereon, and it will both ſlea it and
cure it.
         
         
            Cap. 197. ¶A very good Medicine for a Canker, or diſeaſe
of the G
                  •
               mme
                  •
                or throate.
            
            TAKE Plantine and Honyſuckles, of each of them
a handfull, an ounce of Daiſy leaues, halfe a handfull
of Sage, and a quart of very faire running water,
boyle all theſe together, vntill the one halfe be conſumed:
then put therein fiue ſpoonefulls of ſharpe Vinegar, fiue
ſpoonefulls of ſtone Honny, and as much Roch-Allum as
a Wallnut, this hath beene prooued to cure the Canker.
         
         
            Cap. 199. ¶A Medicine to cure any Canker in
the mouth.
            TAKE a Flowerdeluce roote, waſh it, and ſtiſe it,
then take a few leaues of Penyroyall, lay them to
ſteepe in very faire Conduite water, or elſe in faire
running water for the ſpace of xxiiii. houres, then take the
ſame water and waſh your mouth therewith as often as
you ſhall thinke good.
         
         
            Cap. 200. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE Vinegar, Roſe-water and the iuice of Plantine,
and waſh thy mouth therewith many times, and
it will helpe thee.
         
         
            Cap. 201. ¶A Medicine to cure a Canker in a
womans pappes.
            
            TAKE Gooſe-doung, and Selandine, and bray
them very well together, and lay them to the ſore
pappe, and it will cle
                  •
               ſe the Canker, ſlea the worme,
aud heale the ſore.
         
         
            Cap. 202. ¶A very good water for to clenſe the mouth,
and to faſten teeth.
            TAKE Woodbinde leaues, and Sage, of each of
them a handfull, a good ſpoonefull of pure engliſh
Honny, and a peece of Allume as bigge as a good
Wallnut, Boyle all theſe together in a quarte of faire
running water, and let it boyle till the one halfe be conſumed:
then ſtraine it through a fine linnen cloth, and let the
Patient waſh his mouth with this water luke warme,
three or foure times in a day, and this will clenſe his mouth
of any corruption that ſhall abide therein, after any
Canker or other diſeaſe.
         
         
            Cap. 203. ¶An excellent good Medicine for
a Canker.
            TAKE Ground Iuie, Plantine, Peny-royall, Woodbinde,
Dayſies, Roſemary, Iſop, Featherfew, Sage,
Lauender-ſpike, and Hearb-grace, of each of theſe
alike quantity, and two ſpoonefulls of white wine Vineger,
ſtampe and ſtraine all theſe together, then take wheaten
Flower, and Honny, of each of them one ſpoonefull, then
mingle the iuice of the hearbes, and theſe things all together,

and let it be ſtirred about very well: then make a
Plaiſter thereof, and lay it to the ſore place cold, and by
Gods grace it will helpe you very ſpeedely.
         
         
            Cap. 204. ¶A Medicine for a Canker in
the mouth.
            TAKE the iuice of Plantine, Woodbinde, and a little
Roch Allum, Roſewater, and white wine Vineger,
& mingle all theſe together, and let the Patient waſh
his mouth therewith, and this will helpe him in a ſhort
ſpace, for it hath bene well prooued.
         
         
            Cap. 205. ¶A Medicine for a Canker, or a
ſore mouth.
            TAKE a handfull of Sage, and a handfull of Hony-ſuckle
leaues, a pretty quantyty of Roſemary, and
as much Roch Allum, as halfe a good Wallnut, and
a ſpoonefull of Honny, boyle all theſe together in a quarte
of faire running water, and let them boyle a good while,
then ſtraine it into a Glaſſe or Viall, and let the Patient
waſh his mouth both morning and euening, as long as he
ſhall finde himſelfe greeued, and this will helpe him.
Vſed much by Tho. Sefold.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 206. ¶An excellent good Medicine for a woman
labouring of Childbirth.
            TAKE Mugwort, and ſeeth it very well in faire water,
and plaiſter it as hote as it may be ſuffered, both
to the Nauell and Thighes of the woman labouring
of childe, and it doth prouoke ſpeadie deliuery of Childbirth,
and afterburden, without any perill, but it muſt not
be ſuffered to continue very long to any part of her body,
for if it doe, it will cauſe the Matrix to follow.
         
         
            Cap. 207. ¶An other for the ſame.
            TAKE Hiſope, Veruoine, and Betony, of eache of
them one handfull, ſtampe them very ſmall with olde
Ale, and ſtraine it, and wring foorth the iuice thereof,
and let the woman that trauaileth, drinke a good
draught of it, and it will helpe her preſently without any
daunger. This hath beene prooued.
         
         
            Cap. 208. ¶A preſent remedy for a woman that traueleth
with childe, to helpe her to a ſpeady
and good deliuerance.
            
            TAKE Pollipodium, otherwiſe called Okefearne,
and ſtampe it very well, then plaiſter it vpon the feete
of the woman that traueleth with childe, and it cauſeth
ſpeedy birth of the childe, eyther aliue or dead. This is a
maruelous good ſecret.
         
         
            Cap. 209. ¶A Medicine for the Crampe.
            TAKE Oyle of Violets, Holy-oke, and of Swines
greace, of each of them a like quantity, and make
an Oyntment thereof, and let the party greeued
annoynt the place very often where the griefe is with the
ſame Oyntment, and this will helpe him. Probatum eſt.
Per I. B.
            
         
         
            Cap. 210. ¶A very good Medicine for a
Chincough.
            TAKE a Mouſe and flea it, and drye it to powder in
an ouen, and drinke it in Ale. The ſame is alſo good
for them that cannot hold their water. Probatum eſt.
Per M. Ierueis.
            
         
         
            Cap. 211. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE Bores-greace, and warme the ſoales of the
feete of the patient to the fire, and chafe and rubbe
them with the aforeſaid greace, and when you thinke

that you haue rubbed and chafed them ynough, then let
him goe to bed, and there be kept very warme, and lay
clothes ynough to his feete.
            This may be vſed to little Children, and it will helpe
them.
         
         
            Cap. 212. ¶An approued Medicine for
a Cough.
            TAKE three Figges and roſte them, and put them in
a cup of Beere, and put therein a little Licquorice,
and Anniſe-ſeedes beaten to powder, and ſet it to
ſtand by the fire till it be warme, then take out the Figges
and eate them, then when you goe to bed drinke vp the
drinke alſo, and couer your ſelfe very warme, and in ſo
doing for the ſpace of foure nights together, it will breake
the Cough. This hath bene proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 213. ¶A very good Medicine to take away
a cough, or ſtitch.
            TAKE a quarte of Malmeſye, Aniſe-ſeede, and vnſet
Iſope, of each of them a handfull, a Licquorice-ſticke
or two, bruſed, and halfe a two-peny diſh of Butter,
ſeeth all theſe together till they be thicke, and then take it
and ſpread it vpon a toſte of Wheaten-bread, and lay them
within a fine linnen cloth, and ſet it to your ſtomacke as hot
as you may ſuffer it, but if you will vſe this for a ſtitch, the
Butter muſt be left out.
         
         
            Cap. 214.
            
            ¶A very good Medicine for a cough, and to cauſe
one to auoide flegme from the ſtomacke.
            TAKE a quart of ſtale Ale, and a handfull of Gooſe-meate,
which is commonly called Hayrefe, and a good
quantity of Liquorice pared, and a quantity of ſmall
Reiſons, and boyle them alltogether, vntill the one halfe be
conſumed, and let the patient drinke thereof firſt and laſt.
         
         
            Cap. 215. ¶An excellent good drinke to breake the cough.
            TAKE two penyworth of Licquorice, and ſet it to
ſoke in very faire running water, and ſo let it ſtand for
the ſpace of a day and a night therein, then let the patient
drinke a good draught thereof when he goeth to bed,
as hote as he can drinke it, then let there be a hote Boord, or
a Logget of wood layd as hote as it may be ſuffered, to the
ſoles of his feete when he goeth to bed, and prouoke him to
ſweate if you can, and ſo in the morning do the like againe,
and within three dayes he ſhall be whole. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 216. ¶A Medicine for the Cough, and for the
ſtraightnes of the pipes.
            TAKE drye Figges, and Iſope, and ſtampe them
very well together, and boyle them with Honny,
then let the patient vſe to drinke it faſting, this is
good, and hath bene very well approued to be true.
         
         
            Cap. 217. ¶An excellent good and approued Medicine
againſt an extreame Cough.
            
               
TAKE Fennell-rootes cleane waſhed and Anniſe
ſeedes, of each of them a like quantity, and a little
Licquorice, and ſeeth them altogether in white Wine,
then take and ſtraine it, and put it into ſome earthen or
cloſe pot, and drinke a good draught thereof when you goe
to bed, and the next morning, take a Figge, and a Date,
and roſt them, and eate them as hote as you may, and when
you haue ſo done, neyther eate nor drinke for the ſpace of
two or three houres after, and thus in three or foure dayes
you ſhall be whole.
         
         
            Cap. 218. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            TAKE Hore-hounde, and Iſope, of each of them
a like quantity, then take Water and Sugar, and boyle
them alltogether, till it become a ſyrop, and ſo vſe to
eate this morning and euening, and at all other times when
you ſhall thinke meete and conuenient, and this will breake
the Cough, for it hath bene proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 219.
            TAKE a toſte of Bread, and make it very hote,
and put on as much ſweete Sallet Oyle, on both
ſides thereof, as the bread will receiue, and eate it,
vſe this morning and euening, and it will help you.
         
         
            Cap. 220. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            
            TAKE a little of the roote of Elicompanae, Reyſons
of the ſunne, Figges cut in ſmall peeces, and Anniſe
ſeedes, Iſope, Licquorice, and Hore-hounde, of each
of them a like quantity, Boyle all theſe very well together
in faire running Water, then ſtraine it, and drinke it euery
morning faſting for the ſpace of three or foure dayes, and
it will helpe you.
         
         
            Cap. 221. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            TAKE Barrowes greace, or Bores greace, and foure
or fiue Cloues of Garlicke, and ſtampe them all together:
then when the Patient is going to bed, let him
warme his feete to the fire, and anoynt them with the aforeſayd
oyntment, then when he is in his bed, let him haue a
trencher made hote, and put to the ſoales of his feete, as hote
as he may abide it, and warme clothes, and this will helpe
him. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 222. ¶A very good Medicine for the Cough, and to
breake the fleagme.
            TAKE a pottle of pure Muskadine, and a qua
                  •
               t of
Iſope water diſtilled, and fine or ſixe good races of
caſe Ginger, pare off the rinde from them very cleane,
and ſlice them, then take twice as much Licquorice as you
haue Ginger, and pare it likewiſe, then take two good handfulls
of Sugar-Candie, groſe bruſed, and mixe all theſe together,
and put them into a Glaſſe, and ſhake it often, and
ſtop it very cloſe, and let it ſtand for the ſpace of xxiiii.
            
               
TAKE halfe a pound of white Suger-Candie, halfe
a pinte of Roſe-water, a ſpoonefull or more of Anniſeſeedes,
a pinte or more of Iſope-water, and a good
quantity of Licquorice cleane pared and bruſed: Boyle all
theſe together, vntill you ſee it come to a ſyrop, then ſtraine
it through a fine linnen cloth, and put it into a Glaſſe, and
take it at all times when you ſhall thinke moſt meete, and
conuenient for you.
         
         
            Cap. 228. ¶A ſoueraigne Medicine for the cough
of the Lungs.
            TAKE Rayſons of the ſunne a handfull, and let them
be cleane waſhed, with the ſtones of them cleane picked
out, and a penyworth of Maydenheare, halfe a
ſpoonefull or more of Anniſe ſeedes bruſed ſmall, tenne or
twelue Figges, halfe a pound or ſomewhat more of Portugall
Suger, three pintes of very faire running Water, Boyle
all theſe together, vntill the one halfe be conſumed away,
then ſtraine it through a fine cloth, and euery morning
drinke two ſpoonefulls thereof luke-warme, and you ſhall
preſently finde remedie thereby. Probatum eſt. Per M.
Baker.
            
         
         
            Cap. 229. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE halfe a pound of the beſt Sugar that can be
gotten, and a good quantity of Anniſe ſeedes, and
Licquorice, two handfulls of great Reyſons, and let
the ſtones be picked out, two penyworth of Mayden-heare,
a gallon of faire running Water, a pound of Figges, Boyle

all theſe together, vntill it be halfe conſumed, then take it,
and put it into a cleane earthen pot, and as you vſe it, take
a little at a time, and put it into a Maudlin Cup, or Cruce,
and warme it, drinke this as often as you ſhall thinke good,
but eſpecially Morning and Euening.
         
         
            Cap. 230. ¶A Medicine for the cough of the Lungs,
and for the Rewme.
            TAKE a li. of Elicompanae rootes y• are yong, of Setrach,
Mayden-haire, Ana. 1. ℥. all being new gathered,
ſcrape the Elicompanae rootes, & cut it into ſmall
ſlices, ſeeth them in fiue pintes of faire running Water, and
let it boyle vntill it tome to a pinte and an halfe, then ſtraine
them, and put to it the quantity of three quarters of a pound
of fine Suger, then boyle it againe, vntill it come to the
quantity of three quarters of a pinte, them take two or three
yolkes of new layd Egges, and beate them very well, and
put them therein, and let them boyle together for the ſpace
of halfe a quarter of an houre, then take it off the fire, and
when the Patient will vſe it, let him take a ſpoonefull at a
time, one in the morning, and an other in the euening, and
let the Patient lye vpon his backe for the ſpace of an houre
after he hath receiued it, and let him vſe this for the ſpace of
fiue or ſixe dayes, keeping himſelfe very warme, and it will
rid the greateſt cough that is from him, for it hath been well
prooued.
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 231. ¶A very good Medicine for the Colde.
            TAKE a Pottle of Ale, and boyle it, alſo ſcome it
very cleane, then take Hiſop and Peniroyall, of each of
them halfe a handfull, Anniſe ſeed and Licquorice, of
each of them an ounce, and three peny worth of caſe Ginger,
and fiue or ſixe Figges ſliced: If your Figges do not make it
ſweete inough, then put into it a quantity of fine Suger, (you
muſt ſlice your Licquorice and Ginger, and bruſe your Anniſe
ſeeds) and then boyle it ouer the fire, vntill the one halfe
be conſumed, and then ſtraine it through a fine linnen cloth
into ſome Glaſſe, or elſe ſome Pot, where it may be kept
cloſe, then let the Patient drinke thereof morning and euening
for the ſpace of fiue or ſixe dayes together, and he ſhall
finde great eaſe thereby. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 232. ¶Another for the ſame.
            TAKE Hiſop, Roſemary, Plantine, and the roote of
Raddiſh, of each of them a like quantity, and ſeeth
them in a pottle of white Wine, vntill the one halfe be
conſumed, then take it from the fire, and ſeperate the hearbs
from the licquor, then take the hearbs, and put them into a
Morter, and ſtampe them very well, and ſtraine them, and
put it into the Pot againe, then take a pinte of engliſh Honny,
and boyle it, and ſkome it, then take the quantity of a
ſmall Nutte of May Butter (if it may be gotten) and let it be

clarified, and put into the other Licquor, and let it ſeeth
a little ſpace after, then ſtraine it againe through a fine
linnen cloth, and put the Licquor into a Glaſſe, or ſome other
cleane Ueſſell, and let the Patient drinke thereof morning
and euening, to the quantity of ſeuen or eight ſpoonefulls
at a time, with ſtale Ale, vntill he be whole. This hath
been often proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 233. ¶A Medicine for the ſtopping of the noſe and head,
which commeth by reaſon of colde.
            TAKE a good quantity of the iuice of Primroſe, and
blow it with a quill into the Patients noſe, and let
him keepe himſelfe warme after it, and it will cleare
both his head and noſe.
         
         
            Cap. 234. ¶A very good Drinke for a Cold or Cough.
            TAKE Iſop, Roſemary, Plantine, & Raddiſh-rootes,
of each of them a like quantity, and ſeeth them in a
pottle of pure Muskadine, and ſo let it ſeeth vntill ſuch
time as the one halfe thereof be conſumed away, then take
foorth the hearbs, and put them into a woodden diſh, or elſe
into a morter, and ſtampe them, and ſtraine the iuice into the
licquor, and then put in the hearbs againe, then take a pinte
of clarified Honny, and the quantity of a quarte of May-Butter,
being likewiſe clarified, and ſo boyle all theſe againe
for the ſpace of a quarter of an houre, or ſomewhat more,
then take it and ſtraine it through a fine linnen cloth, into
ſome glaſſe, or elſe into ſome cleane earthen veſſell, and ſtop
it cloſe, and let the Patient vſe to drinke this both morning
and euening for the ſpace of 3. or 4. dayes together, but he
muſt take the quantity of vii. ſpoonefulls at a time, mingled

with ſtale Ale warme, and this will helpe him, although his
Cold or Cough be neuer ſo great, for it hath been well
prooued. C. D.
            
         
         
            Cap. 235. ¶Another very good Drinke for the colde,
and to open the Pipes.
            TAKE Endiue, Succory, Parſly, Fennell, Bourage,
Time, Hiſop, Germaunder, Neepe, and Penyroyall,
of each of them a good quantity, and ſeeth all theſe together
in a pottle of faire running Water, and let them boyle
vntill the one halfe thereof be conſumed, and then ſtraine it,
and put to it the quantity of two ſpoonefulls of good wine
Vineger; and three or foure ounces of fine Suger, to make it
ſweete, and ſo let the Patient drinke a good draught thereof
morning and euening, for the ſpace of three dayes together,
and this will helpe him. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 236. ¶A good Medicine to take away any Corne in your
Toe, or elſe-where.
            TAKE a knife, and pare the Corne as neere the quick
as it may be ſuffered, and then take the inner part of a
Figge, and a quantity of Verdy-greace, and mixe them
both together, and lay it to the Corne, and let it be bound
very faſt with a linnen cloth, and this will eate out the roote
of the Corne, for this hath been prooued. Per I. Bell.
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 237. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            TAKE Marygoldes ſtamped, and lay them vpon the
ſore both Morning and Euening, and if the Corne be
not very deepely rooted, it will helpe. Or elſe pare
your Corne, and lay thereto the quantity of halfe a peaſe
or ſomewhat more of Turpentine and red Waxe boyled together,
and this will take away the Corne.
         
         
            Cap. 238. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            TAKE and cut away the Corne, and then take a
blacke Snaile and bruiſe it, and put a drop or two of
the iuice thereof into the place greeued, and put thereto
a little powder of Sandefere, and it will helpe you.
         
         
            Cap. 239. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            FIrſt, pare away the Corne as neere as it may be ſuffered,
then take Vnſlekt Lime, and put it into the hole,
to the quantity of a Fatch, and couer it with a plaiſter
made of Waxe and Roſen mixed together, and let it
continue on the place for the ſpace of foure and twenty
houres, and this will preſently helpe you.
         
         
            Cap. 240.
            
            ¶A Medicine to heale any Cornes
in ones feete or toes.
            TAKE red Waxe, Vineger, and a little quantity of
Aquavitae, and boyle them all together, with two or
three cloues of Garlicke, then take a knife that is
ſharpe, and when you goe to bed, cut your Corne as neere as
you can ſuffer to cut it, then take one of the cloues of Garlicke,
& ſome of the Waxe, and binde it to your toe, vſe this
three or foure times, and this will take away the Corne, that
you ſhall neuer be troubled therewith againe.
         
         
            Cap. 241. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            TAKE Oyſters and open them, and cut out the white
pith that groweth vnto the ſhells, and dry it, and make
thereof a powder, and when you goe to bed cut your
Corne with a ſharpe knife, and picke out as much of the
roote as you can, then put into the hole ſome of this powder,
and if you will, you may vſe a very little of ſublimed Mercury,
the which is to be had at the Apothecaries, and then
wrap a linnen cloth about your toe, and it will eate away
the Corne cleane. This hath been prooued
            
         
         
            Cap. 242. ¶A foueraigne Medicine for the Collick.
            TAKE houſhold bread that is made of cleane wheate,
and make a toſte thereof, and toſte it at the fire, and
euer as you toſte it, caſt Malmeſye on it, then take

               Lauender flowers, and caſt it on the toſte, then lay it vppon
a thinne cloth, and as hote as the Patient can ſuffer it, let
him lay it to his Nauell, as cloſe as he can. This hath holpen
many.
            
         
         
            Cap. 243. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            TAKE Dates and bren them in a pan as ye do parched
Peaſon, and let the Patient put them in a linnen
cloth, and ſet them to his Nauell as hote as he may
poſſibly abide it, and by vſing this often, he ſhall finde great
eaſe.
         
         
            Cap. 244. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            TAKE a cleane ſtone, & make it red hote in the fire,
then take it foorth againe, and let it coole vntill the
redues be gone, and then take a penyworth of Saffron
and lay it vpon the ſtone, and turne it too and fro, vntill it be
turned almoſt to powder: then take it and temper it well
with the quantity of two ſpoonefulls of pure Malmeſey, and
ſo let the Patient drinke it firſt and laſt, and by Gods grace
this will helpe him.
         
         
            Cap. 245. ¶An approued Medicine for the Collick
and Stone.
            TAKE the cuttings of a Vine and dry them throughly,
& when you are diſpoſed to vſe them, burne them vpō a
Tileſtone, or elſe vpon ſome cleane harth, then take the
aſhes y• cōmeth of y• Vine, & mingle it with a pint of Renniſh

Wine, or white wine, & ſo let it ſtand for y• ſpace of a night,
and the next morning you muſt drinke a good draught thereof
faſting, (you muſt haue a great regard in the putting of
the aſhes and the wine together, becauſe they ought to be of
equall quantities.) This hath been proued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 246. ¶A Medicine to be vſed for the Collicke and Stone
in manner of a Plaiſter.
            TAKE Parſly & Smallage, of each of them one ounce,
and two ſpoonefulls of Capons-greaſe, put theſe into
an earthen veſſell, and let one ſpoonefull of the greace
be put on the top, and the other in the bottome of the hearbs,
then ſet theſe to boyle on the embers from morning to
night, and then ſtamp them and ſtraine them: then take the
oyntment and ſpread it vpon a linnen cloth, and lay it as hot
as it may be ſuffered to the Nauell, and bottome of your
belly. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 247. ¶A good Medicine for the Collicke.
            TAKE a quarte of white Wine, and Milke that is
new from the Cowe, or Goates milke if it may be
gotten, and make a poſſet thereof, then ſkome the curd
away cleane, and take the poſſet drinke, and put therein a
handfull of Mother of Time, and a handfull of yong Parſly,
and ſeeth them in the poſſet drinke, then take a penyworth
of long Pepper & bruiſe it, and put it into the poſſet drinke,
and let the Patient drinke a good draught thereof firſt and
laſt, and he ſhall finde great eaſe thereby. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 248. ¶A good Medicine for a woman that is
troubled with the Collicke.
            TAKE the buds of Palme when they be floured in
March, and diſtill them, and giue a good draught of
the ſaid water to the Patient to drinke faſting for the
ſpace of three or foure dayes together, and the party greeued
ſhall quickly be whole. Alſo Litarge drawne into water, is
good for the ſame diſeaſe.
            
         
         
            Cap. 249. ¶A good Medicine for the Stone.
            TAKE a good handfull of Time, and aſmuch Parſly,
and ſeeth them in white Wine a good while, then
ſtraine it, and ſhare a good ſpoonefull of white Sope,
into a good draught of the ſame Wine, and giue it to the
Patient to drinke, and this will helpe him preſently.
         
         
            Cap. 250. ¶An excellent good Medicine for the Collick.
            TAKE a good quantity of the leaues of a Lorell tree,
and dry them and beate them to powder, and put
thereto a quantity of the powder of Nutmegs, and
mingle them with freſh Butter, and with a linnen cloth bind
it to the Nauell of the party greeued, and it will helpe him
ſpeedily.
         
         
            Cap. 251. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            
            TAKE a handfull of Grouncell and ſtampe it very
well in a Morter, & put thereto an ounce of Cummin,
and fry them with ſheepes ſuet, and ſtale Ale, and make
a Plaiſter thereof and lay it to the Nauell of the party
greeued, as hote as it may be ſuffered. This hath beene
prooued.
            
         
         
            Cap. 252. ¶An approued Medicine for the Collick and Stone.
            TAKE Philupendula, Scabions, Mouſe-eare, water
Creſſets, of each of them a like quantity, then take
the middle rinde or barke of an Elder tree, and then
put all theſe into an Duen that is hote, and dry them, and
make thereof a Powder, and giue the Patient to drinke the
quantity of a ſpoonefull at a time, either in poſſet ale, or Ale
it ſelfe alone warme. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 253. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            TAKE the waight of eight groates of Cummin, the
waight of ſeauen groates of Gallingall, the waight of
ſixe groates of Bayes, fiue groates waight of long Pepper,
the waight of foure groates of Fennell ſeede, the waight
of three groates of Aliſander-ſeede, two groates waight of
Parſly ſeede, and the waight of one groate of engliſh Saffron:
Beate al theſe to powder in a Braſen Morter, and let it be
very well ſearſed: then put thereto a good quantity of fine
Suger, and mingle them well together, and let the party
greeued vſe of the ſame powder in his Pottage, (the quantity
of halfe a ſpoonefull at a time) And let him vſe of this

powder in his drinke, (as in Ale that is olde, or elſe in white
Wine, but it is beſt in Pottage. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 254. ¶An approued Medicine for the Collick
and Stone.
            TAKE a pottle of white Wine that is pure and good,
and put it into a pot, and take alſo two great blew
Flint ſtones, and let them be as bigge as they will
eaſily goe into the pot whereas the Wine is, then caſt the
ſtones into the fire, where as they may be red hote, then take
them foorth and quench them in the pot whereas the Wine
is, then take them foorth againe out of the pot, and put them
in the fire againe, as is aforeſaid, and ſo in like manner the
third time, and ſo from time to time, vntill the one halfe be
conſumed away: and when you ſee that the Wine is halfe
conſumed, then ſet it to ſtand vntill it be well ſettled, and
then let the party greeued drinke thereof, and let him vſe
it as often as he ſhall thinke good, or that he ſhall feele any
paine, and this will helpe him of the Collick and Stone.
For by experience I am able to report, that it did helpe one
Mayſter Taylor of Briſtow, that was priſoner in the Kings
Bench, with diuers others.
         
         
            Cap. 255. ¶An excellent good and perfect Medicine to
cure the Collick, Stone, and
Stranguary.
            TAKE v. or vi. leaues of the hearbe called Lawrell,
ſtampe them and ſtraine them in Ale, or if they be dry,
beate them to powder & put it in Ale, & let the Patient

drinke thereof faſting, and let him be kept warme all the
ſame day after in his Chamber: for after the receipt thereof,
he ſhall be troubled with fiue or ſixe ſtooles, or more.
This hearbe groweth in Gardens, and is like to Miſſelden,
otherwiſe Miſtletae, and it hath leaues like vnto the hearbe
which is called Miſſell, which groweth in old Apple trees,
and beareth a berry of the bignes of a warte, and it is commonly
giuen to Cattell for medicines.
            The next day after that you haue taken this Medicine as
aforeſaid, make a Powder of theſe things following, Filinendula,
and Saxifrage, of each of them one ounce, Coriander
ſeede, Gromell ſeede, and Alexander ſeede, of each of
them halfe an ounce, Iuy berries, Broome-ſeede, the bloſſome
of the Elder flowers, and the berries of Holme, of each
of theſe one ounce, and the like quantity of Anniſe ſeede and
Fenell ſeede, 
               
                  〈◊〉
                Oxegall, and halfe an ounce of the Rowe
of a red Hearing, the Roundes of a Thorneback-fiſh, which
is a round nut, which you ſhall finde within the prickes
which ſtand vpon the fiſhes backe, and Pollipodium, which
is a fearne growing out of an Oke, dried into powder: of
each of theſe halfe an ounce, beate all theſe in powder, and
mixe them together, and for the ſpace of sixe or ſeuen dayes
following, take euery day faſting to the quantity of one
ſpoonefull of the ſame Powder, and mixe it with Ale, and
drinke thereof: but you muſt abſtaine from meate & drinke
for the ſpace of foure or fiue houres after the receipt hereof.
This hath cured many.
            
         
         
            Cap. 256. ¶A Medicine to cure the Collick and Stone.
            TAKE Blacke berries, Hawes, and Akornes, and dry
them vpon Tiles, then take the powder of them ſeuerally,
of each a ſpoonefull, and ſearſe it fine, and giue

it to the Patient in Malmeſey to drinke euery morning
faſting, for the ſpace of fiue or ſixe dayes. This hath been
prooued.
         
         
            Cap. 257. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            TAke vnſet Leekes, Mallowes, Pellitory, of each of
them a like quantity, ſtampe them very well, and put
thereto a penyworth or two of Neates oyle, fry them
well together in maner of a plaiſter, put them into a bagge
made of linnen cloth, and being very hote, lay it to the belly
of the Patient, and it will helpe within one houre.
            And for the Stone, lay the ſame to the Reines of the
backe behinde, and it will help with ſpeede.
         
         
            Cap. 258. ¶A very good Medicine for the Collicke.
            TAke Gromell ſeede, Parſly ſeedes, and Anniſe ſeedes,
of each of them two ſpoonefuls, greene Fenell one
handfull, one Parſly roote, one Raddiſh roote, let eyther
of them be as long as a finger, vnſet Time, Cheryſtones,
Philopendula, of each of them one handfull, Waſh
all theſe, and bruſe and ſtamp them very ſmall, Then take
them and boile them in a pottle of white Wine, in an earthen
pot cloſe, till a pint thereof he conſumed, and then let it
runne through a linnen cloth without ſtrayning, and drinke
this both morning and euening. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Cap. 259. ¶A Medicine for the Collicke and Stone.
            TAke Camamile, as much as will lie in the palme of
your hand, Pellitory of the wall, and Auens, of each of
them a handfull, and a ſpoonefull of Partly ſeede a little

bruſed, then make a Poſſet of Renniſh Wine, and let the
curd be cleane taken off, and then boile all theſe together in
the ſame poſſet drinke, till all the ſubſtance be boyled out,
then vſe to drinke this both morning and euening, and this
will helpe you.
         
         
            Cap. 260. ¶An aproued Medicine for the Collicke.
            TAke an ounce of Cloues & Mace, a handfull of Time,
a handfull of Roſemary, and as much Iſope, and ſeeth
all theſe in a pottle of white Wine, and let it ſeeth vntill
it be conſumed from a pottle to a quarte, then put
thereto a little Suger, & then drinke the ſame luke-warme
at ſuch time as you feele your ſelfe to be in paine, and when
it is very well ſodden as aforeſaid, you muſt burne it as you
do commonly vſe to burne other Wines.
         
         
            Cap. 261. ¶An aproued Medicine for the Stone.
            TAke a Carret roote, and ſlice it very thinne, and lay it in
white Wine, and ſo let it remaine for the ſpace of two
dayes and two nights, and then ſtraine it, and let the Patient
drinke thereof morning and euening faſting, and this
will helpe him. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Winde Collicke.
            Cap. 262. ¶An aproued Medicine for the winde Collicke
and for a ſtitch.
            TAke Capillus Veneris, Parſly rootes, & Fenell rootes, of
each of them a quarter of an ounce, bruſe all theſe hearbs
together, and let the party grieued drinke the iuice thereof
with white Wine morning and euening for the ſpace of 3
or 4 dayes, and it will helpe him. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            
            Cap. 263. ¶An excellent Medicine for the Windy Collicke.
            TAke a pottle of pure Malmeſey that is not mixt with
any other Wines, and 4 or 5 ſpoonefuls of the pith of
Parſly rootes, and two handfuls of Violet leaues, and a
doſen of Bay leaues, ſeeth all theſe together vntill the one
halfe be boyled away: then take it, and ſtraine it well
through a very fine linnen cloth, and let the Patient drinke
a good draught thereof morning and euening warme.
         
         
            Cap. 264. ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
            TAke a quart of Ale clarified, and two ſpoonefulls of the
flower of Licquorice, and a ſpoonefull of the flower of
Annis ſeedes, and halfe a ſpoonefull of Fennell ſeedes bruſed,
a little Time, and ſeeth them all together vntill it be
conſumed from a quart to a pint, and then ſtraine it through
a linnen cloth, and vſe this morning and euening for the
ſpace of 4 or 5 dayes warme, and this will helpe you.
         
         
            Conſumption.
            Cap. 265. ¶A remedy for a Conſumption.
            TAke a pottle of Roſewater, and as much Milke of
Goates, of Mares, or of the Milke of a Cow that is all
of one colour, and put thereto to the number of 50 or
threeſcore Egges, mingle the yolks of the Egges very well
with the Milke and Roſewater, but let not any of the white
remaine amongſt them, and diſtill a water thereof, and giue
it to the Patient to drinke warme firſt & laſt, with a Cake
or two of Manus Chriſti, which is made with Golde and
Pearles: Vſe this, and you ſhall finde much eaſe thereby,
for it hath holpen many.
         
         
            
            Cap. 266. ¶A remedy for a Conſumption in the Reines.
            TAke a handfull or two of Clary leaues, and pricke
them, and 4 or 5 yolks of Henne egges newly layde,
then take Saffron and dry it vpon a Tileſtone or ſome
ſuch thing, and grinde it very ſmall, and put all theſe together,
and fry them in freſh butter, and eate it firſt in the morning,
and this will helpe you.
         
         
            Deafeneſſe.
            Cap. 267. ¶A ſoueraigne Medicine for the paine and buzzing
in the head, which hindreth the hearing
very much.
            TAke a Cloue of Garlicke, pill it, and picke three or
foure holes in the middeſt of it, and then dip it in fine
engliſh Honny, and put it into your eare, and put
a little blacke wooll after, and for that night lie vpon the
other ſide, and let your eare that is ſtopped be vpright, and
the next night following vſe the other eare in the ſame ſort,
and lye them on the contrary ſide againe, and ſo euery other
night alter as aforeſaid, and ſo continue it for the ſpace of
eight or nine dayes together, and this will expulſe all the
ill humors foorth at your noſe, it will alſo expell the paine,
and reſtore the hearing. This hath beene prooued.
         
         
            Cap. 268. ¶An approued Medicine for deafeneſſe.
            
            TAke Bayleaues, Bapherries, Betony, and Sticards,
of each of them one handfull, ſeeth them in white wine,
vntill the one halfe be conſumed, (and for an old man
vſe Malmeſey in ſtead of white wine) then take it, and put it
into a veſſell that hath a narrow mouth, and let the Patient
hold his eare ouer it (being vnſtopped) ſo that he may ſuffer
it (the ſame not being too hote nor too colde) then take oyle
of bitter Almonds, and let three or foure drops thereof fall
into his eare. Let the Patient haue alwayes a locke of fine
blacke wooll that groweth betweene the Sheepes legges,
to ſtop his eare cloſe withall, wherein, if he put a little
Muſke, it will be the better. This hath beene prooued by
Tho. Steuens of Buſhton.
            
         
         
            Cap. 269. ¶An excellent Medicine for one that is deafe,
and that his hearing is almoſt
cleane gone.
            TAke a red Onyon, and take out the core that is in the
middeſt thereof, and put thereto the oyle of roſted
Almonds, but let the Onyon be ſomewhat warme
when you put the oyle into it, and let it ſtand ſo for the ſpace
of one night, then let it be bruiſed, and ſtrayned into a poringer,
and let the party grieued cauſe one to drop three drops
at a time both morning and euening, and let him ſtop his
eare with a little blacke wooll that groweth vnder the eare
of a blacke Sheepe, and let him when he is in his bed lye
on the ſame ſide: thus vſing firſt the one eare, and afterwards
the other in this manner, it will by Gods helpe cure
him. This hath cured many.
            
               
FIrſt, it is to be conſidered what things are good for the
eyes, and what are not, for the eye is the moſt neceſſary
member of all other pertaining to mans body, for without
the ſight thereof, we can of our ſelues do nothing: therefore
this ſmall member is chiefely to be regarded, and according
to my ſimple skill, I haue gathered a fewe flowers (as I may
tearme them) to preſerue, and keepe the ſame, and in ſo
doing, if I offend, I ſhall be hartely ſory, but if they pleaſe,
then ſhall I thinke my labours happely ſpent.
            
               
                  Good for the ſight.
                  Meaſurable ſleepe.
                  Red Roſes.
                  Veruaine Rootes.
                  Fennell.
                  Selandine.
                  Pimperuell.
                  Oculus Chriſti.
                  To waſh your eyes
with cleare water.
                  To looke vpon any
manner of greene
colours.
                  To looke in a faire
Glaſſe.
                  Waſhing your hands
and feete often.
               
               
                  Ill for the ſight.
                  To eate Garlicke,
                  Onyons and Leekes.
                  To eate Lettice.
                  To trauell or go too ſuddaine
after meate.
                  Hote Wines. Cold ayre.
                  Drunkennes. Gluttony.
                  Milke. Cheeſe.
                  Ouermuch beholding of
bright and red things,
and alſo white.
                  Much ſleepe after meate.
                  Too much lett. of bloud.
                  Cold worts. Duſt. Fi
                        •
                     e.
                  Much weeping, and
ouermuch watching.
               
            
         
         
            Waters for the Eyes.
            
               ¶A ſpeciall good water for to preſerue the eyeſight.
               TAke a new layd Egge, and roſte it hard, cut the ſhell in
the middeſt, then take foorth the yolke, and put a piece
of Coperas into the place where the yolke lay, and
binde the Egge together againe, and let it lye in the fire, vntill

you thinke that the Coperas be reſolued to water, then
take the white out of the ſhell, and cut it into ſmall pieces,
and put it into a glaſſe of cleere running water, and let it
ſtand a little while, then ſtraine it through a very fine cloth,
and keepe it in a cloſe glaſſe, and euery morning and euening
waſh the Patients eyes therewith.
            
            
               ¶A Medicine for ſore eyes.
               TAke Coporas, and lay it to ſteepe in faire running water
for the ſpace of 5 or 6 houres, then take it, and ſtraine it
through a linnen cloth into a little glaſſe or Viall, and when
you goe to bed ſtrike the brees of your eyes therewith, and
let it drop into them, and this will helpe your eyeſight
very much.
            
            
               ¶A very good Medicine to kill the pinne and the
webbe in the eye.
               TAke red Sage, red Fennell, three leaued graſſe, and
Dayſies, of each of them a like quantity, then take the
white of a new laid egge, and beate it till all the froth
may be eaſily taken off, and put thereto halfe a ſpoonefull of
Honney, then ſtampe all the hearbs together, and when you
haue ſtamped them very ſmall, then ſtraine them, and put to
the iuice thereof the white of the egge and the Honny all together,
and let them be very well tempered, then take a feather,
and drop a little of this into the eye of the Patient: then
take a plaiſter of Flaxen tow, and dip it in the ſaid Medicine,
and lay it vpon the Patients eye, and binde it faſt, and
let it continue an houre or ſomewhat more at euery time
that it is dreſſed. This hath been many times proued.
            
            
               ¶Another ſoueraigne Medicine for the webbe in
the eye, if it be olde.
               TAke red Pimpernell, & Euphraſia, & ſtamp them very wel
in a Morter, and then fry them with Capons greace in
a cleane panne, and when it is fryed, wring it through

a linnen cloth into ſome braſſe veſſell, and let it ſtand therein
three dayes after, then take it foorth, and put it into a boxe
of Horne or Tinne, and a little thereof at time, and put it
into the webbe of the eye, and this Medicine wil help it.
            
            
               ¶A very good Medicine to cleare the eyeſight.
               MAke a Powder of Fennell, Anniſe, and Elicompane,
and temper them with Aquavitae, and then drye them
againe, and eare a quantity thereof euery morning and euening,
and this will both cleare the ſight, purge the winde,
and make one ſeeme yong long. This hath beene prooued.
            
            
               ¶A Medicine for bleared eyes.
               TAke the ſtone that is called Salumnaris, which is to be
had at the Apothecaries, and beate it to fine powder,
and put it into a ſpoonefull or two of Roſewater, and
one ſpoonefull of running water mingled together, then
take a feather, and euery morning and euening let a drop or
two fall into your eye. Vſe this often, and it will helpe you.
            
            
               ¶A Medicine for eyes that are bloudſhot and red.
               TAke Houſleeke, and ſtampe it very ſmall, then take a
new laid egge, and make a hole in the end, and draw
out all the meate, and put into it the iuice of Houſleeke,
and ſet it in the embers, and ſo diſtill it, and with a feather
ſcumme it cleane, and at night when you go to bed take a
feather, and drop a drop thereof into your eye, lying vpon
your backe, and it will preſently helpe you. This hath
been prooued.
            
            
               ¶A Medicine for to kill a pearle or web
in the eye.
               
               TAke three leaued graſſe that beareth the Ho
                     •
                  yſuckle,
and take the iuyce thereof, and put it into the eye of the
partie grieued, and it will by vſing it twice a day, help
it in fir dayes ſpace.
            
            
               ¶An experienced water for the eyes.
               TAke Selandine, Fennell, Sage, Roſemary, Veruine,
and Rue, of each of them a good handfull, take all theſe
and waſh them very cleane, and dry the water foorth of
them againe with a fine cloth: then put them into a Limbecke,
and diſtill them, and let the Patient drop of this water
often into his eies, and this will recouer his ſight againe
although it be ſuppoſed to be paſt all hope of recouery.
            
         
         
            Face.
            
               ¶A very good Medicine to deſtroy any beate in the face,
or in any other place, although it be
S. Anthonies fire.
               TAke a pottle of Smithes water, a handfull of Sage
two handfuls of Elder leaues, or of the greene barke
of an Elder tree, and two peny worth of Alum, take
theſe, and ſeeth them altogether, from a pottle to a pint
then take it, and put it into an earthen pot, or ſome gally put
and let the Patient anoint his face therewith when he goeth
to bed, and by the next morning be ſhall finde great eaſe
thereby: but let him vſe it for the ſpace of fiue or ſixe dayes,
and this will helpe him by Gods grace.
            
            
               ¶Another very good Medicine for a red or
high coloured face.
               TAke Vi
                     •
                  e-leaues and Strawberies, of each of them a
like quantity, then take as much ſweete Creame, as you
ſhall thinke good for the quantity of the things aforeſaid,

then put vnto it two penyworth of Camphire, and put it
into a Stillatory all together, and diſtill it, and then take
the water thereof and waſh your face therewith euery morning
and euening for the ſpace of nine or tenne dayes, and
this will take away the high colour. This was much vſed
by Maiſter Cox, who did help many with it.
            
            
               ¶Another Medicine to take away the pimples
and high colour out of ones face,
be it neuer ſo farre gone.
               TAke greene and white Coporeſſe, of each of them a like
quantity, and put them into a ſawcer of faire running
water, and warme it on the coales, and as hote as euer
you can ſuffer it, anoint the pimples of your face therewith,
or any other place of your face which is high coloured, or
red, and in vſing this often, it will helpe you.
            
            
               ¶A Medicine for to make ones face cleare,
and to ſhine.
               TAke a good quantity of the Marrow of Swines feete,
Cow-milke, and Roſewater, and mingle them well
together, and anoint your face therewith lukewarme,
and it will make it very faire.
            
         
         
            Falling Euill.
            
               ¶An excellent good remedy for the Falling Euill.
               TAke Piony-rootes one handfull, and a handfull of
Miſtlet
                     •
                   that groweth in a Blackthorne Tree, and
an handfull of Pollipodium, otherwiſe called Okefearne,
and a handfull or two of Selandine, if it be to be

had, ſtampe them very well, and ſoke them in Ale for the
ſpace of 24 houres, then take it, and ſtrayne it through a
fine linnen cloth, and put it into ſome earthen pot to be kept
cloſe frō the aire, and let the Patient drinke a good draught
thereof euery morning faſting, and laſt in the euening for
the ſpace of nine or tenne dayes, and by Gods help he ſhall
be cured. This hath been prooued.
            
            
               ¶Another very good Medicine for the ſame.
               TAke Germander that is gathered in May, when it hath
the bloſſome on it, and dry it in the ſhadow where no
Sunne commeth, and make thereof a powder, and
when you will, vſe it: then take the yolke of an Egge, or
two, and beate the powder and the yolks all together in
ſome woodden diſh or porenger, then ſeeth it, and when it is
ſodden, giue it to the Patient to eate both morning and
euening for the ſpace of nine dayes: But during this time,
he muſt abſtaine from all kinde of Wines, and carnall company
of women, and alſo from all manner of Pulſe, as
Beanes, Peaſe, Fitches, and Tares, and from all other
things that are of a hard concockcion or digeſtion, Probatum
eſt.
               
            
            
               ¶Another Medicine for the ſame.
               TAke the Matrice of a Sow that hath yong Pigges,
and dry it vppon a Tileſtone or Fireſhouell, and make
a Powder thereof, and giue it to the Patient to eate,
or elſe put it in his drinke, and as ſoone as he hath receiued
the ſame, you ſhall perceiue the ſicknes to remoue into his
fingers ends, grieuing him very ſore for a ſpace, Then make
ſame kinde of rupture to ſet to his fingers ends, and you
ſhall in a ſhort ſpace ſee the yellow matter or corruption
proceede foorth of them.
            
         
         
            
               
               ¶A very good Medicine for the bloudie Flux.
               TAke Plantine, Knotty-graſſe, & Sheppards purſe,
of each of them a good quantity, and boyle them all
together in new Milke, Broath, or red Wine, and
when they are well ſodden, then ſtraine the hearbes ano the
Milke, and let the Patient drinke this often, and it will
helpe him. Probatum eſt.
               
            
            
               ¶Another excellent good Medicine to ſtop the
bloudie Flix.
               TAke a pound of Alm
                     •
                  nds, and blaunch them, and ſtamp
them in a Morter very ſmall, then take the yolks of
xii new layd Egges reare roſted, and mingle them
with the ſaid Almonds, then put to them a quart of good red
wine-vineger, and mingle it with the aforeſaid ſtuffe, and
put them into an earthen pot, and ſtirre them well together,
and ſo let the Patient drinke the quantity of v. or vi. ſpoonefuls
thereof at a time warme, 3 or 4 times euery day, as
long as neede ſhall require, and it will helpe him.
            
            
               ¶An experienced Medicine to ſtay the bloudie Flix.
               TAke a peece of Beefe which groweth about the Briſket
of the Oxe, and let the Patient eate a peece thereof
rawe, and this will ſpeedily help him.
            
         
         
            Gowte.
            
               ¶An experienced Medicine for the Goute.
               TAKE ſtale Piſſe, and ſeeth it, and ſcome it, and put
thereto a good quantity of the iuice of red Nettles, red
Fenell, Mints, and Wormewood, and let the iuice of

them be of as euen porcions as you can geſſe them, Muſtard
and Cummin, of each of them a little, and the iuice of hearbe
Benet as much as of all the reſt, Seeth all theſe together,
and make a Playſter thereof, and ſo apply it often to the
place grieued, and it will help. This hath been prooued.
            
            
               ¶Another good Medicine for the Gowt,
or any other ache.
               TAke Roſen and Pitch, of each of them a quarter of a
pound, and a quantity of Frankenſence, as much as a
beane, and as much of Turpentine, then take a quantity
of Deare-ſuet, or Sheepes 
                     •
                  allow, and boyle them all
together in a pot, and when it is well boyled, then take it
foorth, and waſh it as you do Birdlime in cleane water, and
then take ſome of it, and ſpread it vpon a peece of Leather,
and lay it to the ſore, and ſo let it remaine there vntill it fall
off it ſelfe, Vſe this two or three times, and you ſhall finde
greate eaſe thereby.
            
            
               ¶A Medicine for the Gowte.
               TAke Shomakers ſpects or pieces of leather, and fry out
the greaſe, and lay ſome of it vpon a browne paper, and
warme it a little at the fire, then apply it to the place grieued,
and it will take away the paine thereof in one night.
Probatum eſt.
               
            
         
         
            Greene Sicknes.
            
               ¶An approued Medicine for the Greene Sicknes.
               TAKE a pottle of red Wine that is pure, (or for want
thereof, take ſo much Hollocke) and two ounces of
Fennell ſeede
                     •
                  , and three ounces of A
                     ••
                  iſe ſeedes, and
put them all t
                     •
                  gether, and 
                     •
                  et them boyle ouer a ſoft fire, vntill

the one halfe be conſumed, then ſtraine it, and let the
Patient drinke thereof firſt and laſt, luke warme, and let
the Patient drinke the quantity of halfe a pint thereof at a
time, if it may be indured. This muſt be vſed for the ſpace of
eight dayes together, alwayes beginning two dayes after
the changes of euery new Moone: and if it be farre gone,
that the Patient cannot recouer perfect health in that ſpace,
then let this Medicine be vſed eight dayes in a moneth for
the ſpace of three moneths together, in the beginning of
euery moneth as aforeſaid, and without all doubt it helpeth.
This hath been often prooued.
               
            
            
               ¶A Medicine for the Greene Sicknes.
               TAke an hearbe that is called Roſus ſolus, it groweth
lowe by the ground, and it hath ſomewhat a broade
leafe (ſome do call it the Sheepes rot) it beareth a yellow
flower. Diſtill this hearbe, and giue ſome of the water
to the Patient, to drinke morning and euening, and let him
vſe ſome exerciſe of labour, and by this drinke he ſhall be
holpen without all doubt. The Patient muſt vſe this drinke
for the ſpace of ſixe or ſeauen dayes together, for it is alſo
reſtoratiue, and much vertue hath been found heerein.
               
            
            
               ¶A Medicine for to take away any extreame ache,
or ſwimming in the head.
               TAke Roſemary, Lauender-flowers, Winter-ſauery,
Camamile, Bayes, and Lauender it ſelfe, both new
and old, Mints, and Fenell, ſeeth theſe all together in
water, and put thereto a handfull of Bay ſalt, then take the
ſame licour the hearbs and all, and waſh your feete therewith
twiſe euery morning and euening for the ſpace of three
dayes, and in doing thus, it will take away any paine in the
head if it be neuer ſo extreame or grieuous, for it hath
been prooued.
            
            
               
               ¶An excellent good Medicine for the
Head-ach or Megrime.
               TAke fiue or ſixe Nutmegs, and pare and ſlice them
very thinne, then make two little linnen baggs of the
length and breadth of your finger, and put in the Nutmegs,
then take a quantity of pure red Roſewater, and lay
your baggs in the ſame water, in a diſh, vpon a cha
                     •
                  ngdiſh
of coales, and make them hote, and lay them to the temples
of your head, and this will help.
            
            
               ¶Another Medicine for a continuall head-ach.
               TAke Betony-water, and then take a cloth and double
it three or foure times double, and let it be ſome
three fingers broade, wet it very well in the Betony-water,
and lay it to your forhead cold. Let the cloth being
wet, come round about your head, and tye it very faſt,
and when the cloth is dryed, wet it againe, and in doing thus
three or foure times, it will by Gods grace help thee.
            
            
               ¶A very good Medicine to clenſe or purge
the Head.
               TAke Pellitory of Spaine, and chew the roote thereof in
your mouth, three or foure dayes at ſeuerall times, and
this will take away the paine of the head, and alſo faſten
the teeth in the gummes. Probatum eſt.
               
            
            
               ¶A very good Medicine for the head-ach.
               TAke water of Margerum, and hold your noſe ouer it,
and draw your winde hard vnto you, vntill ſuch time
as the water hath entred into your noſe diuers times,
and then ſuddainely your head-ach ſhall be taken away.
            
            
               
               ¶A very good Medicine for the Megrime truly proued.
               TAke an dunce of Pepper, and 4 or 5 Nutmegs, a quarter
of an ounce of Graines, and a quart of Vinegar,
and two handfuls of Roſemary, boyle all theſe together
betweene two platters vpon a chafingdiſh of coles, and
then take a cloth and put it ouer your head, and hold your
head cloſe ouer it, vntill it be very well boyled: It is the
better if you let it boyle almoſt all away, by Gods grace
this will help you.
            
         
         
            Iaundiſe.
            
               ¶A Medicine for the black Iaundiſe.
               TAKE ſhell-ſnailes and roſt them, or elſe dry them at
the fire, or in an ouen, and when they are dry, beate
them to powder, then take a ſpoonefull thereof at one
time, and drinke it in Ale, and this being taken for the ſpace
of nine or tenne dayes together both morning and euening,
it doth perfectly cure this diſeaſe.
            
            
               ¶A very good Medicine for the yelow Iaundiſe.
               TAke earth-wormes, and waſh them and ſlit them, then
take a little ſcraped Iuory and engliſh Saffron beaten
to powder, mixe theſe with white Wine, and let the Patient
drinke a good draught thereof luke-warme, both morning
and euening.
            
            
               ¶A Medicine for the yellow.
               TAke Bayſalt, Otes, and Commin, and dry all theſe, and
make two bags thereof, and as hote as the Patient may
ſuffer it lay the one after the other to the plow, or crowne of
the head, and ſo let him vſe it a good while.
            
            
               
               ¶A preſent remedy for an Itch.
               TAKE Dock-rootes and beate them, and bruiſe
them with freſh Butter, and anoint the Patient with
the Salue, and in fiue or ſixe times dreſſing, it will
helpe him.
            
         
         
            Liuer.
            
               ¶A Medicine for the ſtopping in the Liuer.
               TAKE Broth made of a Chicken, with theſe things
in it, that is to ſay, Mercury and Succory, of each of
them halfe a handfull, and a few great Reiſons, the
ſtones picked out, and let all theſe be boyled together, then
take a few bitter Almonds, and blaunch them and beate
them, and with the ſame Licquor, make Almond Milke, and
ſo vſe to drinke it euery morning firſt.
            
            
               ¶Another Medicine for the heate of the Liuer,
or drineſſe in the hands.
               TAKE a good quantity of Strawbery-water diſtilled,
and ſeeth therein a good quantity of Liuerwort, and
drinke it with a good quantity of Sirop of Mints, and
this will coole the heate of the Liuer.
            
            
               ¶A very good drinke made of Whey, for to coole the
extreame heate of the Liuer and Stomacke.
               TAke Violet-leaues, Sinckfoile leaues, Succory, Endiue,
Scabions, and Fumitory, of each of them a good handfull,
ſeeth all theſe in a pottle of Whey which hath been boyled,
and ſo let it continue ſtill ſeething, vntill a third part thereof
be conſumed, then ſtraine it through a fine liunen cloth, and
let the Patient drinke a good draught thereof both morning
and euening, and it will helpe him. Probatum eſt.
               
            
            
               
               ¶An approued Medicine for the Mother.
               TAke a quantity of Nepe-royall, and ſtamp it, then take
two ſpoonefuls of the ſaid iuice, and a ſpoonefull of Sallet
oyle, and let two parts thereof ſeeth away, then vnto
that which remayneth, but onely the quantity of the oyle,
and let the Patient anoint the place very often where the
Mother doth ariſe.
            
         
         
            Morphew.
            
               ❀ A very ſpeedy remedy for the Morphew.
               TAke three ſpoonefulls of Elder-water, and let the Patient
drinke euery day ſo much, for the ſpace of nine dayes,
and looke that the Patient do ſweate euery day, then take
three or foure Oke-apples, and lay them to ſteepe in white
wine Vinegar for the ſpace of 24 houres, and then let him
waſh his body with the Vinegar, and this will help him.
            
         
         
            Piles or Emerodes.
            
               ¶An excellent remedy for the Piles.
               TAke the beards of the heads of vnſet Leekes, and waſh
them cleane, then take a quantity of faire running
Water, and boyle them therein, till they be ſomewhat
tender, then dry thē well in a linnen cloth, then ſtamp
them as ſmall as you can, and when you haue ſo done, take
a good piece of freſh Butter, and boyle them therein vpon a
Chafingdiſh of coles, then put into it a good quantity of
engliſh Saffron, and boyle them together, and when it is
well boyled, ſtraine it through a faire linnen cloth into a
Glaſſe and keepe it, and when you will vſe it, make a Plaiſter
thereof vpon a linnen cloth, or elſe a piece of leather, and
lay it cold to the place which is grieued, and this will ſpeedily
help him.
            
            
               
               ¶A Medicine to ſtaunch the bleeding
of the Piles.
               TAke the iuice of Millfoile, and put thereunto the powder
of burnt Garlicke, and let the partie grieued drinke
thereof, and in ſhort ſpace the Piles will dye. This hath
been prooued.
            
         
         
            French Poxe.
            
               ❀ An excellent good water for the French Poxe.
               TAke white Coporas, Roch-Allum, Licquorice, and
Honny, of each of them a penyworth, or ſomewhat
more, of Sage, Roſemary, and Woodbinde, of each of
them a like quantity, and boyle them all together in faire
running Water, and let the Patient vſe this often, and it
will help him.
            
            
               ¶A maruellous good oyntment for the
French Poxe.
               TAke Hoggs-greace that is vntried to the quantity of a
quarter of a pound, of Quickſiluer, ℥. 1. and qualifie your
Quickſiluer with faſting Spettle, then put to the Hoggs-greace
and the Quickſiluer 3 or 4 ſpoonefulls of ſtrong
and ſharp Vineger, then beate all theſe very well for the
ſpace of two or three houres together, and then put it into an
earthen pot, or Gally pot, and let the Patient vſe to anoint
the place grieued often therewith, and doubtleſſe this will
help him. Probatum eſt.
               
            
            
               ¶A good Medicine to kill the great Pocke.
               TAke a good quantity of Camphire, and lay it to the place
where the Pocke is, and it will preſently eate it cleane
away. Probatum eſt.
               
            
            
               
               ¶Another for the ſame.
               TAke a good quantity of Hemlocks, and a good quantity
of the dregs of ſtrong Ale, and a good quantity of Mutton
Suet, and boyle all theſe very well together, and make a
Pultis of them, and lay it to the place where the griefe is,
and this will help him. Probatum eſt.
               
            
            
               ¶An excellent good Medicine to heale the
French Pox.
               TAke Goacum Capium halfe a pound, Salſa perilla two
ounces, Barke of Goacum two ounces, Licquorice
one ounce, Anniſe ſeedes one ounce, Fennell ſeede one
ounce, Seeny one ounce, and of Betany, Scabions, Smallege,
Pellitory of the wall, Penyroyall, Harts-toong, Maydenhere,
wild Mints, or red Mints, red Sage, Oculus Chriſti, Liuerwort,
and of the hearbe Mercury, of euery one of them a
good handfull, cleane picked and waſhed, and then put all
theſe together to ſleepe for the ſpace of one whole night, in
three gallons of faire running Water, or elſe in two gallons
of pure white Wine, and one gallon of ſtrong Ale, then take
them, and boyle them all together, vntill it be conſumed to
three quarts, then ſtraine it through a fine linnen cloth, and
put it into a cloſe veſſell.
               ¶Note this, that if you boyle it in water, it will continue
but ſixe or ſeuen dayes, but being boyled in Wine, and Ale,
twenty dayes, which is too ſhort a ſpace for the party which
is ſicke and diſeaſed, to vſe it.
               This muſt be drunken by the ſicke perſon both morning
and euening, and at meate, and you muſt put into euery three
quartes of the water, one quarter of an ounce of Coloquintida,
and let the party which is ſicke vſe it, vntill ſuch time as
it hath ſcowred the body very well, and if it do not purge
well, then take this Medicine following.
            
            
               
               ¶Another for the ſame.
               TAke halfe an ounce of Seny, a ſpoonefull of Anniſeſeedes,
halfe an ounce of Licquorice, a ſpoonefull of
Fenell ſeedes, twenty Reyſons of the ſunne, the ſtones
picked foorth, boyle theſe all together in quart of Water,
and let it boyle vntill the one halfe be conſumed, then ſtraine
it, and put thereto one ounce and an halfe of Deaphenicon,
and ſhake it together, and let the party grieued drinke thereof
warme euery morning faſting.
               This Purgation neuer maketh the body ſicke, neyther
doth it hurt the ſtomacke.
               Note alſo, that this drinke aforeſaid, will heale any old
vlcer if it be waſhed therewith, and eſpecially of that which is
made both of Wine and Ale, if the party be neuer ſo ſore diſeaſed,
let him purge twice or thrice with Coloquintida, prepared,
and it will help him for euer.
            
         
         
            Small Poxe.
            
               ¶A Medicine to driue out the ſmall Poxe.
               TAke Milke, Saffron, and engliſh Honny, and ſeeth them
together, and giue it to the Patient, and let him be
kept warme after it.
            
            
               ¶Another for the ſame.
               TAke Dragon-water, white Wine, and Methridatum, or
Treacle of Ieane, and ſome Vnicornes horne, and ſeeth
theſe together, and giue them to the Patient as aforeſaid.
            
         
         
            Purgations.
            TAke a pinte of white Wine, and an ounce of Se
                     ••
                  ie, and
a good handfull of Reiſons of the ſunne, the ſtones picked
out, and halfe a ſpoonefull of Anniſeedes, put all theſe

into the ſaid white Wine to ſleepe one whole night, and the
next morning boyle it vntill it be come to a draught, and ſo

                  •
               et the Patient drinke it luke-warme, and if you will you
may put thereunto three or foure rootes of Polipodie of the

                  •
               ke. This is very good. Probatum eſt.
            
         
         
            Plague and peſtilence.
            HEerein are conteyned diuers and ſundry good rules and
eaſie Medicines, which are made with little charge, for
the poorer ſort of people, as well for the preſeruation of all
people from the Plague before infection, as for the curing
and ordering of them after ſuch time as they ſhall be infected.
            
               ¶A preſeruatiue by correcting the ayre
in all houſes.
               TAke Roſemary dryed, Iuniper, Bay-leaues, or Frankincenſe,
and caſt the ſame vpon the coles in a chafingdiſh,
and receiue the fume or ſmoke thereof into your head. If you
will, put a little Lauender or Sage that is dryed, into the
fire with the reſt it will do much good.
               Alſo to make your fires in earthen pannes (rather to remoue
about your Chambers, then in Chimneys) ſhall be
better to correct the aires in your houſes, then otherwiſe.
            
            
               ¶A preſeruatiue againſt the Plague.
               TAke a handfull of Hearbe-grace, otherwiſe called Rue,
a handfull of Elder-leaues, a handfull of red Sage, and a
handfull of red Bramble leaues, and ſtamp them well together,
and ſtraine them through a fine linnen cloth, with a
quarte of white Wine, then take a quantity of Caſe Ginger,
and mingle it with them, and drinke a good draught thereof
both morning and euening for the ſpace of nine dayes together,
and by Gods grace it will preſerue you.
            
            
               
               ¶An excellent good drinke to be taken euery morning
for a preſeruatiue againſt the Plague,
and for to auoide infection.
               TAke a handfull of Winter-Sauery, and boyle the ſame
in a quart of good wine-Vinegar, with a ſpoonefull of
Graines being very fine beaten, and put into the ſame, then
put into it a quantity of fine Suger, and ſo drinke a good
draught thereof euery morning faſting.
               ❀ When you muſt of neceſſitie come into any place where
any infectious perſons are, it is good for you to ſmell to the
roote of Angellica, Gentian, or Valerian, and to chew any of
theſe in your mouth.
            
            
               ¶A ſpeciall preſeruatiue againſt the Plague.
               TAke fiue ſpoonefuls of wine-Vinegar, three ſpoonefuls
of faire running-Water, halfe a ſpoonefull of Treacle
of Iene, and of Bolearmoniake as much as a ſmall nut,
being beaten to powder, and drinke this euery morning and
euery euening. Proued by M. Knight of Andouer.
               
               Take vi. leaues of Sorell, and waſh them with Water
and Vinegar, and let them lie to ſteepe in the ſaid Water and
Vinegar a good while, then eate them faſting and keepe in
your mouth and chew now or then either Stewall, or the roote
of Angelica, or a little Cinamon, for any of theſe is maruellous
good.
            
            
               ❀ Medicines to be vſed after infection taken.
               FOraſmuch as the greateſt cauſe of the Plague doth
ſtand rather in poyſon, then in any putrifaction of humors,
as other Agues do, the chiefeſt way is to moue much
ſweating, and to defend the hart by ſome cordiall thing.
            
         
         
            
            Suppoſitarie.
            IF the Patient be coſtiue and bound in his body, let him
take a Suppoſitarie made with a little boyled Honny, and
a little fine Powder of Salt, and ſo take it in at the fundament,
and ſo keepe it till it moue a ſtoole.
            
               ¶A very good Medicine to be drunke, ſuſpecting
any to haue the Plague.
               TAke a great onyon and take foorth the core, then fill it full
with good Treacle of Iene, and wrap the ſame in a paper,
and roſt it vntill it be ſoft, then ſtraine the ſame with a little
white wine Vinegar, and temper it with a quantity of Suger,
and giue to the Patient two ſpoonefulls thereof to drinke
faſting, and if the Patient be infected with the Plague, you
ſhall perceiue it within ſixe houres, after the receipt of the
ſame drinke.
            
            
               ❀ An excellent Medicine for the Plague.
               TAke three or foure ſlips of hearbe grace, and vi. ſpoonefulls
of Vineger, and beate them both together in a Morter,
then ſtraine the iuice out thereof, & put thereto an ounce
of fine Treacle, and an ounce of fine Suger, and ſet it ouer the
fire, and ſtirre it together, and make thereof a ſirop, and then
put it into a cloſe bare: then take a Sage-leafe, and euery
morning faſting ſpread as much as a beane thereof vpon the
ſame leafe, and ſo eate it morning and euening firſt and laſt.
And if he that eateth it be infected, it wil driue it cleane from
his hart, and if he be not infected, it will preſerue him within
the ſpace of xxiiij houres after the receipt thereof.
               
            
            
               ❀ A very good Medicine for the Plague.
               TAke in the morning faſting, one dry Fig, one Wallnut, and
4 or 5 leaues of hearbe-grace, chopped all together very
ſmall, and eate them, and drinke afterwards a good draught
of white or claret Wine: If it be a woman with child, leaue
out the hearbe-grace. This hath been often proued.
            
            
               
               ¶A very good Medicine againſt the Plague.
               TAke a Figge, and put therein a little Hearbe-gra
                     ••
                  
mingled with a little Bayſalt bruſed, and the kernell of
a Wallnut cleane picked, theſe being put all together
into the Fig, let the Patient eate three or foure of theſe Figs
ſo dreſſed, euery morning next his hart, and drinke a very
good draught of white Wine after it, and let him walke
an houre after it, before he eate any more meate, and by
vſing of it thus euery morning, by Gods help he ſhall be ſafe
from any infection.
            
            
               ❀ A Medicine to breake the Botch.
               IF it fortune the Botch to appeare, then take red
Bramble leaues, Elder leaues, and Muſtard ſeede,
and ſtamp them all together, and then take thereof,
and make a Plaiſter and lay it to the ſore, and it will draw
foorth all the venome.
            
            
               ❀ A maruellous good drinke for them that are
infected with the Plague.
               TAke leafe-gold, and mingle it with the iuice of Lemons,
and a litle Suger-candie, Cloues, Mace, and a litle Cinamon,
and a like quantity of Licquorice finely pared & ſliced,
and let this be ſteeped in white Wine, or elſe in good Claret
Wine, and put therein a good quantity of the powder of Angellica,
or elſe of the decoction of the ſame roote, the ſame
drinke will help the Patient being drunke warme.
            
            
               ❀ An excellent Medicine to ripen and to bring
foorth the ſore.
               TAke a white onyon, and cut it in pieces, and three ounces
of Butter that is cleane without ſalt, then take cloues of
Garlicke cleane picked, the waight of xx d. and the quantity
of halfe an egge of leuen, and a little otemeale ſmall beaten,
boyle all theſe together with a little new Milke, or elſe faire
water, & make a pulteſſe of it, & lay it very warme to the ſore.
            
         
         
            
            Suppoſitarie.
            IF the Patient be coſtiue and bound in his body, let him
take a Suppoſitarie made with a little boyled Honny, and
a little fine Powder of Salt, and ſo take it in at the fundament,
and so keepe it till it moue a ſtoole.
            
               ¶A very good Medicine to be drunke, ſuſpecting
any to haue the Plague.
               TAke a great Onyon and take foorth the core, the fill it full
with good Treacle of Iene, and wrap the ſame in a paper,
and roſt it vntill it be ſoft, then ſtraine the ſame with a little
white wine Vinegar, and temper it with a quantity of Suger,
and giue to the Patient two ſpoonefulls thereof to drinke
faſting, and if the Patient be infected with the Plague, you
ſhall perceiue it within ſixe houres, after the receipt of the
ſame drinke.
            
            
               ❀ An excellent Medicine for the Plague.
               TAke three or foure ſlips of hearbe grace, and vi. ſpoonefulls
of Vineger, and beate them both together in a Morter,
then ſtraine the iuice out thereof, & put thereto an ounce
of fine Treacle, and an ounce of fine Suger, and ſet it ouer the
fire, and ſtirre it together, and make thereof a ſirop, and then
put it into a cloſe boxe: then take a Sage-leafe, and euery
morning faſting ſpread as much as a beane thereof vpon the
ſame leafe, and ſo eate it morning and euening firſt and laſt.
And if he that eateth it be infected, it wil driue it cleane from
his hart, and if he be not infected, it will preſerue him within
the ſpace of xxiiij houres after the receipt thereof.
               
            
            
               ❀ A very good Medicine for the Plague.
               TAke in the morning faſting, one dry Fig, one Wallnut, and
4 or 5 leaues of hearbe-grace, chopped all together very
ſmall, and eate them, and drinke afterwards a good draught
of white or claret Wine: If it be a woman with child, leaue
out the hearbe-grace. This hath been often proued.
            
            
               
               ¶A very good Medicine againſt the Plague.
               TAke a Figge, and put therein a little Hearbe-grac
                     •
                  
mingled with a little Bayſalt bruſed, and the kernell of
a Wallnut cleane picked, theſe being put all together
into the Fig, let the Patient eate three or foure of theſe Figs
ſo dreſſed, euery morning next his hart, and drinke a very
good draught of white Wine after it, and let him walke
an houre after it, before he eate any more meate, and by
vſing of it thus euery morning, by Gods help he ſhall be ſafe
from any infection.
            
            
               ❀ A Medicine to breake the Botch.
               IF it fortune the Botch to appeare, then take red
Bramble leaues, Elder leaues, and Muſtard ſeede,
and ſtamp them all together, and then take thereof,
and make a Plaiſter and lay it to the ſore, and it will draw
foorth all the venome.
            
            
               ❀ A maruellous good drinke for them that are
infected with the Plague.
               TAke leafe-gold, and mingle it with the iuice of Lemons,
and a litle Suger-candie, Cloues, Mace, and a litle Cinamon,
and a like quantity of Licquorice finely pared & ſliced,
and let this be ſteeped in white Wine, or elſe in good Claret
Wine, and put therein a good quantity of the powder of Augellica,
or elſe of the decoction of the ſame roote, the ſame
drinke will help the Patient being drunke warme.
            
            
               ❀ An excellent Medicine to ripen and to bring
foorth the ſore.
               TAke a white onyon, and cut it in pieces, and three ounces
of Butter that is cleane without ſalt, then take cloues of
Garlicke cleane picked, the waight of xx d. and the quantity
of halfe an egge of leuen, and a little otemeale ſmall beaten,
boyle all theſe together with a little new Milke, or elſe faire
water, & make a pulteſſe of it, & lay it very warme to the ſore.

I would wiſh that all ſuch perſons that haue been infected

                     •
                  ith this diſeaſe, ſhould willingly keepe their owne houſes,
or places of abode, without being conuerſant with thoſe that
are whole, vntill the ſores haue left running, and be perfectly
whole and ſound, which in ſanguine and cholericke perſons
will be healed ſooner then in thoſe which be of melancholike
and flegmatike complexious. Such perſons (I aſſure
you) may not very well be conuerſant with them that are
not infected, for the ſpace of one whole moneth at the leaſt.
Likewiſe the contagion ſuſpected to remaine in any clothes,
either wollen or linnen, cannot very well be auoided by better
meanes then by fire and water, and by often waſhing of
them in froſts and ſunneſhine with good diſcretion, and burning
the clothes that are of ſmall value. Therefore I beſeech
God of his great mercy to keepe vs all in ſafety from it.
            
         
         
            Ringwormes or Tetters.
            
               ¶A Medicine to kill a Ringworme or Tetter,
or any other maner of Itch.
               TAke Sallet-oyle and ſalt, and temper them very well
together, and warme them luke warme, and let the
Patient anoint the places where the ſores are, and in
three or foure times dreſſing, it will help him.
            
         
         
            Salues.
            
               ¶A very good Salue for a new cut or wound
that will not ceaſe bleeding.
               TAke the blades of vnſet Leekes, and ſtamp them very
well, and put thereunto a quantity of wheate flower,
and a quantity of Honny, and ſtirre them very well,
but let it come neere no fire, but all cold lay it to the wound,
and this will ſtaunch the bleeding, and draw out the bruſed
bloud, and make it cleane. This hath been often proued.
            
            
               
               ¶An excellent Salue for a cut.
               TAke two handfulls of Valerian, and two handfulls 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Bugle, that is moſt commonly growing in woods, and
bruſe them very ſmall, then take a quantity of Deeres
ſuet, and halfe as much vnwrought waxe, Let there be of
theſe two as much as the hearbes may boyle therein, then
ſet it on the fire, and when it is halfe boyled, then put a quantity
of the beſt Eurpentine therein that may be gotten, then
let it boile till it be inough (but all the while, ſee that you do
not ceaſe ſturring it) then ſtraine it through a fine linnen
cloth, and put it into ſome Gallypot, or earthen veſſell, and ſo
keepe it. This hath been many times and often proued.
            
            
               ¶A very good way to make the blacke Salue, that
cureth all old ſores and vlcers, be they neuer
ſo great, foule, and ſtinking.
               TAke a gallon of ſtale Ale, being very ſtrong, two handfulls
of Woodbinde leaues, halfe a handfull of ſeeded
Nettles, and as much Coleworts which haue the ragged
leaues, halfe a pound of red Onyons, halfe a pound of
Garlicke pilled, a pound of vnſet Leekes, a handfull of the
powder of a rotten poſt, which is Oke, for that is beſt, then let
all theſe be ſtamped all together very ſmall in a Morter, and
then put them into the Ale, with halfe a pound of Roch Allum,
then ſet them ouer a ſoft fire, and let them boyle, vntill
the one half or more be conſumed, then ſtraine them through
a fine cloth, into ſome earthen or other veſſell that is cleane,
and then put to them halfe a pound of virgin waxe, halfe a
pound of Roſen, halfe a pound of Neruoile that is greene,
and a quantity of ſtone Honny, then let it ſtand for the ſpace
of foure or fiue dayes, then take it againe and boyle it till
halfe be conſumed away, then put it into an earthen pot,
and let it be ſtopped very cloſe, and vſe it as you ſhall haue
occaſion.
            
            
               
               ¶An aproued Medicine to keepe teeth from ſtinking,
and alſo to make them white.
               TAke a quantity of long Pepper, Mints, Purſlane, Ariſtologia
rotunda, Salgem, & ſeeth them in pure white
Wine, and ſtraine it into a Glaſſe or Viall, and when
you ſhall thinke good, waſh your teeth therewith, and this
will keepe them both white and ſweete. Per M. Cox.
               
            
            
               ¶A moſt excellent remedy to eaſe the raging paine
of the teeth.
               TAke a little Balme and Baſill, and rub them both together
in the palme of your hand, vntill ſuch time as
they come almoſt to a iuice, and then put it into your
eare on the ſame ſide that the paine is on, and it will help you
preſently. This hath holpen many.
            
            
               ¶A very good Medicine for the tooth-ache.
               TAke a good quantity of the rootes of Henbane, and
ſeeth it in white wine-vineger, or Roſewater, and put
the decoction thereof in your mouth, and it will helpe
you.
            
         
         
            Wormes.
            
               ¶A Medicine for Wormes in a Childes belly.
               TAke Aquacompoſita that is made of hearbs, and waſh
the breaſt of the child, then take powder of Mirrhe very
fine beaten, and ſtraw it likewiſe vpon the breaſt of the
childe (after that it hath been well waſhed) and lay a warme
cloth to it, and ſo let it lye for the ſpace of xxiiii. houres
to it.
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   