
      
         
            
            
            CERTAINE EXPERIMENTS
CONCERNING
FISH AND
FRVITE:
Practised by IOHN TAVERNER Gentleman,
and by him published for the
benefit of others.
             
               
                  ANCHORA SPEI
               
            
            LONDON,
Printed for William Ponsonby.
1600.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONORABLE SIR EDMOND
ANDERSON KNIGHT, LORD
CHIEFE IVSTICE OF THE
COMMON PLEAS.
            
               RIGHT Honorable my
good Lord, it was my bap
lately to light vpon a Book
dedicated vnto your Lordship,
by one M. George
Churchey, intituled, A new
booke of good husbandrie, and intreating of
fishponds, and ordering of the same: which
booke, as it should seeme, was first written in
Latine by one Iames Dubrauius, but translated
into English by the industrie of the said
Maister Churchey, wherin his good meaning
and trauell is greatly to be commended. I
thereby gathering that your Lordship tooke
some delight in that practise, & being before
that time minded to put in writing certaine
experiments, that my selfe had obserued concerning
those matters, did presently conclude

with my selfe, humbly to craue that the same
may passe vnder your L. protection: your
vertues also deseruing that I should make
choise herein of your Lordship before others,
as one vnto whom the whole commonweale
of this Realme in general is greatly bounden,
for the great and painfull watchings, care and
trauell you take in administration of Iustice in
your place and calling: and therefore I in particular,
find my selfe willing (if by any meanes
I may) to moue vnto your Lordship any delight
or liking, though neuer so litle. And if
your Lordship haue bene any practiser of
these delights, I meane making of fishponds,
or planting of fruite, I doubt not but you shal
in this litle Treatise, find somewhat that you
knew not before, and thereby your delight
that way augmented, which, if it so happen to
be, my expectation herein is most amplie satisfied:
Beseeching the Almightie, to blesse,
preserue and keepe you and all yours, with
such felicitie, as your heart desireth.
            
               
                  This 22. of Ian. 1600.
               
               You Lordships in all humblenes,
IOHN TAVERNER.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               GOOD Reader, in seeking to shun
that Monster Idlenes, and hauing a
desire by all honest meanes possible,
to benefit this my natiue countrie of
England, and finding my abilitie otherwise
insufficient to performe
the same, I haue thought good to set
downe some experiments that my selfe haue had concerning
fish and fruite: of which two things, especially of
fruite, although many authors haue more learnedly written,
yet many of them being strangers, inhabiting in Climates
far differing from ours here in England, doe also
for the most part teach how such fruite as their countries
bring forth are to be vsed, of which kind of fruites here
in England we haue litle or no vse. As also concerning
fish, there are none that haue written in our vulgar tong
to anie purpose that euer I haue seene, sauing that one
Maister Churchey hath procured to be translated into English
a Treatise compiled by a stranger, a Morauian (as
I take it.) Howbeit by reason the translator (as it should
seeme) had no great experience in that matter, he therfore
that shall practise, shall find great want in that booke
to supplie his desires that way. Notwithstanding the good
indeuour of Maister Churchey is greatly to be commended,
neither is my meaning herein to say what may be said
in these matters, but onely what things my selfe haue obserued
and practised. And if I should set downe by way of

preface, the exceeding great benefit that might grow to
this Realme, by practising to haue aboundance of the two
foresaid cōmodities, the preface would grow to a greater
volume then now the whole booke containeth. And although
I know that many men can say more then my self
can do herein, yet I also beleeue that most men know not so
much: for whose sake I haue compiled this litle treatise,
by which, if they take either profit or honest pleasure,
I haue my desire. Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            CERTAINE EXPERIMENTS
CONCERNING
FISH AND FRVITE.
            
               
                  FIrst it is requisite to speake of
ponds, I meane such as be
necessarie, profitable, and conuenient
to be vsed with vs
here in England, not such in
which the prodigall Romains
vsed to spend their superfluous
wealth and treasure, rather
for vaine ostentation, then for any honest recreation
of mind, or profite vnto themselues,
or the common wealth: whereunto I wold wish
our countrey people in all their actions to haue
chiefe regard. It should seeme that many of the
Romains imployed incredible wealth in making
of ponds, in which with sea water, they kept diuerse
kind of sea fish, for delicacie and wantonnesse,
rather then profit: for that such kind of
ponds were onely made neare vnto the sea side,
wheras the like fish might more conueniently be
taken in the sea it selfe. I would rather wish the
greatest store of our ponds to be made farre vp
land in the inmost partes of the Realme, vnto
which places fish cannot well be brought from
the sea, to be eaten fresh whilest it is good, and

sweete. The ponds I meane to speake of, shall be
of two sorts: the one digged right downe into the
ground by labour of man: the other made with a
head in a valley betweene two hils, by swelling
of the water ouer grassie ground, not in former
times couered with water. Those that are digged
right downe are for the most part but small,
and serue indeed to little vse, vnlesse it be to keepe
fish in for the winter time, to spend as need requireth,
or to feede fish in: otherwise of themselues
they are not able to sustaine any number of fish, in
any good sort, to increase in grouth or goodnesse
of meate, and therefore I meane not to speake
much of such ponds. But the other kind of pond
made with a head being rightly ordered, as hereafter
is mentioned, will giue great nourishment
to fish without any feeding saue of it selfe. It is
therefore requisite for him that would haue good
fish, to haue two such ponds with heads so made,
as with their sluces he may lay them drie when
he pleaseth, and againe to fill them with water
when he shall thinke good, to the end that one of
them may lie drie one yeare, & the other the next
yeare. The greatnesse of his ponds may be according
to the aptnes of the place where he maketh
them, and to the cost he meaneth to bestow. And
that valley that hath not any sudden descent but
descendeth by little & little, hauing also some littell
rill or brooke running through it, is fittest
for this purpose: by reason that in such places a
man shall with least charges in making the head
ouerflow greatest quantitie of ground. The sayd

ponds are to be made as followeth.
               
                  The making of a pond for fish.
                  Hauing a place conuenient, viz. a valley betweene
two hilles, and some small brooke or rill
running through the same, you are to dig a channell
or pond as it were from the one hill to the other,
ouerthwart the valley: and with the earth
that you take out of the same to make your head.
Alwayes making your head downe the streame
from the channell, so that the channell shalbe the
deepest place of your pond, and in no wise to dig
any earth, or to make any channell on the backside
of your head: for that will much weaken
your head. You must also begin the foundation
of your head not hard by the brim of your channell,
but some eight or ten foote from the same,
least the weight of the earth of the head cause
your head to slide into the channell: and raise
your head not vpright, but slopewise for caluing
or slipping downe. And looke how high you
meane to make your head, and so much it is requisite
to be in breadth in the top thereof, & three
times that breadth in the bottome: as for example:
If you meane to make your head ten
foot high, it had need to be ten foot broade in the
top, and thirty foote broade in the bottome, otherwise
it will hardly lye, but calue and slippe
downe againe, vnlesse you force it with timber.
Howbeit such may be the nature of your earth,
as a light sand, or onely chalke, that it will not
stand without timber, otherwise a stiffe clay

mingled with grauell, is best for such a head: if
your soile be a light sand, or altogether a grauell,
or chalke, it will hardly hold water. It is not
good to put any timber in your head to beare it
vp, but rather only earth being broken very smal,
and watered with water often times as you
raise it: for that will cause it to bind closer and surer
then any ramming or timber worke will do.
I suppose the Spring time, & Autumne to be best
for the making of such heads, especially if you
water it well and breake the earth small, that it
may drie againe and settle. In the making of
the head,Where to lay your sluce. you are to lay your sluce in the head against
the deepest place of your channell, being
made of a whole peece of timber, or at least wise
the forepart thereof being a whole peece, and the
residue of one or two peeces more, being ioyned
very close, and stopped with haire and tarre in the
ioynts: for if therein be neuer so small a hole, it
will spoyle your head at the sewing of your pond.
Hauing made and hollowed your trough, hewen
through at the tayle, but close at the end next to
the pond, you are to naile thereon a strong boord
or planke, very close in all places: or else which
is better, a slab being before the hollowing of your
trough, sawne from the same: then turne that
side downeward, and then the vpper side will be
that which before was the bottom of the trough:
at the end whereof next to the channell in the
vpper part thereof, you are to make the tampion
hole square, and likewise make a square tampion
to shut close in the same, with a steale, either

of the same peece which is best, or else strongly
mortised with a bouetaile mortice into the sayd
tampion, and so reaching vp as high as the top
of your head, or at least to the vppermost part of
the water. And the best fashion for the head of
your sluse, is two strong planks, fastened on each
side of the tampion hole, being in breadth somewhat
broader then the square of your tampion,
& grated boords nailed before & behind the same,
some two or three foote from the bottome. But
for the more speedy sewing out the water, you
may make as it were a nose of grated boords before
the tampion, at the bottome of the sluce, of
some three or foure foote long, and a foote deepe.
The residue of the sluce may be boorded vp to the
top with boords vngrated, and I thinke grated
boords to be better for this purpose, being made
with a hand saw, rather then holes made with
piercer or augur. The trough of this sluce had
need be layd so soone as you begin to make your
head, because it may conuey the water from you,
which else will trouble you in making the channell.
                  The sluce made, and the channell digged, it
may be you shall need more earth to be carried in
dung-carts or barrowes which you are still to
keepe mingled with water, and the earth broken
smal: in frostie weather it is good working of any
such head. Also take heede you put not in the
sayd head, any dung or turfs of grasse, that will
turne to dung: but onely good earth. When the
head is raised, it is requisite to settle well before

you fill the same with water, and therefore not
good to fill it full the first yeare, but rather halfe
full: and to store it with such fish as you meane
to keepe therein,When to store your ponds. in Ianuary, February or
March: after which time it is not good to carry
or handle any fish all the sommer time, vntill
it be October or Nouember. The colder the
weather is when you handle your fish, the better:
vnlesse it be for such fish as you meane to
spend presently.Not good to handle fish in hot weather. But store-fish being taken or
handled in hot weather, will be sicke, and not
prosper long time after, and perhaps die thereof,
although not presently.
                  And to speake of fish, I meane such as are vsually
kept in ponds or lakes, I will deuide them
into two sorts: those that liue by rauening and
deuouring of other fish, and the others that
liue vpon seedes, roots, weeds, corne, wormes,
and such like: for as there are some beasts that
do liue chiefly and naturally by flesh of other
beasts, and other some that liue onely by corne,
grasse, fruit, & such like, & will at no time taste of
flesh:Rauening fish. so there are fishes much like in nature. The
fish that liue vpon rauening and deuouring of other
fish, are the Pike, the Trought, the Perch,
& the Eele: and these kinds will not naturally
feede vpon corne, rootes, seeds, grasse, or such
like.Fish not of the rauening kind. But the Carpe, the Breame, the Tench,
and the Roch, liue naturally vpon corne, seedes,
grasse, wormes, bodes, flies, and such like: & will
not naturally feede vpon any other fish, neither
hath nature giuen them meanes so to do, for that

the foresayd deuouring fish haue only dog-teeth,
or sharpe teeth, wherewith they bite and hold any
other fish that they take: and when that by
griping and biting it, they feele it dead, and cease
to struggle or striue, then they swallow it downe
whole. The other kind do not so: but hauing
teeth only like vnto man, broade and flat do grind
and chew all their meate before they swallow it:
and it is as vnnaturall for the Carpe, Breame,
Tench or Roch to eate another raw fish, as it is
for a sheep or a cow to eate raw flesh. The sharpe
and deuouring teeth in the Pike, Perch,
Trought & Eele, are easily seene and perceiued,
but so are not the flat grinding teeth in the other
kind of fish. Howbeit if you search diligently the
head of the Carpe, Breame, or any the other aforesayd
of that nature, & of any bignesse, when
it is sodden you shall find two neather iawes, hauing
in each iaw a row of flat teeth, like to the
eye teeth in a man, & apt to grind & chew withall,
with which two neather iawes they grind their
meate against a certaine flat bone in the roofe of
their mouth, or vpper part of their throte, which
is commonly called the stone in the Carpes head,
and is in steede of his vpper iaw and teeth, and of
many thought to be a remedy for excessiue bleeding
at the nose for man. The like is in the head
of the Tench and Roch, although by reason of
the smalnesse it is not easie to be found. Of the
same nature also is the Barbill, Cheuen, Dace,
Bleke, and riuer Roch: although I haue not
seene them vsually in any pond. Howbeit they wil

liue and wex in a pond, especially the riuer Roch,
but not spawne, vnlesse it haue great store of watea
running through it continually, neither will
the Trought spawne in any standing poole, but
will liue and grow very fat and good, if the pond
be of any greatnesse, as some fiue or sixe acres
of ground, or more, and that he may haue good
store of small fry to feede on, and will also be
very fat and good all the winter long, by reason
he doth not spawne as aforesayd.
                  The best fish in my opinion is Carpe,
Breame, Tench, and Perch: howbeit if your
pond be not aboue foure or fiue acres of ground,
a Breame will be fiue or sixe yeares at the least,A Breame long in growing, and a great increaser.
before it be of any bignesse to eate, as also they
will ouer-store any pond with fry, which is a
great hinderance to the growth of your bigger
fish. Hauing stored your pond, as aforesayd, you
shall find that the first yeare your fish will spawne
exceedingly.The first yeare your fish will spawne exceedingly. Howbeit if any water run through
your pond, your fry will very hardly be kept in:
for that all the beginning of the sommer they
will go away against the streame: and in the latter
end of the sommer they will go away with
the streame,The nature of fish. if they be not with very good grates
kept in, and herein you are to vse very great
diligence. And therefore your pond being full
of water, it is good to conuey away the residue in
some ditch, along hard by the one side of your
pond, casting the banke of your ditch toward the
pond: the leuel of the water will direct you
where to make your ditch: so may your conuey

away your superfluous water.No water to run through a pond in the Sommer time. If any water
runne through your pond, especially in the
Sommer time, it will also make your fish leane
with laboring against it, as it is their nature to
do, and also in manner vnpossible to keepe in
your frie.
                  A pond being thus ordered, and your fish
therein feeding all the Sommer time,How to order your fish at sewing time. it is requisite
that about Hollantide next you sew
your pond, taking out all your fish: the best,
and such as you meane to spend that winter,
to put into small ponds, or stewes, whereas
with a dragge you may take them againe as
you neede to spend them: the other store-fish
you may put into the like pond, as aforesayd,
either new made, or one that hath lien dry all
the Sommer before.To preserue ouer many fry, is a hinderance to the owner. Howbeit if you haue any
great number of frie, especially of Breame, it
were better to preserue but part of them, and
the residue to put into some stew or small pond
with Pikes:To feede Pikes with your superfluous fry. so shall you alwayes haue
good Pikes, and also your Carpe, Breame,
and Tench will be very fat and good. If your
ponds be not ouerstored with fry, your pond
being sewed, and your fish bestowed, it is good
to let that pond you last sewed, to lie as drie as
you can by any meanes all that winter, and
the next sommer vntill Michelmas: and then
to fill it with water of the first floud that happeneth
about that time: and sew your other
pond betweene Michelmas and Hollantide,
vsing the same as is before rehearsed. As for

hauing any fish to spend in the Sommer time,
it is requisite to trust to your angle, a bownet,
a tramell, or such like: by which meanes
you shall seldome faile of some fish for your
spending. If you should keepe any Carpe,
Breame, or Tench in stewes in the Sommer
time, they will wex leane, vnlesse you do feede
them with corne: as barly, sod pease, or oates,
or any other kind of corne. It may be heare
expected I should set downe some proportion
of number of fishes, hauing regard to the
greatnesse of your pond, and the greatnesse of
the fish. Surely as the fertility of some soyle
will nourish double the number of cattle that
some others will do, euen so of pondes: if the
soyle bee a fat clay, or other good ground, it
will nourish double the number of fish, that
a leane barren heath ground or drie sand will
do. Howbeit the ordering of a pond in such
sort as aforesayd, and to lie dry euery other
yeare, will much mend any ground euery yeare,
especially if in the Sommer time when it lyeth
dry, cattell, and especially sheepe may
feede and lie therein, as hereafter shall appeare
by good reason. Howbeit in an indifferent
soile, I suppose you may well keepe foure
hundreth Carpe,The proportion of fish according to the greatnesse of your pond. Breame, or Tench, for euery
acre, supposing your fish to be eight or ten
inches in length: and the greater your pond is,
the greater number in proportion it will keepe:
as for example: a pond of foure acres will
much better keepe 1600. fish, then a pond of

two acres will keepe eight hundreth of like
fish: for euery hundreth of such fish as aforesayd,
you may keepe halfe a hundreth Perches
in the same pond, after you are once sufficiently
stored of frie, and not before: for that
a Perch is a very great deuourer of frie, especially
of Carpe. I haue seene in the belly
of a small Perch sixteene or seuenteene small
Carpe frie at once: but hauing sufficient of
frie, they do good in a pond, rather then otherwise:
and will themselues be very fat and
good. The Pike is in no wise to be admitted
into your great ponds, with your other
fish, he is so great a deuourer, and will grow
so fast hauing his fill of feeding, that being
but eight or ten inches in the beginning of
Sommer, he may be eighteene or twentie inches
before Hollantide, at what time he will
eate more fish euery day, then will suffise a man,
and will feede onelie of Carpe before anie other
fish, if there be Carpe frie in the pond. Howbeit
hauing two such ponds as aforesaid, made with
heads, you shall euerie yeare haue sufficient
store of reffuse frie, to feede some good number
of Pikes withall, wherewith they will be made
verie thicke, sweete, and well growne, but not
fatte, vnlesse you haue some store of small
Eeles, wherewithall to feede them some moneth
or sixe weekes before you take them to
spend: for that only that feeding vpon Eeles, being
cut in peeces, so as they may stir in the water,
and yet not be able to escape awaie, will

make the Pikes verie fat.
                  The causes mouing to haue a pond lie but one
yeare with water and fish,Causes why ponds shold lie drie euery other yeare. and the next yeare
emptie and drie, do hereafter ensue. First
by that meanes you shall auoide superfluous
number of frie, which greatly hinder the growth
and goodnesse of your greater fish. Secondly,
by that meanes you shall so proportion your
pond, that it shall neuer be ouerstored. Thirdly,
by that meanes your water shall alwayes
be excellent sweete, by reason it ouerfloweth
such ground as hath taken the sunne and ayre
all the sommer before: wherein also if cattell do
feede, or especially be fodered and lie, their
dung and stale together with the naturall
force of the Sunne at the next Spring ouerflowing
with water, will breede an innumerable
number of flies, and bodes of diuerse
kinds and sorts, which in a faire sunshine day
in March or Aprill, you shall see in the water as
thicke as motes in the Sunne, of which
bodes and flies the fish do feede exceedingly.
Also great store of seedes, of weedes,
and grasse, shedding that sommer that it lieth
drie, is a great feede to your fish the next
Sommer after, when it is ouerflowne with
water. The sayd bodes doe for the most
part breede of the blowings and seede of diuerse
kinds of flies, and such like liuing creatures
in the sommer, when your pond lieth drie,
in the dung of cattell, and otherwise: and
take life and being the ne
                        •
                     t Spring time

by the naturall heate of the Suune, together
with the moisture of the fat and pleasant
water, as aforeiaid: for surely many and sundrie
kinds of flies that flie about in the ayre
in Sommer time, do take life in the water ouerflowing
such ground where they haue bene
left by the blowings and feede of other flies.
And I haue often obserued and beheld in a
sunshine day, in shallow waters, especially
where any dung or fatte earth is therewith
mingled: I say, I haue seene a young flie
swimme in the water too and fro, and in
the end come to the vpper crust of the water,
and assay to flie vp: howbeit not being perfitly
ripe or fledge, hath twice or thrice fallen
downe againe into the water: howbeit in
the end receiuing perfection by the heate of
the sunne, and the pleasant fat water, hath
in the ende within some halfe houre after taken
her flight, and flied quite awaie into
the ayre. And of such young flies before
they are able to flie awaie, do fish feede exceedingly.
Fourthlie, your fish shall euerie yeare
haue feeding in proportion to their increasing
in bignesse: for it standeth with reason, that
Carpes or other fish of twelue inches long,
will require more feeding then so many of
si
                        •
                     e inches long will do: but chieflie by meanes
aforesayd of sewing euerie yeare,What maketh sweete fish. you shall
haue oportunitie to be rid of the great increase
of frie, and your greater fish more sweete and fat
then any other hath by farre.
                  
                     
Fish will liue in a manner in any pond, and
without any feeding, or such other industrie
as aforesayd: but then they are forced to liue
vppon the muddie earth and weedes that
grow in such ponds, and being so fedde, they
will eate and taste accordingly: and there is
as great difference in taste betweene fish that is
kept as aforesaid,Great difference in goodnesse of pond fish. and other fish that is kept
in a standing pond without feeding or other
industrie, as is betweene the flesh of a Larke,
and the flesh of a Crow or Kite. And I suppose
that that is the cause that most men
are out of loue with all pond fish, because they
neuer tasted of any good or well ordered pond
fish.
                  That Sommer that your pond lieth drie,
as aforesaid, if there happen to grow any
sower or rancke weedes therein (as many
times there will) it is good to cut them vp,
and being dried with the sunne, to burne them,
so shall you haue sweete grasse, or yong weeds
come in their place, that cattell will feede
on, and also the heate of the sunne shall much
amend your ground. Also trench out the water,
that it may lie as drie as may be possible:
and if you can plough it, and haue Sommer
corne therein, as bucke or barley that Sommer
that it lieth drie, I thinke it very good.
                  I haue heard the common people in the
fenne countries affirme, and that very earnestly,
that their fishes do feede of ashes, by
reason that in a drie Sommer, when much of

their fenne grounds lie drie, and are pastured
with cattell, then towards the winter time
such ranke grasse, sedge, reedes, or weedes,
as the cattell do leaue vneaten, they will
burne them with fire, to the end that the next
Sommer such old sedge, reedes, or weedes, may
not annoy the comming vp of young and better
sedge, reedes, or grasse. And the common
people find by experience, that after such
a drie Sommer, as aforesaid, all the next Winter
the water ouerflowing those grounds,
their fish will be exceeding fat and good: and
therefore (say they) surely the fish do feede vppon
the ashes of the weeds, and such like burnt
as aforesaid. But the truth is, in such a drie
Sommer as aforesaid, the cattell then feeding
in such grounds as then lie drie, do
bestow therein great quantitie of dung and
stale, wherein is bred great abundance of
such bodes, flies, and wormes, as aforesayd:
as also the naturall and liuelie heate of the
Sunne piercing such grounds, doth make the
same pleasant and fat, and to bring forth the
next Sommer many hearbes and weedes,
the seedes of which do yeeld vnto fishes verie
great foode and nourishment, and not the barren
drie ashes, as afore is imagined.
                  He that cannot haue such ponds as aforesaid,The second sort of ponds.
and hauing but some small mote or other
horse-pond in his ground, that standeth
continuallie full of water, may often times
haue a dish of good fish, if he will bestow some

feeding of corne,How fish may be fed in such ponds. as sod barley or pease, cheese-curds,
or bloud of beasts, to throw into his
pond in the sommer time, for that fish being
not of the rauening kind, do then onelie feede.
But it behoueth to do it in such sort, as he may
be assured that the fish do eate it, and that he
be not beguiled with duckes, geesse, or such like.
He may therefore make a square thing of some
two foote broade, of Elme boords, with
ledges some three or foure inches deepe, and
therein sincke his corne with a line tied vnto
the foure corners thereof, so that he may pull
it vp and let it downe when he pleaseth, and
after the fish haue once found the vse thereof,
you shall well perceiue they will haunt it. Sweet
graines in small proportion are also good, but
if they be once sower or mustie, the fish will not
feede on them, and also they will stench your
pond.The Tench good to be fed. The Tench of all other fish will best like
to be fed, as aforesaid, and will be very good,
sweete, and fatte, and next vnto him the
Carpe.
                  It is with fish as it is with other creatures,
for like as one acre of ground, will hardly
feede one ore throughout the yeare, to keepe
him in good plight and fat, yet so much corne
or hay you may lay in that acre, that you may
feede therein ten or twentie oxen. And euen
so, although one acre of ground ouerflowed
with water, will naturallie, and if it selfe keepe
but 300. or foure hundreth Carpes, or other
fsshes: yet so much feeding you may adde thereunto,

that it may keepe three thousand or foure
thousand in as good plight as three hundreth
or foure hundreth without such feeding.The great increase of fish. Of all
creatures fish are the greatest increasers in
number: and so great is the increase of them,
that I do verily suppose the Sea it selfe and
all fresh riuers likewise, would be ouerstored
if they did not deuour one another in very great
quantity: yet haue they many other enemies
besides fish, that do continually pray and feede
vpon them: as, for pond fish, first the small Eeles,
when the Carps, Breams, Tenches, or Roches
do lay their spawne in egges in spawning time,
you shall many times see sixe,Eeles and afterward Perches great deuourers of frie. ten, or more small
Eeles follow them, and as the spawne falleth
from them they eate it, as also Duckes will do
the like. Afterward so sonne as it is quicke, the
Eele, and especially the Perch, will deuour it in
great quantitie before it be able to swimme any
thing fast. After that, it is foode for the Kings
fisher,Fish haue many enemies to destroy them. all kind of shel-foule, the Bitture, the
Hearne, the Cormorant, and the Ospray. And
when it is at the greatest, as if it bee a Carpe
of three foote long, the Otter will kill him: otherwise
all ponds would quickly be ouerstored,
if it also go not away with flouds, which is
greatly to be foreseene. I remember myselfe did
once put three spawning Carps into a pond that
was some three acres of ground, and with them
nine or ten milters about February, and in Nouember
next following I did sew the same pond,
and of those breeders I had 9000. and vpwards

of Carpe frie, notwithstanding all the foresaid
enemies: and surely a Breame will increase
in number much more.How fish do breede. The ingendring
and breeding of the like fish as aforesaid,
I haue noted to be in this manner, sometime
in May, and sometime in Iune, as the
season happeneth to fall out apt for generation,
the water by Gods prouidence hauing
then a naturall warmth to performe the
same, the male fish by course of nature, will
chase about the female, seeking copulation:
and as in all other creatures, so in this the female
seemeth to shun and flie from the male,
so that you shall see three, foure, or fiue male
fish chase one female, and so hold her in on euerie
side, that they will force her to swimme
through weedes, grasse, rushes, straw, or any
such like thing that is in the pond, wherein
she being intangled and wearied with their
chasing, they find oportunitie to ioyne in copulation
with her, mingling their milt with her
spawne, sometime one of them, sometime another,
at which time the spawne falleth from
her like little egges, and sticketh fast to the
sayd weedes: some eight, nine, or ten dayes
after which time it quickneth, taketh life,
and hath the proportion of a fish: yea two or
three dayes before it quicken, if you take such
an egge and breake it vppon your naile, you
shall perceiue the proportion of a fish therein.
After it is quicke it mooueth very little for
some fortnight or three weekes, and then it

gathereth together into sculles by the shore side,
where the water is shallow: howbeit the
Tench frie will lie scattering in the weedes, and
not flote in sculles.
                  And if there run any water from your pond,
you shall not possible keepe Eeles out of the
same, they will come into the same against
the streame. Their manner of breeding is
very vncertaine and vnknowne,The breeding of Eeles very vncertaine and vnknowne. but vndoubtedly
they are bred in the brackish or sea water:
and at the first full Moone in Maie they begin
to come into all great riuers, and out of
great riuers into lesser riuers, and out of those
lesser riuers into all small brookes, rils, and
running waters, continually against the
streame all the beginning of Sommer: as
likewise with the first floud that commeth
about Michelmas, they couet to go downe
the streame, and will not stay vntill they come
into the deepe and brackish waters, if they be
not taken or letted by the way. I know that
some hold opinion that they breede of the
May deaw, for proofe whereof they say if you
cut vp two turfes of grassie in a May morning,
and clap the grassie sides of those turfes
together, and so lay them in a riuer, you shall
the next day find small young Eeles betweene
the sayd turfes: and so you shall indeeede,
for the most part do. Howbeit not therefore
they do breede of the deaw, for if you likewise
take a little bottle of sweete hay, straw, or
weedes, that haue had no May deaw fallen

thereon, and sinke it in a riuer at that time of
the yeare, and take it out suddenly the next
morning, and you shall find likewise many
small Eeles therein. The reason is, at that
time of the yeare that riuer being full of such
young Eeles, they will creepe into euery thing
that is sweete and pleasant.Eeles come from the brackish and sea water. And for proofe
that the sayd Eele frie doe come out of the
brackish waters against the streame into all
other Riuers, Rils, and Ponds, if in the beginning
of the Sommer you do diligently obserue
at the taile of any water Mill,In the riuer of Seuerne I haue seene great store of these small Eele frie taken going against the streame, when they are no greater then a wheate straw. especially
neare vnto any great riuer, you shall see
them in great numbers early in the morning,
and late in the euening, in Iune or Iuly at
the chinckes and holes in the floud-gates to
labour exceedingly to get vp against the streame,
although they be often times driuen backe with
the violence of the water, yet cease they not
still againe to labour vntill they haue gotten
vp against the streame. The like do Salmonds,Eeles go against the streame, and so doth most other fish in the spring time.
Barbils, Troutes, Roch, Date,
Cheuin, Gogions, and other riuer fish at
Weres and Dammes in great riuers, for that
they couet to spawne in shallow waters, and
not in the deepe: the which thing when they
haue performed,Fish couet to go downe the streame in the latter end of the Sommer. they then presently couet to
go downe the streame vntill they come vnto the
brackish or sea water.
                  It may be here expected that I should set
downe the baites to be vsed for all kind of
pond-fish,Baites for euery seuerall fish. for all seasons of the yeare, but therein

I haue not had such exact knowledge to prescribe
vnto the diligent practiser any better
then himselfe can find out. I haue found that
the Carpe, Breame, and Tench, being vsed
to feeding, will bite at the red worme, paste
made of dough, or the grashopper, most part
of the Sommer season. The Tench also is
a fish very easilie taken in a Bownet, and whosoeuer
hath of them in his ponds, it behooueth
him to take great heede that he be not deceiued
by leud people.
                  The shallow or pond Roch with the red fins
will spawne in most ponds. The riuer Roch
and Dace will not spawne in any pond: howbeit
if your pond be neare any riuer, and that
there runne any water from it in the Sommer
time, you shall find that they will come into the
same against the streame, where you would
thinke it vnpossible: and so will Pickerell and
Perch. And I haue heard some affirme very
constantly, that water-fowle do often times
bring the spawne of such fish in their feathers
into ponds.Many opinions concerning breeding of fish. Others will affirme, that the heate
of the Sunne may draw vp such spawne of fish
before it be quicke, and so the same taking life
in the moist ayre, may afterward fall downe in a
shower of raine into a pond: the reason that hath
mooued many men so to thinke, is, because they
haue found such kind of fish in their ponds, where
they are sure that they nor any other haue euer
put any such. Howbeit surely the same haue
come into the sayd ponds against the streame, as

aforesaid, in Sommer flouds, and not by any
such other monstrous generation as is last afore
mentioned. And somewhat to say of the
growth of fish: as nature may be helped by
art in other things, so likewise in fish very
much: for that a Carpe may with feeding the
first yeare be brought to be sixe inches long,
and the next to twelue or foureteene inches,
whereas in ordinary ponds without feeding,
they will hardly be brought to be fourteene inches
in fiue or sixe yeares.
                  I do not thinke that ground would yeeld vnto
the owner any other way so much benefite, as
to be conuerted into such ponds with heads
as is afore mentioned, if onely fish were spent
vppon the dayes by law ordained for that
purpose in this Realme: the which thing if
it were obserued, no doubt would turne this
Realme to incredible benefite, many and sundry
wayes. But now those that should spend
such fish, will rather bestow their money in
Rabbets, Capons, or such like. Howbeit
I am perswaded that fish vsed as aforesayd,
and dressed whilest it is new taken, is very
wholsome for mans body, and also more delicate
then most kinds of flesh.
                  A Breame will be very long in growing,
before it come to any bignesse,A Breame very slow in growth. as commonly
fiue or sixe yeares before he be a foote long, but
if your water be not very great, he will hardly be
a foote long in ten yeares.
                  The Tench will grow and prosper very well:

howbeit will neuer be so great as some Carpes
will be.
                  I haue seene a Carpe of xxxiii.Carpe. inches betweene
the eye and the forke of the taile, but neuer
any Tench aboue two and twenty inches
of like measure.
                  The Pike will grow exceedingly, if he may
haue his fill of other small fish: as, the first yeare
to twelue or fourteene inches, the next to twenty
or two and twenty inches.
                  And whosoeuer hath ponds with heads as
aforesayd, shall euery yeare very conueniently
feede some good number of Pikes in some ditch
or small stew with refuse frie.
                  If you haue such ponds as aforesayd, often
or twelue acres of ground or more, neare any
riuer where Troughts are,Troughts may be kept in ponds. you may get
Troughts to put into such ponds with your other
fish, so there be no Pikes amongst them.
Howbeit when you come to sew your pond,
and that the water commeth any thing neare
the mud, your Troughts will then die: yet
haue I seene them grow exceedingly in such a
pond in one yeare, and to be very fat and good:
howbeit they must be very charily handled in
the cariage, and a few of them caried in a great
deale of faire and cleane water, and that in
cold weather, and may not be handled with
hands, but in a hand-net very charily: and so
likewise are all other fish to be vsed, especially
such as you meane to keepe for store.
                  If you haue Carpes in small ditches, in the

moneth of March, at what time Todes doe
ingender, the Tode will many times couet
to fasten himselfe vppon the head of the
Carpe, and will thereby inuenime the Carpe,
in such sort that the Carpe will swell as great
as he may hold, so that his seales will stand as
it were on edge, and his eyes stand out of his
head neare halfe an inch, in very vgly sort: and
in the end will for the most part die thereof:
and it is very dangerous for any person to eate
of any such Carpe so inuenimed.
                  It is not sufficient that fish be aliue and
swimme away when they are put into a pond,Fish to be charily handled in the cariage.
but if they be brused or take heate in the cariage,
they will be long before they recouer againe
and fall to their feeding, and sometime
neuer recouer, but after long pining and sicknesse,
do in the end die also.
                  The Carpe of all pond fish will abide most
hardnesse in cariage:The Carpe will abide most hardnesse. next to him the Tench,
then the Breame, Pike, and Perch. A Carpe
in the winter time may be caried aliue in wet
hay or grasse that is sweete for the space of fiue
or sixe houres.
                  If you cary any fish in water, let not the Tench
or Eele be caried among them,Tenches and Eeles not to be caried with other fish. because they
cast great store of slime, which will choke and
kill your other fish, especially Pike or Perch.
                  A Pike will hardly feede of any thing except
it stirre and be aliue, but the Perch and Eele
will feede of the small guts of sheepe being cut,
or of any garbage of Chickens, Coneys, or such

like, and of bloud of beasts.
                  The Tench, Perch, and Eele, being vsed to
be fed, will not lightly faile to bite at an angle
anytime the Sommer halfe yeare.
                  The feeding of frie the first yeare will make
them quickly past many dangers, as of being
past danger of eating of some other fishes and
foules, as also past danger of going away at
grates, or at the holes of water rats in
bankes. Also they will be of a larger and greater
growth then euer they will be not being fed:
and it behooueth to feede them with such foode
as they are able to feede on: as, the first moneth
with otemeale, or some other meale sodden,
and being cold may be like a gelly in thicknesse,
a very little in quantity to be laid in shallow
places, where onely the frie do haunt,
and not the greater fish. A Carpe frie will
begin to feede when he is not aboue an inch long,
at what time also they will begin to gather together
in sculles after some fortnight or three
weekes, you may then make their meate thicker,
and increase in quantitie as your frie bee
of abilitie to eate it, giuing to euerie kind of frie
such feeding as his nature requireth.
                  It is not good to handle any kinde of frie
whilest it is very young and tender, or at
least wise not in handes, but in some small
mashed hand-net, that is flatte and not
deepe like a bagge or a sacke, and a few at
once, that they rub not one vpon another.
                  The second yeare you may feede your frie

with sodden barley or mault steeped in water,
and the third yeare with sodden pease: for
like as any kind of beasts, especially such as
chew not the cud, do take more nutriture out
of sodden corne, then out of corne being raw:
so fishes being of nature more cold then other
creatures, take lesse nutriture of raw
corne then any other creatures do. And if you
feede your fish with raw corne, you shall find it
come from them in their dung not halfe concocted,
whereby a great part of the feeding
thereof is lost and doth not good. It may be
demaunded if it will quite the cost, to haue fish
in this sort fed. Surely if corne be not excessiue
deare, it will beare the charges very well: for
that a small quantity of corne will suffice a
great many of fish. Howbeit the other way
before mentioned, with ponds with heads,
and to lie drie euery other yeare, is lesse troublesome,
and will breede very excellent, good,
sweete, and fat fish: so that they bee not ouerstored,
although they haue no feeding by
hand.
                  The more that a pond lieth open vnto the
Sunne, the ayre, and the winds, the better it
is for your fish.
                  The leaues of any kind of trees, but especially
of oke, falling into any pond, is noysome
to the fish, and so is the greene boughes
of oke, or any other wood except willow▪
                  
                  The haunt of cattell vnto any pond is verie

good, and nourishing to the fish, especially
of kine and oxen, and chiefly when such cattell
do feede where corne hath bene newly
mown or reaped, for that therewil then remaine
in their dung much corne and seedes of grasse,
which the fishes being not of the rauening kind
do feede on.
                  The fish that bee not of the rauening kind,
do feede little or nothing in the winter time,
but do lie either in holes in the bankes, or in
weedes in the bottome of the ponds, to shun
the extremitie of cold ayre.
                  The rauening kind do feede in the winter
season, although nothing so much as in the
Sommer season.
                  Some will hold opinion that the Pike
will not eate the Perch, because of his sharpe
finnes, but I haue often times seene two or
three small Perches in the belly of a Pike,
and likewise in the belly of an Eele. And I
haue likewise seene a Pike choked sometime
with eating of a Perch, when as he hath swallowed
the Perch with the taile foremost.
                  But the Pike will not lightly meddle with
the Perch if there be any store of other kind
of feeding for him in the pond of other small
fish.
                  It is also requisite that the Pike be helped, so
that he labour not ouer much in chasing of his
pray before he take it, as to haue the tailes of
the small fish cut off, when you throw them into
the stew or small pond vnto your Pikes, to the

end they may with the more ease take them,
The Perch and Eele will feed of bloud of beasts
as aforesayd, and likewise of the small garbage
of sheepe and such like being cut small, and
also of small frie of fish, either
dead or aliue.
               
            
            
               
               THE PREFACE CONCERNING
FRVITE.
               
                  IF the benefite arising vnto the
common-wealth through the
abundance of fruite were well
weighed and pondered, there
would be lawes established for
the increase and maintenance
therof throughout this Realme.
Many countries as Gloccster-shire, Hereford-shire,
Worcester-shire, great part of Kent and Sussex are
so replenished with fruite, that it serueth the poorer
sort not onely for foode a great part of the yeare, but
also for drinke the most part of the yeare. I haue
knowne in those countries many men that haue 12. or
twenty persons vprising and downe lying in their
houses, that do not spend most yeares two quarters
of malt for their drinke (but onely cider and perry)
and also do yearely sell great quantitie. And there is
no doubt but in most countries in England there
might be the like, if men would generally plant fruite,
and notwithstanding take as great commoditie in effect
by pasturing or earing of their ground as they
now do. But in many places the short estate that
men haue in their holdings, and the discommoditie
they find in stealers, do discourage them. Howbeit
if men would generally plant in their hedge-rowes,

balkes and other places, it would be a very small matter
to any one man, although poore folke did now &
then take some part of the same. Howbeit it were very
necessary that some law were established to punish
such offenders, not so much in respect of the value of
the thing, as in that it discourageth men to set & plant
fruite, and that respect were had to Moses Law, viz.
that so long as the same extendeth but to the filling
of their bellies to expell hunger, it is the more to be
borne withall: but if they shall also cary away to any
value, there is no reason but that it should be seuerely
punished. I am also perswaded that cider and perry
is very wholesome for the bodies of naturall English
people, especially such as do labor and trauell. It is
also by experience found to be very good to furnish
ships withall for long voyages by sea, for that a small
quantity thereof will relish and giue good taste vnto
a great deale of water: and very great commodity
might arise to this Realme, if we were able to spare
mault to serue the Low countries withall, or rather
the same being made into beare, for that our Themes
water doth for that purpose passe any other water
whatsoeuer: which thing in time might be very commodious
vnto our Prince in respect of custom, & likewise
to the whole Realme, in respect of maintenance
of Nauigation by transporting the same, besides other
commodities not here to be spoken of.
            
            
               
               CERTAINE EXPERIMENTS
CONCERNING
FRVITE, AS
FOLLOWETH.
               
                  FOR planting of any great
quantity of fruite it is necessarie
first to sow in some bed
(being before hand well trenched
two foote deepe,A nurcery of plants and grafts. and the
earth broken small and layd
light but not dunged) the kernels
of apples, crabs, or pears.
The kernels of apples may be gotten in some
good quantitie of such as make apple pies to sell
in markets or market townes. The keruels of
crabs or peares, are to be picked out of crabs
that are stamped for veriuyce, or peares ground
or stamped for perry: which kernels being
sowne in such beds as aforesayd, being kept from
cropping of cattell or Coneys, and also kept with
weeding, will in two yeares be ready to remoue
and to be set in beds three foote asunder one
way, and a foote the other other way, the body
being cut off halfe a foote aboue the ground, in
which beds hauing stood one yeare, they may
then be grafted with what fruite you please,

a handfull aboue the ground is best grafting,
which beds being kept with weeding, you may
also commodiously plant strawberies vnder your
grafts. Within three or foure yeares after the
grafting, they will be ready to remoue into an
Orchard, where you may plant them to continue:
but if you meane to plant them in your
hedge-rowes in your ground where cattle commeth,
they had need to be of sixe yeares growth
after the grafting, because you may then the
more conueniently tie bushes about them, or
other prouision to keepe them from cattle: but
the wild choke peare that is neuer grafted, will
make very good perry.
               Also one other way to plant an Orchard
may be done by planting of small crab-stockes
in beds in some nurcery as aforesayd, three foote
asunder one way, and one foote the other way,
the ground in the sayd beds being first trenched
two foote deepe, and the mould laid light, and
the stocke cut off halfe a foote aboue ground:
and the next yeare the same to be grafted close
by the ground, or at the most foure inches aboue
the ground, to the end that if the first grafting
happen to faile, it may be againe grafted the
second time. Howbeit some also do vse to graft
fiue or sixe foote high, and vppon great olde
stockes, the same is not greatly amisse: howbeit
the other way is farre better as I take it, for
that the siences so grafted fiue or sixe foote high,
are many times broken downe with foules lighting
on them, & many times broken downe with

the wind in the ioynt when they are 3. or 4. years
old, which is a great displeasure vnto the owner.
               Aboue all things you must foresee,An especiall note to be obserued. that the
ground of your nurcerie or orchard be not naturally
ouer wet or moist. It cannot lightly be too
drie, for that the rootes will naturally run downwards,
vntill they come vnto sufficient moisture:
but if the roote of anie plant be once set too deepe,
he cannot helpe himselfe: it is against nature for
the roote to grow vpwards, but will rather grow
mustie and die.
               The third way to plant an Orchard, is by setting
of slips of trees of cider fruite, which is the
speediest & readiest way in shortest time to haue
store of such fruite. But that kind of setting doth
seldome prosper but onely in some few especiall
kind of cider fruite. As also an Orchard so planted,
will not continue aboue fortie, or at the most
fiftie yeares, but it will decay againe.
               In planting of an Orchard the greatest care
is to be had,Wet groūds vnfit for an Orchard. that the ground be not too wet: for
that a tree planted in such ground cannot prosper:
or if it grow, it will not beare other then
spotted and cappard fruite, either apple, peare or
plumme, neither will it shoote out or grow in anie
good sort. If your ground be naturally wet, it
must be holpen with making of trenches betweene
euerie row of trees, so as the water may
draine away, at the least three foote deepe: and
whereas the ground is inclined to moisture, you
are to set your trees verie shallow, as halfe a foot
deepe, and rather to raise a hillock of earth about

your tree roote, then to set your tree too deepe
near the water.An especiall matter to be noted in planting of any trees whatsoeuer. And here note, that euery ground
hath an vpper crust of earth, which by the natural
heate of the Sun, & pleasantnesse of the ayre piercing
the same, is made more fruitfull then the residue
of the earth is: which vpper crust in some
grounds is a foote, some two foote, and in some
three foote deepe: also in some grounds not aboue
halfe a foote deepe. And vnder the same
vpper crust is either a hote chalke, a drie sand, a
barren grauell, or a cold lean clay, or lome, or such
like. It is therefore requisite that you set your
yong tree in such sort, as that the rootes thereof
may run and spread in that vpper crust, for that if
you set him any deeper, you spoile all.
               In many places in a chalke ground, where
such crust as aforesayd is very shallow and not
past halfe a foote deepe, you shall see most of the
rootes of the Elmes Ashes, and other trees
there growing, to runne naturally euen three or
foure inches aboue the earth: which thing they
do to shun the extreame heate of the chalke. The
like experience shall you also see in a wet or moorish
ground, a great part of the roote of great
trees to run also aboue the ground, for that they
do naturally shunne the extreame wet and cold of
such grounds.
               The fattest & fruitfullest ground is not best for
fruite, for that the trees growing in such ground
will be very subiect to be eaten with cankers, as
also the fruite will be much wormeaten.
               I suppose the best ground for an Orchard is

a wheate ground, or that which is as it were a
mixture of clay and sand, but in no wise inclined
to wet or springs of water.
               If you plant your trees twenty foote one way
and thirty foote the other,Many men are at great charge
                        •
                      in planting of Orchards, and yet can haue no good fruite, only by reason their trees are at the first set too deepe: howbeit do not perceiue the reason thereof. you may then very conueniently
either plough broade ridges, or mow
your Orchard between euery ranke of trees: and
such plowing will also do good vnto the roots of
the trees, especially if you turne your ground vpward
vnto the roots of your trees some three or
four plowings together, making your forrow in
the middest betweene euery ranke of trees, especially
whereas the ground is inclined to wet.
               It is also requisite that the place where you
set your tree, be digged wide and deepe, to the
end that the rootes may haue loose earth to run
into: by which meanes the roote spreading and
increasing, it will send out the more nourishment
and strength into the top.
               Also when you plant your young trees in your
Orchard, it is requisite to cut off all the top, otherwise
he will be in danger to die the next
Sommer, by reason the roote cannot the first
yeare be able to giue nourishment vnto many
boughes & branches. Many couet to haue their
trees sixe or seuen foote high before they branch
out in top, but I haue found very great inconuenience
in so doing, for that when such trees
come to beare fruite, the bodies will not be able
to sustaine the tops, but that they will bend
downe, and often times breake in sunder
with the weight of fruite: but to braunch
at some foure foote in height, I take to

be the best, especially where commeth no cattell
to crop them.
               In my opinion there were no fruite to be compared
vnto the Pippin, if it were not so subiect
vnto the canker as it is. There be manie kinds
of good apples, howbeit will not beare past once
in fiue or sixe yeares to anie purpose. Some other
kinds will beare euerie second yeare exceeding
full. Of both which sorts I haue diuers
kinds, howbeit cannot giue proper names to euerie
of them. The good bearing fruite is fittest
for cider, so it be also naturally moist and not drie.
Howbeit the peare maketh the more delicate
drinke then the apple will do: and I haue seene
some perrie of that strength, that it will warme
the stomacke euen like white wine, and tast as
pleasantly. And I am verily perswaded, that a
ground planted with wild peares otherwise called
choke peares, would be verie beneficiall vnto
the owner: for that such kind of fruite is fittest for
perrie, as also for the most part doth beare verie
full euerie yeare: and vntill your trees be of some
ten or twelue yeares growth, you may take commoditie
by ploughing or mowing your ground,
and grasing the same with horses, and afterward
by mowing and grasing the same with any other
cattell, especially if you set your trees twentie
foote asunder one way, and thirtie foote another
way, as aforesaid.
               The Peare will prosper in a ground inclined
to wet better then the apple will do.
               There is a disease in trees, which is called a

canker, wherevnto the pippin chiefly is greatly
subiect, and the same doth spoile manie trees. I
know no better remedie for the same, then to cut
it cleaue out in the winter time, which oftentimes
doth helpe the same, so that the barke will
againe ouergrow the sore, and do well: but if it
haue once gone more then halfe about the tree, it
will hardly be euer recouered: and for the most
part the best and most delicate fruite is most subiect
to this infirmitie. It may be here expected I
should treat of all kindes of grafting, as to graft
in the cleft, in the leafe, in the noch, or otherwise:
but surely for apples, peares, or most kind of
plummes, I haue found to graft in the clift some
foure inches aboue the ground to be the best.
Howbeit the Abricocke plumme, the vine, and
such other as haue great store of pith, they are fittest
to be grafted in the leafe, or eie (as the call it.)
The third way to graft in the noch, the cyent
must be in effect as great as the stocke, and such
grafts for the most part grow to be toppe heauie,
and therefore that kind of grafting to no great
purpose in my opinion.
               Some writers teach, that apples may be grafted
vpon the willow, the Elme, the Ash, Alder,
and such others: but a man had better be without
such fruite-trees in his Orchard then to haue
them, for that they will haue a tast of the stocke
that they are grafted on. An apple is not good to
be grafted, but vpon the stocke of the wild apple
or crab, as likewise the peare and warden vpon
the wild peare stocke.
               
                  
If you graft a Peare or a Warden vppon a
white thorne, it will be finall, hard, cappard, and
spotted.
               The Medler is good to be grafted vpon the
white thorne.
               The Quince is best to be planted of the wild
siences that grow out of the root of other Quince
trees, and so likewise the Philbard.
               The Chesnut and Walnut are to be set of
Nuts: and besides the commodity of the fruite,
do also become very good timber.
               The Chesnut timber will outlast the heart of
oke, to lie either alwayes wet or alwayes drie,
or sometime wet and sometime drie.
               The perry wil not last well aboue one yeare,
but the cider will last good two or
three yeares.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   