
      
         
            
            
            AN Arrant Thiefe,
Whom Euery Man may Trust:
            In Word and Deed,
Exceeding true and Iust.
            WITH A Comparison betweene a Thiefe and a Booke.
            Written by Iohn Taylor.
            
            LONDON. Printed by Edw: All-de, for Henry Gosson, and are to bee solde in Panier-Alley. 1622.
         
         
            
            
            THis Water Rat,
               
                  The Annagram of Rat is Art. (or Art) I would commend,
            But that I know not to begin or end:
            He read his Verses to me, and which more is
            Did moue my Muse to write Laudem Authoris,
            
            If for his Land Discoueries 
                  I touch not his Trauailes to Scotland Germany, or Bohemia or the Paper Boate.
                she should praise him,
            Whether would then his liquid knowledge raise him?
            Reade his two Treatises of Theefe and Whore,
            
            You le thinke it time for him to leaue his Oare.
            Yet thus much of his worth I cannot smother,
            Tis well for vs when Theeues peach one another.
            This Preface is but poore, 'tis by a Boy done,
            That is a Scholler of the Schoole of Croydon,
            
            Who when he hath more yeares and learning got,
            Hee'l praise him more or lesse, or not a jot.
            
               Giuen vpon Shroue Tuesday from our seate, in the second Forme of the famous free Schoole of Croydon.
               By RICHARD HATTON.
            
         
         
            
            WHen a Fresh Waterman doth turne Salt Poet,
            His Muse must prattle all the world must know it:
            Of Whores and Theiues (he writes two merry Bookes)
            He loues them both, I know it by his lookes.
            Alas I wrong him: blame my Muse not mee,
            She neuer spake before, and rude may bee.
            
               Giuen from the lowe estate of the fift Forme neere to the Schoole doore at Croydon beforesaid,
               By GEORGE HATTON.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE HOPEFVLL PAIRE OF BRETHREN, and my worthy Patrones, Master RICHARD, and GEORGE HATTON, Loue, Learning, and true Happines.
            YOur Muses, th'one a Youth, and one an Infant,
            Gaue me two Panegericks at one Instant:
            The first Pen,This Gentleman was pleased Annagrāmatically to call me Water-Rat, or water Art, Wc I doe Annagrammatize Water-Rat, to bee A trew Art.
                the first line it pleasd to walke in,
            Did make my Art a Rat, and like Grimalkin,
            
            Or a kinde needfull Vermin-coursing Cat,
            By Art I play, but will not eate your Rat.
            
            I thanke you that you did so soone determine,
            To Annagram my Art into a Vermine,
            
            For which I vow, if e're you keepe a Dayrie,
            Of (now and then) a Cheese I will impaire yee.
            Kinde Mr. George, your Muse must be exalted,
            My Poetry you very well haue salted.
            Salt keepes thinges sweet, & make them rellish sauory
            And you haue powdred well my honest kna &c.
            I thanke you to, nor will I be ingratefull,
            Whilest Rime or Reason deignes to fill my patefull,
            You truely say that I loue Whores and Thieues well,
            And halfe your speech I think the world belieues well,
            
               For should I hate a Theefe, Theeues are so Common,
            I well could neither loue my selfe or no man,
            But for Whores loue, my purse would neuer hold out,
            They'l heate and picke the Siluer and the Gold out.
            You both haue grac'd my Thiefe, he bath confessed,
            You (like two Shrieues) conuay'd him to be Pressed.
            
            In mirth you write to me, on small Requesting,
            For which I thanke you both, in harmlesse Iesting,
            And may your Studies to such goodnes raise you,
            That God may euer loue, and good men praise you.
            
               Yours, when you will, where you will, in what you will, as you will, with your will, again your will; at this time, at all time, at all times or some
                     •
                  times, in pastimes.
IOHN TAYLOR
            
         
         
            
            
               To any Reader He or Shee,
               It makes no matter what they bee.
            
            
               WHen you open this first leafe, Imagine you are come within the doore of my house, where according as you behaue your selues you are Courteously welcome, or you may lay downe the Booke, and goe the same way you came: the flattering of Readers, or begging their acceptance is an argument that the ware is scarce good which the Author meanes to vtter, or that it is a Cheape yeare of wit, and his lyes vpon his handes, which makes him pittifully, like a Supliant to begin Honorably Complaineth to your Humblenes, ('tis but mistaken, the first should be last.) Some men haue demanded of me, why I doe write vpon such sleight Subiects, as the Praise of Hempseed. The Trauailes of Twelue-pence. Taylors Goose. The Antiquity of Begging. A Cormorant. A Cōmon Whore. And now an arrant Thiefe?
               
               
                  •
               o whom I answer heere, that many Graue and excellent Writers haue imployed their Studyes to good purposes in as triuiall matters as my selfe; and I am assured that the meaner the subiect is, the better the Inuention must bee, for (as Tom Nash said) euery Foole can fetch Water out of the Sea or picke Corne out of full Sheaues, but to wring
                  •
                Oyle out of Flint, or make a plentifull Haruest with little or no Seede, that's the Workman, but that's not I. And Gentlemen, as I lately sent you a Whore that was honest, so I haue now sent you a Thiefe, that will neuer Rob you nor picke your Pockets of more then you are willing to part with all.
            
               Yours at all good times IOHN TAYLOR
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A THIEFE.
            I Lately to the world did send a A Booke I writ called a Whore.
                
               Whore
            
            And she was welcom, though she was but poore
            And being so, it did most strange appeere
            That pouerty found any welcome heere,
            But when I saw that many Rich men sought,
            My Whore, & with their coine her freedom bought
            I mus'd, but as the cause I out did ferrit
            
               
                  •
                found some Rich in Purse, some poore in merrit
            Some learned Schollers, some that scarse could spell:
            Yet all did loue an honest Whore, right well,
            Twas onely such as those that entertaind hir,
            Whilst scornful Knaues, & wides Fooles disdaind hir.
            Now to defend her harmels Innocence,
            I send this Thiefe to be her Iust defence:
            Against all truemen, and ile vndertake
            There are not many that dare answer make.
            Then Rowze my Muse, be valiant, and be briefe,
            Be confident my true and constant Thiefe:
            Thy Trade is scatt'red, vniuersally,
            Throughout the spacious worlds Rotundity,
            
               For all estates and functions great and small,
            Are for the most part Thieues ingenerall.
            Excepting Millers, Weauers, Taylers, and
            Such true trades as no stealing vnderstand.
            Thou art a Thiefe (my Booke) and being so
            Thou findst thy fellowes wheresoeu'r thou goe,
            Birds of a feather still will hold together
            And all the world with thee are of a feather:
            The ods is, thou art a Thiefe by nomination,
            And most of men are Thieues in their vocation.
            Thou neither dost cog, Cheate, steale sweare or lye
            Or gather'st goods by false dishonesty,
            And thou shalt liue when many of the Crue
            Shall in a Halter bid the world Adue.
            And now a thought into my minde doth fall
            To proue whence Thieues haue their originall:
            I finde that Iupiter did wantonly
            On Maya get a sonne call'd Mercurye,
            
            To whom the people oft did Sacrifice,
            Accounting him the God of Marchandize:
            Of Elloquence, and rare inuention sharpe,
            And that he first of all deuisd the Harpe.
            The God of Tumblers, Iuglers, fooles & Iesters,
            Of Thieues, and fidlers that the earth bepesters,
            Faire Venus was his Sister, and I finde
            He was to her so much vnkindely kinde,
            That hee on her begat Hermophrodite
            
            As Ouid very wittily doth write:
            His wings on head and heeles true Emblems bee
            How quick he can inuent, how quickly 
                  •
               lee:
            
               By him are Thieues inspirde, and from his guift
            They plot to steale and run away most swift:
            In their conceites and sleights, no men are sharper,
            Each one as nimble finger'd as a Harper.
            Thus Thieuing is not altogether Base
            But is descended from a lofty Race.
            Moreouer euery man, himselfe doth showe
            To be the Sonne of Addam, for we knowe
            He stole the Fruite, and euer since his Se
                  •
               de,
            To steale from one another haue agreede.
            Our Infancy is Theft, tis manyfest
            We crie and Rob our Parents of their Rest:
            Our Childe-hood Robs vs of our Infancy,
            And youth doth steale our childe-hood wantonly:
            Then Man-hood pilfers all our youth away,
            And middle-age, our Manhood doth conuay
            Vnto the Thieuing hands of feeble age,
            Thus are we all Thieues, all our Pilgrimage,
            In all which progresse, many times by stealth
            Strange sicknesses doth Rob vs of our health.
            
               Rage steales our Reason, Enuy thinkes it fit
            To steale our Loue, whilst Folly steales our wit.
            
               Pride filcheth from vs our Humillity,
            
            And Leachery doth steale our honesty,
            Base Auarice, our Conscience doth purloin,
            Whilst sloath to steale our mindes from work doth Ioyne
            Time steales vpon vs, whilst we take small care,
            And makes vs olde before we be a ware:
            
               Sleepe and his brother Death conspire our fall
            The one steales halfe our liues, the other all.
            
               Thus are we Robb'd by Morpheus, and by Mors
            
            Till in the end, each Corps is but a Coarse,
            Note but the seasons of the yeare, and see
            How they like Thieues to one another be
            From Winters frozen face, through snow & showers
            The Spring doth steale roots, plāts, buds & flowers,
            Then Sommer Robs the Spring of natures sute,
            And haruest Robs the Sommer of his fruite,
            Then Winter comes againe, and he bereaues
            The Haruest of the Grayne, and Trees of Leaues,
            And thus these seasons Robs each other still
            Round in their course, like Horses in a mill.
            The Elements, Earth, VVater, Ayre, and Fire
            To rob each other daily doe Conspire:
            The fiery Sun from th'ocean, and each Riuer
            Exhales their Waters, which they all deliuer:
            This water, into Clowdes the Ayre doth steale
            Where it doth vnto Snow or Haile Conicale,
            Vntill at last Earth Robs the Ayre againe
            Of his stolne Treasure Haile, sleete, snow or Raine.
            Thus be it hot or cold, or dry, or wet,
            These Thieues, from one another steale and get.
            Night Robs vs of the day, and day of Night:
            Light pilfers darknes, and the darknes light.
            Thus life, death, seasons, and the Elements
            And day & Night, for Thieues are presidents.
            Two Arrant Thieues we euer beare about vs
            The one within, the other is without vs,
            All that we get by toyle, or Industry
            Our Backs and Bellies steale continually,
            
               For though men labour with much care & Carke,
            Lie with the Lamb downe, rise vp with the Lark.
            
            
               
                  •
               weare and forsweare, deceaue, and lie and Cog,
            And haue a Conscience worse then any Dog,
            
               
                  •
               e most vngracious, extreame vile and base,
            And (so he gaine) not caring for disgrace:
            Let such a Man or Woman count their gaines
            They haue but meat, & Rayment for their paines.
            No more haue they that do liue honestest
            Those that can say their Consciences are best,
            Their Bellies and their Backs, day, night and hower,
            The fruites of all their labours do deuower:
            These Thieues do rob vs, with our owne good will,
            And haue dame natures warrant for it still,
            
               
                  •
               omtimes these Sharks do work each others wrack
            The Rauening Belly, often Robs the Back:
            Will feed like Diues, with Quaile, Raile, & Pheasant
            And be attir'd all tatter'd like a Peasant,
            
               
                  •
               ometimes the gawdy Back, Mans Belly pines,
            
               
                  •
               or which he often with Duke Humphrey dines:
            
               
                  •
               he whilst the minde defends this hungry stealth
            And sayes a temp'rate dyet mainetaines health,
            
               
                  •
               et Corland crie, let Guts with famine mourne,
            The maw's vnseene, good outsides must be worne,
            Thus do these Thieues Rob vs, and in this pother
            The minde consents, and then they Rob each other:
            Our Knowledge and our Learning (oft by chance)
            Doth steale and Rob vs of our Ignorance:
            Yet Ignorance may sometimes gaine promotion
            Where it is held the Mother of deuotion)
            
               But knowledge ioynd with learning, are poor things
            That many times a man to begg'ry brings:
            And fortune very oft doth Iustly fit
            Some to haue all the wealth, some all the wit.
            
               Tobacco Robs some men, if so it list
            It steales their Coyne (as Thieues do) in a Mist:
            
            Some men to Rob the Pot will neu'r refraine
            Vntill the Pot Rob them of all againe,
            A prodigall can steale exceeding Briefe,
            Picks his owne purse, and is his owne deare Thiefe:
            
            And thus within vs, and without vs we
            Are Thieues, and by Thieues alwayes pillagde be.
            First then vnto the greatest Thieues of all
            Whose Thecu'ry is most high and Capitall:
            You that for pomp, and Titles transitory
            Rob your Almighty maker of his Glory,
            And giue the Honour due to him alone
            Vnto a Carued block, a stock or stone,
            An Image, a Similytude, or feature
            Of Angell, Saint, or Man, or any creature,
            To Alters, Lamps, to Holly Bread, or Waters,
            To shrines, or tapers, or such Iugling matters,
            To Relliques, of the dead, or of the liuing
            This is the most supreamest kind of Theiuing.
            
            Besides they all commit this Fellonie
            That breake the Saboath day malliciouslie,
            God giues vs sixe dayes and himselfe hath one,
            Wherein he would (with thanks) be calld vpon:
            And those that steale that day to bad abuses,
            Robs God of Honour, without all excuses:
            
               Vnto these Thieues, my Thiefe doth plainely tell
            That though they hang not here, they shall in Hell
            
               
                  •
               xcept Repentance, (and vnworthy Guerdon
            
               
                  •
               hrough our Redemers merits) gaine their pardon.
            
               
                  •
               hen Ther's a Crew of Thieues that prie and lu
                  •
               ch
            
               
                  •
               nd steale and share the liuings of the Church;
            
               
                  •
               hese are Hells factors, Marchants of all Euill,
            
               
                  •
               obs God of Soules, and giue them to the Deuill.
            
               
                  •
               or where the Tythe of many a Parish may
            
               
                  •
               llowe a good sufficient Preacher paye,
            
               
                  •
               et Hellish pride, or lust, or Auarice,
            
               
                  •
               r one or other fowle licentious Vice,
            
               
                  •
               obs Learning Robs the people of their teaching
            who in seauen yeares perhaps doth heare no preaching
            When as the Parsonage by accounts is found
            
               
                  •
               earely worth two, 3. or 4. hundred pound,
            
               
                  •
               et are those Soules seru'd, or else staru'd I feare
            
               
                  •
               ith a poore Reader 
                  In the 93. page of a Booke, called the Spirit of Detraction the Author cites 12. Parishes in one Hundred in Wales in this predicament.
                for eight poundes a yeare.
            Preacher breakes to vs the Heau'nly Bread
            
               
                  •
               hereby our straying Soules are taught and fed:
            
               
                  •
               nd for this heau'nly worke of his, 't is sence
            
               
                  •
               hat men allow him earthly Recompence.
            
               
                  •
                shall he giue vs foode that's spirituall
            
               
                  •
               nd not haue meanes to feede him Corporall?
            
               
                  〈◊〉
               ; (of all men) tis most manifest,
            
               
                  •
               ainefull Churchman earnes his wages best.
            
               
                  ••
               ose that keepe back the Tythes, I tell them true
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                arrant Thieues in Robbing God, of'is due:
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                he that robs Gods church ('t encrese their pelse)
            
               
                  •
               is most apparent, they Rob God himselfe.
            
               The Patron oft deales with his Minister
            As Dionisius did with 
                  Iupiters Idol in Scracusa in Sicitia.
                Iupiter
            He stole his Golden Cloake, and put on him
            A Coate of Cotton, (nothing neere so trim)
            And to excuse his theft, he said the Gold
            was (to be worne) in Winter time, too Cold,
            But in the Summer, twas too hot and heauy,
            And so some Patrones vse the Tribe of Leuy:
            That for the Winters cold, or Summers heate,
            They are so pold, they scarse haue cloathes & meat.
            Amongst the rest, there may some pastors be,
            Who enter in through cursed Simonie:
            But all such are notorious Thieues therefore
            They climb the wall, & not com through the The dore is Christ. dore,
            Thus Menelaus did the Priesthood win
            From Iason by this simonayck sinn,
            For he did pay three hundred Tallents more
            Then Iason would (or could) disburse therefore.
            And many a mitred Pope and Cardinall
            This way haue got their State Pontificall:
            These Rob and steale, (for which all good Men grieu
                  ••
               
            
            And make the House of Praier, a den of Thieues.
            
            But though the Hangman, heere they can outface
            Yet they shall all hang in a worser place.
            Then there are Thieues who make the Church their gaines
            VVho can Preach wel, yet will not take the paines:
            Dumb dogs, or rau'ning wolues, whose careles care
            Doth fat themselues, & keep their flocks most bare.
            Besides Churchwardens, with a griping Fist
            Like Thieues may Rob their Vestry, if they list.
            
               The Poores neglector (O I pardon craue)
            Collector I should say, may play the Knaue,
            The Thiefe I would haue said, but chuse you whether
            He may be both, and so he may be neither.
            So leauing Church-Thieues, with their cursed stealth,
            He now descend vnto the Common-wealth.
            And yet me thinkes I should not passe the Court,
            But sure Thieues dare not thither to resort.
            But of all Thieues in any Kings Dominion,
            A Flatterer is a Cutpurse of opinion,
            That like a Pick-pocket, doth lye and wayte,
            To steale himselfe into a mans conceit.
            This Thiefe will often dawbe a great mans vice,
            Or rate his Vertue at too lowe a price,
            Or at too high a pitch his worth will raise,
            To fill his eares with flatt'ry any wayes.
            
               
                  •
               urueyors, and Purueyors, now and then
            May steale, and yet be counted honest men.
            When men doe for their liuing labour true,
            
               
                  •
               e's a base Thiefe that payes them not their due.
            They are all Thieues, that liue vpon the fruites
            Of Monnopollies if vngodly Suites.
            
               
                  •
               he Iudge or Iustice that doe Bribes desire
            Like Thieues, deserue a halter for their hire.
            
               
                  •
                Reuerend Father, worthy of beleeuing,
            
               
                  •
               aid taking bribes was Gentleman like Thieuing.
            
            
               
                  •
                Marchant now and then his goods may bring,
            And steale the Custome, and so rob the King.
            
               Thieues they are all, that scrape and gather treasures,
            By Wares deceitfull, or false weights or measures.
            
               That Landlord is a Thiefe that rackes his Rents,
            And mount the price of rotten Tenements,
            Almost vnto a damned double Rate,
            And such a Thiefe as that One that 8 years since bought many houses, where I & many poore men dwelt, & presently raised our Rents, from 3. l. to 5. l. but I changed him quickly for a better., my selfe had late.
            A paire of Louers, are starke Thieues, for they
            Doe kindely steale each others hearts away.
            Extortioners, I Thieues may truely call,
            Who take more Int'rest, then the principall.
            Executors, and Ouer-seers Thieuing,
            
            Haue often wrong'd the Dead, and Rob'd the liuin
                  •
               
            
            All those within the ranke of Thieues must bee,
            That trust their Wares out from 3. monthes to thre
                  •
               
            
            And makes their Debtors thrice the worth to pay,
            Because they trust them, these are Thieues I say,
            That doe sell Time, which vnto God belongs,
            And begger whō they trust most, with these wron
                  •
               
            
            He is a Thiefe, and basely doth purloyne,
            Who borroweth of his neighbours goods, or Coyn
                  •
               
            
            And can, but will no satisfaction giue,
            These are the most notorious Thieues that liue,
            Vpon such Thieues (if Law the same allow'd)
            A hanging were exceeding well bestow'd.
            A Farmer is a Thiefe, that hoards vp Graine
            In hope of Dearth, by either Drouth or Raine,
            He steales Gods treasures, and doth quite forget,
            That ouer them hee's but a Steward set,
            And for his Rob'ry he deserues to weare
            A riding Knot an Inch below his Eare.
            Of Drinking Thieues exceeding store there are,
            That steale themselues Drunke e're they be aware
            
               These are right Rob-pots, Rob-wits, and Rob-purses,
            To gaine Diseases, Begg'ry, and Gods curses.
            Drawers, and Tapsters too, are Thieues I thinke,
            That Nick their Pots, and cheate men of their Drinke,
            
               
                  •
               nd when Guests haue their Liquor in their braine,
            
               
                  ••
               eale Pots halfe full, to fill them vp againe.
            Though this be Thieu'ry yet I must confesse,
            
               
                  •
               is honest Theft to punish Drunkennes.
            
               
                  •
               nd of small Thieues, the Tapster I preferre,
            
               
                  •
               e is a Drunkards Executioner,
            
               
                  •
               or whilest his money lasts he much affects him,
            
               
                  •
               hen, with the Rod of pouerty Corrects him.
            
               
                  •
                Chamberlaine vnto his Guests may creepe
            
               
                  •
               nd pick their Pockets, when th'are Drunke asleepe▪
            
            
               
                  •
               ut amongst Thieues, that are of lowe Repute
            
               
                  •
               n Hostler is a Thiefe, most absolute:
            
               
                  •
               e with a Candles end Horse teeth can Grease,
            
               
                  •
               hey shall eate neither Hay, Oates, Beanes, or Pease,
            
               
                  •
               esides a hole ith Maunger, and a Bag
            
               
                  •
               ang'd vnderneath may Cozen many a Nag,
            
               
                  •
               nd specially, if in a Stable darke,
            
               
                  •
               one doe not the Hostlers knau'ry marke.
            
               
                  •
               e will deceiue a man, before his face,
            
               
                  •
               n the Peck's bottome, some few Oates hee'l place
            Which seemes as if it to the brim were full,
            
               
                  •
               nd thus the Knaue both Man and Horse will Gull.
            
               
                  •
               he breake Horsebread, he can thus much doe,
            
               
                  •
               mongst fiue loaues, his Codpiece swallowes two,
            
               
                  •
               he Hostler sayes the Horse hath one good tricke,
            
               
                  •
               uicke at his meate, he needs must trauell quicke.
            
               If men, at full Racke for their Horsmeat pay,
            So hard into the racke hee'l tread the Hay,
            
            That out, the poore Beasts cannot get a bit,
            And th'Hostler held an honest man for it,
            For who would thinke the Horses want their right,
            When as the Racke is still full, day and night?
            With bottles, if men will haue Horses fed,
            To each a Groates worth ere they goe to bed,
            The Thieuish Hostler can rob Horse and Men,
            And steale the bottles from the Racke agen,
            And put in Hay that's pist vpon, I wot,
            Which being dry'd, no horse will eate a jot,
            And all such Hostlers, wheresoe're they bee,
            Deserue a Horses nightcap for their Fee.
            One stole a Wife, and marryed her in post,
            A hanging had bin better stolne, almost:
            By her he night and day was long perplex'd,
            Cornuted, scolded at, defam'd, and vex'd,
            
               He cannot steale truly, or truly he cannot steale.That (in comparison of all his paine)
            A friendly hanging had bin mighty gaine.
            There's an olde speech, a Tayler is a Thiefe,
            
            And an olde speech he hath for his reliefe,
            Ile not equiuocate, I'le giue him's due
            He (truly) steales not, or he steales not, true,
            Those that report so, mighty wrong doth doe him,
            For how can he steale that, that's brought vnto him
            And it may be they were false Idle speeches,
            That one brought Cotton once, to line his Breeches
            And that the Tayler layde the Cotton by,
            And with olde painted Cloath, the roome supply,
            
               
               
                  •
               hich as the owner (for his vse) did weare,
            Nayle, or sceg, by chance his breech did teare,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                which he saw the Linings, and was wroth;
            
               
                  •
               r Diues and Lazarus on the painted Cloath,
            
               
                  •
               he Gluttons Dogs, and Hels fire hotly burning,
            
               
                  •
               ith Feinds & fleshooks, whence ther's no returning,
            
               
                  •
               e rip'd the other breech, and there he spide,
            
               
                  •
               he pamper'd Prodigall on Cockhorse ride:
            
               
                  •
               here was his fare, his Fidlers, and his Whores,
            
               
                  •
               is being poore, and beaten out of Doores,
            
               
                  •
               is keeping Hogs, his eating huskes for meate,
            
               
                  •
               is Lamentation, and his home retreat,
            
               
                  •
               is welcome to his Father, and the Feast,
            
               
                  •
               he fat Calfe kill'd, all these thinges were exprest.
            
               
                  •
               hese Transformations fild the man with feare,
            
               
                  •
               hat he Hell fire within his breech 
                  This fellowes Breches were not lynde with Apochri
                           •
                        ha.
                  
                  I heard of one that had the picture of the Deuill in the back linings of his Dublet witnes at the Swan in St. Mar
                           •
                        ids.
                  
                should beare,
            
               
                  •
               e mus'd what strange inchantments he had bin in,
            
               
                  •
               hat turn'd his linings, into painted Linnen.
            
               
                  •
               is feare was great, but at the last to rid it,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                Wizard tolde him, 'twas the Tayler did it.
            
               
                  •
               ne tolde me of a This Miller kept a Windmill not many yeres since at Purflet in Essex.
                Miller that had power
            
               
                  •
               ometimes to steale 5. Bushels out of foure:
            
               
                  •
               s once a Windmill (out of breath) lack'd winde,
            
               
                  •
                fellow brought Foure bushels there to Grinde,
            
               
                  •
               nd hearing neither noyse of Knap or tiller,
            
               
                  •
               ayd downe his Corne, and went to seeke the Miller:
            
               
                  •
               ome two flight-shoot to th'Alehouse he did wag,
            
               
                  •
               nd left his Sacke in keeping with his Nag,
            
               
                  •
               he Miller came a by-way vp the hill,
            And saw the Sacke of Corne stand at the Mill,
            
               Perceiuing none that could his Theft gaine-say,
            For toll tooke Bag and Grist, and all away.
            And a Crosse way vnto the Alehouse hy'd him,
            Whereas the man that sought him, quickly spide him
            Kinde Miller (quoth the man) I left but now
            A Sacke of Wheate, and I intreat that thou
            Wilt walke vp to the Mill where it doth lye,
            And Grinde it for me now the winde blowes hye.
            So vp the Hill they went, and quickly found
            The Bag & Corn, stolne from the ground vngrown
            The poore man with his losse was full of griefe,
            He, and the Miller went to seeke the Theefe,
            
            Or else the Corne, at last all tyr'd and sad,
            (Seeking both what he had not, and he had)
            The Miller (to appease or ease his paine)
            Solde him one Bushell Some say that he sold him the 4. Bushels againe, and then stole one bushell for toll. of his owne againe.
            Thus out of 4. the man Fiue Bushels lost,
            Accounting truely all his Corne and cost.
            To mend all of this Thieuing Millers brood,
            One halfe houres hanging would be very good.
            But there's a kinde of stealing misticall,
            Pickpocket wits, silch lines Sophisticall,
            Villaines in Vearse, base Runagates in Rime,
            False Rob-wits, and contemned slaues of time,
            Purloyning Thieues, that pilfer from Desart
            The due of Study, and reward of Art.
            Pot Poets, that haue skill to steale Translations,
            And (into English) filch strange tongues and Natio
                  •
               
            
            And change the Language of good Wits vnknown
                  •
               
            
            These Thieuish Rascals print them for their owne.
            
               
               
                  •
               istake me not good Reader any wayes,
            
               
                  •
               ranslators doe deserue Respect and praise,
            
               
                  •
               or were it not for them, we could not haue
            
               
                  •
                Bible, that declares our soules to saue,
            
               
                  •
               nd many thousands worthy workes would lye
            
               
                  •
               ot vnderstood, or in obscurity,
            
               
                  •
                they by Learned mens Intelligence,
            Were not Translated with great diligence:
            honour such, and he that doth not so,
            
               
                  •
               ay his soule sin
                  •
               ke to euerlasting woe.
            speake of such as steale Regard and Fame,
            Who doe translate, and hide the Authors name,
            Or such as are so barren of Inuention,
            That cannot write a line worth note, or mention,
            
               
                  •
               et vpon those that can will belch their spite,
            And with malitious Tongues their Names backbite.
            
               
                  •
               o this effect I oft haue wrote before,
            
               
                  •
               nd am inforced now this one time more,
            
               
                  •
               o take my Pen againe into my fist,
            And Answer a deprauing Emblemist,
            
               
                  •
                spare to Name him, but I tell him plaine,
            
               
                  •
               e're he dare abuse me so againe,
            
               
                  •
               e whip him with a yerking Satyres lash,
            
               
                  •
               ang'd like th'inuectiue Muse of famous Nash.
            
            That he shall wish he had not beene, or beene
            Hang'd, e're he mou'd my Iust incenced spleene.
            He hath Reported most malitiously,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                sundry places amongst company,
            That I doe neither Write, nor yet Inuent
            The thinges that (in my Name) doe passe in Print.
            
               But that some Scholler spends his Time and braine,
            And let me haue the Glory and the Gaine.
            Is any Poet in that lowe Degree,
            To make his Muse worke Iourney-worke to me?
            Or are my Lines with Eloquence Imbellish'd,
            As any Learning in them may be relish'd?
            Those that thinke so, they either Iudge in hast,
            Or else their Iudgements pallat's out of tast.
            My pen in Hellicon, I ne're did dip,
            And all my Schollership is Schullership,
            I am an English-man, and haue the scope
            To write in mine owne Countries speech (I hope)
            For Homer was a Grecian, and I note
            That all his workes in the Greeke tongue he wrote▪
            
            
               Virgill, and Ouid, neither did Contemne
            To vse that speech, their Mothers taught to them.
            
               Du Bartas, Petrarcke, Tasso, all their Muses,
            Did vse the Language that their Countrey vses.
            And though I know but English, I suppose
            I haue as many tongues as some of those.
            Their Studies were much better, yet I say
            I vse my Countries speech, and so did they.
            Because my Name is Taylor, some doe doubt,
            My best Inuention comes by stealing out
            From other VVriters workes, but I reply,
            And giue their doubtfull diffidence the lye.
            To close this point I must be very briefe,
            And call them Knaues, that calls me Poet Thiefe.
            
            But yet a Poets theft, I must not smother,
            For they doe often steale from one another:
            
               They call it borrowing, but I thinke it true,
            To tearme it Stealing, were a style more due.
            There is a Speech, that Poets still are poore,
            
               
                  •
               ut ne're till now I knew the Cause wherefore:
            VVhich is, when their Inuentions are at best,
            Then they are dayly rob'd, 'tis manifest,
            For noble Thieues, and poore Thieues all Conjoyne,
            From painefull Writers studies to purloyne,
            And steale their Flashes, and their sparkes of wit,
            Still vtt'ring them at all occasions fit,
            As if they were their owne, and these men are
            For their stolne stuffe esteemed wise and Rare.
            They call it borrowing, but I tell them plaine
            
               
                  •
               Tis stealing, for they neuer pay againe.
            The vse of Money's ten i'th Hundred still,
            And men in Bonds bound, as the owner will,
            But wit and Poetry (more worth then treasure)
            Is from the Owners borrowed, at mens pleasure,
            And to the Poets lot it still doth fall,
            To loose both Interest and principall.
            This is the cause that Poets are poore men,
            Th'are Rob'd, and lend, and ne're are payde agen.
            Tis said that Iacob (counsel'd by his Mother)
            Did steale his Fathers blessing from his Brother,
            This was a Theft which few will imitate,
            Their Fathers blessings are of no such rate,
            For though some Sonnes might haue them for the crauing,
            Yet they esteeme them scarcely worth the hauing,
            Their Fathers money they would gladly steale,
            But for their blessings they regard no deale.
            
               And by their Waters, you may guesse and gather;
            That they were sick, and grieued of the Father:
            But on such Thieues as those, I plainely say
            A hansom hanging were not cast away.
            Some Thieues may through an Admirable skill,
            An honest Common wealth both poll and pill:
            These fellowes steale secure as they were Millers,
            And are substanciall men, their Countries Pillers:
            Purloyning polers, or the Barbars Rather,
            That shaue a Kingdome, Cursed wealth to gather;
            These Pillers, or these Caterpillers swarmes
            Grow Rich, and purchase Goods by others harmes▪
            
            And liue like Feinds, extreamely fear'd, and hated
            And are, and shalbe euer execrated.
            A King of Britaine once Catellus 
               He was the 40.th King after Brute & he Raigned before Christs' birth 171. yeares. nam'd
            Vpon Record his Charity is fam'd:
            His Iustice, and his memory was so Ample
            He hang'd vp all opressors, for example.
            If that Lawe once againe were in request
            Then, of all trades a Hangman were the best.
            These are the Broode of Barrabas, and these
            Can Rob, and be let loose againe at ease,
            Whilst Christ (in his poore members) euery day,
            Doth suffer (through their Theaft) and pine away.
            And sure all men, of whatsoere degree
            Of Science, Art, or Trade or mysterie,
            Or occupation, whatsoere they are
            For truth cannot with Watermen compare.
            I know ther's some obiections may be made,
            How they are Rude, vnciuill in their trade,
            
               
               
                  •
               ut that is not the question I propounde
            
               
                  •
                say no Theaft can in the Trade be founde,
            Our greatest foes by no meanes can Reueale,
            Which way we can deceiue, or cheate, or steale:
            We take men in, and Land them at their pleasure,
            And neuer bate them halfe an Inch of measure,
            Still at one price our selues we waste and weare,
            Though all things else be mounted double deare,
            And in a word, I must Conclude and say
            A Waterman can be a Thiefe no way.The Annagram of Waterman is A TREW MAN.
            
            Except one way, which I had halfe forgot
            He now and then perhaps may Rob the pot,
            Steale himselfe Drunke, and be his owne Purspicker,
            And Chimically turnes his Coyne to Liquer:
            This is almost a Vniuersall Theaft
            
            A portion Fathers to their Sonnes haue left,
            Men are begot, and doe like their begetters
            And Watermen doe learne it of their betters.
            Ther's nothing that doth make them poore and bare,
            But cawse they are such true men as they are:
            For if they would but steale, like other men
            The Gallowes would deuoure them now and then
            Whereby their number quickly would be lesse,
            Which (to their wants) would be a good redresse,
            Their pouerty doth from their truth proceede
            Their way to thriue were to be Thieues indeede,
            If they would steale and hang as others doe
            Those that suruiue it were a healpe vnto,
            Truth is their trade, and truth doth keepe them poore
            But if their truth were lesse their wealth were more,
            
               All sortes of men worke all the meanes they can,
            To make a Thiefe of euery Water-man:
            And as it were in one consent they ioyne,
            To trot by land i'th' dirt, and saue their Coyne.
            Carroaches, Coaches, Iades and Flanders Mares,
            Doe rob vs of our shares, our wares, our Fares.
            Against the ground we stand and knocke our heeles,
            Whilest all our profit runnes away on wheeles,
            And whoseuer but obserues and notes
            The great increase of Coaches, and of Boates:
            Shall finde their number more then e're they were,
            By halfe and more within these Thirty yeare.
            Then Watermen at Sea had seruice still,
            And those that stay'd at home had worke at will,
            Then vpstart Helcart-Coaches were to seeke,
            A man could scarce see Twenty in a weeke,
            But now I thinke a man may dayly see,
            More then the Whirryes on the Thames can be.
            When Queene Elizabeth, came to the Crowne,
            A Coach in England, then was scarcely knowne,
            Then 'twas as rare to see one, as to spy
            A Tradesman that had neuer tolde a lye.
            But now, like plagues of Aegipt, they doe swarme,
            As thicke as Frogs, or Lice, vnto our harme.
            For though the King, the Counsell, and such States,
            As are of high Superiour ranckes, and rates:
            For port or pleasure, may their Coaches haue,
            Yet 'tis not fit that euery Whore or Knaue,
            
            And fulsome Madams, and new scuruy Squires,
            Should Iolt the Streets in pomp, at their desires,
            
               Like great Tryumphant Tamberlaines, each day,
            Drawne with the pamper'd Iades of Belgia,
            
            That almost all the streets are choak'd out-right,
            Where men can hardly passe from morne 'till night.
            Whilest Watermen want worke, and are at ease,
            To Carry one another, if they please,
            Or else sit still, and poorely starue and dye.
            For all their liuings on foure Wheeles doe flye.
            Good Reader thinke it not too long, or much
            That I thus amply, on this point doe tutch,
            Now we are Borne, we would our worke apply
            To labour, and to liue vntil we Dye,
            And we could liue well, but for Coaches Thieuing.
            That euery Day doe rob vs of our liuing.
            If we, by any meanes, could learne the skill
            To rob the Coachmen, as they rob vs still:
            Then in the Sessions booke it would appeare,
            They would be hang'd fiue hundred in a yeare.
            Besides it is too manifestly Knowne,
            They haue the Sadlers Trade almost o'rethrowne,
            And the best Leather in our Kingdome they
            Consume and waste; for which poore men doe pay.
            Our Bootes and Shooes to such high price they reare,
            That all our profit can buy none to weare.
            
               
                  •
                in Bohemia saw, that all but Lords,
            Or men of worth, had Coaches drawne with Cords:
            And I my Necke vnto the Rope would pawne,
            That if our Hackney Ratlers were so drawne,
            With Cords, or Ropes, or Halters, chuse yee whether
            It quickly would bring downe the price of Leather.
            
               Then Watermen should haue more worke I hope,
            When euery Hireling Coach drawne with a Rope,
            Would make our Gallants stomack at the matter
            
               The Wher
                  
                     •
                  yes were wont to haue all the Whores Till the Coaches Robd them of their Custom.And now and then to spend their Coyne by water.
            Without all flattery, here my minde I breake,
            The Prouerb saies, giue loosers leaue to speake:
            
            They Carry all our Fares, and make vs poore
            That to our Boates we scarce can get a Whore,
            Some honest men and women, now and then
            Will spend their moneyes amongst Watermen,
            But we are growne so many, and againe
            Our fares so few, that little is our gaine.
            Yet for all this (to giue the Deuill his due)
            Our honest trade can no wayes be vntrue.
            If some be rude amongst the multitude
            'Tis onely want of worke that makes them Rude,
            'Tis want of money and of Manners to
            That makes them do as too too oft they doe
            And euery good thing that in them is scant
            It still must be Imputed to their want.
            But leauing true men, I must turne my stile
            To paltry Thieues, whose Glory is their guile:
            For thrice three hundred of them from one tooke
            Some of them ready money, some a Booke,
            And set their hands to Billes, to pay to me
            When I from Scotland should returned be.
            Crouns, Pounds or Angels, what thy pleas'd to writ
            I haue their fists to shewe in blacke and white.
            And after that, I to Bohemia went,
            And gaue out money, and much money spent:
            
               And for these things, those Thieues Ingenerall,
            Will neither giue me gaine or Principall.It is cald a Kicksie winsie, or a Lerrio cun
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  wang.
            
            
               
                  •
                lately wrought a Pamphlet to the Crue,
            
               
                  •
               hat spake their due, for keeping of my due:
            Wherein I gaue them thankes that had me paide,
            
               
                  •
               nd pardond, those that in their graues were laid:
            
               
                  •
               o those that were exceeding poore, or fled,
            Except good words) I very little sed,
            
               
                  •
                praid for them that onely would and could not
            
               
                  •
               nd I inueigh'd at those that could and would not.
            
               
                  •
               nd let those shifters their owne Iudges be
            
               
                  •
               f they haue not bin arrant Thieues to me,
            
               
                  •
               or first and last they tooke (with their good) wills
            
               
                  •
               eere fifteene hundred bookes vpon their bills,
            
               
                  •
               nd all their hands (If I the truth may vtter)
            
               
                  •
               re worse then obligations seald with butter:
            
               
                  •
               or I haue in my store (not worth a Lowse)
            
               
                  •
               s many Bills as well may thatch a House,
            
               
                  •
               nd there I haue the hands of Knights and Squiers:
            
               
                  •
               nd Omnium gatherum Cheating knaues and liers,
            
               
                  •
               eauen hundred in a Galleymawfrey, Close
            Which I would sell for fifteene pence the Groce,
            
               
                  •
               hei'le neyther pay, with comming, nor with sending
            
               
                  •
               nd are like olde Bootes, past all hope of mending.
            
               
                  ••
               rst they did Rob me of my expectation
            
               
                  •
               nd made me walke along perambulation,
            
               
                  •
               nd as my Royall Maister To whom I in all humillity must euer, acknowledg my obedience and dutiful Thankfulnes and seruice. when I came
            
               
                  •
               he good Prince, and my Lord of Buckingham
            
            With many more of Honour, Worship, and
            
               
                  •
               en of inferiour callings in this land,
            
               Were bountifull to me at my Returne,
            Yet I like one, that doth one Candle burne
            In seeking of another, spent their guifts
            To finde out Sharkes, and Complements and shift
            Theft is the best Name I can giue their Crime,
            They rob me of my Bookes, my Coyne, and time,
            Of others Bounty, and mine owne good Hopes,
            And for this Theft I leaue them to the Ropes,
            I speake to those that can and will not pay,
            When in the Streets I meete them euery day,
            
               I have 700. Billes of their hands which in all co
                     ••
                  es to neer; 00. l.They doe not much mistake if they doe thinke
            I wish them hang'd, for keeping of my Chinke.
            Thus haue I touch'd a Crue of Thieuing fellowes,
            That Rob beyond the Compasse of the Gallowes:
            Whilest many little Thieues are hang'd vp dead
            That onely Steale for need, to finde them Bread,
            As Pharaoh's fat Kine, did the Leane deuoure,
            So great Thieues swallow small ones by their power
            And sure I thinke, that Common Burglaries,
            Pick-pockets, High-way Thieues, and Pilferies,
            And all that thus Felloniously doe Thieue,
            
            Are Thieues whose labours The trade of Thieuing is very profitable to many men. many doe Relieue.
            Who but poore Thieues doe Iaylors wants supply?
            On whom doe vnder Keepers still rely?
            From Thieuing, money still is gotten thus,
            For many a Warrant and a Mittimus,
            And if men were not apt to Filch and Thieue,
            
            'Twere worse for many a High, and vnder-Shrieue
            The Halter-maker, and the Smith are getters
            For fatall Twist, and pond'rous Bolts and Petters.
            
               
               
                  •
               e Carman hath a share amongst the rest,
            
               
                  •
               hough not voluntary, yet hee's Prest.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                Ballad-maker doth some profit reape,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                makes a Tiburne Dirge, exceeding Cheape,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                whil'st the Printers, and the dolefull Singers,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                in these gainefull busines dip their fingers.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                very Hangman hath the sleight and skill,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                extract all his goods from others Ill,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                is the Epilogue vnto the Law,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                from the jawes of Death his life doth draw.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                last, the Hangmans Broaker reapes the fruit,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                selling to one Thiefe anothers Sute.
            
               
                  ••
               sides Thieues are sit members, for 'tis knowne,
            
               
                  •
               hey make men carefull how to keepe their owne,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                were it not for them, we still should lye
            
               
                  ••
               ck'd in the Cradle of security.
            
               
                  •
               ll'd in base Idlenes, and sluggish sloath,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                to all ill, and to all Goodnes loath.
            
               
                  •
               hich would infect vs, and corrupt the blood,
            
               
                  •
               nd therefore for our health's sake, Thieues are good.
            
               
                  •
               nd some men are so prone to steale, I thinke
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                as Nat'rall as their meate and drinke,
            
               
                  •
               hey are borne to't, and cannot doe withall,
            
               
                  •
               nd must be filching still, what e're befall.
            
               
                  •
               wispe of Rushes, or a Clod of land,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                any wadde of Hay that's next to hand
            
               
                  •
               hey'l steale, and for it haue a good excuse,
            
               
                  •
               hey doe't to keepe their hands in vre, or vse.
            
               
                  •
               ut not t'excuse a Thiefe in any case,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                there are some Crimes, as voyde of Grace,
            
               On whom men scarce haue feeling or a thought,
            Nor e're like Thieues are to the Gallowes brought
            Those that obey false Gods commit offence,
            Against th'Eternall Gods Omnipotence.
            Those that doe grauen Images adore,
            Are worse then Thieues, yet are not hang'd therefo
                  ••
               
            
            Tis Treason high, to take Gods Name in vaine,
            Yet most men doe't, through frailty, or for Gaine▪
            
            The Saboth is prophan'd continually,
            Whil'st the offenders pay small Or none at all. penalty.
            And Parents are dishonour'd, without Awe,
            The whil'st the Children doe escape the Law.
            And Murther, though't be ne're so foule and dead
            Is oft times made Man-slaughter or Chance-med
            Adultery's neighbourhood, and Fornication,
            May be Conniu'd at, with a tolleration.
            A Witnes, that false Testimony beares,
            Tis a great wonder if he loose his Eares,
            But sure, the Prouerbe is as true as briefe,
            A Lyer's euer worser then a Thiefe,
            
            And 'tis call'd Thrift, when men their mindes doe
            To couet how their Neighbours goods to get.
            To be vaine-glorious, and Ambitious proude
            Are Gentleman-like partes, must be allow'd.
            To beare an Enuy base and secretly,
            Tis counted Wisedome, and great Pollicy.
            To be a Drunkard, and the Cat to whip,
            Is call'd the King of all good Fellowship.
            But for a Thiefe, the whole world doth Consent
            That Hanging is the fittest punishment.
            
               
               
                  〈◊〉
                if that Law were put in Execution,
            
               
                  •
               hinke it would be Mankindes Dissolution:
            
               
                  •
               nd then we should haue Land and Tenements
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                nothing, or for very easie Rents,
            
               
                  •
               hereby we see that man his wealth esteemes,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                better then his God, his soule it deemes:
            
               
                  •
               or let God be abusde, and let his soule
            
               
                  ••
               nne greedily into offences foule,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                scarcely shall be question'd for't, but if
            
               
                  •
               mongst his other sinnes) he play the Thiefe
            
            
               
                  •
               nd steale mens goods, they all will sentence giue,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                must be Hang'd, he is vnfit to liue.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                the Low Countryes, if a wretch doe steale
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                Bread, or Meate, to feed himselfe a meale,
            
               
                  •
               hey will vnmercifully beat and Clowt him,
            
               
                  ••
               le, pull, and teare, & spurne, & kicke, & flowt him,
            
               
                  •
               ut if a Drunkard be vnpledg'd a Kan
            
               
                  ••
               awes out his Knife and basely stabs a man,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                runne away the Rascall shall haue scope,
            
               
                  •
               one holdes him, but all Cry Run thiefe Runne. 
               Lope Scellum Lope,
            
            
               
                  •
               hus there's a close Conniuence for all Vice,
            
               
                  •
               xcept for Theft, and that's a Hanging price.
            
               
                  •
               ne man's adicted to Blaspheme and sweare,
            
               
                  •
                second to Carowse, and Domineere:
            
               
                  •
                third to Whoring, and a fourth to Fight,
            
               
                  •
               nd Kill and slay, a fift man to Backbite,
            
               
                  •
                sixt and seauenth, with this or that Crime caught,
            
               
                  •
               nd all in generall much worse then nought.
            
               
                  •
               nd amongst all these sinners generall,
            
               
                  •
               he Thiefe must winne the Halter from them all,
            
               When if the matter should examin'd be
            They doe deserue it all, asmuch as he.
            Nor yet is Thieuery any vpstar sinne,
            But it of long Antiquity hath bin:
            And by this Trade Great men haue not disdain'd,
            To winne Renowne, and haue their states maintain
            Great Alexanders Conquests, what were they
            But taking others goods and Lands away:
            (In manners) I must call it Martiall dealing,
            But truth will tearme it Rob'ry, and flat stealing,
            For vnto all the world it is well knowne,
            That he by force, tooke what was not his owre.
            Some Writers are with Tamberlaine so briefe,
            To stile him with the Name of Scithian Thiefe.
            
            
               
                  Platarch.
               
               Licurgus lou'd, and granted guifts beside
            To Thieues that could steale, and escape vnspide:
            But if they taken with the manner were,
            They must restore, and buy the bargaine deere.
            
               Thieues were at all times euer to be had
            Exampled by the good Thiefe and the Bad.
            And England still hath bin a fruitfull Land
            Of Valiant Thieues, that durst bid true men stand
            One Bellin Dun
               
                  Hen. 1., a famous Thiefe suruiu'd,
            From whom the Towne of Dunstable's deriu'd:
            And Robin Hood 
               
                  Rich. 2. with little Iohn agreed
            To rob the Rich men, and the Poore to feede.
            
               
                  Edw. 3.The Priests had heere such small meanes for there
                  •
               o
                  •
               
            
            That many, of them were inforc'd to Thieuing.
            
            Once the Fift Henry could Rob exc'llent well,
            When he was Prince of Wales, as Stories tell.
            
               
               
                  •
               hen Fryer Tucke a tall stoute Thiefe indeed,
            
               
                  •
               ould better Rob and steale, then Preach or reed.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               Gosselin Deinuill, 
               
                  Edw. 2. with 200. more,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                Fryers weedes, Rob'd, and were Hang'd therefore.
            
               
                  •
               hus I in Stories, and by proofe doe finde
            
               
                  •
               hat Stealing's very olde, time out of minde,
            
               
                  •
               re I was Borne, it through the world was spread,
            
               
                  •
               nd will be when I from the world am Dead.
            But leauing thus, my Muse in hand hath tooke,
            To shew which way a Thiefe is like a Booke.
            
         
         
            
            
            A Comparison betweene a Thiefe and a Booke.
            
            COmparisons are odious, as some say,
            But my Comparisons are so no way,
            In the Pamphlet which I wrote before,
            Compar'd a Booke most fitly to a Whore:
            
            
               
                  •
               nd now, as fitly my poore Muse alludes,
            
               
                  •
                
               Thiefe t' a Booke in apt similitudes,
            A good Booke steales the minde from vaine pretences,
            From wicked Cogitations, and offences:
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                makes vs know the worlds deceiuing plesures,
            And set our hearts on neuer ending Treasures.
            So when Thieues steale, our Cattle, Coyne or Ware,
            It makes vs see how mutable they are.
            Puts vs in mind that we should put our trust,
            Where Fellon cannot steale, or Canker rust.
            Bad Bookes through eyes and eares doe break & enter,
            And takes possession of the hearts fraile Center.
            Infecting all the little Kingdome Man,
            
            With all the poyso'nous mischiefe that they can,
            Till they haue Rob'd and ransack'd him of all
            Those thinges which men may iustly goodnes call,
            
               Robs him of Vertue, and Heau'nly grace
            And leaues him Begger'd, in a wretched case.
            So of our Earthly goods, Thieues steale the best,
            And richest Iewels, and leaue vs the rest.
            Men know not Thieues from true men by their look
                  •
               
            
            Nor by their outsides, no man can know Bookes.
            
            Both are to be suspected, all can tell,
            And Wisemen e're they trust, will try them well.
            A Booke may haue a Title good and faire,
            Though in it one may finde small goodnes there:
            And so a Thiefe, whose actions are most vile,
            Steales good opinion, and a True mans stile.
            Some Bookes (prophane) the Sacred Text abuse,
            With common Thieues, it is a common vse.
            Some Bookes are full of lyes, and Thieues are so,
            One hardly can beleeue their yea or no.
            Some Bookes are Scurrilous, and too obsceane,
            And hee's no right Thiefe that loues not a Queane.
            Some Book's not worth the Reading for their fruites
            Some Thieues not worth the Hanging, for their sutes
            Some Bookes are briefe, and in few wordes declare
            Compendious matter, and Acutenesse rare,
            And so some Thieues will breake into a House,
            Or cut a Purse whilst one can cracke a Lowse.
            Some Bookes are arrogant and Impudent,
            So are most Thieues in Christendome and Kent.
            
            Some Bookes are plaine and simple, and some Thie
                     •••
                  
               
            
            Are simply Hang'd, whil'st others get Reprieues.
            Some Bookes like foolish Thieues, their faults are sp
                  ••
               
            
            Some Thieues like witty Bookes, their faults can hide
            
               
               
                  •
               ome Bookes are quaint and quicke in their Conceits▪
            
            
               
                  •
               ome Thieues are actiue, nimble in their sleights.
            
               
                  •
               ome Bookes with idle stuffe the Author fills,
            
               
                  •
               ome Thieues will still be Idle, by their wills.
            
               
                  •
               ome Bookes haue neither Reason, Law, or sence,
            No more haue any Thieues for their offence.
            
               
                  •
                Booke's but one, when first it comes to th'Presse,
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                may encrease to Numbers Numberlesse,
            And so one Thiefe perhaps may make threescore
            And that threescore may make ten thousand more,
            Thus from one Thiefe, Thieues may at last amount
            Like Bookes from one Booke past all mens account.
            And as with Industry, and Art, and Skill,
            One Thiefe doth dayly Rob another still,
            So one Booke from another (in this Age)
            Steales many a Line, a sentence or a Page.
            Thus amongst Bookes, good fellowship I finde,
            All thinges are common, Thieues beare no such minde.
            And for this Thieuing Bookes with Hue and Cry
            Are sought, (as Thieues are) for their Fellony.
            As Thieues are chasde and sent from place to place,
            So Bookes, are alwayes in continuall Chase.
            As Bookes are strongly Boss'd, and Clasp'd & bound,
            So Thieues are Manacled, when they are found:
            As Thieues are oft examin'd, for their Crimes,
            So Bookes are vsde, and haue bin at all times.
            As Thieues haue oft at their Arraignment stood,
            So Bookes are tride if they be bad or good.
            As Iuries and Graund Iuries, with much strife.
            Giue vp (for Thieues) a Verdict, Death or Life.
            
               So as mens fancies Euidence doe giue,
            The shame or fame of Bookes, to dye or liue:
            And as the veriest Thiefe may haue some friend,
            So the worst Bookes, some Knaue will still defend.
            As Thieues their Condemnation must abide,
            Bookes are deem'd true somtimes, somtimes bely'd.
            As Thieues are Iudged, so haue Bookes agen,
            As many Censures (almost) as are men.
            And as their faults are different in degree,
            Some Thieues are hang'd, some Bookes are burnt w
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               
            
            Some Thieues are for their small offences whip't,
            All Bookes are Prest, except a Manuscript.
            
            As Thieues are buryed, when the Lawe is paide,
            So some Bookes in obliuions Graue are laide.
            The Iaylors keepe the Thieues, and much regards
            The strength of Fetters, Locks, bolts, grates & wards
            And will knowe when and how abroad they goe,
            And vnto Bookes the StacionersThere is od
                     •
                   betwixt a Keeper & a Iaylor the Stationer keepes Bookes against his wil, the Iaylor holdes Thieues with his will. are so.
            Still Bookes and Thieues in one Conceit doe ioyne:
            For, if you marke them, they are all for Coyne.
            Some Thieues exceeding braue a man may finde
            In Sattin, and their Cloakes with Veluet linde:
            And some Bookes haue gay Coates vnto their backe
            When as their insides, goods and goodnes lackes.
            Some Bookes are all bet
                  •
               tterd, torne and 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            Some Thieues endure a rugged punishment▪
            
            Some Thieues may come (their sorowes to increase)
            Before a shallowe Officer of Peace,
            One that can Cough, call kn
                  •
               ue, & with non sense
            
            Commit, before be knowe for what offence:
            
               A Booke somtimes doth proue a Thieues true friend,
            And doth preserue him from a hanging end:
            For let a man at any Sessions looke,
            And still some Thieues are saued by their Booke.
            
            And so some Bookes to Coxcombs hands may come,
            Who can crye Pish, and Mew, and Tush, and Hum,
            Condemne ere they haue read, or throughly scand,
            Abusing what they cannot vnderstand.
            Some Thieues are like a Horne-booke, and begin
            Their A. B. C. of filching, with a Pin;
            Their Primer is a Poynt, and then their Psalter
            May picke a Pocket, and come neere a Halter.
            Then with long practise in these Rudiments,
            To breake a House may be his Accidence,
            And vsing of his skill (thus day by day)
            By Grammer he may Rob vpon the way,
            Vntill at last, to weare (it be his hap)
            A Tiburne Tippet, or olde Stories Cap.
            That is the high'st degree which they can take,
            An end to all their Studies there they make:
            For amongst Thieues, not one amongst a score,
            
               
                  •
               f they be rais'd so high, they'l steale no more.
            Thus the Comparisons holdes still you see,
            To Whores and Theiues, Bookes may compared bee.
            All are like Actors, in this wauering Age,
            They Enter all, vpon the worlds great Stage:
            Some gaine Applause, and some doe Acte amisse,
            And exit from the Scaffold with a Hisse.
            Now if my Whore or Theife play well their Parts,
            Giue them their due, Applaud their good deserts.
            
               If ill, To Newgate hisse them, or Bridewell,
            
            To any place, Hull, Halifax or Hell.
            And thus the Thiefe and Booke ioyne both in one;
            Both hauing made an END, they both haue
            DON.
         
         
            Thus hauing Treated sufficiently of Whores and Whoring, and Thieues and Thieuing, I doe purpo
                  ••
                shortly, to set forth a Pamphlet, in the Commendat
                  ••
               ons of Iaylors and Iayles, with the necessity of Hangiing, and the Hangmans Art or Mystery, Compend
                  ••
               ously described.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   