
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  Dauids Psalter / diligently and faithfully trāslated by George Ioye / with breif Arguments before euery Psalme / declaringe the effecte therof.
                  
                     Psalme .cxx.
                     Lorde / delyuer me from lyinge lippes ād from a deceaitful tonge
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶The description & prayse of the Godly: the vngodlye setforthe agenst him.
               
               
                  OH / how blessed is the man / that goith not to counsail with the vngodlye: nor abydeth not in the waye of the wiked / nether sitteth not downe in the chaier with the peruerse pestelent skorners.
               But delyteth in the lawe of the Lorde: and in it / hathe his meditacion daye and night.
               This man is lyke the tree plāted by the ryuer syde: whiche yildeth forth her frute in her tyme.
               Whose leaues fal not downe: all hir frute plentuously prospereth

But contrarye wyse it cometh vnto the vngodly: for thei be lyke the duste dispersed of the winde.
               Wherfore / the synfull vngodlye: maye not lyue in the felowshippe and congregacion of the iuste.
               For as the waye of the iuste pleaseth the Lorde: euen so dothe the waye of the vngodly perishe.
            
            
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A prophecye of Criste to be annoynted kinge ouer the Gentilis: But first the furiouse vprore and vayne enforcements of hys enymes both of Gentyles and Iwes is described.
               
               
                  SE how the gentils grinne? se how the people enforce al in vaine.
               The kynges of the worlde runne togither: and the cheiftens

swarme on heapis agenst the lorde and his anoynted.
               Sainge / let vs breke their bondes and cast of their yokis from vs.
               But he that dwelleth in heauen derideth them: it is the lorde that skorneth them.
               In his furiouse wrathe therfore: thus he troubleth and speketh vnto them.
               I shal verely anoint my kynge: ouer zion my holy hill
               I shal enstruck him in the lawe of the lorde: and euen thus do I affirme of him / Thou art my sonne / this daye haue I begoten the.
               Aske of me / ād I shal geue the the gentils for thyne enheritaunce: & euen the vttermoste coostes of the worlde shall be thy nowne possession.
               
                  Whom thou shalt correcke with an yerne staffe: and breke lyke an erthen vessel.
               Wherfore ye kynges se that ye be wyse: and receiue disciplyne / O iuges of the erthe.
               That ye maye geue the lorde his honour: & serue him ioyously with reuerent feare.
               And that ye maye embrase the sonne / lest he beinge wrath / ye perishe for your mischeif.
               For his anger shalbe shortly kindled: and then / oh how blessed are thei that truste in him.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psalme. ¶The songe of Dauid as touchinge the fleinge from his sonne Absalon .ii. Reg. xv.xvi. &c.
               
                  
                     ¶Domine quid.
                     Psal. 3.
                  
               
               
                  WHat a multitude are thei (oh Lorde) that trouble me? what a mayney make insurreccion agenst me?
               What a multitude are thei / that thus saye by me? God wyll neuer helpe nor saue him. Nomore he wilSela.
               When it is thou lorde that fightest for me: euen my glory whiche liftest vp my hed.
               I crye therfore lowd vnto thel orde: and he hereth me from his holy hil.
               And now I laye my selfe downe to slepe: and the lorde sustayninge me / I ryse agene.
               I fere not thousandis of the people / althoughe thei close me in rownd about.
               For thou lorde my god shalt stepe sorthe to saue me: thou shalt

smyte the chawnes of all my enemes and breke to pouldre the tethe of the vngodly.
               Helth and saluacion are thyne oh Lorde: power forth therfore thy goodnes vpon thy peple.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 4. Dauids songe adhortatorye playd vpon the musik instruments.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶An exhortacion vnto godlynes and innocēcye / the vngodly are blamed / and the felicite of the godly is declared.
               
               
                  OH god my rightwisnes which herest me cryinge vnto the: & beinge in distresse thou settest me forth at large / haue mercy vpon me and here my prayer.
               O men mortal / howe longe (my gloriouse maiestye cōtempned) wil

ye loue lyes & seke vanite? euer:Sela Whem wyll ye acknowlege that the Lorde delyuerth whom he loueth? the lorde / when I crye vpon him he hereth me.
               Trimble for fere and sinne not: be take your selues to swete meditacions yn youre beddys wythe silence.
               Offre vp the sacrifices of innocencye: and truste vnto the Lorde. This multitude was wont to saye / who wil do vs good? whē it is euen thou Lorde / whiche hast expressed the light of thy presence vpon vs.
               Wherby thou hast powred a greter gladnes into my hert / then thei can haue in all the riche encrese of their wheat and wyne.
               
                  In sauegarde therfore and peace shal I lye downe & slepe: for thou lorde onely geuest me a suer habitacion.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psalme. ¶Dauid his songe adhortatorye / concerninge the heretages.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶The description of two heretages / and the ende of ether of them.
               
               
                  HEare my wordis lorde: and vnderstande my thought.
               Attende vnto the voyce of my cryinge / oh kynge ād my God: For before the I make my supplicacion.
               Erly in the morninge here my voice Lorde: for erly dresse I my selfe vnto the in my contemplacion.
               
                  For thou arte God / whom no vngodlynes plesethe: with whō the maligne dwelleth not.
               In thy presens the violent abydeth not: thou hatest al workers of myscheif.
               Thou destroyest lyers: blodye ād fraudelent thou aborrest oh lorde But I / animated with thy manyfolde goodnes / am comen vnto thy housse: I adoure in thy holy temple / reuerently feringe the.
               Lede me Lorde in thy rightewisenes defensed from my aduersaries: and prepare thy waye before me.
               For the trwthe is not in their mouthes / they are corrupted within: their throte is an open graue / but with their tongue thei flater.
               Dampne them o god / let them fal

at their owne counsails / cast them out for their owne manifolde myscheif / for they are rebellious agenst the.
               But contrarye wyse / al men mought reioyse that truste in the: they mought euermore be glad / thou beinge their defender.
               Thei mought reioyse all in the: which worship thy name.
               For thou lorde art gracious vnto the iuste: and with thy fauour defendest him as with a bukler.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal 6. ¶The songe adhortatorye of Dauid playd of the ten stringed instrument.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶Longanimite prayth / complayninge her desier to be differred / but at the last she geueth thankis for that she is herde / and that her enimes

begin to be confounded
               
               LOrde / rebuke me not I praye the in thy wrathe: nether chastise me not in thyne anger.
               Haue mercy on me Lorde / for I am sike: hele me / Lorde / for I am al in despayre.
               For euen my soule is greuously tempted: but thou lorde / how longe ceassest?
               Tourne the Lorde to delyuer my soule: & saue me for thy goodnes. For amonge the dampned / ther is none that remēber the: in hel who is he (thinkeste thou) that cā prayse the?
               I labour in wailinge / I wasshe my bed euery night: and wet my pillowe with my teris.
               My syght ys loste withe heuye

moorninge: I am witherd vp amonge so many myne enymes.
               But now ye shall auoyde fro me / o al ye sinneful: for it is the Lorde that hath herde the noyse of my wepinge.
               The lorde hath herde me his suppliaunt: the Lorde hath receiued my prayer.
               Thei shalbe shamed & sore troubled al that are my enemyes: they shalbe turned backe and confounded sodenly.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. ¶Thindignacion of Dauid / which he sange vpon the facte of Chus the sonne of Iemini.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶Hetestifieth his innocencye / he commytteth his iniurye vnto the rightwyse iuge / and sheweth hym not to slepe.
               
               
                  
                  LOrde my god / in the do I truste: saue me from al that persecute me / & delyuer me.
               Lest they rauessh & tere me in pesis lyke a lyō: for ther is none els to delyuer me.
               Lorde my god / if I did this thinge: if this faute be founde in me:
               If I haue hurted them agen that hurted me: If I haue vniustely spoyled myn enemye:
               Then let my enemie persuwe me and take me / and trede me downe vnder his fete: ye let hym thruste my glorye in to the dirte. Let him so doSela. Aryse and be borne vp lorde with thy wrath and indignacion agenste my aduersaries / and performe that vengeaunce that thou hast promysed.
               
                  That the congregacion of the peple mought be gathered togither: euen for their sakes / yet be thou exalted agene.
               Oh lorde the auēger of the peple auēge me accordinge to myne innocencye and pure lyuinge.
               Leasse (I prayethe) the malignite of the vngodly: vndersette the iuste / oh rightwyse god enseer of hertis and raynes.
               As for my suernes I referre it to god / of whom I receiue it: whiche preserueth the right in herte.
               God thauenger is iuste: god threteneth at al tymes.
               If we turne not / lo / he shaketh his swerde: he bendeth his bowe redye to shote.
               He recheth him his weapens redye to slaye: he heateth his arowe

headis the more greuously to wounde.
               Lo / this aduersarye traueleth groninge forth a monster: for he hath conceiued labourouse affliccion / & wilbe delyuered of a lye.
               He hath cutforth and digged vp a dyke: and is fallen into his owne pitte.
               For his owne miserable mischeif shal fal into his owne necke / and his heuye miserye shal light vpon his owne head.
               I thanke the Lorde for his rightwisnes: and I shal prayse the name of the lorde whiche of al is the highest.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 8. ¶The songe adhortatorye of Dauid to geue thankys at theyr wyne

pressinge or grapes gatheringe
               
                  LOrde / oure lorde / how meruelous is thy maiestye thorowout al the erthe: whiche extolleth thy prayse vnto the starres.
               Which prayse and strength with al / thou hast put euen into the mouthes of soukinge infantis: in that thou ledest awaye captyue thy enymes and takest vengeance of thy aduersaryes.
               When I cōsyder the heuens the worke of thy fingers: the mone and starris whyche thou haste made:
               Then thinke I / oh what a creature is man that thou thus rememberst him? what thinge is mā mortal that thou thus regardest him?
               
                  Thou hast made him but lytel inferiour vnto god: thou hast crowned him with glory and honour. Thou hast made him Lorde ouer the workes of thy handis: and subdewed al thinges vnto his fete.
               Both shepe and al oxen: withe al the beastes of the felde.
               Fowlis of the ayer / fisshes of the sea: and what soeuer swymmeth there yn.
               Oh lorde / our lorde / how meruelouse is thy gloriouse maiestie thorow out al the erthe.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psalme. ¶The songe adhortatorye of Dauid / called the encrease of the sonne
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶The thankis geuinge of Dauid which here for his exaltacion and restoringe vnto his seat royal prayseth god.
               
               
                  
                  I Shall prayse the (Oh Lorde) with al my herte: ād preche forth thy meruelouse factis.
               I shalbe glad and reioyse in the / magnifyinge thy name ryght highelye.
               Because myne enemye is fled backe: he is fallen ād destroyd by thy power.
               For thou hast delyuered me & geue sentence withe me / settinge me at last in my seate royal / oh iuste iuge.
               Thou holdest downe the haithen thou destroyest the wicked / & quē
                  chest their name for euer.
               Thou takest awaye clene the harde and sharpe weapēs of our enimys / thou cuttest awaye cytes:

that with their fall their name be forgoten.
               But the Lorde raigneth euerlastinge: which hath prepared his seat roial to obserue equite.
               He tempereth the worlde with rightwisnes: and ministreth trwe iugement vnto the peple.
               The lorde is a salfe sanctuary to the oppressed / and a refugye in the tyme of distresse.
               And for this cause / al that knowe thy name cleaue vnto the: for thou forsakest thē not that seke the (oh lorde.
               Praise the Lorde which dwelleth in zion: put the peple in mynde of his counsels.
               For he holdeth in mynde the blode of the oppressed: he enquirethe for it / he forgeteth not their cry
                     •
                  ge

Lorde thou art mercifull / and intent vnto the trouble done to me of my enemyes: and thou delyuerest me from the power of deth.
               That I might layeforth thy hyghe prayse in zion: and reioyse yn thy sauinge helth.
               When euen cōtrarye / the heithen be drowned in their owne mischeif / which thei inuented: and their fete taken in their owne nette which thei haue bente.
               The lorde maketh his iugement knowne: in that he trappeth the synner taken in his owne snare. So he doth.Sela. Oh / prayse worthy perpetuall.
               The vngodly go their waye vnto hel / & all heithen that forget god. But the poore adflicte shal neuer be fo
                     •
                  goten: nether shall the expectacion

of these poore forsaken be frustrate.
               Aryse lorde that this man preuayle not: let these haithen be condempned before the.
               Smyte them with soden feare / that thei might knowe them selues to be but men mortal. So do.Selah.
            
            
               Psal. x. after the Hebrws
               
                  HOw now happeneth it oh lorde that thou art gone away so farre frō vs? wilt thou be hid in tyme of anxte ād affliccion?
               The poore perissheth at the wealy pryde of the vngodly: Oh wolde god thei were once taken in their owne conspyrisons which thei so craftely conspire.
               The vngodly maketh a gaude at

the fulfillinge of his mischeuous entent: the thefe and he that blasphemeth the lorde are praysed.
               This vngodlye is so proude that he regardeth nether his thefte nor blasphemy: for in all his myscheuous deuyses / he thinketh not once of god.
               Al his wayes at all tyme are prophane / thy iugementes are taken out of his sight / all his enemyes he contempneth.
               For euē thus hath he determined withe him selfe: I wyll passe ouer no tyme without malyce and myscheif.
               His execrable mouth is ful of cursinge / fr
                     •
                  ude & desaite: vnder hys tongue there sitteth miserable affliccion and heuey miserye.
               He laith awayte euer wyth oute

for londe and towne / he hunteth preuely to slaye the innocent / his eyes are set faste vppon the goers fore bye.
               He layeth awayte bente lyke a lyō at the mouthe of his denne / he waytethe to robbe the poore / to souke him vp drawne into his nette.
               He smyteth him / he maketh hym ful feble and weake: & casteth downe with his tyrannye the goers forebye.
               For thus thinketh he: god knoweth it not / for he tourneth awaye his face and wil neuer se it.
               But Lorde god therfore aryse: stretche forth thy hande / and forget not these poore oppressed.
               Wherfore shal the vngodly contempne god: & thinke in his herte that thou carest not / nor regardest

not our affliccion?
               Se therfore and loke vpon it: for thou art he that consyderest oure heuye and sorowful affliccion
               Our enemyes with our greuous iniurye mought be taken vp into thy hande: vnto thy soucour is lefte the poore sely forsaken / thou helpest the soucourlesse.
               Breke the strength of the maliciouse vngodlye: that he myght perisshe togither with his owne vngodlynes.
               It is the lorde that abydeth kynge for euer: when al heithen perisshe frome out of the erthe.
               Here (Lorde) the desyer of the pore afflicte: geue eare vnto their brestes.
               Auenge the pore sely forsaken: leste this mortal man here after be

so bolde as thus cruellye agen to oppresse him.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. ¶The exhortacion of Dauid.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶As constāt faith is neuer without temptacion / so is it neuer ouercome.
               
               
                  My cōfidence is in the lorde. How then now shal ye saye vnto me / get the hence anon swyftlyer then the byrde into the hilles?
               For lo / the vngodlye bende their bowe and set their arows theryn preuely to smyte the pure in herte Vtterly to destroye them: ād who ther shal the iuste turne him selfe to go?
               The lorde that is in his holy temple:

the lorde whose seat royall is in heuen loketh vpon this: he sercheth and beholdeth narowly the sonnes of men.
               The lorde beholdeth the rightuouse / but the sinful vngodly he vtterly hateth.
               He rayneth snaris vpon sinners: fyer / brimstone / storme and tempeste are the cuppe that he geuethe them to drinke.
               For the rightwyse Lorde louethe rightwisnes: his chere is intente and geuen to equite.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 12. ¶The songe of Dauid adhortatorye to be sunge at the musik instrument.
               
                  ¶The Argument
                  He complaineth of the open vnfaithful delinge. He prayeth for the destruccion of the vnfaithful & fal
                     
                        •
                     e

chirch / because that where so reigne these vayne vngodlye / there 
                        •
                     re all full of myscheyf / and wyc
                     
                        •
                     ednes.
               
               
                  LOrde helpe: for holynes is lost: faithfulnes is gone from the chylderne of men.
               Thei be but vayne lyes that one 
                     •
                  elleth another: it is but flaterye & 
                     •
                  lauerye speche that euery herte 
                     •
                  magineth.
               The lorde mought cut al these flateringe tongues out of their proude mouthes:
               Which saye / let vs stablyssh with 
                     •
                  utorite oure owne tōgues: let vs steke to our owne lippes: and then who shalbe lordis ouer vs?
               For the calamite of the oppressed 
                     •
                  nd wailinge of the poore / I will

aryse saith the lorde / I shal restore him to helthe and renyue him. The speches of the Lorde are pure speches / purified ād purged by fyer from the erthe / melted & tryed vnto the vttermost.
               Thou Lorde therfore holde them from vs: kepe vs for euer frō this kinde of men.
               For al are ful of the vngodly / where vanite is exalted amonge the children of men.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 13. ¶ The songe of Dauid adhortatorye.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶The prayer of a pacyently longe sufferer
               
               
                  
                     ¶Vsquequo domine.
                     Psal. 13.
                  
               
               
                  
                  HOwe longe wilt thou forget me (lorde? wilte thou forget me for euer? howe longe wilt thou hyd thy face from me?
               How longe shall I reuolue thoughtis in my mynde? howe longe shal this laborouse heuynes waaste my herte? how longe shal this enemye be exalted ouer me?
               Beholde and helpe lorde god: illumine my eyes / lest I slepe in deth. And let not myne enemye saye / I preuailed agenst him: lest if I be moued from my place / my troublouse aduersaries reioyse.
               For I wil cleue vnto thy merciable goodnes / my herte hoppeth for ioye at the comynge of thy sauinge helthe / that I might prayse the when thou hast geuen it me.
            
            
               
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 14. ¶An exhortatorye songe of Dauyd.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶He complayneth of al men to be sinners and that the tyme shall come that the vngodly shal dye for fere / but vnto the godlye there shall come a plentuouse ioye from that heuenly zyon.
               
               
                  THe vayne folysshe thinke in theire hertis / that god is not god: they folowe corrupte and execrable studyes / there is none that dothe good.
               When the Lorde shulde loke forth from heuen vpon the children of men to see whether there were eny that vnderstode or regarded God:
               He sawe that all were gone frome

him / al alyke togither were corrupted / ther was none that did good no not won.
               Haue thei vnderstandinge which are al geuē vnto mischeif? which deuoure my peple lyke meat? yea / which cal not vpon the lorde?
               Then therfore shall thei tremble: when god standinge on the iuste mennis syde / shal saye vnto them. ye made but a mocke at the counsayl of the pore: but yet is the lorde his hope.
               Who shal geue Israel his sauinge helthe frō zion? When the Lorde shall bringe home agen his peple: Iacob shal reioyse and Israel shalbe right glad
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 15. ¶The songe of Dauid.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  
                     ¶The heretage & lyfe of the godlye in this worlde.
               
               
                  LOrde who maye dwell in thy tabernacle? who maye continwe in thy holy hyll?
               Euen he that lyueth innocently / doinge that at iuste is / whose herte is euer in meditacion vpon the trwthe.
               He that deceiueth not nor hurteth with his tongue / nether dothe none euyl to his neghbour / nor reuileth not his felowe.
               But setteth naught by the vngodly / and hath them in pryce that fere the lorde: which kepeth his oth ād promyse with his neighboure. And lendeth not his money for a vauntage: nether receyueth gyfte agenst the innocent.
               
                  He that doth these thinges / abydeth & dwelleth there stil for euer
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 16. ¶Dauids delicat and swete prayes
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶The variable state of this worlde considered / he confesseth nothinge to be stable. Wherfore there is nothinge more holy and certayne then to cleue to the lorde withe all confidence.
               
               BEpe me (oh God) for in the do I truste. I confesse vnto the lorde / saynge thou arte my Lorde / my goodis are nothing for the.
               I gaue my selfe therfore sometyme to helpe the saynts / which are vpon the erth.
               But whē their aduersite with incommodities begane to growe / they went backe.
               
                  I shall not offer vp none of their blodye drinke offeraunces / nether yet once take the names of them into my lippes.
               For the lorde is the porcion of my heretage and my cuppe: thou holdest vp my lotte.
               My lotte fill vpon a fayer place / and my heretage pleaseth me wel I thanke the lorde for his monicion: for euen by night my conscience correcketh me.
               I loke vppe euermore beholdinge the Lorde present at myn eyes / for euen at my right hande is he present / lest I shulde slyde.
               Wherfore my herte ioythe & my greatnes reioyseth / that my flesshe at laste maye reste suerlye.
               For thou wilt not leue me in my graue: nor suffere thi dere beloued

holy one to be corrupted.
               But thou shalt shewe me the pathe of lyfe / thou shalt make me glad with thy presence / for there is perpetuall ioye in thy power.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 17. ¶The prayer of Dauid.
               
                  ¶The Argument
                  ¶He contendeth in a maner withe god / because he so greuously tempteth him studyinge to do wel. And he prayeth to be delyuered of the lorde from his enymrs.
               
               HEre (lorde) myne innocencye / attende vnto my cryinge: geue eare vnto my vnfayned prayer spokē withe all my herte.
               Let thy iugement declare myne innocencye: let thy eyes beholde equite.
               Proue my herte / and serche it by

night / trye me withe fier / and yet shalt thou not finde me a dissembler: for I decreed withe my selfe not to offende / no not in worde
               I tempered me frome the workes of m
                     •
                  n / and from the ways of the peruerse: for the worde of thy lippes.
               kepe my stepis within thy pathes leste my fete turne into any contrary waye.
               For I crye vnto the (oh God) for soucoure: geue eare to me and here my wordes.
               Assigne me thy wonderfull mercyes / thou which with thy right hāde kepest the faithful from their aduersaries.
               kepe me as one wolde kepe the apple of his eye: hyde me vnder the shadewe of thy winges.
               
                  From the vngodly which trouble me / euen fro my enemyes whych close yn my lyfe.
               Which with their riches tyrannously oppresse: & with their mouthes crye out proudlye.
               Thei laye awayte at our fete: turninge downe their eyes to the erth Thei ar lyke the hōgry lyō gredy of his proye: euen the yonge lyon layd bente in his preuye denne.
               Aryse lorde / and preuent him / cast him downe grouelinge / and redeme me from the vngodly with thi swerde.
               Delyuer me by thy power frō the mortal / euen from the men of this worlde / which in this lyfe enioye their parte.
               For euen thou out of thy store house fillest their bellies / that when

thei be satisfied with children / thei maye yet leue the reste of their goodis to their infants.
               But I / when I shall apere before the in my innocencye / shalbe satisfyed: I shalbe wel filled when thi glorye shalbe declared in the daye of apperaunce.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 18 ¶The songe adhortatorye of Dauid the seruaunt of the Lorde / whiche sunge this songe vnto hym when he delyuered him both from the power of Saul and also frome al his enemyes.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶He geueth thankis: he telleth into what perel he was brought / he describeth lyke a poet the diuine power / and praiseth his benefittis.
               
               
                  
                  I Shall loue the (oh Lorde) my strength / lorde thou arte my ferme rocke / my bulwarke / ād my refugie. My god / my defense vnto whom I cleaue. My buckler / my mighty sauinge helth / and my saynctuarye. When I prayse and loaue the lorde: then am I salfe frome myne enemyes.
               Bondis of dethe compassed me about / the roringe flowdis of Belial swelled vp agenste me.
               The snares of hel closed me in: in the nettis of deth was I masshed But yet beinge in theis distresses I called vpon and worshiped the Lorde / and cryed vnto my god.
               And he herde my voice / euen from his holye hill.
               And as sone as my cryinge came

vnto his earis: the erthe trembled and shoke / the foundacions of the hilles staggarde & were smyten togither: for it was he that was wrathe.
               Fume ascended out of his nostrelles / and deuoueringe fyer out of his mouth / so that coles were kindled there at.
               He made the heuēs to stowpe whyle he came downe / hauinge a derke cloude vnder his fete.
               He was caried vpon the Cherubims / and did flee / he came fleinge with the winges of the winde.
               He closed him self in derknes sittinge therein as in his tabernacle he was hid in blacke waters euen in clowdes ful of rayne.
               But at the brightnes of his lokingeforth: clowdes proceded / hayle

and fyerye beames.
               And then the Lorde thondred frome aboue / and the most highe god sent forth his noyse: here feldown haile and boltis of fier.
               He shet forth and scatred his dartes / he smote forth mightely mich lighteninge ouer al.
               The veynes of springes were opē
                  ned / the foundacions of the rounde erth were layd wyde opē at thy chydinge / Oh lorde / they laye naked at thy breth ād stomak of thy wrathe.
               Then he did put downe his hande frome an highe and toke me vp quickly: ād drewe me forth of the vehement waters.
               He delyuered me frome the violē
                  ce of my enemyes / and my haters which had ouercome me.
               
                  Whiche had taken their plesure vpon me in tyme of my aduersite: but it was the Lorde that helped me:
               And led me forth at large / he delyuered me / because he had chosen me.
               The lorde gaue me after my innocencye / and rewarded me accordinge to my pure lyuinge.
               For I did diligently waite vpon the wayes of the lorde / nether did I fle from my god vnto any wother.
               For I holde faste al his lawes before myne eyes / nether do I thruste his ordinances frome me.
               I order my selfe perfaitly and purely towarde him / and I take good heed leste I fal into any sinne.
               The Lorde mought rewarde me

after my innocencye and pure lyuinge / for his benigne liberalite.
               With the holye man thou art holye / and pure with the pure.
               With the electe thou arte chosen: and with peruerse thou doist frowardelye.
               For thou sauest the pore oppressed: and layst ful lowe the highe lokes of the proude.
               Thou lightest my candle / Lorde my god: thou dispellest my derkenes with thy light.
               Thou beinge my goyd / I breake thorowe the hole raye in batayle: thorowe thy helpe / my god / I leape the wallis.
               The waye of the lorde is immaculate / the speche of the Lorde is pure: he is the shilde to al that truste in him.
               
                  For who is it that is god but the lorde? or who is it that is almightye besyds our god?
               It is God that girdeth me withe strength / it is he that kepeth my waye pure and good.
               Which maketh my fete as swifte as are the fete of an herte: & setteth me vp in an highe place.
               Which enstructeth my hādis vnto batail: and techeth my armes to breke bowes of stele.
               Thou stretchest forth for my defence thy sauinge buckler / withe thy righthande thou sustayneste me / and encreasest me with thy iē
                  tle familiarite.
               Thou spredist my waye vnder me / lest my helis slyde awaye
               I folowe vpon myne enemyes ād take them: neuer tourninge again

vntil thei be al slayne.
               I smyte them downe / so that they rise not agē: thei fal vnder my fete Thou girdeste me withe strength vnto batell: and throest them downe vnder me which ryse agēst me Thou (myne enemyes backes turned) settest me in their neckis / thou scaterest my enemyes al awaye Thei called vpon / but none herde them: euen vpon the lorde thei called / but he helped them not.
               But I beit them as smal as dust scatred with the wide / & made no more of them then of the dirte in the streatis.
               Thou delyuerst me frō the cōtēciouse peple: ād settest me to be the head ouer the gētils / a naciō which I knew not / & yet thei serue me As sone as thei herd me thei obayd

me: but my nowne knowne peple fal fro me.
               Thei aborred and yrked the knowlege of me: they swarued awaye frome their wonte pathe.
               The Lorde lyueth / and blessed be he euen my very rocke of stone / God be exalted and praysed whiche is my sauinge helthe.
               Euen god whiche geueth me power to auenge me / and casteth this peple vnder my fete.
               It is he that delyuereth me from my enymye / he geueth me victorie vpon them that ryse agenst me / sauinge me from euery euell.
               Wherfore I shal prayse the amō
                  ge the gentils oh lorde: and I shal magnifie thy name.
               Which enrichest thy kynge with miche helthe / thou endewest Dauid

thy anoynted with grete benefits / and his sead also for euer.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psalme. 19. ¶The songe of Dauid adhortatorie.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶He compareth the brightnes of the worde of god vnto the light of the sonne / expressinge the holsome vertue therof.
               
               
                  THe heuens declare the almightye maiestye off god / and the firmament sheweth forth the worke of his handis.
               Euery daye precheth the same: & euery night layeth forth the same also vnto our knowlege.
               There is nether speche nor tōgue but amonge them are the voyces of these al herde.
               Into al the worlde goethforth the

speche of them / and their wordis vnto the worldis ende.
               He hath set in them a tabernacle for the sonne: whēce he procedeth like a bridegrome out of his chā
                  bre / and lyke a geaunt he dresseth him selfe to peruse his coursse:
               Frome the one syde of the heuens he goth forth myghtely to the tother: and there is noman that maye hyde him from his heat.
               And euen so is the lawe of the lorde perfayt / restoringe the mynde / the testimonye of the lorde is true techinge children wysedom.
               The chastisinges of the lorde are right / makinge glad the herte: the precepte of the lorde is pure / illumininge the eyes.
               The fere of the lorde is cleane ād ferme for euer / the iugementes of

                  
                     •
                  he lorde are egal and iuste.
               More pleasaunt thē golde or any 
                     •
                  reciouse stone: and sweter then e
                  
                     •
                  her honey or the honey combe.
               Which / who so is thy seruant / he 
                     •
                  epeth them: for in kepinge them here foloweth grete rewarde.
               Who taketh hede vnto his fau
                  
                     •
                  s? absolue me from those sinnes 
                     •
                  hich I knowe not:
               And also from them which I haue boldely cōmitted that thei haue no dominion ouer me / for so shal I be pourged and absolued frō
                  
                  
                     •
                   ful grete sinne.
               Let the wordis of my mouth ple
                  
                     •
                  se the: let the meditacion of my 
                     •
                  erte be accept vnto the / oh Lorde 
                     •
                  y rocke and my redemer.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psalme. 20.

¶Dauidis songe adhortatorye.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶ He promyseth as it were in the persone of a master / that he wil be benigne and Ientle ouer all to hys seruaunts.
               
               
                  The lorde shal here the in tharticle of thy distresse the maiestye of the God of Iacob shall defendethe.
               He shal sende the helpe from the holy place: and from zion he shall defende the.
               He shal remember al thy sacrifice and accepte thy brent offeraunce. So he shalSelah.
               He shal geue the thy hertis desy
                     •
                   and accomplesshe thy mynde.
               We shal reioyse in thy helthe ād triumphe gloriously vpon the maiestye of our god / for the lorde shal

graunt the al thy peticions.
               Now know I that the lorde will preserue his anointed: the Lorde wil bringe him helpe from his holy heuen with the sauinge power of his righthande.
               Some truste in chariets and some in their horses: but we wil remember the name of the lorde our god. Thei shal fal grouelinge whē we shal aryse and stande vpright.
               Saue vs lorde / helpe vs oh kynge when we cal vpon the.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 21 ¶Dauidis songe adhortatorye.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶He geueth God thankis for hys innumerable benefits / whiche he partelye reciteth.
               
               
                  
                  LOrde / se how the kynge reioyseth in thy strength? howe excedinge glad is he of thy victoriouse helpe?
               Thou haste geuen him the desier of his owne herte: and graunted him the peticions of his lyppes. So thou hasteSelah.
               Thou hast preuented him withe thy benigne liberalite: ād hast set the golden crowne vppon hys head.
               He asked lyfe of the / and thou gauest him longe lyfe / ye a perpetual lyfe.
               Hts glorye excedeth / but yet through thy helpe: honour and clea
                     •
                   fame hast thou layd vpon him.
               And thou shalt also endewe hym with perpetual felicite / and make him glad wythe thy ioyouse presence.
               
                  For the kynge trusteth in the lorde / and in the goodnes of the most hygheste: wherfore he can not slyde.
               Let all thy enimyes fele thy power / all thy aduersaries mought haue experience of thy righthande. Set fyer on them as it were in an oouen in the tyme of thy indignacion: Lorde let the fyer deuower and swelowe them vppe in thy wrathe.
               Destroye their ysswe out of the erthe: and pluck their progenie out of the sorte of men.
               For they enforce myscheif agenst the: thei conceayue shrewd counsails which thei maye not bringe to passe.
               
                  But thou shalt turne them into flyght: and withe thy bowe smyte them in their faces.
               Be thou exalted (lorde) in thy nowne strength / that we maye prayse and preche thy power.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psalme. ¶Dauidis songe adhortatorye cō
                  cerninge the hynde erely chased.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶He desierthe depely the helpe of God / beinge now in extreme anxte and distresse: whiche he expresseth with meruelouse cōparysons. He felith helpe / and geueth thankes. In whiche al he figureth Cryste goodly / and at last he setteth to the prophecy of the callinge of the gentyls.
               
               
                  
                  My God / my god: wherfore hast thou forsaken me? the wordes of my oute cryinge are ful farre from helthe.
               I cal vpon the / the hole daye Oh my god / and yet thou herist not: ye I ceasse not cryinge the hole nyghte.
               Verely thou art he that dwelleste in the holye temple / oh the glorye of Israel: thou wast the hope off oure fathers / in the thei trusted / ād thou delyuerdst them.
               Vnto the thei cryed and were delyuered / in the thei trusted and were not confounded.
               But I am a worme and nomore a man / a fable / a iestinge stoke for men / a vyle abiecte in ignominye of the comen peple.
               
                  Al that se me contempne me / they wryue their lippes at me / ād nodde their headis. (Saynge).
               He trusted in the Lorde / let him redeme him / let him delyuer him yf he loue him.
               But thou receyuedst me cominge forth euen of my mothers wombe: and wast my hope euen at my mothers brestis.
               Into thy lappe was I layd from my birthe / as sone as I was borne thou wast and art my god.
               Go not therfore fro me / this my perellous anxte beinge now present: for I haue no man to helpe. Many fyerce bull is cloose me about / ye grete far steris compasse me yn.
               They gape vpon me withe theyr mouthes: euen as roringe rampaunt

lyons.
               But I was powerd forth like water / my bones shaken out of ioynt and my herte in the myddis of me melted awaye lyke waxe.
               My strengthe was dryed vp lyke a potsherde / my tongue cleued to my chaues / for thou hast brought me vnto the deade dust.
               ye there were yet very dogges cō
                  passinge me aboute: euē the counsail of the most myscheuouse digginge and breakinge my handis & fete ful cruelly.
               All my bones racked / were layd open to be tolde of al that loked vpon me.
               Thei diuide my cote emonge thē selues: and caste lottis for my garment.
               Thou Lorde therfore tarye not

thou art my strength / haste the to helpe me.
               Delyuer my lyfe from the swerde and my only dere soule frome these doggis.
               Saue me from the open mouthes of these lyons / delyuer me frō the hornes of these vnicornes.
               And I shal declare thy gloriouse maiestye vnto my brethern / euen in the middes of the congregaciō shal I prayse the.
               ye that fere the lorde prayse hym / thou the hole sead of Iacob magnifie him: ād thou that art the populose sead of Israell reuerence him.
               For he despisethe not / nor turneth not away his face frome the pore afflicte / nether hideth he his face from him / but he hereth him whē
                  
he cryeth.
               I shal preche prayse of the before the hole congregacion / and paye my vowes before them that fere the.
               The lowely shal ete and be satisfied / thei shal prayse the Lorde ād seke him / thei mought lyue for euer.
               They shal be conuerted vnto the lorde and al the coostis of the erth shal preche him / and al the kynredes of the gentils shal fal downe before him.
               For the kingdome of the gentils is the lordis / and he shalbe lorde ouer them.
               And al the riche of the erthe shall ete and worship him / thei shal bowe their knees before him / and al men shal go downe to the grounde

/ orels their soule shal not lyue. This sead shal serue him / & shal singe praise vnto the Lorde for euer.
               Thei shal come and shewethe for me of his rightwysmaking / vnto the gentyls yet to be borne / whō the Lorde shal create.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psalme .23. ¶The songe of Dauid.
               
                  ¶ The Argument.
                  ¶He syngeth thinnumerable benefits of God vnder the similirude of an herdeman faithfully fedinge his flocke of shepe.
               
               THe Lorde fedeth me: wherfore I can want nothinge. He 
                     •
                  ettith me in a goodly lusty pasture: and retcheth me for the vnto swete still runninge waters.
               
                  He refressheth my soule / and directeth me in the right waye / for his names sake.
               For albe it I shulde go vnto the valye of the dedely shadewe / yet fere I none euyll / for thou art with me: ye thy staffe and shepehoke ar my counforte.
               Thou spredest me a table in the presence of my aduersaryes / thou sowplest my head with oyntmēt and fillest my cuppe.
               Thy goodnes therfore & thy benigne mercye ar with me through all my lyfe that I myght dwell in thy house for euer.
            
            
               ¶ The title of the Psal. 24. ¶The songe of Dauid.
               
                  ¶ The Argument.
                  He singeth / god to be lorde ouer al thinges: but yet onely innocent
                        •
                     
                     
to dwel with him / and the kynge of glorye to come vnto vs.
               
               
                  THe erthe and whatsoeuer is in it / is the lordis: bothe the rounde worlde and thinhabiters thereof.
               For he hath layd her foundacion vpon the seas / ād set her fast vpō the flowdis.
               Who then maye ascende into the hill of the lorde? or who maye abyde stil in his holy place?
               An innocent in his dedis and pure in herte: whiche extoll
                     •
                  th not his mynde vnto vayne hope / nether swereth not to deceyue.
               This man shalbe lyberally endewed of the Lorde: receyuinge rightwisnes of god his sauiour.
               This is the generacion that getteth

him: it is Iacob that findeth thy presence. Sela.So it is
               
               Open youre gates o ye princes / & let these euerlastinge gatis be opened that the grete kynge myghte enter yn.
               Who is this grete kynge? the stronge and mighty Lorde / euen the lorde that stronge warryer.
               Open your gates o princes / & let these euerlastinge gatis be nomore shut / that the grete kynge myght enter in:
               Who is this grete kinge? it is the lorde of powers / that is this grete kinge. So he is.Sela.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 25 ¶The songe of Dauid.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶It is a comon prayer and acknowleginge of his sinnes.
               
               
                  
                  VNto the (oh Lorde) do I lyftvp my mynde.
               In the (oh my god) do I truste: let me not (I beseche the) be shamed / nether let myne enemyes runne vpon me.
               For as many as truste in the are not shamed: but thei be shamed that are vayne transgressours.
               Thy wayes lorde shewe thou me and thy pathes teche me.
               Induce and teche me thy trouthe for thou arte my god and my helthe / in the do I truste at all tymes.
               Remember thy mercy and goodnes: which thou of euer vseste.
               But the synnes and trespases of my yougth remember them not / but for thy benignite ād goodnes remember me oh lorde.
               
                  Ful good and iuste is the lorde / & therfore he reduceth sinners into the waye.
               He ledeth the homble and mylde / as it behoueth with discrecion / ād the afflicte he techeth his waye.
               All the wayes of the lorde ar mercy and faithfulnes / vnto them that kepe promyse 
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  o couenaunt with him.
               For thy names sake Lorde haue mercye on my sinne / oh lorde / for it is grete.
               Who so fereth the lorde / him he directeth in that waye whiche is vnto him acceptable.
               His soule shal haue the fruiciō of al goodnes: and his posterite shal possesse the londe.
               The lorde techeth his secretes ād his couenaunt vnto the
                     •
                   that

fere him.
               My eyes are euer intēte vnto the lorde: for he plucketh my fete out of the ne
                     ••
                  e.
               Turne vnto me Lorde and haue mercy on me: for I am forsaken & sorowful.
               The ang
                     •
                  ysshe of my sorowfull hert encreseth: lede me forth therfore of my distresse.
               Beholde 
                     •
                  y affliccion and heuy ladour: and take awaye al my sinnes.
               Consyder my en
                     •
                  myes for thei be ful many: ād they persewe me with a myscheuous hate.
               kepe my soule and delyuer me / let me not I beseche the be shamed / for I truste in the.
               Let pu
                     •
                  enes and equite preserue m
                     •
                  : f
                     •
                  r in the do I truste.
               
                  Redeme Israel (oh god) lose hym from all his anxte and distresse.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 26. ¶The Psalme of Dauid.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶Innocencye / which is of faith / faithfully confesseth her silfe vnto the lorde / prayinge / lest this innocencye and fayth perysshe and be loste.
               
               DElyuer me (lorde) in iugement / for I walke innocētly: in the (oh lorde) do I truste / and wauer not.
               Proue and serche me oh lorde / seeth and trye out my raynes & my herte.
               For thy merciable goodnes do I holde before my eyes: and in thy trowthe do I walke.
               I dwel not with vayne men: nether go I yn vnto these ydle and

craftye deceyuers.
               I hate the chirche of the myscheuous maligne / nether sitte I amō
                  ge these vngodlye.
               I wasshe my handis with innocencye / and so go I (oh lorde) vnto thy altare.
               To preche forth with a lowde voyce thy prayse / and to shewe forth al thy meruellouse workis.
               I loue (oh lorde) the habitacle off thy howse: ād the place where thy glorye dwelleth.
               Ioyne thou not my soule with sinners / nether my lyfe withe these blodye men.
               In whose handis myscheife is founde / their right hande is full off brybes.
               I verely walke innocently: redeme me and haue mercy on me.
               
                  My fote standeth faste in the righte. In the myddes of the congregacions I shal loaue the lorde.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 27. ¶ The Psalme of Dauid.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶The profe and experience of faith / which in any perel imminent / receyneth consolacion at the helpe of the lorde.
               
               
                  THe Lorde is my light & my helthe: whome then shal I feare? the lorde is the strength of my lyfe / of whom then shal I be afrayde? Whyle ther comeforth agēst me the maligne myscheuouse / and euen my enemyes to deuower me hole / lo thei fal downe al to smitē Whē their tētis ar pitched agēst me / yet I fere not: whē thei be incē
                  sed to batail agēst me / then am I most suer.
               
                  For one thinge I desyer of the Lorde / one thinge do I seke / euen to dwell in the house of the Lorde for euer / that I might se the maiestye royall of the Lorde and beholde his temple.
               For he hath hyd me in a perellouse tyme / he did hyd me in the secrete place of his tabernacle / & lifted me vp into a rocke of stōne. And at laste he gaue me victorye ouer my enemyes whiche had cō
                  passed me aboute.
               Wherfore I offer in his tabernacle thofferaunce of thankis geuinge / I prayse and synge vnto the Lorde.
               Here (oh Lorde) my voice wherwith I call vpon the / haue mercy on me / and helpe me.
               My hert acknowlegeth the / my

countenance seketh the / Lorde I desyer thy face.
               Hyd not thy face fro me / repell not thy seruant in thy wrathe.
               Thou art my strength / leue me not / nether forsake me oh God my sauiour.
               For my father and my mother haue forsaken me: but yet the Lorde shal take me vp to nouresshe.
               Teche me (lorde) thy waye / and lede me in a right pathe from my a waite layers.
               Let not my enimes take their plesure vpō me / for periured witnesses ar rysen vp agenst me imagening a mischeif for me.
               But this thinge is my counfort: I am suer to se the benigne goodnes of the Lorde in the londe of the lyuinge.
               
                  Truste thou therfore in the lorde (who so euer thou be) for it is he that shal counfort and strengthē thy hert: se therfore thou truste in the lorde.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 28 ¶The Psalme of Dauid.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶Sodēly and incessantly he callethe vpon the lorde / to be delyuered from the fraudulent. He is herde / and geueth thankis.
               
               VNto the (oh lorde my rocke) do I crye: repel me not I beseche the / frustrat not my hope / lest I be lyke mē descendinge into their graues.
               Here the voice of thy suppliaun
                     •
                   criynge vpon the: which lyft vp my handis towerde thy holy temple.
               Repute me not I beseche the emō
                  ge

the vngodly or the myscheuous / spekinge frendly to their neyghbour / but myscheuously thinkinge in their hertis.
               Rewarde them accordinge to their myscheif and maliciouse thoughtes: geue them after their deades / requite thē as thei be worthy Euen as thei regarde not the lorde through the workis made with his hande: so let him destroye them neuer to be restored.
               I thanke the lorde for he hath he
                     •
                  
                  de the voyce of his suppliaunt The lorde is my strength & shilde vnto him my herte cleueth / of him fele I helpe / and therfore my herte reioyseth magnifyinge him with my songe.
               The lorde is oure strength: he is the sauinge power of his anoynted.
               
                  Saue thou therfore thy peple / be mercyfull and good vnto thy heretage: fede and beare them vp continually and euer.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psalme. 29. ¶The songe of Dauid.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶He exciceth the mighty vnto the worship of one alone for al sufficient / god almyghty: Whose almighty power he precheth / singeth / and magnifieth eycedingly.
               
               
                  GEue ye vnto the lorde / o ye mighty princes: geue him (I saye) his glorye and the prayse of his power.
               Acknowlege this name of the lorde to be omnipotent: worship the holy maiestie of the lorde.
               For it is the lorde that by his onely cōmaundement ruleth the waters: god almyghty prepareth the

thonder / the Lorde commaundeth the seas.
               The voice of the lorde taketh effecte / the voice of the lorde is ful of maiestye.
               At the lordis biddinge the Cedre trees be al to broken / ye the Lorde verely wyl breke euen the Cedre trees of Lybani.
               He shal trede downe the mount Libanum lyke a stronge bull: and Saron lyke a vnicorne.
               The commaundement of the lorde scatereth forth flames of fyer. The voyce of the Lorde makethe the deserte to tremble / he shaketh euen the deserte of Cades.
               The voice of the Lorde makethe the hartes and hyndes sycke / and maketh naked euen the thick wodis.
               
                  In his temple therfore / euery mā speketh his glorie.
               The Lorde ceasseth the dil
                     ••
                  ye: the lorde obteineth stil his euerlastinge kingdom.
               The lorde geueth strength to his peple with goodnes and peace
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psalme. 30 ¶Dauids songe of thankis geuinge for the foundacion and reasinge vp of his house.
               
                  ¶The Argument
                  ¶It is a thankis geuinge / wherby the godly are taught al thinges to be suer committed vnto god. It appereth it to be writen after some syknes.
               
               WIth highe prayses (oh lorde) shal I extol the / for that thou hast taken me vp to preserue me: nether haste thou suffred my enimies to triumphe

ouer me.
               Lorde my god / vnto the haue I c
                     •
                  
                  yed: and thou hast healed me.
               Lorde thou hast called me agene fro my graue / thou hast restored my soule from goynge▪ downe into the pitte.
               Singe ye vnto the lorde / you that be his sayntis / geue thākis in the holy remembraunce of him.
               For whyle he is wrathe for a lytel space / through his fauour yet geueth he lyfe: althoughe the eueninge be turned into wepinge / yet is gladnes restored in the morninge.
               Verely / when I sayde in my flowers: I shall neuer fall nor suffer hurt.
               (For thou Lorde of thy goodnes hadst geuen strengthe vnto my

hil) anon as thou hadst hyden thy face I was troubled.
               But here / vnto the / oh lorde I cryed: vnto the my lorde made I my prayer.
               What (I saye) profiteth my blode if I be corrupte? shal my duste magnifye the? shall it prayse thy trowthe?
               Heare me therfore lorde and haue mercye on me: Oh Lorde helpe me.
               Then thou turnedest my moornynge into ioye / thou vnlacedest my sake and gyrdedste me wythe gladnes.
               Wherfore thy glorye shal be songē incessantly: for I / lorde my god shal magnifie the for euer.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 31.

¶Dauids songe adhortatorye.
               
                  ¶The Argument
                  ¶It is a prayer in grete tribulacion / a gra
                        •
                     youse hearinge / and than
                        •
                     esgeuinge.
               
               
                  IN the (oh lorde) do I truste let me neuer I beseche the be shamed / but for thy mercyes sake delyuer me.
               Bowe downe thy eare vnto me / spede the to delyuer me / be my stronge rocke / and wel defenced house wheryn thou wilt saue me.
               For thou arte my stonney rocke & my castel: for thy names sake therfore be my goyd and nourysshe me.
               Lede me forth of the nette which thei haue hyd for me: for thou art my defender.
               Into thy handis I commēde my

spirit: redeme me / Lorde god which art so trwe.
               For I hate them that embrase vanite: but in the (Oh Lorde) do I truste.
               I shal be glad and reioyse in thy mercy: for thou wilt loke vpō my adfliccion when thou espieste my soule in distresse.
               Nether wilt thou yild it into the power of my aduersarye / but wilt set my fete at large.
               Haue mercy vpon me (lorde) for I am in trouble: my eyes rimple ād waxe dimme for heuynes / my soule / my bellye.
               My lyfe is consumed with sorowe / and my yearis in sighinge: my strength is fallen awaye in calamite / and my bones are consumed.
               
                  I was obprobriously defamed of al my enimyes: vnto my neighbours and siche as knewe me I was grete fear. Who so sawe m
                     •
                   thei fled out awaye fro me.
               Out of mynde I fyl forgoten as 
                     •
                   dead man: I was gone lyke a 
                     •
                  rye broken potsherde.
               For my selfe herde the obloquye / 
                     •
                  nd threatis of the multitude ga
                  
                     •
                  hered about me: thei consented al agenst me / thei conspired to take awaye my lyfe.
               But in the (oh lorde) do I truste / and I saye / thou art my god.
               In thi hande are my destenes / deliuer me from the power of my e
                  
                     •
                  imes and persuers.
               Shew thi graciouse countenance vnto thi seruaunt: ād saue me for thi mercys sake.
               
                  Lorde let me not be confounded / for vnto the do I call: but let the vngodly be shamed and layd a sleape in their graues.
               Let lyinge lippes be sewed vp togither / which craftely prowdly / & spightfully speke agenste the iuste.
               Oh how grete goodes sayst thou vp for the fearers of the? whiche good thou doist vnto thē that truste in the / euen in the presence of al mortal men.
               Thou hiddest these men preuelye in thy syght from the prowde mē thou hiddest them in thy tabernacle from virulent tongues.
               Thākis be vnto the Lorde for his highe goodnes towarde me / defended as I were in the moste stronge cyte.
               
                  For I / some tyme without al hope sayd: I am cast out of thy sight and yet thou herdest thy supplyaunt cryinge vnto the.
               Loue ye the lorde therfore all hys saints: for the lorde defendeth his faithfull / but these prowde doers he rewardeth plentuously.
               Be constant / and the lorde wil confirme and stablysshe youre hertys as many as truste in him.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 32. ¶Dauids admonicion.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶He techeth it to be a ioyouse thinge / to be eased quyt from the burden of synne / and contrarye wyse: a miserable thinge to haue an obstinat conscience clogged and depressed with synne / And at last he showeth by what wayes sinnes be forgeuen.
               
               
                  
                  OH how blessed is he that is eased of his transgression / whose sinne is kouered?
               Oh happye man / vnto whom the lorde rekeneth not his sinne: yn whose mynde there is nothinge desaitfully hyd.
               For I verely / whyle I held my tō
                  ge / my bones aked with my dayly out cryinge.
               For daye and night thy heuy hande pressed me downe / my succulent moister was turned into a sō
                  mer drought. So it wasSelah.
               But my sinne / after that I had cō
                  fessed it vnto the / and vnkouered before the / my wikednes:
               When I sayd / accusinge my self: I acknowlege & confesse my trāsgression vnto the lorde / euen anone

thou forgauest the cryme of my sinne. So thou didest.Sela.
               Wherfore whatsoeuer saynt he be / let him praye vnto the as sone as he feleth the same distresse / ād then shall not the inundacion of swellinge waters touche him.
               Thou art my refugye in my tribulacion closinge me aboute / & now thou closest me about with the ioye of delyueraunce. So thou doist.Selah.
               I shall enstructe the (saiste thou) and shewe the what waye thou muste go / I shal fasten myne eyes vpon the.
               Except ye wil be horse and mules clene with out vnderstandinge.
               Whose mouthes and headis vnlesse thei be with snaffle and brydle refrayned / thei wil not obaye the.
               
                  Let the vngodly loke for many plages: but who so trusteth in the lorde shall be closed aboute wythe mercye.
               Be glad in the Lorde and reioyse ye rightwyse / be io
                     •
                  unde and mery ye all that be off an vpryghte herte.
            
            
               
                  ¶The Argument. of the .33. Psal.
                  ¶It is a prayse wherin the almyghty power of god is praysed
               
               REioyse ye rightwyse in loauinge the lorde: for hys prayse becometh wel the iuste.
               Loaue ye therfore the lorde / synge vnto him with harpe / lute / ād ten stringed instrument.
               Synge vnto hym a newe songe / smyte vp your instruments with

a lowde melodye.
               For the worde of the Lorde is ryght holye / and al his workis ferme and fast.
               He loueth equite and right / the erthe is replenysshed withe the goodnes of the lorde.
               By the worde of the lorde heuens were made / and al their ornowerment at the brethe of his mouth.
               He gathereth vp the waters togither on heap: ād agene / he hydeth them in the botome of the sea.
               All the erth mought feare the lorde / al thinhabiters of the worlde mought worship him.
               For at his commaundement al thinges haue their beinge: as sone as he spake the worde / al thinges were done.
               The lorde scaterth the counsel of

the haithen: and the thoughtis of peple he frustrateth.
               But his counsel dureth for euer / the thoughtes of his herte contynwe through al generacions.
               Oh happy nacion which holdeth the lorde for their god / whome he hath chosen to him for his heretage.
               The lorde loketh forth from heauen to consyder al the children of men: euen from his suer seat royal he beholdeth al thinhabitours of the worlde.
               For he only hath made the hertis of them / it is he alone that knoweth al the dedis of them.
               It is not the puissaunce of an innumerable host that saueth a kinge / nether is the geaunt delyuered by his grete strength.
               
                  The horsman deceyueth thy salfgarde: noman is delyuerde by the multitude of horsmen.
               But beholde / they are the eyes of the lorde that be set vppon them which fere him reuerently / ād cleue vnto his mercy.
               That he wolde preserue their soules from pestelence / and nouressh them in famyn.
               Let our soule therfore cleue to the lorde / for it is he that is our shilde and defender
               In him therfore shal oure hertis reioyse / as longe as we truste yn his holy name.
               Let thy mercy (oh lorde) shyne vpon vs / euen as we truste vppon the.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psalme. 34.

¶The songe of Dauid concerninge the fayninge of his madnes / mutacion of his mouth / and witte / before Abimelech / of whom when he was castout he fled his waye .i. Reg. xxi.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶It is a thankis geuynge: in the which he testifieth that god neuer forsaketh his beloued.
               
               I Shal prayse the lorde at al tyme: his prayse shal be euer in my mouth.
               In the laude of the lorde my soule delyghteth her selfe / as the hō
                  ble oppressed here this / so maye they be glad.
               Magnifie ye the lorde wythe me / and let vs togither extoll his name.
               For I asked counsel of the Lorde and he answerde me / and he delyuerd

me out of al my fere.
               Whoso loke vp vnto him are made fresshe and bright / and their faces are not confounded.
               Whosoeuer in his adfliccion cal vpon the lorde / he is herde: and he delyuerthe hym oute off all distresse.
               Euen the angell of the Lorde pitcheth castels and lyeth rowndabout them that fere him / and delyuerth them.
               Taste and se how good is the lorde: blessed is he whosoeuer trusteth in him.
               Reuerence the Lorde ye that are his saynts: for they lacke nothinge that reuerently fere him.
               But the cruel shal want ād be famysshed: when the fearers of the Lorde shal want nothinge.
               
                  Come hither oh children ād geue eare vnto me: the feare of the lorde shal I teche you.
               Who so coueteth to lyue longe / & desierth also to haue good dayes. Let him refrayne his tōgue from euel / and his lippes lest they speke desayte.
               Let him estiwe yl / ād do good / studye for peace and folowe it.
               For the eyes of the lorde are intē
                  te vnto innocents / and his eares bente vnto their prayers
               But he loketh grymme vpon them: that do yll: to cut awaye their memorial out of the erthe.
               Those men / whē thei krye / the lorde hereth them / and delyuerth thē out of al their distresse.
               The lorde is present with the contrite herte: and preserueth the deiecte

mynde.
               Many incommodites fal vpō the iuste: but from them al / the Lorde delyuerth them.
               He kepeth al their bones: so that not one of them be broken.
               But ful miserable is the deth of the vngodly / for thei that hate the iuste shalbe plucked vp by the rote The lorde redemeth the soule off his seruaunt / nether are they banesshed who so truste in him.
            
            
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶Dauid maketh his inuocaciō to god in his greuouse oppression of his enymes: which persecute vs for our wel deseruinge of them.
               
               
                  LOrde take vpp my cause in my stryfe: and fight agenst them that fight agenst me. Take vp buckler and speare / and

stande vp to helpe me.
               Drawe forth thy swerde and runne vpō them that persue me / tel my soule. lo / I am here by the / euē I which am thy sauynge helthe. Let them be shamed and counfounded that prease vpon my soule let them turne their backes with shame that thinke me euyl.
               Make them lyke duste layd forth for the wynde / the angel of the lorde scateringe them.
               Let their wayes be derke and slyber: the angel of the Lorde persuynge them.
               For thei haue bent preuely theyr dedely nette for me an innocent / they haue digged vppe a pitte for me gyltles.
               Let their owne calamyte come vpō thēselfe vnwaris: let thē be taken

in their owne preuey nette: let them fall into theyr owne myscheyfe.
               But my soule mought reioyse yn the Lorde / and be glad of hys saluacion.
               Al my bones shal saye: lorde who is lyke vnto the? which delyuerst the weake deiected from his stronger / and the poore nedy on frome his robbers.
               Ther arose agēst me false witnesses / imputinge thingis to me which I neuer knewe.
               Thei requited me yll for good / leuinge me poorely al alone.
               But thei / when thei were ful syke then was my vesture a sacke: I macerated my self with faste / and my prayer rolled in my bosome.
               I went as one moorninge for his

felowe or brother / I hombled my selfe beinge sorye as one had buryed his owne mother.
               But contrarywyse / thei (when I was ful syke) made ful mery / thei ranne togither / ye euen the laame came runninge vpon me vnwaris thei kit their clothes nether omitted they any token off moorninge.
               But all was but ypocrisye / ye euen theyr cotes strewed wythe asshes: for in the mean ceason they grinned and gnasshed their tethe vpon me.
               Lorde when wilt thou loke vppon this? restore me frome the shameful rebukes of them / delyuer my dere soule from the tyrants.
               That I might geue the thankis in the most ful congregacion / and

                  
                     •
                  rayse the when the moste peple 
                     •
                  e present.
               Nether let these lyers my enimies triumphe ouer me: let thē wynke in vayne one vpon another wh
                  
                     •
                  ch thus deadly hate me
               For thei thinke nothing peceably but when the londe is in tranquilite / then take they fraudelent counsails.
               Thei spake agenst me with open mouth: saynge / o well well / nowe we se it with our eyes.
               And thou lorde also hast sene it / tarye not therfore / lorde go not farre fro me.
               Awake & ryse vp / that thou migh
                  
                     •
                  st auēge my cause / o lorde my god Auenge me for thy rightwisnes 
                     •
                  ake lorde my god / that they reioy
                  
                     •
                  e not vpon me.
               
                  Nether let them saye in their hertis it gothe on oure syde / let them not saye / we haue conuicted him. Let them be shamed and altogyther confounded that thus reioyse vppon my trouble / let them b
                     •
                   cled with shame & ignomynye that thus triumphe ouer me
               Let them be glad and reioyse tha
                     •
                   fauour my innocencye / so that they affirme at al tyme / grete is the lorde which loueth the helth and peace of his seruaunt.
               But my tongue mought be contynually spekinge off the forme off thy rightwyse makinge / and let this loaue ād prayse neuer go out of my mynde.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal 36. ¶The songe adhortatory of Dauid the seruaunt of the lorde.
               
                  
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶The naughty nature and arro
                     
                        •
                     ant boldnes of the vngodly is he 
                        •
                     e descrybed / yt ys here also as
                     
                        •
                     ed / that the godly mighte enioye 
                        •
                     he fruicion of the goodnes of god
               
               
                  THus thinketh my herte of the audacite of the vngodlye / that he hath not god before his eyes For albe it he flatereth god vtwar
                  
                     •
                  ly / yet he aborreth not execrable myscheyfe / declaringe his inwarde hatered.
               The wordis of his mouth are de
                  
                     •
                  ayte and mere myscheife / he refu
                  
                     •
                  eth to be taught to do wel.
               In his bed he studeth myscheif / he ioyneth him selfe to what so euer waye is not good / and that at euil ys he estiweth not.
               When thy goodnes oh Lorde recheth

vp vnto the heauens / and vnto the cloudes thy trewthe ys spred.
               Thy rightwisnes is lyke a mighty hill / & thy equite lyke the depe sea vnable to be mesured.
               When it is thou which preserueste both men and beastis Oh Lorde.
               Howe precyouse and riche is thy goodnes oh God? wherwithe the childern of men animated / are bolde to truste vnto the shadew of thi wynges.
               Thei are satisfyed with the plentuouse encrese of thy howse / and drinke of thy delyciouse swete flowde.
               For with the / is that lyuely perpetual sprynge / and in thy lyghte we se lighte.
               
                  Setforth thy goodnes vnto those that knowe the / and thy rightwisnes vnto the right herted.
               Let not the fote of pryde ouer take me: let not the hande of the vngodly moue me.
               But let them fal that worke myscheif / cast them downe that they neuer more ryse agene.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 37. ¶The songe of Dauid.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶It is an admonicion and warninge that we folowe not the synfull / allected and allwered of their fayned felicite / heal so paynteth the nature and the ende both of the godly and vngodly.
               
               
                  
                     Noli emulari.
                     Psal. 37.
                  
               
               
                  
                  FOlowe not the stepis of the euel: nether inuye th
                  
                     •
                  u the prosperite off yll doers.
               For sodenly lyke heye are thei kut downe / and lyke the green grasse be thei witherd.
               But thou / se thou truste in the lorde / and do good: that thou mayste dwell vpon the erthe and he maye wel fede the.
               And thou shalt delyte in the Lorde / which shal geue the thy hertis desyer.
               Layeforth thy waye before the lorde and truste vnto him / for he shal setforth thy good dedis like the morninge / and thy iuste dealinge lyke the middaye.
               Geue thy selfe hole vnto the lorde / and abyde his plesure / let not

his lyfe moue the whom all thingis prosperously succede: euen that man whyche lyueth all yn synne.
               Remitte wrath / swage anger / let not their euell ensample prouoke the to do yl.
               For euel doers shalbe cut awaye: but thei that paciently abyde the Lordis plesure shall possesse the londe.
               Suffer a lytle whyle / and the vngodly shalbe clene gone / when thou shalt loke for his place he shal not apere:
               But the meke spryted shal possesse the londe / and enioye myche peace.
               The vngodly layeth awayte for the iuste / and grinneth vpon him with his tethe.
               
                  But the lorde laugheth him to scorne: for he seith when his daye shal come.
               The vngodly drawe forth theyr swerde and bende theyr bowe to throdowne the poore afflicte / and to kyll them that go the right waye.
               But their owne swerde shal perse their owne herte: and their bowes shalbe broken.
               That litel of the rightwise is better / then the grete goodis of the vngodly.
               For the armes of the vngodly are consumed: but the iuste men / the lorde strengtheneth.
               The lorde also knoweth the daye of the innocentes / for their heretage is perpetual.
               Thei shalnot be shamed in the p
                     •
                  
                  rellouse

tyme / but in honger they shalbe sated.
               But the vngodly shal perisshe: & the enimyes of the Lorde shalbe consumed with fyer / their smoke fleynge vp lyke the smoke of fate brent wethers.
               The vngodly borowth and gathereth his goods by vsury neuer to repaye nor geue / but the iuste geueth forth lyberally.
               Who so approue this liberalite thei shal possesse the lāde / but they that abhorre it shalbe rent vpp by the rotes.
               Of the lorde are the stepis of a good man directed: ād he loueth his waye.
               When he fallith he shall not be hurte: for the lorde susteyneth him with his hande.
               
                  I was a chylde and now am I olde / and yet neuer sawe I the iuste forsaken / nor his sead seeke his breede.
               Althoughe he wolde be euer geuinge forth almose: and for this cause his sead enioyd his good prosperously.
               He fleeth yll and folowth good / and he dwelleth here many dayes For the Lorde loueth iuste dealinge / nether forsaketh he his sayntis but they ar kept for euer / but the sede of the vngodly shalbe cut awaye.
               But the iuste shal possede the lō
                  de / and shal dwell longe therupō Wysedom is euer in the mouthe of the iuste: & his tongue speketh equite.
               For the lawe of his god is in his

herte: wherfore his wayes ar ferme and faste.
               The vngodly loketh narowly of the iuste: and honteth to slaye hī. But the Lorde leueth him not in to his powr / nether wil not let hī dampne him when he iugeth hī. Truste in the Lorde and kepe his waye / & he shal exalt the to possede the lande / and that thou maist se the destruccion of the vngodly. I sawe on a tyme the vngodly rootinge and strongly setteling himself & rysing vp flourisshing lyke the grene baye tree / but lo / in the twinclinge of an eye he was gone / and when I loked for his place / it coud not be fownde.
               kepe innocencye / and beholde the right / for these thingis at laste shal procure a man peace
               
                  When the trangressours shalbe banesshed awaye togither: for the ende of the vngodly is dethe and destruccion.
               But the helthe of the iuste cometh from the lorde: for it is he that is their strengthe in the article of distresse.
               The Lorde bringethe them helpe and delyuerth them / he defendeth and saueth them from the vngodly / for because thei trust in him.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 38. ¶The songe of Dauid wheryn he remembreth his affliccion.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶It is a faithful enserchinge of hī selfe and confession of his cryme / his frēdis forsake him / his enimes stand agenst him. In the lorde ther
                     
                        •
                     ore

onely / helthe is layd vp.
               
               LOrde I beseche the reproue me not in thy furye / nether correcke me not in thy wrathe.
               For thy arowes are set fast in me 
                     •
                  hy hande is layde sore vpon me.
               Thy wrathe hath left nothinge hole in my flesshe / nothinge hole in my bones for my sinne.
               For my synnes are rysen ouer my head / beinge as it were a grete burden miche heuyer then I am able to beare.
               My secrete soris stynke and fester / for my nowne folysshnes.
               I am adflycte / and deyected so farre / that I am werye off my lyfe.
               My loyns are full off mysery
                     •
                  
                  
there is no helth in al my bodye▪ I am sore febled and broken / th
                     •
                   anguyssh of my herte breketh forth into lowd cryinge.
               Lorde thou knowest all my desie
                     •
                   and my waylinge is not hyd frome the.
               My herte panteth / my strength hath lefte me / and my eye sight goeth fro me.
               My frendis and neighbours stode agenst me when I was smiten and my very kinsfolke fled farre fro me.
               But they flew vpon me that layd awayt for my lyfe / and they that forged myscheyf for me / inuented and sought fraudes and gyle at al tyme.
               But I as a deffe man herde not: for I am as the domme that ope
                  
                     •
                  eth

not his mouth.
               I am as one that here not / & therfore cannot rebuke agene.
               For in the (oh lorde) do I truste / thou wilt not frustrate my hope / oh lorde my god.
               For this thinge do I aske / that they reioyse not vpon my hurte / nether make a gaude at the slidinge of my fete.
               For I am verely redye to the scourge / and my blewe strypes do I neuer forget.
               For I my selfe confesse my vngodlynes / and my sinne gēdreth sorow in me.
               But my enimes are salfe and strō
                  ge / and thei encrease which hate me wrongfully.
               Which also requite me euell for good / thei vexe me iniuriously because

I folowe that at good is.
               Forsake me not therfore lorde my god / go not farre fro me.
               Haste the to helpe me / Oh lorde / my sauinge helth.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal 39. ¶The songe of Dauid adhortatorye committed vnto Idithum
                     •
                   course.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A common prayer / wherin when he confesseth all men for their dayly sinnes worthy beatinges / he desierth god of his meecy.
               
               I Had decreed with my selfe so to kepe my wayes / that I wolde not offende in worde I kept my mouth with brydle / for the vngodly obserued me.
               I refrayned / I held my tongue / I was domme: ye and that for a good purpose / but yet it encresed ād

                  
                     •
                  asperated my sorowe.
               My herte brent withe in me / and 
                     •
                  hyle I thus reuolued wyth my 
                     ••
                  lfe / this fyer encresed more and 
                     •
                  ore.
               Thus therfore I begane to speke 
                     •
                  hewe me my ende oh lorde / and 
                     •
                  hat is the length of my dayes: 
                     ••
                  t me knowe I beseche the when 
                     •
                   shal make an ende.
               
                  
                     •
                  o thou haste brought my day
                  
                     •
                  s into an handful longe / and my 
                     •
                  ge is as nothynge before the: And suerlye all the state of man 
                     •
                  s not els but vanite. Nomore it is.Selah For mannys lyfe ys but a shadewe: he embusieth him self in vaine / he heapeth vnto him and knoweth not for whom he gatherethe yt.
               
                  Now therfore what thinge maye I lokefore oh lorde? My hope is fastined in the.
               Delyuer me therfore frō al my transgressions: ād make me not the reuylinge stocke of the vaynelyers.
               I shalbe stil and not once opē my mouth: if thou wilt do this thynge.
               Take awaye thy strypes fro me / for I am consumed of thy heuye hande.
               When thou rebukest and correckst man for his vngodlynes / then (be he neuer so grete) he is wasted awaye as it were of a motte so friuole and vayne a thinge is man. So he is.Sela.
               Lorde here my prayer / receyue my cryinge at thy eares / turne the not

                  
                     •
                  waye fro my teres: althoughe I 
                     •
                  e but a stranger withe the and a 
                     •
                  ilgryme as were al my fathers.
               Spare me yet a litle (some pardō obtayned) ere I go hence / and nomore be sene.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 40 ¶The songe adhortatorie of Dauyd.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A confession wherby god is praised / how he ought to be worshiped and onely called vpon in tribulacion with ferme hope.
               
               WHen I had longe taryed & waited vpon the lorde / at laste he attended vnto me and herde my kryinge.
               He drewe me forth of the depe pitte and toughe mudde / he did sette fast my fete vpon the rocke and directed my iourney.
               
                  Then he did put a new songe in to my mouthe / euen the songe off thankis geuinge vnto our god / that al men mought consyder / fere / and trust in the lorde.
               Oh happye man that putteth his confidence in the lorde / and turneth not himself vnto pryde / but turneth awaye from vanite.
               For thou / lorde my god doost meruels innumerable / and thy counsels are with vs peerlesse.
               When I wolde remember ād tell them forthe: thei ar innumerable And as for offrance and sacrifice thou loueste them not / but by my ears thou twitchest me: brēt sacrifice nor pourginge sacrifice thou requirest not: wherfore then I sayd: lo here am I comen my nowne selfe.
               
                  In the firste side of the boke it ys wryten of me / that I muste do that thinge that pleaseth the / oh my god: which thinge also I do it gladly / for thy lawe is writen in the middes of my breste.
               I preche the forme of thy rightwysmakinge before the hole congregacion / lo my lyppes ceasse not oh Lorde / as thou seest.
               Thy rightwysmakinge / euen frō the myddys of my herte do I declare / thy trouth and saluacion I do speke: I dissemble not thy goodnes and faith before al the hole chirche.
               Wherfore a lorde ceasse thou not to be merciful vnto me / let thi goodnes ād thy faith always defende me.
               
                  For troubles innumerable oue
                     •
                  
                  whelmed me / my sinnes so cōbre
                     •
                   me that I might not decerne the
                     •
                   for thei are moo then the hears of my head / wherfore euen my herte failed me.
               Haste the lorde to delyuer me: spede the to helpe me.
               Let them be sone shamed and confounded that seke my soule to destroye it / let them fall bake wythe shame that reioyse vpō my hurte. Let them at laste be destroyed after their confusion / whiche barke agenst me withe spight sayinge / Ohe / ohe.
               Let them reioyse ād be glad in the all that seke the / and who so loue thy sauinge helthe mought saye contynually: The Lorde be magnified.
               
                  
                  
                     •
                   am a pore afflicte abiecte / lorde 
                     •
                  elpe me / for thou art my delyue
                  
                     •
                  er / oh my god tarye not.
            
            
               
                  ¶The Argument. of this Psal. 41.
                  ¶Dauid now beynge in a sykenes whether it be of bodye or soule: pra
                     
                        •
                     eth the lorde to haue mercye vpō him / mouing hym to pyte the pore
               
               
                  BLessed is he that consydereth thestate of the pore: for in tyme of perell the Lorde shall delyuer him.
               The lorde shal kepe him and make him salfe and blessed vpon the erthe / nether shal he betake him into the handis of his enymes
               The Lorde shal restore him when he lye syke / oh lorde thou changest al his siknes.
               
                  For this cause I saye oh lorde haue mercy on me / heale my soule / for I am a sinner agenst the.
               My enimes speke euil vppon me / saynge when shal he dye? that his name maye perisshe.
               And whether he came in to se / or went forth: thus speketh his herte / heapynge myscheyfe vpon him selfe.
               Al my enimes come runninge togither agenst me / and thei take euyl counsail agenst me.
               An enmyouse worde is blowne abrode emonge them: saynge / there he lyeth neuermore to ryse.
               ye and euen my nowne famyliare whom aboue al I trusted / whiche eit my brede / layd awayte suerlye for me.
               Thou therfore lorde haue mercye

on me: and restore me that I maye requyte them.
               By this thinge shal I knowe that thou louest me / if my enemye runne not vpon me.
               For myne innocencye / I beseche the sustayne me / and set me before the for euer.
               Praysed be the Lorde god of Israel / frome age to age for euer. Amē Amen.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 42. ¶An admonicion or exhortacion of the children of Chore
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A complaint before god of the rebuke of his enymes / and of the trouble of mynde spronge therof: but yet faste and ferme hope counforteth her owne selfe.
               
               
                  AS the thirsty harte panteth and gapethe cryinge at the fresshe riuers / so cryeth my soule vnto the / oh god.
               My soule thirsteth for God / euen the lyuinge god / when shal I once come and apere before the face of god?
               My teris which I shed night and daye are turned into my mete / whyles dayly it is sayd to me / where is thy god?
               These thinges I reuolue withe my selfe / poweringe forth before me the heuinesses of my mynde.
               When shal I goforth freshly arayed to go with my felows ioyouslye with thankis into the house of the Lorde with so goodly a grete companye?
               How deiecte art thou o my soule / 

                  
                     •
                  nd wherfore doist thou thus tro
                  
                     •
                  ble me? truste in God / for the tyme shal cōe that I shal geue hym thākis in his presence for my helthe geuen me agene.
               My soule is deiecte & vexed within me oh God when I eft anone remember what thou didest in the londe by Iordane at the lytel hyll hermonim.
               One depe water calleth in another / thy water courses rored: thy grete showers and floudes ranne ouer me.
               Dayly the lorde encreseth his goodnes / wherfore I shal prayse the lyuinge god euery night.
               And I shal saye vnto god my rocke of stone: wherfor forgetest me? wherfore go I so heuely my enymes vexinge me? and brekynge

my bones?
               My enimes cast me in the teth dayly saynge vnto me / where is thy god?
               But oh my soule / thou art sone deiected: ād wherfore troublest me? truste in god / for the tyme shal come that I shal geue thankis agene vnto my God for helthe restored.
            
            
               ¶This Psalme folowinge is off the same Argument ād mater before.
               
                  GEue sentence with me / oh god / and defende my cause from the godlesse / from the fraudelent myscheuouse delyuer me.
               For thou (o god) art my strength wherfore repellest me? wherfore go I thus heuyly my enymes ve
                  
                     •
                  inge

me?
               
                  
                     •
                  endeforth thy light and trouth / 
                     •
                  et them lede me forth and set me 
                     •
                   thy holy hil thy dwelling place That I might go vnto the altare 
                     •
                  f god / euen god my ioye and glad
                  
                     •
                  es / and singe thankis vnto the 
                     •
                  ith harpe oh God my God.
               Oh my soule wherfore arte thou 
                     •
                  eiected / and wherfore makest me 
                     •
                  o heuey? truste in god / for the ty
                  
                     •
                  e shal come that I shal geue th
                  
                     •
                  nkis agene for my helth restored
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 44 is al one with the foresayd psal.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶He complayneth vnto god / askinge that accordinge vnto the couenāt made with the fathers / he wolde helpe vs for that we be adflicte ynoughe.
               
               
                  WIthe oure eares we haue herde / O god / our fathers puttinge vs in mynde off the workis (which while their selues lyued / thou wroughtst in tyme past.
               For thou with thy nowne hande (the gentils cast out) didest greife them yn: thou destroydst and didest cast out miche peple.
               For they gote not that londe wyth their swerde / nether dyd theyr owne arme saue them / but it was thy righthande / thy arme and the light of thy chere / for thy fauoure went with them.
               For thou art that kinge and oure god / whyche sendist thy sauinge helth vnto Iacob.
               Thou being our capitain / we blewe out our enimes as it were with

hornes: we acouraged with thi strength / trode them downe / as many as rose agenst vs.
               For our trust consisted not in our bowes / nether was it oure o
                     •
                  ne swerde that saued vs.
               But it was thou that sauedst vs from our enymes / and confoundedst our aduersaries.
               Let vs therfore continually prayse the our god / and euermore geue thankis vnto thy maiestye. So let vs do.Selah.
               But now thou forsakeste vs and castest vs their laughinge stoke agenst them to be reuyled / nether goist thou forthe with our armye Into flight thou turnest vs before our enymes / and our aduersaryes trede vs vnder their fete.
               Thou hast made vs lyke a flocke

of shepe alto torne and wiried / ād euen emonge the gentils thou scateredst vs.
               Thou soldeste thy people for nothinge / nether dideste thou steke styffely cōtendinge for their price Thou laydst vs forth to be a iestinge stoke vnto oure neighbours to be a laughinge and mockinge stoke to thē that dwelt aboute vs. Thou madist vs but a fable vnto the gentils / and in derision emonge the peple.
               Our ignominye is euer before oure eyes: and the shame of our face kouereth vs.
               For the noise of the rebuker and chyder / and enimes inuadinge vs All these thinges are comen vpon vs / netheles yet we forget the not nether breke we thy couenant.
               
                  Our herte turneth not backe / but thou declinedst our steapis from thy pathe.
               Thou beitist vs to pouder where dragons dennis were: and kouerdst vs withe a deadly shadewe
               Iff we had forgoten the name off oure God / and stretched forth our handis vnto any strange g
                     •
                  d:
               God might worthely haue enquered vpon this thinge / for it is he that knoweth the hid thoughtis of the herte.
               But for thy sake are we kylled d
                     •
                  
                  ylye / we be estemed as shepe apoynted vnto the bochers stalle.
               Aryse vp therfore / wherfore slepest thou so fast / oh Lorde? Awake and forsake vs not vtterly.
               Wherfore hideste thou thy face?

wherfore forgetest thou both our affliccion and oppression.
               For oure soule is depressed vnto the duste / our bellye steketh faste to the grounde.
               Aryse therfore and helpe vs / and delyuer vs for thy grete goodnes.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 45 ¶A louely songe adhortorye to be songe of the sonnes of Chore.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A prayse vnder the laude of the kinge and quene / that is to were of the very kinge cryste and his spouse the chirche.
               
               
                  LEt my herte powerforthe a pure oracion: that I might rendre my worke vnto the kynge.
               Thou my tongue / se that thou beist the penne of a prompte redyescribe.
               
                  Of al men thou arte the fayereste a grete grace fleethforth of thi lippes / ye and that because god hath blessed the for euer.
               Begyrde thy loynes with thy swerde / oh most mighty prince: stepe forth in thy honour / glorye / & magnificence.
               Ascende and be caryed vpp withe these thingis as it were in thi chariet: that is to wite / withe verite / faith / myldenes and iustice and aboue al / thy meruellouse right hā
                  de shal directe the.
               Thy sharpe arows mought perse the hertis of the kynges enymes: the grete multitude be throne downe of the.
               Thy seat royal / oh God / is perpetual the sceptre of thy kingdome is the sceptre of equite.
               
                  Thou louest rightwisnes and hatest iniurye / wherfore god thy god hath anoynted the with the ointement of gladnes aboue all thy felows.
               Thy clothes be redolēt with mirthe / muske / and aumber / so goodly thou comest forthe off thy yuerye palaces wherin thou lyueste so plesauntly: kyngis daughters also do dwel in these thy so goodlye places.
               The quene standeth at thy right hande / in the moste ryche & noble golden aparel.
               Vnto hir thus do I turne my oracion / heare o daughter beholde ād geue eare / forgete thy people & the house of thy father.
               For the kinge is taken withe thy incomparable bewtye / it is he that

is thy lorde and thou shalt fald
                     •
                  
                  wne before him.
               The daughters of Tyri / and the richest of the peple / shal bringe giftes before the as thy suppliaūts The goodly bewtye of the quene sheweth al within forthe / and all hir robis are clothes of tysswe broydred with golde ād made withe nedle werke.
               She is led vnto the kinge / & virgins of hir nyghe kynne come after hir vnto the / o kinge.
               Thei are brought with gladnes & grete ioye / thei ar brought into thi kinges palace.
               For thy parents lefte (o quene) thou shalt haue children whom thou shalt setforth to be prīces ouer al the worlde.
               I shal remēber thy name vnto all

thy posterite / that euen that populose nacion mought praise the foreuer and euer.
            
            
               ¶The title of this Psal. 46. ¶The songe adhortatorye of the childerne of Chore.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶The chirche compared by an allegory vnto a defensed cite / cānot be hurte: because the lorde is present with it.
               
               GOd is our refuge and strē
                  gth: he is founde also to be our helpe vnable to be expressed in tyme of tribulacion.
               Wherfore we fere not althoughe the erthe be moued / and hilles be tombled downe into the botome of the sea.
               ye if hir waters swel ād ryse agē
                  ste vs: if the proude mountaynes grinne vpon vs. Let them not spareSelah.
               
                  For it is the swete flowde withe hir ryuers that make glad the cyte of god which is the holy tabernacle of the most highest.
               God is in the myddis off hir / she shal not be hurte / for god wil sone helpe her in tyme.
               Let the sediciouse haithen swell / let the kingdome stere vp stryfe / and al the erthe crake & shake.
               yet is the lorde of powers with vs and oure refuge is the god off Iacob. so he isSelah.
               Come ād se the workis of the lorde / what desolacions he hath made vpon the erth.
               He hath banesshed batel vnto the farthest costis of the erth / he hath broke bowe / shafte and spere / and their chariets hath he brent in the fyer.
               
                  Attende therfore and knowledge that I am the highe God euen ouer the gentils am I aboue al throughe al the erthe.
               The lorde of powers is with vs / and our refuge is the God of Iacob. so he isSelah.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 47 ¶The songe adhortatory of the sō
                  nes of Chore.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A thankis geuinge for some victory / cōtaininge the figure of crist
               
               
                  CLappe your handis al peple / singe ye vnto god ioyously.
               For the lorde is highe / & meruelous / he is the grete kynge ouer al the erthe
               He hath suddewed the peple vnto

vs / and caste the gentyls vnder oure fete.
               He hath chosen our heretage / euen the beutye of Iacob whom he loueth. So he hathSelah.
               God is lyfted vp with grete tryumphe: the lorde is exalted withe the noyse of trompet.
               Singe ye to god singe / singe ye to our kinge / synge.
               For god is the kynge of the vniuersal erthe: singe ye withe wysedome.
               God is kinge ouer the gētils / god sitteth in his seat royal.
               The cheif rulers of the people ar gatherd togither before the God of Abraham:
               For he is miche more excellent & aboue the goddis which ar the defenders of the erthe.
            
            
               
               ¶The title of the Psal. 48. ¶The songe of praise of the sonnes of Chore.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶It is a praise of Ierusalem / which is a figure of the chirche and of euery faithful soule.
               
               
                  THe lorde be magnified and highly praysed / for the cite of oure god / his holy hill.
               The mount zion / in whose northsyde the cyte of the grete kinge is situate / is a beutyful ladye / and the flower of the hole londe.
               God is wel knowne in hir / by the defence of hir houses.
               For lo / when kinges ether came thither or passed forebye it:
               When they now beholde it / they be so astonyed / amased / and so wō
                  der

ther at:
               Thei be so afrayd ther at and sorowe as it were wemen in tyme of their trauele.
               They be in lyke fere / as thoughe a soden storme shulde blowe from the southe and alto breke the shippes of the sea.
               These thinges haue we herde ād sene in the cite of the lorde of powers / euen in the cite of oure God god mought preserue hir for euer. so he moughtSelah.
               We expresse thy goodnes oh god in the middis of thy temple.
               Eu
                     •
                  n as thy maiesty / so is thy prayse spred vnto the vttermost endes of the worlde: for thy righthā
                  de is ful of iustice.
               The mount zion mought be glad the daughters off Iuda moughte

reioyse for thy iugementes.
               Walke ye rounde aboute zion / vewe and tel hir towers.
               Consyder wel hir wallis / and buyld vp hir howses / that she maye be a memorial for them to come.
               For here is god / ye oure god for euer into euerlastinge: he wilbe oure goyde as longe as we lyue
            
            
               ¶The Title ¶The songe adhori
                     •
                  torye of the sonnes of Chore.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A contemninge of worldely thinges.
               
               
                  HEare this thinge al peple / geue eare al ye that inhabit the hole worlde.
               As wel the lowest and highest / as riche and pore.
               
                  My mouth shal speke wysdome / ād my herte shal expresse trwe intelligence.
               I shal diuerte vnto parables / and propowne my derke allegories in meter.
               Wherfore shulde I fere any myschaunce at any tyme / and so wrap my selfe in an heape of troubles? For as for them that truste in their goodis / and glorye in the multitude of their riches: none of them in any maner off wyse maye redeme his brother from deth nor bye his lyfe of god.
               No man may geue the price of his lyfe here to lyue euer / neuer to fele corrupcion: for this perpetuyte is denyed him.
               For ye maye se as wel the wise as the fole both alyke dye & perissh / 

and leue their riches to other.
               Although yet thei had decreed to haue dwelt euer in their owne closettis and howses / and to magnifie their names vpon the erthe / euer to endure in their posterite.
               When it maye not be geuen to man / that he shulde reste with his riches / but in this thinge he is lyke the beastis.
               Siche is the pathe of foles / & their posterite go in vnto the same. so they do. Selah.
               Whom redacte into their graue / deth lyeth fedinge vpon them / as the flok vpon their pasture.
               But the iuste shalbe in light / whē the tresure of these vngodly shalbe consumed / and hel shalbe their hospital.
               
                  
                     •
                  ut god shal redeme my soule frome

the power of hel / and counforte me. so he shal.Selah.
               Be not afrayd when thou seist a man made riche / and the glory of his house encresed.
               For at his deth he shal / of al nothinge receyue / nether his glory shal not folow him.
               But whyle he lyueth his soule is called happye / he is praysed whyle he is in prosperite.
               But when he shal passe awaye to his fathers kynnered / he shal neuermore se light.
               Man when he is in price and honour / he is without consideracion he is compared and lyke the brute beastis.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 50 ¶The songe of Asaph.
               
                  ¶ The Argument.
                  
                     ¶Here he threteneth / god to come and to rebuke our vnrightwisnes wherby we worship him contrary to his mynde / and those thinges wherin he wolde cheifly be worshyped / we leue vtterly vndone.
               
               THe lorde god so strōge (the erthe called vp frome the east vnto the weste and frō that goodly zion) shal speke / comī
                  ge in his maiestie.
               For our god shal come and not tarye / a deuoueringe fier shal go before him / and rownd about him a vehement whirlewinde.
               He shal cal to him heuen aboue / & the erthe beneth / to cōtende with his people in iugement.
               Sainge / be you gatherd togither before me my faithfull / ioyned to my couenaunt concerninge trwe sacrifices.
               Here the heuens shall preche his

rightwismakinge / for god him selfe wilbe iuge. so he wilSelah.
               Heare my peple / for I shal speke / o Israel be thou thi selfe witnes / whither I be not god: yea and that euen thy god.
               Did I euer rebuke the for thi sacrifices? or for thy dayly brent offeraunces to be offered before me?
               Did I aske ether bull of thy house or gote out of thy folde?
               For / myne are al the beastis of the wodes / and thousandis beasts vpon the mountains.
               The birdes of the hilles ar wel knowne to me: & of the foulis of the felde am not I ignorant.
               If I haue luste to ete / I nede not tel the / for al the worlde is myne & whatsoeuer is in it.
               Do I ete o ye flesh? or drīke I gotis

blode? Slaye thankis geuinge vnto the lorde: and paye thy promises vnto the most highe god
               And then cal vpon me in tyme off tribulacion / and I shall delyuer the: to thentent thou shuldst magnifie me.
               But contraryewyse / thus speketh god vnto the vngodly: wherfore prechest thou my lawe / and takest my couenaunt into thy mouth?
               When yet thou hatest my discipline / ād castest my wordes at thy tayle?
               When thou hast goten a thefe thou runnest with him: and laist in thy lotte with aduouterers.
               Thou openneste thy mouth vnto myscheif: and thy tongue painteth forth desaytes.
               Thou sittest and spekest agenste

thy nowne brother / and vexest vniustly thy mothers sonne.
               These thinges thou doist / and yet do I wynke therat / besyds al this as thoughe this were not ynoughe / thou thinkest me but lyke thi selfe: but I shall reason and conuynce the / and set my selfe in thy sight.
               Considere these thinges I praye you / wherby the rememberaunce of god is fallen awaye: lest when I plucke you awaye / there be none to delyuer you.
               Who so slayeth laude and thankis geuinge / he magnifieth me / & by this waye shal I shewe hym that sauinge helthe that comethe from god.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 51.

¶¶The songe adhortatory of Dauid / concerninge the cōmīge of the prophete Nathan vnto him after that he had had ado with Bathsaba .ij. Reg. xij.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶ A mynde knowleginge hir selfe gylty of aduoutry and murther / prayeth feruently that the lorde wolde restore hir / her former faith & confidence & tranquilite of mynde
               
               
                  HAue mercy vpon me oh god / accordinge vnto thy goodnes: for thy grete infinite mercyes do awaye my transgressions.
               Nowe & yet agene washe me frō my wikednes / and pourge me fro my sinne.
               For my transgressions do I knowlege / and my sinne neuer gothe out of my mynde.
               
                  Agenst the onely to haue so sinned it beruweth me and it repēteth me to haue had done this greuouse sinne in thy sight: wherfore iustifie me acordinge to thy promise and make me clene accordinge to thy equite.
               Beholde / with sorowe and payne was I borne: and with sinne my mother conceiued me.
               Bespreigne me with ysope and I shalbe clene: washe me / and so shal I be whyter than snowe:
               Shewe me ioye and gladnes / and my bones shal reioyse / which thou hast b
                     •
                  oken.
               Auerte thy face fro my sinnes / ād do awaye al my iniquites.
               Create a clene herte in me oh god and a stable spirit renewe with in me.
               
                  Cast me not out of thy sight: and thy holy spirit take not fro me Restore me the gladnes of thy sauinge helth: and sustayne me with thy fre benigne spirit.
               And I shal directe transgressors into thy waye: and sinners shalbe conuerted vnto the.
               Delyuer me from that blody synne oh god / oh god my sauiour / that my tōgue might magnify the forme of thy rightwysmakinge.
               Open my lippes / Oh Lorde / that my mouth mought sheweforthe thy prayse.
               For if thou louedst any slayne sacrifice / I wolde paye it vnto the: but brent sacrifices delyght not the.
               The sacrifice that god desierth / is a contrite spirit / a broken and hombled

herte / these thinges (oh god) thou despiseth not.
               Be thou good and merciful therfore vnto zion / that the wallis off Ierusalem mought be edified ād preserued.
               For thus wilt thou be pleased with the slayne sacrifices of rightwisnes / with offraunce and brent sacrifice / thus shal the very bullocks be put vpon thy autare.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 52. ¶An admonicion adhortatorye of Dauid as touchinge the trecharye of Doeg the Idumey tellynge Saule that Dauid was come into the house of Abimelech.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶He rebuketh proude temerariouse tongued and sheweth what vengeaunce abydeth them
               
               
                  WHerfore thus arrogantlye magnifiest thou thy selfe at al tymes / o myscheuous geaunt?
               Wherfore enforceth thy tongue myscheife forginge desayte like a newe sette raser?
               Wherfore louest thou malice rather then honestye / rather to lye then to saye the trouth? As thou doist.Selah. For thou delytest in al maner off perniciouse speche / oh fraudulent tongue.
               Wherfore / euen god shal vtterlye rende thevp by the rootis / and destroye the: he shal throo the downe alto broken oute of thy tabernacle / and plucke vppe thy rootis out off the lande off the lyuynge men. So he shal.Selah.
               Which thinge / the iuste seinge they

shalbe astonned / saynge thus with scorne vpon him.
               Lo this geaunt / whiche toke not god for his strengthe / but trusted in the multitude of his riches / cleuinge vnto his owne myscheif ād desayte.
               But I my selfe beinge off the familye of God flouresshinge lyke the grene olyue / shal truste in the goodnes of god for euer and euer I shal geue the perpetual thākis for thy goodnes done vnto me / I shal worship thi name / for because it is right accepte vnto thi faithful.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the psal. 53 ¶An admonicion adhortatorye of Dauid concerninge the heretage.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶It affirmeth al men to be vngodly and very sinners / & the vngodly

rather to fayne / then to haue the fere of god: and the saluacion of the godly to come of the lorde.
               
               
                  THe vayn lyers saye in their hertes / that god is not god: for thei are corrupt with sinne and are become abominable / there is none that wil do good.
               God lokedforth off heuen vppon the children of Adam / to se whither any man fauoured and sought god.
               And here euery man was gone from him / they were altogither corrupte / none dyd good / no not won. Is it not manifest that thei cōmitte sinne? that thei deuoure my peple lyke meate? and that they call not vpon god?
               That they fere thinges not to be

fered? but god shal shake the bones in sondre of them that fighte agenst the (oh Christ)
               Thou shalt confounde them / for god aborreth them.
               Oh / wolde God that the sauinge helth were once sent from zion vnto Israel? that when God restore the captiuite of his peple / Iacob mighte be glad and Israhel reioyse.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 54. ¶ The admonicion adhortatorye of Dauid / sunge at the orgains / when the zepheis went and tolde Saule that Dauid was hyde and laye preuely amonge them .i. Reg. xxiij. and .xxvi.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶ An inuocacion of one beinge in grete distresse / and aknowleginge of goddis benefits.
               
               
                  GOd / for thy namis sake saue me / & delyuer me by thy power.
               Oh God here my prayer / geue eare vnto the wordis off my mouthe.
               For strange enimes are risen agē
                  ste me: and cruell tyraunts hauinge no respecte vnto God / seke my lyfe. so they do.Selah.
               But lo / God bringeth me helpe / the lorde sustaineth my soule.
               He shal requite euil vnto my enymes / and for his trow this sake destroye them.
               Lyberally therfore shal I sacrifye vnto the: and shall prayse thy name oh lorde / for it is good.
               For he hath delyuered me out off al tribulacion / so that nowe myne eye se hyr plesure vppon myne

enymes.
            
            
               ¶he Title of the Psal. 55. ¶ The admonicion adhortatorye of Dauid / sunge at the orgayns.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A feruent prayer / whiles our frē
                     dis aliened from vs / ar become more cruel and woder agenst vs / the
                        •
                      our enimes.
               
               
                  OH god here my prayer and turne not awaye my desier.
               Attende vnto me and here me beginninge and kryinge with grete noyse.
               For the yellinge out of my enymes / for the fierce incursion off the vngodly: obiectinge grete crymes agenst me which nowe in a furye are bent to runne vpon me:
               My herre fainteth in me / and deadly feare is easte vpon me.
               
                  Feare and tremblinge are fallen into me / ād horrible drede ouerwhelmed me.
               And I thoughte withe my selfe / wolde god I had dowues wings that I mighte fle awaye to haue reste.
               Lo / then wolde I fle ful farre hence / and diuerte into the wildernes so I woldeSelah.
               I wolde spede me to escape more swiftly then any grete soden whirlewynde.
               Skater them lorde ād dyuyde their tongues: for I sawe the cyte full of iniurye and sedicion.
               Which myscheif / daye and night walked aboute the wallis of it / ād in the middes therof was there miserable affliccion and heuye heapis of miserye.
               
                  In the middis therof wiked fraude: vsury ād desayte go neuer ou
                     •
                   of hir streatis.
               But and if it had bene myne enemye that thus reuyled and vexed me / I coud haue borne it: ād if my haters had thus oppressed me / I coude haue had auoyded them.
               But it was thou oh my nowne felowe / my companion / my familiare / so wel knowne: vnto whome I committed so louingly my secretis / with whom gladly I went in to the house of god.
               Fle thou vpon them oh deth / and let them go quicke into their graues / for malice raigneth in theyr hous
                     •
                  s / ād myscheife dwelleth secretly in their hertis.
               But I cryed vnto god / and the lorde saued me.
               
                  〈2 pages missing〉
               
            
            
               
               HAue mercy vpō me / o god / for there is one that tredeth me doune and with cō
                  tinuall warre vexeth me.
               My daylye enymes trede me vnder their fete / for there are many that proudly fight agenste me.
               But yet when so euer any feare assayleth me / then in the (o lorde) do I truste.
               In the promyse of god do I glory in god do I truste: nether do I fere what man can do to me.
               Thei maligne and vexe me in all that I do or saye / thei take al their counsails to myscheue me.
               They dissemble & kepe themselfe closse / they obserue my stepis and waite howe they myght take my soule.
               But yet al in vayne / for it shal escape

from them: for it is thou Oh god which in thi wrath castest downe the multitude of the peple.
               Thou tellest my flightis / and my teres thou puttest vp into thy botell / are they not al in thy rekeninge boke?
               What daye so euer I call vppon the / anon my enymes turne theyr backes / wherby I am certified verely that thou art my god.
               In goddis worde do I glorye / yn the promyse of the Lorde do I reioyse.
               In God is my truste / I fere not what so euer man can do to me.
               Vnto the (oh god) shal I hole committe my selfe / vnto the shal I geue thankis.
               For it is thou that haste delyuerd my soule from deth: ye and my fete

frome slydinge / that I might walke before god in the light off the lyuinge.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the psal. 57 ¶The songe adhortatory of Dauid Called / Destroye me not / & called also the delicate. When he fled from Saule into the Denne .i. regum .xxij. and .xxiiij.
               
                  ¶ The Argument.
                  ¶A thankis geuinge for the meruelous delyueraunce from his so grete perels.
               
               HAue mercy vpon me (oh god) haue mercy vppon me / for in the do my soule truste and vnder the shadew of thy wynges is my confidence vntill this malice be passed ouer.
               I crye vnto the hyghe God / euen God which finesheth all that he

hath begunne in me.
               He shal sende from heuen and delyuer me: he shal cast him into shame and obprobrye that ceasseth not to trede me vnder his fete / he shal sende me helpe I saye for his goodnes and trouthes sake.
               He wyll delyuer my soule lyinge in the middes of these wode lions that is to saye emonge the sonnes of Adam / whose tethe are speres & dartes / but their tongue is a sharpe swerde.
               Be thou exalted o god aboue the heuens / and liftvp thy glorye and maiestie aboue al the erthe.
               For they haue prepared a net for my fete to take my soule / they haue digged vppe a pitte before me

into the which / their selues shall fall. So they shal.Selah.
               My herte is redy oh god / my herte is redye to singe and prayse the Awake my soule awake with harpe and Lute / and I my selfe shall awake right erlye.
               That I might magnifie the Oh lorde emonge the peple / and prayse the amonge the gentils.
               For thi grete goodnes recheth vp vnto the skye / ād thy faithfulnes vnto the cloudes:
               Be thou exalted o God aboue the skye and lyfte vpp thy gloriouse maiesty aboue al the erthe.
            
            
               ¶The title of the Psal. 58. ¶The songe of Dauid adhortatorye called Destroye me not.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶The audacite of the vngodly euen

from their mothers wombe is described / and what ende abidethe them.
               
               IF ye thinke trwly vpon iustice: iuge then that at right is / ye sonnes of Adam.
               But ye rather conceiue synne and myscheif in your hertis / youre hā
                  des be stretched forth vnto robery and rauine vpon the erthe.
               The vngodly are naught euen from their mothers wombe / thei erre anone as they be borne / speking lyes.
               They boyle in them selue as hotte in venome as edders / they stoppe their eares lyke the wylye deffe serpent called aspis.
               Which wilnot here the voice off the charmere / charme he neuer so wyselye.
               
                  Oh god alto breke their tethes in their mouthes / breke them in peses / euen the very wange tethe of these lyons whelpis oh Lorde
               Make them melte and so sinke awaye lyke water: when thei bende to shote their arowes / breke them in pesis with their owne shaftis. Drye them vppe lyke snailis / and consume them lyke the childe borne before the tyme ere it euer see sonne.
               Plucke them vp lyke an hawthorne / before their thornes be sharpe / let a soden whirlewinde with grete violence take them awaye quycke.
               So that then the rightwise maye wel reioyse / when he see this vengeaunce / and bathe his fete in the blode of the vngodly.
               
                  For euen then shal it be sayd / verely / the rewarde abydeth the rightwyse: douteles it is God that yet delyuerethe vs vppon the erthe.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal 59. ¶ The songe of Dauid called neperdas / When Saul had closed his howse aboute / to haueslayne him.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A thankis geuinge and a prayer desyeringe sich shamelesse sinners so beseginge him / vtterly to be destroyde.
               
               
                  DElyuer me frome my enymes my god: & defende me frome my rysers agenste me.
               Delyuer me frome these doers off myscheif: and saue me frome these blodye men.
               For lo / thei laye awayte for my lyfe

/ horribly they runne vppon me giltlesse / oh lorde.
               Thei are bente and comen vppon me fautlesse: aryse and beholde / & helpe me.
               But thou therfore oh lorde god of powers the god of Israel / aryse & punysshe all these haithen: pitye not al these wiked transgressours No do notSelah.
               Let them runne wanderinge about the cyte vntil euentyde howlinge lyke houndes.
               Lo they laye agenste me with their mouthes / swerdis are in theyr lippes / thinkinge that none shall punesshe them.
               But thou lorde skornest them / ād despysest al these haithen.
               Frome the / do I acknowlege my strength to haue come to me: for

thou (oh god) art my castel.
               Oh God / it is thy goodnes that preuenteth me / it is god that techeth me how to handle my enimes Slaye them not (saith he) lest my peple be made negligent: but skater them awaye by thy nowne power and caste them downe / oh lorde our shilde.
               For the sinne of their owne mouthe / for the speche off their owne lippes / and their owne pryde.
               Let them be trapped and takē: for their periurye and lyes / let eche of them al be fables in mennis mouthes.
               Consume them in thy wrath consume them that thei nowhere apere / that men maye se vnto the vttermost coostis off the erthe that it is the lorde that raigneth ouer

Iacob. So it is. Selah.
               Let them wander and runne aboute the cite vntil night / howlinge like houndes.
               Euen so let these men be skatered abrode to seke their meate / but let them slepe with emptye belles
               But I shall prayse thy strengthe geuen me / and erely preche thy mercye / for thou haste bene my defender and my refuge in tyme off my distresse.
               Vnto the (oh my strength) shal I singe / for thou (oh God) thou arte my protectour / my God / my tresure.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 60 ¶The songe of Dauid adhortatory / called the beutyfull lyfe of the congregacion / for an enstruccion when he shulde go forth to figh
                     •
                  e agenste the Syrions of M
                     •
                  sopors

mye and agenste the Syrions of 30 be Ioas / whence he returninge slewe in the vale of Salis aboue .xij thousande of the Idumeys .ij. Regum .viij. and .x. and .j. Paralipo .xviij.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶After the Phylistēs had sore assawred him / he praid the lorde for his promises sake to restore & make perfit his kingdome.
               
               OH god thou hadst repelled and broken vs: thou disdaynest and thrustest vs frome the.
               Thou hast smiten togither & broken our lande / heale her breaches for she reeleth lyke to fal.
               Thou shewdst thy peple sore and heuy chaunces / thou gauest vs a cuppe off wyne full off feare and drede.
               
                  But geue a token (I praye the) to them that fere the / that thei maye take herte agayne at the cominge of thy rightwisnes and equite. So they maye Selah.
               That thy welbeloued mighte be delyuered: heare and saue vs with thy right hande.
               God hath promysed it in his holy temple / which promise maketh me glad: I shal diuyde Sichem / & meat out the vale of Suchoth Galaad is myne / and Manasses is myne / Ephraim is the strēgth of my head / Iuda is my leader.
               Moab is my goodly potte / vnto Idumea shal I stretche forth my shoes / the Philistens shal come to me with ioye.
               Who directed me vnto the defensed cyte? Who led me vnto Idumeam?
               
                  Was it not thou (oh god) whiche hadst once forsaken vs / and didst not goforth with our hooste?
               Whiche helpest vs in oure nede / for vayne is mannis helpe.
               But by the power of god we shal do grete thingis right wel: for it is he that tredeth downe our enymes.
            
            
               ¶The title of this Psal. 61. ¶The songe of Dauid adhortatorye.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A prayer spokē out of the wel of faith / and thankes geuinge for cry
                     
                        ••
                     e promys
                        •
                     d.
               
               
                  OH God here my cryinge / attende vnto my prayer.
               I beinge in grete anxt of mynde krye vnto the from the farthest coostis of the erthe: leade

me vp into an higher rocke then I my selfe am able to clyme.
               For thou art my hope / my stronge tower to defende me frome my enymes.
               Let me dwell in thi tabernacle for euer / let me be suer vnder the koueringe of thy wynges. So let meSelah. For thou god herest my desyers / & thy heretage thou geuest to the fearers of thy name.
               Thou shalt adde mo dayes vnto the kinges age / that his yeris maye endure throughe euery generacion.
               That he maye dwell perpetually before god / thi goodnes and faithfulnes mought preserue him
               And thus shal I prayse thi name for euer / that I might daylye performe my promyses.
            
            
               
               ¶The Title of the psal. 62. ¶The songe adhortatory of Dauid.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A soden prayer which procedeth out of a pure faith.
               
               
                  ANd yet shal my soule obserue and wait vpon god alone / for of him depēdeth my saluacion.
               And yet is he onely my stonney rocke / and sauinge helthe / he is my proppe that I shall not gretly reele.
               How longe laye ye awayte for whom ye liste all you togither / and slaye downe right / as a relynge wall or roten hedge is caste downe?
               your counsel is onely of his state and to caste him downe / ye delyte

in lyes / ye praise with your mouthe and curse with youre herte. So ye do.Selah.
               But yet shal my soule obserue ād waite vpon god onely / for of him dependeth my abydinge.
               And yet is he onely my rocke and my saluacion / he is my proppe that I slyde not.
               Vnto god cleuethe my saluacion & al that I haue / my trwe glorye / my strength ād my hope is in god Truste in him ye peple at al tymes / power forth your hertis before him / it is god which is oure hope euerlastinge.
               But yet ful vayne are the childerne of Adam: thei be so vayne liers that if thou layest them in a payer of bylaunces agēst vanite / yet wil vanite waye thē al donne togither

Put not your truste in iniury & robery / geue not your selues to vanite / riches if thei flowe vnto you / set not your herte vpon them
               Once did god speke a certayn thinge which I herde more then once or twyse / that is to weit / that al power is of the Lorde almyghtye.
               And that thou lorde arte all good and mercyful / and that thou lorde geuest vnto euery man after his deadis.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 63. ¶ The songe of Dauid when he was in the deserte of Iuda .i. Regum .xxij.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶He geueth thankis vnto god / for that he neuer forsaketh him.
               
               
                  
                  OH God thou arte my god / vnto the do I haste my selfe / so feruently doth bothe my soule and bodye thyrste for the.
               In this drye deserte for lak of water do I apere before the nonotherwyse then if I were in thy holye temple to beholde thy strength & glorye.
               For thy goodnes is miche better to me then this lyfe / ād my lippes praise the.
               Wherfore al dayes of my lyfe do I magnifie the: and in thy name lyfte I vp my handis.
               My soule is satisfied as it were with fate delicates / when my mouth with glad lippes prayse the. Euen in my bedde do I thinke vpon the / and in the watchis of the

night I remember the.
               For it is thou that helpest me / ād in the shadewe of thy wynges do I reioyse.
               My soule cleueth faste vnto the / thy righthonde sustayneth me
               In vayne therfore do these men seke my soule: for vnder the erthe sone shal thei go hence.
               Thei shall goo their wayes vnto that parte where the swerde destroyth / foxes shal deuoure them.
               But the kinge shal reioyse in god thei shalbe glad all that swere by him / but the mouthe off men spekinge lyes shalbe stopped.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 64 ¶The songe of Dauid adhortatorye.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  
                     ¶He prayeth that the lorde wolde delyuer him from the snaris of his enymes / and he threteneth thē their owne myscheif.
               
               OH god here my voyce whē I nowe praye: that thou woldst delyuer my lyfe frō the feare of my enymes.
               Defende me from the preuye enginnes of the maliciouse / and frō the wodnes off them that worke myscheif.
               Which whette their tongues lyke a swerde / and bende their bowes to shote forthe theyr dedly arowes.
               Preuely to smyte the innocent ād sodenly to tache him / for they are without al fere.
               Thei haue decreed a myscheife amonge themselues / thei haue counselled

togither of snares preuely to be bente / saynge: who shal se them?
               They seke vngracious counsails they be al geuen to inuent myscheif euery man in his owne bosome and breste.
               But god shal smyte them vnwaris with his arowe / where withe they shalbe plaged.
               Then shal their owne tōgues so wounde them selues / that who so see them shal tremble.
               Then shal euery man vnderstande and sheweforth the worke off god / and saye it was wysely done. The iuste shal in the mean ceasō be glad in the lorde / and truste in him / and al men shal reioyse which are right in herte.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the psal. 65.

¶The songe adhortatorye of Dauid with thankis geuinge.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶He besecheth god of his mercye for his almighty prouidence & power / which he here precheth / praynge to remit his sinnes.
               
               
                  VNto the (oh god) prayse is geuen in zion / vnto the / men paye their promyses.
               Thou herest prayer / vnto the therfore cometh euery man.
               Our heuye iniquites shulde ouercome vs / onlesse thou lorde gauest vs forgeuenes of our trāsgressiōs Oh howe blessed is he whō thou hast chosen and ioyned to the to dwel in thy courte / that he mought be satisfied with the goodis of thi house which is thi holy tēple. For thi meruelous mercy here vs

(oh god) our sauinge helth / the hope of al the coostis both of the erthe and wyde see.
               Which girte with strength settethe fast the hilles in their myght He swageth the wodenes off the sea / the roringe waters and swellinge of the peple he peaseth.
               Thei that dwel in the vttermoste coostis of the erthe / are afrayd at thy tokens.
               The frutes that comeforthe ether eueninge or morninge / thou makest them flowresshe into thy prayse Thou visitest the erthe / thou watereste it and enrycheste it aboundantly.
               Thi riuers (oh god) flowe forth with plentuouse waters / wherwith thou preparest foode for men / for euen thus the erth is prepared

Thou waterest hir vorows / thou brekest hir stourdye clottis / thou makest hir softe with subtyle and small showers / and encreasest her oute springe.
               Thou crowneste the erthe wythe thy benygne liberalite / and the whelis off the carte drope fatnes.
               They drope fatnes also euen the goodly plentuouse pastures / and the hill toppis ar girte with gladnes.
               The flockis of shepe are couered with grasse / and the vales laden with wheate / laughe and synge.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the psal. 66. ¶The songe adhortatory of Dauid with thankisgeuinge.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A general thankisgeuinge of all

Israel / which they vsed in their solempne festis / when as yet thei offered but carnall offeraunces and vowes.
               
               
                  SInge withe prayse vnto god al ye inhabitours of the erthe / loaue ye the hyghe maiestye of his holy name / geue glorye and prayse vnto him.
               Saye vnto god / oh howe wonderful are thy workis / thy almighty power frustrateth thenforcemēts of thyne enymes.
               Al the erthe mought faldowne before the and singe vnto the / ād prayse thi name. So it moughtSelah.
               Come and beholde the workis of god / and his meruelous counsels aboue the childerne of men.
               Which turned the seas into drye

londe / so that thei passed thorowe the flowde on fote / and then we reioysed in him.
               Whiche by his power raignethe from euerlastinge / his eyes beholde the gentils / who so forsake him shall not exalte them selues. No they shal notSelah.
               Loaue oure God O ye peple / and putforth a lowd / the voyce off his prayse.
               Which endeweth vs with lyfe / & suffreth not our fete once to slyde Although yet thou prouest vs (oh God) to trye vs euen as syluer is tryed: Bringinge vs into the stockis ād gyrdynge oure loynes wyth chaynes.
               Thou layest sore men vppon our headis as burdens vpon beastis / 

we go thorowe fyer and water / but thou ledest vs oute into grete refresshinge.
               I am come therfore vnto thy house with brente sacrifices to paye vnto the my vowes which I promysed with my lippes ād expressed with my mouth when I was in distresse and anxte.
               I offere vnto the / fatte brente sacrifices withe the swete reeke off wethers / I slaye for the both oxē and gotes. So I do.Selah.
               Come hither and heare al ye that fere the lorde / whyle I shewe you what thinges he hath done vnto my soule.
               Vnto hī am I wonte to crye with my mouthe / and with my tongue in it / I extol him.
               If I fele my selfe gyltye vnfaithfulnes:

the lorde hereth me not.
               But now verely God hath herde me / and lu
                     •
                  steneth vnto the voyce of my prayer.
               Thankis be to god which nether repelleth my prayer / nor yet his mercye from me.
            
            
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶ In this Psalme we praye that the lorde wolde voichesalfe to manifeste him selfe vnto all nacions: for so then shulde al men knowe hī and beleue in him
               
               GOd haue mercye vppon vs and be graciouse vnto vs: he moughte shewe his presens vnto vs. So he mought.Selah.
               That thy waye mought be knowne throughe the worlde / and thy sauinge helthe throughe all nacions.
               
                  That the populose multitude might praise the (oh god) that al peple might loaue the.
               That the peple might be glad ād reioyse / because that thou ruleste them with equite and gouerneste the nacions throughe the worlde. That the peple might prayse the (Oh God) that all peple might prayse the.
               God which is oure god be benigne and liberal vnto vs / that the erthe mought geue forth her yerely frutes with encrease.
               God be benigne and graciouse vnto vs / that al the coostis of the erthe mought feare him.
            
            
               ¶The Title ¶The songe adhortatory of Dauid with thankisgeuinge.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  
                     ¶The reioysinge of his faith / which ascribeth al / and herselfe to / vnto god / he singeth the noble actis os god / and threteneth the gentils at last to yilde them selfe vnto god / which was sene when Criste was preched throughe the worlde
               
               AWaye / and let god aryse / lo nowe shall his enymes be dispersed / and his haters fle out of his sight.
               Thei shalbe dispersed lyke smoke / for as waxe melteth awaye at the fyer / euen so perisshe the vngodlye at his presence
               But the iuste shalbe glad and reioyse at the cominge of God / they shal springe and leape / for ioye.
               They shal singe vnto god and to his name / they shal stande of eche side of his waye / whiche is caryed vnto vs as the sōne vnto the west

Whose name is The LordeIehouah. reioyse ye before him.
               For he wilbe father to the fatherlesse / delyuerer off the pore wedewes / euen god which inhabitethe his owne holy place.
               Euen god which both setteth mē of one mynde in his house / ād the bounde in preson he happely ledeth forth / whiles in the meane ceason the false vnbeleuers ar holdē with pouerty & nede of al thinges Oh god / when thou wentst forthe before thy peple / when thou wentst with them in the wildernes. As thou didst in dedeSelah.
               The erth was shakē togither / the heuēs did sweat at thi presence (o god) which apperedst in Sinai / euē at thi presens (oh god) whiche arte the god of Israel.
               
                  Euen god which of thy liberalite sendest showers vnto thy heretage / and when it is syke and pore thou restorest and refresshest it agene.
               And efte sone thi droues and heerdes of beastis graaze in it / which thinge (oh God) thou procureste vnto the poore / off thy nowne goodnes.
               Lorde it is thou whiche committest it vnto those wemen to shewe thy commaundement frome the grete hooste.
               That kinges withe their hoostis be fledde and slipt awaye / and the pore homely deuyded the spoyle. Then shal ye reste lyke the ryuer betwene the bākes / as it were betwixt the wy
                     •
                  ges of the doue whyter then siluer / whose yel
                     •
                  w backe

shyneth aboue any golde / which doue hangeth in the ayer.
               Whyles the almyghty god / which ruleth and commaundeth euē the kinges / had so ordyned the erthe that the mounte zalmon shulde flowe withe mylke as wythe snowe.
               And that Basan shulde be the hil of God / ye Basan shulde be that hil which shulde be pale for the aboundaunce of cheese.
               ye hilles / wherfore inuye you this hil so bountiful with cheese? whē God loueth to dwell yn this hill? for the Lorde wyll dwell in it for euer.
               Thy chariets (oh god) ar thousande thousands / accompanyed with infinite angels / wherein thou lorde art caryed vnto Sinai / and backe

agene vnto thy holy temple.
               Thou ascendest on highe / the captiuite captiued / giftis receyued emonge men: ye thou receiuedst thi very enimes that thei mought dwel with the lorde god.
               Thankis be vnto the Lorde God throughe euery age / whiche hath laden vs with his holsome benefits. so he hath.Selah.
               Euen vnto god which is vnto vs a sauiour: ye vnto the Lorde God by whom we escape the deth.
               Euen vnto God which on the tother syde smyteth his enemys: he smyteth of the crowne of the hearye obstinat head off the forlorne man perseueringe in his myscheife.
               For the lorde sayd / I shal restore my beloued from Bassan / I shall

restore him from the depe sea
               So that thy fote and the tōgue of thy houndis shalbe dipped in the blode of thy enimes.
               Al men shal beholde the pōpe off thy triumphe (oh God) the goynge of my god and my kinge which arte in the secrete holy place
               Singers shal comeforth agenste the with musyk instruments / and with maydens playnge vpon their virginals.
               ye and euen the hole congregacion shal praise god / thei shal loaue the euen at the wellis o lorde of israel Here shal litel Beniamin go before the princes of Iuda / as zabulō and Nephtalim & shal iuge them Thus hath thy God stablesshed thy strength: Cōfirme (o god) that thīge which thou hast done for vs

vpon thy temple and vpon Ierusalem.
               Vnto the / euen kynges shal brynge gyftes.
               Thou shalt dryue beastes wythe a reede / the droues and herdis with their calues / that is to saye the gentils kickinge agenst the / and gouen vnto riches / thou shalt skater the peple whyche delyte in batayle.
               There shall come ambassiadours frome Egypte / a meruelous grete power off india shall runne vnto God.
               The kyngdomes of the erthe shal singe vnto god / thei shall singe vnto the Lorde. So they shall.Selah.
               Which sitteth rydinge frome the beginninge vpon the heuens / and putteth forth his voice / ye and that

a myghty voyce.
               Attribute power and strength vnto the god of Israel / whose magnificence and might recheth vnto the clowdes.
               God is to be dreaded from his secrete sanctuary / euen the God off Israel which geueth vnto his peple power and strength. Glorye be vnto god.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the psal. 69. ¶ The songe of Dauid adhortatorye called Liles / Roses / or Violets.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A prayer of one in grete and longe distresse which is the figure of the sufferaunce of Cryste & of his membres.
               
               
                  
                  SAue me god / for waters are entred and pearse me vnto my soule.
               I steke in the depe claye where is no botome I am come in to the depe sea / and the violent streme ouerwhelmeth me.
               I am wery of cryinge / my throte is hoorse / my eyes are wasted with lokinge vp vnto my god.
               They that hate me are farre mo then the heares of my head.
               My enymes wex stronge and oppresse me with out a cause / ye falsely thei persecute me: and those thinges which I neuer toke / now am I constrayned to repaye.
               God / thou knoweste my simplicite / and my fawtes are not hid frome the.
               Let them not (I beseche the) be

shamed for my sake which truste in the (oh lorde god of powers) let them not (I praye the) be confounded throughe me / whiche seke the (oh god of Israel.
               For / for thy sake I am bothe reuyled / and shame couereth my face. I am become a stranger vnto my nowne bretherne / and a waye farer to my mothers childerne.
               For / the zele that I bere to thi house hath procured me sorowe / the spightful rebukes of men reuylinge the / fyl vpon me.
               I wept and febled my selfe withe faste: but al was turned into my shame and obprobrye.
               I did vpō me sacke / but for so doinge they iested vpon me.
               They made me theyr laughynge

stok that sate in the gate / and the dronkerds in tauerns made songes vpon me.
               But here in good tyme I offer my prayer vnto the (oh lorde god) helpe me for thy infinite mercy / with thy present and assuered saluaciō Take me vppe oute off this toughe claye / and let me no lenger steke in it / delyuer me frome my haters and frome the depth off this sea.
               Let not / I beseche the / these swellinge waters ouerwhelme me / nor this whirlepitte swelowe me in / and shut vp her mouth ouer me.
               Here me (oh Lorde) for thy swete goodnes / for thi infinite mercy loke vpon me.
               And turne not thy face frome thy seruaunt / for I am in distresse / haste

the to helpe me.
               Drawe nighe to redeme me / delyuer me / for because my enymes blaspheme the.
               Thou knowest my obprobrye / rebukes / shame / and ignomynye / all my enymes are in thy sight.
               My herte is broken ād ouercome with obprobryes and rebukes / I loke for some to pitie me / but there is non: I waited for some counforters / but I finde non.
               Thei did put gall into my meate and when I thirsted thei gaue me to drinke vinaiger.
               Let their owne table before them be turned into their owne snare / requyte them withe lyke meate and drinke into their owne fal.
               Let their eyes be derkened that they se not / and their loynes weake

continually to slyde.
               Power forth vpon them thy indignacion / and let the furye off thy wrath take them.
               Let their houses be desolate / and in theyr tabernacles no man to dwell.
               For whom thou hadst smiten they yet persecuted: and wounded him whō thou hadst plaged.
               Laye vppon heapis off myscheife for them selues / and let them neuer be partakers of thy rightwysmakinge.
               Blot them oute of the boke of the lyuynge men / And let them not be writen emonge the iuste.
               But me / bothe pore and sorowful let thy sauinge helthe defende oh god.
               That I mighte magnifye the name

of god in meter / and extol it highely with thankis geuinge.
               Wher in the lorde miche more delyteth then in bullis ād calues armed with horne and houue.
               Hereto haue ye respecte oh ye hō
                  ble and reioyse / seke god and your soule shal lyue.
               For the lorde hereth the pore afflicte / and his presoners he despiseth not.
               Heuen and erthe mought prayse him / the sea and what so euer crepith in it loaue him.
               For god shal saue zion / and the cytes of Iuda shalbe preserued / inhabited and possessed.
               For the sead of his seruants shal possede it: and who so loue his name shal dwel in it.
            
            
               
               ¶This Psalme is off the same Argument with the former.
               OH god spede the to deliuer me / oh lorde haste the into my helpe.
               Ashamed and confounded mought thei be / that seke my soule / let them be turned bakwarde wythe shame whyche couet to hurte me. Let them be put to flyght with cō
                  fusion which with a gaude cry at me / ohe ohe.
               But they al mought ioye and be glad in the / which seke the ād loue that sauinge helthe whiche is of the / thei mought saye contynually / god be highly praised.
               I am careful and pore (oh God): but thou lorde haste the to helpe / and delyuer me / and tarye not.
            
            
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  
                     ¶ A prayer and thankis geuinge that the Lorde voichsaueth to be present as wel in our age / as yougth / because there is no age withe out tribulacion
               
               IN the / oh lorde / do I truste let me neuer be confounded for thou delyuerest and takest me vnto the for thy mercyes sake / thou hearest me and thou sauest me.
               Thou art my stronge rocke vnto whome I euer flee / thou haste decreed to saue me / for thou arte my rocke and my buswerke.
               My god delyuer me from the hande of the vngodlye / and frome the power off the vniuste and cruell man.
               For thou (Lorde God) art my expectacion and my hope euen from my youghth.
               
                  Vnto the do I cleue euen frō my mothers wombe / thou pluckedst me out of my mothers bellye / wherfore all my prayse I doo spende vpon the.
               I am become a prodigiouse monster vnto many men / but thou art my truste.
               Wherfore I prayse the with full mouth / my mouth is ful of thy glorye at al tyme.
               Caste me not awaye in myne olde age / and whan nowe my strength fayleth me / se that thou yet forsakest me not.
               For my enymes conspyre agenste me / and they that laye awayte for my soule counsell togither saynge.
               God hath forsaken him / perswe and take him / for there is none to

helpe him.
               God / be not farre fro me / my God haste the to helpe me.
               Thei mought be ashamed and perissh that are agenst my soule / let them be kouered withe obprobrye and ignominye whiche studye to hurte me.
               But let me be euer constant / and encrese onely all thy gloriouse prayse.
               Let my mouthe magnifie thy rightwysmakinge and thy sauynge helthe at al tyme / wherof I know non ende.
               Let me entreyn lorde to remember thy power and thy rightwismakinge onely.
               For thou (god) euen fro my chyldehede vnto this present daye techest me to preche thy meruelous actes.
               
                  Forsake me not nowe in myne olde age and hore head (oh god) that I might yet preche thy power vnto this posterite and declare thy arme vnto all men to come.
               And also extolle highly thi rightwisnes (oh god) wherby thou hast finesshed grete thinges / (oh God) who is lyke the?
               Which haste shewed me tribulacions and many greuous affliccions / and efte sone thou restoredst me and lyftedst me vp agene / euē out of the depe erthe.
               Thou encreasedst me with honoure and dignite / and after my trouble didst counforte me.
               Wherfore I do magnifie the and thy trouthe (oh my god) with Lute and Orgains / I singe vnto the with harpe o holy maker of israel

My lippes desyer to prayse the / ye my soule which thou hast redemed desiereth to loaue the.
               My tongue is euermore talkinge of thy iuste dealinge: for they are confounded and shamed that honte to do me myscheife.
            
            
               ¶The title of the Psal. 72. ¶The prayer of Solomon
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A prayer for himselfe / and his peple: wherby cryste and his chirch is signified.
               
               
                  OH god / endewe the kynge with equite / geue the sonne of the kinge grace to ministre iustice.
               That he might rule the peple withe iustice / and gouerne thy pore with equite.
               Let the mountains bringe peace

vnto the peple / and the hille toppes rightwisnes.
               That he might in iugement delyuere the moste pore emonge the peple / and preserue the nedions / but the violent extorsioner vtterlye destroye.
               That thei might the more feare the throughe al generacions as lō
                  ge as the sonne and mone shal walke rounde aboute the erthe.
               Let equite and iustice come downe vnto the erthe lyke rayne into a newe mowen medewe / and lyke the swete honey dropes standing vpon the grasse.
               Let iustice florish in his tyme / ād myche peace endure as longe as the mone kepeth her course.
               And let him rule from the one sea vnto the tother / and from the floude

Euphrates vnto the worldes ende.
               Before him the Ethiopes shall fall downe / and his enymes lik the erthe.
               The kynges of the sea and eylandes shal bringe him gyftes / the kynges of Arabye and Sabe shall bringe him presents.
               Al kynges mought worship hym all gentyles mought serue him
               That he mought delyuer the complayninge pore supplyaunt / and helpe the careful socourlesse.
               That he mought haue compassiō on the pore nede one / and preserue the lyues off the homble oppressed.
               Redeminge them frome daunger & iniurye & esteminge their blode

so precyouse.
               He mought lyue and haue geuen him of the golde of Arabye / be he worshiped with out ende and magnifyed for euer.
               There mought be so grete plenty of wheat in the erthe through out the hille toppes / that thei mought waue and smyte them togither like the trees of Libanus: thei mought groweforth before the cyte lyke the grasse of the erthe.
               His name mought endewre foreeuer / his name mought wex fresshe and yonge lyke the sonne.
               Al nacions be blessed in hym / all folke mought preche hym blessed.
               Praised be the lorde god / the God of Israel / which alone dothe meruelous thinges.
               
                  And praysed be the name off his maiestye for euer / and the erthe vniuersal be fulfilled with his maiestye. Amen. Amen.
               ¶The ende of the prayers of Dauid the sonne of Iesse.
            
            
               ¶The title of this Psal. 73. ¶The songe of Asaph
               ¶The Argument.
               
                  ¶The e
                        •
                     ercyse and encrease of faith which is gretly offended at the prosperite of the vngodly: but when she espyeth the vnlyke ende of the good and badde: she cometh agene to hir selfe with grete consolacyon.
               
               OH how swete is the God of Israel vnto them which are pure in herte.
               My fete verely were almost gone my fotinge had almost fayled me.

When I fyll into a fonde angre mynde to se al thinges prosperously succede with the vngodly.
               Thei bere no burdens / but be yn al ease and riches.
               Thei be not oppressed with mortal myserye of men / nether beaten lyke other men.
               Wherfore they are so pufte vppe with pryde that they be drowned in myscheife and iniurye.
               So that for their wealy riches they be geuen vnto al lustes / and folowe the desyers off their owne hertis.
               Al thinges do they abhorre / saue those onely which they them selues speke / ye and that so proudly Thei stretcheforth their mouthe vp into heuen / but their tongue wandreth throughe the worlde.
               
                  Wherfore thei haue their flok here folowinge them: and here cometh forth their so grete auaūtage. yea / and they dare saye also / howe shulde god knowe it / and how shulde the highe god weit it?
               Wherfore thus consydered I with my selfe: lo these vngodly and riche men possesse ryches perpetually.
               In vayne therfore do I purify my herte: in vayne do I washe my hā
                  des with innocencye.
               In vayne am I beaten al the daye and chastened al the hole night.
               Whiles I thꝰ (I saye) cōsydered with my selfe / I had almost reproued the felowship of thi childern. And I thought then to knowe that thinge which was right harde and heuye for me to knowe.
               
                  Vntyl I was entred into the secrete holy place of god / and considered the ende of these men.
               That is to wete / that thou hadst set them in a slybery place / to cast them downe hedelinge.
               Lorde how sodenly are they baneshed and destroyd / cōsumed with sondry myseheifes?
               Nonotherwyse thē a dreame after a man is a wake / for euen so lorde thou doist awaye their ymage oute of the cite.
               But on this maner in the mean tyme my herte consumed in bitternes / and my raynes were greuously tormented.
               Thus I brent and glowed in foleshnes / and in my nowne consaight was I but a beast.
               Whyles thou yet neuer fayledste

me but heldest me vp by my right hande.
               Thou ledst me by thy counsell and efte sone tokest me vp honourablye.
               Oh how grete glory is layd vppe for me in heuen
                     
                        
                     
                     reversed ?
                   for as fore erthely thinges / when I compare them vnto the / I contempne them.
               My flesshe / my herte and all faile me / for god is the strength off my herte and my parte for euer.
               For lo / who so go farre from the / thei are but loste / thou destroyest al them which (thy maiestye contempned) playe the herlets.
               But I thoughte it best for me to cl
                     •
                  ne vnto God / to truste vnto the Lorde God and preche al his noble actis.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the psal. 74.

¶The admonicion of Asaph.
               
                  ¶ The Argument.
                  ¶A prayer of them beinge in the captiuite of Babylon / liftinge vp their myndes to God / that he suffer them not longe therein to be plaged.
               
               WHerfore (o god) puttest vs awaye for euer? wherfore is thy wrath thus kyndled agenste the flok of thy pasture?
               Remember thy congregacion whom thou hadst goten the off a longe tyme paste / forgete not the sceptre of thy heretage whome thou haste redemed / euen thys hyll off zion wherein thou dwellest.
               Lift vp thy fete quickly agenst theis destruccions / for thy aduersary hath destroyd al thinges in thi holy place.
               Thy enymes singe and rore in thi

solempne feste dayes / they set vp tokens off victorye the pinnacles.
               So that men thought they had herde axes hewīge of the tymber aboue / a grete noyfe came vpon them lyke thonder.
               All then grauen worke of the temple is shaken and smyten downe with twibits and hamers.
               Thi holy temple is set on fier / the house of the glory of God is prophaned and sayd smothe with the grownde.
               And they saye wythe them selues / let vs destroye them all at once / let all the solempne festis off God be banesshed out off the erthe.
               The tokēs which thou somtyme

shewdst oure fathers nowe we se them not / there is no prophete more / there is not one that can se be it neuer so litel.
               How longe (O God) shall thy enimye reuyle? Shall thy aduersarye blaspheme thy name thus euer?
               Wherfore haste thou vtterlye plucked yn thy hande / wherfore haste thou put thy ryght hande into thy bosome?
               O God / thou arte my gouerner euen from the beginninge / and what so euer saluacion is in the worlde it is thy worke.
               Thou skaterest the waters of the sea / thou brekest the headis of the grete dragons which dwel in the waters.
               Thou brekest the harde scale off

this Leuiathan / ād geuest him into meate vnto the peple of indye Thou cuttest forth springe ād floude / thou dryest vppe the mayne seas.
               The daye is thyne / the night is thyne / thou settest forth the light and sonne in their bright aparel.
               Thou hast set fast the coostes off the erthe / somer and wynter thou hast made them.
               Wherfore remember (o lorde) the rebukes of thy aduersarye / and of this stockisshe peple whiche blasph
                     •
                  meth thy name.
               Betake not thy turtle doue vnto the cruel beast / forgete not thy pore afflicte for euer.
               Beholde thy couenant / for the derke howses of the erthe are al full of myscheif.
               
                  Let not the pore contrite and ashamed be repelled / nether the homble adflicte whiche loaue thy name.
               Aryse God / defende thy cause / remember the obprobrye wherewith the folysshe man blasphemeth the daylye.
               Forgete not the proude voyce off thy enymes / for ye pryde of thē that make insurrection agenst ye / encreaseth vehemently.
            
            
               ¶The songe of Asaph adhortatorye / called / Ne perdas / the Hymne of thankes geuinge.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶ The colde negligent prayth to be restored vnto his office / ād promyseth to do it worthely / for the tyme standeth vpon that the Lorde wyll puneshe the Worlde
               
               
                  WE shal prayse the (oh god) we shal prayse thy present name / and thy noble & clere factis we wyll declare forth.
               When the tyme apoynted shal come / I shall iuge that at good and right is.
               Althoughe the erthe and all that inhabit it / be syke and feble / yet will I sustayne her pylers. So I wil Selah.
               I shall saye to the foles / se that ye do not folyshly: and vnto the vngodly / se that ye extoll not youre power.
               Lifte not vp your hornes ouer highe to thinke stiefly peruerse thingis For nether from the easte nor from the weste nor yet frō deserte or from the hilles / shal there come any to defende you.
               
                  But God is the delyuerer / this man he casteth downe and him he lifteth vp.
               For there is a goodly cuppe ful of rede wyne in his hande which shalbe powered forth / but the dreggis therof shal al the vngodly off the erthe souke and drinke vp.
               But I shal euermore preche and praise the god of Iacob.
               And all the hornes of the vngodly shal I breke / but the power off the iuste shalbe exalted.
            
            
               ¶The songe of Asaph adhortatorye and thankful / to be plaid at the orgains.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A praise and thākis for some grete victorye.
               
               
                  GOd is knowne in Iuda / ād grete is his name in Israel For in Salem is his tabernacle and his habitacion in zion.
               There hath he broken the swyfte arows / bowes bucklers swerdes & al the hole bataile. So he hath. Selah.
               Clearer and more to be magifyed art thou then the hilles of theues. For they theyr selues shalbe robbed / & be they neuer so bolde mynded / yet shal they sleape their dede dreame and be brought to naught with al their riches / were thei neuer so myghtye.
               For at thi rebuke (o god of Iacob) bothe carte and horse are ouerwhelmed.
               Thou art to be dreaded / for who maye abyde in thy sight when thou art angrye?
               
                  When thou pronouncest iugemēt from heuen / then the erth trembleth and is stil.
               That is to weit / Euen when god aryseth vnto iugement to delyuer all the pore afflicte of the erthe. As he shal ve
                     
                        •
                     ely. Selah.
               For because of this vengeaunce / men acknowlege ād praise ye / to ye entent thou shuldst bende thi selfe agene to auenge them.
               Dowe ye and paye them vnto youre lorde god al that be here in this companye: bringe forth your gyftis vnto the most dreadful.
               Which interceptith ye breath off princes / he is to be dreaded of the kynges of ye erthe.
            
            
               ¶The title of the Psal. 77 ¶The songe of Asaph committed vnto the quere of Idithum.
               
                  
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶Faith is tempted / but she defendeth her selfe with the contemplacion of god and his deadis / but yet is she stil tempted / but at laste she hath the victorye / when she setleth her selfe in the depe consideracyon of the almyghty power and prouidence of god.
               
               WIth my voice when I cryed vnto god / vnto god when I cryed with my voyce / he gaue eare vnto me.
               When I was troubled / I sought ye lorde / my strength wasted euery night and rested not / my soule refused al counfort
               When god came into my remembrance / I was in grete distresse: when I shulde begynne / my breth fayled me. So it didSelah.
               Thou heldst my eye liddes / I was so astoned that I coude not speke

Then I remembred ye tymes past and the worldes ouer slyden.
               I called to mynde my songes yn the night / I spake vnto my herte and discussed my mynde / saynge. Shal ye Lorde repell me for euer? shal he neuer more be apeased?
               Wyl he with drawe his goodnes for euer? wyll he nomore speke to our posterite?
               Hath god forgotē to haue mercy? wil he shit vp his mercy with his wrath? ye wil he?Selah.
               And at laste I was brought vnto this saynge. Art thou not well yn thy mynde?
               It is (I tel the) the right hōde of the highe God / that maketh this mutacion.
               I shall remember the workis off the Lorde: and gladly cal to mynde

thy olde miracles.
               And I shall preche thy excellent dedis / and speke vppon thy counsails.
               Oh god / thy waye lieth yn thy holy temple / who is so mighty god / as God is?
               Thou art god which doist so meruelouse thingis / which maketh thi strength knowne emōge the multitude:
               Which hast redemed ye peple with thy power / euen the sonnes off Iacob and Ioseph. S
                        •
                      thou hast.Selah.
               Euen the waters knowe the (Oh God) the waters knowe the and fere the / the depe seas tremble at the.
               The clowdes powerforth waters the clowdes caste forth thonder / and eft sone thy arows fle forthe

on euery syde.
               Thy thondre clappis ar herde rownde aboute / lighteninges ar smiten forth into the worlde / the erthe trembleth and quaketh.
               In the sea thy waye lyethe / and thy pathe vpon the depe waters / so that no man can espye thy steppes.
               Thou leddest forth thy peple lyke a flocke of shepe vnder the gouernance of Moses and Aharon.
            
            
               ¶The enstruccion of Asaph.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶An oracion spoken vnto the peple / mony shinge them to be taught by then samples of their elders / to returne into the waye.
               
               
                  
                  HEare my lawe / my peple: geue eare vnto the wordes of my mouth.
               I shal open my mouth to speke parables / and declare the olde harde speches.
               Which we haue both herde and haue certeynly knowne / our fathers so tellinge vs.
               Let vs not hid them from their childerne in ye worlde to come / but let vs al preche ye glorye of ye lorde / his power and strength / & meruelous actis which he hath done For he made a couenant with Iacob / and gaue a lawe vnto Israel / commaundinge our fathers to d
                     •
                  
                  lyuer it forthe and teache it they
                     •
                   childerne.
               That their posterite and chylderne to come shulde both knowe yt / 

and also expowne it vnto their childerne.
               To thentent they shulde set faste their hope in god / neuer to forget his coūcels / but kepe his precepts And not to be lyke their fathers a nacion vnfaithful / fallinge from god vnto false worship / a nacyon that wolde not be certyfied in herte / whose spirit and mynde was not trwe towerd god.
               As were the sonnes of Ephraim / which for al their featis of warre beinge neuer so good archers: yet in tyme of batayle were thei scatered and fled.
               And all for because they kept not couenant with god: and in his lawe they wolde not walke.
               But forgote his counsails / ād also his grete wondrefull workis / 

which he shewed them.
               Before their fathers he did meruelouse thyngys yn the lande off Egipt / euen in theyr playne felde called Tanys.
               He deuyded the sea and led them ouer: and set vp the waters of eche syde lyke wallis.
               Vnder the clowde he led them be daye: and al the night withe clere lyght.
               He cloue in sondre the stonney rockes in the deserte / and gaue thē to drinke there of / as out off a grete depe sea.
               He dreweforth waters of the stonne / so that they gusshed forth lyke ryuers.
               And yet for al this thei sinned agenst him: and exaspera
                     •
                  ed the highe god in that wildernes.
               
                  Temptinge god in their hertis requiring mete after their own lust For they replyed agenst god / saynge: maye god orden be mete in this deserte?
               Lo / he smote ye stonne and there flowed forthe waters plenteously: but whither maye he not also geue mete ād prepare flesshe as wel for his peple?
               These thinges herde / ye lorde was angrye / and lyke fyer was he kyndled agenst Iacob / and his indignacion encreased agenst Israel:
               Because they had not kept promyse with god / nether trusted in his holsome helpe.
               Ouer al this / yet he commaunded the clowdes aboue / and opened ye gates of the skye.
               To rayne them downe Manna to

eate it / because he wolde geue them heuenly fode.
               Here did euery man ete that aūgels fode / for he sent them therof ynoughe.
               He turned aboute the easte winde with ye clowdis / and by his powr induced a south wynde.
               And so raigned them downe flesshe vpon them as thicke as duste and fetherd fowles as plentye as the sea sandis.
               Whiche he threw into ye middys of their tentis / and rownd aboute their tabernacles.
               Then they deuowered them vp / & were filled aboue mesure: for he gaue them their owne desyer.
               They wanted nothynge off their apetite: and yet their mete beynge in their mouthes:
               
                  Lo / the wrathe of god was kindled ouer them / and slewe the moste strongest of them / ād euen the picked out of Israel did he cut away But yet aboue al this they sinned agenste him / for they beleued not these so many his miracles.
               Wherfore he finesshed their dayes and not with out a cause / sodē
                  ly their yeris were gone.
               Whyles he slewe them / they sought him: and sodenly they retourned to god.
               And remembred that god was their stoney rok: and the highe God their redemer.
               Al be it with their mouthes they flatered him: yet with their tōgue they lyed.
               For their hert was not wholl towarde him / nether kept they promyse

in couenant with him.
               But yet (for al this) ful mercyfully did he forgeue them / because he wolde not destroye them / ād ful oft reuoked he his wrathe because he wolde not al kindle it.
               For he consydered that they were but flesshe / and wynde that gothe awaye neuer to returne.
               How oft did thei exasperate him in the deserte / and prouoked hym to anger in the wildernes?
               Oh / how did these bakslyders tē
                  pte god / and mocked ye holy God of Israel?
               Forgetinge his power / & also the daye wherin he had delyuered thē from thoppressour:
               Howe he had wroght his miracles agenst the gipcions / ād his woundres in the felde of Tanys:
               
                  How he changed their ryuers into blode / and also their waters that they coude not drynke.
               How he sent them lyse to ete them vp / and frogges to destroye them He destroyed their corne and grasse with hotte wormes / ād wasted their labour with locustis.
               He beit downe their vynes withe hayle stones / and did froste bight thei moreburyes.
               He destroid their catel with hayle stormes / and smyt downe their flockis with hot thondre boltis
               For in the hot furye off his fyerce indignacion he sent into emonge them grete tribulacions ād incursions of euel sprites.
               He layd open ye waye of his wrathe to inuade bothe those men their selues and their beastis to.
               
                  For he smote euery firste begoten off Egypte: euen all the cheife labours / yn the tabernacles off Ham.
               But his peple he led them forthe lyke a flocke of shepe / and droue them into the deserte lyke a droue of neat.
               He led them so suerly that thei neded nothinge to haue feared: for their enimes he ouerwhelmed with the sea.
               And brought them into the coostes of his holy place / euen vnto that hill which he gote them withe his righthande
               He expelled the gētils before their faces / and diuided them that heretage metforth with lynes / set
                     •
                  
                  līg ye tribis of Israel euen in the tabernacles of their enymes.
               
                  But thei did tempt and anger the most highe god / and obserued not his couenaunt.
               Thei fil bak from him lyke theyr fathers / they rebelled lyke a naughty bowe.
               They angred him with their images erected on highe: and prouoked him to wrathe withe their Idols.
               Which once herde / god was sore amoued / and gretely detested and abhorred Israel.
               And then he forsoke the tabernacle which was first in Silo: euen his habitacion where he dwelt amonge men.
               And betoke their strength into captiuite: and their gloriouse beutye he delyuerd into the handis of their enymes.
               
                  He casted his peple agenst ye swerde / he was so sore angrye wythe his heretage.
               Fyer deuowred his yonge men / & none mourned the state off his maydens.
               His priestes were smytendowne withe swerde / and there were no widewes to lament them.
               And the lorde start vp as one waken from slepe / euen like a soldyere refresshed and animated wyth wyne.
               And beit their enymes on the nether aftir partis / and made them a perpetual ignomye.
               He turned himselfe awaye frome the tentis of Ioseph / and repudiated ye tribe of Ephraim.
               But he chose ye tribe of Iuda / & also the hil of zion whō he loueth.

There he buylded (as rychely ād honourably as myght be) his holy temple: and layd ye foundacion as faste as the erthe it selfe longe to endewer.
               He chose also his seruant Dauid / and toke him vp from ye shepcote He led him awaye from ye folowinge his flok grete with yonge / to fede Iacob his peple and Israel his owne heretage.
               He fed them therfore puerly after thinnocency of his owne herte / ād accordinge to his highe prudent vertue he led them forth.
            
            
               ¶The songe of Asaph.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A complainte of the godly / vpon the destruccion of Ierusalem & miserable captiuite therof.
               
               
                  
                  OH god / the gentils haue inuaded thy heretage / thei haue polluted thy holy temple / and brought Ierusalem into an heap of stones. They haue made the carkases of thi seruāts meat for ye fowls of ye ayer / and ye flesh of thy saynts meat for ye beastis of ye erthe Thei shed their bloude lyke water through out al Ierusalem / and none there was to burye them.
               We are an obprobrye vnto oure neighbours: a laughinge stok derided of them that dwel rounde about vs How lōge lorde wilt thou abhorre vs? wilt thou vtterly kindle thi wrath to burne vs thus vp for euer? Powerforth thi wrath vpō these haithē gētils yt haue not knowē ye / & vpō ye kyngdoms

which cal not vpon thy name.
               Which haue deuowred Iacob / & cut awaye his habitacion.
               Remember not our sinnes of olde committed: but let thi mercyes sodenly preuente vs: for we be made verye pore.
               Helpe vs / oh god our sauioure for thy gloriouse name / & delyuer vs: be peased and pardon our sinnes for thy names sake.
               Wherfore shulde ye gentils saye / where is their god? let ye bloud shed of thy seruantis be auenged vpon the gentyls / in our syght.
               Let the sorowful sighes off them that ly bound in presone entre into thy presence / and for thy myghty power saue them that be iuged to dye.
               These men which haue vs nowe

in their daungere / haue reuyled ye excedingly / but Lorde / turne this contumeliouse reuylinge into their owne bosoms.
               And let vs thy peple and ye flok of thy pasture geue ye thankis for euer / and preche thy prayse vnto euery age to come.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the Psal. 90. ¶A songe committed vnto the quere of Asaph: to be songe of a certayn musyk instrument
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A prayer of men in captiuite / desyeringe delyuerance of god / as he once delyuered his peple out of Egypte.
               
               
                  OH pastor and ruler off Israel attēde vnto vs which ledist Ioseph like a floke / whiche also sittest vpon the Cherubims / declare

thy selfe.
               Shew thy selfe before Ephraim / Beniamin and Manasse: stere vp thy strength and come & saue vs. Turne the vnto vs (Oh God): shewe vs thy face and we shalbe salfe.
               Oh lorde god of powers / how longe wilt thou repell the prayer off thy peple?
               In stede of bodely foode / thou feddest vs withe teres / thou madeste vs drinke plentuously oure owne teres.
               Thou madest vs a chydyng stok vnto oure neyghbours / and oure enymes emonge them selfe contē
                  pne vs
               Turne the vnto vs (oh god) of powers / shewe vs thy face and we shalbe salfe.
               
                  Thou calledst to the a vyneyarde out of Egypt / which (the gentils cast out) thou didest plante it.
               And hir rootis purged / thou preparedst her a fat and fast place: so that her branches spred ouer the hole region.
               Euen the hilles were kouered with her shadewe / for his bowes were lyke the stronge Cedre trees.
               She stretched forth hir branches vnto the sea: and hir bowes vnto the flowde.
               And wherfore then brokeste thou vp hir hedges / that al that passed there forebye might snatche of hir grapes?
               A wylde bore cam in and destroyed hyr / and the wylde beastis

of the felde fede vpon her.
               Oh god of powers turne ye vnto vs we beseche ye / lokeforth frome heuen beholde / and consydre this vyneyarde:
               Euen that plante which with thi nowne righthande hath bene plā
                  ted / that is to weit / euen thy sonne whom thou hast thus manified for thy nowne glorye.
               For it is now brent vp with fyer / and lyeth al to wroted vp.
               Let them therfore perishe at thy mighty rebuke / which haue done this dede.
               And let thy power be present with ye man of thy righthande / euen with ye sone off man whom thou hast magnified for thy nowne glorye.
               And we shall not go backe frome

the / restore vs that we mought cal vpon thy name.
               Tourne vnto vs / oh lorde god of powers: shewe thy face and we shalbe salfe.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the psal. 81. ¶The songe of Asaph.
               
                  ¶ The Argument.
                  ¶A thankes geuinge at the wyne pressinge. Whereby we be taught al encrease & frute / to come of god: him to ministre vs al thinges / yf we conforme oure selues vnto hys wyll.
               
               
                  PRaise ye god our strength with ioyouse iesture: synge ye vnto ye god of Iacob.
               Lyft vp your voyce with loaue ād praise: smyte vp your tympanyes playe vpon your mery Lutes and harpes.
               
                  Blowe vp youre trompets of the new mone / in this so solēpne feste For this is the ryte of Israel / and a lawe so ordened of the God off Iacob.
               Euen the testimony which he decreed for Ioseph / after that he had faughten agenste thegypcyons / where we herde that strange tongue.
               When your shoulders were eased of that burden / and your hādis renounced the pottis of flesshe.
               When thou thy selfe calledst on me in tribulacion / & I had delyuerd ye / I lurkinge in ye thondre / spake vnto ye / and proued ye at ye waters of contencion. So I didSela.
               Oh my peple / heare: for I shal douteles promyse ye (oh Israel:
               That if thou wilt obaye me / thou

shalt haue no strange god / nor fal downe before no nother god.
               For it is I that am the Lorde thy god whiche haue led the out of ye londe of Egipt: open thy mouthe and I shal fil it.
               But my peple receiued not my voyce / and euen Israel forsoke me.
               Wherfore I forsoke them & lefte them vnto the shrewdnes of theyr owne herte: and then thei folowed their owne deuices.
               Oh yt my peple wolde heare me / I wolde that Israel had walked in my wayes.
               For then shulde I haue myneshed their enymes & turned my hande agenst their aduersaries.
               They had frustrated ye haters off ye lorde in Israel / and had had there a longe tyme.
               
                  And he shulde haue fed them with the flower of wheat / and satisfied them with honey / euen out of the very rocke.
            
            
               ¶The Title of the psal. 82. ¶The songe of Asaph.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A monishion for princes and iuges / and a threteninge of the vengeaunce of god.
               
               GOd is fast & present in the company of the princes / rulers / iuges goddis / he is in the middis of ye iuges to contende in iugement.
               Sayng / how longe wil ye iuge vniustly and fauour the face or persone of ye vngodly? As ye do.Selah.
               Defende ye the pore ād socourles auenge ye afflicte and wrongfully oppressed.
               Fauour and helpe the poore and

nedye / and delyuer them from the violence of the vngodly.
               But these men are without witte and wysedome / they walke in derkenes. Wherfore al the foundacions of therthe shalbe moued. I sayd it verely my self: ye be goddes: ye al are ye sonnes of ye most highest.
               But yet lyke men shal ye dye / ād as any other tyraunt shal ye be smyten downe.
               Aryse god / and auēge thou ye erth by iugement: for vnto ye al naciōs belonge of very right.
            
            
               ¶A thankful praise sungon of Asaph.
               
                  ¶ The Argument.
                  ¶An inuocaciō of gods helpe / whiles our enymes conspi
                        •
                     e and prepare them to fight agenst vs.
               
               
                  
                  OH god / be thou not stil cease not / take no lenger aduisement (Oh God.
               For lo / thy enymes swel and flok togither / thy haters lyft vp theyr headis.
               Thei set preuy ginnes agenst thy peple / thei conspire secretly agēst thy hyd faithful.
               Saynge / come and let vs maketh em awaye from ye folke / that there be neuermore mencion made of ye name of Israel.
               For they are conspired al togither with one mynde / and haue smyten handis to coniure agenst the. * Euē these men
               The tabernacles of ye Idumes & Ismaelits / the Moabits and Hagarens / Gebal / Ammon / and Amalec

/ the Palestines with ye citesens of Tyri.
               With these are confedered ye Assirions ye continual helpers of the sonnes of Lot. So they are. Iudicum 6.7Selah
               But serue thou them as thou didest once the Madianites and Sisar
                     •
                   / and as thou seruedst Iabyn at ye ryuer Chison
               Which were destroyed in End or where their karyons laye lyke dō
                  ghills on the erthe.
               Make their capitains lyke Oreb / zebo / zebee and zalmane / ye / al theyr chefe leaders be so serued.
               Which sayde / let vs chalenge for vs / ye habitacle of god.
               My god / make them lyke a whele and lyke stubble layd open for the winde.
               As fyer runneth deuoweringe ye
                  
wode / and as the flame eteth hylles.
               Euen so folowe thou vpon them with thy stormy tempest / ād ouerthro them with thy whirlewinde. Caste shame ouer their faces / that thei mought seke thy name / oh Lorde.
               Let them be confounded and vexed for euer: let them be shamed ād perisshe.
               That thei mought yet thus knowe / that thou lorde art alone / that thy name is alone / and that thou alone arte that moste highest ouer al the erthe.
            
            
               ¶A Psalme of the sonnes of korah playd vpon a certayn musik instrument.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A prayer of the faithful that they

mighte prayse worthely theyr lorde god in tranquilite of mynde.
               
               OH howe amiable are thy habitacions o lorde of powers?
               My soule fayleth me for the desier of the lordis courte / My herte & flesshe leape for ioye to come vnto the lyuinge god.
               Where euen the poore sparowe hath founde her a place / and the turtle her neste to laye in their yō
                  ge / that is to saye euen thy aultare oh lorde of powers my kinge / and my god.
               Oh how blessed be thei which both dwel in thi house and prayse ye also. So theibeSelah.
               Oh blessed whose strength art thou / in whose hertis are thy prayses.
               
                  For when thei goforth in the vale of teris / they take them for consolacion to come / and the leader him selfe is garnesshed with thankes Thei go from plentuousnes into more plentuousnes / and eft sone / god is sene of them in zion.
               Lorde god of powers heare my prayer: luysten vnto me oh God off Iacob. So do. Sela.
               Oh god our shylde beholde: beholde the chere of thy anoynted.
               For one daye in thy courte is sweter then a thousande any where els I had leuer be a dore wayrer at ye house of my lorde: then to walke vp and downe in ye palaces of the vngodly.
               For ye lorde god is my lyght and suer shilde / ye lorde shal geue grace and glory: throughe him / non

shal lake yt at good is / which lyue perfitly.
               Oh howe blessed are they: Lorde God off powers whiche truste yn the.
            
            
               ¶The songe of the sonnes of kore
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A feruent prayer for the delyuerance out of Babylonike captiuite that is to weit out of the bondage of synnes whiche are done awaye throughe cryst.
               
               
                  BE thou merciful o lorde vnto thy londe: restore Iacob from captiuite
               Take awaye ye synne of thy peple: and kouer al their wyckednes. so doSela.
               Take away thy grete indignaciō turne from thy furyouse wrathe. Returne vnto vs oh god our sauiour / slake thy wrath thus bent vpon vs.
               
                  Wilt thou be angry with vs for euer? or wilt thou continewe thy indignacion from age to age?
               Shalt thou not rather returne ād restore vs: that thy peple may reioyse in the?
               Shewe vs lorde thi merciable goodnes: and endew vs with thy sauinge helth.
               I shal yet lysten to heare what ye lorde god wil cōmande: for he wil sende peace vnto his peple and to his sayntes that turne to a better mynde.
               For his sauinge helth is nighe them that fear him: and his glory is to inhabit our londe.
               Mercy and trouthe are met togither: rightwisnes and peace haue kissed eche other.
               Trouth shal bud forthe oute of ye
                  
londe: and rightwisnes shal springe forth from heuen.
               The lorde shal geueforth his goodnes: and our land shal yilde her encrese
               Rightwysnes shall walke before him: to defende him ye waye of his entresse.
            
            
               ¶The prayer of Dauid.
               ¶A comen prayer / to be defended from aduersite and from the awayte layenge of our enymes.
               GEue eare / lorde / vnto me ād answere me / for I am ful pore and greuously troubled. Preserue my lyfe for I am innocent: saue thy seruant (oh my god) trustinge in the.
               Haue mercy on me (lorde) cryinge vpon the incessauntly.
               Make glad the mynde of thy seruant:

for vnto ye / oh lorde do I lift vp my mynde.
               For thou lorde art both swete ād mylde / and ryche in mercy vnto al that cal vpon the.
               Geue eare lorde vnto my prayer: attende to the noyse of my desier. In the tyme of my tribulacion I call vppon the: for thou heareste me.
               Amonge ye goddis (lorde) is there none lyke the: none off them maye do lyke the.
               Al nacions therfore whiche thou hast made mought come and fall downe before the (oh lorde) & magnifye thy name.
               For thou arte grete / and grete thinges thou doist: thou onely arte God.
               Lede me lorde into thy waye / that

I might walke in thy trouth: pluk in my herte yt it might worship thy name alone.
               I thanke the / lorde my god / with al my herte: & thy name shal I for euer magnifie.
               For thy goodnes hathe done me great pleasures: thou delyueredst me from the present pitte euen vnder me.
               Oh god / the violent arose agenst me: and the chirche of the bolde arrogant sought my lyfe / settinge not the before their eyes.
               Thou therfore oh lorde / most mylde and mercyfull God / whiche arte slowe vnto wrath and redy bēt to benignite and trouthe.
               Turne ye vnto me and haue mercy vpon me: geue thy strengthe

vnto thy seruant and helth vnto ye sone of thy hande maiden.
               Declare thy goodnes openly vpō me: that as sone as they se it / thy haters might be confounded / and know / that thou / lorde / hast brought me helpe and consolacion
            
            
               ¶The thankful songe of the sonnes of core / orkorah.
               ¶The prayse of Ierusalem which was the figure of the chirche / and that the gospel of criste shulde begyn there to be preched.
               THe Lorde loueth the gates of zion: whose foundacions are in the holy hyl aboue al ye tabernacles of Iacob.
               Gloriouse and ful of magnificence are those thinges which are prophecyed vpon the / oh cite of god. So they are.Selah.
               I shal reken and acompte thē with

ye: bothe Egypt / Babylon / and my known cytes of Palestyne / ye / Tyro and yndye / lo / euē there was he borne.
               For vnto all men euery where yt shalbe gloriously reported ād preched of zion that is to weit / that euen the moste highest which hathe bylded her / is borne in her
               yea / and ye lorde him selfe shal regestre it in ye cronicles of his peple / yt he hath bene borne in her. So he hath.Selah.
               Wherfore / ye habitacion both off al syngers and daunsers is in the
            
            
               ¶The songe of the sonnes of Core to be reported of eche otherwith their musik instruments / called also the songe of Heman Ezraite
               ¶A prayer and miserable mourninge of one excedingly afflicte and troubled.
               
                  OH lorde God my sauioure / let my prayer come vnto ye I crye daye and night in thy presence / geue eare vnto my sighes.
               For I am filled with tribulacion and my lyfe is euen at ye pyttes brinke.
               ye I am rekened amonge thē which must now be buried: I am estemed lyke vnto one whose strēgth is clene gone.
               I am reputed dead / as free amonge the slayne / euen emonge them which slepe in graue / clene forgoten / whiche by thy power are cut awaye.
               Thou hast thrusted me downe in to a ful depe pitte: euen into derkenes vnable to be passed thorow Thy fury thou hast fastened vpō me / and ouerwhelmed me withe

thy stormey flowdis.S
                        •
                      thou hast.Sela.
               Thou hast remoued my knowne familiare farre fro me / thou haste made me abominable in their sighte / I am in siche distresse / yt I cā nowayes flee.
               My sight fayleth me for so greuouse affliccion: I call continually vpon me / & lyftvp my hādis to ye. Doist thou declare thy meruelouse grete factis vnto ye dead? do ye dead bodyes so lyue yt they maye aknowlege yt? No verelySela.
               Shal thy mercyable goodnes be preched in my graue? and thy trouth with them yt be departed?
               Are thy meruelous great actis knowne in derknes? or is thy rightwisnes preched with thē yt ar clene forgotē Vnto ye (I say) lorde do I crye: & my prayer cōethforth spedely

to mete the.
               Wherfore lorde forsakest me: and hydest thou thy face fro me?
               Sith I / for my affliccion lye pantinge and staggeringe vnder thy greuouse heuy burdens.
               Thy furiouse wrathe tunne ouer me: thy indignacions oppresse me They aryse rownd aboute me continually lyke waters / and at laste thei beare me downe.
               Thou hast taken fro me frende & kynsman: and thei that knew me knowe me not.
            
            
               ¶The songe of Ethan them rai
                     •
                  e.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶This Psalme / is an inuocacion and cōsolacion of the mercy of god promised vnto the faithful / by the couenant smyten with our fathers Abraham and Dauid / neuer to be broken with the godly.
               
               
                  
                  THe mercyes of the lorde shal I euermore synge and prayse: vnto all the posterite to come / I shal declare hys trowthe with my mouthe.
               For I knowe that thy goodnes shal endure for euer: and thi faith and trouth was present euen withe the heuens when they were made.
               Whereby thou thus saydst: I haue smyten vp a couenāt with my chosen: and sworne vnto Dauyd my seruant.
               I shal set faste thy sead for euer: and stablyshe thy seat royal vnto al posterites to come. So I shal.Selah
               Euen the heuens do magnifie thi cleare actes oh lorde: and ye cōgregacion of ye faithful preche thi faith

and trouth.
               For who is there euen in ye clowdes yt maye be compared vnto the lorde? or emonge ye gods lyke vnto the lorde?
               God is to be dreaded in ye grete cō
                  pany of ye faithful / and gretely to be reuerenced aboue al yt are aboute him.
               Oh lorde God of powers who is lyke vnto ye / in maiestye / faith ād trouth? where with thou art assisted on eche syde.
               Thou cōmandest the prowde sea thou presseste downe her waues when they begyn to ryse.
               Thou brekest and woundeste the prowde: and with thy power scaterest thyne enymes.
               The heuens ar thyne / the erthe is thyne / the worlde rownd about ād

whatsoeuer is in it / al ar thyne: for thou hast first made them.
               The northe and south thou hast made them: thabor and Hermon glorye of thy name.
               Thy arme is excedinge stronge / thy hande is most mighty: and thi righthande is most highest of all. With iustice and equite thy seate royal is gloriously stablesshed / mercye and trowthe are thy before goers.
               Oh how blessed is that peple which can blowe vp thy prayse o lorde: whiche walke in the light off thy presence.
               Whiche at all tymes reioyse yn thy name: and leape and springe at the maner off thy rightwysmakinge.
               
                  For thou art ye brightnes of their strength: and thorowe thy fauour our power is listed vp.
               Thou lorde art our shilde / oh holy maker of Israel our kynge.
               Thou spakest some tyme prechinge to thy faithful / saynge: I shall geue strengthe vnto my myghtye one / and exalte my chosen man ouer the peple.
               I shal get Dauid to be my seruāt and with my holy oyntment anoynte him.
               My hande shal staye him / ād myne arme shal strengthen him.
               His enemye shal not ouercome hī: nether ye myscheuous shal not oppresse him.
               I shal smyte downe his enymes before him: and destroye them that hate him.
               
                  My trouth and mercy shal neuer fayle him: and throughe my powr his power shalbe exalted.
               I shal stretcheforthe his maieste emperial vnto the weste sea / and his kingdome vnto ye floude Euphrates.
               He shal cal me / saynge: oh my father: my god / and the rocke off my sauinge helth.
               For I shal make him thouerm ost and higheste of the kynges of the erthe.
               I shal kepe my mercy for him euer: and my couenant shal stande faste with him.
               For his sead shal I continew for euer / and his seat royal shalbe as ferme as the daye that springethe out of the skye.
               But and yf his childern forsake

my lawe: and walke not in my iuste plesures.
               If they defyle my ceremones: and kepe not my commandements:
               Then with a rod shal I viset their transgressions / and loke vpon their sinnes with beatinges.
               But yet my mercye shal I not take from him / nor neuer breke promyse to deceyue him.
               My couenant shal not be frustrate: but what so euer went forth of my mouth / I wil not change it.
               In the sacrament of myne of the I swore by my holynes: If I deceyue Dauid. * Neuer trust me
               His sead shal stande for euer / and his seat royal shall endure in my presence lyke ye sunne.
               It shal be perpetual as ferme as ye mone: and as faste as is that same

assured witnes in ye clowdes So he shal.Sela.the raynbowe
               
               But now se / thou contempnest & castest him awaye / thou makeste thy anoynted to be deadly hated.
               Thou turneste bake thy promyse with thy seruāt / thou prophanest his gloriouse crowne casten downe vpon ye erthe.
               Thou haste clouen downe al his wall is: and broken downe all hys stronge defences.
               They trede hym vnder their fete al that there go forbye / he is an obprobrye vnto hys neyte neyghbours.
               The right hande off hys enemye thou lyftest vppe / and all his aduersaryes thou makeste to reioyse.
               
                  The power off his swerde thou hast writhen it backe: thou geuest him no victory in batail.
               Thou hast obscured his glorye / & smiten his seat royal casten agenste the grounde.
               Thou hast cut of the dayes of his yougth: and couered his face with shame. So thou hast.Selah.
               How lōge lorde wilt thou be hid? wilt thou be hid for euer? how lōge shall thy indignacion be thus kindled lyke fier?
               Remember how shorte is my tyme: hast thou made al mē mortall in vayne?
               May eny man so lyue that he neuer dye? or maye he delyuer hymselfe from the pitte? In no wyse. Selah
               Where is that thy so aunciant mercy / oh lorde: which by so holy

an othe thou promysedst to Dauid by thy trouthe?
               Remember lorde that oprobriouse ignominye where with al ye hole multitude reuyleth thi seruāts which thinge I kepe downe secrete in my bosome.
               Wherewith thy enymes lorde rebuke and deteste the stepis off thy anoynted.
               Thankis be vnto the Lorde for euer: Amen / amen.
            
            
               ¶The prayer of Moses the man of god.
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶A prayse & magnifyinge of god / and a deiection of man / and recourse vnto god.
               
               
                  LOrde thou art our refugye / to receyue vs at all tyme.
               Before the mountayns

or the erthe were brought forthe: before the rounde worlde was made: frome euer vnto euerlastinge thou art god.
               Thou bringest man into duste / & agayne / thou sayest retourne into your perfyt state ye childerne off Adam.
               For a thousand years ar before ye / euen as yisterdaye past: & lyke the watches of the night.
               Whyles thou scaterest them / they be but a dreame / sodenly they are changed lyke grasse.
               The grasse flouressheth and groweth in the morninge / but at the eueninge it is cut downe and withered.
               Euen so / thou being wrath / we be consumed / and in thy anger we ar troubled.
               
                  Thou holdest our sinnes before ye our secrete deadis are open in thy cleare presence.
               Thou beinge angre / al our dayes are slyden awaye: our years ar gone in a thought.
               The dayes of our yearis yt we lyue are almost seuentye yere / and they yt be more lustye / lyue fower score: of whiche euen ye beste be sawced with labour and sorowe: ād euen sodenly are we fallen and flone awaye.
               Who regardeth thy mighty wrath: and also the furye off thy indignacyon?
               Teche vs thus to compte oure dayes / and to consydere them wysely.
               Tourne the Lorde nowe at laste: and be thou mercyfull vnto thy

seruants.
               Let vs be sone satisfied withe thy mercye that we mought reioyse & be glad al the dayes of our lyfe
               Let vs haue gladnes for the dayes of oure affliccion / euen for those yeris whereyn we suffred tribulation.
               Deuyde thy cleare actis emonge thy seruants: and thy noble magnificence vnto their childerne
               And the gloriouse maiestye of our lorde god be with vs / he mought acomplisshe the workis of our hā
                  dis / the worke off oure handis he mought finesshe.
            
            
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶This Psalme declareth / the faithful to be fre from al feare
               
               
                  WHosoeuer dwel in the preuey closet of the most highest: and abideth vnder the shadewe off him that is almyghtye:
               He saith vnto the Lorde / my God is my adsuered hope / ād vnto him do I cleue.
               For it is he that will delyuer the from the honters snare / and from their pestelent myscheif.
               He wil kouer the with his winges to be suer vnder his fethers / his faith and trouthe shalbe thy shilde and bukler.
               So that nether by night thou shalt not be afrayed of night bugges / nor yet by daye feare their fleynge arows.
               No not once to feare their poyso
                     •
                   that krepeth and encreseth in derkenes

/ nor yet that noyouse deuyl yt destroith at none dayes.
               A thousande shalbe smyten downe at thy liftsyde / & ten thousand at thy rightside / so yt no hurt shal come nighe the.
               But ye punishment of ye vngodly thou shalt se it / and beholde it euē with thi nowne eyen.
               For thou lorde / arte my adsuered hope: in an highe place hast thou set thi habitacion to be oure refugie.
               There shal no hurte lightely come at ye / there cometh no plage vnto thi dwellinge place.
               For / for thi plesure he shal cōmā
                  de his aungels to kepe the in all thi wayes.
               To bere the in their handis / yt thou hurtest not thi fete at ye stones

Thou shalt go vpon cruel beastis and venomes serpents: and trede downe lions and dragons.
               Because he trusted in me I wil deliuer him / saith ye lorde: I shal defende him because he knowlegeth my name.
               When he shal cal vpon me / I wil heare him / in his distresse I will be bye him: I shal deliuer and magnifie him.
               I shal satisfy hī with longe lyfe: & at last shewe him the saluacion yt cometh fro me.
            
            
               ¶A thanful songe for the Sabat daye.
               
                  ¶A general prayse of al the peple togither and a knowleginge of the faith.
               
               
                  IT is a goodly thinge / with prayse to magnifie the lorde ād to synge vnto thy name oh most highest.
               To preche thy mercy in the morninge and thy trowthe at the euenynge.
               And that vpō the ten stringed instrument vpon the lute / singinge also vpon the harpe.
               For thou Lorde / makeste me glad with thy workis / and for the dedis of thy handis I reioyse.
               Oh Lorde how clere ar thy dedis? thy counsels are depe and vnserchable.
               An vn
                     •
                  y
                     ••
                   man perceyueth not / nor the 
                     〈◊〉
                   vnderstandeth not this thinge.
               Tha
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  scheuos growvp lyke 
                     〈…〉
                   vngodlye

synful shall flouresshe vnto this ende / 
                     •
                   thei mought be cut awaye for euer.
               But thou lorde / abydest fast for euer euen the most highest.
               For / lo / lorde / thy enymes / thy enymes (I saye) perisshe and al these vngodly men are scatered.
               But my power shall redascende lyke ye horne of the vnicorne / and myn olde age shalbe moyste and flouresshe.
               For that myne eye shal se / ād myne eare perceyue the myscheif hapened vnto my enymes / which arose agenst me.
               The iuste shal floureshe lyke the palme tre / and sprede his brāches lyke the Cedres of 
                     •
                  ibanus.
               For they planted in ye house of ye Lorde / shall flouresshe in the courte

of our god.
               yea / in their olde age shal thei flouresshe and budde / made lustye ād ful of sappe.
               That al men mought knowe / howe iuste and trwe is the lorde my rocke / & no wronge to be in him.
            
            
               
                  &The Argument.
                  ¶What perel / be it neuer so grete / standeth vpon / yet shal faith auoyde it in god.
               
               
                  OH lorde kinge / whiche art clerely endewed / oh lorde which art clothed and girte with strength thou hast so fast set ye rounde worlde that it can not be moued Euen now frome the beginninge hath thy seat royal be constituted from euerlastinge thou haste thy beynge.
               
                  Beholde lorde the floudis extoll them self: the floudis extoll their noyse / the floudis lyftvppe their streames.
               But yet myghtyer is the lorde that dwelleth on highe: then the sowne of the maigne sea and streames of water / be thei neuer so vehement.
               What thingis so euer thou haste testified and promysed vpon thy fayer holy house: thei shall abyde trwe and faste (lorde) perpetually.
            
            
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  ¶An inuocacion of the iugement of god agenst the vngodly / and consolacion of the good for the fauor of god.
               
               OH Lorde god the very auenger / oh god auenge openly and be glorified.
               
                  Be thou exalted oh iuge of worlde: requyte ye prowde as they be worthy.
               How longe Lorde / howe longe do the vngodly triumphe?
               How praare they their owne fables? how longe shal al these wycked persons dispute of vayne thynges?
               How longe shall they grynde thy peple togither / and vexe thy heretage?
               The pore destitute and ye straungers they sleye: and torment ye fatherlesse.
               Saynge / ye lorde knoweth not off it / & ye God of Iacob perceyuethe nothinge of this.
               Take hede therfore ye vnwyse emonge ye peple / and ye foles be once wyse.
               
                  Shall not he heare that did fewe on ye earee? shal he not se ye / yt made the eyes?
               Shal not he that nourterethe the gentils correcke thē? shall not he chastise / that techeth men knowlege?
               Vnto ye lorde verely are mennis deuices wel knowne / he knoweth thē for vayne and naught.
               Oh how happye is that man whom thou techest oh lorde: and whom thou enstructest in thy lawe? That he might be suer in tyme of perell: whyle in ye mean tyme the pitte is digged for the vngodlye. For the lorde shal not repell hys peple / nether forsake his heretage But he shal restore iugement vnto the rule off ryghtwysnes: and hym shal there folowe all that are

pure in herte.
               Who maye helpe agēst these maligne men? or who maye stāde by me agenst these wyked?
               Except the lorde had bene my helper / I had ere nowe bene in my graue.
               For when I thought yt my fete was slyden: yet was it thy mercy lorde that sustayned me.
               In my many fold inwarde sorowful vexacions: thy consolacions yet refresshed my soule.
               Hast thou any thinge to do with the seat of the vngodly / which vnder the cloke of the lawe forgeth al myscheife and payne?
               Thei runne togither agenst ye lyfe of the iuste / and cōdemne innocent bloude.
               But the lorde shalbe my refugye:

and my god shalbe my stronge ferme confidence.
               And he shal requite them their owne malyce / and destroye them for their owne wikednes / ye lorde our god shal vtterly destroye them.
            
            
               
                  ¶ The Argument of the Psal. 95
                  Which is an excytinge and steringe vp of the faithful to praise god faithfully.
               
               
                  COme and let vs leap for ioye before the lorde / let vs synge vnto the rocke of our sauinge helth.
               Let vs come before him with thā
                  kis geuinge / & in the Psalms singe vnto him.
               For he is the lorde / both god & kinge / most mighty aboue al goddis. In his handis ar the depe secretis of the erthe / and also the strength

of the mountains.
               The sea is his / for he hathe made it / al the drye lande ioyninge therto / his handis haue facioned it
               Come a
                     •
                  d let vs faldowne before him / let vs bowe downe oure knees and beseche the Lorde oure maker.
               For he is our god / and we be the peple of his pasture / & the flok off his hande / so longe as we ceasse not to obaye his voyce.
               Be not harde herted as were they that chode and rebelled agenste him in the wildernes.
               Where youre fathers casted me of / they proued me and sawe my workis.
               Fourtye yeres it yrked me of that nacion / in so myche that I sayde: this peples herte is gone fro me / 

for they knowlege not my wayes. In my grete wrath therfore made I my othe agenst them / yt they shulde not come into my reste.
            
            
               
                  ¶The Argument of this Psal.
                  ¶Wherin al thinges / and euen the gentils be excited to loaue god which is to come vnto iugement.
               
               
                  SInge ye to ye lorde a new songe / singe ye vnto the lorde al the hole lande
               Synge ye to the Lorde / & loaue his name / prechinge his sauinge helthe at al tyme.
               Put the gentils in mynde off his glorye / and al peple of his miracles.
               For grete is the Lorde and excedeth al prayse / he is to be dreaded aboue al gods.
               For al the gods of the gentils are

but stockes / it is the lorde yt made the heuens.
               Thankis and highe magnificēce is with him: power and maiestye are in his holy place.
               Geue vnto the lorde ye kinreds of the gentils / geue the lorde his power and strengthe.
               Geue ye power almightye vnto the name of the lorde / takevp youre offeraunce ād come into his holy courte.
               Prayse ye the lorde with holy pō
                  pe / al the erthe mought reuerence his face.
               Publesshe it emonge the gentils / yt the lorde raigneth / euen the lorde which hath setfaste the worlde yt it cannot be moued / euen the lorde (I saye) yt iugeth al folke iustely.
               
                  The heuens mought reioyse and the erthe be ioyouse / the sea mought sowne and be moued with all yt is in her.
               The feldis mought be glad with whatsoeuer is in them / al the strength of the wodis mought leape for ioye:
               Before the lorde / when he shal come: for he shal come to iuge the erthe / he shal come to iuge the rownde worlde with rightwisnes / and the peple with trouthe.
            
            
               ¶It is the very almighty god / which is worshiped in Israel / and all other to be no goddis / and the worshipers of god to magnifie the very forme os our rightwismakinge.
               
                  
                     Dominus regna. exul.
                     Psal. 97.
                  
               
               
                  THe lorde reigneth / the erthe mought reioyse / and those manifold eylandis mought be gladde.
               He is closed aboute with derke clowdes rightwisnes and equite ar the pylers of his seat royal
               Fyer procedeth before him / to burne vp his enymes rownde aboute him.
               His lighteninges shewe vs clerely the worlde rownde aboute / at ye which the erthe trembleth & quakethe.
               The hilles melt awaye lyke waxe at the presence of the lorde / ye al the erthe sinketh awaye at the presence of the lorde.
               The heuens preche forth his rightwisnes: and al peple shal se his maiestye.
               
                  Confounded moughr they be / all that worship ymages and glorye in their goddis / and let al the goddis worship him.
               zion shal reioyse when she hear these thinges: and the daughters of Iuda shall daunce for ioye when they se thy iugementes / oh lorde. For thou lorde art the most highest ouer all the erth / thou art excedingly exalted aboue al gods.
               Whosoeuer loue the lorde / se that ye hate malice: for he kepeth the soulis of his seruants / and delyuereth them from the hande of the vngodly.
               Thorow hī / light is powered into the innocent: and ioye is set faste in ye pure herted.
               Be glad ye rightwyse in the Lorde and be thankful in his holy rememberance.
            
            
               
               ¶:An excitinge of al thinges to prayse god / for fauour geuen throughe crist / the iuge of the worlde to come / lyke vnto the psal. xcvi
               
                  SInge ve vnto the lorde a new songe: for he hathe done meruelous thingis with his sauinge right hande and holy arme.
               The lorde hath made known his sauinge helth / & reueled his forme of rightwyse makinge in the eyes of the gentils.
               He remembred his mercy and trouth for ye howse of Israel: yt al the coostis of the erth might se ye saluacion sent vs from our god.
               Let al the erth make melody vnto ye lorde: be glad / reioyse and singe. Singe ye vnto ye lorde with harpe

playe ye psalmes vpō your harpes Synge with trompets and claryers: make ye melody before the lorde and kynge.
               Let the sea & al yt is in her sownd forth hir melodye / al ye worlde with hir inhabitors.
               The ryuers mought clappe their handis / and the mountayns leap for ioye:
               Before ye lorde / whē he shal come to iuge the erthe / for he shall iuge ye worlde / takinge iustice to counsel / and ye peple / callinge equite to assiste him.
            
            
               
                  ¶The Argument.
                  God is here preased for his goodnes / in that he euer heareth his peple.
               
               
                  
                     Dominus regna. iras.
                     Psal. 99
                  
               
               
                  
                  THe lorde raigneth & maketh the peple to tremble / he sitteth vppon the Cherubims and moueth the erthe.
               The lorde which is worshiped in zion is grete: and highe aboue all peple.
               Let them extol thy grete name / so terrible and so holy.
               Thy power royal loueth equite / thou holdest mercy in thy hande / and that at iuste ād right is / thou doist it vnto Iacob.
               Extol ye the lorde oure god / and fal downe before his fotestole / for he is holye.
               Moses & Arō wer ordined his preistes / and Samuel off the noumber of them that cal vpon his name / called vnto the Lorde / and he

answerde them.
               Out of the clowdy pyler he spake vnto them: for thei kept ye testimonyes and lawe whiche he had geuen them.
               Lorde oure God / it was thou that herdest them / thou waste vnto them / bothe their mercyful god and also the auenger of their vayne deuyses.
               Magnifie ye the lorde our god / ād worship him in his holy hyll: for right holy is the lorde our god.
            
            
               ¶A Psalme of thankis geuinge in the hole congregacion.
               
                  MAke ye mirthe vnto the Lorde throughe oute all the lande / worshipe the lorde in gladnes / come into his presens ioyfully.
               Acknowlege ye that the lorde ys

god: he made vs / and not we oure selfe which ar his peple and ye shepe of his pasture.
               Go ye into his gates with thankis geuinge / and into his vtwarde courte with praise / loaue and preche his name.
               For the lorde is benigne / his mercy is euerlastinge / and his trouth endureth vnto al generacions.
            
            
               ¶Here are princes and rulers taught how they shulde lyue their selues: and entreat other.
               
                  MErcy and equite shal I prayse in my songe / vnto the (oh lorde) shall I singe.
               I shal endeuour to attayne ye pure waye vntyl thou metest me / I shal walke in the innocencye off my herte within my nowne house

I shal not set before me any shrewd counsel: the vngodly vnhonest I so hate them / yt thei shal not in nowyse cleue vnto me.
               Wyked mynded I abhorre / him yt forgeth myscheif in nowyse wil I knowe.
               Him that secretely detracteth his neighbour I wil oppresse / the prowd and arrogant I maye not awaye with.
               My eyes shalbe intent in this worlde vnto ye very faithful to dwel with me: and who so walke yn ye waye of innocencye / he shall be my seruant.
               No deceitful persone shal dwel in my house / no lyer shall tary in my sight.
               Al wiked persons wyll I cast forthe in tyme oute off the lande / so

that al workers of myscheif shalbe cut out of the cyte of the lorde.
            
            
               ¶A prayer of the pore afflicte beinge in distresse / poweringe forth his complaint before the lorde.
               
                  LOrde heare my prayer and let my crying come vnto the.
               Hyde not thy face frome in tyme of my tribulacion / but lysten vnto me when I cal / & haste the to helpe me.
               For my dayes vanishe awaye lyke smoke / ād my bones are consumed lyke a fyer brande.
               My hert is cut downe and dryed vp lyke haye / for I forsoke to take my nowne meate.
               For the noyse of my sorowful wailinge my bones skant cleue vnto my flesshe.
               
                  I am lyke ye pellycane in ye wyldernes / and lyke ye night fowle in ye olde broken celinges.
               I wake and am lyke ye lytel sparowe which sitteth solytary with out his mate in ye rofe of ye house. My enymes reuyle me continually: and thei that ieste vpon me cō
                  spire my deth.
               So that I eat my brede lyke asshes and mengle my drinke with teares.
               And that euen for thy indignacion and wrath / for thou tokest me vppe to caste me agenste the grownde.
               My dayes are lyke the eueninge clowde: for I am witherd awaye lyke haye.
               But thou lorde endurest for euer and thy mencion is throughe out

all ages.
               Aryse thou therfore and haue compassion on zion / for tyme it is to pitye it: hir apointed tyme is nowe come.
               For thy seruantis dyed for ye loue of the stones therof / & it berued them to se her broken into poulder. Haue pyte lorde yt the gentils mought fere thy name / and al the kinges of the worlde mought reuerē
                  ce thy maiestye.
               Euen whē thei shal se the (oh lorde) preserue zion / and appere in thi gloriouse power.
               Whē thou lystenest vnto the prayer of the pore destitute / and contempnest not his desyeres.
               For this thinge shalbe left writē vnto our posterite / yt the peple to come mought prayse the lorde.
               
                  Because he hath loked forth from his highe holy place / euen frō heuen into the erthe.
               To heare the sorowful wailinge of the bounde in presone / to loose them apoynted vnto deth.
               That in zion the name of the lorde mought be preched / and his glorye in Ierusalem.
               In the most ful congregaciō / euē when the kingdomes shal be ther gathered togither to worship the lorde. Although in yt same viage he minesshed my strength / & shortened my dayes.
               Euen while I thus prayd / oh my god take me not awaye in the midde course of my age / for thi yeris are euerlastinge.
               Thou laydst the foundaciō of the erth frō ye beginning: & the heuens

are the worke of thy handis.
               Thei shal perishe / but thou shalt stond faste: and all thinges shalbe consumed in tyme / lyke a vesture: thou shalt change them like a garment / and thei shalbe changed.
               But thou shalt abyde euer one ād the same / and thi yeres shal neuer haue ende.
               The childerne of thy seruants ād their sead / shal abyde and dwel togither with the.
            
            
               ¶A prayse with thankis for the benefits os our creacion / preseruacion / and iustrification
               
                  PRayse ye lorde my soule: ād al the secrete powers of my herte moughte praise his holy name.
               My soule / thanke thou the lorde / and forget not so many his grete

benefits.
               Which forgeueth ye al thy trespases / and healeth al thy infirmytes Whiche redemeth thy lyfe frome dethe / and crowneth ye withe his benigne mercy and ientlenes.
               Which satisfieth thy desier wyth al maner goodnes / and preserueth thy youghth euermore flouresshinge lyke the egle.
               In ministringe his iustice and equite / ye lorde auengeth al ye suffer wronge.
               Vnto Moses he shewed his wayes / and his counsels vnto ye chyldern of Israel.
               Right mylde and merciful is the lorde: slowe vnto wrath / but redy to forgeuenes.
               He chydeth not euer / nother is he angry alwayes.
               
                  He dealeth not with vs after oure sinnes: nor rewardeth vs not acordinge to our wikednes.
               The heyghth of the heuens is not so present ouer the erthe / as is his merciable goodnes ouer them that worship him.
               He setteth out sinnes as farre frō vs / as is the east from the west
               Neuer was there any parente so tender vnto his childerne / as is ye lorde vnto them that worship hī. For it is he that knoweth our makinge / he remembreth yt we ar but of dust.
               That ye age of man mortall is lyke grasse: yt he flouressheth lyke a flower of the felde.
               Which as sone as any sharp winde touche it: it is gone / nomore founde in his place.
               
                  But the merciable goodnes of the lorde / is from euer and euer preseruinge his worshipers / ād the forme of his rightwismakinge is prsent with their childers childern. Solonge as they kepe his couenant / and holde his commaundments in mynde to do them.
               The lorde hath set faste his seat royal in heuen: and with his maiesty emperial he gouerneth al thinges.
               Prayse ye the Lorde his aungels / whiche excell in power to fulfill his plesures / and to obaye the voyce of his worde.
               Prayse ye the lorde al his myghty hoste / his ministers / and ye yt do his plesures.
               Prayse ye the lorde / al his workis in euery place of his dominion.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               Prayse thou the lorde my soule.
            
            
               ¶In this Psalme the prouidence of god agenst al creatures / is praised.
               
                  PRayse ye lorde my soule: oh lorde my god / it cannot be expressed withe how grete myght / maiestye and glorye thou arte ornowerned.
               Thou arte decked with lyght as with thy garment / thou stretchest forth ye heuens lyke a cortayne.
               Thy dwellinge place is volted ouer fast with waters / ye clowdes thou framest into thy chariets / caryed with ye swyft wynges of the wynde.
               Thou makest ye wyndes thy messengers / ād ye flames of fyer to be thy ministres.
               
                  Thou hast layd ye erthe vpon her owne fast foundacion / s
                     •
                   yt she shal neuer fal / nor rele.
               Thou hast wrapped her in with ye sea as it were with hir vesture.
               And euen when ouer ye mountaīs ye waters ascende: yet at thi rebukinge thei flee: at ye noise of thi thondringe thei faldowne.
               Then ye hilles are sene a lofte / ād ye vales beneth in their place which thou hast apointed them
               Thou hast limited ye waters their bowndes whiche thei maye not passe / nether yet turne agayne to ouer flowe ye erthe.
               Thou ledest forthe ye springes in yt vales / which go thorowe betwene ye hilles.
               To geue drinke vnto al thy beastes of ye felde / yt ye wylde asses myght

breke their thirste.
               Aboue in the hilles the foules off the ayer haue their habitacions: & singe out of the thik braunches.
               Thou waterest the hilles frō thy highe places / through thi diligēt worke the erth is replenisshed with yearly encrease.
               Thou bringest forth grasse for catel / and herbes to serue man
               Out of the erth thou bringest forth both fode to sustayne and refresshe man: wyne to make glad mā
                  nis herte / and oyle to make him a mery chere.
               The trees are made fatte off thy lordeship / and also the Cedres off Libanus which thou hast plāted That the fowles mought ther nestle / as is the furtre an house for the storke.
               
                  That the highe hilles mighte be soucour for the hartis / and the rockes a refuge for the kones.
               Thou hast made ye mone to wexe and wanse / the sun knoweth his down fallinge.
               Than bringest thou yn derkenes to make the night / in yt which all ye beastis of ye forestis crepeforth. As ye yōge lyōs roringe for their proye / to seke their meat apoynted them of god.
               But the sun arysinge / thei conuaye them self yn agayne / and leye them downe in their dennes.
               And then cometh forth man vnto his worke / and to tyl his lande vntyl eueninge.
               Oh how grete ar thy workis o lorde? which al so wysely thou hast made / right ful is ye erth of thi goodes.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  The sea also is grete and wyde euery wayes / wheryn are thinges crepinge innumerable / as fisshes and beastes / some smal and some excedinge grete.
               Wherevpon sayle the shippes / & there is the grete whalefisshe whom thou hast made to mocke and playe therin.
               Al these creatures depende vpon ye / yt thou shuldst geue them their meat at their tyme.
               For / thou geuinge it them / thei take it: and thou openinge thy hande / thei are wel satisfied.
               But thou / hydinge thy face / they are sorowful: and thou takinge awaye their breth / thei are but dead and turned into the erthe yt they came of.
               And agayn / whē thou puttest forth

thy brethe / anon there are thinges created agene: and thus thou renewest the face of the erthe.
               The gloriouse maiestye of the lorde mought raigne for euer / the lorde mought reioyse in his workis. At whose loke the erth trembleth at whose touchynge the hilles smoke.
               I shal singe vnto ye lorde whyle I lyue / whyle I haue my beynge I shal singe vnto my god.
               My prayer be plesaunt before hī: for I reioyse in the lorde.
               Sinners mought be cōsumed out of the erthe / and the vngodly neuermore to be sene: but thou / oh my soule / prayse thou the lorde.
               Halleluia.
            
            
               ¶In this psalme / we be taught the prouidēce of god / and how fatherly

he tendreth the faithful.
               THanke ye the lorde / magnifie his name: & preche his woundrefull counsels to the peple.
               Synge and make melody vnto hī comon togither vpon his clere actis.
               Prayse his holy name / the hertis of the sekers of the lorde mought reioyse.
               Seke ye the lorde incessauntly / seke his presence and ceasse not.
               Remember his grete deadis and miracles which he hath done / ād also his iugements which he pronounced with his mouth.
               Oh ye sead of Abraham his seruāts: oh childrē of Iacob his chosē It is he yt is ye lorde our god / whose

ensamples are knowne throughe al the worlde.
               He neuer forgeteth his couenant and promyse / which he hath shewde vnto infinite generacions:
               Euen the same couenant whiche he smote with Abraham / and his holy othe made vnto Isaac:
               Which he decreed for a lawe with Iacob: and confirmed it withe Israel into a perpetual testamēt. Saynge: vnto the shal I geue the londe of Canaan / to be the lot off thy heretage.
               When they were yet but fewe in noumber / & strang
                     •
                  rs therin.
               Goynge from nacion to naciō / frō one kingdome to another peple.
               yet suffred he noman to hurte them / but chastened euen kinges for their plesure.
               
                  Saynge: touche not my anoynted and vnto my prophets / se that ye do no harme.
               After this when he had called a famyn vpon yt lande / and broken al their sustinance.
               Then sent he before them a man / euen Ioseph / which was solde to be a bonde seruant.
               Whose fete were sore bownde with feters / a barre of yerne went ouer his breste.
               But by ye coūsel of ye lorde was he thus proued / vntyl the tyme yt he had set / shuld come.
               And then sent ye kinge commandinge him to be losed: ye prince off ye peple commanded him to be delyuered.
               And made him ruler of his house and lorde ouer al his goodis.
               
                  That he shulde enstructe his nobles at his plesure / & teche his sage rulers prudence.
               And at laste came Israel also into Egipt / and Iacob became a stranger in ye lande of Ham.
               And ye Lorde encreased his peple there so gretely / yt thei were at last stronger then their aduersaries
               And then thegipcions hertes chā
                  ged / they persecuted his peple / ād sought occasions deceitfully to trappe his seruants.
               Wherfore he sent Moses his seruant / and Aaron his chosen.
               And gaue them power to shewe wondres / & to do miracles in ye lā
                  de of Ham.
               He casted derkenes vpon them / & it was midnight ouer al / for it coude not auoyd his commandment.

He turned their waters into blode / and killed their fisshe.
               Their land crewiled ful of froggis / yea and that euen in the kynges preuey chambers.
               He commaunded it / and anon there came forth swarmes off al maner flyes / gnattis / and lyse / were in al their coostis.
               For showers of rayne / he gaue them hayle stormes / and lighteninges into their lande.
               Wherewith he smote their vynes and figtrees / and blasted their trees through out al their coostis
               At his worde / there were present venomese hot flyes / and caterpylers innumerable.
               And eit vp al that grene was yn their lande / and deuowered al their frute.
               
                  Also he smote euery first begoten in their londe / euen their cheif thinges of al their labour.
               And at laste he led them forth with siluer and golde / nether was there any syke in al their tribs.
               Egipt was glad of their goynge forth: for thei begane to be afrayd of them.
               And here / ye lorde stretched thē forth a cloude to shadewe thē / & ministred fier to lightē thē by night Whē thei asked it / he sent thē grete plētye of quailes / & filled them with fode sent down out of ye ayer He opened the rocke / and there flowed forth waters and made them ryuers in the drye deserte.
               And al because he wolde not forgete ye sacramēt of his holy promise made to Abrahā his seruāt.

He led forth therfore his peple with grete gladnes / & his chosen with grete ioye.
               And delyuerd them ye prouinces of the gentyles / and whatsoeuer ye peple had gotē with their labour they now posseded it.
               To thentent thei shulde obserue his iuste plesures / and kepe diligently his lawe.
               Halleluia.
            
            
               ¶This psalme is a thankis geuinge for the olde benefits of god / and an obtaininge of gods fauour. Halleluia.
               GEue ye thankis vnto ye lorde / for he is euermore benigne and merciful.
               Who maye worthely treate his noble actio / and preche his ful prayse?
               
                  Oh how blessed be they that obserue equite / and do right at al tyme.
               Remember vs lorde for thy graciouse goodnes towerd thy peple: & vysyte vs with thy sauinge helth That thy electe myght se thy goodnes / yt thy folke myght be glad & thy nowne peculiare peple might clap their handis for ioye.
               We haue offended with our fathers / we be sinners and haue done wykedly.
               Our fathers yet in Egipte consydered not thy meruelouse actis / they regarded not thi grete goodnes but rebelled euen at the red sea.
               But yet the lorde saued them for his names sake / to declare his almyghty power.
               For anon as he rebuked ye red sea

it was dryed vp / and he led them ouer throughe the depeth as throughe the drye lande.
               He delyuered them from the hande of their haters / & preserued thē from the power of their enymes. The waters ouerwhelmed their aduersaries: so that not one of them remayned.
               And then they beleued his wordis / & sunge him yt gloriouse songe But full sone after forgote they his workis / nether wolde thei abide his plesure.
               And they offended him with their impacient desiers in the deserte / they prouoked god vnto anger in the wildernes.
               And yet he gaue them their desier and did put awaye their penurye of which it yrked them so sore.
               
                  Then thei angred Moses in their tentis / and enuyed Aron ye lordis holy man.
               But the grounde gaped and swalowd yn Dathan / and closed ouer the chirche of Abiram:
               Fier first kindled and set vpon their congregacion / and many off ye vngodly brent vp.
               Thei had also made them a calfe in horeb / and fildowne before the grauen image.
               And thei casted away their glory for ye image of a calfe eating haye Forgetinge god their sauiour / which had done so grete thinges in Egipte.
               So grete miracles in the lōde of Hā / so dreadful thīgis in ye red sea Wherfore the lorde had decreed to destroy thē / had not Moses his

electe man steptforth in yt article into his presence to sustayne and beare his furye / lest he shulde haue casten them awaye.
               Ouer this yet despysed thei some tyme y• desiderable londe / in so miche that thei wolde not beleue his wordis.
               Then they murmured and swelled in their tabernacles / nether wolde thei obey the commandemēt of the lorde.
               Wherfore he lifted vp his hande agenste them / to haue smyten them downe in ye deserte.
               To disperse their sead into amonge ye gentils: and to scater them amonge ye harthen.
               Besydis this thei maryed thē selues vnto Baal peor / & eite ye sacrifices offred to dead stockis.
               
                  And thus they offended him witheir owne inuencyons / wherfore the pestelence fellyn vpon them. Then was Pinhas the auenger anon present: and the pestelence swaged.
               Which thinge was rekened him for a good dede / for euermore amō
                  ge his posterite.
               Thei yet exasperated him at the waters of stryfe / which thīge made Moses to be punyshed for their sakis.
               For they so angred ye spirit of god that he spake it playnly with hys lyppes.
               That they shulde not clene caste out the gentyles / whome the Lorde had promysed them to plucke vppe.
               Wherfore thei were mengled with

the gentils / and lerned the workis of them.
               And thei worshiped their images which brought thē to their fall:
               As to slay their owne sonnes and daughters / and offere them vp vnto deuillis.
               To shed the innocent blode of their owne sones ād daughters / whom thei offred vnto the images of the Cananites / pollutīge the erth with their blode.
               And that they their selues shulde also be prophaned & polluted with their own workis / playnge the harlettis with their own deuises and inuencions.A greuouse fal from God their glory.
               
               Then the lordis wrathe was set on fier agenst his peple / and he abhorred his heretage.
               He gaue them vp into the power

of the gentils / and they yt hated them were their lordis.
               Their enymes oppressed them / they were subiectis vnto them
               Often tymes he delyuered them / and thei as ofte rebelled with their owne deuises / For their owne sinnes therfore wer thei oppressed But yet when he behelde their distresse / ād herde their complaints He remembred his couenant with them / & for his grete infinite mercye he pytied them.
               And gaue them fauour withe all that had taken them.
               Saue vs lorde our god / and gather vs out of the gentils / that we might loaue thy holy name & preche thy glory.
               Praised be the lorde god of Israel from euer into euerlastinge / and

al peple mought saye Amen
               Halleluya.
            
            
               ¶Thankis for the benefits of the prouidence of god.
               GEue ye thankis vnto the lorde: for he is euermore mylde and mercyful.
               Let them geue thankis which are redemed off the Lorde / ye and that euen from the power off theyr enymes.
               And hath gathered them from the gentils / frome the este and weste / from the northe and south
               When they wandred in the wildernes in a waye not troden / findinge no cyte to reste in.
               So hongry and thirsty that their lyues fayled them:
               Thei cryed vnto the lorde in their distresse / and he delyuered thē out

of their anxte.
               And brought them into the right waye / that they myght come vnto the cyte which thei shulde inhabite.
               Let them therfore prayse the goodnes of the lorde / and his clere workis shewed vnto the childerne of men.
               For he satisfieth the hongry soule / and the thirstye he filleth right well.
               For when they sate in derknes ād shadew of deth / beinge bownde & greued with yerne:
               Because they had cast awaye the commandmentis of god / and prouoked the mynde of the most hyghest.
               When he had brought their hertis fullowe withe laboure / when

they laye noman to helpe thē vp. Thei cryed vnto the lorde in their affliccion / and he delyuered them from their distresse.
               He led thē forth of the derkenes of that deadly shadew / and broke of their bondis.
               Let them therfore prayse the goodnes of the Lorde / and his clere actis done vnto the chylderne of men.
               For it is he that brake the brason gates / and smote the barres of yerne in sondre.
               For when the vnwyse had gone a wrōge waye / and shuld be scourged for their own wykednes.
               And when their appetyte abhorred al naner meat / and thei were now euen at dethes dore.
               
                  Thei cryed vnto the Lorde in their anxt / and he delyuered thē out of their distresse.
               He sent his rightwyse one / and healed them / and delyuered them from their dethe.
               Let thē therfore prayse the goodnes of the Lorde / and his woundrese deadis done vnto the chyldern of men.
               And offre him vp the sacrifyce of thankis / and preche his workis ioyously.
               Who so clyme the seas with shippe: and expede their busynes on the sea.
               Thei know the workis of the Lorde and his meruelous actis whiche he dothe in the depthe.
               For at his commandement the wyndye stormes aryse / and lyfte

vp hir waues.
               Now are they lyfted vp vnto heuen / anone are thei downe as depe as hel / whiche perel vexeth their myndes sore.
               They rele and stagger lyke dronken men / and are all at their wittes ende:
               But when they crye vnto the lorde in their anxt / he delyuereth them from their distresse.
               He ceasseth the tempest / and bringeth in the caulme after that he hath swaged the swellinge waues.
               And then thei reioyse for their quietnes geuen them agen / and efte sone he bringeth them vnto their desyered hauen.
               Let them therfore praise the goodnes of the Lorde / and extol his woundreful

workis done for the children of men.
               Let them extol him 
                     •
                  n the congregacion of the peple / and prayse hī in the presence of the elders:
               Which turneth ryuers into drye londe / and the vaynes of quyke springes into thirstye sande.
               He maketh the fatte and fruteful region al barayn / for the malice of the dwellers theryn.
               Whiche contrarywyse also turneth the drye deserte into swete waters: and the drye stouburne clottes into lyuely fountains
               And setteth there the hongrye to bylde them cytes to dwel in:
               To sowe the feldis / and plant vyneyardes / which mought yilde them their yearly encrease.
               He nouressheth and encreseth them

excedingly / and suffereth no their catell to minisshe.
               But when he minissheth and maketh them ful poore and lowe / b
                     •
                   violence / affliccion and sorowe. When he casteth thē bonde to th
                     •
                   rulers for a proye / when he ledeth them al aboute by vayne and voyd placis where is no waye.
               yet at last he easeth the pore from his heuye nede / and geueth him an howsholde lyke a flocke of hepe.
               These thinges mought the iuste beholde / and be glad / and let euery maliciouse stop his mouthe.
               Who so euer thou be and art wyse / marke thou well these thingis that the benefits of god might be knowne.
            
            
               
               ¶A Prayer vnto God agenste vngodly enemes / and for tranquillite and peace.
               
                  My mynde is ful bente (oh god) bothe to synge and playe thy prayse with al my herte.
               A wake thou my lute / ād my harpe to / that I mought begynne spedely a none.
               And prayse the amonge the peple oh Lorde / and loaue the amonge the gentyls.
               Because thy goodnes is hygher then the heuens / and thy tr
                     •
                  uthe and faithfulnes is aboue the clowdes.
               Be thou exalted aboue heuens oh God / and aboue al the erthe in thy maiestye.
               
                  That thi dere beloued mought be delyuerd: saue with thy righthande and helpe.
               God promysed it by his owne holynes (which thinge the mean reason is my felicite) saynge that I shuld diuide vnto my self Sichē / and the vale of Suchoth shuld I meat oute.
               Galaad is myne / Manasse is myne / Ephraim is my cheif strength and Iuda is my leder.
               Moab is my special potte / vnto Idumea shal I stretche forth my shooes / vpon Palestyne wil I blowe vp trompets.
               But who is it that ledeth me forth vnto these defenced cytes? who directeth me vnto Idumea?
               Is it not thou (o god) which hadst repelled vs ād woldst not go forthe

with our hoste?
               And tokest awaye oure helpe at oure moste nede? ful vayne therfore is the helthe and helpe whiche is hoped for / of men.
               In god therfore shal we reken oure present victory / for it is he that tredeth downe oure aduersaries.
            
            
               ¶In this psalme is contayned the vengeaunce of god agenste the persuers of his worde / and thankis be geuen him for oure delyuerance & their confusion.
               
                  OH god my glorye / dissemble not.
               For the mouthe of the vngodly / and the mouth of the deceytful are openned agenst me / and with a lyinge tongue they speke agenst me.
               They circumuent me with tale
                     •
                  
                  
forged of odiouse malyce / and laye agenste me with out a cause.
               For my intire loue / thei were clene agenste me / and that euē while I prayd for them
               Thus thei requyted me hurte for my good doyng / and hatered for my loue.
               Set some cruel tyraunt vpō him to be his master / and set his enimye at his right hande.
               Whē he is presented in iugemēt let him be condēpned / and let his owne defence make his cryme more greuous.
               Let his tyme be shorte / and another redy to take his office.
               Let his chylderne be soucourlesse and his wyfe destitute al helpe.
               Let his chylderne be runagates / beggers / sekīg their meat in their

harde exile.
               Let the extorcioner laye hand vpō al his goodis / & his enymye pluk awaye his laboures.
               Let there be none to pytie him nor none to fauour his fatherlesse.
               Let dethe make an ende of his ysswe / so that in the next generaciō is name be clene extincte.
               But as for the grete synnes of his father / let them be by tale tolde before the lorde / and let not the synnes of his mother be forgoten.
               Let thē be euer present before the lorde / but as for ye memorial of siche mē / let it be plucked clene out of the erthe.
               Because he neuer remembred to do mercie / but persecuted the deiecte man / redye to kyll the pore

sorowful in herte.
               He loued execrable cursinge / let it therfore fal vppon him selfe: he neuer sought fauour / let it therfore be farre from him.
               He wrapt him selfe in execracion as in his clothinge / let it therfore pearse thorowe hym lyke water / and synke into his bones like oyle Let it cleue vpon him lyke his cloke wherewith he is kouered / and sit to his sydis lyke his girdle where with he is euer girte
               Let this worke chaunce to myne enymes from the lorde / and vpon them that perniciously conspire my dethe.
               But thou lorde God deale otherwyse with me / for thy names sake for by thy mercy art thou redy to delyuer me.
               
                  For I am a pore afflicte abiecte! and my hert is wounded with yn me.
               I go forth lyke the eueninge shadewe / and am taken awaye lyke ye locustes.
               My knees folde vnder me for fayntnes and sorowe / and my flesshe is so dryed vp / that ther is no moystenes left in me.
               I am made a reuylinge stok for them when thei se me / thei shake their headis at me.
               Helpe me lorde my God and saue me fo
                     •
                   thy mercyable goodnes.
               That thei might knowe thissame to be thy hande / and that thou haste done it.
               Let them curse blasphemously / so that thou beist benigne and iētle vnto me: let them ryse agenste me

and be confounded / but thi seruāt shalbe glad.
               Let my aduersaryes be cled with ignomyny ād shame / and be kouered with their owne confusion as with a cloke.
               I shal as intyerlye as I can speke forth thankes vnto the lorde / and in the myd multitude loaue him. For it is he that standethe at the righthande of the pore afflicte: to delyuer him from his condempners.
            
            
               ¶A prophecy of the birth of cryste / and of his kingdom both here in his chirche / and also in heuen.
               THe lorde seid vnto my lorde sitte thou on my righthande / vntyl I make thyne enymyes thy fote stole.
               
                  The septre of thy power / the lorde shal sende it forthe from zion / that thou mightst be emperour in the myddes of thyne enimes.
               In the daye of thy triumphe / thy peple shal bring forth their wel willing oblacions with an holy pompe: for the dewe of thy natiuite is spronge out of the wombe of the morninge.
               The Lorde hath sworne / and it shal not repēt him: Thou art the preiste for euer aftir the ryte of Melchisedek.
               The lorde is present at thy right hande / whiche when he is angrye he smyteth euen the kinges
               He taketh vengeance vpō the gē
                  tyls / and filleth all with their kariōs and smytethe the head of the hole worlde.
               
                  In his iourney shal he drinke off the ryuer / and then shal he lyftvp his head.
            
            
               Prayse ye the lorde.
               ¶This Psalme is a prayse & thankis geuinge.
               I Shal prayse the lorde with al my herte / both priuatelye with his faithful / and also in the hole congregacion.
               Grete are the workis of the lorde and gretely desyered of al that embrase them.
               His wurk is worthy laude & glorye / and his rightwisnes endureth for euer.
               He hath so done his woundrefull cleare actis / that they be worthy to be remembred: mylde and mercyful is the lorde.
               He geueth meat to them that fear

him / remembringe for euer his couenaunt.
               The vertw and strength of his dedis he shewed vnto his peple / when he gaue them the possessiōs of the gentyls.
               The workis of his handis ar ferme and right / faste and trwe ar al his precepts.
               Cōfirmed into euery age / as thingis decreed and set vpon trwthe and equite.
               Redempcion hathe he sent vnto his peple / he hath commaunded his couenaunt to stand for euer: holy and reuerent is his name.
               The head of wysdom is the fear of the Lorde / oh right and hole mynde which moderath hir wurkis aftir him / the prayse of them shal endure for euer. Halleluia.
            
            
               
               ¶Constancye of mynde / and necessary substance neuer faile the good man.
               
                  OH blessed man that fereth god / and aboue all thinges delighteth yn his precepts.
               Mighty is his posterite in ye erth the familie of the rightwyse is blessed.
               Honour and riches are in the house of siche a man / and his rightwisnes abydeth for euer.
               In derkenes / the sonne and light wil springe and shyne vpon ye rightwyse / he is mercyful mylde & iuste.
               Plesaunt ād profitable is the mā that hath compassion ād lendeth: which also waye his wordis with iugement.
               
                  For he abydeth euer one vnmoued: the memorial of the iuste endurethe euer.
               At euel tydinges he fereth not / for ferme and fast is his hert by faith in the lorde.
               So constant is his hert that he dreadeth not / vntyll he se the fal off his enymes.
               He deuideth and geueth vnto the pore / his iustice endureth for euer his victoriouse power shalbe gloriously exalted.
               Which thingis al / the vngodlye beholdinge / he shal frete himselfe with inuye / grinne and whett his tethe / and be consumed: ād the desier of the vngodly shalbe frustrate. Halleluia.
            
            
               ¶God is praysed here for his allmightynes.
               
                  
                  LOaue ye o seruaunts of the Lorde / loaue the name of the Lorde.
               Praysed be the name of the Lorde / from hence forth for euermore.
               From the sone rysing vnto the downe falling / loaued be the name of the Lorde.
               The Lorde is excellent highe aboue al nacions / and his glorye aboue the heuens.
               Who is to be compared vnto the Lorde our God? which hath se
                     •
                  eled himself to dwel so hyghe / and yet so humbleth himselfe agene / that he wil beholde what so euer is in heuen and erthe.
               He lyfted vp the nedye one out of the duste: ād erectith the pore out of the donghil.
               
                  To set him amonge the rulers / euen emonge the Princes of his peple.
               He maketh ye barayn / to be a glad mother of the householde / at home amonge hir childern. Prayse ye the Lorde.
            
            
               ¶A prayse with thankis where yn the hope of the faithful is cōfirmed
               WHen Israel shulde come forth out of Egypt / and ye house of Iacob from that straunge peple.
               Thou wast (oh god) reuerent holye vnto Iuda / and vnto Israel their mighty emperowr.
               Which when the sea had espyed / she did flee▪ ād Iordane gaue bak The mountains skipt lyke rammes / and the litle hill toppes lyke lombes.
               
                  What ailed ye (oh sea) to flee? & thou iordane whi wentest thoubak? What made ye / you mountains to leape lyke wethers? and ye hilles to playe like lombes?
               At the presence of the lorde thou tremblest oh erthe / especially at the presence of the god of Iacob. Which tournethe the stone into a ponde of water / and the stonney rocke into a plentuouse springe.
            
            
               ¶The Psal. folowing is a distincte Psal. aftir the Hebrews. &c.
               NOt vnto vs lorde / not vnto vs / but vnto thy name geue thou the glory of thy goodnes ād trouthe shewd for vs.
               Let not ye gētyls saye: where now (I beseche you) is their God?
               Whē our god is he yt is in heuē / & disposeth al thīgis accordīg to his godly wil But these mēnis images

ar but syluer & golde / euē the wurkis of mennis handis.
               Thei haue mouthes & speke not / thei haue eyes and se not.
               Eares haue thei and hear not / noses and smell not.
               Handes haue thei and hādle not / fete and go not / nor tēpere thei no voice withe their throte.
               Lyke are thei vnto those / yt make thē: & vnto those yt truste in thē. But thou o Israel / truste in ye lorde: for it is he yt is thy helper & defender Oh my family of Aarō truste ye in ye Lorde: for he is your helper and defender.
               ye yt whorship ye lorde / truste in ye lorde / for it is he yt is your helper & defēder The lorde mought remēber vs / & take vs vp īto his cure / he mought nouressh vp ye house

of Israel / and encrease the house of Aaron.
               He mought blesse them that fere the lorde / bothe yonge and olde.
               The Lorde mought encrease / bothe you and your chyldean.
               For ye ar the holy faitheful of ye lorde / which hath made heuē and erthe
               Al the whol heuens ar the lordis but the erth hath he geuen to the chyldern of men.
               The dead loaue the not oh Lorde: nor none of them that be gone awaye forgoten.
               But we wil prayse the Lorde / frō hence forthe into euerlastinge.
               Halleluia.
            
            
               ¶A thankis geuinge for delyuerā
                  ce out of grete anxt and distresse.
               
                  My mynde is wel eased ād at reste / for the Lorde hath herde the voyce of my prayer.
               He listened vnto me / when I cryed in my grete perel.
               Ropes of dethe had cōpassed me yn / and helly distresses had inuolued me: I was fallen into affliccion and sorowe.
               But when I called vpon the name of the Lorde / sayng / Lorde I praye the delyuer my soule.
               (For mylde ād iuste is the Lorde / and our mercyful god.
               The Lorde is the keper of the pore humble / and I was destitute all helpe) then he saued me.
               Tourne the therfore (my soule) into thy reste / for ye lorde hath geuen the thy askinge.
               
                  Thou verely-hast delyuered my soule from deth: myne eyes from teris / and my fete from slydinge. That I might walke right before the Lorde / amonge the lyuinge.
            
            
               ¶The Psal. folowing is al one in nowmber with the former / withe the Hebrewes.
               
                  TRuthe it was yt I sayd / when I spake in my vehement afflicciō / when I sayd in my traunce: Euery man is a lyar.
               But what shal I requyte the Lorde for al his benefits geuen me? For I receyued yt holsome cuppe / when I had called vpon the name of the Lorde.
               Wherfore I shal paye my vowes vnto ye Lorde / before al his peple: right preciouse in ye eyes of ye Lorde

is the dethe of his faithful.
               I thāke the Lorde: that thou hast broken the bondis of me thi seruant / of me thy seruant and the chylde of thy hande mayden.
               Wherfore I slaye vnto the offerance of prayse / and I magnifye thy name oh Lorde.
               My promises shal I paye vnto the Lorde / before al his peple in the fore courte of the house of the Lorde / euen in the middis of Ierusalem. Halleluia.
            
            
               ¶Here it is prophecyed of the callyng of the gentyls / by the mercy of God.
               PRaise ye the Lorde all gentyles: loaue him also all peple.
               For his merciable goodnesis encreased more & more towerd vs: &

his faithfulnes endewerth for euer. Halleluia.
            
            
               A thankis geuing openly for deliuerāce from our aduersaryes. &c.
               THanke ye the Lorde / for his euerlastinge goodnes and mercye.
               Let Israel preche forthe his euerlasting goodnes.
               The family of Aron also mought preche his perpetual goodnes / 
               Whoso fere the lorde / let them preche his goodnes euerlastinge.
               Out of my greuouse distresse called I vpon the lorde / & the Lorde herde me / and did set me at libertye.
               The Lorde is with me / I shal not fere what soeuer man / maye do to me.
               The lorde is mi helper / wherfore

I set nought by my enimes.
               Beter is it to truste in the Lorde / then in princes.
               Let al nacions stande aboute me / and yet in the name of the Lorde shal I destroye them.
               Let them compasse & close me yn: and yet in the lordis name shal I slaye them.
               Let them fle aboute me lyke bees / and enforce to consume me lyke fyer the thornes / and yet in the name of the lorde shal I vaynquesshe them.
               Let them caste me down with neuer so grete violence: and yet the lorde wil helpe me.
               The strength and substance of ye dyte of my songe is the lorde: & he himselfe is my helthe.
               The noyse of mirthe and helthe

is in the tabernacles of the iuste: for the righthande of the lorde hath goten the victory.
               The most highe right hande of ye lorde / the righthonde of the lorde obtayneth the triumphe.
               Oh / wolde god I might not dye / but lyue: that I might magnifye the workis of the lorde.
               Let the lorde correk and chastyse me / but not deliuer me to deth.
               Open me the gate of rightwisnes that I might go thorowe it / and loaue the lorde.
               For this is the gate of the lorde: the rightwyse go in thorow it.
               I thanke the / for thou hast herde me: and arte become my sauinge helth.
               The stone which ye bylders reiected: is couched to close vp the toppe

of the corner pinnacle.
               And this is done thorow the lorde: and it is a miracle in our eyes. This is the daye which the lorde hath made / let vs be mery and reioyse there in.
               Saue vs lorde we beseche the / let al thinges now prosper / lorde we praye the.
               Oh blessed that he is / which is come in the name off the Lorde / we maye wel reken you happy & wyssh you good luk which ar in the house of the lorde.
               The lorde god mought shyne vpō vs: ornowern ye this felt daye with bowes and flowers / euen vpp vnto the corners of the auter.
               Thou art my god / and I thanke the / thou art my god / whom I extoll.
               
                  Thanke ye the lorde for his euerlastinge goodnes and mercye.
            
            
               ¶This psal. declareth how vayn ar the wordis / studye / and doctryne of men / and agene how fruteful and godly is the doctryne & waye of the lorde / and how feruent the faithful mynde is in the desyer of goddis worde onely.
               
                  AlephOH blessed innocents / whiche walke in ye waye and lawe of the Lorde.
               Blessed ar they that kepe his testimonyes / & seke him vnfaynedly. Whiche committe no wikednes / but go in his wayes.
               For thou commandist straightly: nothing to be so diligently obserued as thy commandements.
               Wolde god that hitherto my stepes wolde stretche / as to obserue thy ordinances.
               
                  For so shuld I not be shamed / specially while I am attente vnto al thy precepts.
               I shal magnifye the with al my hole herte / if thou techest me the forme of thy rightwysmaking.
               I shal kepe thy ordinances / forsake me not I beseke the at any tyme.
               By what means els may the yonge man so wel kepe his lyfe pure / as by the obseruinge of thy wordis?Beth
               
               With my hole herte therfore shal I seke the: but thou / seduce me not from thy precepts.
               In my hert shal I laye vp thy wordis: that I might the lesse offende the.
               Lorde / neuer ynoughe praysed: teche me thy constitucions.
               
                  That I maye yet with my lippes remember all the plesures of thy mouth.
               That I maye more reioyse in the waye of thy promyses / then in infinite riches.
               That thi comman
                     ••
                  ents might be my meditacion: and that I might beholde thy pathe.
               That I might delight in thy precepts neuer to forgete thy wordes
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     imelGRaunt me thy seruant to lyue / that I might obserue thy plesures.
               Open my eyes that I myght se clerely the miracles which are in thy lawe.
               I am but a stranger vpon the erthe: but yet hyd not thy precepts fro me.
               For my soule is broken withe the

desyer of thy commandmēts at al tyme.
               Thou correckist these execrable prowde men / which fal frome thy precepts.
               Delyuer me from obprobry & contempt / that I myght kepe thy testimonyes.
               For the rulers sit and take counsel agēst me / but thy seruant sit & thinketh vpō thy cōmandemēts. Thy monycyons are my delight: and my senatours.
               My soule cleueth faste vnto ye grounde:Daleth but yet thou refresshe me accordinge to thy worde. I shal laye open my wayes before the: thou therfore hear me and teche me thy plesures
               Shew me ye waye of thy cōmādmēts: ād I wil cōsyder thy meruelouse dedis.
               
                  My soule wasteth in me for wetynes: confirme me with thy worde.
               Take fro me the waye of lyinge / and acordinge to thy law haue mercy on me.
               For I haue chosen the pathe of trwthe / thy iuste iugements please me.
               Let me cleue to thy promises oh lorde: that thou confoundest me not.
               Let me runne in the waye of thy commandements: in the whiche thou makest me a glad herte.
               TEche me Lorde the waye of thy precepts:He. that I might kepe it alwayes.
               Enstruct me to kepe thy lawe / & to obserue it with al my herte.
               Lede me in the pathe of thy commandemens:

for they please me. Inclyne my herte vnto thy monicions: and not vnto auarice.
               Auerte my eyes lest they beholde any vanite: and quiken me in thy waye.
               Set faste vp thy wordes before thy seruant: that they might monisshe him of thy fere.
               Turne awaye my shame whiche I fere: for ful swete ar thy iugements.
               And as for thy commandemēts / I loue them: sustayne me with thy merciable goodnes.
               LEt thy benigne fauour fall vpon me oh Lorde:Vau and thy sauing helth to / acordinge to thy worde.
               That I maye answere my reuylets / for I truste vnto thy promise

Let not the worde of trouth in any wyse go fro my mouthe / for in thy iudgements do I truste
               But let me kepe thy lawe perpetually throwt al ye worlde and yet lenger yf there be eny lenger
               Let me walke yn sauegarde / for I seke thy commandmentes.
               Let me reason off thy testymones before kynges / and not be confounded.
               Let me delyght in thy precepts / which I do loue.
               Let me lyftvp my hādis vnto thy dere beloued precepts / and haue thy commandments in my continual meditacion.
               Put thy promyse into ye mynde of thy seruāt / that thou mightst confirme my hope.
                     
                        •
                     ain
               
               For this is the thīge that coūforteth

me in my trouble / it is thy worde that reuiueth me.
               The proude contempne me gretely: but let me not swarue frō thy lawe.
               I remembre thy euerlastinge iugementes oh lorde: and I finde grete solace.
               I quake al for fere to se these myscheuous / which forsake thy doctryne.
               Thy ordinaunces are my songe whyle I am here a stranger.
               Thy name lorde / I remember be night that I might kepe thi law Graunt me grace / that I might obserue thi precepts.
               LOrde thou art my lotte / my mynde is hole bente to kepe thi wordis.Heth
               
               I desier thi presence withe all

my herte that thou be merciful to me acordinge to thy promise.
               Let me consyder my wayes / ād retourne my fete vnto thy testimonyes.
               Let me haast without stoppe to kepe thy commandmentes.
               Albeit the bondis of the vngodly holde me captiued: yet shal I not forget thy lawe.
               At midnight do I ryse to prayse the / for thy iuste iugements.
               I am felow vnto al that fere the / and kepe thy precepts.
               Oh Lorde / in whose bountuouse goodnes al the erthe floweth / teche me thy commandments.
               BE thou beneficial o lorde / vnto thy seruant / accordinge to thy worde.Thet
               
               Goodnes / discipline / and knowlege

teche me: for I steke vnto thy precepts.
               Before I was tamed with affliccion / I sinned: but now I will obserue thy worde.
               Naturally thou art good / for that same goodnes therfore teche me thy commandments.
               The proude laye their lyes before me: but I shal with al my hert kepe thy precepts.
               Their grosse hert is as harde congeled as a kidney: but yet shall I thinke vpon thy lawe.
               Happy am I that I was so scourged / for thus haue I lerned thi cō
                  mandments.
               Sweter is it to me ye doctryne off thy mouth / then infinite mesure of golde or syluer.
               
                  
                  IodTHy handes haue prepared & finesshed me: geue me vnderstandinge to lerne thy precepts.
               That when thei se me / that fere the / thei mought be glad that I cleue to thy worde.
               I know it verely lorde / that iuste ar thy iugements / for euen of thy faithfulnes thou helpest me.
               Counfort me therfore withe thy mercye / accordinge to the promyse made to thi seruant.
               Let thy swete mercyes come vpō me that I might lyue / for thi law is my meditacion.
               Let the proude be confounded which deal falsely withe me / but let me thinke vpon thi precepts
               Let them come into my fauour that fere the: which also knowe thy monicions.
               
                  Let my herte be pure and hole in thy preceptes / that I be not shamed.
               My soule is almost lost for the desier of thy sauinge helthe for I truste to thy worde.Caph
               
               My eyes ar almost wasted withe waitinge for thy worde / saynge: when wilt thou counfort me?
               For I am dried vp lyke a bledder hanged in the smoke / but yet thy precepts forget I not.
               How longe yet shal thy seruāt lyue? when wilt thou be auenged of my persuers?
               For the proude / which walke not after thy lawe / haue digged vp a pitte for me.
               Al thy precepts ar trwe and faithful: lyars persewe me / helpe thou me.
               
                  Thei had almost vtterly destroid me vpon the erthe / but yet thy cō
                  mandments forsake I not
               Saue me a lyue for thy goodnes / that I might kepe the ordinances of thy mouth.
               THy worde / lorde / standeth for euer with the heuens.Lamed
               
               And thy trouthe endureth frome age to age / as faste as ye erth made of the.
               Acording to thy ordinance they euer abyde / for all thinges serue the.
               Except thy lawe had bene my counfort / I had nowe perisshed in my affliccion.
               I shal therfore neuer forget thi cō
                  maundments / for with them thou refresshest me.
               I am thine / saue thou me / for I seke

thy precepts.
               The vngodly laye awayte to destroye me / but thy testimonies do I consyder.
               I se that al thinges created shall haue an ende: but thy precept is without ende.
               OH / how loue I thy lawe?Mem whiche only do I thinke vpō at tyme.
               Thy commandmēt made me wyser then my enymes: for it is euer with me.
               I am become more prudent then al my techers / for thy statutes ar my thought.
               I passe euen the senatours in wysedom / because I obserue thy cō
                  mandements.
               I plucke bak my fete from euery yl waye / because I wold kepe thi

wordes.
               I go not from thi iugements: for thou art my goyde.
               Oh how swete ar thy wordis in my mouth? thei excede honey in my lippes.
               I vnderstonde thy precepts / wherfore I hate euery lyinge pathe.
               THy worde is a lanterne vnto my fete.Nun and lighte vnto my stepis.
               I haue sworne and decreed to kepe thy iuste iugements.
               I am troubled aboue mesure / but thou lorde repayer me accordinge to thy worde.
               The redynes of my mouth / lorde I praye the let it so please ye: that thou woldst teche me thy iugements.
               My soule warneth me continually:

that I forget not thy lawe.
               The vngodly set snares for me / but yet swarne I not frome thy commandments.
               Thy testimones ar my perpetual heretage they be also the dayntes of my herte.
               My herte is euer bente to do thy precepts / and that not without a cause.
               THe vngodly do I hate:Samech but thy lawe do I loue: Lorde be thou my defender & fore fighter / for I truste vnto thy promyse.
               Auoide fro me ye yl men / that I maye kepe the preceptes off my God.
               Sustayn me with thy worde / that I maye lyue: ād frustrate not my desier.
               
                  Sustayn me that I be false / and thinke vppon thy precepts contynually.
               But trede them downe al that go from thy commandments / for ful crafty is their deceyte
               Thou swepist awaye al the vngodly of the erth lyke fallen lytell chippes: wherfore I loue thy testimones.
               My flesshe trembleth at thy fere / and thy iugements do I dreade.
               
                  Ain.THat at euen and iuste is shal I do / geue me not vppe vnto my vniuste vexers.
               Persuade thy seruant that at good is / lest the proud do me violēce My eyes wasted withe waitinge for helth from the / and for thy iuste worde.
               Deal with thy seruant acordinge

to thy goodnes / and teche me thy commandments.
               I am thy seruant / teche me to knowe thy testimonies.
               It is tyme lorde to do this thinge: for thei haue scaterde thi lawe For I loue thy precept aboue golde and preciouse stone.
               Wherfore I folowe right all thy precepts and I abhorre euery deceitful waye.
               THy ordinances are excellently to be magnified / wherfore my soule obserueth themPhe.
               
               Thy wordis are apert and playne / thei illumyn and geue vnderdinge to the lytel ons.
               Thy precepts do I desier / euē as when I am bretheles to draw in my wynde.
               Beholde me / and haue mercy on

me / euen as thou hast mercy vpon them that loue thy name.
               Directe thou my stepis accordinge to thy worde / that no vngodlynes raigne in me.
               Delyuer me frome the iniuriouse vexacions of men / that I maye kepe thy lawe.
               Loke cheerfully vpon thy seruant and teche me thi commandments My eyen gusshout water / because thei kepe not thy commandmēts.
               
                  zadicRIghtuouse art thou oh lorde / and right iuste are thy iugements.
               The commandmēts which thou ordinest / ar excedinge iust & trwe. Mynown zele killeth me / to se my enymes contempne thy wordes. Thy worde inflameth vehemētly wherfore thy seruant loueth it.
               
                  I my selfe / though I be but lytle and contempned / yet thi precepts forget I not.
               Thi rightwisnes is an euerlastīg rightwisnes / and thy lawe is true When trouble & anxt take me / then thy promises counfort me.
               Thi euerlastīge ordināces make me to vnderstāde / yt I might lyue With al my hole hert I cal vpon the / hear me lorde / that I might kepe thy commandments.Coph
               
               I cal vpon the to saue me / and that I might kepe thy ordinances. I haast me spedely and cal vpon the / for I cleue vnto thy promyse My eyes preuented the night watches / to take my meditacion in thy wordis.
               Hear my voyce for thy goodnes Oh Lorde / reuyue me as thou

were wont.
               For they drawe nighe whiche are farre from thy lawe / and persecute me wrongfully.
               Drawe thou therfore nighe to / oh lorde: for ferme and fast are thy promyses.
               Euen frome the beginninge / this knowe I as concerninge thy testimones / that thou hast set them to endure for euer.
               
                  ResBEholde my affliccion and delyuer me / for I forget not thi lawe.
               Take vp my cause and defende me / and reuyue me accordinge to thy worde.
               Helth is farre from the vngodly for thei serche not diligentlye for thy lawe.
               Thy mercyes are grete and manifolde

(oh lorde) reuyue me after thy wont plesure.
               Be my enymes and persuers neuer so many / yet do I not declyne from thy testimones.
               When I se these transgressors which kepe not thy cōmandmēts thē am I al ful of fere & heuynes Thou seist lorde that I kysse and embrase thy commandments / for thy benigne goodnes therfore reuyue me.
               Thy trwe worde is of euerlastinge / and al thy iuste iugements shal neuer fayle.
               TIraunts persew me an innocent / but thy wordis my herte reuerently feareth.Shin.
               
               At thy wordes I reioyse euen as one that chaunceth vppon a riche proye.
               
                  I hate and abhorre lyes / but thy lawe I kisse and colle.
               Seuen tymes a daye I loaue the / for thy iuste iugements.
               Much peace happeneth to the louers of thy lawe / but no sclaunder at all.
               Thy helth I lokefore o lorde / and thy precepts do I kepe.
               My soule obserueth & loueth thy testimonyes excedingly
               Thy precepts and ordinances shal I kepe / for al my lyfe lyeth in thy presence.
               
                  thauLEt my prayer perse vnto ye / oh lorde / that accordinge to thy promyse thou woldst geue me vnderstandinge.
               Let my supplicacion come vnto ye that acordinge to thy promyse thou woldst delyuer me.
               
                  My lippes mought speke vppon thy gloriouse praise / when thou techest me thy precepts.
               My tōgue shal helpe other to singe thy worde / for al thy commandments ar iuste.
               Let me haue thy helpinge hande / for thy precepts haue I chosen. I am holden lorde / with the desier of thy sauīge helth and thy lawe is al my plesure.
               Let my soule lyue that it mought prayse the / when thou hast holpen me at thy plesure.
               I wandre out of the waye lyke a loste shepe / seke thy seruāt / for thi precepts do I not forget.
            
            
               ¶These. 15. Psal. folowing haue one title / called al ye songes of the degrees / yt is / of thē yt encrease ād ascende in goodnes and vertwe.
               
                  
                  ¶ The Argument.
                  ¶A prayer agenst awaite layers / and euel tongues.
               
               
                  VNto the Lorde / when I am in trouble do I crye / and he soucurth me.
               Lorde delyuer my soule from lyinge lippes / and from a desaytful tongue.
               What hast thou or what geuest thou / oh fraudulent tongue?
               Verely euen stronge and sharpe arows / and also hotte burninge colles.
               Ah lasse for that my banyshment is prolonged / I dwell in exyle amonge the fierce barbarous.
               It irketh my soule to dwel amonge these haters of peace.
               For whyle I thought vpon & studyed for peace / thei bente thēselfe

to batail.
            
            
               
                  ¶ Thargument
                  ¶Helpe is of the lorde
               
               I Liftvp my eyes vnto the hilles / frō whence helpe is brought me.
               My helpe cometh from the lorde / which hath made heuen and erth Thy keper wil not suffer thy fote ōce to slyde / thy keper slepeth not The keper of Israel nether roughteth not in his slepe / nor yet slomberth not.
               For the lorde is thi keper / thy shadowe / euen he that ledethe the by thy righthonde.
               So that be daye the sun burne the not / nor yet the mone be night
               The lorde kepeth the from al euil he kepeth euen thy soule.
               The Lorde kepeth thy outgoyng and thy incomynge / frome nowe

and euer.
            
            
               ¶Thankis geuinge for the prosperouse state of the chirche
               I Reioysed to heare those men / which sayd vnto me: let vs go vnto the house of the lorde
               Let our fete stonde in thy gates o Ierusalem.
               Oh Ierusalem / which art buylded as goodly as any other noble cite / whose citesens agree al in one. Into the which cite the trybs ascende / euen the trybs of the lorde / the chirche of Israel to aknowlege prayse vnto the name off the Lorde.
               For there is the seat of iugement euen the seat royal of the house of Dauid.
               Praye ye for the peace of Ierusalem / happy be they that loue her.
               
                  Al thinges mought be false which thou possedest: plentuousnes be in thy houses.
               For my bretherne and kinsfolkes sakis / I shal praye for thy helthe. For the house off the Lorde oure God / I shall endeuower to do the good.
            
            
               ¶An expectation for the helpe of God.
               VNto the / lift I vp my eyes / oh inhabitour off the heuens.
               For lyke as the seruants eyes wayte at the handis of their masters / and as the eyes of maydens at the handis of their mistres / so depende oure eyes vppon the Lorde oure God vntyll he hathe mercye vpon vs.
               
                  Haue mercy on vs lorde haue mercy vpon vs / for we are filled with miche contempte.
               Our soule is ouer mich fylled with the obprobriouse scornes of the prowde / ād with the reuilings off the disdaynfull.
            
            
               Thankis for thauoydinge of perel
               
                  Except the lorde had stode of our syde / tel it forth (I praye the) Israel
               Except the lorde had stode of oure syde / when men rose agenst vs: They had now swalowed vs vp quyk: when their wrath was kindled agenst vs / they had ere nowe ouerwhelmed vs lyke waters / like a swift stronge streme they had taken vs awaye.
               Euen now had the waters of the proude persed vnto our soul.
               
                  Thanked be the lorde whiche hathe not cast vs a proye into theyr tethe.
               Our lyfe is escaped lyke the litle bryd out of the fowlers snare / for the snare is broken and we be escaped.
               Our helpe consisteth in the name of the lorde / which hath made heuen and erth.
            
            
               ¶The consolacion of the faithful of the rightwisnes of god.
               THey that truste vnto the lorde are lyke the mounte zion whiche moueth not frome his place / but sitteth fast for euer As Ierusalem is closed rowndaboute with mountayns / euen so doth the Lorde close aboute his peple now and euer.
               Lest the tyrannouse power of the

vngodly prease vpon the lot of ye iuste / and make the iuste to extende their handis vnto synne
               Be thou benigne and ientle (o lorde) vnto good men / which are vpright in hert.
               But those men which are auerted vnto their owne malice / the lorde ledeth amonge the wyked. When Israel shall haue peace & helth
            
            
               ¶Thankis for deliuerance out of anxte or captiuite.
               WHen the Lorde retourned the captiuite of ziō: we were restored vnto reste.
               Then were oure mouthes filled with laughter / and oure tongues with ioye.
               Then was it reported euen emonge the gentils / The lorde hath done meruelous grete actis for these

men.
               And in very dede the lorde wrought meruelous grete thīges with vs / which gretely deliteth vs
               Thou hast tourned (oh lorde) our captiuite / no nother wyse then as at the southe wynde the ryuers encrease.
               They that had sowen with teres haue reped with ioye.
               He that sometyme wēt his waye spedely / and wepinge toke vp his sead to cast it forthe / retourneth nowe merelye and iocounde bringinge home his handes full off corne.
            
            
               ¶Al help and defence is of god.
               
                  Except the Lorde sustayne the house / they swete in vayne yt labour to holde it vp & ye cite also except the lorde kepe

it / 
                     •
                  he watche men do but wake in vayne.
               It is but vayn / after your reste to aryse erly and eat your brede in swet and sorowe: except he geue slepe to his dere beloued.
               Lo / these are their heretage / sonnes / wel goten goodes / and the childerne of the lorde.
               Oh blessed man that he is / which hath filled his quiuer with these arows: for thei shall not be ashamed to speke to their enymye euē in the open gates.
            
            
               What goodnes folowethe fearers of God.
               OH blessed men al that worship ye lorde / & walke in his For so shalt thou en (wais ioye ye labours of thi nowns hādis / o how blessed & happy art thou

Thy wyfe is lyke a fruteful vyne that cleueth vnto thy house syde / and thy chyldern stande in order a boute thy table / as men ar wont orderly to set their yōge olyue trees.
               Beholde thus is that man blessed / whiche worshipith the lorde. Thus shal the lorde frō zion enryche the / that thou mightst se Ierusalem to prospere al thy lyfe.
               And that thou moughtst also se thy chylders chyldern / and peace in Israel.
            
            
               ¶Israelis euer troubled / and euer delyuered.
               OFten tymes haue thei faughten agenst me / euē fro my yougth: let Israel (I praye you) tel it.
               Often tyme haue thei faughten

agenst me / euen fro my yougthe / but yet did thei not ouercome me.
               Thei droue their ploughe vpon my bak at their plesure / & did cutforth their vorows.
               But the rightwyse Lorde did cut in sondre their trayses / that al yt hate zion / shulde go home agen whith shame and confusion.
               Thei be made lyke sedge to thek howses / whiche is witherd ere ye syithe be redye.
               Of the whiche / nether the mower fil his hande / nor yet the gatherer his bosome withe the handefuls.
               Where the goers fore by bid them not once god spede / sayng / the lorde sende you encrease / the name of the Lorde be your fortherance.
            
            
               
               ¶A feruent prayer for the remission of synnes.
               
                  OWte of the botomlesse pitte of my heuy trouble I call vnto the / oh Lorde: Lorde hear my prayer.
               Let thy ears be atttent vnto the voice of my complaynt.
               For if thou Lorde / imputest mennis sonnes vnto them / Lorde who shall not fall?
               But thou art mercyful and easy to entreat: that we might reuerē
                  ce and fear the.
               The Lorde is my hope vnto whō my soull cleaueth / and I beleue his worde.
               My soull is set vpon the lorde / from the one morning watche vnto the tother
               
                  Let Israel truste vnto the Lorde / for with the Lorde is ther bothe infinite mercy and plentuouse redempcion.
               For it is he that redemeth Israel from al their synnes.
            
            
               The faitheful studieth to be meek
               LOrde I exalt not my herte / nether extolle I my eyes I take not vpō me grete & stoute thingis to be woundred at. But I represse and refrayne my mynde as the weaned chylde towerd his mother: I am a weanlinge in very dede.
               But Israel trusteth in the Lorde from now and euer.
            
            
               ¶A deliberacion of thedifying of the temple.
               LOrde / remember Dauid / with al his affliccions.
               
                  How he hathe sworne ād vowed vnto the Lorde God of Iacob.
               Saying / I wil not entre into the tabernacle of my house / nether clyme vp into my bedde:
               I wil not slepe with my eyes / nether yet once slomber withe my eye liddis:
               Vntil I prepare a place for ye lorde / euē a tabernacle for the mighty God of Iacob.
               This place lo / we haue herde in Ephrata / we haue fownde it in ye busshy felde.
               Let vs therfore entre into his tabernacles / let vs fall downe before his fote stole.
               Aryse Lorde vnto thy mansion / thou & the arke of thy strength.
               Let thy preistis do on rightwisnes / and thy faithful reioyse.
               
                  For thy seruāt dauids sake / differre not ye coming of thy anoynted For the Lorde hathe made a faithful othe vnto Dauid himselfe / whiche he wil not chāge / Of the sead of thy bellye shal I set one in thy seat royal.
               If thy childern wyl kepe my couenaunt & my ordinances which I shal teche them / then shal the sonnes of them sit in thy seat roial from age to age.
               For ye Lorde hath chosen zion / he hath chosen her for his habitaciō This quyet place shalbe my perpetual reste / here wil I dwel / for she delyghteth me.
               I wil augment her yearly frutes and satisfye hir pore mē with fode ynoughe.
               I shal clothe hyr preistis with

helthe / and hir faithful shal reioyse incessauntly.
               There shal I first setforthe the flouresshing empyre of Dauid / and prepare the lanterne for my anoynted.
               His enimes shal I clothe with confusion: but vpon him shal I set his flouresshing corone.
            
            
               ¶An exhortacion vnto charite.
               BEholde how honest & ioyouse a thīge it is / brethern to dwel togither being of one mynde.
               It is lyke that preciouse oyntmēt powered vpon the head and berde of Aaron / running downe vnto the skirtes of his vesture.
               It is lyke the dewe of the hil of Hermon which descendeth into the hilles of zion.
               
                  For there hath the Lorde promised aboundaunce / and long lyfe to continewe.
            
            
               An exhortation to watche & praye
               ATtende ye al / oh seruaūts of the Lorde whiche stande be night in the house of the Lorde / and prayse the Lorde.
               Lyft vp your handes before that secrete holy place / and loaue ye the Lorde.
               And the Lorde shal enryche you from zion / whiche hath made heuen and erthe. Halleluia.
               LOaue ye o seruants of ye lorde / loaue ye the name of the Lorde.
               Which minister in the house of the Lorde / and in the vtwarde courte of the temple of our God.
               Praise the Lorde / for the Lorde is

good: synge ye vnto his name / for it is plesaunt.
               For the Lorde hath chosen him Iacob: and Israel to be his owne speciall peple.
               For I know that grete is the Lorde / & our Lorde is aboue al ye gods What soeuer it plesed the Lorde / he hath made it in heuen & erthe / bothe in ye sea & in all depe places He bringeth the clowdes frō the coostis of the erthe / he turneth lightenings into rayne / and bringeth forth the windes from their secrete place.
               Whiche smote the first begotē of Egypt / bothe of man and beast.
               He sent miracles and woundres into the middes of the / o Egypte: he wrought them vppon Pharao and al his seruants.
               
                  Whiche smote the mighty nacions / and killed stronge kinges.
               As Sihon the kinge of Thamorrhes / Og kinge of Basan / and all the kingdoms of Chanaan.
               And gaue vp their londe into the possession / and heretage vnto Israel his peple.
               Lorde thy name is euerlastinge / Lorde thy memorial stretcheth vnto euery posterite.
               For it is the Lorde that auengeth his peple / and is graciouse vnto his seruants.
               The images of the gētyls ar but siluer and golde / euen the worke of mennis handis.
               Thei haue mouthes / but thei speke not: and eyes / but thei se not: eares haue they and hear not / and nostrel also / but yet cometh their

no breth oute of their mouthes.
               Thei be lyke vnto them that make them / and al that trust in thē. But thou / o house of Israel / loaue thou the Lorde / o house of Aaron preise the Lorde.
               Oh house of Leui prayse the Lorde / ye that worship the Lorde / loaue the Lorde.
               The Lorde whiche dwelleth in Ierusalem / be praysed in zion.
               Prayse ye the Lorde.
            
            
               ¶An open thankis geuinge.
               GEue ye thankis vnto the Lorde / for he is good / and his mercye endurethe for euer.
               Geue ye thankis vnto the God of al goddis / for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
                  Geue thankis vnto the Lorde of Lordis / for his mercy endureth for euer.
               Which alone doth grete woundres / for his mercy endureth for euer.
               Whiche hath made the heuens with highe wysedō / for his. &c.
               Whiche hath layd open the erth a boue the waters / for his mer. &c. Whiche hath made ye grete lightis: for his mercye. &c.
               The sonne to haue the preeminē
                  ce of the daye / for his. &c.
               The mone and the sterres to bere rule in the night / for his mer. &c. Whiche smote Egypt with her first begoten: for his mercye. &c.
               And led Israel from out of ye middes of them / for his mercy. &c.
               With a stronge hande / and forth

stretched arme: for his. &c.
               Whiche diuided the red sea into partes / for his mercy. &c.
               And led ouer Israel through the middis of it: for his mercy. &c.
               But Pharao with his hoste / he wrapped in the red sea / for his. &c Which led his peple thorow the deserte / for his mercye. &c.
               Which smote the grete kingis: for his mercye. &c.
               And killed ye strōge kīgis / for. &c. Shiō kīge of thamorrhes / for. &c. And Og kinge of Basan / for. &c. And delyuered vp their londe into the possession / for his mer. &c. Into the possession of Israel his seruant / for his mercy. &c.
               Whiche / when we be throne downe / yet he remēbreth vs / for. &c. And loseth vs from our enemyes / 

for his mercy endureth. &c.
               Which fedeth euery beast / for his mercy endureth for euer.
               Thāke ye ye god of heuēs / for his mercy endureth for euer.
            
            
               ¶The lamentacion of the captiues in Babylon with a thretening of the vengeance of god.
               WE dwelt at the flowds of Babylon / and wept when we remembred zion.
               There had we hāged vp our harpes on the salow treis.
               And when thei that helde vs captyue requyred of vs our songes and thankful psalmes / sayng / synge vs of your songes of zion: we answerde.
               How shulde we singe the songes of the Lorde in a strange londe?
               
                  Not with stonding yet soner shal I forget my nown right honde / then Ierusalem shulde fall fro my mynde.
               Let my tonge lese hir vse / if I forget the / let it cleue to my chawnes if I preferre not Ierusalem in my mirthe.
               But Lorde remember the Idumes how thei dealt with vs in yt miserable calamite of Ierusalem / how thei seyd / Subuerte it / and turne it vp sodowne.
               Oh Babylon / thou shalt come vnto as miserable a destruccion thy selfe: happy shal he be that shal requyte the worthely / seruīg the as thou seruedst vs.
               Oh happy man whiche shal take vp thy infantis / and caste them agenst the stones.
            
            
               
               ¶Tgankis for our dayly benefits
               I Shal thanke the with al my herte / & preise the euē emong the highest.
               I shal faldowne prostrate in thy holy tēple / and magnifye thy name / bothe thy mercy and trouthe / for thy worde thou magnifyest according to thy name.
               When I cal vpō the / thou answerest / and enrichest my soule with thy strengthe.
               Al the kinges of the erthe / when they shal heare the wordis of thy mouthe / they shal magnifye the / Oh lorde.
               And shal singe aftir the ordināce of the lorde / because ye right grete is the maiestye of the lorde.
               For the lorde / althoughe he be excellent highe / yet he seith lowe

thingis / and knowth highe thingis a farre.
               If I walke in the middes of tribulaciō / thou refresshest me / thou sendest thy powre into the furiouse wodenes of my enimes / and sauest me with thy right honde.
               The lorde maketh me suer on euery syde / lorde thy goodnes is euerlastinge / the workis therfore of thy hondis suffer thou not to fal.
            
            
               ¶The clere goodnes of the dyuyne wysedom is described / with a prayer agenst the vngodly.
               LOrde / thou enserchest me depely / & ensiest me perfitly Thou knowst how I must sit down / and how I shal ryse agene / thou prouidest me my lyuīg a farre of.
               My iourney and my sitting downe

thou disposest / and seist al my wayes.
               yee there is not one so lytle a worde vpon my tonge / but lo Lorde thou / thou knowist it before.
               Before & aftir thou hast fasshioned me / & hast put to thy nowne hāde And that with a craft more meruelous and highe thē I can knowe or comprehende.
               Whother shulde I flee from thy spirit? or from thy presence / whother may I auoide?
               If I shulde clyme into heuē / there thou arte: if I shulde rūdowne to hel / lo there art thou not absēte If I shulde take me the winges of the morninge / and dwel in the fardest costes of the sea.
               Euē there yet is thy hāde redy to take me / & thy righthāde hath m
                     •
                  
                  
yet whē I thus decre with my sylf paraduēture derkenes maye hyde me / so yt the night may be my light Now / nother is the derkenes so thicke but that thou seist thorow them / ye the night is as bright to the / as is the light / night and daye to the be bothe one.
               For it is thou that possedest my raynes / thou inuoluedst me in my mothers wombe,
               I thāke ye / for I am meruelously made / meruelouse ar thy workis / as my mynde vehemently aknowlegeth.
               My bones ar not yet hyd frō ye / in how secrete soeuer a place I am made / euen withe in the secretes of the grownde.
               Thy eyes ensee my fawtes / and in they boke ar their al writen / my

dayes wer fasshioned / whē as yet there was not one of them.
               Oh God / how preciouse ar thy frendes vnto me? how grete is the nowmber of the cheife of thē: Whē I go aboute to tell thē / the excede the sandes of ye sea: I am a wake yet / and present with the Oh god / wilt thou not slaye these synners / that the wiked me
                     •
                   might once auoide from the?
               Whiche so boldely rebell agens
                     •
                   the: euen thy enimes whiche set up their bristles so temerariousl
                     •
                   agenst the.
               Do I not hate thē that hate th
                     •
                   oh Lorde / & am hangry with th
                     •
                   aduersaries?
               I hate them verely and that excedingly / for that now thei ar a
                     •
                  
                  so be come my enimes to.
               
                  Trye me oh god / & serche my herte / proue me & know my thoughtes And if thou seist me in any laborouse wyked waye / reduce & tourne me into ye waye euerlastīge
            
            
               ¶A prayer for the delyurance frō the euil sayers and a wait layers / threteninge a sharp ende vnto the vngodly and ioyouse successe vnto the goode.
               DElyuer me lorde frō the wiked man / kepe me from the cruel man.
               Whiche conceyue shrewed counsels in their hertis / and stere vp strife continually.
               Thei whette their tonges lyke serpēts: thei nourish edders venō with in their lippes. so theide.Sela.
               Preserue me lorde / from the handes of the vngodly / saue me from the cruel tyraunts whose mynde

is to supplant my steapes
               For the prowd haue hydē preuely a snare for me / they haue bent for me a nette: & which waye so euer my waye lyeth / thei haue layd me stombling blokes. So thei haue.Sela. Wherfore I saye vnto the Lorde / thou art my God / lorde hear the voice of my prayer.
               Lerde be thou my mighty saluacion / kouer my head ī tyme of batail Leane thou not oh lorde vnto the desyers of ye ongodly / finissh not his enforcemēts / lest he be to prowed. No do notSela
               Let their own laborouse deuices be whelmed on their owne hendis / which circumuent me.
               Let burning coles fal vpō thē / let them be cast into the fyer and pitte / so that they may not ryse.
               
                  A mā ful of wordis let hī not stād faste vpō ye erthe / a violent & euil man let thē be honted vnto dethe For I know suerly that the Lorde auengeth the pore afflicte: and delyuereth the destitute al helpe. But yet shal the rightwise magnifie thy name / and the iuste shal walke in thy presence.
            
            
               ¶Dauid praith that his mouth be kept / that he chanceth not into yl company / nether fall not into the handis of the wyked.
               LOrde / the do I call vpō: haast ye vnto me / attēde vnto my noyse crying vnto the. Let my prayer be encēse ascēding before ye / & theleuaciō of my handis be the euening sacrifyce.
               Set a keper oh lorde vnto my mouthe / & watchers at the gate of my lippes.
               
                  Suffre not my hert to slyde vnto any euel thinge / so yt I folowe not ye coūsail ether of ye vngodly / or of any sinful men / lest I be partaker of their pleasaunt proyes.
               Let the iuste man beat me / and so shal it be accept vnto me / let him correk me / vnd so shal he anoynt my head / and not hurte it / but yet for the euil deadis of these men shal I praye.
               Their iuges stōbled at the stone / but yet gaue thei heed to my wordis / for thei wer right glad to thē Our bones lye scatred before the graue: no nother wyse thē whyle one kutteth & diggeth vp ye grownde But vpō ye oh lorde my god / ar my eyes sette / in ye do I truste / draw thou not out my soule. Preserue me frō the snare which

thei haue bent for me / and frō the stombling stones of these mischeuouse doers.
               Let the vngodly fall into their owne nettis / whyles I in the meā tyme passe ouer them.
            
            
               ¶A prae of one in distresse.
               VNto the Lorde do I crye ful lowde: vnto ye Lorde I make my supplicaciō. I powerforth my complaint before him / and my trouble before him do I lay forth: whyle my mynde is almost in dispayer.
               For vnto the is my waye wel knowne / but yet in this waye where in I go thei haue set preuy snares for me.
               Consyder at my right hande and beholde / and thou shalt not fynde one that wil know me / all refugy

is taken fro me / nether is there any that helpeth to saue my lyfe.
               Vnto the therfore do I crye oh lorde / and I saye / thou art my hope and my porcion in the lāde of the lyuinge.
               Attende vnto my prayer for I am very pore and feble / delyuer me fro my persuers / for thei preuaile agenst me.
               Lede my soule forth of preson yt I might magnifie thy name / whiche thing if thou grauntest me / the iuste shal associat themself with me.
            
            
               ¶A prayer of one in distresse.
               LOrde hear my prayer / vnderstande my desyer for thy trouthe and rightwysnes.
               But yet entre not into iugement with thy seruāt / for thou beīg thaccuser

/ no mā mortal is absolued For the enemye is present at my lyfe / to trede it vnder his fete / and to laye me in the perpetuall derkenes of the deadmen.
               Wherfore my mynde with in me is vncertayn / and my herte with in me despaireth.
               yet remember I the olde tyme / I forgete not all thy workis / ād the workis of thy handis I call vnto mynde.
               I stretch forth my handis vnto the / my soule cryeth vnto the from the theirsty lande. Sela. so it dothe
               Haste the Lorde to helpe me / for my spryte faileth me / hyde not thy chere fro me / lest I be lyke men going downe into their graues.
               
                  Shew me swiftly thy merciable goodnes / for in the do I truste / shew me in what waye I maye go / for vnto yt I directe my mynde Delyuer me Lorde / fro my enimes / for vnto the do I fle.
               Teche me to worke thy plesure / for thou art my God.
               Thy beninge spirit mought lead me forth into the londe of innocencye.
               Refresh me Lorde for thy names sake / and for thi rightwisnes lead my soule out of distresse.
               Also / for thy mercys sake scater my enimes / and destroye all that molest my soule / for I am thy seruant.
            
            
               ¶Thankis geuing / and a prayer for the delyuerance from our enimyes.
               
                  THankis be vnto the Lorde my refugy: which enstructeth my hādis vnto batail and my fyngers to fyght.
               My expectaciō / my bolwerck / my castel / my redemer / my shylde / in whom I trust / which gouerneth my subiect peple.
               Lorde what is man that thou acknowlegest him? what is mā mortal yt thou thus regardest him? Mā is lyke a thīge of naught / his dayes passe ouer lyke a shadewe. Lorde / when thou bowest down thy heuens to descende thou touchest the hilles / and thei smoke. When thou lightenest / thou scaterest them / thou shotest forth thy dartis and destroyst them.
               Put down therfore thy honde frō aboue / delyuer & take me vp frō
                  
these vehemēt grete waters / euen from the violence of the vngodly Whose mouthes speke lyes / and their right hond is ful of deceait. That I might singe vnto the / oh God / a new songe: that I might sing vnto the with a ten stringed lute.
               Which enrichest kinges with helthe: which hast delyuerd Dauid thy seruant from the dent of swerde.
               Delyuer me from the hande of aleaūts: whose mouthe speke vanites / and their righthand ful of deceait.
               That our sones / from their yougth myght growe lyke plantes / and our daughters mought shyne lyke the polisshed pylers in ye tēple Let our garners & store houses be

ful & well stored with al thīgis: and our flockis in our villages encrease into thousādys and hondred thousandts.
               Let our oxen be stronge to labour / let there be no ruyne / no breache / no complaynt crying out in our streatis.
               Oh happy peple whose goodis stande in this state / Oh happy peple vnto whō ye lorde is their god
            
            
               ¶God is praysed for his omnipotency / goodnes / prouidēce / & iustice
               I Shal extol the / oh god my kinge: I shal praise thy name for euer.
               At al tyme shal I magnifie the / & prayse thy name for euer & euer Grete is the Lorde / and aboue al praise / nether may his gretenes be serched.
               
                  One posterite shal shew thy workis to another: and prechforth thy power.
               I shal speke forth / thy honour / thei clere fame / thy magnifycēce / and thy actis neuer to be forgotē. The memorial of thy infinite mercy shal be preched / & ye forme of thy iustificacion shalbe sungē. Mylde & mercifulis ye Lorde / slowe vnto wrathe & redy to forgeue The lorde is benign to al mē / his mercy shyneth in al his workis. Wherfore / al thy workis / oh lorde / preche ye / & thy faithful thāke ye They preche ye glory of thy kingdom / ad declare thy power.
               That thei might tell forth thy power / thy clerenes / and thy gloriouse kingdome vnto other men. Thy kingdom is through out al

wordis thy empery endureth through al ages.
               The lorde holdeth vp al yt shulde fal: & lifteth vp agē thē yt be down Al eyes wait vpō the / & thou geuest thē their meat in their tyme
               Thou openest thy hande / & fillest euery beast plentuously.
               Rightwise is ye lorde in al his wayes: and holy in al his workis The lorde is present with al that cal vpon him / so longe as they cal on him of faith.
               He acomplessheth the desire of them that reuerētly fere him: he hereth their cryinge / and helpeth thē The lorde defēdeth al ye loue him but al the vngodly he scatereth
               My mouth mought speke his prayse / ād euery thinge lyuing mought celebrate his holy name for euer

and ey. Alleluia.
            
            
               ¶Onely god is to be trusted vnto
               LOaue the lorde / my soule.
               Whyle I lyue shal I loaue the lorde: I shal singe vnto my god whyl I shal haue my beinge. Truste not vnto princes / nor vnto any other man / in whō there is no For whē ye breth goeth out (helth of mā / he retourneth vnto his erth and thē are al his thoughtis gone Oh happy mā whose strēgth is ye god of Iacob / whose hope is in ye lorde his god.
               Which hath made heuen / the erth the sea / and whatsoeuer is in them: which kepeth promise for euer.
               Which auengeth mē violently oppressed / & geueth meat to the hongry: happy is he yt calleth vnto ye lorde / which loseth mē bounde in preson.
               
                  Onto the lorde (I saye) which geueth sight vnto the blynde / & lifteth vp men fallen: vnto the lorde / which loueth the iuste men.
               Which taketh vp to him / the strā
                  gers: ād defendeth the fatherlesse and the wedowe / but the waye off the vngodly he dampneth.
               The lorde thy God / o zion / raygneth for euer / worlde without ende. Alleluia.
            
            
               LOaue ye the lorde / for good it is to singe vnto our God: a glad and fayer thinge is it to loaue him altogither.
               For the lorde restoreth Ierusalem and gathereth togither the dispersed peple of Israel.
               He heleth the contrite in hert / and bindeth vp their woundis.
               He telleth ye innumerable starres

ād calleth them al by their name Grete is our lorde / & infinite is his powr / & īcōprehēsible is his wisdō The lorde easith thafflicte / & throith down the wyked to the erthe. Singe ye in course to ye lorde his prayse / sing to our god with harpe Which couerth ye skye with cloudis to prepare rayne for ye erthe: which decketh ye hilles with grene Which geueth our catel (flowers their fode / and euen the rauens that cal vpon him / he fedeth.
               He delyteth not in the strength of horsemen / nether in the armed leggis of soudyers.
               But he reioyseth in thē ye reuerence him / and trust vnto his mercy.
            
            
               PRaise thou the lorde o Ierusalē: loaue thy god / o ziō Which strengtheneth the

barres of thy gatis / ād geueth thy citezens prosperouse successe.
               He settith peace with in thy coostes: and filleth the with the flower Which whē he sendith (of wheat his cōmādmēt into the erthe / full swiftly runneth his worde.
               He geueth ye snow lyke wul / & scatereth ye frosty ryme lyke asshes He casteth forth hisyise lyk smoth shyuers / who may abide his cold? Agene / at his commandmēt / al is melted awaye / he turneth his winde / and anon the ryuers runne
               He expowneth his worde to Iacob: his pleasures and godly actis vnto Israel.
               yea / & that euen so / as he did not to al the gētils / which know not his plesures. Alleluia.
            
            
               ¶Here ar al creatures exhorted to praise god
               
                  
                  LOaue ye the lorde frō heuē praise him ye that ar aboue. Praise hī al his aungels / loaue him al his hooste.
               Praise him sunne ād mone / loaue him al starres so bright.
               Praise him most excellent heuēs & waters which ar vnder ye heuēs Praise ye ye name of ye lorde / for at his cōmādment al thinges ar created. Which he hath ordined to endure for euer / he hath geuen thē a lawe which shal not be broken. Praise ye the lorde also frō the erthe / whalis and al depenesses
               Fier & hayle / snow & vapours stormy wynde / ye workis of his worde Mountains and litle hilles / fruteful trees / with al the cedres.
               Beasts and al helpinge beastis / al that crepeth / and fetherd fowlys.

kynges of the erth / & al peple / rulers and aliuges of the worlde yongmen and maydens / olde men and children.
               Prayse ye the name off the Lorde / whose name onely is highe / whose praise excedith heuen and erth. Which hath restored the powr of his peple / which is the glory of al his faithful / euen of the childern of Israel the peple that worship him. Alleluia.
            
            
               
                  SInge ye vnto the lorde a new dyte / his laude mought sownde in the chirche of the faithful.
               Let Israel reioyse in his maker / ād the childern of zion in their kinge Let them magnify his name in daunses / with tympanyes & harpes singinge vnto him
               
                  For the lorde is wel pleased with his peple / which restoreth the afflicte vnto helth.
               Let his faithful reioyse gloriously let thē singe within their chābers The extollinge of god be in their mouthes / and in their handis two edged swerdis.
               To be auenged of the gentils / and to correcke the peple.
               And that thei maye bynde kinges with chaines / ād fetter the rulers of them with gyues.
               To be auenged of thē / as it is writen: This glory mought come vpō al ye faithful of ye lorde. Alleluia.
               PRayse ye the lorde in his secrete holy place / loaue hym for his almighty power
               Loaue him for his noble and mighty actis / praise hī for his infinite gretenes.
               
                  Loaue him with the sowne of shaulme / praise hī with lute & harpe Praise him with taberet and daunse / loaue him with krowds and orgayns.
               Praise him withe lowd cymbals: loaue him with softe virginals.
               Whatsoeuer thinge is endewed with breath: let it prayse the lorde Alleluia. Praise ye the lorde.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Thus endeth the text of the Psalmes / translated oute of Latyne by George Ioye. The yere of our lorde M.D. xxxiiii. ye moneth of Auguste.
         
         
            
            ¶The Table
            
               AD te dom. leua. ps. 25
               
               f. 33
               
               Ad te dom. clam. ps. 28.
               
               f. 37
               
               Afferte do. ps. 29
               
               f. 38
               
               Audite hec om. ps. 49
               
               f. 72
               
               Attendite. ps. 78
               
               f. 118
               
               Ad dominum. ps. 120
               
               
                  196
               
               Ad te leuaui. ps. 123
               
               
                  198
               
               Beatus vir. the .i. psal.
               f. 2
               
               Beati quorum. ps. 32
               
               f. 43
               
               Benedicam do. ps. 34.
               
               f. 46
               
               Beatus qui. ps. 41
               
               f. 61
               
               Benedixisti do. ps. 85
               
               f. 132
               
               Bonum est con. ps. 92.
               
               f. 144
               
               Benedic the .i. ps. 103
               
               f. 156
               
               Benedic the .ii. ps. 104
               
               f. 158
               
               Beatus vir qui. ps. 112
               
               f. 177
               
               Beati immaculati. ps. 119
               
               f. 184
               
               Beati omnes. ps. 128
               
               f. 200
               
               Benedictus do. ps. 144
               
               f. 215
               
               Cum inuocarem. ps. 4.
               
               f. 4
               
               Confitebor tibi. ps. 9
               
               f. 10
               
               
                  Conserua me. ps. 16
               
               f. 18
               
               Celi enarrant. ps. 19
               
               f. 25
               
               Confitebimur tibi. ps. 75
               
               f. 114
               
               Cantate the .i. ps. 96
               
               f. 149
               
               Cantate the .ii. ps. 98
               
               f. 151
               
               Confite. the .i. ps. 105
               
               f. 161
               
               Confitemi. the .ii. ps. 106
               
               f. 164
               
               Confitemi. the .iii. ps. 107
               
               f. 168
               
               Confitebor the .ii. ps. 111.
               
               f. 176
               
               Credidi propter
               f. 181
               
               Confitemi. the .iiii. ps. 118
               
               f. 182
               
               Confitem. the. 5. ps. 136.
               
               f. 206
               
               Confitebor the .iii. ps. 138
               
               f. 208
               
               Cantate the .iii. ps. 150
               
               f. 220
               
               Domine quid. ps. 3
               
               f. 4
               
               Domine ne. the .i. ps. 6
               
               f. 7
               
               Domine deus. ps. 7
               
               f. 8
               
               Domine domi. ps. 8
               
               f. 9
               
               Dixit insipiens. ps. 14
               
               f. 16
               
               Domine quis. ps. 15
               
               f. 17
               
               Diligam te. ps. 18
               
               f. 21
               
               Domine in virtu. ps. 21
               
               f. 27
               
               Deus meus deus. ps. 22
               
               f. 29
               
               
                  Dominus regit. Psal. 23.
               
               f. 32
               
               Domini est terra. Psal. 24
               
               f. 32
               
               Dominus illumina. Psal. 27.
               
               f. 36
               
               Dixit iniustus. Psal. 36.
               
               f. 51
               
               Domine ne. ye .ii. Psal. 38.
               
               f. 56
               
               Dixi custodiam. Ps. 39.
               
               f. 57
               
               Deus auribus. Ps. 44.
               
               f. 64
               
               Deus noster re. Ps. 46
               
               f. 68
               
               Deus deorum. ps. 50
               
               f. 73
               
               Dixit insipiens. ps. 53.
               
               f. 78
               
               Deus in nomine tuo. ps. 54
               
               f. 79
               
               Deus repulisti. ps. 60
               
               f. 88
               
               Deus deus meus. ps. 63
               
               f. 91
               
               Deus misereatur. ps. 67.
               
               f. 96
               
               Deus in adiutorium. ps. 70
               
               f. 104
               
               Deus iudicium tuum. ps. 72.
               
               f. 107
               
               Deus venerunt gen. ps. 79.
               
               f. 124
               
               Deus stetit in sina. ps. 82.
               
               f. 128
               
               Deus quis similis. ps. 83.
               
               f. 129
               
               Domine deus sa. ps. 88.
               
               f. 135
               
               Domine refugium. ps. 90
               
               f. 141
               
               Dominus reg. deco. ps. 93
               
               f. 145
               
               
                  Deus vltionum. ps. 94.
               
               f. 146
               
               Dominus reg. exul. ps. 97.
               
               f. 150
               
               Dominus reg. iras. ps. 99.
               
               f. 152
               
               Domine ex. ye .i. ps. 102.
               
               f. 154
               
               Deus laudem meam. ps. 109.
               
               f. 173
               
               Dixit dominus. ps. 110.
               
               f. 175
               
               Dilexi quoniam. ps. 116.
               
               f. 181
               
               De profundis. ps. 130.
               
               f. 202
               
               Domine non. ps. 131
               
               f. 202
               
               Domine probasti. ps. 139.
               
               f. 209
               
               Domine clamaui. ps. 141
               
               f. 212
               
               Domine ex. ye .ii. ps. 143
               
               fo. 113
               
               Exaudi domine. ps. 17
               
               f. 19
               
               Exaudiat te domi. ps. 20.
               
               f. 26
               
               Exaltabo te do. ps. 30
               
               f. 39
               
               Exultate iusti. ps. 33
               
               f. 44
               
               Expectans expectaui. p. 40.
               
               f. 59
               
               Eructauit cor meum. ps. 45.
               
               f. 66
               
               Exaudi deus ora. ps. 55.
               
               f. 80
               
               Eripe me. ye .i. ps. 59.
               
               f. 86
               
               Exaudi deus depre. ps. 61.
               
               f. 89
               
               Exaudi deus ora. ps. 64
               
               f. 92
               
               
                  Exurgat deus. ps. 68
               
               f. 97
               
               Exultate deo adiu. ps. 81
               
               f. 127
               
               Ecce quam bo. ps. 133
               
               f. 204
               
               Ecce nunc. ps. 134
               
               f. 204
               
               Eripe me the .ii. ps. 140.
               
               f. 211
               
               Exaltabo te de. ps. 145
               
               f. 216
               
               Fundamenta eius. ps. 87
               
               f. 136
               
               In domino con. ps. 11.
               
               f. 14
               
               Iudica me domi. ps. 26
               
               f. 35
               
               In te domine spe. ps. 31
               
               f. 41
               
               Iudica domi. ps. 35
               
               f. 48
               
               Iudica me deus. ps. 43
               
               f. 63
               
               Iubilate. the .i. ps. 66.
               
               f. 95
               
               In te domine the .ii. ps. 71.
               
               f. 105
               
               Inclina domi. ps. 86
               
               f. 135
               
               Iubilate the .ii. ps. 100
               
               f. 153
               
               In exitu Israel. ps. 114
               
               f. 179
               
               In conuertendo. ps. 126
               
               f. 199
               
               Laudate pueri. ps. 113.
               
               f. 178
               
               Laudate domi. ps. 117
               
               f. 182
               
               Leuaui oculos. ps. 121
               
               f. 197
               
               Letatus sum. ps. 122
               
               f. 197
               
               
                  Laudate nomen. ps. 135.
               
               f. 204
               
               Lauda anima. ps. 146
               
               f. 217
               
               Laudate do. quo. 147
               
               f. 218
               
               Lauda Ierusalem ps. 148
               
               f. 218
               
               Laudate do. de. ps. 149
               
               f. 219
               
               Laudate do. in sanc. ps. 151
               
               f. 220
               
               Magnus dominus. ps. 48
               
               f. 70
               
               Miserere. the .i. ps. 51.
               
               f. 75
               
               Miserere. the .ii. ps. 56
               
               f. 82
               
               Miserere the .iii. ps. 57
               
               f. 83
               
               Misericordias do. ps. 89
               
               f. 139
               
               Misericordiam & iudi. ps. 101.
               
               f. 153
               
               Memento do. ps. 132
               
               f. 202
               
               Noli emulari. ps. 37
               
               f. 52
               
               Nonne deo. ps. 62.
               
               f. 90
               
               Notus in Iudea. ps. 76.
               
               f. 115
               
               Non nobis dom. ps. 114
               
               f. 170
               
               Nisi quia domi. ps. 124
               
               f. 198
               
               Nisi dominus edi. ps. 127
               
               f. 200
               
               Omnes gentes. ps. 47.
               
               f. 69
               
               Paratum cor. ps. 108
               
               f. 172
               
               Quare fremuerunt. ps. 2.
               
               f. 2.
               
               Quare deus. ps. 74.
               
               f. 111
               
               
                  Quemadmodum de. ps. 42.
               
               f. 62
               
               Quid gloriaris in ma. ps. 52.
               
               f. 77
               
               Quam bonus. ps. 73.
               
               f. 109
               
               Quare deus repu. ps. 74
               
               f. 111
               
               Qui regis Israel. ps. 80.
               
               f. 125
               
               Quam dilecta. ps. 84
               
               f. 131
               
               Qui habitat it. ps. 91
               
               f. 143
               
               Qui confidunt. ps. 125
               
               f. 199
               
               Saluum me fac. ps. 12
               
               f. 15
               
               Si vere vtique iust. ps. 58.
               
               f. 85
               
               Saluum me fac deus. ps. 69.
               
               f. 101
               
               Sepe expugna. ps. 129.
               
               f. 201
               
               Super flumina. ps. 137
               
               f. 207
               
               Te decet. ps. 65
               
               f. 93
               
               Verba mea au. ps. 5.
               
               f. 5
               
               Vsquequo domine. ps. 13
               
               f. 16
               
               Vt quid domi. Ps. 74
               
               f. 112
               
               Voce mea ad. ps. 77
               
               f. 116
               
               Venite exultemus. ps. 
                     
                        •
                     5.
               
               f. 148
               
               Voce mea ye .ii. ps. 142.
               
               f. 213
               
            
         
         
            Martyne Emperowr. 1534.
            
            
         
      
   