
      
         
            
            THE Subjects Ioy, For the Parliament.
            
               
                  IACOBVS REX.
               
            
            
               SVch and so great, all mans Corruption is
               In shunning Good, and running to Amisse:
               That the Almighty, did long since ordaine
               Lawes, that should our rebellious wils restraine.
               And from that Parlament, of highest Heauen
               A Statute, and an Ordinance was giuen,
               That from those Lawes of the Eternall King,
               All other Lawes (that gouerne men) should spring.
               And as the Sea in Riuers, Creekes and Bayes,
               Flowes, and disperses many seuerall wayes:
               So doth Gods Acts in many Branches run,
               To shew vs what should be vndone, or done.
               For this cause did the power of Heauen ordaine,
               That Kings (like Gods) on Earth should Rule and Raigne:
               To Iudge, to be a Refuge, and Defence
               With Right, of too much wronged Innocence.
               And for this cause, God doth a King command,
               That he his Lawes should ReadDeu. 17. 15 and vnderstand.
               And sure, of All the Kingdomes that there are
               Beneath the Heauens, none may with vs compare:
               To vs th' Almighty, graciously did grant
               Freely his Sacred Gospell heere to plant,
               Making Great Brittaine an Admired mirror,
               (When other Nations blindly liue in Error.)
               For vs a matchles King, he out did picke,
               Defendor of the Faith Apostolicke,
               Who all his Lawes and Statutes doth encline,
               Conformable vnto the Lawes Diuine.
               Gods Law in euery faithfull heartHeb. 8. 10. is writ,
               And our Kings Gouernment doth witnes it.
               And now these Eighteene yeares a blessed Peace,
               Hath made our sinnes (more then our thankes) increase,
               That breach of Lawes, hath sowen neglected seedes,
               Being almost growne vnprofitable weedes:
               Our Gracious King, these euils to preuent,
               Assembled hath a Royall Parlament.
               The high Creator, made this Kingly Creature
               His Steward, by his Office, Name, and Nature,
               And he doth guide and Rule this happy Land,
               As he is guided by th' Almighties hand.
               And though a King hath Honour and Renowne,
               Yet many Cares attend vpon a Crowne:
               And though a King a Royall port doth keepe,
               Yet doth he wake, when Subject; often sleepe.
               And had not our dread Soueraigne, bin protected
               By the Almighty, who hath him directed,
               Wee could not haue enioyed such Peace and Rest,
               Wherewith so many yeares wee haue bin blest.
               And as hee now hath caus'd a Parlament,
               God still be present there, and President:
               Let the Kings heart as it hath done perseuer,
               That God may haue the Glory, now and euer.
               (Like Dauid) let him not from goodnes start,
               But bee a man according to Gods heart.
               Let Salomons great Wisdome euer bee
               In him, that Good from Ill he may fore-see:
               
               Let him with Iosua's courage (Constantly)
               The Deuill, the world, and eke the Flesh defie.
               And let him (like to Moses) euer write,
               And ordaine Lawes that may be Iust and Right.
               Like faithfull Hushaies
                  2 Sam. 15. be his Counsell still,
               To giue Aduice according to thy will.
               Guide thou the Reuerend Bishops, and the Peeres,
               The Iudges, and elected Knights, of Shires,
               And Burgesses of Townes within this Land,
               Doe thou (O God) amidst their Counsell stand.
               Let all their Consultations, still depend
               To beate downe Vice, and Vertue to defend:
               Thy Gospell to increase and propagate,
               And for the Good of Common-wealth and State.
               The Pride of Haman, farre from them expell,
               Confound the Counsell of Ahitophell:
               
               Plucke Heresies vp by the very Roote,
               And tread proude Antichrist quite vnder foote.
               Banish 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , leaprous with base Bribes,
               Papisticke Pharises, Sophisticke Scribes:
               
               And those that wholsome Lawes can wrest and wring,
               For gaine 'gainst Conscience, Country, and their King.
               Thus being guided by thy blessed Spirit,
               They will accomplish Statutes worthy merit:
               That after Ages gladly may Receiue
               The Acts, and Orders, which our times must leaue.
               Let Prince, and Peeres, and people thus Combine,
               The profit will bee ours, the Glory thine:
               And as thy Blessings hath bin multiplyde
               Vpon our Kingdome, let them still abide:
               Let not our Sinnes as a partition bee,
               Or make vs be as castawayes to thee.
               Let not our Crimes thy Indignation moue,
               Whereby they may vs seperate from thy Loue:
               But as thy fauours to Vs haue bin such,
               As neuer any Kingdome had so much,
               So let our thankfulnes to thee therefore,
               Bee euery day expressed more and more.
               Protect the King with thy Almighty Armes,
               Saue him from Forraine and Domesticke harmes:
               At all times with thy heauenly Grace relieue him,
               And after Death a Crowne of Glory giue him.
               Preserue for euermore, our gracious Prince,
               And strength him, his and thy Foes to conuince,
               The Prince and Princesse Palatines high Grace,
               With all the Royall and the hopefull Race:
               Defend them Against all that them oppose,
               And fight their Battels still against their Foes.
               Grant that of this Seed we may ne're want one,
               To magnifie thy Name in Britaines Throne:
               Vntill our Sauiour, and thy onely Sonne,
               Shall come in Iudgement, and the world be done.
               To whom with thee and with the Holy Ghost,
               Bee rendred (euery where from Coast to Coast)
               All Honour, Glory, Power, Might, Praise, Thanks-giuing,
               To thee three Persons, one GOD, euer-liuing.
            
            FINIS.
            
               Iohn Taylor
            
         
         
            Printed by E All-de for H. G. and are to be solde by Edw: Wright.
            
         
      
   