
      
         
            
            In Memorabilis Effigies.
            VEiw and behold his Monumentall Pictor,
            Whose trade was Armes, whose Fortune still was Victor:
            Looke on Truncheon how it is becrowned,
            By which you may perceiue how hee's Renowned.
            His Beard, a Graue bush (Naturally fitted)
            Shewes by the store of hayre how he is witted.
            And howsoeuer Times or Seasons change-thinges,
            This Captaine very truely hath done strange-thinges;
            Whilst some (perhaps) will say these lines do scoffe him,
            Read what the Inside of the Booke speakes of him.
            Iohn Taylor.
         
         
            These 8. Lines by an vnknowne Author.
            GReat Moguls Landlord, and both Indies King,
            (Whose selfe admiring Fame doth lowdly Ring)
            Writes 4. score yeares: More Kingdomes he hath right to
            The Stars say so. And for them he will Fight too.
            And though this worthlesse Age will not belieue him,
            But clatter, spatter, slaunder, scoffe and grieue him,
            Yet hee and all the world in this agree,
            That such another TOOLE, will neuer bee.
         
         
            
            
               
                  ARTHURUS SEVERUS O-TOOLE NONESUCH: AEtatis 80.
               
            
            Great Mogul's Landlord; of both Indies King,
            Whose self-admiring fame doth loudly ring;
            Writes fourscore Years, more Kingdoms he hath right to, for them he will fight too:
            And though this worthless Age, will not believe him,
            But clatter, spatter, slander, scoff, to grieve him
            Yet He and all the World in this agree,
            That such another Toole will never be.
         
         
            
            
            THE GREAT O Toole.
            
               ENglands, Scotlands, Irelands Mirror,
               
                  Mars his fellow, Rebels Terror:
               These Lines doe gallop for their pleasure,
               Writ with neither feete or measure;
               Because Prose, Verse, or Anticke Story,
               Cannot Blaze O Tooles great Glory.
            
            LONDON. Printed for Henry Gosson. 1622.
         
         
            
            
            AN ENCOMIVM OR ENCO-MI-ASS-TRICK, dedicated to the vnlimited memory of Arthur O Toole, or O Toole the Great: Being the Son and Heyre of Brian O Toole, Lord of Poores Court and farre Collen, in the County of Dublin, in the Kingdome of Ireland. The Mars and Mercury, the Agamemnon and Vlisses both for Wisedome and Valour, in the Kingdomes of Great Britaine and Ireland.
            
            
               Prologue.
               
                  BRaue Vsquebough that fierce Hibernian liquor,
                  Assist my braine, and make my wit run quicker:
                  To heate my Muse like to a well warm'd Chimney,
                  I beg thy merry ayde kinde Polihimny.
                  
                  I list not to call Fables into question,
                  Nor of Baboones, or idle b
                        •
                     bles jest I on:
                  
                     And yet if Sence or reason heere you looke for,
                  For neither, or for either read this Booke for.
                  And if perchance I doe in any word lye,
                  Doe, as I writ it, reade it o're absurdly;
                  Though in these dayes there are a Crew of fond men,
                  That for inuention striue to goe beyond men,
                  And write so humerous Dogmaticall,
                  To please my Lord and Lady what d'ee Call,
                  With Inkehorne tearmes stiffe quilted and bumbasted,
                  And (though not vnderstood) yet are well tasted.
                  And therefore Ile not reach beyond the bounds of
                  My weake capacity, nor search the sounds of
                  Deepe Natures secrets, or Arts spacious cirquit:
                  My Muse is free from those, my selfe will her quit.
                  But leauing Idle toyes, with toyle endure I on,
                  To write the praise of this braue bolde Centurion.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            The Argument and meaning, of this following History.
            IN all Ages and Countryes, it hath euer bin knowne, that Famous men haue florished, whose worthy Actions, and Eminency of place, haue euer beene as conspicuous Beacons Burning and blazing to the Spectators view: the sparkes & flames wherof hath sometimes kindled Courage in the most coldest and Effeminate Cowards; as Thersites amongst the Grecians, Amadis de Gaule, and Sir Huon of Burdeaux in France, Sir Beuis, Gogmagog, Chinon, Palmerine, Lancelot, & Sir Tristram amongst vs heere in England, Sir Degre, Sir Grime, and Sir Gray Steele in Scotland, Don Quixot with the Spaniards, Gargantua almost no where, Sir Dagonet, and Sir Triamore any where, all these, and many more of the like Ranke

haue fill'd whole Volumes, with the ayrie Imaginations of their vnknowne and vnmatchable worthes; So Ireland amongst the rest, had the Honor to produce and breed a sparke of Valour, Wisedome, and Magnanimity, to whom all the Nation of the World must giue place. The Great O Toole, is the toole that my Muse takes in hand, whose praises (if they should be set forth to the full) would make Apollo and the Muses Barren; To whom the Nine Worthyes were neuer to be compared: betwixt whom, and Haniball, Scipio, the Great Pompey, or Tamberlaine, was such oddes, that it was vnfit the best of them should holde his stirrop, and who (by his owne Report) in whome Ireland may reioyce, and England be merry, whose Youth was Dedicated to Mars, and his Age to Westminster, which ancient Citty, is now honour'd with his beloued Residence.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ¶To the Honor of the Noble Captaine O Toole.
               
               THou Famous man, Est, west, & North, & Southward,
               From Boreas colde rump, t' Austers slauering mouth ward,
               I call Apolloes daughters all, to witnes,
               Much would I praise thee, but my Wit wants fitnes.
               But thou thy selfe (of thy selfe) canst speake so-well,
               That though my Rimes not altogether goe-well,
               Yet if the Worlds applause would not attend thee,
               were all tongues mute, thy own tongue would commend thee
               Thy selfe (vnto thy selfe) art Fames Trump blasting,
               To make thy name (like Buffe) tough, long and lasting.
               Yet graunt me (thou braue man that ne're feard coulers)
               T'accept the poore Lines of an Artles Scullers.
               Thy Bilboe ofte bath'd in the blood of Foe mans,
               Like Caius Marius, Consull of the Romans:
               
                  When thou hast seem'd more dreadfull in thy harnesse,
               Then Babels Generall great Holophernes,
               
               More in commaund then was Nabuchadnezar,
               
               And more renownd then Cayus Iulius Caesar:
               
               Vpon thy foes brest thou hast often troad free,
               As on the Pagans did braue Boloignes Godfrey.
               
               Fierce Methridates the stout King of Pontus,
               
               If thou dost lead vs, dares not to confront vs:
               Thy matchles vallour, ten to one more tride is,
               Then euer was the Libian strong Alcides:
               
               And all men know that neuer such an od piece
               Of fighting mettle, sprung from Mars his Codpiece.
               Vpon the maine land and the raging Ocean,
               Thy courage hath attaind thee high promotion.
               Thou neuer fear'dst to combate with Gargante,
               
               Thy fame's beyond the battle of Lepanto.
               
               The mighty Alexander of Macedo,
               
               Nere fought as thou hast done with thy Toledo.
               
               We hold thee for a worthy and no base one,
               But one that could haue won the fleece from Iason:
               
               Thou durst oppose 'gainst Bore, Beare Wolfe or Lion,
               And from the torturing wheele to fetch Ixion,
               
               
                  And I acknowledge that thy matchles vallour is,
               To kill Pasiphaes or the Bull of Phalleris,
               
               Though age hath ouertane thee, yet thy will is,
               To grapple with an Aiax or Achilles,
               
               Or with Hells Monarch enuious ill fac'd Pluto,
               
               And proue him by his hornes a dambd Cornuto.
               
               Thou fearst no Diuell, nor no Demogorgon,
               
               Nor yet the valiant Welchman Shon a Morgan:
               
               So that most Wizards and most fortune tellers,
               Approue thee for the greatst of Monster quellers:
               And absolute and potent Dominator,
               For War or Counsell both by land and Water,
               In times of tumult thou amongst the Irish,
               
               Hast made them skip ore bogs and quagmires mirish,
               Whilst in the pursuit, like an angry Dragon,
               Thou mad'st them run away with not a rag on.
               For had thy foes bin Thousands, with thy Pistall,
               And thy good sword, thou brauely wouldst Resist all.
               Thou wast to vs, as vnto Rome was Titus,
               
               And stoutly sent our foes to black Cocitus.
               
               To kill, and cut throats, thou art skild in that trick,
               As if thou wert the Champion to Saint Patrick:
               
               
                  I know not to which worthy to compare thee,
               For were they liuing, they could not out-dare thee.
               To thee what was great Tamberlaine the Tartar,
               
               Or matcht with thee what was our Brittaine Arthur?
               Great Haniball, that famous Carthaginean,
               
               Was not a mate for thee in mine opinion,
               And all Seuerus vertues, sum'd vp totall,
               Remaine in thee, if this blinde Age would note all.
               Thou shewdst thy selfe a doughty wight at Dublin,
               
               When Irish Rebells madly brought the trouble in:
               At Baltimore, Kinsale, at Corke, and Yoghall,
               
               Thou with thy power hast made them oft cry fogh all,
               Oft in thy rage, thou hast most madly Ran on,
               The burning mouth of the cumbustious Cannon.
               For in thy fury, thou hast oft beene hotter,
               More swifter then an Ambler, or a Trotter,
               As witnes can the bounds of fierce Tirconnell,
               
               and the rough Bickerings with the stout Odonnell.
               
               The slaues did scud before thee o're the Quagmires:
               Where many a warlike Horse & many a Nagge mires:
               Thou kildst the gammon visag'd poore Westphalians,
               
               The Al-to-totterd, torne Tatterdemalians:
               
                  The broaging, roaging, brauling, base Bezonians:
               The swift foot, light heeld, run away Slauonians,
               
               Thou letst them haue no ground to stand or walke on,
               But made them flye as Doues doe from a Falcon.
               For if thou list in fight to leade a Band on,
               Thy slaughtering sword if thou but layst thy hand on
               Thy fearefull foes would straight the place abandon,
               Without or hose, or shooes, shirt, or a band on:
               Thou letst them haue no quiet place to stand on.
               By tongue or pen it cannot well be verifide,
               How many hundred thousands thou hast terrifide,
               For thou hast rac'd more Castles, forts and Garrisons,
               Beyond Arithmeticke, and past comparisons:
               The Prouerbe sayes Comparisons are odious,
               I'le therefore leaue them being incomodious,
               In all thy actions thou hast beene impartiall,
               Accomodating thy designes as Martiall,
               In mortall Battells and in bruising battery,
               Thy eares would entertain no smooth tongu'd flattery,
               That though to all men thy exploits seem'd very od,
               Thou broughst them still to an auspitious Period.
               
                  And as thy valour durst out-dare bold Hector,
               
               Like wise Vlisses thou canst speake a Lector
               Such pollicies thy wits mint could deuise on,
               Which wiser pates could neuer once surmise on:
               With many a hundred neuer heard of Stratagem,
               Thou hast got pretious honour, is not that a Iem?
               What tricks, or slights of war so ere the foe meant,
               Thou canst descry and frustrate in a moment.
            
            
               
               Vpon his Wisedome, and Pollicy.
               OF thy Heroick acts, there might be more said,
               For sure they are but slightly toucht aforesaid,
               But Gods or Muses, Men, or Fiends infernall,
               To blaze thee to thy worth, can nere discerne all:
               And should I write but halfe that I know of thee,
               Some Critticks would perswade thee I did scoffe thee.
               Thus hauing shewd thy vallour, now Ile expound,
               Part of thy pollicies, and wisedome profound.
               Vnfellowed, and vnfollowed, and vnmatched,
               Are the rare sleights that in thy pate were hatched:
               Of Engines, Mines, of Counterscarphs and Trenches,
               And to keepe cleare the Camp from whoring wenches:
               To teach the Soldiers eate frogges, snailes and vermine,
               Such Stratagems as these thou couldst determine.
               That Cato, Plato, or Aurelius Marcus,
               
               Wise Socrates, or reuerend Aristarcus,
               
               
                  Diogenes, or wise Pithagoras,
               
               
                  Licurgus, Pliny, Anaxagoras,
               
               
                  
                  Archidamus of Greece, or Romane Tully,
               
               Could nere demonstrate Sapience more fully.
               And specially when there was any trouble like,
               To vexe, molest, or trouble the Republike.
               That wit with valour, valour ioynd with wisdome,
               From all the world thou hast attained this doome:
               To be wars Abstract, Counsells Catechiser,
               That canst direct all, and all scarce the wiser.
            
            
               A Complaint and a Petition to him.
               THus thou of Yore hast followed great Belona,
               
               And shin'd in Armes like twins of bright Latona:
               But now those manly martiall dayes are gone. A
               Time of Cheating, sweating, drinking, drabbing,
               Of Burst gut feeding and inhumane stabbing,
               The Spanish Pip. or else the Galtan Morbus,
               
               Bone-bred diseases, mainely doe disturbe vs:
               That now more men by ryot are confounded,
               Then valiant Soldiers in the wars were wounded.
               
                  Mars yeelds to Venus, Gown-men rules the roast now,
               And men of War may fast, or kisse the post now.
               
                  The thundring Cannon and the rumbling Drum now,
               The Instruments of War are mute and dumbe now,
               And stout experienc't valiant Commanders,
               Are turn'd Saint Nicholas Clarks & high way standers.
               And some (through want) are turn'd base Pimps & Panders,
               The watchfull Corporall, and the Lansprezado
               Are Marchants turn'd, of smoaky Trinidado.
               His shop, (a fadome compasse) now containes him,
               Where midst the misty vapours he complaines him,
               That he who hath made Forts and Castles caper
               Liues now Camelion-like, by Ayre and Vaper.
               Whilst fooles & flatterers thriue, it greatly grieues him,
               When all Trades fayle, Tobacco last relieues him.
               Besides each day some hound-like senting Sergeant.
               Scoutes, gapes, pries, peyes, & tires on him for argeant:
               And Longlane Dogditch, dambd soule wanting Brokers
               The Common wealths bane & poore mens vnclokers,
               The Countries Spunges, and the Citties soakers,
               The Peaces Pestilence, and Warriours choakers.
               These beate their hogs-heads all, to try conclusions
               By base extorting, working our confusions.
               
                  The Souldiers naked, by the Broakers bribing,
               The Scriuener liues braue by sophisticke scribing
               The slaues growe rich (and 'tis not to be wondred)
               By taking Forty intrest for a hundred.
               And Nasty Beadles with their breath contaminous,
               With what are you, and who goe there examine vs:
               With hums and hawes, Sir reuerence, nods & becking,
               With senceles nonsence, checkes and Counter checking:
               The brownbild Rug-gownd bench doe thinke it fitting
               To exercise their Office, by committing,
               Where our expence, with Ale their faces varnish,
               Whilest we incounterd, pay fines, fees and garnish.
               And Tyburne, Wapping, and St. Thomas Watrings,
               Poore Soldiers ends to euery neighbouring State rings.
               Whilst lowzy Ballad-mongers gape and looke out,
               To set some Riming song, or Roging Booke out,
               Where more then all is 'gainst the dead imputed,
               By which meanes men are doubly executed:
               That sure the Gallowes hath eate vp more Pe—ople,
               Then would subdue and win Constantinople.
               
               O rouze thee, rouze thee, then braue man of Action,
               Make Fur-gown'd peace burst into Armed faction:
               
                  Thou hast a pate that canst the State vnsettle,
               Be as thou hast beene then, a man of mettle
               And now base Cowardize doth seeme to rust vs,
               Into some worthy busines, quickly thrust vs,
               Now shew thy selfe a noble Ahashuerus,
               
               And once more make our brauing foes to feare vs,
               Doe thou but leade vs on, and looke but Grimly
               And make no doubt, weele doe the busines trimly.
               Mongst all the tooles of warre, be thou great O Toole,
               
               And neuer let the world esteeme thee no Foole.
               
               O make the wheele of reeling State, and Fate turne
               In spight of sullen melancholly Saturne
               
               To Armes, but from the Armes of lustfull Venus
               
               I doe entreat thy warlike care to weane vs.
               Let not the prick-eard power, of proude Priapus
               
               In bonds of painted Curtezans intrap vs,
               And Rouze vs from our Acts and thoughts libidinous,
               That (Traytor-like) in ambush doe lye hid in vs.
               Let not thy Tents of worthles Martiall discipline,
               Be turn'd to stinking Tap-houses to tipple in:
               But make the freezing pot of num-cold war-boyle,
               And bubble to a hurly burly Garboyle:
               
                  Doe as thou hast done oft most noble Spartan,
               
               Strike silken peace into a feauer Quartane;
               Or else like Phoebus in his hot Meridian,
               Astonish all the world with a Quotidian.
               I know thy worth the world doth all admire on,
               Then clad thy selfe in burnisht steele and Yron.
               I know that all men knowes thou hast been tride well,
               Discreetly thou canst talke, fight, run and ride well,
               I know the reach of thy polliticke skull, can
               Plucke rugged Mars from out the bed of Vulcan,
               
               To make warre roare more loude then any Bull can,
               I know thou canst doe more then any Gull can.
               I know thou hold'st it Valours ignominy.
               To spend thy dayes in peacefull whip her Ginny.
               Thy name & voyce, more fear'd then Guy of Warwicke,
               
               Or the rough Rumbling, roaring Meg of Barwicke.
               
               We should doe some what, if wee once were Rouzed,
               And (being Lowsie) we might then be Lowsed.
               Encourage Souldiers to demeane them like men,
               And measure Veluet with their Pikes braue Pikemen.
               Let shouts & clamors, Woods, groues, dales, & hils fill,
               With dreadfull noyse & cries of follow, follow, kill, kill,
               
                  Let Drums cry dub, dub, and let Cannons thunder,
               Tantara Trumpets, and let Cowards wonder:
               Let Musquets bounce, bounce, let the Welkin rumble,
               Let Townes, Turrets, topsituruy tumble,
               Doe this (as well I know thou canst doo't wisely)
               Exceeding careles, feareles and precisely,
               And then thy Fame shall farther farre be noysed,
               Then Titans rayes, or Iustice scales are poysed.
               And since thou knowest mans time on earth is short all,
               Let mortall Actions make thy name Immortall.
            
            
               Lenuoy.
               IVdge O you Gentiles, what is writ is probable,
               And though it seeme a bable, yet 'tis no bable.
               Doome amongst ill tinges, that the best is meant all,
               And what's amisse, pray take as accidentall,
               For like a puny practizing Astronomy,
               And knowes no grounds nor rules so far o'regon am I:
               In diuing to his valours whirlepit bottome,
               That like the Reuerend Sages of olde Gotam,
               I now perceiue how much I ouershot am:
               
                  I'le wade no further in't, but in briefe breuity,
               Abrupt, absurd, abiect, thus cast thus leaue it I.
               These forc'd Rimes, fully stuft with fruitlesse labour,
               Hath Curried my poore braine-pan like a Tabor:
               And to recure me from this strange quandary,
               Hence Vsquebaugh, and welcome sweet Canary.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   