
      
         
            
            
            THE FEAREFVLL SVMMER: OR LONDONS CALAMITY, the countries courtesy, and both their misery.
            By IOHN TAYLOR.
            OXFORD, Printed by Iohn Lichfield and William Turner, Printers to the famous Vniversity. Anno Dom. 1625.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE TRVLY GENEROVS AND NOBLE Knight, Sir IOHN MILLISSENT, one of the Gentlemen Pensioners to the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
            TO whom should I these sorrowes recōmend,
            But vnto you, the Citties noble freind:
            I know, you are much grieued with their Griefe,
            
            And would adventure life for their reliefe,
            To you therefore these lines I dedicate,
            Wherein their sorrowes partly I relate,
            I humbly craue acceptance at your hand,
            And rest
            
               Your seruant euer to command, 
               IOHN TAYLOR
            
         
         
            
            To the Printer.
            MY conceite is, that these are very lamētable verses, & will greiue many the reading, they so expresse death to life & make mortality immortal; I wish that as many as can make vse of such pittifull lines had copies, the rest may want them: Here and there a verse may occasion a teare, then the Author is a true water-Poet indeed, but else where, there wants not an hand-kercheife to dry that teare: So is the whole worke a 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and deserues an approbation at least from
            
               Io. TAYLOR.
               OR. COLL.
            
         
         
            
            THE PRAEFACE.
            IN this lamentable Time of generall Calamity, our hainous sinnes prouoking Gods just Indignation, this heauy visitation and mortality; I being atendant vpon the Queenes Marie at Hampton Court and from thence within 2 miles of Oxford with her Barge (with much greife and remorse) did see and heare the miserable & cold entertainment of many Londoners, which, for their preseruation fled and retired themselues from the Cittie into the Country. Whence I noted the peoples Charitie, and great amendment, for they had giuen ouer one of the 7 deadly sinnes, which was Coueteusnesse, and in many places were so farre out of loue with a Citizens money, that they abhor'd and hated either to touch or receaue it; entertaining them with bitter wormewood welcome, (which Hearbe was in more request amongst many of them, then any of the heauenly Graces or Cardinall Vertues) yet the hearbe of Grace was in much estimation, although the name of it was a document that they had occasion to Rue the time; I farther perceiued that they were so farre from beleiuing or crediting any man, that they would or durst not trust their owne noses, but were doubtfull that that sence would conspire with the Plague to murther them, wherefore (like cunning Mariners, or

mole-catchers,) they would craftily in their streetes and highwaies fetch the winde of any man, although they were ouer shoes and bootes, and sometimes tumbled into a ditch for their labours. This was the time when a man with a nightcap at noone, would haue frighted a whole Parish out of their wits, when to call for Aquauitae (though it had beene but to make a drench for a sicke horse was enough to haue his house shut up. When Lord haue mercy vpon vs, made many of them tremble more then God Refuse, Renounce, Confound, or Damne. When a man trauailing in the habit of a Cityzen, was a meere bulbegger; when for a man to say, that he came from Hell would yeeld him better welcome, without money, then a man would giue to his owne father and mother that came from London. In this time of mans great miserie and small mercy, I tooke my pen in hand and wrote this ensueing discourse, I haue (as neere as I could) suited it, sadly according to the nature of the subject. And truly, because that the bare and naked trueth was so cleare and ample, that I needed not to stuffe it out with friuolous fables or fantasticall fictions; with my soule, I thankfully acknowledge Gods great mercy extended towards me (one of the most wretched and wicked) in that so many thousands of better life and conuersation haue falne on my right hand and on my left, and round about me; yet hath his gratious protection beene my guard, for the which in my gratitude to my God, and to auoid the sinne of idlenes, I haue written what those that can may reade.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FEAREFVLL SVMMER: OR LONDONS CALAMITY.
            THe Patience and long-suffering of our God,
            
            Keepes close his Quiuer, and restraines his Rod,
            
            And though our crying Crimes to Heau'n doe cry
            For vengeance, on accurst Mortality;
            Yea though we merit mischiefes manifold,
            Blest Mercy doth the hand of Iustice hold.
            But when that Eye that sees all things most cleare,
            Expects our fruits of Faith, from yeare to yeare,
            Allowes vs painfull Pastors, who bestow
            Great care and toyle, to make vs fruitfull grow,
            And daylie doth in those weake Vessels send
            The dewe of Heauen, in hope we will amend;
            Yet (at the last) he doth perceiue and see
            That we vnfruitfull and most barren be,
            Which makes his dreadfull Indignation frowne,
            And (as accursed fig-trees) cut vs downe.
            Thus Mercy (mock'd) plucks Iustice on our heads,
            And grieuous Plagues our Kingdome ouer spreads:
            Then let vs to our God make quick returning,
            With true contrition, fasting, and with mourning;
            
               The Word is God, and God hath spoke the Word,
            If we repent, he will put vp his sword.
            
               
               Hee's greiu'd in punishing, Hee's slow to Ire,
            And HE a sinners death doth not desire.
            If our Compunction our Amendment show,
            Our purple sinnes Hee'l make as white as snow,
            If we lament, our God is mercifull,
            Our scarlet crimes hee'l make as white as wooll,
            Faire London that did late abound in blisse,
            And wast our Kingdomes great Metropolis.
            
            `Tis thou that art dejected low in state,
            Disconsolate, and almost desolate,
            The hand of Heau'n that only did protect thee)
            Thou hast prouok'd most justly to correct thee,
            And for thy pride of Heart and deedes vnjust,
            He layes thy Pompe and Glory in the dust.
            Thou that wast late the Queene of Citties nam'd,
            Throughout the world admir'd, renown'd, and fam'd;
            Thou that hadst all things at command and will,
            To whom all England was a Handmaide still:
            For rayment, fewell, fish, fowle, beasts, for food,
            For fruits, for all our Kingdome counted good,
            Both neere and farre remote, all did agree
            To bring their best of blessings vnto thee.
            
            Thus in conceite, thou seem'dst to rule the Fates,
            
            Whilst peace and plenty flourish'd in thy Gates,
            Could I relieue thy miseries as well
            As part I can thy woes and sorrowes tell,
            Then should my Cares be eas'd with thy Reliefe,
            And all my study, how to end thy griefe.
            Thou that wer't late rich, both in friends and wealth,
            Magnificent in state, strong in thy health,
            As chiefest Mistris of our country priz'd,
            Now chiefly in the country are despis'd.
            
               The name of London now both farre and neare,
            Strikes all the Townes and Villages with feare,
            And to be thought a Londoner is worse
            Then one that breakes a house, or takes a Purse.
            He that will filch and steale, now is the Time
            No Iustice dares examine him, his crime
            Let him but say that he from London came,
            So full of Feare and Terrour is that name,
            The Constable his charge will soone forsake,
            And no man dares his mittimus to make.
            Thus Citizens, plagu'd for the Citty sins,
            Poore entertainment in the Country winnes.
            Some feare the Citty, and flye thence amaine,
            And those are of the Countrey fear'd againe,
            Who'gainst thē barre their windowes & their doores,
            More thē they wold 'gainst Turks, or Iewes, or Moores.
            
            I thinke if very Spaniards had come there,
            Their welcome had beene better, and their cheare.
            Whilst Hay-cock lodging, with hard slender fare,
            Welcome like dogs vnto a Church they are.
            Feare makes them with the Anabaptists joyne,
            For if an Hostesse doe receiue their coyne,
            She in a dish of water, or a paile,
            Will new baptize it, least it something aile.
            Thus many a Citizen well stor'd with Gold,
            Is glad to lye vpon his mother molde,
            
            His bed the map of his mortality,
            His curtaines clouds, and Heau'n his Canopie
            The russet plow-swaine, and the Leathren Hinde,
            Through feare is growne vnmannerly, vnkinde:
            And in his house (to harbour) hee'll prefer
            An Infidell before a Londoner:
            
               Milke-maides and Farmers wiues are growne so nice,
            They thinke 2 Cittizen 2 Cockatrice,
            And country Dances, are wax'd so coy and briske,
            They shun him as they'll shun a Basiliske,
            For euery one the sight of him would fly
            All feareing he would kill them with his eye.
            Ah woefull London I thy greife bewaile,
            And if my sighs and prayers may but prevaile;
            I humbly beg of God that hee'le be pleas'd
            In Iesus Christ, his wrath may be appeas'd,
            With holding his dread Iudgements from aboue
            And once more, graspe thee in his armes of loue.
            In Mercy all our wickednes remit
            For who can give thee thankes within the pit.
            Strange was the change in lesse then 3 monthes space
            In joye, in woe, in grace, and in disgrace:
            A healthfull Aprill, a diseased Iune
            
            And dangerous Iulie, brings all out of tune.
            That citty whose rare obiects pleas'd the eyes
            With much content and more varieties,
            She that was late delightfull to the eares
            With melodye Harmonious, like the Spheares:
            She that had all things that might please her tast
            That was by Skies, or Earth, or Seas embrac'd,
            All odoures, and perfumes to please the sent,
            
            And all she felt did giue her touch content,
            Her Cinque porte sences, richly fed and cloy'd
            With blessings bountifull, which she enjoy'd.
            Now 3 monthes change hath fill'd it full with feare
            As if no Solace euer had beene there.
            What doe the eyes see there but greiued sights
            Of sicke, oppressed, and distressed wights:
            
               Houses shut vp, some dying, and some dead,
            Some (all amazed) flying and some fled.
            Streetes thinly man'd with wretches euery day
            Which haue no power to flee, or meanes to stay,
            Dead Coarses carried, and recarried still,
            Whil'st fifty Corpses scarce one graue doth fill.
            With LORD HAVE MERCIE VPON VS, on the dore
            Which (though the words be good) doth greiue men sore.
            And o're the dore-postes fix'd a crosse of red
            
            Be tokening, that there Death some bloud hath shed.
            Some with Gods marks or tokens, doe espie
            Those Marks or Tokens, shew them they must die,
            Some with their Carbuncles, and sores new burst
            Are fed with hope they haue escap'd the worst,
            Thus passeth all the weeke, till Thursdaies Bill,
            
            Shewes vs what thousands Death that weeke did kill.
            That fatall Bill, doth like a razor cut
            The dead, the liuing in a maze doth put,
            And he that hath a Christian heart: I know,
            Is greiu'd, and wounded with the deadly blowe,
            These are the obiects of the Eye, now heare
            And marke the mournefull musick of the Eare.
            
            There doe the brazen Iron toung'd loud bells
            (Deaths clamorous rauisick) Ring continuall knells,
            Some lofty in their notes, some sadly towling.
            Whil'st fatall doggs, make a most dismall howling,
            Some frantick raueing, some with anguish crying,
            Some singing, praying, groneing, and some dying,
            The healthfull grieuing, and the sickly groaning,
            All in a mournefull diapason moaning.
            Here, Parents for their Childrens losse Lament
            There, Childrens greife for parents life that spent.
            
               Here, Sister mournes for sister, Kin for Kin
            As one greife ends, another doth begin,
            There one lies languishing, with slender fare
            Small comfort, lesse attendance, and least care,
            With none but Death and he to tugge together
            Vntill his corps and soule part each from either,
            In one house one, or two, or three doth fall,
            And in another Death plaies sweep-stake all.
            Thus vniuersall sorrowfull complaining
            Is all the musicke now in London raigning,
            Thus is her comfort sad Calamity,
            And all her Melody is Maladie.
            
            These are the obiects of the eyes and eares
            
            Most wofull sights, and sounds of greiues and feares.
            
               
                  Tasteing.
               The curious tast that whilome did delight
            With cost and care to please the Apetite
            What she was wont to hate, she doth adore
            And what's high priz'd, she held despis'd before.
            The drugs, the drenches, and vnto othsome drinks,
            Feare giues a sweetnes to all seuerall stinks,
            And for supposed Antidotes, each Palate
            Of most contagious weedes will make a Sallate.
            And any of the simplest Mountebankes
            May cheat them (as they will) of Coine and thankes,
            With scraped powder of a shoeing horne
            Which they'le beleeue is of an Vnicorne.
            
            
               Angelicoes, distastfull roote is gnaw'd
            And hearbe of Grace most Ruefully is chaw'd.
            
               Garlick offendeth neither tast, nor smell,
            
            Feare and opinion makes it rellish well
            Whilst Beazar stone, and mighty Methridate,
            
            To all degrees are great in estimate,
            
               And Triacles power is wounderously exprest,
            And Dragon Water in most high request.
            These 'gainst the Plague are good preseruatiues
            But the best cordiall is t'amend our liues,
            Sinn's the maine cause, and we must first begin
            To cease our greifes, by ceasing of our sinne.
            I doe beleeue that God hath giuen in store
            Good medicines to cure, or ease each sore,
            But first remoue the cause of the disease,
            And then (no doubt but) the effect will cease.
            Our sinnes the Cause, remoue our sinnes from hence,
            And God will soone remoue the Pestilence.
            Then euery med'cine (to our consolation)
            Shall haue his power, his force, his operation:
            And till that time, Experiments are not
            But Paper walls, against a Canon shott.
            On many a post I see Quack saluers Bills
            Like Fencers Challenges, to shew their skills:
            As if they were such masters of defence
            
            That they dare combate with the Pestilence;
            Meete with the plague in any deadly fray,
            And bragge to beare the victorie away.
            But if their patients patiently beleeue them,
            They'le cure thē (without faile) of what they giue thē;
            What though ten thousand by their drenches perish
            They made them purposely themselues to cherish,
            Their Art is a meere Artlesse kind of lying
            To pick their lyueing out of others dying.
            
            This sharp inuectiue no way seemes to touch
            The learn'd Phisitian, whom I honour much,
            The Paracelsians and Galennists
            
            The Philosophicall graue Herbalists,
            
            
               These I admire and reuerence, for in those
            God doth dame Natures secrets fast inclose,
            Which they distribute, as occasions serue
            Health to reserue, and health decai'd conserue.
            'Tis 'gainst such Rat-catchers I bend my pen
            Which doe mechanically murther men,
            Whose promises of cure, (like lying knaues)
            Doth begger men or send them to their graues.
            
               
                  Smelling.
               Now London for the sence of feeling next,
            Thou in thy feeling cheifely art perplext:
            Thy heart feeles sorrow, and thy body anguish
            Thou in thy feeling feel'st thy force to languish,
            Thou feel'st much woe, and much calamitie
            And many millions feele thy misery:
            Thou feel'st the fearefull Plague, the Flix and Feuer
            
            Which many a soule doth from the body feuer.
            And I beseech God for our Sauiours merit
            To let thee feele, the Comfort of his Spirit.
            
            
               
                  Feeling.
               Last for the solace of the smell, or sent;
            Some in contagious roomes are closely pen't,
            Whereas corrupted Aire they take, and giue
            Till time ends, or lends liberty to liue.
            One with a peice of tasseld well tarr'd Rope
            
            Doth with that no segay keep himselfe in hope;
            Another doth a wispe of wormewood pull
            And with great Iudgement crams his nostrils full:
            A third takes of his socks from's sweating feete,
            And makes them his perfume alongst the streete.
            Whilst Billets Bonefire like, and faggots dry
            Are burnt it'h streetes, the Aire to purifie.
            Thou great Almighty, giue them time and space,
            And purifie them with thy heauenly Grace,
            
            Make their repentance Incence, whose sweete sauour
            
               May mount vnto thy throne, and gaine thy fauour.
            Thus euery sence, that should the heart delight
            Are ministers, and organs to affright,
            The Citizens doe from the City runne,
            The countries feares, the citizens doe shun:
            Both feare the Plague, but neither feares one iot
            Their euill wayes which hath the plague be got,
            This is the way this sicknes to preuent
            Feare to offend, more then the punishment.
            All trades are dead, or almost our of breath
            But such as liue by sicknes, or by death,
            The Mercers, Grocers, Silk-men, Goldsmiths, Drapers,
            Are out of season, like noone burning Tapers,
            All functions faile almost, through want of buyers
            And euery art and misterie turne Dyers,
            
            The very Watermen giue ouer plying
            Their rowing trade doth faile, they fall to dying.
            
            Some men there are, that rise by others falls
            Prophetick Augurists in vrinal is,
            Those are right watermen, and rowe so well
            They either land their fares in Heau'n or Hell.
            
            But this much (Reader) you must vnderstand
            They commonly are paid before they land.
            Next vnto him th' Apothecarie thriues
            By Physick bills, and his preseruatiues;
            Worme eaten Sextons, mighty gaines doe winne,
            And nasty Grauemakers, great commings in
            And Coffin makers, are well paid their rent
            For many a woefull wooden tenement.
            The Searchers of each corps good gainers be,
            The Bearers haue a profitable fee,
            And last, the Dog-killers great gaine aboundes
            
               For Brayning bawling currs, and foysting hounds.
            These are the graue trades, that doe get and saue
            Whose grauity brings many to their graue.
            
            Thus greiued London, fill'd with mones and grones
            Is like a Golgotha, of dead mens bones:
            The field where death his bloudy fray doth fight
            And kills eight hundred in a day and night.
            Faire houses, that were late exceeding deere,
            At fifty or an hundred pounds a yeare,
            The Landlords are so pittifull of late
            They'le let them, at a quarter of the rate.
            So he that is a mightie moneyed man
            Let him but thither make what hast he can,
            Let him disburse his gold and siluer heape
            And purchase London 'tis exceeding cheape.
            But if he tary but one halfe yeare more
            I hope 'twill be as deere as 'twas before.
            A Country cottage, that but lately went
            At 4 markes, or at three pounds yearely rent
            A Citizen, whose meere necessity
            Doth force him now into the country fly,
            Is glad to hire 2 Chambers of a Carter
            And pray and pay with thanks fiue pounds 2 quarter.
            Then here's the alteration of this yeare
            The Cities cheapnes makes the Country deere.
            Besides another mischeife is, I see
            A man dares not be sicke although he be:
            Let him complaine but of the stone or gout
            
            The plague hath strooke him, presently they doubt,
            My selfe hath bin perplexed now and then
            With the wind Collick, yeares aboue thrice ten,
            Within the countrey I durst not repeate
            
               Although my pangs, & gripes, and paines were great.
            For to be sick of any kinde of greife
            Would make a man worse welcome then a theefe,
            To be drunke sick, which er'st did credit winne
            Was fear'd infectious, and held worse then sinne.
            This made me, and many more beside,
            Their greifes to smother, and their paines to hide,
            To tell a merry tale with visage glad,
            When as the Collick almost made me mad.
            Thus meere dissembling, many practis'd then,
            And mid'st of paine, seem'd pleasant amongst men,
            For why, the smallest sigh or grone, or shreike
            Would make a man his meat and lodging seeke.
            This was the wretched Londoners hard case
            Most hardly welcome into any place,
            Whil'st Countrey people, where soe're they went
            Would stop their noses to avoid their sent,
            When as the case did oft most plaine appeare
            'Twas onely they themselues, that stunke with feare.
            
               Nature was dead, (or from the countrey runne)
            A Father durst not entertaine his sonne,
            The Mother sees her daughter, and doth feare her
            Commaunds her, on her blessing, not come neere her,
            Affinity, nor any kind of kinne,
            Or ancient freindship could true welcome winne,
            The Children scarcely would their Parents know
            Or (if they did) but slender duty shew:
            Thus feare made nature, most vnnaturall,
            Duty vndutifull, or very small,
            No freindship, or else cold and miserable
            And generally all vncharitable.
            Nor London letters litle better sped
            
               They would not be receiued (much lesse be read)
            But cast into the fire and burnt with speed
            As if they had bin Hereticks indeed.
            And late I saw, vpon a Sabaoth day
            Some Citizens at Church, prepar'd to pray:
            But (as they had bin excommunicate)
            The good Church wardens thrust them out the gate.
            Another countrey vertue I'le repeat
            The peoples charity was growne so great
            That whatsoeuer Londoner did die,
            In Church or Churchyard should not buried lie,
            Thus were they scorn'd, despised, banished,
            Excluded from the Church, aliue, and dead,
            Aliue, their bodies could no harbour haue,
            And dead, not be allow'd a Christian Graue:
            Thus was the countryes kindnesse cold, and small,
            No house, no Church, no Christian buriall.
            Oh thou that on the winged windes dost fit
            And seest our miserie, remedy it,
            Although we haue deseru'd thy vengeance hott
            Yet in thy fury (Lord) consume vs not.
            But in thy mercies sheath thy slaying sword
            Deliuer vs, according to thy word,
            Shut vp thy Quiuer, stay tay angry tod
            That all the world may know thou art our God,
            Oh open wide the gate of thy compassion
            Assure our soules that thou art our Saluation.
            Then all our thoughts, and words and workes, wee'le frame
            To magnifie thy great and glorious name.
            The waies of God are intricate, no doubt
            Vnsearchable, and passe mans finding out,
            He at his pleasure worketh wonderous things
            
               And in his hand doth hold the hearts of kings,
            And for the loue, which to our King he beares,
            By sicknes he our sinfull country cleares,
            That he may be a patrone, and a guide
            Vnto a people purg'd and purifi'd.
            This by a president is manifest
            When famous late Elizabeth deceast,
            Before our gratious Iames put on the crowne
            Gods hand did cut superfluous branches downe.
            Not that they then that were of life bereft
            Were greater sinners then the number lest,
            But that the Plague should then the kingdome cleare
            The good to comfort, and the bad to feare.
            That as a good king, God did vs assure,
            So he should haue a Nation purg'd and pure.
            And now that Royall Iames intombed lyes
            And that our gratious Charles his roome supplies,
            As He did for his Father formerly
            A sinfull nation cleanse and purifie.
            So God, for him these things to passe doth bring,
            And mends the subiects for so good a King
            
            Vpon whose Throne may peace and plenty rest,
            And he and his Eternally be blest.
            AMEN.
         
         
            
            
            Against Swearing.
            THere is no sin that euer the Diuell invented for the abuse of God, and the perdition of man, but the Authors and Actors of it may frame some frivolous or impertinent excuse; for examples, our first parents in Paradise did disobediently offend, in hope thereby to gaine further knowledge, and to be like God. Cain slew his brother, and had some poore excuse for the fratricide and murther, because he saw that Abell and his offering was in better acceptation. Samson was ouercome by Dalilah, but he had lewd lust, or lustfull loue to entice him; Dauid had not committed the two crying sins of Adultery and murther, had not the beauty of Bethsheba bin his insuaring object; Achitophel had not bin a Traitour to the Lord's Anointed, and a wicked counsellour to Absolom, but the expectation of raising his estate was his motiue. Ahab had not put Nabaoth to death vnjustly, but that hee knew it the neerest way to be possessour of his Vineyard. Achan's theft, Gehazies lie, Manasses cruelty and Idolatry, Peter's denying, & Iudas
               
his betraying of our Sauiour had all some colour of Excuse, but a swearer is worse then all these, for he hath no starring hole, or by way that can make him appeare guiltlesse either before God or men; Remember this all you that make swearing the glory of your speech, the damnable grounds of your earthly society, the accursed Garbe of your (misnamed) Gentleman like carriage; Remember that God doth heare and see, and can, and will reuenge, and for this inexcusable crime (especially) the wrath of the Almighty is showred and powred vpon vs.
            
               THou that these lines dost either heare or reade,
            Consider with thy selfe, and take good heed.
            Reade them, and let them neuer be forgot,
            They doe concerne thy soule, then sleight them not.
            The
                  Iames.
                
               Friends of hell beleeue there is a God,
            
            And feare and tremble at his angry Rod:
            They doe confesse his glorious Excellence,
            And his Almighty powers Omnipotence.
            But Man his choicest and his chiefest Creature,
            Is so rebellious against God and Nature,
            
            That he gainst Heau'n dare both blaspheme and sweare,
            And (worse then Fiends) they not belieue or feare:
            So that the Earth doth breed, feed, and retaine
            Worse Monsters then there doth in Hell remaine.
            If men beleeu'd the word that God hath spoke,
            They would beleue that word should nere be broke.
            In His enacted Law
                  Exod. 20. is one Decree,
            That all who take his Name in vaine, shall be
            Accounted guilty, and his fearefull wrath
            Will hold them worthy of eternall death.
            Againe 'tis said; Let the
                  Leviticus 24. 
               Blasphemor dye,
            Let him be stoned for his Blasphemy:
            And euill tongues, who dare to curse adventer,
            Shall into Heauens1 Cor. 6. 10. blessednes not enter.
            And Christ (when on the Earth he liued heere)
            Forbade vs that at
               
                  Matth. 5. 
               all we should not sweare.
            
            And in th' eleventh of Deuteronomy againe,
            We are commanded not to sweare in vaine.
            TheGod himselfe complaineth that men blaspheme him, Esay 52. 5. The names of blasphemy is writ vpon the 10 heads of Antichrist, Apre. 13.1. Cursing is forbidden by the Apostle, when he saith Blesse, Isoy, and curse net, Rom. 12. 14. Our Sauiour commandeth vs to blesse them that curle vs, Matth. 5. 44. Blesse them that curse you, and pray for them which hurt you, Luke 6. 28. Accustome not thy mouth to woaring, for in it are many falls, neither take vp for a custome the naming of the holy One, for thou shalt not be vnpunished for such things, Esclesiasticus 23. 9. The Plague shall neuer go forth from the house of the swearer Idem.
                
               Heathen to blaspheme their gods abhorr'd,
            Yet Christians wilfully blaspheme the Lord.
            
               Who euer to reuile the Gods were knowne,
            In Rome, were from the Rock Tarpetus throwne.
            Th'Egyptians Law was, he should lose his head.
            'Mongst Seythians life and goods were forfeited.
            These grieuous punishments did Pagans vse
            Against all them that did their Gods abuse.
            King Donald's Law in Scotland's not forgot,
            Who burne them through the lips with irons hot.
            
            And when King Edmund here had Regall State,
            All Swearers he did excommunicate.
            And Philip King of France (a Prince renown'd)
            Ordain'd that all Blasphemers should be drown'd,
            The Emperour Max milian did decree,
            That all vaine Sweaters should beheaded be.
            The Earle of Flanders, Philip did ordaine,
            Their losse of life and goods that swore in vaine.
            Saint Lewis the King of France enacted there,
            That for the first time any one did sweare,
            
            Into Imprisonment one month was cast,
            And stand within the Pillory at last.
            But if the second time againe they swore,
            
            One with an iron hot their tongues did bore.
            And who the third time in that fault did flip;
            Were likewise boared through the vnder-lip.
            For the fourth time most grieuous paines belongs,
            He caus'd to be cut off their lips and tongues.
            
               Henry the fift of England, that good King,
            His Court to such conformity did bring.
            That euery Duke should sorry shillings pay
            For euery Oath he swore, without delay.
            Each Baron twenty, Knights or 'Squires offence
            Paid 
                  •
               enn
                  ••
                and euery Yeoman twenty pence.
            
               The Boyes and Pages all were whipt most fine,
            That durst abuse the Majesty diuine.
            
            Thus Pagan Princes with sharp lawes withstood
            Profauing of their Gods,Whose sweares falsly, calls the God of Truth to witnes a lie. Who so sweares as he thinks may be deceiued. Who so sweares vnreuerently, dishonoureth God. Who so sweares deceitfully, abuseth Christian fidelity. Who so sweares idlely, abuseth the credit of a faithfull oath. Who so sweares accustomably, God will plague him. of stone, or wood.
            And Christian Kings and Rulers formerly,
            Haue most seuerely punisht blasphemy.
            And shall a Heathen, or an Infidell,
            That knowes no joyes of Heauen, or paines of Hell,
            More reuerence to his deuillish Idols show,
            Then we doe to the true God, whom we know?
            If we remembred well but what we were,
            And what we are, we would not dare to sweare.
            Poore trunks of earth fill'd with vncertain breath,
            By nature heires to euerlasting death:
            Most miserable wretches, most ingrate
            'Gainst God, that did elect vs, and create,
            Redeem'd, conseru'd, preseru'd, and sactifi'd,
            And giues vs hope we shall be glorifi'd.
            H'hath giuen vs being life, sense, reason, wit,
            Wealth, and all things his Prouidence thinkes fit:
            And for requitall, we (quite voide of grace)
            Curse, sweare, and doe blaspheme him to his face.
            Oh the supernall patience of our God,
            That beares with Man (a sin polluted clod)
            When halfe such treasons 'gainst an earthly King
            Would many a Traytor to confusion bring!
            Suppose a man should take a Whelp & breed him,
            And stroake him, & make much of him & feed him,
            How will that curre loue him beyond all other,
            Neuer for saking him to serue another.
            But if he should most disobediently,
            Into his Masters face or throat to fly,
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     Elfred an english Earle, conspiring to put our K. Adolstanes eyes at Winchester, forsware the treason in Saint Peters Church at Rome and fell downe dead presently. Earle Godwin murthered Prince Alfred brother to king Edward Confessor, and being at dinner, the King charged him with the murther, then Godwin swore by bread, and prayed it might choake him if he were guilty, and immediately it choaked him in the place his lands also sunk into the sea, and are called Godwinsands. K. Stephen forsware himselfe to King Henry I, and liued in continuall trouble, & dyed in perplexity, of minde Edward brake his oath made at York, that he came not with intent to cease the Kingdome, and
b
                     •
                  eaking that oath was punisht with a troublesome raigne, his brethren and children all (except one murthered and not any of his issue reigned after him Roger Mortimer, a great Peere of th
                     •
                  s land, for breaking his oath to
King Edward the 2. was most
ignominio
                     •
                  sly hanged bowelld & quartered M.
Fox in his Booke of Martyrs declares of one Richard Long of Calice that forsware himselfe to accuse one Smith for eating flesh
in Lent, after which oath Long went presently &
drowned himselfe. One Grimwood at Hiteham in Suffolks, forsware himselfe and his bowels burst out. One widdow Barnes for
the like sin cost herselfe out of her
window in Cornhill and brake her necke. Anns Anetis forsware herselfe in
Woodstrees for sixe pound of Towe, desiring God she might links down, which fearfully hapned. One Lea in Sunne-alloy
without Bishopsgate forswere himselfe, and after ript out his guts. Sure euery man that liues vpon the ground
            Would say a hanging's fit for such a hound.
            And worser then so many dogges are they,
            That 'gainst their God with oathes doe barke and bray,
            And if repentance doe not mercy win,
            They'll hang in Hell like Hell-hounds for that sin.
            Of all black crimes frō 
               Belzebubs damn'd treasure,
            This swearing sin no profit yeelds, or pleasure:
            Nor gaines the swearer here but earths vexation,
            With change of his saluation for damnation.
            It is a sinne that yeelds vs no excuse
            (For what excuse can be for Gods abuse?)
            And though our other faults by death doe end,
            Yet Blasphemy doth after death extend,
            For to the damn'd in Hell this curse is giuen,
            They for their paines blasphem'd the God of Heauen.
            
            Examples on the earth haue many beene,
            As late in sundry places hath beene seene.
            At Mautna two braue Russians in their game,
            Swore and blasphem'd our blessed Sauiours name,
            Where God iust iudgment (full of feare & dread)
            Causd both their eyes to drop from out their head.
            In Rome, a child but 5 yeares old that swore,
            Was snatch vp by the Deuill, and seene no more.
            And at Ragouse, a Mariner did sweare
            As if he would Gods name in sunder teare;
            When falling ouer-boord, was drown'd and tost,
            And nothing but his tongue was onely lost.
            Remember this you sinfull sonnes of men
            Think how that Christ redeem'd you from Hells den:
            His mercy he hath giu'n in magnitude,
            Requite him not with vile ingratitude.
            
               He made the Eare and Eye, and heares and sees
            The swearers execrable oathes and lyes.
            The God head of the Father they contemne:
            Against the Sonnes Redemption the blaspheme:
            The Holy Spirit grieuously they grieue,
            And head-long into Hell themselues they driue
            I
                  •
                is in vaine for mortall men to think,
            
               Gods Iustice is a sleepe, although it winke:
            Or that his arme is shortned in these times,
            That he cannot reach home to punish crimes.
            Oh thinke not so, 'tis but the Deuills illusion,
            To draw vs desperately to our confusion.
            Some say that 'tis their anger makes them sweare
            
            And oathes are out before they are aware,
            But being crost with losses, and perplex'd
            They thinke no harme, but sweare as being vex'd:
            And some there are that sweare for complement,
            Make aothes their grace, and speeches ornament,
            Their sweet Rhetoricall fine eloquence,
            Their reputations onely excellence.
            Their valour, whom the Deuill doth inflame
            T'abuse their Makers and Redeemers name.
            Thinke but on this you that doe God forget,
            Your poore excuses cannot pay this debt:
            Remember that our sinfull soules d
                  •
               d cost
            A price too great, to be by swearing lost
            And blessed was our last good Parliament,
            Who made an act for swearers punishment,
            And blest shall be each Magistrates good name,
            That carefully doe execute the same.
            Those that are zealous for Gods glory heere,
            (No doubt) in heauen shall haue true glory there,
            
               Which that we may haue, humbly I implore
            Of Him that rules and raignes for ouermore,
            The Eternall Lord of Lords, and King of Kings,
            Before whose Throne blest Saints & Angels sings,
            All power, praise, glory, maiesty, thanksgiuing,
            Ascribed be to him that's euer liuing.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            My farewell to the famous Vniuersity of Oxford.
            I Thanke God, that Ingratitude being the worst of euils, it doth not raigne in me, although it may knock at the doore of my estate, yet (I trust) I neuer shall harbour it; This renowned Seminary and City, allowed me free and generous entertainment for some certaine weekes in these dangerous and contagious times: and although the hand of the Almighty did in some sprinkling and mercifull measure, awaken the security of some in that Citty, yet was, and is his Grace so abundantly extended towards it, that there did not dye in the City and Suburbs being 13 Parishes, aboue 7 of the Pestilence in one weeke all this dangerous yeare; in which is much to be commended the care and diligence of the Graue and right Worship Mr Vicechancellour, with Mr Maior, and the rest of his worthy brethren, who neglected or omitted no meanes, that prouidence and Charity could vse for the preseruation

of the healthy, and the comfort of the sick; this I being a witnesse of, in the way of thankfulnesse thought fit to expresse: assuring them in generall, that they shall neuer want the prayers and best wishes of him that wilbe euer at their seruice
            
               IOHN TAYLOR
            
            
         
      
   