
      
         
            
            
            Some few yeares since, I rode to my Lords Mannour of Haleing in Surrey, where I presented his Lordship with a Manuscript, or written Booke of the names and degrees of all the Knights of the Noble Order of the Garter, since the first institution by King Edward the third, which was of mine owne collections out of Windsor Castle, and some authentique Histories: His Lordship receiued it gratefully, and rewarded me honourably: in the which Booke was an Anagram of his Name and Earledome of Nottingham, which I hold very fitting to bee hereunder Printed, because it fals correspondent to the reuerence of his age, and the happinesse which the words import.
         
         
            
            Charles Howarde, Earle of Nottinghame.
            Anagramma.
            O Heauen cals, and hath true Glorie for me.
            
               And happie was this happy Anagram,
               
                  Heauen cals Charles Howard Earle of Nottingham:
               
               And he obeyd the call, and gaind true Glory,
               
               For change of earthly titles transitory.
            
         
         
            
            FOR THE SACRED MEMORIALL OF THE GREAT, NOBLE, and ancient Example of Vertue and Honour,
            The Illustrious and Welbeloued LORD, CHARLES HOWARD Earle of Nottingham, Iustice in Eyre of all his Maiesties Forests, Parks, and Chases on this side Trent; Knight of the Honourable Order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of his Maiesties most Honourable Priuy Councell.
            WHO DEPARTED THIS Life at his Mannour of Haleing in Surrey on Thursday the 14 of December, 1624. and was buried at Rigate, amongst his Honourable Ancestors, the 20 of December last. 1624.
            Printed at London for H. G. 1625.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVrable, Right Worshipfull, of both Sexes, who had either alliance by Mariage, Consanguinity by Birth, or bore loue to the Right Noble and truly vertuous deceased.
            
               I Humbly craue your Worthinesse t'excuse
               This boldnesse of my poore vnlearned Muse,
               That hath presum'd so high a pitch to flye,
               In praise of Vertue and Nobility,
               I know this taske most fit for Learned men,
               For Homer, Ovid, or for Virgils pen:
               But for I with him haue both seru'd and sail'd,
               My gratefull duty hath so far preuail'd,
               Boldly to write true Honours late decease,
               Whiles better Muses please to hold their peace.
               And thus much to the world my Verse proclaimes,
               That neither Gaine nor Flattery are my aimes,
               
                  But Loue and Dutie to the Noble dead,
               Hath caus'd me cause these Lines be published.
               And therefore I entreat your gen'rous Hearts,
               T'accept my duty, pardon my deserts,
               Beare with my weaknesse, winke at my defects,
               Good purposes doe merit good effects,
               Poore earthen Vessels may hold precious Wine,
               And I presume that in this Book of mine
               In many places you shall something find,
               To please each Noble well affected mind.
               And for excuse my Muse doth humbly plead,
               That you'le forbeare to iudge before you reade.
            
            He that is euer a true well-wisher, and obsequious Seruant to your Honours, Worships, and Noble Personages; Iohn Taylor.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            For the sacred Memoriall of the Great, Noble, and Ancient Example of Vertue and Honour, the Illustrious and welbeloued Lord, Charles Howard, Earle of Nottingham, Iustice in Eyre of all his Maiesties Forests, Parks, and Chases on this side Trent; Knight of the Honourable Order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of his Maiesties most Honourable Priuy Councell, &c.
            
               WHat English Muse forbeares to shed a teare
               For Englands Nestor, grauest oldest Peere?
               Not onely old in number of his dayes,
               But old in vertue, and all good mens praise:
               Whose actions all his pilgrimage did passe,
               More full of honour then his title was.
               And though his corps be seuer'd from his spirit,
               
               And that the world sufficient knowes his merit:
               Yet shall my poore vnworthy artlesse Verse
               In duteous seruice wait vpon his Hearse.
               My selfe his Honour on the Seas attended,
               And with his bounty haue I beene befriended,
               And to acquite me from vnthankfulnesse,
               My lines shall here my gratitude expresse.
               No monumentall Marble reard on hie,
               He needs t'emblaze him to posterity,
               No flattering Epitaph he needs to haue,
               To be engrau'd vpon a gaudy graue,
               His life and actions are his Monument,
               Which fils each Kingdome, Clime, and Continent.
               
                  And when their memories shall stinke and dye,
               Who in most stately sepulchers doe lye,
               Then Royall Histories shall still relate
               To each degree, or age, or sex, or state,
               The vertue, valour, bounty, and the fame
               Of Englands all beloued Nottinghame:
               
               And Noble hearts his memory shall retaine
               Vntill the World to Chaos turne againe.
               That yeere of wonderment call'd eighty eight,
               
               When Fraud and Force did our destruction wait,
               When Hell, and Rome, and Spaine did all agree,
               That wee should vanquish'd and inuaded be.
               Our foes at Sea thirty one thousand men,
               With neere foure hundred ships and Gallies then,
               Then this White Lion rows'd with irefull teene,
               Defending both his Country and his Queene.
               Like second Mars to battle braue he went,
               
                  God making him his worthy Instrument,
               His Chieftaine, Champion, and his Generall,
               With sixscore ships, and Vessels great and small,
               To conquer those that did for conquest come,
               And soile the power of Hell, and Spaine, and Rome.
               
               Then valour was with resolution mixt,
               And manhood with true honour firmly fixt.
               When death and danger threatned euery where,
               Braue Charles (all fearlesse) did encourage feare.
               When roring cannons countercheckt heauens thunder
               And slaughterd mē their vessels keeles lay vnder,
               The Sun eclyps'd with smoake, skies darke and dim,
               And battering bullets seuerd lim from lim,
               When as that sea might be the Red Sea call'd,
               Then he with dreadlesse courage, vnappall'd,
               Like a bright Beacon, or a blazing Star,
               Approu'd himselfe a thunderbolt of war,
               
                  Whose valour and example valiantly
               Pursu'd and wonne a glorious victory.
               And then by him (through the Almighties hand)
               Preserued from inuasion was this Land.
               So that who euer shall his Tombe passe by,
               And shall enquire who there doth buried lye,
               If answer be but made, He's in this Graue
               Who did in Eighty eight this Kingdome saue;
               Then is the totall told, and seruice best,
               Wherewith this little Land was euer blest.
               At1596 
                  Cales likewise the Sea-fight we did win
               By his direction and graue disciplin.
               The Spanish ships soone from his force retir'd,
               Some torne, some sunke, some taken, and some fir'd,
               And whensoere he gaue the ouerthrow,
               He nere insulted ore his conquerd foe,
               But like a Noble Lyon, euery way
               He scorn'd to prey vpon a yeelding prey:
               With pity, piety, and true remorce,
               His clemency was mixt with manly force.
               Vnto his foes a noble care he had,
               Nor would affliction to affliction adde:
               So that his enemies much cause did find
               To loue and honour his true noble mind.
               Yet gainst offenders he was sharply bent,
               Seuere in threats, and milde in punishment,
               His iustice would condemne, and in a breath
               His mercy sau'd whom iustice doom'd to death.
               His aduersaries he did oft relieue,
               And his reuenge was onely to forgiue.
               He knew that well got honour nere shall die,
               But make men liue vnto eternitie:
               It as his greatest riches he esteem'd,
               And Infamy he basest begg'ry deem'd.
               
                  He knew, though worthy spirits may be crost,
               Yet if they lose no honour nothing's lost.
               And those that haue afraid of enuy bin,
               True honour or good fame did neuer win.
               If he an auaritious mind had bore,
               Of wealth no subiect then had had such store:
               So many yeares Englands high Admirall,
               
               Fees, offices, and prizes that did fall,
               With gifts and fauours from the Queene and State,
               And other things, amounting to a rate:
               That had he beene a mizer, close of hand,
               No subiect had been richer in this Land,
               In deeds of pity, and true charity,
               Good house-keeping, and hospitality,
               Bounty, and courteous affability,
               He was the Brooch of true Nobility:
               And for these vertues men shall scarcely find,
               That he a fellow here hath left behind.
               He knew that Auarice and Honor be
               Two contraries that neuer will agree:
               And that the Spender shall haue true renowne,
               When infamy the Mizers fame shall drowne.
               He euery way most nobly was enclin'd,
               And lou'd no wealth but riches of the mind:
               His pleasure was, that those that did retaine
               To him, and serue, should by him thriue and gaine:
               And he thought t'was enough for him to haue,
               When as his seruants did both get and saue.
               So amongst Nobles I thinke few are such,
               That keepes so little, giues away so much.
               His latest Will did make it plaine appeare,
               The loue which to his seruants he did beare.
               To great and small amongst them, more or lesse,
               His bounty did expresse his worthinesse:
               
                  We know that God to man hath life but lent,
               And plac'd it in his bodies tenement,
               And when for it againe the Landlord cals,
               The Tenant must depart, the Cottage fals.
               God is most iust, and he will haue it knowne,
               That he in taking life, takes but his owne:
               Life is a debt which must to God be rendred,
               And Natures retribution must be tendred.
               Some pay in youth, and some in age doe pay,
               But tis a charge that all men must defray,
               For tis the lot of all mortality,
               When they begin to liue, begin to dye.
               And as from sin to sin we wander in,
               So death at last is wages for our sin.
               He neither hath respect to sex or yeares,
               Or hath compassion of our sighes nor teares,
               He'll enter (spight of bars, or bolts, or locks)
               And like a bold intruder neuer knockes.
               To Kings and Caitiffes, rich, poore, great and small,
               
                  Death playes the tyrant, and destroyes them all.
               He calls all creatures to account most strict,
               And no mans power his force can contradict.
               We must perforce be pleas'd with what he leaues vs,
               And not repine at ought which he bereaues vs.
               Hee's lawlesse, and tis folly to demand
               Amends, or restitution at his hand.
               He doth deride the griefe of those that mourne,
               And all our fraile afflictions laugh to scorne.
               For hee condemnes, and neuer heares the cause,
               He takes away despight the power of Lawes.
               Yet hee our vassall euer doth remaine,
               From our first birth vnto our graue againe:
               And God doth in his seruice him employ,
               To be the bad mans terrour, good mans ioy.
               
                  Death is the narrow doore to life eternall,
               Or else the broad gate vnto death infernall:
               But our Redeemer in his spotlesse offering,
               Did lead the way for vs to heauen by suffering.
               He was the death of death, when he did die
               Then Death was swallow'd vp in victory,
               
               And by his rising blessed soules shall rise,
               And dwell in the celestiall Paradise.
               
               For these respects, you whose affinity,
               Propinquity, or consanguinity,
               Whose blood or whose alliance challenge can
               A part in this deceased Nobleman,
               The law of Nature and affection moues,
               That griefe and sorrow should expresse your loues,
               He was your secondary maker, and
               Your authors earthly being, and you stand
               In duty for your liues and honours bound
               To him, for by him haue you beene renown'd.
               Yet Death that's common vnto euery one,
               Should be intolerable vnto none:
               And therefore let his noble spirit rest,
               Amidst those ioyes which cannot be exprest,
               Let those that liue his goodnesse imitate,
               And yeeld vnto the course of mortall fate.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   