
      
         
            
            THE
Vnnaturall Father:
OR,
The cruell Murther committed by
IOHN ROWSE of the Towne of Ewell, ten miles
from London, in the County of Surry, vpon two
of his owne Children.
With his Prayer and Repentance in Prison, his Arraignment
and Iudgement at the Sessions, and his Execution
for the said fact at Croydon, on Munday the
second of Iuly. 1621.
            
            London printed for I. T. and H. G. 1621.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE
VNNATVRALL
FATHER.
            
               AS a chaine consists of diuers
linkes, and euery linke depends
and is inyoak'd vpon one another:
Euen so our sinnes, being
the Chaine wherewith Satan
doth binde and manacle
vs, are so knit, twisted, and sodered
together, that without
our firme faith ascending, and
Gods grace descending, wee
can neuer bee freed from those infernall fetters; for Sloth is
linked with Drunkennes, Drunkennes with Fornication and
Adultery, & Adultery with Murder, and so of al the rest of the
temptations, suggestions and actions, wherewith miserable
men and women are insnared, and led captiue into perpetuall
perdition, except the mercy of our gracious God be our defence
and safegard.
            For a lamentable example of the Diuels malice, and mans
misery, this party, of whom I treat at this time, was a wretch,
not to be matched, a fellow not be fellowed, & one that scarce
hath an equall, for matchlesse misery, and vnnaturall Murther.
But to the matter.
            
               This Iohn Rowse being a Fishmonger in London, gaue ouer
his trade, and liued altogether in the Towne of Ewell, neere
Nonesuch, in the County of Surry, ten miles from London,
where he had Land of his owne for himselfe and his heires for
euer to the value of fifty pounds a yeere, with which hee liued
in good and honest fashion, being well reputed of all his
neighbours, and in good estimation with Gentlemen and others
that dwelt in the adioyning Villages.
            Vntill at the last he married a very honest and comely woman,
with whom hee liued quietly and in good fashion some
six moneths, till the Diuell sent an instrument of his, to disturbe
their Matrimoniall happinesse: for they wanting a
Maidseruant, did entertain into their house a Wench, whose
name was Iane Bl
                     •
                  ndell, who in short time was better acquainted
with her Masters bed then honesty required, which in
time was found out and knowne by her Mistris, and brake the
peace, in such sort, betweene the said Rowse and his Wife, that
in the end, after two yeeres continuance, it brake the poore
womans heart, that she dyed & left her Husband a widdower,
where he and his Whore were the more free to vse their cursed
contentments, and vngodly embracements.
            Yet that estate of being vnmarried was displeasing to him,
so that he tooke to wife another woman, who for her outward
feature, and inward qualities was euery way fit for a very honest
man, although it were her hard fortune to match otherwise.
            With this last Wife of his he liued much discontented, by
reason of his keeping his lewd Tr
                  •
               ll in his house, so that by
his dayly Ryot, excessiue drinking, & vnproportionable spending,
his estate began to be much impouerished, much of his
Land morgag'd and forfeited, himselfe aboue two hundred
pounds indebted, and in processe of time to be (as a lewd

liuer) of all his honest neighbours reiected and contemned.
            His estate and credit being almost past recouerie wasted
and impaired, he forsooke his Wife, came vp to London with
his Wench, where hee fell in new league with a corrupted
friend; who (as he said) did most courteously coozen him of
all that euer he had, & whom at this time I forbeare to name;
because it was Iohn Rowse his request before his execution, that
he should not be named in any Booke or Ballad, but yet vpon
a Dye his name may be picked out betwixt a sinke & a trey.
This false friend of his (as he said) did perswade him to leaue
his Wife for altogether, and did lodge and boord him and
his paramore certaine weekes in his house, and afterward
caused him and her to be lodged (hauing chang'd his name)
as Man and Wife in an honest mans house neere Bishopsgate,
at Beuis Marks, where they continued so long, till his
money was gone, (as indeede he neuer had much, but now
and then small petty summes from his secret friend aforesaid)
and he being fearefull to bee smoak'd out by his Creditors,
was counselled to leaue his Country, and depart for Ireland;
and before his going ouer-Sea, his friend wrought so, that all
his Land was made ouer in trust to him, and Bonds, Couenants,
and Leases made, as fully bought and sold for a summe
of two hundred and threescore pounds; of all which money
the said Rowse did take the Sacrament and his death, that hee
neuer did receiue one penny, but hee said that now and then
he had fiue or ten shillings at a time from his said friend, and
neuer aboue twenty shillings, and that all that euer he had of
him, being summ'd together, was not aboue three & twenty
pounds, the which moneys his friend did pay himselfe out of
his Rents. But some more friend to him, then he was to himselfe,
did doubt that he was cheated of his Land: whereupon
(to make all sure) he said that his false friend did so farre preuaile

with him, that hee the said Rowse tooke an Oath in the
open Court at Westminster Hall, that hee had lawfully sold
his Land, and had receiued the summe abouesaid, in full satisfaction
and paiment, and his said friend did vow and protest
many times vnto him, with such oathes and vehement
curses, that he neuer would deceiue his trust, but that at any
time when hee would command all those forged Bonds and
Leases, that hee would surrender them vnto him, and that
hee should neuer be damnifide by them or him, to the value
of one halfe-penny. Vpon which protestations (hee said) he
was enticed to vndoe himselfe out of all his earthly possessions,
& by a false oath to make hazard of his inheritance in
Heauen.
            In Ireland he stayd not long, but came ouer againe, and
was by his friend perswaded to goe into the Low Countries:
which he did, neuer minding his Wife and two small
Children which he had by her, hauing likewise a brace of bastards
by his Whore (as some say) but he said that but one of
them was of his begetting. But he, after some stay in Holland,
saw that he could not fadge there, according to his desire,
and withall, suspecting that he was cheated of his Land, and
aboue all, much perplexed in his Conscience for the false
oath that he had taken, pondering his miserable estate, and
ruing his vnkindnesse to his Wife, and vnnaturall dealing to
his Children, thinking with himselfe what course were best to
take to helpe himselfe out of so many miseries which did incompasse
him, he came ouer againe into England to his too
deare friend, demanding of him his Bonds and Leas
                  •
               s of his
Land which hee had put him in trust withall. But then his
friend did manifest himselfe what he was, and told him plainly,
that he had no writings, not any Land of his, but what hee
had dearely bought and paid for. All which (Rowse replyed

vnto him) was false, as his owne Conscience knew. Then
said the other, haue I not heere in my custody your hand
and Seale to confirme my lawfull possession of your Land?
and moreouer haue I not a Record of an Oath in open
Court, which you tooke concerning the truth of all our bargaine?
And seeing that I haue all these especiall points of
the Law, as an Oath, Indentures, and a sure possession, take
what course you will, for I am resolued to hold vvhat I
haue.
            These (or the like) words, in effect passed betwixt Rowse
and his Friend (Trusty Roger) which entring at his eares,
pierced his heart like Daggers; and beeing out of money
and Credit, a man much infamous for his bad life, indebted
beyond all possible meanes of paiment; a periured
wretch to coozen himselfe, hauing no place or meanes to
feede or lodge, and fearefull of being arrested, hauing so
much abused his Wife, and so little regarded his Children,
being now brought to the pits brim of desperation,
not knowing amongst these calamities which way to turne
himselfe, hee resolued at last to goe home to Ewell againe
to his much wronged Wife, for his last refuge in extremitie.
            The poore Woman receiued him with ioy, and his
Children with all gladnesse welcomed home the prodigall
Father, with whom he remained in much discontentment
and perplexitie of minde: the Diuell still tempting him

                  〈◊〉
                mischiefe and despaire; putting him in minde of his

                  〈…〉
                better estate, comparing pleasures past with
present miseries, and hee re
                  •
               oluing that hee had beene a
man in that Towne had beene a Gentlemans companion,
of good Reputation and Calling, that hee had Friends,
Lands, Money, Apparell, and Credit, with meanes sufficient

to haue left for the maintenance of his Family, and
that now he had nothing left him but pouerty and beggery,
and that his two Children were like to be left to go from
doore to doore for their liuing.
            Being thus tormented and tost with restlesse imaginations;
hee seeing dayly to his further griefe, the poore case
of his children, and fearing that worse would befall them
hereafter, hee resolued to worke some meanes to take away
their languishing liues, by a speedy & vntimely death,
the which practise of his (by the Diuels instigation and assistance)
he effected as followeth.
            To bee sure that no body should stop or preuent his diuellish
enterprise; hee sent his Wife to London in a friuolous
errand, for a riding Coate: and she being gone somewhat
timely, and too soone in the morning, both her Children
being in bed and fast asleepe, beeing two very pretty
Girles, one of the age of sixe yeeres, and the other foure
yeeres old, none being in the house but themselues, their
vnfortunate Father, and his ghostly Counsellor, the dores
being fast locked, hee hauing an excellent Spring of water
in the Seller of his house (which, to a good minde
that would haue imploy'd it well, would haue beene a blessing:
for the water is of that Christaline purity, and cleerenesse,
that Queen Elizabeth of famous memory would dayly
send for it for her owne vse) in which hee purposed to
drowne his poore innocent children sleeping: for he going
into the Chamber where they lay, took the yongest of 
                  〈◊〉
               
named Elizabeth forth of her bed, and carried her 
                  〈◊〉
               
the Stayres into his Seller, and there put her in the Spring
of Water, holding downe her head vnder that pure Element
with his hands, till at last the poore harmelesse soule
and body parted one from another.
            
               Which first Act of this his inhumane Tragedy being
ended, hee carried the dead corps vp three payre of
stayres, and laying it downe on the floore, left it, and went
down into the Chamber where his other Daughter, named
Marry, was in bed; being newly awaked, and seeing her father,
demanded of him where her Sister was? To whom he
made answer that he would bring her where she was. So taking
her in his armes, hee carried her downe towards the
Seller: and as hee was on the Seller stayres, shee asked him
what he would doe, and whither he would carry her? Feare
nothing, my Child (quoth hee) I will bring thee vp againe
presently: and being come to the Spring, as before hee had
done with the other, so hee performed his last vnfatherly
deed vpon her, & to be as good as his word, carried her vp
the stayres & laid her by her sister; that done, he laid them
out, and couered them both with a sheete, walking vp and
downe his house, weeping and lamenting his owne misery,
and his friends treachery, that was the maine ground of all
his misfortunes, & the death of his Children: and though
there was time and opportunity enough for him to flye, &
to seeke for safety; yet the burthen and guilt of his conscience
was so heauy to him, and his desperate case was so extreme,
that hee neuer offered to depart; but as a man weary
of his life, would, and did stay, till such time as hee was
apprehended and sent to Prison, where he lay till he was rewarded
with a iust deserued death.
            What his other intents were, after hee had drowned his
Children, is vncertaine; for hee drew his sword and
laid it naked on a Table, and after, he gate a poore woman
downe into the Seller, and in the same place where the two
Infants lost their liues, hee did helpe the woman to wring
a Bucke of his clothes, and then he requested her to help to

conuey his goods out of his house; for hee said that hee
feared that the Sheriffe of Surry would come and seaze vpon
all. But the woman not thinking of any of the harme
that was done, imagined that he had meant that his goods
would be seazed for debt, and not for murther.
            But to returne to the miserable Mother of the murdered
Children, shee said that her heart throbbed all day,
as fore-boading some heauy mischance to come: and hauing
done her businesse that shee came about to London,
as soone as shee came home, she asked for her Children,
to whom her Husband answered that they were at a
neighbours house in the Towne. Then said she, I will goe
thither to fetch them home. No quoth he, I will goe my
selfe presently for them. Thē said his wife, let the poore woman
that is heere goe and bring them home. But at last she
saw such delay was vsed, she was going her selfe; then her
Husband told her that hee had sent them to a Kinsmans of
his at a Village called Sutton, foure miles from Ewell, and
that hee had prouided well for them, and prayd▪ her to bee
contented and feare nothing, for they were well. These
double tales of his, made her to doubt somwhat was amisse:
therefore shee intreated him for Gods sake to tell her truely
where they were. Wherevpon he said, If you will needs
know where they are, goe but vp the staires into such a
Chamber, and there you shall finde them. But in what a
lamentable perplexity of mind the poore woman was when
shee perceiued how and which way they lost their liues,
any Christian that hath an heart of flesh may imagine.
Presently the Constable was sent for, who tooke him into
his custody, who amongst other talke, demanded of him
why and how hee could commit so vnnaturall a fact, as to
murder his Children? To whom he answered, that he did it,

because he was not able to keepe them, and that hee was
loth they should goe about the Towne a begging: and
moreouer, that they were his owne, and being so, that hee
might doe what hee would with them, and that they had
their liues from him, and therefore he had taken their liues
from them, and was contented to lose his life for them: for
he was sure that their miseries were past, and for his part,
he had an assured hope to goe to them, though they could
not come to him.
            So being had before a Iustice, his Examination was very
briefe; for he confest all the whole circumstances of the
matter freely; so that he was sent to the common Prison of
Surry, cal'd the White Lyon, where hee remained fourteene
or fifteene weekes a wonderfull penitent Prisoner, neuer, or
very seldome, being without a Bible or some other good
booke meditating vpon; and whon any one did but mention
his Children, he would fetch a deep sigh, and weepe, desiring
euery one to pray for him and vpon his owne earnest
request, he was praide for at Pauls Crosse, and at most of the
Churches in London, and at many in the Country, and at
the Sessions holden at Croydon, the latter end of Iune last, he
made such free confession at the Barre, declaring the manner
of his life, his odious Drinking, his abominable Whoring,
his cruell Murther, and the false dealing of his deceitfull
friend, which was the cause of his finall wracke: with
which Relations of his pronounced, with such vehemency
and protestations, he moued all that heard him to commiseration
and pitie.
            So, according to Law and Iustice, he was there condemned
and iudged (for the murthering of his two Children)
to be hang'd; which Iudgement was executed on him at
the common Gallowes at Croydon, on Munday the second

day of Iune, 1621. where he dyed with great penitency and
remorce of Conscience.
            This was the lamentable end of Iohn Rowse, a man of the
age of fifty yeeres, and one that might haue liu'd and dyed
in better fashion, if he had laid hold on the grace of heauen,
and craued Gods protection and fatherly assistance: but of
all that herein is declared, this one thing which I now declare,
is most lamentable & remarkable; which is, that Ewell
being a Market Towne, not much aboue ten miles from
London, in a Christian Kingdome, and such a Kingdome,
where the all-sauing Word of the euer-liuing God is most
diligently, sincerely, and plentifully preached; & yet amidst
this diligence, as it were in the Circle or Center of this sincerity,
and in the floud of this plenty, the Towne of Ewell
hath neither Preacher nor Pastor: for although the Parsonage
be able to maintaine a sufficient Preacher, yet the liuing
beeing in a Lay-mans hand, is rented out to another
for a great sum, & yet no Preacher maintained there. Now
the chief Landlord out of his portion, doth allow but seuen
pounds yeerely for a Reader, and the other that doth hyre
the Parsonage at a great Rent, doth giue the said Reader
foure pound the yeere more out of his meanes and courtesie:
and by this meanes the Towne is serued with a poore
old man that is halfe blinde, and by reason of his age can
scarcely read: for all the world knowes, that so small a stipend
cannot finde a good Preacher Bookes, and very hardly
bread to liue on; so that the poore soules dwelling there,
are in danger of famishing, for want of a good Preacher to
breake the Bread of Life vnto them: for a Sermon amongst
them, is as rare as warm weather in December, or Ice in Iuly:
both which I haue seene in England, though but seldome.
            And as the Wolfe is most bold with the Sheepe, when

there is either no Shepheard, or an impotent insufficient
one, so the Diuell (perhaps) tooke his aduantage of this
wretched man, seeing he was so badly guarded, & so weakely
guided to withstand his force and malice: for where
God is least known and called vpon, there Satan hath most
power and domination. But howsoeuer, I wish with all my
heart, that that Towne and many more were better prouided
then they are, and then such numbers of soules would
not be in hazzard to perish; nor so many sufficient schollers
that can preach and teach well, liue in penury through want
of maintenance. I could runne further vpon this point, but
that I doe shortly purpose to touch it more to the quick in
another Booke.
            By this mans fall, we may see an example of Gods Iustice
against Drunkennes, Whoredome, and Murder; the Diuel
being the first Author, who was a Murtherer from the beginning:
who fil'd Cain with Enuy, that hee murdered his
brother Abel: who tempted Dauid first to Adultery, and
afterwards to Murther; who prouoked Herod to cause the
blessed Seruant of God Iohn Baptist to lose his head, because
hee told him it was not lawfull for him to marry his
brother Philips Wife; and who was the prouoker of the aforesaid
Herod to murther all the innocent male children in
his Kingdome. And let vs but marke and consider the
plagues and punishments that God hath inflicted vpon
Murderers, Adulterers, and Incestuous persons: First, Cain,
although by his birth hee was the first man that euer was
borne, a Prince by his birth, and heire apparant to all the
world; yet for the Murther by him committed on his brother,
he was the first Vagabond and Runnagate on the face
of the earth, almost fearefull of his owne shaddow: and after
he had liued along time terrifide in Conscience, was

himselfe slaine (as is supposed) by Lamech. Simeon and Leu
                     •
                  
               
the sonnes of Iacob were accurst of their Father for the
slaughter of the Sichemites; Ioab the Captaine of Dauids
Host, was slaine for the murthering of Abner; Dauid himselfe,
for the death of Vrias, and the Adultery committed
with Bethsheba, was continually plagued and vexed with the
Sword of Warre, with the Rebellion of his owne sonnes,
and with the vntimely deaths of Amnon, and Abs
                     •
                  lon. Baanah
and R
                     •
                  chab, for the slaying of Ishbosheth the sonne of
Saul, they were both by Dauids commandement put to
death, who had both their hands and feete cut off, & were
afterward hanged ouer the Poole in Hebron: Samuel 2. 4.
The examples are infinite out of diuine and humane Histories,
that God did neuer suffer Murder to goe vnrewarded:
and this miserable man, of whom I haue heere related,
is a most manifest spectacle of Gods reuenging vengeance,
for that crying and hainous sinne.
            As concerning Lust and Incontinency, it is a short pleasure,
bought with long paine, a hunnied poyson, a Gul
                  •••
                of
Shame, a Pickpurse, a breeder of Diseases, a gall to the
Conscience, a corrosiue to the heart, turning mans wit into
foolish madnesse, the bodies bane, and the soules perdition:
it is excessiue in youth, and odious in age; besides,
God himselfe doth denounce most fearefull threats against
Fornicators and Adulterers, as the Apostle saith, that
Whoremongers and Adulterers shall not inherit the Kingdome
of Heauen, 1. Cor. 6. 9. And God himselfe saith, that
he will be a swift witnes against Adulterers, Mal. 3. 5. And
the Wise man saith, that because of the whorish woman, a man
is brought to a morsell of bread, and a woman will hunt for the
precious life of a man: For, saith he, can a man take fire in his
bosome, and his cloathes not bee burnt? or can a man goe vpon

hot Coales, and his feete not be burnt? So hee that goeth in to his
neighbours Wife, shall not be innocent, Prou. 6. 27, 28, 29. Abimelech,
one of the sonnes of Gedeon, murdered threescore
and ten of his Brethren; and in reward thereof (by the iust
Iudgement of God) a woman with a piece of a Milstone
beate out his braines, after hee had vsurped the Kingdome
three yeeres, Iudges the 9. Our English Chronicles make
mention, that Roger Mortimer, Lord Baron of Wallingford,
murdered his Master King Edward the second, and caused
the Kings Vncle, Edmund Earle of Kent, causelessely to bee
beheaded: but Gods Iustice ouertooke him at last, so that
for the said Murders hee was shamefully executed. Humphrey
Duke of Glocester was murdered in the Abbey of Bury
by William de la Poole Duke of Suffolke, who afterward was
beheaded himselfe on the Sea by a Pyrat. Arden of Feuersham,
and Page of Plimmouth, both their Murders are fresh
in memory, and the fearefull ends of their Wiues and their
Ayders in those bloudy actions will neuer bee forgotten.
            It is too manifestly knowne, what a number of Stepmothers
and Strumpets haue most inhumanely murdred their
Children, and for the same haue most deseruedly been executed.
But in the memory of man (nor scarcely in any History)
it is not to be found, that a Father did euer take two
Innocent Children out of their beds, and with weeping
teares of pittilesse pitie, and vnmercifull mercy, to drowne
them, shewing such compassionate cruelty, and sorrowfull
sighing remorcelesse remorce in that most vnfatherly and
vnnaturall deede.
            All which may be attributed to the malice of the Diuell,
whose will and endeuour is that none should be saued, who
layes out his traps and snares, intangling some with Lust,
some with Couetousnesse, some with Ambition, Drunkennesse,

Enuy, Murder, Sloth, or any Vice whereto hee sees
a man or a woman inclined most vnto, as hee did by this
wretched man, lulling him, as it were, in the cradle of sensuality,
and vngodly delight, vntill such time as all his
meanes, Reputation, and Credit was gone, and nothing left
him but misery and reproach. Then hee leades him along
through doubts and feares, to haue no hope in Gods Prouidence,
perswading his Conscience that his sinnes were
vnpardonable, and his Estate and Credit vnrecouerable.
            VVith these suggestions, he led him on to despaire, and
in desperation to kill his Children, and make shipwracke of
his owne Soule, in which the diligence of the Diuel appeareth,
that he labours and trauels vncessantly: and as Saint
Bernard saith, in the last day shall rise in condemnation against
vs, because he hath euer been more diligent to destroy
soules, then wee haue been to saue them. And for a
Conclusion, let vs beseech God of his infinite mercy
to defend vs from all the subtill temptations
of Satan.
         
         
            
            IOHN ROVVSE his Prayer for pardon
of his lewd life, which hee vsed to
pray in the time of his imprisonment.
            
               GOD of my Soule and Body, haue mercy
vpon mee: the one I haue cast away by my
Folly, and the other is likely to perish in thy
Fury, vnlesse in thy great mercy thou saue it. My
Sinnes are deepe Seas to drowne mee; I am swallowed
vp in the bottomlesse Gulph of my own transgressions.
With Cain I haue beene a Murderer,
and with Iudas a Betrayer of the Innocent. My
body is a Slaue to Satan, and my wretched Soule
is deuoured vp by Hell. Blacke haue beene my
thoughts, and blacker are my deeds. I haue beene
the Diuels instrument, and am now become the
scorne of men; a Serpent vpon earth, and an Outcast
from Heauen. What therefore can become
of mee (miserable Caitiffe?) if I looke vp to my
Redeemer, to him I am an Arch Traitor, if vpon

Earth, it is drowned with Blood of my shedding,
if into Hell, there I see my Conscience, burning in
the Brimstone Lake. God of my Soule and Body
haue mercy therefore vpon mee: Saue mee, O saue
mee, or else I perish for euer: I dye for euer in the
world to come, vnlesse (sweet Lord) thou catchest
my repentant Soule in thine Armes; O saue me, saue
me, saue me.
         
         
            
            IOHN ROVVSE of Ewell his own
Arraignment, Confession, Condemnation,
and Iudgement of himselfe, whilst he lay Prisoner
in the White Lyon, for drowning of
his two Children.
            I Am arraign'd at the blacke dreadfull Barre,
            Where Sinnes (so red as Scarlet) Iudges are;
            All my Inditements are my horrid Crimes,
            Whose Story will affright succeeding Times,
            As (now) they driue the present into wonder,
            Making Men tremble, as trees struck with Thunder.
            If any askes what Euidence comes in?
            O'Tis my Conscience, which hath euer bin
            A thousand witnesses: and now it tels
            A Tale, to cast me to ten thousand Hels.
            The Iury are my Thoughts (vpright in this,)
            They sentence me to death for doing amisse:
            Examinations more there need not then,
            Than what's confest heere both to God and Men.
            The Cryer of the Court is my blacke Shame,
            Which when it cals my Iury, doth proclaime
            Vnlesse (as they are summon'd) they appeare,
            To giue true Verdict of the Prisoner,
            They shall haue heau 
                  〈…〉
                set,
            Such, as may 
                  〈…〉
                uens debt.
            
               About me round sit Innocence and Truth,
            As Clerkes to this high Court; and little Ruth
            From Peoples eyes is cast vpon my face,
            Because my facts are barbarous, damn'd, and base.
            The Officers that 'bout me (thicke) are plac't,
            To guard me to my death, (when I am cast)
            Are the blacke stings my speckled soule now feeles,
            Which like to Furies dogge me, close at heeles.
            The Hangman, that attends me is Despaire,
            And gnawing wormes my fellow-Prisoners are.
            
               His Inditement for Murder of his
Children.
               THe first who (at this Sessions) lowd doth call me,
               Is Murder, whose grim visage doth appall me,
               His eyes are fires, his voice rough windes out-rores,
               And on my head the Diuine Vengeance scores:
               So fast and fearfully I sinke to ground,
               And wish I were in twenty Oceans drownd.
               He sayes I haue a bloudy Villaine bin,
               And (to proue this) ripe Euidence steps in,
               Brow'd like my selfe: Iustice so brings about,
               That blacke sinnes still hunt one another out:
               'Tis like a rotten frame ready to fall,
               For one maine Post being shaken, puls downe all.
               To this Inditement, (holding vp my hand,)
               Fettered with Terrors mor
                     •
                   then Irons stand,
               And being ask'd what to the Bill I say,
               Guilty I cry. O dreadfull Sessions day!
            
            
               
               His Iudgement.
               FOr these thick Stygian streams in which th'ast swom,
               Thy guilt hath on thee laid this bitter doome;
               Thy loath'd life on a Tree of shame must take
               A leaue compeld by Law, e're old age make
               Her signed Passe-port ready. Thy offence
               No longer can for dayes on earth dispense.
               Time blot thy name out of this bloudy roule,
               And so the Lord haue mercy on my Soule.
            
            
               His speech what hee could say for himselfe.
               OWretched Caytiffe! what perswasiue breath
               Can call back this iust Sentence of quicke death?
               I begge no boone, but mercy at Gods hands,
               (The King of Kings, the Soueraigne that commands
               Both Soule and Body) O let him forgiue
               My Treason to his Throne, and whilst I liue,
               Iebbits and Racks shall torture limme by limme,
               Through worlds of Deaths Ile breake to fly to him.
               My Birth-day gaue not to my Mothers wombe,
               More ease, then this shall ioyes, when e're it come.
               My body mould to earth, sinnes sinke to Hell,
               My penitent Soule win Heauen, vaine world farewell.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   