
      
         
            
            
            A LOGICALL ANALYSIS OF TWENTIE SELECT PSALMES, Performed by W. TEMPLE.
            
               A man in honour, and who vnderstandeth not, is made like to the beasts that perish.
               
                  Psal. 49.21.
               
               Life is in the way of righteousnesse, and the pathway thereof leades not vnto death.
               
                  Prou. 12.28.
               
            
            Imprinted at London by FELIX KYNGSTON, for Thomas Man, and are to be sold at his shop in Pater-noster row, at the signe of the Talbot. 1605.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST NOBLE PRINCE, HENRY PRINCE OF WALES.
            
               MOst noble Prince. It succeedeth with the Art of Logike, as it doth with a drug of rare vertues: which resting confined within the limits of the Apothecaries shop, winneth not anie opinion or credit with men: but being taken out and skilfully applied, discloseth her value & merit. So this art resting imprisoned within the lists of the schoole and the cabinets of the learned, findeth no grace or regard: but being drawne foorth as it were into the field of imployment and seruice, it doth then manifest to the world the proportion of worth and respect, that is due vnto her. For to be able, first to contriue and perfit the frame of a discourse: and then againe to discouer and lay foorth in the pure naturals not onely the seuerall members, but the particular structure and conformation of the same: what estimation doth it not deserue? And this

is it which Logike doth vndertake and performe. Out of the former imployment this worthie art furnisheth vnto vs varietie and choise of arguments for cleering the cause in question: and directeth vs to hold that, which is true and iustifiable: to disclaime that, which is inconsequent: to marshall each thing in his proper ranke and place. Out of the other vse and seruice it yeeldeth vnto vs a benefit of no lesse moment and aduantage: wee being guided by her addresse in the examination and triall of the worke made: to the end we may not be deceiued with any outward lustre and shew, but be exactly informed how sound and warrantable it is, that is propounded. Hereupon answerably to the direction in this behalfe, in the first place wee consider what the proper subiect is, that is deduced and handled: the inobseruation whereof being the originall of an erronious and misguided course in iudging. For as wee cannot iudge with what commendation and credit, either the Canonier dischargeth his shot, being ignorant of the marke whereat he leuelled: or the Nauigator performeth his course, being not made acquainted to what cape or port he would arriue: so in case it be vnknowne vnto vs what is the peculiar different and position debated in anie tractate or speech, we cannot discerne with what soundnes and wisedome the dispute is managed: we cannot challenge ought as impertinent: nor take exception to inconsequences. Hauing found and obserued the question, we are in the second place to examine the qualitie of the proofes alleaged, and how iudiciously the illustration thereof is carried. Wherein if we shal proceed by the square of this art: whatsoeuer is base

or fine in the mettall of any discourse, this artificiall touchstone of Logike will vpon application and triall immediatly detect. It will in particularitie shew whether the wit hath failed in the search of allegations: and whether error in liew of truth, inconsequence in steede of an vncensurable conclusion, disorder in place of methodicall proceeding hath been intertained. Neither must we apprehend that in this imployment she is like the vnskilfull Painter, who cannot with his pensill represent other forme than of a fish. This may I truly auouch, that as there is no obiect visible, which the well affected eye hauing the concurrence of a fit and rightly disposed meane seeeth not: and no magnitude which the learned hand of the Mathematician measureth not: so there is no subiect of what nature soeuer, falling within the reach of naturall reason, which by Logike the expresse image thereof cannot be disputed. Out of this large extent it is, that the said art is of excellent and meritorious seruice in deliberations and resolutions of State, in courts of equitie and iustice, in the field and consultations militarie, yea in all questions of humane and ciuill consideration. That matters diuine and Theologicall are not excepted, but that in the handling and iudging of them also Logike serueth for a singular light and helpe: I appeale to the Diuines of this and all former ages. For a further proofe whereof and by way of instance in this behalfe: though I am not of that reuerend and worthy profession, hauing been imployed in seruices of a different qualitie: yet haue I of late in this time of my idlenes, vnder hope of pardon at the hands of our professed Theologians, attempted by the direction

of the said Art an Analysis of certaine choise Psalmes. This Analysis I haue presumed (most noble Prince) to dedicate vnto your Highnes, not onely that it might serue as a pledge of my indisguised and perpetuall deuotion to your seruice: but for that also the subiect analysed is a meditation performed by a great Prince, and for the nature thereof no argument of vulgar and humane conceit, but surpassing and diuine: and therefore a Prince in either respect the fittest person for a dedication of this kinde. To tender the work of a great Potentate vnto one of an inferiour representation and ranke, would be liable to the exception of disparagement. Neither doth it cease in regard of the vnfolding & exposing thereof to view, to be the act of a Prince: no more than admirable excellencies leaue to be such, when they are discabineted & presented to the eye. And whereas it is an inspired & sacred work, it is vpon this ground also not vnmeete to bee exhibited vnto Princes. For they holding their royalties and honours at the will and pleasure of the Lord of Lords, cannot otherwise assure their inuestiture and interest in them, than by a course of obedience vnto his will. This obedience is not performable without information taken of what is pleasing. This information is taken from the voyce onely of the Lord in Scripture. This voice is the precept there deliuered, or the iustifiable and recommended practise of sanctified persons. Now this subiect, whereof I make tender vnto your Highnes in a Logicall Analysis (whereby it is stripped as it were of all outward habit, and laid foorth in the first and naturall lineaments) is able to supplie vnto the greatest Princes speciall direction both out

of precept and president, how to please him who hath thus aduanced and honoured them. Would your Highnes be informed what person it is, who onely is capable of a blessed and prosperous estate? The first Psalme will resolue you that the person of a Prince, as he is a Prince, is not the seate of this blessednes and felicitie, but so farre foorth as he is a person whose delight is in the law of the Lord. And therefore the Prophet in the Psalme following, out of a desire that Kings and Princes should partake in the glorie of this happinesse, earnestly perswadeth them to the doing of homage and worship vnto Christ Iesus: which is a course of pietie, wherein besides their presenting in priuate of all spirituall seruice vnto him, they professe withall in publike their alleageance and readie obedience to the royall authoritie and lawes of his kingdome. Would your Highnes be aduertised what sort of people they are, whom you ought specially to respect and esteeme? The Psalmist will tell you out of his owne practise, Psal. 16. that they are the worthies and excellent of the earth. Would your Highnes vnderstand what loue and regard you are to beare to the Sanctuarie and place of the Lords worship? It may please you to take notice hereof out of the 84. Psalme: where King Dauid imparteth with vs his passionate longing to returne vnto the house of the Lords publike seruice, recommending it by way of admiraiton as most worthie of al respect and affection on our part: and valuing his participation there with the godly in the said seruice aboue all the regalities and honors in this world. Would your Highnes bee presented

with a picture of the miseries whereto both Prince and people are subiect? This picture the 90. Psalme with the 39. affoordeth vnto vs. There Princes may learne that our fairest and best daies are vexation and griefe: that Man, and whatsoeuer is of strength and excellencie in man, is for weaknes and brittlenes like a moth: that our life for length is as a spanne, as nothing, as a day past, a watch in the night, a dreame, a word, a thought. Would your Highnes behold as it were in a glasse the singular aduantages and priuiledges of depending on the Lord? This glasse will the 91. Psalme furnish vnto you. To be short: if your Highnes desire to see a president how a Prince shuld demeane himselfe, either in the case of any his capitall transgressions against the Lord, or in the case of blasphemie committed by others: the cariage of this worthie King Dauid will in either case serue for a most worthy president. In the 51. Psalme, whereas hee had by misgouernment of his person mightily transgressed, being admonished hereof by Nathan one of the Lords faithful remembrancers, he performeth two remarkable duties: the one of humbling himselfe before the Lord out of a repentant heart: the other of earnest mediation, that the Lord would be pleased not to interpret his transgression to the preiudice of the Church and Common-wealth of Israel. In the 94. Psalme, finding himselfe disabled to proceede in iustice against some, who being not contented to tyrannize the Lords people, did withall disgorge blasphemie against the Lord himselfe, he doth first solicite the Lord to a reall execution of his wrath against them: and then by a quick and

pertinent apology he cleereth the glorious and fearfull name of the Lord from all imputation and dishonour. You see hereby (most worthie Prince) the ground and inducement of this my dedication: which if it may in these your tender yeeres be of any vse vnto your Highnes, either for instruction in the knowledge of that eternall Lord, who will honour Princes in case they honour him, or for admonition of dutie in your cariage towards him: I shall attaine to the scope of my deseigne herein. The almightie King so blesse your Highnes in the course of your education, that it may be a meane to supply your noble heart with all princely vertues, and draw vpon your person all honourable happinesse.
            
               
                  To your Highnes seruice most affectionatly deuoted, W. TEMPLE.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               THE author of this Analysis, where he differeth either in the translation of any Psalme, or in the exposition thereof from others (besides the particular direction affoorded him for his choise from the proper nature and course of analysing) hath for his warrant in this behalfe some interpreters of the best note and qualitie. And whereas he hath in the cariage of the said Analysis sequestred in a manner all termes of art and schoole, some few onely excepted which the pen and pulpit haue allowed: howsoeuer happily he could haue proceeded therein after a more Logicall formalitie, and so in likelihood haue better satisfied aswell others who haue tasted the Vniuersitie, as himselfe: yet hath he iudged it meete to hold this popular and plaine course: least in an argument divulged for the vse of all, he should out of a care of yeelding satisfaction to a few, giue occasion vnto many of iust exception and challenge.
         
         
            
            A SVRVEY ASWELL OF THE POSITIONS AND QVESTIONS BOTH PRINCIPAL and occasionall disputed by the Prophet in the Psalmes analysed, as of other important matters handled by way of declaration.
            
               THat the godly man onely is blessed: disputed Psal. 1. pag. 2.
lin. 8.
               
               That the condition of the wicked is alwaies vnprosperous and wretched: handled Psal. 1. pag. 5. lin. 1.
               
               That both Prince and people ought to renounce their proceedings against Christ: and so to doe worship and homage vnto him: perswaded Psal. 2. pag. 8. lin. 2.
               
               That all proceedings against Christ will prooue vaine and succeslesse: argued pag. 9. lin. 4.
               
               That such as oppose against Christ shall suddenly perish: argued pag. 13. lin. 27.
               
               That the Lord hath annointed Christ to be king ouer his Church: disputed pag. 11. lin. 14.
               
               The Lords decree touching the choise and ordaining of Christ to be King ouer his Church, set foorth pag. 12. and 13. where the publisher and parts of the decree are declared.
               That the Lords deare children are they, vnto whom the Prophet is to doe good: declared pag. 16. lin. 32.
               
               That the Lords deare children are they, in whom the Prophets whole delight and loue is: shewed pag. 18.
               
               The Prophets detestation of idolatrie: declared pag. 18. lin. 12.
               
               That the Lord onely is vnto him perfit happines: shewed pag. 20. lin. 1.
               
               
                  That he shall neuer fall frō the fauour of God: proued p. 21. l. 19.
               
               Sanctification and the parts thereof: declared pag. 20. lin. 34.
               
               The assurance of our resurrection, and the excellencie of eternall life: declared pag. 21. lin. 36. and pag. 22. lin. 13.
               
               The Prophets profession of dependance on the Lord: disputed pag. 24. lin. 29. and pag. 25.26.27.28. and pag. 120. and 121. and pag. 31. lin. 23.
               
               The Prophets gratefull acknowledgement of the Lords gracious proceedings, handled pag. 34. lin. 18. and pag. 35. lin. 30. and pag. 194. and pag. 19.163.171.184.
               
               The Prophets exhortation vnto others to concurre with him in the dutie of magnifying the Lord: handled pag. 35. lin. 23. and pag. 180. lin. 25. and pag. 184. pag. 185.186.
               
               That we ought to meditate on the goodnes of the Lord, to the end we may thereupon be moued to trust in him: argued pag. 37. lin. 11.
               
               A perswasion to feare the Lord. pag. 38. lin. 3.
               
               Wherein the feare of the Lord consisteth, shewed pag. 39. lin. 21.
               
               A perswasion to practise certaine particulars of obedience required by the Lord in his law. pag. 40.
               
               That the Lord doth minister a supplie of his gracious fauours to the practisers of the said obedience. pag. 40. lin. 10.
               
               In what sort the Lord doth execute his wrath vpon the wicked. pag. 41. lin. 1.
               
               That the godly are without grieuing at the prosperitie of the wicked to rest vpon the Lord, and to walke obediently before him: disputed pag. 44. lin. 30.
               
               That the Lord proceedeth with the wicked to their ruine, and with the godly to their good: disputed pag. 46. lin. 5. and pag. 117. lin. 27. and pag. 118.
               
               That by the practise of dependance on the Lord and holines of life, it shall succeede well with vs in all our affaires: handled p. 47. lin. 34.
               
               The obiections made against the Lords fauourable proceeding with the godly, refelled and answered pag. 49. lin. 25.
               
               That the plotting of the wicked against the iust is without successe: shewed pag. 50.
               
               That the little pittance furnished by the Lord vnto the godly

man, is of great vse & comfort vnto him: shewed p. 51. lin. 26
               
               That the Lord supplieth vnto the godly continuall reliefe and maintenance: disputed pag. 53. lin. 5.
               
               That reliefe shall not faile vnto the godly in the time of famine: debated pag. 53. lin. 31.
               
               That the wicked in the time of famine shall perish for want of reliefe. pag. 54. lin. 9.
               
               That the godly are enabled to be helpfull vnto others in the time of famine: argued pag. 54. lin. 21.
               
               That the Lord doth settle and fortifie the estate of the godly: shewed pag. 55. lin. 22.
               
               That the fall of the godly is a recouerable fall. pag. 56.
               
               That by resting vpon the Lord, and walking obediently before him, the godly shall enioy a long, safe and comfortable life: debated pag. 57. lin. 17.
               
               That by this course of depending on the Lord and walking obediently before him, the godly man shall obtaine this fauour, as to be an eye witnesse of the Lords iustice executed vpon the wicked: shewed pag. 59. lin. 20.
               
               That the godly man endeth his daies in peace and happines: handled pag. 60. lin. 12.
               
               That the godly are they, whom the Lord euer helpeth in the time of affliction: argued pag. 60. lin. 22.
               
               A relation of the combat the Prophet had betwixt the spirit and the flesh, together with the issue thereof. pag. 62. and 63. and pag. 197. lin. 16.
               
               That our life is by the Lords ordinance exceeding short and subiect to vanitie: handled pag. 64. lin. 5. and pag. 69. lin. 15. and 26. also pag. 70. lin. 5. and pag. 136. lin. 15. and pag. 137. lin. 1. and lin. vlt.
               That no man is of sufficient strength to endure the Lords afflicting hand: shewed pag. 68. lin. vlt.
               That the godly should not feare the wicked, though abounding in riches and glorying in the strength of them: disputed pag. 73.75.76.77.78.79.80.
               
               That the wicked, notwithstanding their wealth, die in their owne persons: in the memorie and honour of their names: in the persons also of their posteritie: handled pag. 76. lin. 7.
               
               
                  That hell shall eternally torment the wicked: but the righteous shall eternally raigne in heauen ouer them: shewed pag. 79. lin. 17. and 30.
               
               That the wicked shall at their death rest naked and stripped of their wealth and glorie, and so be in a most miserable case: prooued pag. 80. lin. 24.
               
               Whether the true worship of the Lord consist in the ceremoniall action of sacrificing, or in the spirituall conformitie of the hart to the Lords will: propounded pag. 83. and defined pag. 90. lin. 13. and pag. 93. lin. 30.
               
               A description of the Maiestie accompanying the Lords comming into his most royall court, to determine the controuersie he had with the Israelites touching his worship. pag. 84. lin. 8.
               
               A refutation made by the Lord of the colourable pretences and allegations wherewith the Israelites would iustifie their formall and outward sacrificing. pag. 87.
               
               That the outward profession of pietie and obedience disaccompanied with the sincere affection of the heart, is odious vnto the Lord: argued pag. 91. lin. 32. and pag. 89. lin. 30.
               
               The cause and the euent of that impious conceit of the wicked, who imagine the Lord to be an allower of their wickednes. pag. 92. lin. 17.
               
               The Prophets humble confession of his sinne: handled pag. 98. lin. 14.
               
               That by the Lords remission of our sinnes we shall subsist before him in a condition and estate of righteousnes: declared p. 99. lin. 31. and pag. 100.
               
               The Prophets profession of glorifying the Lord, and magnifying his fidelitie in keeping promise with his children: handled pag. 105. and 106. also pag. 180. lin. 25. and pag. 184.
               
               The discourse of the flesh vpon this question, whether God be good to Israel: the seuerall effects of the said discourse: the inducement and ground of holding the negatiue of the said question. pag. 111.112.114.115.
               
               That the wicked enioy prosperitie. What are the parts and effects of their prosperitie: declared pag. 112. lin. 5. and pag. 113.
               
               A liuely description of the wicked. pag. 113. lin. 13. and pag. 114.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A LOGICALL ANALYSIS OF TWENTIE SELECT PSALMES.
            
               THE PSALMES ANALYSED are these, namely:

                     Psalm. 1.
                     
                     Psalm. 2.
                     
                     Psalm. 16.
                     
                     Psalm. 27.
                     
                     Psalm. 34.
                     
                     Psalm. 37.
                     
                     Psalm. 39.
                     
                     Psalm. 49.
                     
                     Psalm. 50.
                     
                     Psalm. 51.
                     
                     Psalm. 73.
                     
                     Psalm. 84.
                     
                     Psalm. 90.
                     
                     Psalm. 91.
                     
                     Psalm. 94.
                     
                     Psalm. 103.
                     
                     Psalm. 104.
                     
                     Psalm. 107.
                     
                     Psalm. 116.
                     
                     Psalm. 139.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PSALM. 1.
               
                  BLessed is the man that doth not walke in the counsell of the wicked: nor stand in the way of sinners: nor sit in the seate of the mockers:
               
                  2 But his delight is in the Law of the Lord: and in his Law doth he meditate day and night.
               
                  3 For he is like a tree planted by the riuers of waters: which bringeth forth her fruite in due season: whose leafe fadeth not: so 
                     〈◊〉
                   soeuer he shall do, shall prosper.
               
                  4 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   wicked are not so: but as the chaffe which the winde 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  
                  5 Therefore the wicked shall not stand in the iudgement: nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous.
               
                  6 For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous: and the way of the wicked shall perish.
               
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 1.
                  The question disputed by the Prophet in this Psalme is this:

                        That the godlie man onelie is blessed, vers. 1, 2.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     THe scope of the Psalmist in clearing this question is to rectifie our conceit and iudgement touching the person who is capable of blessednesse: and so consequently to perswade vnto holines of life. For if, contrarie to the opinion of the wise in the world (of whom some haue seated felicitie in persons ciuilly vertuous, some in the honourable and rich, some in the outward grace and pleasures of the bodie) the sanctified person onely be blessed: we ought, in case we desire to be happie, to reforme our iudgement herein, and betake our selues to a course of pietie. For so we are to apprehend of the Prophets intention in this Psalme, as if in direct tearmes he reasoned with vs thus:

                        
                           If the godly man only be blessed, then in case we desire to be blessed, we ought to betake ourselues to a course of pietie.
                        
                        
                           But the godly man only is blessed.
                        
                        
                           Therefore in case we desire to be blessed, we ought to betake our selues to a course of pietie.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Proposition or first sentence is a particular consequent of a principle in common reason: namely, That in case we would be possessed of a thing, we must be made capable thereof, and vse the meanes tending thereto.
                  
                  The Assumption or second sentence is the question and subiect of this whole first Psalme.
                  
                     The Conclusion or last sentence is the body and substance of all the Psalmes following: each of them being as it were a Sermon to preach and perswade courses of pietie.
                  Now before the Psalmist disputes the said question by force of argument, he describeth vnto vs this godly man by his cariage: the parts whereof are two:

                        1. His forbearance of sinfull actions, vers. 1.
                        2. His imployment in actions of pietie, vers. 2.
                     
The prophane and sinfull actions, which the godly man forbeareth, are of three degrees: into which they are distinguished by their efficients and authors, thus:

                        
                           1. To deliberate and resolue in heart vpon the committing of sinne at the perswasion of others, as the wicked doth. This action, with the efficient thereof, is expressed by this phrase of walking in, or according to the counsell of the wicked.
                        
                           2. After resolution taken of sinning, to hold a constant course therein in the traine of our life, as the sinner doth. This action, with the author thereof, is noted by our standing in the way of the sinner.
                        
                           3. Out of an habit of sinning in heart and in the course of life, to make open profession of impietie, and as it were to reade a Lecture thereof, as the Mocker doth. This action, with the committer thereof, is signified by sitting in the seate of the Mocker.
                     
The actions of pietie, wherein the godly man imployeth himselfe, are, by naming a part for the whole, implied to be all the actions and duties of obedience required at our hands. Onely two of them are here specified: namely,

                        1. Taking delight in the Law of God, vers. 2. in the beginning.
                        2. Meditating in the same Law day and night, vers. 2. in the end.
                     
Hauing thus described the person, who is the subiect and seate of blessednesse, he proceedeth to cleare the question in hand by light of argument, thus:

                        
                        With whom it succeedeth prosperously in this and the future life, he is blessed.
                        With the godly man onely it succeedeth prosperously in this and the future life.
                        Therefore the godly man only is blessed.
                     
                  
                  The Proposition is omitted, as a knowne and cleare description of a blessed man.
                  The Assumption is vers. 3. in the end. That the words in the end of the said third verse carrie the sense comprised in the Assumption, may appeare by conference of them with the 4. and 5. verse. In which verses the wicked (whose state by way of illustrating the state of the godly is declared by the Prophet) are made as chaffe and vncapable of an happy and prosperous condition in this and the future life. So as if the Prophet would notifie vnto vs the nature of the condition allotted to the godly, by setting downe the difference and vnlikenes which the state of the wicked hath therewith: then if he shew that the state of the wicked is vnprosperous and wretched in either life: we are proportionably to conceiue that he would thereby make it knowne, that it succeedeth prosperously with the godly in either life.
                  The Conclusion is vers. 1. and 2.
                  Of the said Assumption the Prophet yeeldeth vs an illustration, first from comparisons: and then from the efficient cause of the said prosperous successe. Of the comparisons the one is a Similitude or a comparison of things like; the other a Dissimilitude or a comparison of things vnlike betwixt themselues.
                  The Similitude vsed by the Prophet is this:

                        As a tree, which being planted by the riuers of waters, yeeldeth her fruite in due season and withereth not in her leafe, alwaies in her kind prospereth, vers. 3.
                        
                        So the godly man, whose pietie is fruitfull and neuer withering, doth alwaies prosper, vers. 3.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Dissimilitude is this:

                        
                        The condition of the wicked man is alwaies vnprosperous and wretched, vers. 4. in the beginning.
                        
                        But the state of the godly man is euer prosperous and flourishing, vers. 3.
                        
                     
The former part of this Dissimilitude is cleared vnto vs, thus:

                        Who are liable to vtter reiection by the power of Gods wrath, their condition is alwaies vnprosperous and wretched.
                        But the wicked are such as are liable to vtter reiection by the power of Gods wrath.
                        Therefore the wicked are those whose condition is alwaies vnprosperous and wretched.
                     
                  
                  The Proposition is omitted.
                  The Assumption is folded and closed vp in a short comparison, vers. 4. in the end: where it is said, that the wicked are as chaffe which the winde driueth away. This short comparison being vnfolded and distinguished into his parts, will represent vnto vs both the said Assumption and a declaration thereof by a Similitude, thus:

                        As chaffe, a thing contemptible and of no vse, is readilie dispersed with euery blast of winde:
                        So the wicked being of no regard with the Lord and of no good vse in life, rest exposed to vtter reiection by the breath of the Lords wrath.
                     
                  
                  The Conclusion, as it is vers. 4. in the beginning: so is it repeated and expounded more at large, vers. 5. Where in expresse termes it is auouched, that (because the wicked are as chaffe, that is, subiect to vtter reiection from the face of the Lord) therefore they shall not stand in that iudgement, nor in the assemblie of the iust: that is to say, they shall not be partakers of the prosperous state allotted to the godly in this and the future life: but it shall succeede with them vnprosperously and miserably in either. By iudgement therefore I vnderstand the prosperous condition of the godly in this life, ensuing vpon the reformed and vpright cariage of all proceedings on the

Lords part: and by the assemblie of the iust, their happie state in the future world.
                  Hitherto of the comparisons vsed for the discussing of this point, That with the godly it succeedeth prosperously in either life. The truth hereof is further manifested and inforced by noting vnto vs the efficient cause of this prosperous successe, thus:

                        Whose way the Lord approoueth and liketh, with him it euer succeedeth prosperously.
                        But the godly man is he whose way the Lord approoueth and liketh, vers. 6. in the beginning.
                        
                        Therefore the godly man is he, with whom it euer succeedeth prosperously. vers. 3.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption (namely, that the Lord approueth and liketh the way of the godly) is amplified by setting downe a contrarie action of the Lords, thus:

                        
                           The Lord doth dislike and hate the way of the wicked, vers. 6. in the end. Whereas the Prophet saith, that the way of the wicked shall perish: we must vnderstand as meant thereby the efficient cause of this perishing, namely, the hatred conceiued by the Lord against the wicked.
                        
                           Therefore the Lord doth approoue and like the way of the godly man: that is, his person and holy cariage of life, vers. 6. in the beginning.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PSALM. 2.
               WHy doe the nations rage, and the people plot vaine things?
               
                  2 Why doe the Kings of the earth band themselues, and the Princes consult together against the Lord, and against his Christ?
               
                  3 Saying: Let vs breake their bands, and cast their cords from vs.
               
                  4 He that sitteth in the heauens shall laugh: the Lord shall

haue them in derision.
               
                  5 Then shall he speake vnto them in his wrath, and confound them in the heate of his displeasure.
               
                  6 He shall say: Euen I haue annoynted, and set my King vpon Sion mine holy mountaine.
               
                  7 I will declare the decree thereof. The Lord said vnto me, Thou art my Sonne: this day haue I begotten thee.
               
                  8 Aske of me, and I shall giue thee the nations for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy possession.
               
                  9 Thou shalt crush them with a scepter of iron, and breake them in pieces like a potters vessell.
               
                  10 Be wise therefore now ye Kings: be learned ye Iudges of the earth.
               
                  11 Serue the Lord in feare, and reioyce with trembling.
               
                  12 Kisse the Sonne, least he be angrie, and ye perish in the way, when his wrath shall burne neuer so little. Blessed are all that trust in him.
               
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 2.
                  THis Psalme containes an exhortation to all estates and degrees of men both Prince and people, to forbeare plotting and attempting against the kingdome of Christ, and consequently to doe worship and homage vnto him. For what Dauid speakes here of himselfe, wee must take it spoken of him as he is a type and figure of Christ. And it is true that the tenne tribes of Israel with their Princes and Gouernours, that the Philistims also, the Ammonites and others warred against Dauid with intention to depriue him of the imperiall crowne and scepter, which he had receiued from the Lord: so is it true likewise that the Princes and people of the Iewes, the high Priests, Scribes and Pharisies together with Herod, Pilate, and their associates, conspired the ruine of Christ and his kingdome. Which conspiracie of theirs was vnder a type shadowed foorth and signified by the combination entred against Dauid and his temporall soueraigntie.
                  
                     The Question then deduced in this Psalme is this:

                        That both Prince and people should renounce their former proceedings against Christ, and so, as becommeth loyall subiects, do worship and homage vnto him, vers. 10.11.12.
                        
                     
                  
                  AS I take this to be the question handled here by the Prophet: so I apprehend the sense of those three verses, wherein the said question is contained, to be such as I haue set downe. First, in the tenth verse the Prophet doth vnder generall termes of being wise and learned, aduise both Prince and people to be informed of the Lords pleasure in this particular of forbearing all deseignes and practises against Christ. Then verse 11. he exhorts them to doe worship vnto him, setting downe the manner and forme how this worship is to be performed, namely, with all reuerence and with a full ioy of heart, accompanied with a speciall humbling and trembling at the consideration of Christs Maiestie and their former rebellions. Thirdly, in the 12. verse he moues them to the doing of homage vnto Christ: where by kissing the Son, (namely, the eternall Sonne of God mentioned in the seuenth verse) is noted the publike acknowledgement and profession which both Prince and people are to make of their subiection vnto Christ. Amongst the ancients a kisse tendered by an inferiour to a superiour, was a signe and testimonie that the inferiour publikely acknowledged and professed the other to be his Lord. So as it is required at the hands of all Potentates and their subiects, that they should not onely present in priuate a spirituall worship vnto Christ, but also publikely professe their alleageance vnto him, and obedience to the royall authoritie and lawes of his kingdome.
                  
                  Now to perswade both Prince and people to this dutie and conformitie, the Prophet vseth three seuerall arguments: the first whereof is this:

                        
                        Arg. 1.
                        If your proceedings against Christ will prooue vaine and succeslesse, forbeare them, doing worship and homage vnto Christ.
                        But your proceedings against Christ will proue vaine and succeslesse, vers. 1. & 2. Both these verses carrie this sense, that their mutining, their plots and endeuours against Christ will not take effect.
                        Therefore forbeare your proceedings against Christ, doing worship & homage vnto him. ver. 10.11.12
                        
                     
                  
                  Touching the Assumption: the Prophet, before he acquaint vs with the demonstration thereof, describeth the nature of the said proceedings mentioned in the Assumption, by noting vnto vs,

                        1. The authors and contriuers of them, vers. 1. & 2. which were in the time of Dauid, the Princes, and people of the tenne tribes: the Philistims, Ammonites and Moabites: but in the time of Christ, the Princes and people of the Iewes, with Herod and Pilate.
                        
                        2. The seuerall degrees of them, which are:
                           
                              1. Their tumultuous mutining and raging, vers. 1. in the beginning.
                              2. Their plotting and contriuing of the courses they are to hold for the accomplishment of their deseignes, vers. 1. in the end.
                              3. Their presenting of themselues in open field and in actions of publike hostilitie, vers. 2. in the beginning.
                              4. Their consulting vpon all occurrences and deuising of stratagems, that may any way aduance the execution of their proiects, vers. 2. in the midst.
                           
                        
                        3. The persons against whom the said proceedings are: they being intended not onely against Christ, but in the person of Christ against God the Father, the author and erector of Christs kingdome, vers. 2.
                        4. The maine scope and end of them: which is the subuersion of Christs kingdome, vers. 3. Where vnder these

termes of breaking their bands and cords, we are to vnderstand the endeuours and attempts of the said Princes and people to supplant the gouernment and lawes, whereby the kingdome of Christ is ordered and managed. Now this end, which these mutinous leaguers propound vnto themselues, is amplified by imparting with vs the action of their mutuall incouraging themselues to a resolute and speedie compassing thereof. For the Prophet produceth them, speaking by way of instigation and incouragement thus: Let vs breake their bands, &c.
                        
                     
                  
                  Now the demonstration of the said Assumption is this:

                        
                           If the Lord hold no accompt of your deseignes and attempts, but will proceede to the confounding of them: then can you not preuaile by them against his Christ.
                        
                        
                           But the Lord holdeth no accompt of your deseignes and attempts, but will proceede to the confounding of them, vers. 4. and 5. In the fourth verse it is said, that the Lord will laugh and mocke at them, that is, make no reckoning of them, in regard of any possibilitie in them to preuaile. In the fift verse is set downe the Lords purpose to frustrate and disappoint them: which purpose is implied vnder the termes of speaking vnto them in his wrath: and more cleerely signified in the words following, of confounding them in the heate of his displeasure.
                        
                           Therfore can you not preuaile against his Christ, ver. 1. & 2.
                     
                  
                  Here least any of these rebellious leaguers might apprehend in the Lord either a defect of power to disappoint their enterprises against his Christ, or a purpose to tēporise with them in this cause: the Prophet amplifieth the Assumption of the said Demonstration by noting vnto them:

                        1. The Lords power, whereby he is able to defeate them, vers. 4. in the beginning. Where vnder that description of the Lord by the place where he sitteth, is implied the Lords Maiestie and power.
                        
                           2. The circumstance of time when he will doe it, vers. 5. in the beginning. Where by the particle (then) is noted that point of time, which the Lord hath appointed and determined for the execution of his wrath vpon them.
                     
                  
                  Hitherto the frustration of the plots and conspiracies against Christ hath been handled and prooued. Now the Prophet proceedes to a further inforcement of his generall exhortation to all Princes and people, by an argument concluded thus:

                        Arg. 2.
                        
                           Whom the Lord hath annoynted King ouer his Church, against him you must not combine, but doe worship and homage vnto him.
                        
                        
                           But it is his Sonne Christ prefigured by Dauid, whom the Lord hath annoynted King ouer his Church, vers. 6. What is said in this verse, may be vnderstood both of Dauid and Christ. By Sion, which is the siege of the temporall kingdome, wee must vnderstand the whole tract of Iudea in regard of Dauid: and the whole Church of God, in regard of Christ.
                        
                           Therefore against Christ you must not combine, but doe worship and homage vnto him, vers. 10.11.12.
                     
                  
                  Touching the Assumption: because the Princes and people of the world may take exception thereto, as being not perswaded of the truth thereof: the Prophet vndertaketh to prooue and cleere the same by a double vncontrollable testimonie: the one from the Lords owne mouth, vers. 6: the other from an authenticall euidence vnder the great seale of heauen, namely, the Lords decree made in that behalfe, ver. 7. He concludeth and reasoneth thus:

                        If the Lord himselfe affirme that he annoynted Christ for King ouer his people, and if he hath made a solemne decree in that behalfe: then is it true that the Lord hath annoynted Christ king ouer his people.
                        But the Lord himselfe affirmeth that he hath annoynted Christ for King ouer his people, vers. 6. and he hath

made a solemne decree in that behalfe, ver. 7. Where it is said, I will declare vnto you the decree: that is, I, who am the eternal Sonne of God, will for your satisfaction herein make knowne vnto you the decree made by the Lord touching the choise & ordaining of me his Sonne Christ to be King ouer his Church.
                        
                        Therfore it is true that the Lord hath annoynted Christ for king ouer his people. vers. 6.
                        
                     
                  
                  The decree mentioned in the Assumption the Prophet setteth foorth vnto vs,

                        1. By the instrument, who publisheth the same.
                        
                        2. By the parts thereof.
                        
                     
                  
                  The instrument vsed in the publication of the said decree, is Christ Iesus. For vnto him, who is to publish the same, the Lord saith, Thou art my Sonne, &c. Now the Lord cannot properly speak this to any but to Christ: as it is expounded by the Apostle, Heb. 1.5.
                  The parts of the said Decree are three:

                        
                           The first is, the designing of the person of the King, and the notifying of the choise and consecration made of him, vers. 7.

                              
                                 The person of the King is designed and noted in these words: Thou art my Sonne: and so consequently King of heauen and earth.
                              
                              
                                 The notifying of the choise and consecration made of this person, is in these words: This day haue I begotten thee. As by the generation heere mentioned, wee must conceiue and vnderstand the manifesting to the world that Christ was consecrated the Sauiour and King of his people from all eternitie: so these words (this day) are to be vnderstood of the time when the said manifestation was reallie performed: the first degree of that time being at the Natiuitie of Christ: the second, at his baptizing.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                           The second part of the said decree concernes the kingdome giuen vnto Christ, vers. 8. Where this kingdome is described vnto vs:
                           
                              1. By the meanes whereby it is obtained, namely, the intercession of Christ, in these words: Aske of me.
                              
                              2. By the kinde and nature of it: it being not an estate determinable at a certaine time, but an inheritance to be possessed for euer.
                              
                              3. By the largenes thereof: it being not closed vp within the limits and precincts of Iudea, but extendable to all the Nations of the earth.
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           The third part of the said decree, is touching the administration of this kingdome of Christ, vers. 9. Where vnder one part of Christs administration, the whole is implied and meant. For as Christ doth crush the wicked with an iron rod, that is, with the execution of his iustice vpon them, and that with as great facilitie as one may breake an earthen vessell: so doth he gouerne and guide his children with the scepter of his word in the way of happines, rendring vnto them in the end, the reward of eternall glorie.
                     
                  
                  It being now apparant that the Lord hath annoynted Christ King ouer his people: the Prophet returnes to the pressing of his generall exhortation by a third argument, thus:

                        Arg. 3.
                        
                           By opposing against Christ you shall suddenly perish, vers. 12. Where by perishing in the way, is meant the suddennes of this euent, they being to miscarrie euen in the middest of their course, before they can arriue to the compassing of their designes.
                        
                           Therefore see that you doe worship and homage vnto him, vers. 10.11.12.
                     
                  
                  The first part of this reason is amplified:

                        
                        1. By the efficient cause of their ruine, namely, the iustice of God whereby he punisheth the wicked, signified vnder the name of Gods wrath, which being kindled consumes the vngodly.
                        
                        2. By an argument taken from the contraries, thus:
                           
                              
                                 Who subiect themselues vnto Christ shall be blessed, vers. 12. in the end. Where by one part and dutie, namely, confidence and dependance on the Lord, our whole subiection and obedience vnto him is signified.
                              
                                 Therefore who oppose themselues against Christ shall perish. vers. 12.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PSALM. 16.
               ¶Mictam of Dauid.
               PReserue me, O mightie God: for in thee doe I trust.
               
                  2 O my soule: thou hast said vnto the Lord, Thou art my Lord: my well doing extendeth not vnto thee:
               
                  3 But to the Saints that are on the earth, and to the excellent, all my delight is in them.
               
                  4 The sorowes of them who endow another God, are multiplied: their offrings of blood will I not offer: neither make mention of their names with my lips.
               
                  5 The Lord is the portion of my inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot.
               
                  6 The lines are fallen vnto me in pleasant places: yea I haue a faire heritage.
               
                  7 I will praise the Lord, who giueth me counsell: my reines also teach me in the nights.
               
                  8 I do set the Lord alwaies before me. Sith he is at my right hand, therefore I shall not slide.
               
                  9 Wherefore my heart is glad, and my tongue reioyceth: my flesh also doth rest securely.
               
                  10 For thou wilt not leaue my soule in the graue: nor suffer thy welbeloued to see corruption.
               
                  
                  11 Thou wilt make me know the path of life: in thy presence is the fulnes of ioy: and at thy right hand there are pleasures for euermore.
               
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 16.
                  THe title of this Psalme, namely, Mictam of Dauid, is by the Prophet premised thereto, partly to aduertise vs who is the author and inditer thereof, and partly to recommend vnto vs the excellencie of the Psalme, it being such as containes a doctrine more to be valued than a iewell of the purest gold.
                  There are of this Psalme two parts:

                        1. The one an effectuall request vnto God: in the foure first verses.
                        2. The other a thankesguing: in the rest of the verses following.
                     
                  
                  The request is this:

                        That the Prophet might be preserued in the whole traine of his life.
                     
                  
                  To induce the Lord to yeeld hereto, the Prophet vseth three arguments. The first is concluded thus:

                        Arg. 1.
                        Who trust and rest vpon thee, let them be preserued by thee.
                        I am one who doth trust and rest vpon thee, vers. 1. in the end.
                        
                        Therefore let me be preserued by thee, O Lord, ver. 1. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Proposition though it be omitted, yet must we conceiue of it as the ground and foundation of this motion made by the Prophet. For it doth remember vnto the Lord his gratious promise and the condition thereof: which is a precedent acting of this dutie of resting vpon the Lord, required by him.
                  The Assumption doth tender vnto the Lord a reall accomplishment on the Prophets part of the said condition: he

hauing acted that which the Lord requireth, which is a confident reposing on him.
                  The Conclusion out of a regard to the condition thus accomplished, doth challenge at the Lords hands an actuall and readie performance of the said promise.
                  The second argument, whereby Dauid doth solicite Gods preseruation of him, is this:

                        Arg. 2.
                        
                           If thou be my soueraigne Lord, and I thy seruant, let me be preserued by thee.
                        
                        
                           But thou art my soueraigne Lord, and I thy seruant, vers. 2. Albeit the Prophet doth not in distinct termes set downe that he is the Lords seruant: yet, forasmuch as his acknowledging God to be his Lord, doth necessarily implie that he is the Lords seruant, we are to conceiue it as set downe.
                        
                           Therfore let me, O Lord, be preserued by thee, vers. 1.
                     
                  
                  The Assumption hath an illustration from the testimonie of his soule and conscience, vers. 2. in the beginning: where the speech addressed to his soule carrieth this sense:

                        Thou, O my soule, doest auouch and professe that the Eternall is my Lord and Master. And therefore I doe acknowledge him for my soueraigne Lord, and my selfe for his seruant.
                     
                  
                  The third argument, wherewith hee would perswade the Lord to preserue him, is drawne from the consideration of the end of his preseruation, and is this:

                        Arg. 3.
                        If vpon thy preseruation of me, I shall be readie to doe good vnto thy deare children: let me, O Lord, be preserued by thee.
                        But vpon thy preseruation of me I shall be readie to doe good vnto thy deare children, vers. 3. Where the Prophet maketh profession of extending his well doing to the Saints and the excellent of the earth: that is, to Gods children.
                        
                        Therfore let me, O Lord, be preserued by thee, vers. 1.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Assumption is amplified:

                        1. By a description of Gods deare children.
                        
                        2. By noting the persons, who haue no part in the Prophets well doing.
                        
                        3. By setting downe the motiue inducing him to the doing of good vnto the Lords children.
                        
                     
                  
                  The description of Gods deare children is by two titles giuen vnto them: whereof.

                        1. The one stileth them with the name of Saints: they being such whom the Lord by his spirit hath sanctified and set apart to the duties of holinesse, vers. 3.
                        2. The other honoureth them with the name of the excellent and worthies of the earth: which is an effect of the former, vers. 3.
                     
                  
                  The persons who haue no part in the fruits of the Prophets well doing, are of two sorts:

                        1. The Lord himselfe: who is alsufficient, and can no waies be aduantaged by any mans well doing, vers. 2. in the end.
                        2. The prophane and wicked of the world. The exclusion of these from communicating in the good he is ready to do, is implied in the profession he maketh to extend his well doing to the Saints: and therefore not to the prophane and wicked: of whom he doth vers. 4. protest his hatred and detestation. So as by noting the persons vnto vs, who haue no part in his well doing, we may vnderstand him as if he reasoned thus:
                           
                              
                                 The persons that are to haue part in the fruites of my well doing, are either thou O Lord, or the wicked, or thy deare children.
                              
                              
                                 Not thou O Lord, who canst not be aduantaged thereby: nor the wicked, whom I hate and detest.
                              
                              
                                 Therefore they are thy deare children, whom I loue, that are to haue part in the fruites of my well doing.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The motiue inducing the Prophet to the doing of good vnto the Lords deare children, is this:

                        
                        In whom my whole delight and loue is, vnto them I am readie to doe good.
                        The Lords deare children are they in whom my whole delight and loue is, vers. 3. in the end.
                        
                        Therfore the Lords deare children are they vnto whom I am readie to doe good, vers. 3. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  Touching the Assumption: the delight and loue therein mentioned, he doth notifie vnto vs by drawing into consideration the contrarie affection he beareth vnto such as are the opposites of Gods children, namely, the Idolaters and wicked of the world. He concludeth thus:

                        I detest and hate the Idolaters and wicked of the world, vers. 4.
                        
                        Therefore I doe with speciall loue and delight embrace Gods deare children, vers. 3. in the end.
                        
                     
                  
                  The former part of this conclusion touching Idolaters, and the Prophets detestation of them, is set out vnto vs:

                        1. By a description of Idolaters, vers. 4. in the begin.
                        2. By two actions of the Prophets, whereby he discouereth and professeth his hatred of them, vers. 4. in the other part of the verse.
                     
                  
                  The description of Idolaters,
                     
                        1. Is from a comparison: wherein they are resembled to men who marrie wiues and conferre dowries vpon them. For so Idolaters doe in the inward worship and deuotion of their hearts, as it were marrie themselues to Idols, and endow them with their goods: as may appeare in that at their great charge they erect Churches, Altars, and Images vnto them, and withall do honour them with holie daies, solemne feasts, and oblations of worth.
                        2. It is from the effect and issue which followeth vpon this course held by Idolaters. For thereby they multiplie anguish and troubles vnto themselues: that is, they draw vpon themselues by the iustice of God, both inward and outward calamities and vexations: as appeareth by Deut. 31. vers. 16.17.
                     
                  
                  
                     The actions of the Prophet whereby he discloseth and professeth his detestation of the said Idolaters, are these:

                        1. His renouncing all communication with them in their sacrifices.
                        
                        2. His protesting against all future mention of their names in his mouth.
                        
                     
                  
                  Hitherto of the Prophets request for preseruation. His thanksgiuing followeth from the beginning of the fifth verse to the end of the Psalme: so as the subiect handled in these verses, is this:

                        I will magnifie the Lord with my heart and tongue, vers. 7. and 9.
                        
                     
                  
                  In the 7. verse he professeth that he will praise the Lord: and this he repeateth vers. 9. though in other termes: for hee saith; Wherefore my heart is glad, and my tongue reioyceth: and my flesh doth rest securely: that is, My whole person hath cause of speciall reioycing and comfort in regard of the Lords blessings bestowed on me. What is said in either of these verses hath reference to the benefits as well recorded after them, as mentioned before them. And the 9. verse may aptly serue to interpret more at large the profession of magnifying the Lord in the 7. verse.
                  Now let vs see vpon what inducement the Prophets profession of magnifying the Lord is grounded. The inducement is this:

                        
                           The Eternall hath bestowed sundrie benefits vpon me, vers. 5.6.7.8.10.11. In these verses the Prophet doth particulate the seuerall benefits he hath receiued from the Lord.
                        
                           Therfore will I magnifie him with my heart and tongue, vers. 7. and 9.
                     
                  
                  The former part of this reason is not set downe in these expresse and formall termes, but necessarily collected from the enumeration of the benefits conferred vpon the Prophet. The benefits are propounded,

                        1. First in generall.
                        
                        2. Then in particular.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The benefits in generall are mentioned vers. 5. and 6: where vnder rhetoricall and borrowed formes of speech, hee shewes that the Lord onely, and none other, is vnto him absolute and perfit happinesse: whether we respect

                        1. The giuing of the said happinesse: which he doth significantly implie, by glorying that the Lord is the portion of his inheritance and of his cup: that is, the author and supplier vnto him of all comfort and blessednes both for this and the future life, vers. 5. in the beginning.
                        2. The preseruing thereof being giuen vnto him. For vers. 5. in the end, he honoureth God for the maintenance and support of his lot: that is, the state of happinesse allotted vnto him.
                        
                        3. The pleasure accompanying the same, vers. 6. Where he likewise glorieth, that the lines are fallen vnto him in pleasant places: and that he hath a faire and goodly heritage. By lines and the heritage he speaketh of, he meaneth the estate of happinesse, which by the free mercie of God is befallen vnto him: and that it is in pleasant places and most faire. Whereby hee noteth the pleasure accompanying the said estate. The name of lot and lines seemeth to be taken by the Prophet from the ancient manner of surueying and diuiding lands and inheritances: as wee finde obserued and practised by Iosua in the diuision of Canaan amongst the Israelites.
                        
                     
                  
                  The benefits propounded in particular, are comprised by him in the verses following: in which he magnifieth the Lord,

                        1. For the sanctification of his heart.
                        
                        2. For two future benefits, namely, his resurrection, and life eternall.
                        
                     
                  
                  His Sanctification he declareth by noting vnto vs the parts thereof: which are these:

                        
                        1. The illumination of his vnderstanding, vers. 7. in the beginning. Where he shewes that the Lord aduiseth and counselleth him: that is, inlighteneth and informeth his vnderstanding by his holy Spirit.
                        2. Direction of his thoughts and affections, vers. 7. in the end. Where he shewes that his reines instruct him: that is, his will and affections are ordered and guided by the Lord in the choise of the way he ought to hold. This part of sanctification is set foorth vnto vs, by noting the time when it is performed, namely, in the nights: that is, alwaies both night and day. For by one part of time hee meaneth and signifieth the whole time of his life.
                        3. Perseuerance in faith and dependance on God, vers. 8. Where he saith, that he euer sets the Lord before his eyes: that is, hee doth euer by faith rest vpon the Lord. And hereupon he deduceth in the same verse this most comfortable conclusion:

                              
                                 I doe by faith euer rest vpon the Lord for his help, vers. 8. in the midst. Where by saying thus; Sith the Lord is at my right hand, he doth aduertise vs that with the eye of his faith he euer beholdeth the Lord readie to helpe him: which is in effect as if he should say: I doe euer by faith looke vnto God, and rest on him for helpe.
                              
                                 Therefore shall I euer stand in the fauour of the Lord, and neuer so be shaken as to fall from it, vers. 8. in the end.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Hauing honoured God for his Sanctification, he proceedeth to a further glorifying of him for the said future benefits:

                        1. Of his resurrection.
                        
                        2. Of the eternall life.
                        
                     
                  
                  Of his Resurrection he speaketh vers. 10. thus: Thou wilt not leaue my soule in the graue
                     ▪ (meaning by soule the subiect or place wherein his soule resideth, which is his body) nor

suffer thy welbeloued to see corruption. This is first and principally to be vnderstood of Christ, as it is at large expounded in the 2. of the Acts, vers. 25. &c. for Christs bodie, though for some time it remained in the graue, yet neuer was corrupted in any part thereof, but rose a most sound and perfit bodie. Whereas the bodie of Dauid neuer yet rose from the graue, but was in the same reduced to putrifaction and dust. But secondarily this is to be vnderstood of Dauid, and likewise of all others the members of Christ: who in regard of the strict vnion betwixt the head and the members, must of necessitie participate in the resurrection of the head Christ Iesus.
                  
                     The blessing of eternall life is mentioned vers. 11: where the Prophet honoreth the Lord for the same in these words: Thou wilt make me know the path of life: that is, After thou hast raised my bodie from the graue, I shall then really and in mine owne experience enter both bodie and soule together into the path and enioyance of life eternall. Touching this blessing of eternall life, the Prophet doth set foorth and recommend vnto vs the worthinesse and excellencie thereof, in that it is accompanied

                        1. With fulnes of ioyes.
                        
                        2. With an eternal continuance of the said ioyes.
                        
                     
                     Of both these the efficient cause is specified, namely, the face and presence of God.
                  
               
            
            
               PSALM. 27.
               THe Lord is my light and my deliuerance: whom shall I feare? The Lord is the strength of my life: of whom should I be afraid?
               
                  2 When the wicked, euen mine enemies and my foes came vpon me to eate vp my flesh, they stumbled and fell.
               
                  3 Though an host pitched against me, mine heart should not be afraid: though warre should be raised against me, I would trust in this.
               
                  
                  4 One thing haue I desired of the Lord: the same I doe require, euen that I may dwell in the house of the Lord al the daies of my life, to behold the beautie of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.
               
                  5 For in the time of trouble he hideth me in his Tabernacle: in the secret place of his pauilion he hideth me: he setteth me vpon a rocke.
               
                  6 And now is my head lifted vp aboue my enemies who are round about me. I will offer in his Tabernacle sacrifices of ioy: I will sing and praise the Lord.
               
                  7 Hearken vnto my voyce (O Lord) when I crie: haue mercie also vpon me and heare me.
               
                  8 Mine heart saith vnto me as from thee: Seeke ye my face. O Lord, I seeke thy face.
               
                  9 Hide not thy face from me, nor cast thy seruant away in displeasure: thou hast been my succour, leaue me not, neither forsake me, O God of my deliuerance.
               
                  10 For my father and mother forsake me: but let the Lord gather me vp.
               
                  11 Teach me thy way, O Lord, and leade me through the right path, because of such as obserue me.
               
                  12 Deliuer me not vnto the lust of mine aduersaries: for there are false witnesses risen vp against me, and such as breathe violence.
               
                  13 I should haue fainted, except I had beleeued that I should see the goodnes of the Lord in the land of the liuing.
               
                  14 Waite on the Lord: be strong, and he shall comfort thine heart: yea waite on the Lord.
               
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 27.
                  The Subiect of this Psalme is an humble sute presented by the Prophet vnto the Lord, namely:

                        That the Lord would be pleased to deliuer him from his enemies, vers. 7.9.11.12.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Prophets sute is first set downe, ver. 7: and then repeated, vers. 9.11. and 12. Whereas he saith, Heare me and

haue mercie on me, vers. 7. Again, Hide not thy face from me, and forsake not thy seruant, vers. 9. Againe, Teach me thy way, and guide me through the right path, vers. 11. Againe, Deliuer me not to my enemies, vers. 12. All these speeches, which he hath in this varietie of termes expressed, carrie this interpretation and sense: Abandon me not, O Lord, to mine enemies, but deliuer me from them. The hearing desired, vers. 7. is an hearing to deliuerance: and the mercie to be shewed, is mercie in the act of deliuerance. So verse 9. Gods not hiding his face from the Prophet, and his not forsaking him, is Gods fauourable countenance towards him and readines for his deliuerance. So vers. 11. the way he would be taught, and the right path he would be guided through, is the way and path of his deliuerance: neither must we conceiue that he desires a bare knowledge of this way, but an actuall setting of him in the path of preseruation and libertie. So vers. 12. not to be deliuered to the appetite of his enemies: what doth it import but a motion for his deliuerance from them?
                  Now to perswade the Lord to a gracious regard of his sute for deliuerance from his enemies: first he maketh profession of his secure dependance vpon him in the sixe former verses of the Psalme: And then in the verses following vnto the 13. he soliciteth the grant of his said sute by sundrie other arguments.
                  Out of the profession of his dependance on the Lord, he concludeth thus:

                        Arg. 1.
                        Who resteth securely on thee, O Lord, for deliuerance: it may please thee to deliuer him from his enemies.
                        I am one who doth rest securely on thee, O Lord, for deliuerance, vers. 1. Where the Prophet twice setteth downe this sentence vnder an interrogatorie forme of speech, thus: Of whom should I be afraid? As if hee should say: I feare not man, but rest securely vpon the Lord.
                        
                        It may please thee therefore, O Lord, to deliuer me from mine enemies, vers. 7.9.11.12.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Assumption he cleereth,

                        1. By acquainting vs with the ground of his secure dependance vpon the Lord.
                        
                        2. By a comparison from the greater to the lesse.
                        
                        3. By answering an exception that may be taken against the said Assumption.
                        
                     
                  
                  The ground of his resolute dependance on the Lord, is the experience he hath had of the Lords gratious proceeding with him heretofore in deliuering him from trouble. Vpon which ground he reasoneth thus:

                        
                           The Lord hath in former times deliuered mee from trouble, vers. 1. Where vnder the termes of light, deliuerance, strength of life, he ascribeth vnto the Lord the honour of deliuering him from trouble. As by darknes the Scripture noteth aduersitie: so by light it noteth deliuerance from the same.
                        
                           Therefore doe I securely rest vpon the Lord, vers. 1. in these words: Of whom should I be afraid?
                        
                     
                  
                  The former part of this reason, which containes the said experience of the Lords speciall fauour towards him in the time of his trouble, he doth make apparant vnto vs by giuing this instance thereof:

                        When mine enemies were vpon the point of ruining me, the Lord confounded them, and deliuered me from them, vers. 2.
                        
                        Therefore the Lord hath in former times deliuered me from trouble, vers. 1.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Comparison, whereby the said Assumption is further illustrated, is deliuered in the 3. verse, thus:

                        
                           If mightie armies should enuiron me and conspire my destruction, yet would I rest securely vpon the Lord, vers. 3. Where hee expresseth his secure dependance on the Lord, first by these words: Mine heart should not feare: Secondly, by this forme of speech: I would trust in this: that is, in the Lords readines and power to helpe and deliuer me, whereof he hath had experience.
                        
                           
                           Therefore in the case of a lesser perill, such as this is wherein I am, I will not faile to rest securely vpon the Lord.
                        
                     
                  
                  Now touching the Exception that may be taken against the said Assumption, we are to consider

                        1. What the exception is.
                        
                        2. What is the answere thereto.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Exception is not comprised and set downe seuerally by it selfe in a formall and distinct speech, but is left to bee conceiued and gathered by vs out of the Answere thereto. The Answere implieth the said exception to be this:

                        If (notwithstanding thy request vnto the Lord out of a confidence in him for thy returne vnto his Sanctuarie) thou remaine as yet banished from the same: thou doest then in vaine rest vpon the Lord.
                        But, notwithstanding thy request vnto the Lord out of a confidence in him for thy returne vnto his Sanctuarie, thou remainest as yet banished from the same.
                        Therefore thou doest in vaine rest vpon the Lord.
                     
                  
                  In answere to this exception: The Prophet doth speake first vnto the Assumption: and then to the Proposition.
                  
                  Touching the Assumption, he acknowledgeth

                        1. His tendering of the said request.
                        
                        2. His present separation from the Lords house.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The said request for his returne vnto the Lords Sanctuarie, he setteth foorth vnto vs,
                        
                           1. By comparing it with a like request of his made at other times, vers. 4. in the beginning, where he saith thus:

                                 
                                    As I haue at other times desired this one thing of the Lord, namely, that I might enioy the opportunitie and comfort of being in his Sanctuarie all my daies:
                                 
                                 
                                    So at this present I doe craue the same fauour.
                                 
                              
                           
                           2. By imparting with vs the ends, for which he maketh the said request. The ends are these:
                              
                                 
                                 1. That he might be at rest, and not compelled to any longer peregrination and wandring, verse 4. in the middest. Where by dwelling in the Lords house, he acquaints vs with this his desire of being at rest, and freed from further wandring.
                                 2. That hee might imploy himselfe in the exercises of the Lords worship, vers. 4. in the latter part. Where vnder the termes of beholding the Lords beautie and visiting his temple, he letteth vs vnderstand the desire he hath to performe vnto God in his Tabernacle the seuerall duties of his worshippe there. The beautie of the Lord, that is, his power, wisedome, mercie and iustie, we behold in the word of the Lord read and expounded in the Sanctuarie, as also in the sacrifices of the Law and Sacraments of the Gospell.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        His present separation and banishment from the Lords house, which together with the said request the Prophet acknowledgeth, as it was then apparant to all Israel, so is it implied and signified vnder these words: The same do I require, vers. 4. Now the fauour required by him, is his returne vnto the Lords house. But this he would not haue required at the Lord hands, had hee not at that time stood depriued thereof.
                     
                  
                  The Prophet hauing thus spoken to the Assumption of the said exception: he now taketh in hand to answere the Proposition thereof: which he accordingly performeth, vers. 5.6. His answer is founded vpon a deniall of the said Proposition. Which deniall, though it be not deliuered in expresse and distinct termes: yet out of that which is set downe, we are to conceiue it to be to this effect:

                        
                        Howsoeuer, notwithstanding my said request, I remaine confined from the Lords house: yet doth it not thereupon follow that I rest vpon the Lord in vaine.
                     
                  
                  This his deniall of the said Proposition he doth iustifie in this sort:

                        Notwithstanding my inforced discontinuance from the Sanctuarie: I haue been euer protected by the Lord: I do participate in the Lords solemne worship, though not personally, yet by faith and affection of heart: And I shall actually hereafter and in person communicate in the same.
                        Therefore howsoeuer I remaine in bodie debarred from the Sanctuarie, yet I rest not in vaine vpon the Lord.
                     
                  
                  The former part of this the Prophets answere for conuincing the said Proposition, consisteth of three seuerall branches. Whereof

                        1. The first concerning the Lords daily protection of the Prophet, is set downe vers. 5. Where by auouching, that the Lord in the time of trouble hideth him and setteth him vpon a rocke, he sheweth, that notwithstanding his absence from the Sanctuarie, hee is euer protected by the Lord: the Lord being vnto him as it were a place of sure retrait and a rock of defence.
                        2. The second touching his present participation in the Lords solemne worship by faith and affection of hart, is in the former part of the sixt verse: where by glorying, That now his head is lifted vp aboue his enemies, he plainly testifieth, that hee is (though not personally, yet by reach of his faith and affection of heart) present in the Lords house, howsoeuer his enemies enuiron and oppresse him.
                        3. The third concerning the certaintie of his future and personall communication in the Lords worship performed in the Sanctuarie, is in the latter part of the sixt verse: where by glorying in like sort, That he will offer in his Tabernacle sacrifices of ioy: that

he will sing and praise the Lord: he doth tell vs that he shall hereafter, notwithstanding the malice of his enemies, be in person actually partaker of the Lords solemne worship in his Tabernacle.
                     
                  
                  Hitherto hath the Prophet insisted vpon the profession of his secure reposing vpon the Lord: to the end he might perswade and induce him to yeeld vnto his humble sute for deliuerance from his enemies. He doth now further prosecute the same his sute by other perswasiue arguments: of which one is set downe, vers. 8. thus:

                        Arg. 2.
                        
                           Who call vpon thee for helpe against their enemies out of an obedience to thy commandement in that behalfe: it may please thee to giue a gratious eare vnto such for their deliuerance.
                        
                        
                           But I call vpon thee for helpe against mine enemies out of an obedience to thy commandement in that behalfe, vers. 8. In the former part of this verse, the Lords commandement for seeking his face, that is, for calling vpon him in the time of trouble, is distinctly and particularly expressed. And to proue that the Lord commandeth the seeking of his face, the Prophet produceth the testimonie of his heart: My heart (saith he) telleth me thus much from God, That wee should seeke his face. In the latter part of this verse, the Prophets obedience vnto this commandement is recorded: where hee saith: O Lord, I seeke thy face.
                        
                        
                           Therefore it may please thee (O Lord) to giue vnto me a gratious eare for my deliuerance, vers. 7.
                     
                  
                  In the ninth verse he doth presse the grant of his said sute, thus:

                        Arg. 3.
                        
                           Thou hast heretofore bin mine aide and deliuerance from mine enemies, vers. 9. in the middest.
                        
                           Therefore now likewise (O Lord) deliuer me from them, vers. 9. Where this conclusion is expressed foure times in a seuerall & different phrase.
                     
                  
                  
                     In the tenth verse hee perswades the Lord to a fauourable consideration of his petition, by propounding vnto him the present state and condition wherein he was. His perswasion is in this forme:

                        Arg. 4.
                        
                           If I rest altogether helplesse on the part of man, I pray thee let me finde helpe and protection at thy hands against mine enemies.
                        
                        
                           But I rest altogether helplesse on the part of man, vers. 10: where hee saith, That his father and mother forsake him: that is, he is vtterly destitute of all helpe for his deliuerance on the part of man.
                        
                           Wherefore I pray thee (O Lord) let me finde help and protection at thy hands against mine enemies, vers. 10. in the end. Where (as Tremellius translates it) the Prophet saith: Let the Lord receiue me, or gather me vp. Which words doe containe the Prophets sute vnto the Lord for protection against his aduersaries.
                     
                  
                  In the 11. verse he pleades for his deliuerance, by presenting vnto the Lords remembrance what discouragement will grow vnto the godly by his remaining in trouble: and how occasion will thereupon be offered vnto the wicked to triumph and blaspheme the Lord, as if he were not faithfull in his promises. For this I take to be the meaning of these words in the end of the said verse: Because of such as obserue me: as Tremellius translates it. The Prophet did discerne that the Lords proceeding with him was obserued both by the godly and by the wicked: the godly obseruing to their discouragement the continuance of an heauie affliction vpon him: the wicked obseruing it with ioy and triumph. And therefore he pleades with the Lord for deliuerance by an argument taken from the issue, which his continuance in trouble will draw with it:

                        
                        Arg. 5.
                        
                           My remaining in trouble will discourage thy people, and occasion the wicked to triumph and blaspheme, vers. 11. in the end.
                        
                           Therefore deliuer me (O Lord) calling vnto thee for helpe against enemies, vers. 11. in the beginning. Where hee prayeth the Lord to make knowne vnto him the way of his deliuerance, and to set his feete actually in the direct path thereof.
                     
                  
                  In the 12. verse he grounds his mediation with the Lord for this fauour of deliuerance, vpon the end and intention of his enemies:

                        Arg. 6.
                        
                           My enemies would depriue me of my good name and of my life, vers. 12. in the end. Where by distinguishing his enemies into slanderers and murderers, he noteth their end to be the ouerthrow of his good name and life.
                        
                           Wherefore suffer me not (O Lord) to rest exposed vnto their malice, but deliuer me from them, vers. 12. in the beginning.
                     
                  
                  The Prophet hauing hitherto with so many important motiues accompanied his humble petition vnto the Lord for deliuerance: hee doth in the two last verses of the Psalme (out of an assured perswasion to preuaile with the Lord) encourage himselfe to rest confidently vpon him: and so returneth to a further inlargement of the first argument alleaged by him to perswade his deliuerance. He reasoneth thus:

                        If my confident perswasion touching the accomplishment of the Lords promised blessing towards me before my death, hath hitherto supported and intertained me in breath and life: then ought I still to depend securely on the Lord.
                        But my confident perswasion touching the accomplishment of the Lords promised blessing towards me before my death, hath hitherto supported and intertained me in breath and life, vers. 13.
                        
                        
                           Therefore ought I still to depend securely on the Lord, vers. 14. Where this conclusion is deliuered by way of an exhortation vnto himselfe.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is set downe vers. 13. in these termes: I should haue fainted, except I had beleeued that I should see the goodnes of the Lord in the land of the liuing. Where by the goodnesse of the Lord, he meaneth his deliuerance from trouble, and the enioying of a successor to his Crowne out of his owne loynes. By the land of the liuing, he vnderstandeth this present life.
                  The Conclusion (as hath been noted) is vers. 14: where it is further inforced to improoue and aduance his dependance vpon the Lord, by shewing what effect it worketh on Gods part:

                        If the Lord will supplie all grace and comfort to the hearts of such as rest confidently vpon him: doe thou (O my soule) rest strongly and confidently vpon the Lord.
                        But the Lord will supplie all grace and comfort to the hearts of such as rest confidently vpon him, vers. 14. in the midst.
                        
                        Wherefore doe thou (O my soule) rest strongly vpon the Lord, vers. 14. in the beginning and end of the verse.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PSALM. 34. ¶A Psalme of Dauid, after he had changed his behauiour in the presence of Abimelech, and departed, being expelled by him.
               
                  I Will at all times giue thankes vnto the Lord: his praise shall be in my mouth continually.
               
                  2 My soule shall glorie in the Lord: the meeke shall heare it and be glad.
               
                  3 Praise ye the Lord with me, and let vs magnifie his name together.
               
                  
                  5 I sought the Lord and he heard me: and he deliuered me out of all my feares.
               
                  6 They shall looke vnto him, and flocke vnto him: and their faces shall not be ashamed.
               
                  7 This poore man cried and the Lord heard him: and saued him out of all his distresses.
               
                  8 The Angell of the Lord pitcheth round about them that feare him, and deliuereth them.
               
                  9 Taste yee and see how gratious the Lord is. Blessed is the man that trusteth in him.
               
                  10 Feare the Lord ye Saints of his. For nothing wanteth to them that feare him.
               
                  11 The young lions do lack and suffer hunger: but they who seeke the Lord, shall want nothing that is good.
               
                  12 Come my sonnes, hearken vnto me: I will teach you the feare of the Lord.
               
                  13 What man is he that desireth life, and loueth long daies to see good?
               
                  14 Keepe thy tongue from euill, and thy lips that they speake no guile.
               
                  15 Eschew euill and doe good: seeke peace and follow after it.
               
                  16 The eyes of the Lord are vpon the righteous, and his eares are open to their crie.
               
                  17 The face of the Lord is against them that doe euill, to cut off their remembrance from the earth.
               
                  18 The righteous crie and the Lord heareth them, and deliuereth them out of all their distresses.
               
                  19 The Lord is neere vnto them that are broken in heart, and saueth such as are brused in spirit.
               
                  20 Many are the troubles of the righteous: but the Lord deliuereth him out of all.
               
                  21 He keepeth all his bones: not one of them is broken.
               
                  22 But malice shall slay the wicked: and they that hate the righteous shall perish.
               
                  23 The Lord redeemeth the soules of his seruants: and none that trust in him shall perish.
               
                  
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 34.
                  We are first to consider of the title of this Psalme: and then of the Psalme it selfe.
                  The title doth acquaint vs,

                        1. With the author of the Psalm: who is the Prophet Dauid.
                        
                        2. With the time of the inditing thereof: which was vpon his escape from Achis King of the Philistins: who is by a name common to the Kings of that people intitled Abimelech.
                        
                        3. With the occasion of inditing the said Psalme: which was the Prophets safe escape and deliuerance from so capitall an enemie as King Achis. This his escape is set foorth by noting vnto vs the meane vsed for effecting the same: which was Dauids changing of his ordinarie cariage and behauiour, that is, his counterfeiting the losse of his wit and sense. For the Lord did by his prouidence so order the Prophets disguising in this behalfe, that it made way for his deliuerance.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Psalme it selfe is a thankfull acknowledgement on Dauids part of the Lords gratious deliuerance of him from the imminent perill wherein he was, being in the Court of Achis, and within the reach of his authoritie. The historie hereof you may reade, 1. Sam. 21.
                  This gratefull acknowledgement of his deliuerance, the Prophet propoundeth and testifieth:

                        1. By his owne personall magnifying the Lord for the said deliuerance, vers. 2. and 3.
                        2. By a double exhortation vnto others. For he inuiteth others
                           
                              1. To concurre with him in this dutie of magnifying the Lord, vers. 4.
                              2. To hold a course
                                 
                                    
                                       Partly of meditating on the Lords goodnes, vers. 9.
                                    
                                       Partly of fearing the Lord, vers. 10.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Prophets personall magnifying the Lord for his deliuerance is amplified, by noting vnto vs:

                        1. The time, when he will doe it, vers. 2. where he saith, that he will at all times magnifie the Lord.
                        
                        2. The instrument, wherewith he will performe this action of magnifying the Lord, vers. 2. I will praise him (saith he) with my mouth.
                        
                        3. The affection, wherewith he will accompanie this dutie of extolling the Lord, vers. 3. My soule (saith he) shall glorie in the Lord: that is, I will with a sincere and vnfained affection extoll the Lords goodnes towards me, and not with my tongue only.
                        
                        4. The effect wrought in others by performing this dutie of praise vnto the Lord, vers. 3. For (saith the Prophet) the meeke, that is, the children of God hearing this my thankefull acknowledgement of the Lords mercie to me, will thereupon reioyce and be occasioned to praise the Lord with me. This reioycing and praising the Lord, is the effect wrought in others by Dauids performing this dutie of magnifying the Lord.
                        
                     
                  
                  The second point, whereby hee testifieth his gratefull acknowledgement of the Lords mercie towards him in his deliuerance, is his exhortation vnto others, that they would concurre with him in this dutie of magnifying the Lord. He perswadeth them hereto in this sort:

                        If God hath deliuered me from the imminent perill wherein I was, being amongst the Philistins: praise him together with me for this blessing.
                        But God hath deliuered me from the imminent perill wherein I was, being amongst the Philistins, vers. 5. and 7. where he saith, that the Lord hath deliuered him from all his feares and distresses: meaning the feares and distresses in which he was, during his abode in the presence of King Achis and the Philistins.
                        
                        Therfore praise ye ye
                            Lord with me for this blessing, v. 4.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Assumption is cleered by declaring vnto vs:

                        1. The Lords gratious proceeding in generall with his children.
                        
                        2. The effect, which the obseruation of the Lords mercie in the deliuerance of Dauid worketh in others.
                        
                     
                  
                  Out of the consideration of the Lords gratious proceeding with his children in generall, he cleereth the said Assumption, thus:

                        
                           Such as call vpon the Lord out of an heart fearing him, are protected and deliuered by him, vers. 8. Where for a further manifesting of the truth of this sentence, he specifieth the instruments vsed by the Lord in working the deliuerance of his children. These instruments are the Angels: by whose action of incamping about vs, he doth implie and signifie all other seruices done by them in fauour of Gods children.
                        
                           But I Dauid called on the Lord out of an heart fearing him, vers. 5. and 7. In the 5. verse he saith: I sought the Lord, namely, out of an heart fearing him. In the seuenth verse, changing the person (which is a forme vsuall in Scripture) hee repeateth his seeking and calling vnto the Lord vnder these termes: This poore man cried vnto the Lord: that is, I Dauid who was in a poore and distressed case, cried vnto the Lord for help against the perill wherein I was.
                        
                        
                           Therefore was I protected and deliuered by the Lord, vers. 5. and 7.
                     
                  
                  The effect growing from the obseruation of the Lords mercie in the deliuerance of Dauid, is, The recourse that others shall make vnto the Lord by humble petition in the day of their trouble, vers. 6. where he saith: They shall looke vnto the Lord and flock vnto him: that is, They obseruing how mercifully the Lord hath proceeded with me in deliuering me from the danger of death, shall thereupon bee moued in the day of trouble, as it were to runne vnto

the Lord for help by way of supplication. Now this their recourse vnto the Lord by way of humble petition, is recommended vnto vs by noting the blessed issue following thereupon. The issue is, that vpon such their recourse vnto the Lord for helpe, their faces shall not be ashamed: that is, they shall find fauour in the Lords sight for grant of their requests.
                  The Prophet hauing thus exhorted others to a concurrence with him in magnifying the Lord: he now perswadeth them to a performance of two other duties:

                        1. The one of meditating on the goodnes of the Lord, to the end they may repose vpon him, vers. 9.
                        2. The other of fearing the Lord, vers. 10.
                     
                  
                  The former dutie is recommended and pressed by this argument:

                        
                           If they be blessed who trust in the Lord: then ought we to meditate on his goodnes, that we may thereupon be moued to trust in him.
                        
                        
                           But they are blessed who trust in the Lord, vers. 9. in the end.
                        
                           Therefore ought wee to meditate on the goodnes of the Lord, that wee may thereupon be mooued to trust in him, vers. 9. in the beginning. Where by tasting and seeing how gratious the Lord is, wee must take to bee meant not a bare knowledge of the Lords goodnes, but a serious meditation accompanying the same, and such as may perswade our hearts to a confident dependance on him. Which point of dependance and trust in the Lord, howsoeuer it be not mentioned in the first part of this 9. verse, which presenteth vnto vs the exhortation of meditating on the goodnes of the Lord: yet must we conceiue it to be there in effect & sense: as if the Prophet had said, Taste and see how gratious the Lord is, that thereupon you may bee drawne to trust in him. For blessed is the man who trusteth in him.
                     
                  
                  
                     The other dutie, whereto the Prophet perswadeth vs, is this:

                        That we should feare the Lord: that is, that we should serue and honour him in the cariage of our life.
                     
                  
                  This dutie is inforced and perswaded in this sort:

                        Such as feare the Lord want nothing, vers. 10. in the end.
                        
                        Therefore feare the Lord ye Saints of his, vers. 10. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  The first part of this reason is handled by a comparison: wherein is shewed the different proceeding held by the Lord towards such as feare him, and towards such as being of a proud spirit and reposing on their owne strength haue reiected all feare of the Lord: and these hee calleth young lions. The comparison is this:

                        
                           Young lions are in want and hunger, vers. 11.
                        
                           But such as feare the Lord, want no good thing, vers. 10. and 11. Here in the 11. verse, such as feare the Lord are noted vnto vs by a particular action of theirs: which is, To seeke the Lord by prayer.
                        
                     
                  
                  Now in the 12. verse, the Prophet by way of preuention offereth to satisfie a question that may be demanded touching this feare, namely: What this feare is, whereto the Prophet perswadeth, and which is accompanied with the happines spoken of in the 10. and 11. verse. Before he resolue this question: he doth (because the matter is of moment, and draweth with it an happie life) solicite his auditors to an attentiue hearing of him:

                        1. By an argument drawne from a circumstance of their persons: in that he calleth them by the sweete title of Sonnes: a title which the Prophets bestowed vpon their disciples, to testifie their speciall loue and kindnes vnto them, vers. 12. in the beginning.
                        2. By noting vnto them the worthines of the subiect, in the knowledge wherof he would informe them: which is, the feare of the Lord, vers. 12. in the end.
                        3. By remembring vnto them, the desire that is in euerie

of them of an happie life, vers. 13. Where by way of an interrogation hee aduertiseth them that this desire of enioying happines is in euery man. For the Prophet demaunding this question, (What man is he that desireth life?) doth in effect and sense speake thus: Sure I am that there is no man who doth not affect and desire an happie life.
                     
                  
                  These motiues, whereby hee induceth his auditors to an attentiue and carefull hearing of him, are concluded thus:

                        You are my disciples whom I loue as my sonnes: the point of doctrine, wherein I will informe you, concernes the feare of the eternall God: and euery of you desires the happines which doth accompanie this feare, vers. 12. and 13.
                        
                        Hearken therefore vnto me, who am readie to instruct you in this point of doctrine, vers. 12. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  Hauing solicited his disciples to this attention in hearing him, hee proceedes to resolue them what this feare is, whereto he exhorteth them. To performe this, he setteth downe the particulars, wherein this feare of the Lord consisteth. He sheweth that it consisteth,

                        1. In a religious vse of the tongue, vers. 14. Where forbidding the abuse thereof, he doth withall prescribe the lawfull and holy vse of the same.
                        2. In forbearance of sinfull actions, and in doing of that which is iust and good before God and man, vers. 15. Where in the end of the verse, that generall of doing good, is declared by mentioning two speciall actions that are to be done: whereof

                              
                                 The one is, the seeking after peace and concord with men.
                              
                              
                                 The other is, the intertaining of it when it is found and procured.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Now to raise vp in his said disciples a care to practise the aboue mentioned particulars of obedience to the law of the Lord, the Prophet presseth them with an argument

taken from the consideration of the Lords gratious proceeding towards those who in the cariage of their life do labour to put in practise the said particulars. The argument perswading hereto, is this:

                        If to such as practise the said particulars of obedience to the law of the Lord, the Lord ministreth a continuall supplie of his gratious fauours: then ought you to practise the said particulars of obedience to the law of the Lord.
                        But to such as practise the said particulars of obedience to the law of the Lord, the Lord ministreth a continuall supplie of his gratious fauours, vers. 16. Where the Prophet by particulating these two actions of the Lord, namely, His beholding of the righteous with the eye of his prouidence for their protection: and, His hearing of their crie with the eare of commiseration for their deliuerance from trouble: the Prophet (I say) vnder the name of these two speciall actions, doth implie and signifie the Lords gratious proceeding in euery respect with the righteous, that is, with such as performe obedience to his law.
                        
                        Therefore ought you to practise the said particulars of obedience to the law of the Lord, vers. 14. and 15.
                        
                     
                  
                  Touching the Assumption: To the end it may appeare what speciall acknowledgement we owe vnto the Lord in regard of this course of fauour he holdeth with vs for our protection and deliuerance: the Prophet setteth vpon the said Assumption an illustration taken from the different and vnlike proceeding he holdeth with the wicked. The illustration, wherein the Lords fauourable course with the righteous is set foorth by his different proceeding with the wicked, is this:

                        The Lord doth execute his wrath vpon the wicked, vers. 17. and 22.
                        
                        But the godly he doth protect from perils, and deliuereth thē from all their troubles, vers. 16.18.19.20.21.23.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The former sentence of this illustration is presented vnto vs by the Prophet vnder these two particular actions of the Lord: whereof,

                        
                           The one is, the Lords rooting from out the earth the memorie of the wicked, vers. 17. which is an euident execution of his wrath vpon them.
                        
                           The other is, the Lords ordering of the wicked to be instruments of their owne destruction, vers. 22. which is another reall and apparant execution of his iustice vpon them.
                     
                  
                  The second sentence of the said illustration, to the end we may rest assured of the Lords fauour, and euer depend vpon him, is in varietie of termes expounded and iterated in so many verses, as I haue quoted: in each of which verses the Lords action of protecting or deliuering is mentioned.
                  
                     In the 16. verse, both actions are noted, as hath been declared.
                     In the 18. verse, his action of deliuerance is signified by his gratious hearing and deliuering of them out of distresse.
                     In the 19. verse, his action of deliuerance is not only recorded, but improoued also and magnified by noting the extremitie of the distresse, from which the godly are deliuered. For it is said in this verse to this effect: That the Lord is neere vnto the godly, and saueth them euen then, when they faint and are as it were at the last gaspe through the greatnes of their affliction.
                     In the 20. verse, his action of deliuerance is specified and recommended by aduertising vs that the number of the troubles, out of which the iust is deliuered, is great. Which argueth the greatnes of the mercie and power of the Deliuerer.
                     In the 21. verse, his action of protection is remembred: it being there said, That the Lord hath that care of preseruing the iust, that he cannot receiue hurt in

any one bone without his prouidence and will.
                     In the 23. verse, his action of deliuerance is comprised both in the beginning and end of the said verse. In this verse the godly are described:

                           
                              1. Vnder the title of being the Lords seruants.
                           
                              2. By their dependance on the Lord.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PSALM. 37.
               
                  A Psalme of Dauid. Fret not thy selfe because of the wicked men: neither enuie at the euill doers.
               
                  2 For they shall soone be cut downe like grasse, and shall wither as the greene herbe.
               
                  3 Trust thou in the Lord and doe good. Thou shalt inhabite the earth and be fed assuredly.
               
                  4 And delight thy selfe in the Lord: and he shall giue thee thy hearts desire.
               
                  5 Commit thy way vnto the Lord, and trust in him. For he shall bring it to passe.
               
                  6 And he shall bring foorth thy righteousnes as the light, and thy right as the noone day.
               
                  7 Waite patiently vpon the Lord and hope in him: fret not thy selfe for him who prospereth in his way: for the man (I say) who bringeth his enterprises to passe.
               
                  8 Cease from anger and leaue off wrath: fret not thy selfe, at least to doe euill.
               
                  9 For euill doers shall be cut off: but they that waite vpon the Lord, shall by inheritance possesse the earth.
               
                  10 Yet a little while, and the wicked shall not appeare: and thou shalt looke after his place, and he shall not be found.
               
                  11 But the meeke shall by inheritance possesse the earth: and shall haue their delight in the multitude of peace.
               
                  12 The wicked practiseth against the iust, and gnasheth his teeth against him.
               
                  13 The Lord laugheth him to scorne: for he seeth that his day is comming.
               
                  
                  14 The wicked haue drawne their sword, and haue bent their bow to cast downe the poore and the needie: and to slay such as be of vpright conuersation.
               
                  15 But their sword shall enter into their owne heart: and their bowes shall be broken.
               
                  16 A small thing is better vnto the iust man, than great riches to the wicked and mightie.
               
                  17 For the armes of the wicked shal be broken: but the Lord vpholdeth the iust men.
               
                  18 The Lord knoweth the daies of vpright men: and their possession shall be perpetuall.
               
                  19 They shall not be confounded in the perillous time: and in the daies of famine they shall haue enough:
               
                  20 Whilest the wicked perish, and the enemies of the Lord as the fat of lambes: as this consumeth vanishing into smoke, so they consume.
               
                  21 The wicked borroweth and cannot repay: but the righteous is mercifull and giueth.
               
                  22 For such as be blessed of God, doe by right of inheritance possesse the earth: but they that be cursed of him, shall be cut off.
               
                  23 The steps of the man, with whose way the Lord is delighted, are established by him.
               
                  24 When he falleth, he is not vtterly cast down: for the Lord vpholdeth his hand.
               
                  25 I haue been young, and now am old: yet I neuer saw the righteous forsaken, nor his seede begging bread.
               
                  26 He is euer mercifull and lendeth: and his seede enioyeth the blessing.
               
                  27 Depart from euill, and doe good: and thou shalt dwell for euer.
               
                  28 For the Lord loueth righteousnes, and forsaketh not his Saints: they are preserued for euer: but the seede of the wicked is cut off.
               
                  29 The righteous man shall by right of inheritance possesse the earth, and dwell therein for euer.
               
                  30 The mouth of the righteous speaketh of wisedome, and his tongue talketh of iudgement.
               
                  
                  31 The law of his God is in his heart: and his foote slideth not in his steps.
               
                  32 The wicked watcheth the righteous and seeketh to slay him.
               
                  33 But the Lord will not leaue him in his hand: nor suffer him to be condemned when he is iudged.
               
                  34 Waite thou on the Lord and keepe his way: and he shall exalt thee that thou maist by inheritance possesse the land: thou shalt see the destruction of the wicked.
               
                  35 I haue seene the wicked strong, and spreading himselfe like a greene bay tree.
               
                  36 Afterward he passed away: and loe, he is no more: and I sought him, but he could not be found.
               
                  37 Marke the vpright man, and behold the iust: the end of that man is peace:
               
                  38 Whereas the transgressors be destroyed together: and the end of the wicked is cut off.
               
                  39 The deliuerance of the righteous is from the Lord: he is their strength in the time of trouble.
               
                  40 And the Lord helpeth them and deliuereth them: he deliuereth them from the wicked, and saueth them, because they trust on him.
               
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 37.
                  The Prophet in this 37. Psalme imparteth with vs a direction how to carrie our selues in the case of the prosperity of the wicked and our owne particular distresse: and consequently, a remedie against such temptations as doe grow from the consideration of the said prosperitie and distresse. To which purpose he disputeth this question:

                        That the godly are without grieuing at the prosperitie of the wicked to rest vpon the Lord, and to walke obediently before him.
                     
                  
                  Before we proceede to lay foorth the Prophets demonstration of this question: forasmuch as the branches of it be

diuers and dispersed into sundrie verses, in some of them ioyntly, and in some of them singly: it shall not be amisse to obserue briefly how and where they be set downe.
                  There are (as we see) three branches of the said question:

                        1. Not to grieue at the prosperitie of the wicked.
                        
                        2. To rest vpon the Lord.
                        
                        3. To walke obediently before him.
                        
                     
                  
                  The first branch is vers. 1.7. and 8.
                  The second and third branch are ioyntly and cleerely comprised, vers. 3. in the beginning, and vers. 34. in the beginning. It is said, vers. 3. Trust in the Lord and doe good. So is it said, vers. 34. Waite on the Lord and keepe his way. In which verses, by doing good, and by keeping the Lords way, is meant an obedient and holy walking before him.
                  All three branches are in the 4. verse, though somewhat obscurely, noted vnder this forme of speech: Delight thy selfe in the Lord. Whereby is meant, that we should without grieuing at the Lords proceedings rest satisfied with his good pleasure declared by them, and so conforme our will to his will by depending on him, and by pleasing him in the traine of our life. To doe this, is to take delight and contentment in the Lord.
                  In some other verses one of the said branches onely is specified: as,

                        
                           Vers. 5. and 7. Our resting on the Lord is mentioned.
                        
                           Vers. 27. Our walking obediently before him is remembred.
                     
                  
                  But forasmuch as these branches are in other verses ioyned together, and made the principall and maine scope of the Prophets dispute in this Psalme: we must, where we finde them seuered, conceiue notwithstanding that by noting one part, the other parts are implied and signified.
                  Now the demonstration of the said question, comprising in generall whatsoeuer is in this Psalme deduced by the Prophet, is this:

                        
                        If the Lord proceede with the wicked to their ruine, and with the godly to their good: then ought the godly without grieuing at the wicked to rest on the Lord, and to walke obediently before him.
                        But the Lord proceedeth with the wicked to their ruine, and with the godly to their good.
                        Therefore ought the godly without grieuing at the wicked, to rest vpon the Lord, and to walke obediently before him.
                     
                  
                  The Proposition is omitted: but being thus supplied, it will the better informe our iudgement in discerning and waighing the conclusion.
                  Of the Assumption there be two parts: namely,

                        
                           The Lords proceeding with the wicked to their ruine.
                        
                        
                           The Lords proceeding with the godly to their good.
                        
                     
                  
                  The first part of the Assumption concerning the Lords proceeding with the wicked to their ruine, is declared in the second verse, by obseruing the circumstance of the short time that they are to florish:

                        The wicked shall (saith the Psalmist) be quickly cut down.
                     
                  
                  This their short florishing and speedie fall is made euident vnto vs, by comparing it to the speedie withering of grasse, and any other greene herbe. The comparison is this:

                        As grasse and any other greene herbe doth quickly wither and vanish:
                        So shall the wicked speedily fall & be reduced to nought.
                     
                  
                  This part of the said Assumption touching the ruine of the wicked, is repeated vers. 9: and the circumstance of the short time allotted to their florishing, rementioned v. 10.
                  The second part of the said Assumption, which concernes the Lords proceeding with the godly to their good, is not in these generall termes deliuered by the Prophet, but may sensibly be collected from the consideration of the particular blessings, which the Prophet hath sprinkled in sundrie parts of this Psalme, to the end he might

by shewing how gratious the Lord is towards his children, thereby induce them to a dependance on him, and to a course of pietie in their life. Let vs see then what these particulars are, and how by them he disputeth this question of resting vpon the Lord, and walking obediently before him, without grieuing at the prosperitie of the wicked.
                  
                  His first argument for the perswading hereof is this:

                        Arg. 1.
                        Thou shalt by thy dependance on the Lord, and by walking obediently before him, enioy for a long time a safe and comfortable estate of life, vers. 3. And repeated vers. 9. & 11. And vers. 27. & 34.
                        
                        Therefore rest vpon the Lord, and walke obediently before him, vers. 3. Also vers. 27. and 34.
                        
                     
                  
                  The former part of this reason is deliuered in the third verse vnder these words: Inhabite thou, or, Thou shalt inhabite the earth and be fed assuredly. And in the 9. and the 11. verse vnder these termes: They shall by inheritance possesse the earth. Hereby is promised vnto the godly man that he shall be preserued on the earth a long time, and supplied with the comforts of this life, as being by the gratious ordinance and fauour of God in Christ, the right owner and Lord of the earth.
                  Further, this reposing on the Lord and this sanctified cariage of life, is solicited by the Prophet in this sort:

                        Arg. 2.
                        Thou shalt by this religious course of life obtaine at the hands of the Lord the requests of thine heart, vers. 4. in the end.
                        
                        Wherefore rest on the Lord, and liue obediently before him, vers. 4. in the beginning. That this is the interpretation and sense of these words: Delight in the Lord: is shewed before.
                        
                     
                  
                  His perswasion to the said dependance and holines of conuersation, is in the 5. verse framed and tendered after this forme:

                        Arg. 3.
                        By this course of dependance on the Lord and holines of life, it shall succeede well with thee in all thy affaires, vers. 5. in the end. Where it is said: The

Lord shall bring it to passe: that is, Blesse and prosper thee in thy proceedings.
                        Rest therefore on the Lord, and walke obediently before him, vers. 5. in the beginning: where vnder the name of one part of the question, both parts of it are to be vnderstood.
                        
                     
                  
                  The former sentence of this perswasion being such as may be excepted vnto, the Prophet doth in the 6. verse preuent and satisfie the exception that may be taken against it. The exception is not in distinct termes expressed, but by the answere thereto we may conceiue it to be this:

                        The life of the godly man doth rest exposed to sundrie calumnies and oppressions.
                        Therefore it succeedeth not well with him in all his affaires.
                     
                  
                  The Prophets answere to this exception is such, as if hee should directly say: That, howsoeuer the godly man is exposed to calumnies and oppressions, yet it followeth not, that therefore it succeedeth ill with him in his particular. This deniall of the sequell presented in the said exception, as if it were expresly set downe (as it is out of congruitie to be vnderstood) the Prophet doth iustifie by acquainting vs with the Lords proceeding in this case on the behalfe of the godly. For he giues vs to vnderstand in the 6. verse, That howsoeuer the innocencie of the godly be at sometime couered as it were with a thicke and darke mist of slander and oppression, yet the Lord will in his good time scatter and dissolue this mist, and so make the innocencie of the godly apparant and cleere to the world. For thus saith the Prophet touching this point:

                        The Lord will bring foorth thy righteousnes: that is, make thy innocencie knowne to the world, notwithstanding any mist of slanders cast vpon it.
                        And therefore it followeth not, that in the case of slanderous imputations laid vpon thee, it succeedeth ill with theee in thy affaires.
                     
                  
                  Now the cleerenes which the Lord will set vpon the innocencie

of the godly man, is notified vnto vs by a double comparison. For it is compared first in generall with the light of the Sunne: then in particular with the light of the Sunne at noone day. As if he said:

                        The light of the Sunne is great: but the light and cleerenes which the Lord shall set vpon the innocencie of the godly man shall equall it: nay, which is more, it shall equall the brightnes of the Sunne at noone day.
                     
                  
                  These verses following (viz. the 7.8.9.10.11.) doe repeate that which hath bin afore deliuered. In the 7. and 8. verses the generall and maine question is contained. The first part of the 9. verse, with the whole tenth, pertaine to the first part of the generall Assumption, which concernes the Lords proceeding with the wicked to their ruine. And ye second part of the 9. verse, together with the 11, do remember vnto vs that, which is propounded in the end of the third verse, as the first particular argument perswading dependance on the Lord, and a sanctified cariage of life.
                  Thus you see how the Prophet hath concluded the maine question by three particulars, importing the Lords gratious proceeding with the godly to their good. Before he proceede further: he incountreth and refelleth three obiections made against this fauourable proceeding held by the Lord towards his children.
                  The first obiection is vers. 12. thus:

                        Obi. 1. v. 12.
                        The wicked are suffered by the Lord to plot and practise against the iust. This is declared by noting vnto vs the cause of this plotting, namely, their malice: which is implied and signified by that effect of gnashing their teeth.
                        Therefore it seemeth that the Lord proceedeth not so gratiously with the godlie, as hath been remembred.
                     
                  
                  The answere to this obiection is vers. 13. by imparting with vs the frustration and dissuccesse of the sayd plotting, thus:

                        
                        Answer. v. 13.
                        
                           Their plotting against the iust is vaine and without successe, vers. 13. in the beginning. Where the Prophet ascribing vnto the Lord the action of laughing, doth thereby shew that the Lord holdeth such proiects and practises, at which he laugheth, for succeslesse and vaine. For, were they to take effect, it could not with any congruity be said, that the Lord laugheth at them.
                        
                           Therefore the plotting of the wicked against the iust hindreth not, but that the Lord may be said to hold notwithstanding a gratious proceeding with ye 
                           iust.
                        
                     
                  
                  The former part of this answere touching the miscariage and failing of the wicked in their plots and practises, is cleered by aduertising vnto vs the cause of the said failing: which is, a determination on the part of the Lord, to dispatch the wicked ere they execute their designes. The conclusion is this:

                        
                           The Lord doth by the eye of his prouidence direct to a reall issue his determined dispatch of the wicked, ere they execute their designe against the iust, vers. 13. in the end. Where it is said: The Lord seeth the day, that is, the appointed and decreed ruine of the wicked to be at hand. By the Lords seeing the approch hereof, we are to vnderstand not an idle beholding, but an actual directing to issue on the Lords part of the said determined dispatch and ruine of the wicked.
                        
                           Therefore the plotting of the wicked against the godly is vaine and without successe, vers. 13. in the begin.
                     
                  
                  The second obiection is vers. 14. thus:

                        Obi. 2.
                        The wicked attempt the destruction of the godlie: which the Prophet signifieth by two particular actions of theirs: the one of drawing their sword: the other of bending their bow against the iust.
                        And therefore it may seeme that the Lord suffering this attempt against the godly, proceedeth not so gratiously with them, as hath been mentioned.
                     
                  
                  
                     The answere hereto is vers. 15: where the Prophet, though not in formall and expresse termes, yet in sense and effect denieth the sequell deduced in this obiection. For he telleth vs that howsoeuer the wicked attempt against the godly, yet his attempt is such as is not to be regarded: it being in the issue thereof not only frustrated and disappointed, but of a fatall and pernitious consequence to the vtter ouerthrow of himselfe. As if the Prophet should frame his answere to the said obiection, thus:

                        Answer. v. 15.
                        The attempts of the wicked are frustrated by the Lord, and made the meanes of their owne destruction.
                        Therefore notwithstanding their attempts suffered by the Lord, it may iustly be said that the Lord proceedeth gratiously with his children.
                     
                  
                  The third obiection is not set downe, but preuented by an answere thereto in the 16. verse. The obiection is this:

                        Obi. 3.
                        The godly hath little: whereas the wicked abound in wealth.
                        And therefore it seemeth that the Lord is not so gratious in his proceeding with the godly, as is remembred.
                     
                  
                  The answere to this third obiection is comprised in the 16. and 17. verse. The Prophet in the 16. verse tendreth this answere:

                        Ans. v. 16 and 17
                        The little pittance which the Lord furnisheth vnto the godly man, is of great vse and comfort.
                        And therefore it cannot vpon any such regard as is noted in the obiection, be inferred, that the Lord proceedeth not gratiously with his children.
                     
                  
                  The former branch of this answere is cleered vnto vs,

                        1. By comparing the little pittance of the godly with the wealth of the wicked, in the quantitie of the present vse and comfort yeelded by each of them, vers. 16.
                        2. By comparing the said little pittance with the wealth of the wicked, in the point of lasting and continuance incident to each of them, vers. 17.
                     
                  
                  
                     The first comparison is this:

                        The wealth of all the wicked in the world heaped together, may be of great comfort and vse to any one of the wicked:
                        But the little pittance furnished by the Lord vnto one godly man, is to the same man of farre greater vse and comfort.
                     
                  
                  The second comparison is this:

                        
                           The wealth of the wicked doth vanish and perish, ver. 17. in the beginning: where the Prophet expresseth and deliuereth this sentence by saying, that the armes or strength of the wicked (which consisteth in their wealth) shall be broken.
                        
                           But the substance and reliefe of the godly doth last and remaine, v. 17. in the end. Where by these words: The Lord vpholdeth the iust: we are to vnderstand the supporting of the substance and intertainment allotted to the iust. For there being in this 17. verse a comparison, wherein things are compared in a different and vnlike qualitie: the analogie betwixt the first and latter part of the comparision will not hold good without some such interpretation. The first part of the comparison doth touch the perishing not of the wicked mans person, but of his wealth. And therefore the second part of the said comparison, must proportionably concerne not the iust mans person, but his intertainment and substance. Besides, this 17. verse being an answere to an obiection, which importeth the substance and reliefe of the godlie to be very little: the sense of it cannot be sutable with ye obiection, vnlesse it be expounded as hath been said. This exposition is likewise confirmed by that which is deliuered in the 18. verse: where the Psalmist proueth that the possession of the iust remaineth for euer: that is, That the iust shall neuer faile of intertainment and reliefe.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Prophet hauing in this sort answered the said third obiection, he doth thereupon take an occasion to dispute and determine this excellent and comfortable question: namely,

                        That the Lord supplieth vnto the godly continuall reliefe and maintenance, vers. 17. & 18.
                        
                     
                  
                  The said question is set downe in the end of the 17. and 18. verses. In the 17. it is said, That the Lord supporteth the iust: that is, hath that regard to their substance and reliefe, as it neuer faileth them. In the 18. it is auouched that their possession lasteth for euer: that is, the Lord doth alwaies relieue and feede them.
                  Let vs now see how the Prophet doth handle and iustifie this his assertion. The first argument for the cleering thereof, is concluded thus:

                        Arg. 1.
                        Of whom the Lord hath a speciall regard and care, to them their intertainment and reliefe neuer faileth.
                        But of the godly the Lord hath a speciall regard and care, vers. 18. in the beginning: where it is said: That the Lord knoweth the daies of the vpright men: that is, The Lord is carefull that it succeede well with them.
                        Therefore to the godly their intertainment and reliefe neuer faileth, vers. 17.18.
                        
                     
                  
                  The second proofe vsed by the Psalmist for the deciding of the question in hand, is a comparison of this nature:

                        Arg. 2.
                        If reliefe faile vnto the godlie at any time, it will in all likelihood faile them in the time of famine.
                        But reliefe shall not faile them in the time of famine. vers. 19.
                        
                        Therefore reliefe shall not faile vnto the godly at any time, vers. 17.18.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is set out vnto vs by three seuerall illustrations: whereof

                        
                        1. The first serueth to distinguish betwixt that which in the time of famine befalleth vnto the godly, and that which happeneth not vnto them. The argument of distinction is this:
                           
                              
                                 The godly shall not be distressed with want in the time of publike famine, vers. 19. in the begin.
                              
                                 But in such a time they shall be filled and satisfied, vers. 19. in the end.
                           
                        
                        
                           2. The second is a comparison, wherein is shewed how differently in the time of famine it succeedeth with the wicked and the godly: thus,
                              
                                 
                                    The wicked shall perish in the time of famine for want of reliefe, vers. 20.
                                 
                                    But to the godly reliefe shall not faile in such a time, vers. 19.
                              
                           
                           The former part of this comparison is thus declared:

                                 
                                    Euen as the fat of tender lambes in sacrifices consumeth away, vers. 20. in the midst:
                                 
                                    So the wicked waste and perish in the time of famine, vers. 20. in the beginning and end.
                              
                           
                        
                        3. The third illustration of the said Assumption is this:
                           
                              
                                 The godly man doth in the time of famine giue vnto others for their reliefe, vers. 21. in the end.
                              
                                 Therefore the godly man hath at that time wherewithall to relieue himselfe, vers. 19.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The former sentence of the said third illustration is made manifest vnto vs, by noting

                        1. The different course held by the wicked in the time of famine: thus,
                           
                              
                                 The wicked borrow for their reliefe in the time of famine, and repay not, vers. 21. in the beginning.
                              
                                 But the godly giue and are helpfull vnto others in that time, vers. 21. in the end.
                           
                        
                        2. By noting the cause and meanes whereby the godly are inabled to giue and to be helpfull vnto others, thus:
                           
                              
                              
                                 Who by the blessing of the Lord doe possesse the earth with the commodities of it as the right owners of the same, they are inabled to giue vnto others in the time of famine.
                              
                              
                                 But the godly by the blessing of the Lord do possesse the earth with the commodities of it, as the right owners of the same, vers. 22.
                              
                                 Therefore the godly are inabled to giue vnto others for their reliefe in th
                                       •
                                     time of famine, vers. 21.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is amplified by a comparison of things different and vnlike amongst themselues, thus:

                        The wicked being accursed of the Lord, shall be cut from the earth and the commodities of it, vers. 22. in the end.
                        
                        But the godly being blessed of the Lord, doe and shall possesse the earth with the commodities of it, as the right owners of the same, vers. 22. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  Hitherto the second argument, to proue, That the godly shall neuer want reliefe and intertainment, hath been handled. The third followeth vnder this forme:

                        Arg. 3.
                        The Lord doth settle and fortifie the state of the godlie, vers. 23. Where these words (The man with whose way the Lord is delighted) containe a description of a godly man.
                        
                        Therefore the godly cannot want reliefe and intertainment, vers. 17.18.
                        
                     
                  
                  To the Antecedent of this third argument the Prophet hath added by way of anticipation, an answer to an obiection, which may be made against the said Antecedent. The obiection is this:

                        The godly falleth from his condition.
                        How therefore can it be said that his condition standeth established and fortified by the Lord?
                     
                  
                  The answere to this obiection is from a distinction of falles, vers. 24: where the Prophet distinguisheth betwixt falles, thus:

                        
                        The fall of the godly is not an vtter deiection, but a recouerable fall.
                        And therefore notwithstanding a fall of this kinde, it may truly be auouched that he is of a setled and fortified estate and condition.
                     
                  
                  This answere importing the fall of the godly to be recouerable, is amplified from the cause of this recouerie, thus:

                        The Lord doth hold the godly from vtter deiection, and raiseth him from the fall wherein he is, vers. 24. in the end.
                        
                        Therefore when the godly falleth from his estate, he recouers himselfe againe thereto, vers. 24. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  The fourth reason, whereby to cleere the question of the perpetuall reliefe and intertainment supplied to the godly man, is drawne from a testimonie of the Prophets particular experience and obseruation: which is double: the one, of neuer seeing the godly man goe from doore to doore a begging, vers. 25: the other, of obseruing him to be helpfull vnto others, and blessed in his children, vers. 26. The conclusion grounded on these two particular obseruations, is this:

                        I haue not at any time seene the godly man, or any of his posteritie begge their bread from doore to doore: but I haue obserued him to be helpfull vnto others, and blessed in his children, vers. 25. and 26.
                        
                        Whereupon I may reasonably inferre that the godly man endures not want of reliefe and intertainment, vers. 17.18.
                        
                     
                  
                  Touching the Prophets obseruation in this behalfe: wee must vnderstand that the profession and state of begging was prohibited by the law of God and accursed by him. Whereupon it is credible that no godly man would so carrie himselfe as to be forced to offend against the sayd law, and so to incurre the curse of the Lord: who is alwaies at the right hand of his children to guide and support them.
                  
                     Hitherto the Prophet hath disputed and cleered three obiections made against the fauourable and gratious proceeding held by the Lord towards his children. To which dispute he hath likewise added the discussing of this worthy and comfortable Assertion, concerning The Lords supplying of reliefe from time to time vnto the godly.
                  
                  Now therefore hauing shewed not onely in the former part of the Psalme, but in handling the said obiections and Assertion added thereto, That the Lord proceedeth with the wicked to their ruine, and with the godly to their good: he doth returne in the 27. verse to his maine and principall exhortation of resting vpon the Lord, and walking obediently before him.
                  
                  To perswade hereto, the Prophet vers. 27. repeateth and againe presenteth vnto vs the conclusion propounded in the 3. verse. The conclusion is this:

                        
                           By this course of resting on the Lord, and walking obediently before him, the godly shall enioy a long, safe and comfortable life, vers. 27. in the end.
                        
                           Wherefore rest on the Lord, and walke obediently before him, vers. 27. in the beginning. Where the later branch of this conclusion which concernes holie obedience of life is onely mentioned: but vnder the name of this, wee are to conceiue likewise of the former as set downe.
                     
                  
                  Now to make it appeare vnto vs that this repetition of the said conclusion is not idle and out of want of other matter, but of speciall moment and vse: the Prophet drawes into discourse and consideration the doctrine comprised in the Antecedent of the said conclusion, amplifying and cleering the same by sundrie arguments: namely,

                        1. By noting vnto vs the cause of enioying so happie and comfortable an estate of life, thus:
                           
                              
                                 Whom the Lord loueth and neuer forsaketh, they shall enioy a long, safe, and comfortable life.
                              
                              
                                 But the godlie are those whom the Lord loueth

and neuer forsaketh, vers. 28.
                              
                                 Therefore the godly shall enioy a long, safe, and comfortable life, vers. 27. in the end, and vers. 28. in the midst, and vers. 29.
                           
                        
                        2. By imparting with vs by way of comparison, the Lords vnlike & different proceeding with the wicked, thus:
                           
                              
                                 The wicked are cut off by the Lord from the enioyance of this happie and comfortable life, vers. 28. in the end. Where by an argument from the greater to the lesse, hee sheweth, That not only the wicked, but their seede also and posteritie shall be cut off.
                              
                              
                                 But the godlie shall enioy the said happie life. vers. 27.28.29.
                           
                        
                        3. By describing vnto vs a iust and godly man, vers. 30. and 31. The description is this:

                              
                                 He is a godly man who conformeth himself to the law of the Lord,
                                 
                                    1. In his speech, ver. 30.
                                    2. In his heart, ver. 31.
                                    3. In his life & actions, vers. 31. in the end.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        4. By answering an obiection made against the enioyance of the said happie life promised to the godly man, in the antecedent of the aboue named conclusion. The obiection is this:

                              
                                 The wicked watcheth the righteous and seeketh to kill him, vers. 32.
                              
                                 How therefore shall the godlie man enioy the happie life promised vnto him?
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The answere hereto is this:

                        The Lord deliuereth the righteous from the hand of the wicked. This action of the Lords is in the 33. verse noted by these two particulars: the one, of not leauing the iust in the hands of the wicked: the other, of not suffering him to be iudicially at the appetite

of the wicked condemned.
                        
                        Therefore howsoeuer the wicked seeke the dispatch of the iust, yet shall the iust enioy the happie life promised vnto him.
                     
                  
                  Thus we see how the Prophet to presse his maine exhortation, of resting on the Lord, and walking obediently before him, hath in the 27. verse not onely repeated the conclusion deliuered in the 3. verse, but hath also set vpon the antecedent part thereof foure worthie illustrations from the beginning of the 28. to the end of the 33. verse. Now in the 34. verse, before he fall to a fresh prosecution of the said exhortation, hee doth (out of a purpose to imprint in our hearts and memories a doctrine of so excellent vse and comfort) recommend again vnto vs the said conclusion offered in the third verse. And then in the end of the 34, he vrgeth and inforceth the said exhortation of resting on the Lord, and walking obediently before him, by this argument: which is in number the fourth, whereby the principall question of the Psalme is concluded:

                        Arg. 4.
                        By this course of resting on the Lord, and walking obediently before him, thou shalt obtaine this further mercie at his hands, as to be an eye witnesse of the execution of the Lords iustice vpon the wicked, vers. 34. in the end.
                        
                        Wherefore rest vpon him, and walke obediently before him, vers. 34. in the beginning.
                        
                     
To the former part of this reason the Prophet hath added a declaration from two comparisons.
                  
                     1. The first is this, carying with it a testimonie of experience:

                           
                              I obserued and discerned the wicked to vanish and perish, vers. 36.
                           
                              Wherefore obserue and thou also shalt see him vanish and perish, vers. 34.38.

                                 The first sentence of this comparison is amplified by the like obseruation made of the wicked mans contrarie estate, thus:

                                       
                                       
                                          I saw the wicked florish, vers. 35. Where this florishing of the wicked is resembled to the spreading and florishing of a Bay tree.
                                       
                                          So I obserued and discerned him to vanish and perish, vers. 36.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     2. The second comparison, whereby to shew that the iust shall see with his eye the ruine of the wicked, and wherein is noted vnto vs the obseruation of a contrarie euent in the godly, is set downe in this sort:

                           
                              Obserue the godly man, and thou shalt see how he endeth his daies in peace and prosperitie, ver. 37.
                           
                              Obserue in like manner the wicked, and thou shalt aswell see how he endeth in miserie and destruction, vers. 34.38.
                        
                     
                  
                  That part of the second comparison which concernes the peaceable and prosperous end of the iust, is thus argued:

                        Whom the Lord euer helpeth and deliuereth in the time of affliction, their end must needes be peaceable and happie.
                        But the godly are they whom the Lord euer helpeth and deliuereth in the time of affliction, vers. 39. and 40.
                        
                        Therefore the end of the godlie men must needes bee peaceable and happie, vers. 37.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is made knowne and euident by this reason:

                        Who so repose their trust in the Lord for deliuerance in time of affliction, them the Lord euer helpeth and deliuereth at such time.
                        But the godly are they who repose their trust in the Lord for deliuerance in time of affliction.
                        Therefore the godly are euer holpen and deliuered by the Lord at such time.
                     
                  
                  The Proposition is omitted, as being the Lords knowne promise.
                  The Assumption is vers. 40. in the end.
                  The Conclusion is vers. 39. and 40.
               
            
            
               
               PSALM. 39.
               TO Ieduthun the Master of the Quier, a Psalme of Dauid.
               
                  2 I said: I will take heede to my waies, that I sinne not with my tongue: I will keepe my mouth brideled while the wicked is in my sight.
               
                  3 I was dumbe and spake nothing: I kept silence euen from good: but my sorrow was more stirred.
               
                  4 Mine heart was hote within me: and the fire kindled in my meditation. Whereupon I spake with my tongue saying:
               
                  5 Lord, let me know mine end, and the measure of my daies what it is: let me know how long I am to liue.
               
                  6 Behold: thou hast made my daies as an hand bredth: and the time of my life is before thee as nothing: surely euery man is altogether vanitie, though neuer so strongly setled. Selah.
               
               
                  7 Doubtlesse man walketh in a shadow: doubtlesse he maketh great adoe for nought: he heapeth vp riches, and cannot tell who shall gather them.
               
                  8 But now Lord, what waite I for? mine hope is in thee.
               
                  9 Deliuer me from all my transgressions: and make me not a reproch vnto the foolish.
               
                  10 I hold my peace: I open not my mouth: because thou didst it.
               
                  11 Remoue from me thy wound: for I faint by the stroke of thy hand.
               
                  12 Assoone as thou doest chastise man, rebuking him for his iniquitie: thou doest dissolue his excellencie as a moth. Surely euery man is meerely vanitie. Selah.
               
               
                  13 Heare my prayer O Lord, and hearken vnto my crie: be not deaffe vnto my teares. For I am a stranger before thee, and a seiourner as all my fathers.
               
                  14 Stay thine hand from me, that I may refresh my selfe, before I goe hence and be not.
               
                  
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 39.
                  The Prophet being vnder the afflicting hand of the Lord, doth in this Psalme relate vnto vs:

                        1. The combat he had betwixt the spirit and the flesh. From the beginning of the second verse, to the end of the seuenth.
                        2. The issue of the said combat. From the beginning of the 8. verse, to the end of the 14.
                     
                  
                  The combat is described by setting downe,

                        1. The actions of the spirit, vers. 2.3.
                        2. The incounter of the flesh, vers. 3. in the end, and vers. 4.
                     
                  
                  The actions of the Spirit in the Prophet Dauid, are two:

                        1. His resolution not to let fall any passionate words, vers. 2.
                        2. The performance of this resolution, vers. 3. in the former part thereof.
                     
                  
                  His resolution to be silent and to forbeare all distempered and impatient speeches, is set out vnto vs by implying the ende hee aymeth at therein: which is to preuent and take from the wicked, who obserued the cariage of the Lords children, al occasion of traducing and reproching the profession of fearing the Lord. This end is not in distinct and expresse termes particulated, but necessarilie and sensibly implied in the second verse vnder these words: While the wicked is before me: that is, while the wicked obserueth me & watcheth an occasion to deride and scandalize the cariage and profession of the godly. Now what the wicked would obserue and traduce, to preuent that the Prophet voweth silence. But the cariage and profession of the godly is that which the wicked would obserue and traduce. Therefore to preuent and disappoint the wicked herein, the Prophet resolued with himselfe to refraine his tongue.
                  
                     
                     The performance of the said resolution to be silent, is amplified by a comparison in this sort:

                        I spared to speake that which would haue serued to my speciall aduantage and good, and which I might iustly haue pleaded in my defence, vers. 3. in the midst.
                        
                        No marueile then if I spared my tongue otherwise, verse 3. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  The incounter of the flesh is likewise set forth vnto vs by these two actions of the flesh: whereof,

                        1. The one is a further prouocation and increase of the Prophets passion, growing out of the indeauour vsed by him to suppresse the same, vers. 3. in the end: and vers. 4. in the beginning.
                        2. The other is an actuall interruption of the said resolution to be silent: which the flesh wrought in him by stirring and prouoking his passion, vers. 4. in the end. For his passion, the more he indeuoured to qualifie and restraine it, being so much the more inflamed, he doth out of an impatient humour and to shew the greatnes of the miserie hee endured, breake his resolution of silence by tendering vnto the Lord this passionate and inconsiderate request: namely,

                              That the Lord would be pleased to take him presently out of this life, vers. 5.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  This request for present death is deliuered in these termes: Let me know my end: and the measure of my daies what it is: and how long I am to liue; that is to say: let me by an actuall experiment of death in mine owne person feele and discerne the vtmost period and reach of my daies: which in effect is nought else than a request, That he may die. Now he doth not onely propound this sute, but to the end he may obteyne at the Lords hands a grant therof, he doth accompany it with certaine motiues concluded thus:

                        
                        If my life by thine owne ordinance be exceeding short and likewise subiect to vanitie: I pray thee, verifie on my person the truth and effect of this thy ordinance in cutting off this my life.
                        But my life by thine owne ordinance is exceeding short and likewise subiect to vanitie, vers. 6. and 7.
                        
                        Wherefore (O Lord) execute on my person the truth and effect of this thine ordinance in cutting off my life, vers. 5.
                        
                     
                  
                  The first member of the Assumption concernes the shortnes of the Prophets life. That his life is exceeding short, hee sheweth by two comparisons:

                        1. In the one he compareth the length of his life to the length of a spanne, vers. 6. in the beginning.
                        2. In the other he resembleth his life to that which is nothing, vers. 6. in the midst.
                     
                  
                  The second member of the Assumption, which importeth the vanity of his life, is not in particularity expressed: but in liew of it, the Prophet hath set downe this demonstration thereof:

                        Euery man, though neuer so strongly founded in his estate, is a meere vanitie: and likewise all his indeuors and trauels are meerely vaine.
                        And therefore, considering I am a man, my life can be nought else but a meere vanitie.
                     
                  
                  The former part of the Antecedent is vers. 6. in the end.
                  The later part of the said Antecedent, which concernes the vanity of all the indeuours and trauels of man, is vers. 7. in the middest. Where it is said, that man maketh great ado for nought: that is, he spends his indeuours and trauels in vaine. Now this generall, namely, That man spendeth his indeuours and trauels in vaine, is amplified:

                        1. By a comparison, in the beginning of the 7. verse.
                        2. By allegation of a particular instance, in the end of the 7. verse.
                     
                  
                  The comparison, wherein the vanity of mans indeuour and trauell is shewed, being laid forth in her parts, is this:

                        
                        
                           As a bare shew or vanishing image is of no substance or vse:
                        
                        
                           So neither are the indeuours or trauels of man, vers. 7. in the beginning. Where it is affirmed that man walketh in a shadow: that is, imployeth himselfe about that, which is nought else but a bare shew and vanishing image.
                     
                  
                  The particular instance alleaged to argue and witnesse the vanitie of mans indeuours, is this:

                        
                           Man gathereth riches he knoweth not for whom, vers. 7. in the end. Vpon this instance (it being supposed by the Prophet that all other actions and imployments of man are in nature and vse like to the said instance) it may be inferred, that all the indeuours of man are vaine.
                        
                     
                  
                  Hitherto of the Combat, which the Prophet sustained betwixt the spirit and the flesh: the flesh preuailing so farre with him, as that it drew from him, being not able to containe himselfe within limits of patience and moderation, the making of an vnaduised motion vnto the Lord for present death.
                  The issue of the Combat followeth in the rest of the verses of this Psalme: namely, from the beginning of the 8. ver. to the ende of the 14. The said issue is (as shall appeare) a plaine and absolute defeate giuen in this combat by the Spirit vnto the flesh. For after the Prophet had for a while out of his passionate and impatient humor solicited the Lord to retire him out of this life: he doth vpon better aduisement suggested from the Spirit, correct and checke himselfe by calling to minde the folly and vanity of the motion he tendered vnto the Lord for death. And therefore he reclaymeth himselfe thus in the 8. verse:

                        But now Lord, what waite I for? As if he should say: It is in vayne that I present this inconsiderate request vnto thee: I cannot expect ought from it.
                     
                  
                  Now hereupon, the Prophet changing his former note (the Spirit hauing obteyned victory against the incounters of

the flesh) he becommeth an humble suter vnto the Lord, namely:

                        That the Lord would be pleased to remoue from him his present affliction, vers. 11.13.14.
                        
                     
                  
                  This sute for the remoue of the affliction presently vpon him, is the issue of the combat aboue mentioned and described.
                  To perswade the Lord to giue him satisfaction by the grant of the said sute, he pleadeth by sundry arguments. The first is this:

                        Arg. 1.
                        My hope and confidence for mercie and deliuerance is in thee O Lord, vers. 8. in the end.
                        
                        Therefore withdraw, I pray thee, thy afflicting hand from me, vers. 11.13.14.
                        
                     
                  
                  The sequell of this reason hath for the warrant and ground thereof, the Lords promise to deliuer those who rest vpon him: which promise is the proposition of this first conclusion: but omitted by the Prophet, as a matter alreadie being in the publike knowledge of all.
                  Here, before the Prophet proceede to a further pressing of his humble sute: forasmuch as his conscience tels him that his sinnes haue originally drawne vpon him his present affliction: least the consideration of them should on the part of the Lord be a bar to his said sute; he doth for this regard humbly intreate, in the 9. verse a remission of all his transgressions: iustly apprehending that the cause being remoued, the effect also will determine. This motion doth carrie with it a confession of his sinne against God, and an acknowledgement of the desert thereof: which is a reason of moment to induce the Lord to remit sinne. As this clause of the said 9. verse, Deliuer me from all my transgressions, doth aptly receiue the exposition & sense I haue set downe: so may it not vnfitly and with good warrant be expounded of the remoue of the present crosse which the Prophet endured as a punishment due to his transgressions. Which interpretation being allowed of, the said clause must then serue as a conclusion to the first argument,

and to all other the motiues presented vnto the Lord by the Prophet, for deliuerance from the present trouble wherein he was.
                  
                  The second argument, whereby hee mediateth with the Lord the remoue of his present affliction, doth remember vnto the Lord the euent and inconuenience that will ensue vpon the said affliction, in case it be continued:

                        Arg. 2.
                        If the affliction that is presently vpon me, will expose me and my profession of thy name as a scorne vnto the wicked: I pray thee (O Lord) remooue it from me.
                        But the affliction that is presently vpon me, wil expose me and my profession of thy name as a scorne vnto the wicked, vers. 9. in the end. Where it is said: Make me not a reproch vnto the foolish: that is, withdraw this affliction from me, least the continuance thereof occasion the foolish and wicked to traduce and reproch my profession of thy name. So as in this later clause of the ninth verse, there is folded vp and included aswell the Prophets sute as the argument to perswade it.
                        
                        Therefore I pray thee (O Lord) remoue the said affliction from me.
                     
                  
                  The Prophet hauing presented vnto the Lord, who is iealous of his owne honour and euer ready to giue proofe how highly hee doth valew it, the remembrance of the imputation and scandall, that may be throwne vpon the profession of his name, in case of the continuance of the said affliction: he doth in the 10. verse adde hereto a speciall inducement grounded vpon the Lords gracious nature and promise to help those who with patience submit themselues to his good pleasure. The inducement is of this sort:

                        Arg. 3.
                        I doe now in all patience and reuerence humble my selfe before thee, submitting my selfe wholy to thy good pleasure, vers. 10. in the former part.
                        
                        
                           It may please thee therefore O Lord to haue mercie on me, and to deliuer me from my present trouble, vers. 11.13.14.
                        
                     
                  
                  The former sentence of this reason, which concernes the Prophets submittance of himselfe in al humilitie and patience vnto the Lords good pleasure, is amplifyed by drawing into consideration the principall efficient and author of the affliction laid vpon the Prophet, thus:

                        I do acknowledge that it is thou (O Lord) who hast laid this present affliction vpon me, vers. 10. in the end.
                        
                        Therefore doe I in all patience and reuerence humble my selfe before thee, and submit my selfe wholy to thy good pleasure, vers. 10. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Prophet giuing the Lord no rest till hee find rest from his trouble, doth by a fourth argument solicite his preuailing with the Lord in his sute: thus,

                        Arg. 4.
                        
                           I quaile and faint vnder the burden of this my affliction, it being farre surpassing my strength, ver. 11 in the end.
                        
                           It may please thee therefore (O Lord) to remoue it from me, vers. 11. in the beginning. Where the Prophet maketh his request in these words: Remoue from me thy wound: that is, the affliction laid vpon me, which is to my person and state, as a wound vnto my bodie.
                     
                  
                  The ground of this fourth reason is a consideration of the Lords most wise and gracious proceeding: who doth proportion out afflictions to the measure of strength in his children: and will not suffer the rod of the vngodlie to rest on his Saints, least they also should reach out their hand to iniquitie.
                  To the Antecedent of this fourth reason the Prophet hath yeelded this illustration:

                        
                           If no man be of sufficient strength to endure thy afflicting hand, then must I needes faint vnder it.
                        
                        
                           But no man is of sufficient strength to endure thy afflicting hand, vers. 12. Where the Prophet sheweth,

that man is no more able to beare the burden of affliction, than a moth is able to endure a bruse offered vnto it by ones hand. But assoone as the Lord afflicteth him for his sinne, hee melteth and dissolueth as being of no strength to beare it.
                        
                           Therefore must I needes faint vnder it, vers. 11. in the end.
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is amplified by three seuerall arguments: namely,

                        1. By noting the efficient cause mouing the Lord to inflict punishments: which is the iniquitie of man, vers. 12. in the first part thereof.
                        2. By a comparison: wherein man and whatsoeuer is of strength and excellencie in man, is compared in weaknes to a moth, thus:

                              
                                 As a moth is so exceedingly brittle, as that with a touch of the finger it is presently dissolued:
                              
                              
                                 So man and whatsoeuer is of strength and excellency in man is so weake, that it cannot endure the touch of the Lords afflicting finger, without being reduced to nought, vers. 12. in the middest.
                           
                        
                        3. By imparting with vs the nature and condition of man: he being in his nature & condition nought else but a meere vanitie. Out of which consideration he thus concludeth:

                              
                                 Nothing meerely vanity is of sufficient strength to endure the afflicting hand of God.
                              
                              
                                 Euery man is meerely vanitie, vers. 12. in the end.
                              
                                 Therefore no man is of sufficient strength to endure the afflicting hand of God, vers. 12. in the former part of the verse.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The Prophet hauing thus dilated vpon the fourth argument, he returnes to solicite his maine sute, remembring vnto the Lord the qualitie and condition of his life, as a reason whereby to draw the Lord to a mercifull regard of his said sute. His conclusion is this:

                        
                        Arg. 5.
                        If my abode in this life be very short, I pray thee whilest opportunitie is offered of shewing mercie vnto me, shew it in deliuering me from my present trouble.
                        But my abode in this life is very short, vers. 13. in the end.
                        
                        Therefore whilest opportunitie is offered of shewing mercie vnto me, shew it in deliuering me from my present trouble, vers. 13. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is not expressed in these very termes: but in steed of the said Assumption, the illustration thereof is set downe thus:

                        I am a pilgrim and a seiourner here vpon earth, as my predecessors were, vers. 13. in the end.
                        
                        Therefore am I of a short abode here vpon earth and in this life.
                     
                  
                  The conclusion of the 5. argument being in the beginning of the 13. verse, is there amplified by acquainting vs with the manner and forme of offering vnto the Lord this petition for deliuerance from the said affliction. The manner and forme here vsed, is The petitioners extraordinarie vehemencie and earnestnes in pressing the Lord to a grant of the petition offered. This extraordinary vehemencie in the petitioner, is expressed in this sort:

                        1. By iterations of calling vpon the Lord to heare him. For he doth thrice call on the Lord to heare him, vers. 13. in the beginning and middest.
                        2. By the petitioners crying vnto the Lord, vers. 13. in the middest.
                        3. By effusion of his teares, vers. 13. in the middest.
                     
                  
                  This vehemency and earnestnesse of the petitioner with the Lord, expressed by the particulars mentioned, may serue for a motiue whereby to preuaile with the Lord in this sute for deliuerance. For this earnestnes and importtunacie in our praiers proceeding frō a true sense of our wants and accompanied with faith in the Lords promises, is a thing commaunded by him and such as wherein hee taketh

speciall contentment: and for that regard of great force with the Lord.
                  The Prophet hauing bin thus extraordinarily earnest with the Lord in the 13 verse: hee doth in the 14. and last verse close vp and conclude his sute, by propounding vnto the Lord the end for which he beggeth deliuerance from the present crosse which lieth so heauily vpon him. His perswasion is this:

                        Arg. 6.
                        If thy afflicting hand continue vpon me, I shall haue no time before I die of refreshing and fitting my selfe to doe thee honour and seruice.
                        But I would most willingly haue some time before I die of refreshing and fitting my selfe to doe thee honour and seruice, vers. 14. in the later part of the verse. Where vnto these words (That I may refresh my selfe before I depart hence) I take the exposition, which I haue set down, to be most agreeable, and suting with the Prophets intention in this last argument.
                        
                        Therefore I pray thee let not thy afflicting hand continue vpon me, vers. 14. in the beginning. Where the Prophet intreateth the Lord to stay his hand from him: that is, to desist from afflicting him any longer.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PSALM. 49.
               TO the Master of the Quier amongst the sonnes of Corah, a Psalme committed to be sung.
               
                  2 Heare this all ye people: giue eare all ye that dwell in the world:
               
                  3 Aswell low as high, the rich aswell as the poore.
               
                  4 My mouth shall deliuer manifold wisedome: and the meditation of my heart manifold knowledge.
               
                  5 I will incline mine eare to a parable: I will vtter my worthie sentence on the harpe.
               
                  
                  6 Wherefore should I feare in the euill daies, when the wicked shall compasse me about, as at my heeles?
               
                  7 Namely, such as trust in their goods, and boast in the multitude of their riches.
               
                  8 A man can by no meanes redeeme his brother: he cannot giue his ransome to God:
               
                  9 (For the redemption of their life is ouer deere: and shall neuer be compassed.)
               
                  10 That he may liue still for euer, and not see the graue.
               
                  11 For it is seene that the wise doe die: and likewise that the ignorant and foolish doe perish: and leaue their riches for others.
               
                  12 Their intention is that their houses and their habitations shall continue for euer, euen from generation to generation: in that they call them by their names vpon earth.
               
                  13 Yet man shall not continue in honour. He is like the beasts that die.
               
                  14 This their way sheweth their follie: yet their posteritie doe greatly approoue their course.
               
                  15 Like sheep they shall lie in the graue: death shall deuoure them: and the righteous shall haue dominion ouer them in the morning: and hell shall consume their forme being raised from out the house thereof.
               
                  16 But God will deliuer my soule from the power of the graue: and he will receiue me to himselfe.
               
                  17 Be not thou afraide therefore, when one is made rich, and when the glorie of his house is increased.
               
                  18 For he shall take nothing away with him when he dieth: neither shall his pompe descend after him:
               
                  19 Though he blessed his soule in his life: and men praise thee, in that thou makest much of thy selfe.
               
                  20 Howsoeuer they come euen to the age of their fathers: yet shall they neuer enioy the light.
               
                  21 A man in honour hauing no vnderstanding, is made like to the beasts that perish.
               
                  
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 49.
                  The position debated by the Prophet in this Psalme, I take to be this:

                        That the godly should not feare the wicked, though abounding in riches and glorying in the strength of them, vers. 17.
                        
                     
                  
                  That this is the position handled here by the Prophet, may appeare by comparing the 17. verse with the 6. and 7: where the Prophet professing this much, that there is no cause why himself should feare the wicked, namely, such as repose on their wealth and boast in the multitude of their riches, though they beset him on each side, and be as it were at his heeles ready to surprize him. After he hath at large from the beginning of the 8. verse to the end of the 16. set downe an illustration and proofe of that which he so professeth of himselfe: he doth in the 17. verse direct his speech to all godly men in generall, concluding by way of exhortation out of the argument and profession deliuered in the said 6. and 7. verse, That none of them ought to feare the wicked, though abounding in riches and glorying in the strength of them. This particle of the position, which concernes the glorying of the wicked in their wealth, is not in the 17. verse expressed in formall and distinct termes: but forasmuch as it is added by the Prophet to the argument vsed in the 6. and 7. for proofe of the 17: we must conceiue it to be a part of the position couched in the said 17. verse.
                  Now before he proceede to a reall discussing of the said position: forasmuch as it containes no vulgar and meane point of knowledge, but such a doctrine as is worthie of all regard, howsoeuer it may seeme in the eye of the carnall man a contemptible paradoxe: the Prophet hath thought meete to honour it with a preface.
                  In the preface, the Prophet

                        
                        1. Summoneth such as are to be his auditors.
                        
                        2. Soliciteth audience and attention at their hands.
                        
                     
                  
                  The summons is performed by him,

                        1. In generall, vers. 2.
                        2. In particular, vers. 3.
                     
                  
                  In the generall summons, all people and inhabitants of the earth indistinctly are cited. But least any should thinke themselues priuiledged and exempted from tendering their appearance vpon this generall summons: hee doth in the 3. verse particulate the seuerall estates and degrees of persons, that are cited to appeare: namely, The vulgar people, the noble, the rich, and the poore. And these, as they are all equally and without partialitie summoned: so are they all indifferentlie and without personall regard bound to become auditors of the doctrine to bee propounded.
                  His soliciting of audience and attention at the hands of all people of what degree and qualitie soeuer is performed by presenting vnto their consideration:

                        1. The excellencie and worthines of the said doctrine, vers. 4. Where to note the singular value of it, and the instruction it doth minister, it is intitled by the name of wisedome and knowledge: and in the 5. verse, by the name of a parable and sentence most worthie to be obserued.
                        2. His readines to concurre with them in a serious meditation thereof, ver. 5. in the beginning. Where he professeth that in regard of the excellencie of the said doctrine, he will incline his eare thereto, that is, withall care and reuerence meditate thereon together with them.
                        3. The manner and forme of tendring and publishing the said doctrine, vers. 5. in the end. Where he saith, that he will deliuer and publish it on his harpe, that is, in such forme and manner as is very pleasing and delightfull.
                     
                  
                  These particular motiues vsed by the Prophet to solicite and

draw all the inhabitants of the earth to an attentiue hearing of the said doctrine, are thus concluded:

                        If the doctrine I propound, containe matter of excellent wisedome: if my selfe shall in person readily concurre with all men in the serious meditation of it: if I shall publish it in a pleasing forme and sort: then let all men attentiuely heare the said doctrine.
                        But the doctrine I propound, containes matter of excellent wisedome: my selfe shall in person readily concurre with all men in the serious meditation thereof: I shall publish it in a pleasing forme and sort. vers. 4.5.
                        
                        Therefore let all men attentiuely heare the said doctrine, vers. 2.3.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Prophet hauing thus summoned and solicited each condition and sort of people to the hearing of the said doctrine: hee doth now proceede to a particular and actuall demonstration of the same. The doctrine to bee demonstrated, is the position aboue remembred, namely:

                        That the godly man should not feare the wicked, though abounding in riches and glorying in the strength of them, vers. 17.
                        
                     
                  
                  The demonstration of this position is twofold:

                        The one from an instance in the Prophets one person, deliuered in a comparison of paritie, vers. 6. and 7.
                        
                        The other is from the consideration of the wretched condition whereto the wicked are subiect at their death. vers. 18.
                        
                     
                  
                  The instance taken from the Prophets owne person for cleering the said position is concluded thus:

                        I the Prophet feare not the wicked, though abounding in wealth and glorying in the strength thereof, ver. 6.7.
                        
                        Therefore let no other godly man feare them, vers. 17.
                        
                     
                  
                  The former part of this reason, which containes the instance taken from the Prophets owne person, is cleered thus:

                        
                        If the wicked notwithstanding their wealth dye in their owne persons: in the memorie and honour of their names: and likewise in the persons of their posteritie: then is there no iust cause why I the Prophet should feare them, though glorying in the strength of their wealth.
                        But the wicked, notwithstanding their wealth, die in their owne persons: they die in the memorie and honour of their names: they die also in the persons of their posteritie. The first branch of this Assumption is vers. 8. & 10: the second is vers. 12. and 13: the third is vers. 15.
                        
                        Therefore there is no iust cause why I the Prophet should feare the wicked, though glorying in the strength of their wealth, vers. 6. and 7.
                        
                     
                  
                  The first branch of the Assumption, which concernes the dying of the wicked in their owne persons, notwithstanding the strength of their wealth, is expressed ver. 8. & 10. Where it is confidently auerred, that out of the strength of riches there cannot be presented vnto God a sufficient price whereby to deliuer the wicked from death into a state of immortalitie in this life. Which in summe and effect is all one, as if it were said: The wicked are vndoubtedly to dye in their owne persons, notwithstanding the strength of their wealth wherein they trust. Now this first branch of the said Assumption is proued by two seuerall arguments: whereof

                        
                           The one is set downe, vers. 9.
                        
                           The other is deliuered, vers. 11.
                     
                  
                  
                     In the 9. verse, the argument prouing that the wicked, notwithstanding their riches, die in their owne persons, is concluded thus:

                           
                              If it be impossible out of riches to present vnto the Lord a sufficient value whereby to deliuer the wicked from death: then are they, notwihhstanding their riches, assuredly to die in their owne persons.
                           
                           
                              
                              But it is impossible out of riches to present vnto the Lord a sufficient value whereby to deliuer the wicked from death, vers. 9.
                           
                              Therfore the wicked, notwithstanding their riches, are assuredly to die in their owne persons, vers. 8. and 10.
                        
                     
                     In the 11. verse, the proofe that the wicked, notwithstanding their riches, are to die in their own persons, is this:

                           
                              All men, aswell the wise as the foolish, doe in person die, vers. 11.
                           
                              The wicked are in the number of the wise, or the foolish.
                           
                           
                              Therfore the wicked, notwithstanding their riches, doe in person die, vers. 8. and 10.
                        
                     
                  
                  The proposition is confirmed:

                        1. By a testimonie from common experience and obseruation, vers. 11. in the beginning. Where it is said, That it is seene and obserued, that the wise and the foolish die: and therefore it is out of question that they die.
                        
                        2. By a speciall act of leauing their goods to others either by testament and gift, or by way of other conueiance. The conclusion is this:

                              
                                 They leaue their wealth to others by way of testament, or other conueiance, vers. 11. in the end. But in case they had an immortalitie on earth; they would not leaue or abandon that, which is the intertainment of their life and the strength they repose on.
                              
                                 Therefore it is apparant that they are subiect to death, ver. 11. in the beginning.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The second branch of the aboue mentioned Assumption importing the dying of the wicked in the memory and honour of their names, is recorded in the beginning of the 13. verse. Where it is said: Yet man shall not continue in honor:
                     
that is: he cannot make the memorie and honor of his name immortall: but the memory of his name shall perish. In this exposition, as being most sutable with the sense of the 12. verse immediately proceeding, I follow the French.
                  
                     That the wicked die in the memorie and honour of their names, the Prophet sheweth:

                        1. By an argument of Diuersitie: wherein hee imparteth with vs, first the end which the wicked propound vnto themselues, namely the immortalitie of their names amongst men: secondly, the meanes vsed by them for attaining to this end: which is the building of magnificall houses, and intitling them with their names. Now the said argument is thus set downe:

                              
                                 The intention of the wicked is to eternize the memorie of their names, by building faire houses and calling them by their names vpon earth: that is, amongst men in the world, v. 12. Where by particulating this meanes of giuing immortalitie to their names, he vnderstandeth all other meanes to this purpose.
                              
                                 Yet shall they not make their memorie and honour of their names immortall, vers. 13. in the beginning.
                           
                        
                        2. By a Similitude: which being laid foorth in her parts, is this:

                              
                                 As brute beasts perish, and together with thē the remembrance of thē, ver. 13. in the end.
                              
                                 So the wicked who glorie in their riches shall perish, without leauing any memorie of their names, vers. 13. in the beginning, and end also.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The third and last branch of the aforesaid Assumption, concerning the dying of the wicked in the persons of their posterity, is deliuered in the 15. verse: where it is auouched

that the posteritie of the wicked shall lie in the graue and be deuoured by death. But before he proceed to a particular declaratiō of this point, he brandeth their posteritie in the 14. verse with a note of extreame madnes: in that discerning the folly and vanity of their ancesters proceedings, they doe notwithstanding approoue and follow them. Hereupon in the 15. verse the Prophet inferreth that it succedeth with them as with their predecessors. For death seazeth vpon them and consumeth them. The truth of this third branch the Prophet maketh evident.
                  
                     1. By a Similitude, thus, vers. 15. in the beginning.

                           
                              As death seazeth vpon cattell and consumeth them to nought:
                           
                           
                              So death seazeth vpon the posteritie of the wicked, and consumeth thē in the graue to dust.
                           
                        
                     
                     2. By a comparison from the greater, thus:
                        
                           
                              Hell shall seaze vpon them and eternally torment their persons raised from out the graue: that is, in the day of iudgement, vers. 15. in the end.
                           
                              No marueile then if corporall death seaze on them, and consume them in their graues, v. 15 in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  The first part of this comparison from the greater, is amplified by a Dissimilitude, wherein the condition of miserie prepared and reserued for the wicked in that day of the general resurrection, is set forth vnto vs by notifying the different estate ordained for the righteous in the said day. The Dissimilitude is this:

                        The righteous shall in that day of the generall resurrection eternally raigne in heauen ouer the wicked, vers. 15. in the middest. Where the said day is called the Morning.
                        
                        But hell shall eternally torment the wicked at the same day, vers. 15. in the end.
                        
                     
                  
                  To the former sentence of the said Dissimilitude there is yeelded this proofe:

                        
                        Vndoubtedly I the Prophet shall in the last day by the mightie power of the Lord, both rise and be receiued into heauen to raigne in glorie ouer the wicked, vers. 16.
                        
                        Therefore all other righteous men likewise shall in that day both rise and raigne in glorie ouer the wicked. For what appertaineth vnto the Prophet in regard of his faith in the Messias, whereby he is righteous: the same belongeth to each other man that hath the same faith, whereby he is iustified.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Prophet hauing hitherto from the beginning of vers. 6, to the end of the 17. demonstrated the maine position of this Psalme by propounding and debating an instance taken from his owne person: hee doth now in the 18. verse proceed to a further illustration of the said positiō, by drawing into consideration the wretched condition whereto the wicked are subiect at their death. Hee reasoneth vpon this ground after this sort:

                        If the wicked shall at their death rest naked and stripped of all their wealth and glorie, and so be in a most miserable case: the godly ought not to feare them though they abound and glorie in their wealth.
                        But the wicked shall at their death rest naked and stripped of all their wealth and glorie, and so be in a most miserable case, vers. 18.
                        
                        Therfore the godly man ought not to feare them though they abound and glorie in their wealth, vers. 17.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is amplified,

                        1. By an argument of Diuersitie, thus:
                           
                              
                                 Though they liue an happie life in the world, both in their owne flattering conceit, and in the opinion of others who doe applaud them, vers. 19. Thus doth this verse (according to the French) cohere with the 18: and is thus expounded by Caluin and Marlo. It is said, that the wicked blesseth his soule in his life: that is, he flattereth himselfe

with a conceit that hee enioyeth an happie life in following his pleasures and commodities: yet shall they at their death rest naked and stripped of all their wealth and glorie, and so be in a most wretched case, vers. 18.
                           
                        
                        2. By a comparison from the greater, thus:
                           
                              
                                 After this life, though neuer so long, they shall be excluded from eternall life, vers. 20. So I expound this verse according to Tremell.
                              
                              
                                 No marueile then if at their death they rest naked and stripped of their wealth and glorie, vers. 18.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The first part of the said comparison, which concernes the exclusion of the wicked from eternall life, is cleared by a Similitude: wherein, touching this point of vncapablenes of eternall glory, they are resembled vnto brute beasts. The said Similitude distinguished into her parts, is this:

                        
                           As the brute beasts die and rest vncapable of eternall life, vers. 21.
                        
                           So shall the wicked die and rest vncapable of eternall life, vers. 20.21. Whereas in this 21. verse it is said: A man in honour hauing no vnderstanding: we must take it for a description onely of the wicked, which haue bin spoken of throughout this Psalm. But withall it containes the cause that maketh the wicked vncapable of eternall life: which is the want of the knowledge and feare of God: which being in the wealthie and honourable wicked, is a barre betwixt heauen and them.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PSALM. 50.
               
                  A Psalme deliuered to Asaph. The mightie God, the God Iehoua hath spoken and called the earth from the rising vp of the Sunne, to the going downe thereof.
               
                  2 Out of Sion a place of most perfit beautie God shineth.
               
                  3 Our God will come and will not keepe silence. There shall

be a deuouring fire before him, and a mightie tempest round about him.
               
                  4 He calleth vpon the heauens aboue, and on the earth, that he may deliuer vnto his people what is law, saying:
               
                  5 Gather vnto me those who are my welbeloued, who haue made a couenant with me by sacrifice:
               
                  6 When the heauens declared his righteousnes, and God to be a soueraigne Iudge.
               
                  7 Heare O my people (saith he) and I will speake: heare O Israel, and I will contest with thee: I am God, euen thy God.
               
                  8 I will not reprooue thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt offrings, though they were not continually before me.
               
                  9 I will take no bullocke out of thine house, nor goates out of thy foldes.
               
                  10 For all beasts of the forrest are mine, and the beasts on a thousand mountaines.
               
                  11 I know all the fowles of the mountaines: and the wilde beasts of the field are mine.
               
                  12 If I should be hungrie, I would not tell thee: for the world is mine, and all that therein is.
               
                  13 Will I eate the flesh of buls, or drinke the blood of goates?
               
                  14 Offer vnto God praise: and pay thy vowes vnto the most high:
               
                  15 And call vpon me in the day of trouble: I will deliuer thee, that thou maist glorifie me.
               
                  16 But vnto the wicked, saith God: What hast thou to doe to declare mine ordinances, and to take my couenant in thy mouth?
               
                  17 Seeing thou hatest correction, and hast cast my words behinde thee.
               
                  18 When thou seest a theefe, thou runnest with him: and thou art partaker with the adulterers.
               
                  19 Thou giuest thy mouth to euill, and with thy tongue thou forgest deceit.
               
                  20 Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother: and slanderest thy mothers sonne.
               
                  21 Thou diddest these things: and because I held my tongue, thou thoughtest that I was like thee. But I will reprooue thee,

and set them in order before thine eyes.
               
                  22 Consider now this, ye that forget God: least I teare you in peeces, and there be none to deliuer you.
               
                  23 He that offereth praise, doth glorifie me: and who composeth his way, him will I cause to enioy the saluation of God.
               
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 50.
                  The Prophet in this Psalme representeth vnto vs the Lord our God in the quality of a Iudge sitting in his throne of Maiestie, & assisted with a most solemne assembly and presence of all creatures in heauen and earth: before whom as witnesses of his vpright and equall proceeding, hee disputeth and determineth a cause in controuersie betwixt himselfe and his people of Israel. The controuersie is this:

                        What that is, wherein the true worship of the Lord consisteth: whether it be the ceremoniall action of sacrificing, or the spirituall conformitie of the heart to the Lords will.
                     
                  
                  That we may the better conceiue what is deliuered in this Psalme, wee are to consider that there bee two parts thereof:

                        
                           The one, a preface: from the beginning of the first verse, to the end of the seuenth.
                        
                           The other, the Lords contestation with his people about the said controuersie: from the beginning of the 8. verse, to the end of the 23.
                     
                  
                  Touching the preface: the scope thereof is to shew, that there is iust cause why the Israelites ought with al attention and reuerence to heare the Lord, while he debateth this question of his worship with them. To induce them to this duty of all carefull and respectiue hearing, there are exhibited in the said preface two arguments:

                        
                        1. The first is, a description made by the Prophet of the Maiestie, wherewith the Lords comming into his most royall Court to define of the said controuersie, is accompanied vers. 1.2.3.4.5.6.
                        2. The second is, a motiue propounded, ver. 7. by the Lord himselfe, taken from the consideration of the singular mercie shewed by him vnto the Israelites.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Maiesty of the Lords comming into his iudiciall Court for the purpose mentioned, is by the Prophet set forth vnto vs by sundrie particulars, namely:

                        1. By a summarie report of his nature, vers. 1. Where he, who commeth as Iudge in this cause, is said to be, The mightie God, the God Iehoua: and therefore of infinite Maiestie.
                        2. By his action of summoning the solemne assemblie that is to be present at this iudgement, ver. 1. Where by these words, The Lord hath spoken and called the earth, the Prophet implieth that the Lord himself doth as it were in person solemnely summon the said assemblie.
                        3. By noting the greatnes of this assembly, vers. 1. and 4. Where it appeareth that all creatures on earth and in heauen also are summoned to furnish this solemne presence: that they might be witnesses of the Lords proceeding with his people.
                        4. By the magnificencie of the place, where the Lord is to sit as Iudge, and to shine in his glorie. This place is Sion, vers. 2. Where it is said: That out of Sion God shineth: that is, Sion is the place, out of which hee speaketh, and where he sheweth himselfe for the sentencing of the cause in question. That Sion is a place of magnificencie, it appeareth by this, in that it is called, a place of most perfit beautie: that is, a place which had the word and ordinances of the Lord, in which the beautie of his holinesse, power, wisedome, mercie and iustice was discerned and beheld.
                        
                           5. By the end of his comming as Iudge in this cause, vers. 3. and 4. In the third verse it is said, The Lord will come and not be silent: that is, will reproue his people, and deliuer vnto them (as it is said ver. 4.) what is law in the cause controuersed.
                        6. By the glorie of his power, vers. 3. Where, by these words (there shall be a deuouring fire before him and a mightie tempest) is expressed the mightie power of the Lord, whereby he is able to reuenge himselfe vpon the contempt of his Maiestie, and to frustrate all opposition against him.
                        7. By imparting with vs the formall course, which the Lord holdeth in citing the parties, namely, the Israelites, with whom he is to deale in this controuersie. The course he taketh for citing the said parties, doth consist:

                              1. In the summons made by himselfe of the apparitors, whom he is to imploy in this proper seruice of citing the said parties. The apparitors imployed in this seruice, are the creatures in heauen and earth, vers. 4.
                              2. In the charge and commission giuen by the Lord to the said apparitors for the seruice they are to performe, vers. 5. Where their commission and charge is noted to bee this, namely: to cite and draw together his people to an appearance before him. And least the said apparitors should faile in the performance of their charge by mistaking and citing one people for another: the Lord doth describe vnto them, vers. 5. the people that are to be cited. The description is this:

                                    1. They are such, whom the Lord hath honoured with the title of his welbeloued, vers. 5.
                                    2. They are such, as made a couenant

with the Lord, and confirmed it by interposing and offering of sacrifice, vers. 5. Now these actions of making and confirming the said couenant, are vers. 6. declared and distinguished by noting the time whē they were performed: which was foorthwith vpon the publication of the law: When the heauens did yeeld vnto the Lord this testimonie, that hee was a righteous God and the soueraigne Iudge of the world, vers. 6.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Thus you see the Description made by the Prophet of the Maiestie of the Lords comming to sit in iudgement vpon the cause in controuersie betwixt him and his people. And this is the first argument whereby to raise vp in the Israelites all attentiue and reuerent hearing of the Lord.
                  The second argument for this end and purpose, is a motiue propounded by the Lord himselfe, and concluded thus:

                        I who speake vnto thee (O Israel) am be, who hath couenanted with thee to bee a God of infinite mercie and fauour vnto thee, vers. 7. in the end. Where it is said: I am God, euen thy God. Which words doe import, that the Lord hath couenanted with his people to bestow vpon them the blessings of this and the future life.
                        
                        Therefore thou oughtest in dutie to heare me with all attention and reuerence, while I contest with thee and decide the cause in question betwixt vs, ver. 7. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  Hitherto of the preface of this Psalme. There followeth now to be considered, The Lords contestation with the Israelites about this questiō of his worship. Of the Lords contestation in this behalfe there be two parts:

                        
                        
                           The one, a refutation of their colourable pretences and allegations. From the beginning of the 8. verse to the end of the 13: and then from the beginning of the 16. verse to the end of the 21.
                        
                           The other, a pronouncing of sentence vpon the cause in controuersie: first interlocutorily, vers. 14. and 15: and then definitiuely, vers. 23.
                     
                  
                  Touching the refutation made by the Lord of their colourable pretences & allegations in this questiō of his worship by sacrifices: to the end we may the better discerne and iudge how the Lord manageth the same: wee must vnfold and lay to open view the said allegations and pretences: they being not here expressed, but implied and left to our collection by the answere that is made vnto them. The first pretence on the part of the Israelites for the iustifying of the worship they performe vnto the Lord in offering of sacrifices, is this:

                        If the worship we tender vnto thee in offring our sacrifices be hypocriticall and worthie of censure: thou wilt not reprooue our failing to offer them as often as is in thy law prescribed. For the omission of a sinfull act is not reprouable.
                        
                        But thou wilt reprooue our failing to offer sacrifices as often as is in thy law prescribed.
                        Therefore the worship we tender vnto thee in offring our sacrifices, is not hypocriticall and worthie of censure.
                     
                  
                  The Lords answere hereto is deliuered in the 8. verse: where by way of contradiction he doth publikely protest against the Assumption of this their first pretence, in this sort:

                        I will not (saith the Lord) reprooue thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt offrings, though they were not continually before me: that is, as often as is prescribed, vers. 8.
                        
                     
                  
                  This his protestation against the Assumption of the Israelites first pretence, the Lord by force of argument doth make good and iustifie after this manner:

                        
                        If I should reprooue thy failing in this behalfe, it might seeme I had neede to demaund and take sacrifices at thy hands.
                        But I haue no neede to demaund and take sacrifices at thy hands, vers. 9. That of this ninth verse the sense is such as I haue set downe, may appeare by the proofe thereof added in the two verses immediatly following.
                        
                        Therefore I will not reprooue thy failing in this behalfe, vers. 8.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption contained in this answere made by the Lord, is cleared by him:

                        1. First by this conclusion:
                           
                              
                                 Who is the Lord and owner of each sacrificeable creature in the world, hee needes not to demaund and take sacrifices at thy hands.
                              
                              
                                 But I Iehoua am the Lord and owner of each sacrificeable creature in the world, vers. 10.11.
                              
                                 Therefore I neede not to demaund and take sacrifices at thy hands, vers. 9.
                           
                        
                        2. Secondly, by preuenting and refelling an exception that may be taken by the Israelites to the said Assumption. For whereas the Lord professeth, that he hath no need to demand and take sacrifices at their hands, they may replie vpon him, thus:

                              
                                 Thou desirest sacrifices, and takest contentment in them.
                              
                              
                                 Therefore it is probable that thou wouldest be supplied with them at our hands.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The Lord in answere to this exception and replie of theirs,

                        1. First, sheweth the inconsequence presented by the Israelites in the said replie.
                        
                        2. Secondly, he doth vtterly disclaime the antecedent part of the said replie.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Touching the inconsequēce: the Lord discouereth and laieth open the same by an argument of Diuersitie, propounded in the beginning of the 12. verse, thus:

                           
                              If I desired sacrifices and took contentment in them: yet should I not need to demand and take a supplie of them at thy hands, v. 12. Where by the word, hungring, is signified the affection of desiring sacrifices: and by saying, I would not tell thee, is implied a resolution on the Lords part not to demaund any sacrifices of them. So as hee maketh the Israelites see hereby, that howsoeuer he should desire sacrifices, yet it followeth not that he would demand any at their hands.
                           But now to make this euident, that the Lord, though he desired sacrifices, yet neede not to demand them of the Israelites: he addeth and repeateth vers. 12, the reason which was before mentioned in the 10. and 11. verse. The reason is this:

                                 
                                    The soueraigne Lord of the earth and absolute commander of al the creatures therein, neede not take a supplie of sacrifices at thy hands, though he desired them.
                                 
                                 
                                    But I am the soueraigne Lord of the earth, and absolute commander of all the creatures therein, vers. 12. in the end.
                                 
                                    Therefore I neede not take a supplie of sacrifices from thee, though I desired them, ver. 12. in the beginning.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Touching the Lords disclaiming the Antecedent part of the said replie: he performeth it in the 13. verse vnder this interrogatorie forme of speech, deliuered with a shew of disdaine and detestation: Will I (saith he) eate the flesh of buls, or drinke the blood of goates? In which words, the Lord styleth and calleth his supposed desire of sacrifices and taking contentment in them, by the name of eating bullocks flesh, and drinking

of goates blood: shewing hereby, that he doth no lesse abhorre the desire of sacrifices and taking delight in them, than he doth the eating of bullocks flesh, and drinking the blood of goates. And thus he peremptorily denieth and renounceth the antecedent part of the said replie and exception made by the Israelites, as a most prophane and grosse conceit of him.
                  
                  The Lord hauing from the beginning of the 8. verse to the end of the 13 refuted som part of the Israelits allegations in defence of their sacrificing: he doth in the 14. and 15. vers. deliuer and pronounce his interlocutorie sentence: shewing what that is, wherein his true worship consisteth: which in generall is The Spirituall conformitie of our hart and life to the Lords will. The parts thereof here specified are these:

                        1. An acknowledgement of the Lords blessings, made
                           
                              1. By tendering praise vnto him, vers. 14. in the beginning.
                              2. By performance of vowes, vers. 14. in the end.
                           
                        
                        2. A calling vpon the Lord in the day of trouble, vers. 15. Now to this particular dutie of inuocation, the Lord perswadeth vs by his sweete and gratious promise of helpe and deliuerance, concluded thus:

                              
                                 If by calling on me thou shalt receiue deliuerance from thy trouble: then faile not to call vpon me.
                              
                              
                                 But by calling on mee thou shalt receiue at my hands deliuerance from thy trouble, vers. 15. in the middest.
                              
                                 Therefore faile not to call vpon me, vers. 15. in the beginning.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption, which containes the Lords comfortable promise of deliuerance, hath an illustration by noting the end of this deliuerance: which is this:

                        That the person deliuered may (to testifie his gratefull acknowledgement

of so great a blessing) praise and magnifie the power, wisedome, mercie and fidelitie of the Lord shewed in his deliuerance. This is it which is meant by that action of glorifying the Lord, vers. 15. in the end.
                        
                     
                  
                  The interlocutorie sentence being thus pronounced: the Israelites notwithstanding, as if they rested yet vnsatisfied in the question of the Lords worship; replie againe vpon the Lord in the behalfe of their sacrificing, thus:

                        Who alloweth our profession of obedience and pietie, must needes allow our sacrifices whereby the said profession is made.
                        But thou canst not but allow our profession of obedience and pietie.
                        Therefore thou must needes allow our sacrifices whereby the said profession is made.
                     
                  
                  In answere hereto, the Lord disavoweth the Assumption of this reply and reiecteth it as absolutely vntrue, protesting vnto the hypocriticall Isralites, v. 16: That their profession of pietie and obedience is very odious in his sight. And this I take to be the true meaning of the expostulation deliuered in the said 16. verse: where the Lord doth by way of detestation reprooue the Israelites, in that they being of a prophane and impious heart, doe notwithstanding in words and in the outward obseruances of sacrificing pretend great pietie: speaking with such respect and reuerence of the Lords word and couenant, as if their harts were free from all thought of impiety, and their actions of sacrificing conformable to the law of the Lord. Now why their profession of pietie and obedience should bee odious in his sight, the Lord rendreth this reason:

                        Who carrieth himselfe wickedly in the traine of his life, his profession of pietie is odious in my sight.
                        But thou, O Israel, carriest thy selfe wickedly in the traine of thy life, vers. 21. Where it is said: Thou diddest these things: that is, thou hast imployed

thy selfe in these wicked actions.
                        
                        Therefore thou art he whose profession of pietie is odious in my sight. vers. 16.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is cleared by the Lord, by laying forth in particularity sundry wicked actions committed by this hypocriticall crew of Israelites:

                        Thou canst not (saith the Lord) endure reproofe: and thou contemnest mine holy word, vers. 17: Thou doest consort with theeues and adulterers, partaking in their sinnes, vers. 18: Thy speech is wicked and deceitfull, vers. 19: Thou doest not spare to slander euen thine owne brother, vers. 20: Thou imaginest me the eternall Lord to patronize and allow this thy wickednes, vers. 21. in the middest.
                        
                        Therefore thou carriest thy selfe wickedly in the traine of thy life, vers. 21. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  The last particular sin, wherewith in the antecedent part of this reason, the Lord chargeth the said hypocritical crew, being set downe in the middest of the 21. verse, is there amplified,

                        1. By noting the cause of that impious imagination in the wicked. Now the cause which moueth the wicked man to imagine that the Lord fauoureth and alloweth his wickednes, is the Lords long patience and delay of punishment, vers. 21. in these words: Because I held my tongue: that is, because I spared thee a long time and forbare to punish thee: therefore thou thoughtest that I was like thee: that is, concurring with thee in the approbation of thy wickednes.
                        2. By setting downe the euent and issue, which the said imagination and this abuse on the part of the wicked of the Lords long sufferance, draweth with it. The said euent and issue is this: namely, The Lords proceeding in his good time to a reall punishment of their wickednes. This action the Lord expresseth by threatning vnto the wicked such a reproofe

and visible detection of their sinnes, such a representation and ranking of them before their eyes, as they shall be forced to acknowledge them without replying ought in their defence. This is then performed, when the Lord doth actually execute his iustice on the wicked.
                     
                  
                  Hitherto from the beginning of the 8. verse to the ende of the 21. (the 14. verse and 15. onely excepted, where the said interlocutorie sentence is recorded) hath the Lord deliuered his refutation of such colorable pretences and allegations, as the Israelites vsed in defence of the worship they performed in offering sacrifices.
                  There followeth now the Lords proceeding to definitiue sentence. But before the pronouncing thereof, hee addresseth vnto the Israelites an exhortation to obserue and consider seriously both what hath been already deliuered, and what the determination is hee makes of this question touching his worship. The said exhortation is inforced by the Lord, thus:

                        You shall perish, in case the cariage of the worship you are to present vnto me be disagreeable to the sentence pronounced thereon by me, ver. 22. in the end: where their perishing is expressed vnder these termes: Least I teare you in peeces, and there be none to deliuer you.
                        Therefore obserue and consider seriously the determination I make of this question touching my worship, vers. 22. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  This exhortation being premised: the Definitiue sentence followeth in the 23. verse, in these words:

                        He that offereth prayse, doth glorifie me: and who composeth his way, him will I cause to enioy the saluation of God. vers. 23.
                        
                     
                  
                  This definitiue sentence comprizeth a declaration of the particular, wherein the true worship of the Lord consisteth. To the end therefore that none might pretend ignorance in this question of the said worship: the Lord

doth here as cleerely distinguish and define wherein the said worship standeth, as if hee should pronounce and deliuer his definitiue sentence vnder this formall conclusion:

                        Whereby the Lord is truly worshipped, and whereto hee promiseth eternall happines, in that the true worship of the Lord consisteth.
                        But by the sacrifice of praise the Lord is truly worshipped, and to the conformitie of our heart and life vnto his will eternall happines is promised, vers. 23.
                        
                        Therefore in the sacrifice of praise, and in the conformitie of our heart and life vnto his will, the true worship of the Lord consisteth. This is it, whereto the Lord aimeth in his whole dispute with the Israelites in this Psalme.
                        
                     
                  
                  Whereas in the definitiue sentence it is auouched and notified, that the Lord is truly honoured by the offer and sacrifice of praise: we are vnder the name of this one part of the Lords worship, to conceiue as meant, each other part and duty of spirituall obedience vnto God, whereby we doe him this honor, as to confesse and acknowledge to the glory of his name that he is the God, by whom all things in heauen and earth are disposed and ordered in wisedome, power, mercy and iustice: and that in regard thereof we owe vnto him all reuerent acknowledgement and seruice whatsoeuer.
               
            
            
               PSALM. 51.
               
                  1 TO the Master of the Quier, a Psalme of Dauid:
               
                  2 When the Prophet Nathan had been with him, after his entrance into Bathshebah.
               
                  3 Haue mercie vpon me, O God, according to thy louing kindnes: according to the greatnes of thy compassions, blot out mine iniquities.
               
                  
                  4 Wash me throughly from mine iniquitie, and clense me from my sinne.
               
                  5 For I acknowledge mine iniquities: and my sinne is alway before me.
               
                  6 Against thee, against thee onely haue I sinned and done euill in thy sight: that thou maist be knowne to be iust in thy speaking, and pure when thou iudgest.
               
                  7 Behold, I was formed in iniquitie: and in sinne hath my mother conceiued me.
               
                  8 Behold, thou louest truth in the inward affections: and thou hast taught me wisedome in the secret of mine heart.
               
                  9 Purge me with hyssope and I shall be cleane: wash me and I shall be whiter than snow.
               
                  10 Make me to heare ioy and gladnes: that the bones, which thou hast broken, may reioyce.
               
                  11 Hide thy face frō my sins, & rase out all mine iniquities.
               
                  12 Create in me a cleane heart, O God: and renew a constant spirit within me.
               
                  13 Cast me not away from thy face: and take not thine holy spirit from me:
               
                  14 Restore vnto me the ioy of thy saluation: and support me with thy free spirit.
               
                  15 I will teach thy waies vnto the wicked, that sinners may be conuerted vnto thee.
               
                  16 Deliuer me from blood O God, the God of my saluation: and my tongue shall sing ioyfully thy righteousnes.
               
                  17 Thou shalt open my lips O Lord: and my mouth shall shew foorth thy praise.
               
                  18 For thou delightest not in sacrifice: otherwise would I giue it: thou delightest not in burnt offring.
               
                  19 The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a contrite and broken heart, O God, thou despisest not.
               
                  20 Be fauourable vnto Sion according to thy good will: build the walles of Ierusalem.
               
                  21 Then shalt thou take pleasure in the sacrifices of righteousnes, the burnt offring and oblation: then shall they offer calues vpon thine altar.
               
                  
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 51.
                  The inscription of this Psalme doth particularlie aduertise vs,

                        1. Of the author thereof, namely, Dauid: and of the person, vnto whose charge it was committed to order the singing of the same, vers. 1.
                        2. Of the
                           
                              
                                 time when the said Psalme was indited.
                              
                              
                                 occasion whereupon the said Psalme was indited.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The time of inditing the said Psalme, was shortly after the Lord had addressed the Prophet Nathan vnto Dauid, to reprooue and conuince him of his adultery with Bathshebah, and of his murther in the person of Vriah.
                  
                  The occasion of inditing it, was the reproofe and conuiction performed by the said Prophet. For Dauid being drawne thereby to a serious consideration of the sayd sinnes: to the end he might leaue to the Church of God a testimony of his repentance, and a direction both to Prince and subiect how to demeane themselues in the case of any their transgressions against the Lord: thought meete to indite and divulge this most worthie Psalme.
                  Now in the said Psalme the Prophet Dauid tendereth vnto the Lord his humble sute:

                        1. For himselfe. From the beginning of the 3. verse to the end of the 19.
                        2. For the Church and common-wealth of Israel, verse 20.21.
                     
                  
                  The sute he maketh for himselfe, is partly

                        1. For pardon of his sins, vers. 3.4.9.11.16.
                        2. For restitution to his former estate
                           
                              
                                 Of inward grace and sanctification, v. 12.
                              
                                 Of outward fauors & prerogatiues, v. 13.14
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  These seuerall sutes he maketh for himselfe, he tendreth first singly, and soliciteth each of them in a peculiar sort:

then hee propoundeth them ioyntly, and pleadeth in common for the grant of them all, vers. 15.16.17.18.19.
                  The request he maketh for pardon of his sinnes, is expressed in these different formes of speech:

                        1. Be mercifull vnto me in blotting out mine iniquities, as it were out of the booke of debt and account, wherein thou hast recorded them, vers. 3.
                        2. Wash and clense me from my sin, vers. 4. to note that sinne is meerly pollution and filthines.
                        3. Purge me from my sinne with hyssope, vers. 9. that is, by the blood of the Messias: the sprinkling wherof vpon vs for the purgation of our sinnes, was represented by the ceremonial sprinkling of hyssope.
                        4. Hide thy face from my sinne, vers. 11.
                        5. Deliuer mee from blood, vers. 16. that is, from the guilt of my bloodie sinnes, and from the particular punishment due vnto them.
                     
                  
                  Howsoeuer it hath pleased the Prophet to deliuer his sute for the remission of his iniquities, in this varietie of phrase: we must know that he doth in each of them comprehend this sense:

                        Be mercifull vnto me for the pardon of my sinnes, vers. 3.4.9.11.16.
                        
                     
                  
                  Let vs now see how hee pleadeth with the Lord for the graunt of this pardon. To perswade the Lord hereto, he vseth sundrie arguments. The first whereof is this:

                        Arg. 1
                        Thou art O Lord of a nature gratious, and abounding in compassion, vers. 3. in the middest.
                        
                        Therefore accordingly thereto be mercifull vnto me for the pardon of my sinnes, vers. 3. in the beginning and end.
                        
                     
                  
                  Hauing remembred vnto the Lord the exceeding goodnes and gratiousnesse of his nature, with request that the Lord would answerably thereto proceede with him: now least some exception might be taken against him for impenitencie and disacknowledgement of his offence: the

Prophet doth acquaint the Lord how hee demeaneth himselfe in this behalfe: namely, that he doth with griefe of heart humbly confesse and acknowledge his iniquities. Which confession he maketh as hauing a speciall eye and regard to the Lords promise of mercie in the case of our returne vnto him by vnfained confession and humiliation. Out of this argument hee pleadeth thus with the Lord for remission of his sinnes:

                        Arg. 2.
                        Who with a sensible feeling and griefe for his sinnes doth humbly confesse and acknowledge them: vnto him (O Lord) it may please thee to be mercifull in the pardon of his sins. This is the Lords promise in effect.
                        
                        But I with a sensible feeling and griefe for my sins, do humbly confesse and acknowledge them, vers. 5.6.
                        
                        Therefore it may please thee to be mercifull vnto me in the pardon of them, vers. 3.4.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is by the Prophet amplified diuersly:

                        1. By noting the end of this his confession: which is, that it may thereby appeare how iustly the Lord hath proceeded with Dauid, both in reproouing him for his sinne by the Prophet Nathan, and in punishing him by the death of his child, vers. 6. in the later part: where it is said: That thou maist be knowne to be iust in thy speaking, that is, in thy reproofe of me made by Nathan: and pure when thou iudgest: that is, found vpright in thy proceeding with me, when thou diddest punish me in the person of my childe.
                        2. By setting downe the very roote and spring of the sinnes confessed by him: namely, the originall corruption of his nature: whereof he confesseth himselfe guiltie, euen then when he was formed and cherished in the wombe of his mother, vers. 7.
                        3. By declaring the forme and manner of committing the sinnes confessed: which was wittingly and with knowledge, vers. 8. Where the Prophet to aggrauate his sinne, acknowledgeth,

                              
                              
                                 That the Lord not onely requireth at his hands an vpright cariage of life, as things which he loueth and delighteth in (which is expressed by saying, that the Lord loueth truth in the inward affections, that is, hee loueth and requireth the integritie of the heart, and a cariage answerable thereto.)
                              
                              
                                 But had also acquainted him with the knowledge of that which he loueth and requireth. For the wisedome which the Lord taught him in the secret of his heart, was the knowledge hereof: namely, that the Lord required at his hands a forbearance of all sinfull actions, and particularly of murder and adulterie: as also a performance of such holie duties as are commaunded in the lawe. Now the Prophets confession of his knowledge in this behalfe, doth necessarilie implie a like confession of committing wittingly and wilfully the sinnes, for the pardon whereof he is an humble suter.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Dauid hauing added to the acknowledgement of his sinnes in generall, a partticular confession of the ende, for which he acknowledgeth them: of the roote and fountaine, from whence they issued: of the forme and manner also of committing them: doth further in all humblenes inforce his sute for the remission of the same, thus:

                        Arg. 3.
                        If by thy remitting of my sinnes I shall subsist before thee in a condition and estate of righteousnesse: I pray thee let me finde fauour at thy hands for the remission of them.
                        But by thy remitting of my sinnes I shall subsist before thee in a condition and estate of righteousnes, vers. 9. Where in saying, that being purged and washed from his sinne, he shall be cleane and whiter than snow: he noteth the estate and condition that succeedeth and followeth the remoue and pardon of our vnrighteousnes. And

this estate in the account of the Lord, who vnto the true beleeuer imputeth no sin, but holdeth him for righteous in Christ, is an estate of righteousnes.
                        
                        Therefore I pray thee (O Lord) let me finde fauour at thy hands for the remission of them, vers. 3.4.9.
                        
                     
                  
                  To the Assumption there is yeelded this declaration:

                        1. From the efficient cause both of the pardon desired, and of the righteousnesse ensuing thereupon: which is the sprinkling of the blood of the Messias, figured by the ceremoniall sprinkling of hyssope, vers. 9. in the beginning.
                        2. From a double comparison: for in the said 9. verse:
                           
                              
                                 First, he compareth the righteousnes spoken of, to the puritie and beautie that followeth vpon purging and clensing. The comparison being in her parts laid foorth, is this:

                                    
                                       As he that is purged and washed becommeth cleane and faire:
                                    
                                    
                                       So I the Prophet being purged from my sin, shall become righteous.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 Secondly, he compareth the said righteousnes to the whitenes of snow, vers. 9. in the end: where hee maketh the degree of perfection in the sayd righteousnesse to exceede the perfection of whitenes in snow. The comparison is this:

                                    
                                       The perfection of whitenes in snow is in a very high degree:
                                    
                                    
                                       But the perfection of the righteousnesse, which will befall vnto me vpon the remoue of my sinne from me, will be in an higher degree and measure.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The Prophet being exceedinglie afflicted aswell with griefe in that he had displeased the Lord, as with the consideration of the iudgements denounced by Nathan against his sinnes: and being desirous to be relieued in this behalfe out of some special knowledge and assurance in his

heart, that the Lord is reconciled vnto him: doth by way of amplifying the sute for remission of his sins, accompanie the same in the 10. verse with interposing this request:

                        That the Lord would be pleased not onely to be reconciled vnto him, but assure him likewise hereof, vers. 10.
                        
                     
                  
                  This motion for some assurance in his heart, that the Lord hath remitted his iniquities, is propounded and deliuered in these termes: Make me to heare ioy and gladnes. As by hearing, he meaneth such a knowledge as may assure him: so by ioy and gladnes, hee vnderstandeth the pardon and reconcilement it selfe, whereof he is desirous to bee assured. This reconcilement he calleth by the name of ioy and gladnes, to note the comfortable effect, which it worketh in the heart of an humbled and penitent sinner.
                  Now this motion for assurance in his heart of pardon and reconcilement on the Lords part, hee enlargeth and vrgeth in the 10. verse by a consideration taken from this particular end thereof: namely,

                        That as hee hath been deiected and broken both with griefe for his sinne, and with feare of the iudgements denounced against him:
                        So he may vpon assurance in his heart of the Lords reconcilement with him, take speciall ioy and comfort in his ancient loue and fauour towards him, vers. 10. Where the Prophet resembleth the breaking of his heart with griefe, to the breaking of his bones by any force and violence.
                        
                     
                  
                  Hitherto from the beginning of the 3 verse to the end of the 11, the Prophet hath by sundrie reasons mediated with the Lord the pardon of his sinnes. Now followeth the humble motion he maketh for restitution vnto his former estate:

                        1. Of inward grace and sanctification.
                        
                        2. Of outward fauours and prerogatiues.
                        
                     
                  
                  For restitution vnto his former estate of sanctification, hee

deliuereth his motion vnder these termes:

                        Create in me a cleane heart O God: and renew within me a constant spirit, vers. 12.
                        
                     
                  
                  The thing requested in this motion, is a reuiuing of his former holy desire and care to serue the Lord euer after in obedience of hart & life. This reuiuing of the said desire and care he calleth the creating of a cleane heart in the first part of the verse: and the renewing of a constant spirit in the latter part thereof. Dauid had vpon his fall so little sense and feeling of the grace of sanctification, as that hee speakes as if he had vtterly lost it, and so stood in need of a new infusion and creation thereof: whereas it was not vtterly extinguished, but exceedingly impayred and decayed onely: as may appeare in that by way of interpretation he calleth it in the latter patt of the verse, a renouation and raising thereof to the same degree wherein it was in former time.
                  
                  This reuiuing of his former holie desire and care to serue the Lord, the Prophet describeth vnto vs:

                        1. By noting the principall efficient and author thereof: who is God.
                        
                        2. By declaring the subiect, wherein it is: namely, the heart.
                        
                        3. By implying the forme and manner of working it: which is, by a course of purging and clensing the heart.
                        
                        4. By shewing, that he would haue this grace of renouation (which he calleth a constant spirit) permanent and firme, not subiect to alteration. So as here withall is implied the end of the said renouation: namely, That he may euer without defection honor God.
                        
                     
                  
                  His petition to bee restored vnto his former estate of outward fauours and prerogatiues, is conteined verse 13. and 14. in these words:

                        Cast me not away from thy face: and take not thine holie spirit from me: but restore vnto me the ioy of thy saluation, and support me with thy free spirit, vers. 13.14.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     It seemes that in presenting of this motion, the Prophet had a reference to the Lords proceeding with Saul, whō he cast off, and from whom he retyred the graces of his spirit. And therefore by these words (thy face, thy holy spirit, the ioy of thy saluation) I take to be meant the outward testimonies and prerogatiues of the Lords kinde and fauourable proceeding with Dauid, in which hee was wont to reioyce: namely,

                        1. The place of the Lords worship, whereto he resorted.
                        
                        2. The continuance of the Scepter in his person and the line of his posteritie.
                        
                        3. His abilitie to manage the duties of his calling in the said Scepter.
                        
                        4. The loue and obedience of his subiects towards him.
                        
                        5. Good successe in the courses held by him.
                        
                        6. The Lords protection of him.
                        
                     
                  
                  These graces and fauours are the Lords face, the Lords spirit, the ioy of the Lords saluation: which the Prophet by desert on his part, and by the rule of iustice on the Lords part, had forfeited and lost: howsoeuer in act and by the Lords most gratious sufferance, he enioyed them as yet. And therefore discerning in his heart of the forfeiture he had made in this behalfe, prayeth the Lord in the thirteenth verse: That neither himselfe may be remoued from them, nor they withdrawne from him: But that the Lord would be pleased (as he prayes, vers. 14.) to restore and confirme vnto him his former title and interest in them: and so by the power of his spirit support him in the comfortable and free enioyance of the said prerogatiues.
                  
                  Hereby we plainly discerne what is the subiect of the Prophets petition in this place: namely, That whereas in desert on his part, and by the law of iustice on the part of the Lord, he had forfeited the said fauours and prerogatiues:

                        The Lord notwithstanding would be pleased to reconfirme vnto him his former title and interest in them, and support him in the enioyance of the same, vers. 14.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     This sute he handleth and amplifieth:

                        1. By an argument of Diuersitie, thus:
                           
                              
                                 Remoue me not from the said fauours and prerogatiues, nor retire them from me, vers. 13.
                              
                                 But reconfirme vnto me my former interest in them, and support me in the enioyance of them, vers. 14.
                           
                        
                        2. By noting the efficient cause, whereby this reconfirmation and support is to be performed: namely, the free, cheerefull, and comfortable spirit of the Lord: which doth infranchise vs into the state of the Lords children, and doth intertaine vs therein.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Prophet hauing singly and in seuerall made tender vnto the Lord of his humble sute, first for pardon of his sin: and then, that he may be restored and reinuested into his former estate aswell of inward grace and sanctification, as of outward fauours and prerogatiues: he doth now ioyntly and in common plead for graunt of the whole sute he maketh for himselfe in this Psalme. His sute for himselfe considered ioyntly in all the parts thereof, is now this:

                        That the Lord would be pleased to grant him both pardon of his sinne, and restitution also into his former estate aswell of inward grace as outward fauours, vers. 16.
                        
                     
                  
                  This ioynt sute for these three particulars I take to be specially meant and deliuered in the 16. verse. For whereas he saith: Deliuer me O God from blood: his sute may well be interpreted to be this; That the Lord would not onely remit vnto him his sinne: but remit likewise this particular punishment due vnto his sinne: namely, the forfeiture he hath made aswell of the measure he had of inward grace, as of the outward prerogatiues aboue remembred.
                  To perswade the Lord to yeeld him contentment herein; the Prophet acquaints him with a double resolution hee hath in his heart, wherby to glorifie him. For vpon grant of this whole sute, he professeth:

                        
                        1. That he will further the instruction and conuersion of others vnto the Lord, vers. 15.
                        2. That he will publish and magnifie the Lords fidelitie in keeping promise with his children, vers. 16.17.
                     
                  
                  The first duty which he professeth to performe for glorifying the Lord, is concluded thus:

                        If vpon obtaining mercie at thy hands for pardon of my sinne, and for restitution into my said former estate, I shall be drawne to glorifie thee by furthering the instruction and conuersion of others vnto thee: it may please thee (O Lord) to graunt vnto me the pardon and restitution desired by me.
                        But vpon obtaining mercie at thy hands for pardon of my sinne, and for restitution into my said former estate, I shall and will glorifie thee by furthering the instruction and conuersion of others vnto thee, v. 15. Where the conuersion of others to the profession of the Lords name is set downe as an end: and the instruction of others as a special meane wherby to attaine vnto the said end.
                        
                        Therefore it may please thee (O Lord) to grant vnto me the pardon and restitution desired by me, vers. 16.
                        
                     
                  
                  The second duty he professeth to performe, and by performance whereof he would moue the Lord to a compassionate regard of his sute, hath this conclusion:

                        In case thou shew mercie vnto me for the pardon of my sinne, and for restitution into my said former estate: thou shalt thereby open my lips to publish and magnifie thy fidelitie in keeping promise with thy children. vers. 16. and 17.
                        
                        Wherefore (O Lord) it may please thee to shew mercie vnto me for the pardon of my sinne, and for restitution into my said former estate, vers. 16. in the begin.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Antecedent part of this reason, which containes a profession on the part of the Prophet, of setting forth the praise of the Lords fidelitie in keeping promise with his children, is handled and enlarged thus:

                        
                        
                           I will, in case thou shew vnto me the mercie desired, offer vnto thee either sacrifice or praise.
                        
                        
                           But I will not offer sacrifice vnto thee, vers. 18. in the middest. Where he saith: Otherise would I giue sacrifice vnto thee: that is, Forasmuch as thou delightest not in sacrifice, but doest reiect it, I will offer no sacrifice vnto thee.
                        
                           Therefore will I offer praise vnto thee, vers. 16. and 17. In the 16. he affirmeth that his tongue shall sing the Lords righteousnes and fidelitie in keeping promise. In the 17. he professeth that he wil open his lips and set foorth the Lords praise in this behalfe.
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is cleered by this argument:

                        Sacrifice is not pleasing vnto thee, vers. 18. in the beginning and end.
                        
                        Therefore I will not offer it, vers. 18. in the middest.
                        
                     
                  
                  To the Antecedent of this reason there is yeelded this euidence:

                        
                           That which in thy seruice is pleasing vnto thee, is accompanied with an humble and contrite heart, ver. 19 Where this sentence is twice expressed: thereby to assure vs that a contrite heart is pleasing vnto the Lord. And whereas it is called, The sacrifices of God: it is to note the worthines thereof, and the excellent measure it hath of pleasing God.
                        
                           But sacrifice is not accompanied with an humble and contrite heart. This sentence is not here set down: but omitted as a sinne knowne and obserued as well out of the practise in those daies on the part of the prophane and hypocriticall Israelites, as out of the publike reproofe and reiection made by the Lord of the ordinarie sacrifices presented vnto him, as being odious in his sight.
                        
                           Therefore sacrifice is not pleasing vnto thee, ver. 18.
                     
                  
                  Hitherto from the beginning of vers. 3. to the end of the 19, the Prophet hath been an humble and affectionate petitioner

for himselfe. Now he becomes an earnest suter vnto the Lord for the Church and common wealth of Israel. The effect of his sute is this: that whereas the heinousnes of his transgressions had iustly occasioned the Lord in iustice to withdraw his fauour from the people vnder Dauids gouernement:

                        The Lord would be pleased, notwithstanding his sinnes, to aduance the publike good of the Church and common wealth of Israel, vers. 20. in the beginning and end.
                        
                     
                  
                  Whether this publike good desired by the Prophet vnder these formes of speech (be fauourable vnto Sion: build the walles of Ierusalem) be the raysing vp and furnishing of a setled place for the Lords worship, or a gracious protection of the Church and common wealth, or a supplying of either of them with carefull officers, is not agreed vpon. It shalbe sufficient to know that the Prophet is in generall a suter that the state of the Church and common wealth may prosper and flourish, through a supply made by the Lord of all needfull blessings. To induce the Lord hereto the Prophet alleageth two arguments:
                  The first is this:

                        
                           Thou art of a nature gratious, and abounding in mercie towards thy people, vers. 20. in the middest; and in these words: According to thy good will: that is, Forasmuch as thou art in nature most gratiouslie and fauourably disposed: therefore be gratious vnto Sion.
                        
                        
                           Wherefore (O Lord) aduance the publike good of thy people both in the Church and common-wealth, v. 20. in the beginning and end. Where by Sion wee may vnderstand the Church, and by Ierusalem the Common-wealth.
                     
                  
                  The second argument, whereby to perswade the Lord in this behalfe, is drawne from the consideration of the effect, which will ensue vpon the Lords gracious proceeding with the Church and common wealth. And it is indeede a profession and vow on King Dauids part, to

take order that the people vnder his gouernement shall present vnto the Lord such worship and seruice, as shall be pleasing and acceptable in his sight. His mediation with the Lord by force of this argument is concluded thus:

                        
                           If vpon thy aduancing of the publike good of the Church and common-wealth, the honour and worship of thy name shall withall be promoted: then it may please thee (O Lord) to aduance the publike good of the Church and common-wealth.
                        
                        
                           But vpon thy aduancing of the publike good of the Church and common-wealth, the honour and worship of thy name shall withall be promoted, vers. 21. Where the said honour and worship is called by the name of righteous sacrifices, burnt offrings, oblation, offring of calues. Now when this honour and worship is such as the Lord is pleased and delighted therewith: it is apparant that then the seruice and worship of his name is greatlie aduanced. So as, where the Prophet saith that the Lord shall then take pleasure in sacrifices, accompanied with the vprightnes and integritie of the heart: his purpose thereby is to notifie vnto vs, that then the Lords worship and seruice shall be much promoted.
                        
                           Therefore it may please thee (O Lord) to aduance the publike good of the Church & common wealth. v. 20.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PSALM. 73.
               
                  1 A Psalme of Asaph. Yet God is good to Israel: euen to the pure in heart.
               
                  2 As for me: my feete were almost gone: my steps had well neere slipt.
               
                  3 For I fretted at the foolish, when I saw the prosperitie of the wicked.
               
                  
                  4 For there are no knots euen vnto their death: but they are lustie and strong.
               
                  5 They are not in trouble as other men: neither are they beaten with other men.
               
                  6 Therefore pride doth compasse them as a chaine: and crueltie couereth them as a garment.
               
                  7 Their eyes stand out for fatnes. The thoughts of their hart doe passe throughout.
               
                  8 They are pernicious: and speake maliciously of oppressing: they speake as from on high.
               
                  9 They set their mouth against heauen: and their tongue walketh through the earth.
               
                  10 Therefore his people come to this point, when waters of a full cup are wrung out vnto them:
               
                  11 That they say: How? doth the mightie God know this? or is there knowledge in the most high?
               
                  12 Behold these wicked men: how being at their ease in this world, they encrease in riches.
               
                  13 Certainly, in vaine haue I clensed my heart and washed my hands in innocencie:
               
                  14 Sith I am daily punished, and chastned euery morning.
               
                  15 But if I say: I will thus speake thereof: behold, I shall be found disloyall to the generation of thy children.
               
                  16 If I endeuoured to know this: it seemed vnto me a verie hard thing:
               
                  17 Vntill I entred into the Sanctuarie of the mightie God, and there vnderstood their end.
               
                  18 Surely, thou hast set them in slipperie places: thou doest cast them downe into desolation.
               
                  19 How suddenly are they destroyed, perished and consumed fearfully?
               
                  20 They are as a dreame when one awaketh. O Lord, when thou awakest, thou contemnest their image.
               
                  21 When my heart was vexed, and I tormented my selfe in my reines,
               
                  22 Then was I foolish: when I was ignorant, I was as a beast before thee.
               
                  
                  23 Therefore will I be alway with thee. Thou hast held me by my right hand.
               
                  24 Thou wilt guide me by thy counsell, and after receiue me into glorie.
               
                  25 Whom haue I in heauen but thee? and I delight in none on earth besides thee.
               
                  26 When my flesh and my heart faile, God is the strength of mine heart, and my portion for euer.
               
                  27 For behold: they that withdraw themselues from thee, shall perish: thou cuttest off all those that goe a whoring from thee.
               
                  28 As for me: to draw neere vnto God, it is my happines. I doe put my trust in the Lord, that I may declare all thy workes.
               
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 73.
                  The Prophet doth recount vnto vs in this Psalme the issue of a conflict and dispute he had betwixt the Spirit and the flesh. The question disputed was this:

                        Whether God were good to Israel: that is (as it is vers. 1. expounded) to such as out of a sanctified heart desire to honour him.
                     
                  
                  The issue of the said conflict and dispute, is a double conclusion inferred by the Spirit:

                        The one: that God is good to Israel, vers. 1.
                        
                        The other: a profession of perpetuall dependance on God in regard thereof, vers. 23. where it is said: Therefore will I be alway with thee: that is, I will in regard of thy gratious proceeding with thy children, euer rest vpon thee.
                        
                     
                  
                  Touching the former conclusion: The Prophet doth grace the very front of this Psalme therewith: And afterward he setteth downe the reason and ground thereof. But before hee impart with vs the ground of this first issue and conclusion; he reporteth vnto vs:

                        
                        1. The discourse of the flesh: from the beginning of the 2. verse vnto the 15.
                        2. The course held by him, whereby he was resolued touching the point in question, vers. 15.16.17.
                     
                  
                  In the discourse made by the flesh, hee deliuereth vnto vs these two effects thereof:

                        1. That himselfe was almost drawne to hold the negatiue of the question aboue mentioned. For shewing vers. 2. that his feete had almost slipt, he meaneth that his heart had almost slipt into this prophane conceit, that the Lord was not good to Israel: which is the negatiue of the question.
                        2. That many of the Lords children did actually hold the negatiue of the said question: namely, That God was not good to Israel, vers. 10.
                     
                  
                  Concerning this point: That himselfe was almost drawne to hold the negatiue of the said question, we are to consider:

                        1. How the Prophet expresseth his readie inclination thereto.
                        
                        2. The ground and inducement of his holding the said negatiue.
                        
                     
                  
                  His ready inclination to apprehend, that the Lord is not good to Israel, hee expresseth by certaine borowed formes of speech carrying a comparison, which being vnfolded and distinguished into his parts, will be this:

                        Euen as he who treadeth on a slipperie place, hardly staieth his steps from slipping:
                        So in this question of the Lords kindnes and regard to his children, my heart had almost slipt into this impious apprehension, That hee was not gratious and good vnto them, vers. 2.
                        
                     
                  
                  The ground and inducement of holding this negatiue, That the Lord doth not in mercie regard his Israel, is this particular discourse intertained by the flesh, and concluded thus:

                        
                        
                           If the wicked alwaies enioy prosperitie, and the godly endure affliction: it may hereby appeare that the Lord is not good vnto his children, howsoeuer they honour and serue him.
                        
                        
                           But the wicked alway enioy prosperitie, and the godly endure affliction, vers. 3.4.5. As in each of these verses the prosperitie of the wicked is noted: so in the 5, together with the prosperitie of the wicked, there is set downe the affliction of the godly: who are there said to be in trouble and to bee beaten: whereas the wicked are free from this lot.
                        
                           Therefore it may hereby appeare that the Lord is not good vnto his children, howsoeuer they honour and serue him. This conclusion is implied in the second verse. For that conceit whereinto the Prophet had almost slipt, which was, that God was not good vnto Israel, is the conclusion made and deduced by the flesh in this place.
                     
                  
                  The Assumption of this discourse, namely the former branch thereof which concernes the prosperitie of the wicked, is diuersly amplified:

                        1. By noting the effect, which the obseruation of the sayd prosperitie wrought in the Prophet. The effect was, the Prophets grieuing thereat, vers. 3.
                        2. By laying foorth the parts of the said prosperitie, which are these:
                           
                              1. The perpetuall tenor of health in the wicked to their last gaspe, vers. 4. Where this part of prosperitie is represented vnto vs by a comparison included in this word, knots or tyings. The comparison is this:

                                    
                                       As a web or thred drawn into length by the weauer without knot or breach: so is their health carried vnto the end of their daies without any interruption by diseases.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 2. The vigor and strength of their bodie ioyned to their health, vers. 4. in the end.
                              3. Their freedome from the discomforts and miseries, whereto the godly are subiect, ver. 5. Hereby is implied their enioyance of all other parts of prosperitie, viz. worldlie peace, reputation amongst men, honours and offices, plentie of wealth and delicacies.
                           
                        
                        3. By relating the effects, which the said prosperitie hath wrought in the heart of the wicked: by particulating whereof there is presented vnto vs a liuely description of the wicked:
                           
                              1. In generall, by noting their excesse in pride and crueltie.
                              
                              2. In speciall, by declaring the effects of their pride and crueltie.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Their excesse in pride and cruelty is recorded v. 6. and in the first part of the 7. In these verses their excesse in these two great sinnes is laid open vnto vs by seuerall comparisons:

                        First, the greatnes of their pride is noted by comparing it to a chaine of gold or precious stones, partly in the point of the exceeding lustre & glittering the chaine hath: and partly in regard of the large reach and compassing that the chaine is able to make.
                        Secondly, the greatnes of their crueltie is noted, by comparing it to a goodly garment that couers the whole bodie.
                        Thirdly, the swelling of their heart with pride and crueltie, is compared vers. 7. to a face swollen and puft with fatnes.
                     
                  
                  By these comparisons the Prophet would make it appeare that the pride and crueltie of the wicked is in so great a measure, as that a man can discerne nought else in them but pride and cruelty.
                  The description of the wicked in speciall from the effects of their pride and cruelty, is this:

                        
                        1. In their thoughts and wishes they embrace and appropriate to themselues the whole world, vers. 7. in the end.
                        2. They worke ruine vnto others, vers. 8. in the beginning.
                        3. The subiect of their speech is, how they may maliciously plot the oppression of others, vers. 8. in the middest.
                        4. They speake bigly and pontifically, as if they would terrifie all men with their thundring orations, vers. 8. in the end.
                        5. They disgorge blasphemies against God, and contumelies against men, as if they would domineere ouer heauen and earth, vers. 9.
                     
                  
                  Hitherto from the beginning of the 2. verse to the ende of the 9, the Prophet hath shewed that himselfe had almost slipt into this prophane conceit of the Lords disregard and neglect of his children, being led thereto by the discourse intertained by the wisedome of the flesh.
                  He is now vers. 10. to aduertise vs of that other effect, which the discourse of the flesh hath wrought in many other the Lords children, who also are drawen thereby to apprehend and hold, That the Lord is not gracious to Israel, but hath cast off all care and regard of such as sincerely worship him. For in the 10. and 11. verse it is said to this effect:

                        The Lords people also are come to this point (when they drink of the cup of affliction that is reached vnto them) that they say: The mightie God taketh no knowledge or care how it succeedeth with men.
                     
                  
                  The ground of this apprehension in the Lords children, the Prophet setteth downe to be this discourse of the flesh: which in effect is the same with the discourse aboue remembred:

                        If the Lord tooke notice and care how it succeeded with vs, the wicked who hate him should not enioy prosperitie, nor the godly who loue him lose their labour in seruing him.
                        
                           But the wicked who hate him enioy prosperitie, vers. 12: and the godly who loue him lose their labour in seruing him, vers. 13.
                        
                        Therefore the Lord doth not take notice or care how it succeedeth with vs, vers. 11: where this conclusion is deliuered by way of an interrogation.
                        
                     
                  
                  The latter part of the Assumption, which concernes the supposed losse of labour in seruing the Lord, is manifested thus:

                        Whom the Lord doth daily afflict, they lose their labour in seruing him.
                        But the godly are daily afflicted by the Lord, vers. 14. This is touched likewise in the end of the 10. verse.
                        
                        Therefore the godlie lose their labour in seruing him. vers. 13.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Prophet hauing from the beginning of the second verse to the 15, deliuered vnto vs ye discourse of the flesh, together with the effect wrought thereby aswell in himselfe as in sundrie other the Lords children: doth now verse 15.16.17. acquaint vs with the course hee held, whereby to resolue himselfe touching the maine point in question, namely: Whether the Lord were good vnto his children.
                  
                  The course held by the Spirite for resolution in the said maine question of the Lords affection to his people, was the Prophets recourse vnto the Sanctuarie: that is, to the Lords holy word laid vp and reserued in the Sanctuarie, verse. 17: where hee doth apparantly confesse these two things: the one, his entrance into the Sanctuarie: the other, the information receiued there how the Lord stood affected both to the wicked and to the godly: to the wicked as a seuere Iudge: to the godly as a kind and gracious father, euer regarding their good. Of this nature and reach must we conceiue the said information to bee (as may appeare by the verses going before and following) howsoeuer it seeme to concerne the wicked only, in that they alone are mentioned in the 17. verse.
                  
                     Now this course of repairing vnto the Sanctuary, there to be resolued in the said question of the Lords affection to his people, had this discourse in the hart of the Prophet for the ground thereof:

                        I must iudge of the Lords affection to his people either by his outward proceedings with them, or by the light of his word in the Sanctuarie.
                        But not by his outward proceedings with them, v. 15.16.
                        
                        Therefore by the light of his word in the Sanctuarie, vers. 17. Vpon this discourse as vpon a good warrant and ground, he repaireth vnto the Sanctuary for the purpose aforesaid.
                        
                     
                  
                  In liew of the Assumption, the Prophet hath in the 15. and 16. verse substituted the proofe thereof by two seueral arguments, whereby this course of iudging is disclaimed and found vnworthie to be held, aswell in regard of the preiudice and wrong which would ensue thereupon to the Lords children, as in respect of the lost labour therein or impossibility to attaine therby vnto the true and certaine knowledge of the Lords affection towards his people. He concludeth thus:

                        
                           If to iudge of the Lords affection to his people by his outward proceedings with them would be both a wrong to the profession of his children, and likewise a lost labour: I will forbeare to iudge of the Lords affection to his people by his outward proceedings with them.
                        
                        
                           But to iudge of the Lords affection to his people by his outward proceedings with them, would bee both a wrong to the profession of his children, and likewise a lost labour, ver. 15. and 16. In the 15. verse he saith, that in case he should thus speake thereof: that is, thus interpret the Lords affection to his people by the outward euents of prosperitie and aduersitie, hee should betray the profession of his children, by exposing it to disreputation and contempt. For if it be once apprehended, that the Lord regardeth the wicked aswell as the godly:

who will hold in any recommendation and accompt this profession of worshipping the Lord? In the 16. verse affirming that it seemed vnto him an hard thing to be resolued in the said question: he meaneth that the difficultie was such as all indeuours to that purpose became vaine and fruitlesse.
                        
                           Therefore will I forbeare to iudge of the Lords affection to his people by his outward proceedings with them.
                        
                     
                  
                  Thus you see what the direction and course is which the Spirit held for resolution in the said maine question of the Lords affection towards his people: so as the dispute betwixt the Spirit and the flesh touching this question, was drawne vnto this issue and conclusion:

                        That the Lord, notwithstanding his prospering of the wicked and his afflicting of the godly, is good vnto Israel.
                     
                  
                  We are now to vnderstand from the Prophet being thus particularly and soundly informed out of the Sanctuary, the ground and reason of the said issue and conclusion: which in summe is this:

                        If the Lord hath ordained for the wicked, howsoeuer they florish, iudgement and destruction: and for the godlie an happie issue from out their trouble: then is God good to Israel.
                        But the Lord hath ordained for the wicked, howsoeuer they florish, iudgement and destruction: and for the godly a blessed issue from out their trouble. From the 18. verse to the end of the Psalme. Also this blessed issue is implied vers. 1.
                        
                        Therefore God is good to Israel, vers. 1.
                        
                     
                  
                  The first part of the Assumption concerning the destruction of the wicked, is by the Prophet cleered and set forth vnto vs, thus:

                        
                        1. By comparing their deiecting with their setting vp. vers. 18.

                              
                                 As thou hast placed them in a slipperie estate:
                              
                              
                                 So doest thou deiect them from the same into vtter desolation.
                              
                           
                        
                        2. By noting the manner of their destruction, which is sudden and fearfull, vers. 19. Where is implied also for cleering this point a testimonie from experience and obseruation: as if the Prophet should say: Behold, wee see with our eyes how they are in a moment deiected and destroyed.
                        
                        3. By resembling their vanishing to a dreame, vers. 20.

                              
                                 As a dreame vanisheth when we awake:
                              
                              
                                 So vanish the wicked and their prosperitie.
                              
                           
                        
                        4. By declaring the efficient cause of their destruction, ver. 20. in the later part. Where the Lords awaking: that is, the displaying of his power to doe iustice on the wicked, is noted to bee the cause, by the force whereof, their image, that is, their outward flourishing estate is made contemptible and brought to nought.
                     
                  
                  The second part of the said Assumption which importes the happie issue of the godly from out their trouble, is not in these distinct termes expressed. But forasmuch as the Word which discloseth the Lords iustice to the wicked, doth withall discouer his loue & compassion to the godly, we must conceiue it as set downe in expresse termes: as indeede we find this point of happines on the part of the Lords children, insinuated and comprehended as in the first verse, so likewise in the latter part of the Psalme, which containes the Prophets solemne profession of perpetually depending vpon the Lord. Which profession of his beginneth vers. 23. and so continueth to the ende of the Psalme.
                  The ground of the said maine issue and conclusion being thus laid forth: the Prophet hath verse 21. and 22. added thereto a confession and censure of the brutish conceit

whereinto hee was readie to slip, touching the Lords affection to his people. His censure is propounded thus:

                        When I grieued at the prosperitie of the wicked, and at the affliction of the godly, I was foolish and senselesse, vers. 21. and the first part of vers. 22.
                        
                        When I was ignorant of the Lords affection to his people, I grieued at the prosperitie of the wicked, and at the affliction of the godly. Omitted.
                        
                        Therefore when I was ignorant of the Lords affection to his people, I was foolish and senselesse, vers. 22. in the later part. Where he expresseth this imputation and marke of foolishnes, by comparing himselfe vnto a beast.
                        
                     
                  
                  Hitherto the first and maine issue of the dispute betwixt the Spirit and the flesh hath been, together with the reason and ground thereof, related vnto vs: namely, That God is good to Israel. Now the second issue being a conclusion deduced vpon the former, is to be imparted with vs.
                  This second issue of the said dispute, is the Prophets profession of his perpetual dependance vpon the Lord, ver. 23. in the former part. Where the Prophets protestation of euer being with the Lord, I interprete as meant of adhering and cleauing alway vnto him by a liuely and constant faith in his promises: it being faith which first worketh and after intertaineth our spirituall and real vnion with him. Besides, it was a defect in the Prophets faith which made ouerture to this dispute betwixt the Spirit and the flesh: and therefore to shew how he hath profited by the victorie of the Spirit, and how ready he is to eschew hereafter the like fault of distrust in the Lord, hee solemnely professeth that he will euer rest and relie vpon him. Lastlie the nature of the arguments alleaged to perswade and confirme his perpetual being with the Lord, doth best sute with the said interpretation and point of perpetuall dependance vpon the Lord.
                  This second issue then of the conflict aboue remembred,

being a consequent of the first and maine issue, is by the Prophet inferred thus:

                        I finde in the Sanctuarie that as God is a seuere Iudge to the wicked, so hee is gratious and good to Israel, vers. 1.
                        
                        Therefore I professe that I will euer depend vpon him. vers. 23.
                        
                     
                  
                  But for a further encouragement of his hart herein, and that it may appeare he hath other good warrant for this his profession, he doth to the reason already alleaged adde sundry excellent inducements, whereby to perswade the withdrawing of his confidence from al worldly meanes, and the reposing thereof wholy vpon the Lord. His second reason therefore to this purpose is this:

                        Thou diddest support me in this temptation and conflict by the direction and power of thy spirit and word, verse 23. in the end.
                        
                        Therefore hauing this experience of thy assistance and fauour towards me, I will euer depend vpon thee, vers. 23. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  The third inducement of this his profession, is of this sort:

                        Thou wilt guide me, in case I depend vpon thee, by the addresse and light of thy word in the way to eternall glorie, vers. 24.
                        
                        Therefore will I euer rest vpon thee, vers. 23.
                        
                     
                  
                  The fourth argument perswading this dependance, is concluded thus:

                        If I will depend vpon any other besides thee, then is there some in heauen or earth whom I honor and serue besides thee.
                        But there is none in heauen or earth whom I honour and serue besides thee, vers. 25.
                        
                        Therefore will I not depend vpon any other besides thee, vers. 23.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Prophet stayeth not here, but proceedeth on to a fift reason, thus:

                        
                        Who is euer vnto me, in whatsoeuer my distresses, a compleat sufficiencie of all comfort, strength and happines: on him will I euer depend.
                        But the Lord is euer to me, in whatsoeuer my distresses, a compleat sufficiencie of all comfort, strength and happines, vers. 26.
                        
                        Therefore the Lord is hee, on whom I will euer depend. vers. 23.
                        
                     
                  
                  He yet ceaseth not: but to aduance his confidence and reposing vpon the Lord, he draweth into muster a sixt motiue, disputed thus:

                        If they who leaue and abandon thee, to rest vpon others, shall certainly perish: then will I (O Lord) euer depend vpon thee.
                        But they who leaue and abandon thee, to rest vpon others, shall certainly perish, vers. 27.
                        
                        Therefore I resolue euer to depend vpon thee, vers. 23.
                        
                     
                  
                  For a further warrant and reinforcement of the profession he maketh to rely only and wholy vpon the Lord, he tendereth vnto vs this conclusion:

                        If my happines consist in resting onely and wholy vpon the Lord, I professe and resolue euer to rest vpon him.
                        But my happines consisteth in resting wholy and onelie vpon the Lord, vers. 28. in the beginning.
                        
                        Therefore I professe and resolue euer to rest vpon him, vers. 23: and vers. 28. in the end.
                        
                     
                  
                  To close and shut vp this his profession, he doth in the last period of the last verse of this Psalme, acquaint vs with the end of his perpetuall dependance vpon the Lord: which is this:

                        That hee may (the Lord honouring this his dependance with continuall fauours and blessings vpon him) haue alwaies cause to declare and magnifie the Lords gratious proceedings towards him, vers. 28. in the end.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               PSALM. 84.
               
                  1 TO the Master of the Quier amongst the children of Corah, a Psalme deliuered to be sung vpon Gittith.
               
                  2 O Lord of hostes: how amiable are thy Tabernacles?
               
                  3 My soule longeth, yea fainteth also for the courts of the Lord: mine heart and my flesh crie out with longing to come to the mightie and liuing God.
               
                  4 Yea the sparrow findeth an house, and the swallow a nest for her selfe, where she may lay her young. But thy altars, O Lord of hostes, my King and my God.
               
                  5 Blessed are they that dwell in thine house, who praise thee continually. Selah.
               
               
                  6 Blessed is the man, who hath in thee power to goe in thy paths according to his heart.
               
                  7 They going through the vale of Mulberies, make it a fountaine. The raine also of blessings couereth them.
               
                  8 They goe from strength to strength, that they may appeare before God in Sion.
               
                  9 O Lord God of hostes heare my prayer: hearken O God of Iacob. Selah.
               
               
                  10 O God our shield, behold me and looke vpon the face of thine annoynted.
               
                  11 For one day in thy courts is better than a thousand elsewhere. I had rather be a doore-keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tabernacles of wickednes.
               
                  12 For the Lord God is a Sunne and shield vnto vs: The Lord giueth grace and glorie: no good thing doth he withhold from them that walke vprightly.
               
                  13 O Lord of hostes: blessed is the man that trusteth vpon thee.
               
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 84.
                  The inscription nameth not the author of the Psalme: it noteth onely the person to whose charge it was committed

to be sung: and the instrument called Gittith on which it was to be sung.
                  Touching the Psalme it selfe: the argument is this. The Prophet Dauid being through the practise and tyrannie of his enemies barred from all accesse vnto the place of the Lords publike worship and seruice (which place is called vers. 2. by the name of Tabernacles: in the 3. verse the courts of Iehoua: in the 4, Altars: in the 5. and 11, the house of the Lord) maketh this humble sute vnto the Lord:

                        That he may find fauour with the Lord for his returne vnto the place of his publike worship. vers. 9.
                        
                     
                  
                  That this motion here set downe, is the particular solicited and vrged in this Psalme, may appeare by conferring the 9. verse with the 3. and the 11. For what he longeth for in the 3. and magnifieth in the 11: the grant of that hee doth without doubt earnestly sue for and presse in the 9: there being in the whole Psalme no other subiect, wherewith his intercession can properly sort and agree. But in the 3. he longeth for his returne vnto the Courts of the Lord: and in the 11, he esteemeth his presence in them, though it were but for a day and in the qualitie of a doore keeper, a matter of the greatest happines. It is therefore his repaire againe vnto the place of the Lords publike worship, for which he is an humble suter.
                  Now the grant of this sute the Prophet doth perswade by sundry arguments: the first whereof doth represent vnto the Lord how passionatly the Prophet doth long for his returne vnto the tabernacle: out of a perswasion on the Prophets part, that the Lord will not suffer to rest vnsatisfied so holy and religious a longing of his poore seruant. The conclusion is this:

                        If I doe passionatly long to repaire againe vnto thy Tabernacle, I pray thee (O Lord) let me finde fauour in thy sight for my repaire thereto.
                        But I doe passionatly long to repaire againe vnto thy tabernacle, vers. 3.
                        
                        Therefore I pray thee (O Lord) let me finde fauour in thy sight for my repaire thereto, vers. 9.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Assumption is deliuered and recorded by the Prophet in the third verse: where he protesteth in expresse termes, that his desire to returne vnto the place of the Lords worship (which place he there calleth the courts of the Lord, and likewise by the name of the Mightie and liuing God) is such as is very passionate and accompanied with an extraordinarie fainting of his soule: yea such as draweth his heart and flesh, that is, his whole person into an extremitie of inward and outward crying vnto the Lord for obtaining contentment in the sute he maketh.
                  The said Assumption is amplified:

                        1. By recommending the Lords Tabernacle by way of admiration, as most worthie of all loue and regard: it being the place of his presence, and where he acquainted his people with his mercie to them in the Messiah, and with his iustice against sinne. From this argument he reasoneth thus:

                              
                                 Thy Tabernacle (O Lord) is most worthie of all loue and regard, vers. 2.
                              
                                 Therefore doe I exceedingly long to returne vnto it, vers. 3.
                           
                        
                        2. By noting two effects, which doe accompanie this his passionate longing to returne. With these he acquainteth the Lord, the rather to procure from him satisfaction in his request:

                              
                                 The one, is a fainting and consuming of his heart with griefe during his discontinuance from the Lords house, vers. 3. in the former part.
                              
                                 The other, is the crying of his whole person vnto the Lord, aswell inwardly with his hart, as outwardly by his voyce and some humble gesture of body for obtaining a grant of his sute, vers. 3. in the later part.
                           
                        
                        3. By imparting vnto the Lord the miserie and vnhappines of his present condition: the consideration whereof wrought in the heart of the Prophet a longing for some change and alteration in his present estate,

by repayring againe vnto the holie assemblies. As if he should thus say:

                              
                                 My present condition is altogether vnhappie and miserable.
                              
                              
                                 No marueile therfore if I long for a change thereof by my returne vnto the Lords house.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The former part of this reason is not in direct termes expressed by the Prophet: but in steed thereof he hath yeelded and set downe a cleare proofe of the same, containing such a description of happines as is incompatible with the Prophets present estate. The proofe containing the said description is this:

                        
                           They are happie who haue the libertie of accesse to thy tabernacle, vers. 5. and 6. These two verses affoord vnto vs from the consideration of the particularities comprised in them this generall sense and description of happines. In the 5. verse, they are held for happy who haue the libertie of dwelling in the Lords house. In the 6. verse, hee is reputed happie who hath in and by the Lord the power and libertie of treading and walking in those paths which leade vnto the tabernacle. Which paths are called the Lords paths: because they are the way to the Lords house.
                        
                           But I haue not the libertie of accesse to thy tabernacle, vers. 4. in the end. Where I expound that interrupted speech (Thy altars O Lord) in this sort: Thy altars: that is, by naming one part for the whole, Thy tabernacle is the place from whence I rest banished, and whereto I haue not libertie of accesse. Which exposition doth fitly answere the comparison of little birds (as after shall appeare) deliuered in the said verse.
                        
                           Therefore I am not happie. This conclusion is omitted as a matter so apparant and palpable vpon the setting downe of the premisses, as it needes not any particular expressing thereof.
                     
                  
                  
                     Of this syllogisme, which containes the Prophets deploration of his present vnhappy and distressed condition, the Assumption is first handled: and then the Proposition. The Assumption is cleared by a comparison of Dissimilitude: wherein is shewed how the present estate of the Prophet is different and vnlike to that of the little birds who are allowed liberty to flie vnto the tabernacle, there to rest and breede. The Dissimilititude is this:

                        
                           The sparrow and the swallow finde by thy prouidence libertie of accesse to thy tabernacle, there to rest and breede, vers. 4. in the former part.
                        
                           But thy tabernacle is the place whereto I can haue no accesse, but rest banished from it, vers. 4. in the later part. You may see hereby how aptly the said interrupt speech serueth as a reddition to the comparison deliuered in the former part of the verse. Neither neede wee feare that any absurditie will follow, in case the former part of the said 4. verse be interpreted as is set downe. For the tabernacle being spacious and large, and the composition thereof such as it was distinguished into sundrie parts: no marueile if little birds did find the commoditie of resting and breeding in some parts thereof, though not in the Sanctuarie or neere the Altar.
                     
                  
                  The Proposition of the said syllogisme is amplified, by noting two seuerall kindes of persons to whom the said description of happines doth agree:

                        
                           The first kinde is of Priests and Leuites: who vers. 5. are defined to be such as daily reside in the tabernacle, and are there imployed in the seruice of worshipping and praising the Lord.
                        
                           The second is of the Israelites, who repayred out of the countrey to appeare before the tabernacle, v. 6: where it is said, that they haue liberty according to their hearts desire to tread the Lords paths, that is, the paths which leade vnto the Lords house.
                     
                  
                  
                     These countrie Israelites, who tendered their appearance before the Lord, according to the statute enacted in that behalfe, Exod. 23.17. and Deut. 16.16: these Isralites (I say) are by the Prophet described by setting out vnto vs,

                        1. Their resolute enduring of all the difficulties and incommodities that accompanied their repaire vnto the tabernacle: as namely the incommoditie.
                           
                              1. Of thirst. That they endured this, appeareth hereby: in that they passing through the valley of Mulberies, a valley very drie and destitute of water, digged and serched for fountaines, whereby to relieue their thirst, vers. 7.
                              2. Of showers and stormes of raine, ver. 7. in the end. Where the raine which falleth on the passengers is called the raine of blessings: because it communicateth the blessing of fertilitie to the earth.
                              3. Of wearines and faintnes, vers. 8. Where the enduring of this incommodity is implied hereby, in that it is said, They goe from strength to strength: that is, with an affectionate desire and courage to entertaine themselues in some measure of strength, and to encounter with patience all sense of wearines. This interpretation, considering the question is of trauellers and of difficulties endured by them, seemeth most notable.
                           
                        
                        2. The end, for which they did so resolutely endure the said incommodities. This end was that they might present themselues before God in Sion: Sion being the appointed and designed place, wherein they were to performe worship and seruice vnto the Lord, vers. 8.
                     
                  
                  Hitherto hath the Prophet amplified and pressed the first argument, wherby he would perswade the Lord to a grant of his fate for returne vnto the tabernacle.
                  The second argument to this purpose, and the third also

follow in the 10. verse comprehended in these words: O God, who art our shield, behold me, and looke on the face of thine annoynted: That is, Thou (O God) who hast heretofore protected and deliuered me from trouble: and thou who hast annoynted me King ouer thy people, and therein to be a type of thy eternall Sonne, behold me with all fauour and mercie for my returne vnto the place of thy publike worship.
                  
                  This 10. verse, as you see, containeth a double conclusion: the first whereof is grounded vpon a comparison of paritie accompanied with a testimony of experience. The conclusion is this:

                        Thou hast (O Lord) heretofore protected me, and deliuered me from a condition of miserie into an estate of comfort, vers. 10. in these words: O God who art my shield.
                        Wherefore shew me now the like fauour for my returne from the miserie wherein I am vnto the comfort of thy tabernacle, vers. 10. in these words: Behold me: namely, with thy fauourable eye for my returne vnto the place of thy publike worship.
                        
                     
                  
                  The other conclusion is grounded vpon a comparison from the greater to the lesse, thus:

                        Thou (O Lord) hast out of thy loue towards me vouchsafed vnto me this great honour as to annoynt me King ouer thy people, and withall to bee therein a type of thy eternall Sonne, vers. 10. in the end.
                        
                        Therefore I pray thee refuse not vnto me this lesser fauour for my returne vnto thy tabernacle, vers. 10. in these words: Behold me and looke vpon the face of him.
                     
                  
                  The Prophet ceaseth not here: but pleadeth with the Lord by a fourth argument for his returne vnto the Tabernacle. In this argument he doth magnifie the happines that doth accōpanie such who haue the liberty of accesse vnto the Lords house, there to present vnto him the seruice and worship required. From hence he concludeth thus:

                        
                        To be partaker of thy publike worship at thy tabernacle, though but for a day and in the qualitie of a doore-keeper, I esteeme the greatest happines, vers. 11.
                        
                        Therefore I pray thee (O Lord) refuse me not this fauour of returning thereto, vers. 9.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Antecedent part of this fourth reason is diuersly amplified and cleered:

                        1. By two comparisons, from the lesse to the greater, vers. 11.

                              The former comparison is this:

                                    
                                       To spend the whole terme of my life in the palaces of the prophane and mighty in the world, I may accompt a matter of great honour and happines.
                                    
                                    
                                       But to spend one day of my whole life in thy tabernacle I hold for a more honourable and happie condition.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              The other comparison is this:

                                    
                                       To enioy an estate and place of eminent dignitie amongst the mightie in the world, I may repute it a matter of honour and happines.
                                    
                                    
                                       But to hold the meanest roome in thy tabernacle and Church, I accompt it far more honourable and happie.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           2. By noting the particulars wherein the greatest happines consisteth. This argument is thus deduced:

                                 
                                    Who enioy at the hands of the Lord, prosperitie, protection, spirituall grace and eternall glorie, theirs is the greatest happines.
                                 
                                 
                                    But who sincerely worship at the tabernacle, they enioy at the hands of the Lord, prosperitie, protection, spirituall grace and eternall glorie, vers. 12. Where as the two last particulars are set downe in plaine termes: so the two first are expressed by two metaphors: each

whereof implieth a seuerall comparison: the one from the Sunne, by whose light and influence the earth doth prosper and florish: the other, from a shield, whereby the bodie is protected against hurts.
                                 
                                    Therefore who sincerely worship at the tabernacle, theirs is the greatest happines, vers. 11.
                              
                           
                           The Assumption hath this proofe:

                                 
                                    Vpon the true worshippers at the tabernacle the Lord doth conferre all good blessings. vers. 12. in the end.
                                 
                                    Therefore he bestowes on them prosperitie, protection, spiritual grace and eternall glorie, verse 12. in the beginning.
                              
                           
                        
                        3. By laying foorth the essentiall and proper qualitie of the sincere worshippers at the tabernacle: namely, their faith and dependance on the Lord. Out of this argument hee inferreth this conclusion:

                              
                                 Who by a true faith rest on thee (O Lord of hostes) they are in a state of the greatest happines, vers. 13.
                              
                                 But the sincere worshippers at the tabernacle doe by a true faith rest on thee.
                              
                              
                                 Therefore the sincere worshippers at the tabernacle are in a state of the greatest happines, vers. 11.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PSALM. 90.
               
                  1 THe prayer of Moses a man of God. O Lord thou hast been our habitation from generation to generation.
               
                  2 Before the mountaines were made, and before thou haddest formed the earth and the world: euen from euerlasting to euerlasting thou art our God.
               
                  3 Thou reducest man to this point of being brayed into powder,

saying: Returne ye sonnes of men.
               
                  4 For a thousand yeeres are in thy eyes as yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in the night.
               
                  5 Thou cariest them away as it were by a flood: they are as a dreame. In the morning they are as an herbe which changeth:
               
                  6 Which florisheth in the morning and waxeth greene: but is cut downe in the euening and withereth.
               
                  7 We are consumed also by thine anger: and by thy wrath are we troubled.
               
                  8 Thou hast set our iniquities before thee: and our secret sinnes before the light of thy face.
               
                  9 For all our daies passe away through thy great anger: we consume our yeeres as a thought.
               
                  10 The daies of our life are threescore yeeres and tenne, or (in case we be of strength) fourescore yeres: and the best of them is but trouble and griefe: yea it is suddenly cut off, and we flee away.
               
                  11 Who acknowledgeth the power of thy wrath, and of thy great indignation according to thy feare?
               
                  12 Teach vs so to number our daies, that thereby wee may haue an heart of wisedome.
               
                  13 Returne O Lord: how long? and be pacified towards thy seruants.
               
                  14 Fill vs with thy mercie euery morning: so shall we reioyce and be glad all our daies.
               
                  15 Comfort vs according to the daies that thou hast afflicted vs, and according to the yeeres wherein we haue seene euill.
               
                  16 Let thy worke appeare vpon thy seruants, and thy glorie vpon their children:
               
                  17 And let the beautie of the Lord our God be vpon vs: and direct in vs the worke of our hands: direct (I say) the worke of our hands.
               
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 90.
                  In the front of this Psalme there is set an inscription to informe vs of these two circumstances:

                        
                        1. Of what kinde this Psalme is.
                        
                        2. Who is the author thereof.
                        
                     
                  
                  The former circumstance doth aduertise vs that this Psalme is in the nature of an humble petition, as may appeare by the 12. and 13. verses: and so by the rest to the end of the Psalme.
                  The other doth notify that Moses was the author of the said petition. And to the end we might hold it in extraordinary accompt and recommendation: Moses the inditer thereof is set forth vnto vs vnder this worthie and honorable title, That he was a man of God: that is, A man both imployed by God as a great Prophet and Commaunder amongst his people, and likewise pleasing the Lord in the execution of his charge.
                  
                  Touching the Psalme it selfe: as it is thought to haue been then indited, when the Lord had passed sentence of death against the Israelites, in regard of the discontentment and murmur they fell into vpon the relation made concerning the land of Canaan, by such as were imployed in the seruice of discouering it: So it is probable that the occasion thereof grew, in that Moses discerning the reall execution of the said sentence, and the peoples anxietie and languishing thereupon, did out of a commiseration of their present estate, and withall that hee might furnish vnto them an addresse how to demeane themselues in an affliction of this qualitie, deliuer and recommend vnto the people this forme of prayer. The subiect and drift whereof what it is, may appeare by drawing into consideration the 12.13.14. and 15. verses.
                  
                     Vers. 12. Hauing in the precedent verses first remembred vnto the Lord his former gracious proceeding with his people: and then deplored the miserie whereto they were subiect: he doth in the 12. verse intreate at the hands of the Lord such grace and direction, as whereby they may make a speciall and wise vse of the said miserie. And this he calleth numbring of our daies, and the hauing

of an heart of wisedome. Now this numbring of our daies is then performed and this wise hart attained vnto, when wee seriously examine and calculate all parts of the miserie incident to our daies: and so grow to repentance of heart and dependance on God. So as this is one part of the sute made here by the Prophet: namely, That the Lord would teach the people to make a wise vse of their miserie.
                     
                     Vers. 13. In this verse hee compriseth an apparant deprecation of the Lords displeasure: as if hee should say: Whereas (O Lord) thou hast in displeasure against our sinnes auerted thy louing countenance from vs: I pray thee, let it now returne againe and shine on vs: change the nature of thy proceeding with vs by desisting from further afflicting vs, and by supplying vnto vs a comfortable condition of life. And this is the other part of the sute exhibited by the Prophet in this Psalme.
                     Vers. 14. He prayeth that the Lord would shew himself good and gracious to his people in some great measure: which he calleth a filling of vs euerie morning with his goodnesse. Now this great measure of goodnesse on the Lords part, consisteth in remouing their present crosse, and in supplying vnto them such an estate of life as is comfortable. So as this 14. verse containeth also the second part of the said prayer and sute.
                     Vers. 15. He soliciteth at the hands of the Lord a present recomforting and reioying of his people. Which is one and the same in sense with that which is sued for in the 13. and 14. verse. For hee meaneth that comfort and ioy of estate, which is to follow vpon the Lords retyring of his afflicting hand, and yeelding vnto the people other testimonies of his goodnes. So as this verse likewise comprehendeth the second part of the Prophets prayer.
                  
                  
                     By examining therefore and weighing the sense of the said verses, it appeareth that the prayer comprised in this Psalme by the Prophet Moses, is in summe this:

                        That the Lord would teach the people to make a wise vse of their miserie, vers. 12: and withall supply vnto them a comfortable condition of life, vers. 13.14.15.
                        
                     
                  
                  The whole sute is first solicited from the beginning of the Psalme to the end of the 12. verse: and then, the later branch thereof to the end of the Psalme. The Prophets mediation with the Lord for graunt of the whole sute, is grounded vpon two seuerall inducements: the first whereof is taken from a comparison of parity, accompanied with a testimonie of experience, and concluded thus:

                        Thou hast heretofore from age to age successiuelie been gracious vnto our predecessors and vs, vers. 1. Where by this word, Habitation, the Prophet meaneth the gracious comfort and protection yeelded vnto them by the Lord.
                        
                        Therfore I pray thee (O Lord) be now likewise gracious vnto vs, namely in teaching vs to make a wise vse of our miserie, and withall in supplying vnto vs a comfortable condition of life, vers. 12.13.14.15.
                        
                     
                  
                  The antecedent part of this reason hath a double amplification: the one from a Similitude: the other from a comparison of the greater to the lesse.
                  The Similitude is folded and closed vp in that word, habitation: but being disclosed and laid foorth in his parts, will be this:

                        As the house, wherein man dwelleth, doth yeeld vnto him a place of comfort and rest, as also protection against outward iniurie and extremitie.
                        So thy fauor (O Lord) towards our predecessors and vs, who haue had no place of habitatiō, but haue liued in the quality of Pilgrims, hath euer furnished both vnto them and vs, special comfort and protection against trouble and distresse.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Comparison from the greater to the lesse is in the second verse: and discouereth vnto vs the verie originall and roote of the Lords fauourable proceeding with his people. The Comparison is this:

                        
                           Thou hast been gracious vnto vs thy people before the creation of the world, vers. 2. Where by a gradation from the lesse to the greater hee expresseth the creation of the world: naming first the hils, then the earth, and lastly the whole world.
                        
                           No marueile then if since the creation successiuely thou hast so kindly proceeded with vs, vers. 1.
                     
                  
                  The second inducement, whereby to draw the Lord vnto a commiseration of the people, in whose fauour Moses is become an humble suter, is such as wherein hee doth by way of deploration of their present miserie, represent vnto the Lords view as it were a picture of the condition, wherein they were. His deploration doth particulate the seuerall parts of the said miserie, and is framed in this sort:

                        We thy people are subiect to death: to exceeding shortnes of life: to suddennes of vanishing: to great calamities: to a senselesnes of apprehending thy powerfull wrath.
                        It may therefore please thee (O Lord) to haue a gracious commiseration of vs, in teaching vs to make an holie vse hereof, and in supplying vnto vs a comfortable estate of life.
                     
                  
                  The Antecedent part of this Deploration hath 5. branches: the first is vers. 3: the second verse 4: the third vers. 5. and 6: the fourth vers. 7.9.10: the fift, vers. 11.
                  The first branch, namely that which concernes the mortalitie of the Israelites, is declared:

                        1. By noting the efficient of this mortalitie: namely, The Lord and his ordinance enacted to that purpose, Gen. 3.19. Dust thou art, and into dust thou shalt returne. This statute and the author thereof are signified vers. 3.
                        
                           2. By a Similitude implied in this word, Returne. For hereby it appeareth that the passing of our life is vers. 3. resembled to the wheeling of a thing about from the first point of the circuit, till it returne to the same againe. The comparison therefore being vnfolded and distinguished into his parts, will be this:

                              
                                 As that which hath wheeled about from the first point of the circuit to the same againe, hath fully ended his reuolution:
                              
                              
                                 So man taking the beginning of his circuit in this world from dust, as from the first point thereof, doth by returning to the said first point determine his reuolution.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The second branch touching the shortnes of our life, as it serueth aptly to resolue the question of our mortalitie: so to assure vs that we delude and flatter our selues when we imagine a length in life, it is by the Prophet cleered by a Comparison, thus:

                        A thousand yeeres are in all true and iust calculation a time of no length or a matter of nothing, vers. 4.
                        
                        No marueile then if the ordinarie terme of mans life be exceeding short.
                     
                  
                  The first sentence of this Comparison is made knowne vnto vs by two seuerall Similitudes, vers. 4:

                        
                           In the former, the length of a thousand yeeres is compared to the length of a day alreadie past, thus:
                           
                              
                                 As yesterday, which is past, is a space of time for the length thereof not worthy the naming:
                              
                              
                                 So are a thousand yeeres for length as yesterday, and not worth the naming.
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           In the later, the space of a thousand yeeres is resembled to that which is farre shorter in length than a day, namely to a watch in the night, which consisteth onely of three houres. So as if a thousand yeeres be for length like vnto a watch in the night, the life of 1000. yeres must runne in accompt for a matter of nothing.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The third branch of the said deploration imports the suddennes of our vanishing together with the shortnes of our aboad here. The manifesting whereof is taken from three Comparisons, vers. 5. and 6:

                        In the first: the suddennes of our vanishing, with the shortnes of our life, it resembled to the sudden transporting of things by a torrent or land flood: the force whereof doth presently carrie away whatsoeuer it incountreth.
                        In the second: our sudden vanishing is likened to a dreame, which vanisheth in a moment.
                        In the third: it is compared to greene grasse, which is cut and withereth almost assoone as it sheweth it selfe out of the ground.
                     
                  
                  The fourth branch is of the crosses and calamities incident to our life. v. 7.8.9.10. In the 7. and 9. verse the Prophet setteth out our crosses and calamities vnder the name and title of the Lords consuming wrath, noting by the efficient the effect wrought thereby: and in the 10. he setteth them out by acquainting vs with the trouble and griefe that accompanie our best and happiest daies. So as, in case the wrath of the Lord, that is, the affliction laid vpon vs consume and wast vs: if also the excellentest and best of our daies be nought else but vexation and trouble: it is euident hereby, that our life is wasted through continuall crosses and calamities. And this is it, which is likewise deplored by the Prophet. Now this consuming of our dayes through daily afflictions, is expressed vnto vs:

                        1. By laying foorth the cause thereof: namely, our sinnes both secret and apparant, vers. 8: where the Lord is said to set our sinnes before him: that is, to take notice of them and punish them.
                        
                        2. By noting the sudden vanishing of our daies and the shortnes of them. This point the Prophet doth illustrate and make plaine.
                        
                        
                           1. By a Similitude, vers. 9. in the end, thus:

                              
                                 As a thought assoone as it is conceiued, doth presently vanish:
                              
                              
                                 So doe our daies passe in a moment.
                              
                           
                        
                        2. By answering an obiection: which is this, as may appeare by the answere thereto:

                              Obi.

                                    
                                       Man liueth many yeeres, as to 70. or 80:
                                    
                                       And therefore is not in likelihood subiect to such wasting crosses, nor to that shortnes of daies, or sudden vanishing, as is pretēded.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Ans. The Prophet granting vers. 10. the antecedent of this obiection: namely, that a man by the ordinarie course of nature may attaine to the terme of 70. yeeres, yea of 80, in case the constitution of his bodie be vigorous and strong: denieth the consequence deduced thereupon in the sayd obiection. As if he should thus say:

                                    
                                       Let it be true that man liueth to 70. or 80. yeeres:
                                    
                                    
                                       Yet I denie it as following hereupon, that he hath either an immunitie frō trouble and vexation, or any long and constant aboad in this life.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              His deniall of either point the Prophet doth iustifie and cleere by a seuerall comparison. His deniall of immunitie from trouble is warranted in this sort:

                                    
                                       The excellentest and best daies of mans life are vexation and griefe, vers. 10. in the middest.
                                    
                                       
                                       No marueile then if the ordinary daies of his life be daies of wearines and tribulation, vers. 7.9.
                                 
                              
                              His deniall of mans long and constant abode in this life hath this ground:

                                    
                                       The best daies of mans life doe quickly come to their period, and vanish suddenly, vers. 10. in the end.
                                    
                                       No marueile then if the ordinarie and weake daies of his life do quickly and suddenly determine, vers. 9. in the end.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  There remaineth the 5. and last branch of the misery deplored by the Prophet, contained in the 11. verse: where Moses by way of an interrogation doth acknowledge and admire the spirituall dulnes of heart in the people, that (considering the miserie wherein they were, and the course held by the Lord to reclaime them from wickednesse) yet to fill vp the measure of their miserie, and as it were in contempt of that feare of his Maiestie which the Lord laboured to worke in them, they added thereto the sinne of not apprehending how great the force and power of the Lords wrath is, when hee doth execute it vpon man.
                  Now this dulnes and senselesnes of the people in this behalfe, is in the end of the said 11. verse amplified and made heinous, by aduertising vnto vs the meanes vsed by the Lord▪ whereby to worke in them a reuerent and sensible regard of his Maiestie. These meanes Moses calleth the Lords feare: because they were vsed by the Lord as instruments to worke a feare of his Maiestie. Of this nature were the Lords promises and comminations: his signes and wonders: his proceedings in mercy and iustice. Answerably to these meanes vsed by the Lord to draw the people to a feare of his Maiestie, the people feared him not: and therefore the Prophet wondreth thereat, and confesseth

that none acknowledgeth the power of the Lords wrath according to his feare, that is, answerably to the meanes vsed to worke in the people a feare of his Maiestie.
                  Hitherto from verse 1. to the end of of the 11, the Prophets whole sute hath been solicited, partlie by remembring vnto the Lord his former gracious proceeding with his people, and partlie by a deploration of the peoples miserie.
                  He now proceedeth to a seuerall solicitation of the second branch of his sute, which concernes the deliuerance of the people from their present affliction into a comfortable condition of life. To procure fauour and mercy herein, hee draweth his plea from the circumstance of the time, wherein they haue endured calamities:

                        
                           We haue (saith he) a long time endured affliction and trouble, vers. 13. Where in that interrogatorie speech of How long? the Prophet complaineth that the people hath felt the Lords afflicting hand a long space.
                        
                           Wherefore O Lord commiserate our estate, and supplie vnto vs some comfortable condition of life, vers. 13.14.15.
                     
                  
                  The Prophet stayeth not here, but presseth the grant of his petition from this consideration which the people propound vnto themselues vpon their preuailing with the Lord:

                        If vpon thy gracious commiseration of vs in this behalf, we shall honor and magnifie thee with ioy and cheerfulnes all our daies: it may please thee in regarde hereof to commiserate our estate, and to affoord vs a comfortable condition of life.
                        But vpon thy gracious commiseration of vs in this behalfe, we shall honour and magnifie thee with ioy and cheerefulnes all our daies, vers. 14. in the end.
                        
                        Therefore it may please thee in regard hereof to commiserate our estate, and to affoord vs a comfortable condition of life, vers. 13.14.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     In the 15. verse he repeateth the argument deliuered in the 13: but setteth on it a new force and strength from a comparison of parity:

                        Thou hast afflicted vs many yeeres, vers. 15. in the middest and end.
                        
                        Let vs therfore O Lord proportionably thereto see some daies of comfort, vers. 15. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  Lastly, he doth in the 16. and 17. verse ground his intercession with the Lord for the people vpon these two particulars: whereof, the one is, the glorie that the Lord shall gaine by shewing the fauour desired: the other is, the fitnes and disposition that will vpon grant of the sute in hand be wrought in the people to acknowledge the Lords goodnes, and to respect the honor of his name in al their proceedings. The Prophets conclusion vpon the said particulars is this:

                        If vpon thy gracious deliuerance of vs from trouble into a state of comfort, thou shalt thereby glorifie thy goodnes vpon vs and our children: and withall direct and fit vs to an acknowledgement thereof, and to a respect of thy honour in all our proceedings: it may please thee O Lord not to refuse to shew mercie vnto vs, in deliuering vs from our afflictions into a condition of ioy and comfort.
                        But vpon thy gracious deliuerance of vs from trouble into a state of comfort, thou shalt thereby glorifie thy goodnes vpon vs and our children: and withall thou shalt direct and fit vs to an acknowledgement thereof, and to a respect of thine honour in all our proceedings, vers. 16.17.
                        
                        Therfore it may please thee O Lord not to refuse to shew mercie vnto vs, in deliuering vs from our afflictions into a condition of ioy and comfort, vers. 13.14.15.
                        
                     
                  
                  Touching the Assumption: the 16. verse imparteth with vs that particular which concerneth the glorifying of the Lords goodnes vpon the people and their children. This goodnes is in the said verse called the worke of the Lord, and his glory also. But in the beginning of the 17. verse this

                     goodnes is termed the beautie of the Lord. For as the Lords goodnes is a most excellent worke, it being that which procureth vnto him great glorie, and that whereby wee inioy the admirable blessings of this and the future life: So, because in it the excellencie of the Lords nature doth gloriouslie shine, and for that by it wee are allured and drawne to a speciall loue of him, it is not without iust reason called the Lords beautie. This particular then of the said Assumption which importeth the glorifying of the Lords goodnes vpon the people and their children, is deliuered in the 16 verse, and repeated in the beginning of the 17. The other particular of the said Assumption, which concernes the disposition and fitnes that will bee wrought in the people to acknowledge the Lords goodnes, and to respect his honour in their proceedings, is comprehended in the middest and end of the 17. verse, in these termes: Direct or dispose the worke of our hands: that is, thou shalt (the future being meant by the imperatiue) vpon thy conferring on vs the blessed comfort desired by vs, thereby direct and fit vs to a gratefull acknowledgement of this thy goodnes in all the duties and actions of our life.
                  
               
            
            
               PSALM. 91.
               WHo so dwelleth in the couert of the most high, shal lodge vnder the shadow of the Almightie.
               
                  2 I say: The Lord is my retrait and fortresse: he is my God on whom I trust.
               
                  3 Surely, he will deliuer thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the noysome pestilence.
               
                  4 He will protect thee with his wing, when thou shalt come vnder his wings. His fidelitie shall be thy buckler and shield.
               
                  5 Thou shalt not be afraid of the feare of night, nor of the arrow that flieth by day:
               
                  6 Nor of the pestilence that walketh in the darknes, nor of the plague that destroyeth at noone day.
               
                  
                  7 A thousand shall fall at thy side, and tenne thousand at thy right hand: yet shall it not come neere thee:
               
                  8 Onely with thine eyes shalt thou behold, and see the reward of the wicked.
               
                  9 Sith thou hast set the Lord, the God of my retrait, the most high to be thy dwelling place:
               
                  10 There shall none euill come vnto thee, neither shall any plague come neere thy tabernacle.
               
                  11 For he will giue his Angels charge ouer thee to keep thee in all thy waies.
               
                  12 They shall beare thee with both hands, that thou hurt not thy foote against a stone.
               
                  13 Thou shalt walke vpon the Lion and Aspe: the young Lion and the Dragon shalt thou tread vnder foote.
               
                  14 Because he resteth on me, I will deliuer him, saith the Lord: I will exalt him, because he acknowledgeth my name:
               
                  15 When he shall call vpon me, I will heare him: I will be with him in trouble: I will deliuer him and glorifie him:
               
                  16 With long life will I satisfie him, and cause him to see my saluation.
               
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 91.
                  The position insisted vpon and disputed throughout this Psalme, is this:

                        That they, who rest vpon the Lord, shall be deliuered from all hurts, and made partakers of all comfort.
                     
                  
                  The drift of the Prophet in handling this position, is to perswade a confident dependance vpon the Lord: as if hee should reason in this sort with vs:

                        If by resting vpon the Lord we shall be deliuered from all hurts and discomforts, and made partakers of al comfort: then ought we to rest vpon the Lord.
                        But by resting vpon the Lord we shall be deliuered from all hurts and discomforts, and made partakers of all comfort.
                        Therefore ought we to rest vpon the Lord.
                     
                  
                  
                     The Assumption is the position aboue remembred, and the only subiect argued in this Psalme. Of it there be (as you see) these two members:

                        The one: That by resting on the Lord we shall be deliuered from all hurts.
                        The other: That by resting on the Lord we shall be partakers of all comforts.
                     
                  
                  The first member which concernes our deliuerance from all hurts and discomforts, is set down in the 1.4.9. & 10. verse.
                  
                     Vers. 1. It is said, that who so dwelleth in the couert of the most high
                        ▪ that is, hee who depends vpon the Lords fauour: shall lodge vnder the shadow of the Almightie, that is, shall be secured against all perils and discomforts. Here our depending is resembled to dwelling: the Lords fauour to a couert: our protection against hurts to our lodging vnder a shadow.
                     Vers. 4. It is affirmed, that who so commeth vnder the Lords wings, that is, he who hath by a true faith recourse vnto the Lord: shall be protected with the Lords wing, that is, shall be defended by the gracious and fauourable prouidence of the Lord.
                     Vers. 9. and 10. In these verses our protection against hurts and discomforts, in the case of our resting on the Lord, is in plaine and expresse termes deliuered.
                  
                  Let vs now see how this first member of the said position is handled. The illustration thereof is from the beginning of the first verse to the end of the thirteenth: and is performed by sundrie arguments:

                        1. By a comparison, ve
                              •
                           s. 1. thus:

                              
                                 As he who lodgeth vnder a shadow or couert is relieued and protected against the parching heate of the Sunne:
                              
                              
                                 So by resting vpon the gracious fauour of the most high, we shall be secured against all perils and discomforts.
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           2. By a testimonie of experience handled as a comparison of paritie, thus:

                              
                                 I haue found that vpon my confident resting vpon the Lord, I haue receiued from him comfort and deliuerance, vers. 2. Where he doth in an holy sort glorie, that the Lord is his retrait and fortresse, that is, he who hath reached vnto him his hand of protection and deliuerance, vpon his reposing on him: as is noted in the end of the verse.
                              
                                 Therefore thou also shalt finde that vpon thy like confident resting vpon the Lord, he will affoord thee the like comfort and deliuerance, vers. 1.
                           
                        
                        To the former part of this reason there is yeelded from out the second verse this amplification:

                              
                                 As a fortresse or place of retrait protecteth him who retireth thereto:
                              
                              
                                 So the Lord protected me when out of a trust in his mercie I retired vnto him.
                              
                           
                        
                        3. By an induction of the particular hurts and discomforts, from which the Lord will deliuer such as depend on him. The induction is this:

                              
                                 The Lord will deliuer thee from surprises in secret and open violences, vers. 3: from sudden terrors in the night, and sudden perils in the day both spirituall and corporall, vers. 5: from each kinde of pestilence and plague, vers. 6.
                              
                                 And therefore in case thou depend vpon him, thou shalt be secured against all hurts and discomforts, vers. 1.4.9. and 10.
                           
                        
                        4. By a Similitude yeelded from out the 4. verse, thus:

                              
                                 As an hen spreadeth her wings, & therewith protecteth her tender chicken in case they retire therto:
                              
                              
                                 So the Lord relieueth and protecteth such as haue their recourse vnto him and rest on him, vers. 4. in the beginning: where together with this sentence the said similitude is folded vp.
                           
                        
                        
                           5. By setting downe the ground on the Lords part of the deliuerance which he affoordeth vnto his children reposing vpon him. This ground is the Lords promise of deliuerance, and his fidelitie in keeping this promise, vers. 4. in the end: where the Prophet noteth this later: and by naming it doth implie and meane both it and the former. He reasoneth thus:

                              
                                 The Lord hath made promise of deliuerance to such as rest on him, and he is faithfull in the performance thereof.
                              
                              
                                 Therefore in case thou rest on his promise of deliuerance, he will not faile to protect and shield thee against all hurts and discomforts. Either part of this reason is in the end of the fourth verse wrapt vp in these termes: His fidelitie shall be thy buckler and shield. Which sentence is so to be resolued and vnderstood, as containing both the argument and conclusion deduced thereupon: and likewise yeelding withall vnto vs a declaration of the said conclusion, which is the question in hand, from a similitude, thus:
                           
                        
                        6.

                              
                                 As a shield or buckler, in case wee vse it, doth defend our bodies from hurt:
                              
                              
                                 So the Lord, who is faithfull in keeping promise, in case thou rest vpon his promise, will accordingly protect thee.
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           7. By an argument of diuersitie: wherein answere is made to this obiection:

                                 Obi.

                                       
                                          If many thousands may on each side of thee perish by the plague and other meanes of destruction: it is altogether improbable that thou shouldest escape in this common mortalitie.
                                       
                                       
                                          But many 1000 may on each side of thee perish by the plague & other means of destruction.
                                       
                                       
                                          
                                          Therefore it is altogether improbable that thou shouldest in so common a mortalitie escape.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                                 
                                    Ans. The answere to this obiection is to the proposition thereof, thus:

                                       
                                          Though thousands should perish by the rage of the pestilence and other meanes of destruction, vers. 7. in the beginning.
                                       
                                          Yet shalt thou, in case thou rest on the Lord, be spared and as it were priuileged against all meanes of destruction, vers. 7. in the end.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           This answere to the proposition of the said obiection the Prophet doth warrant and iustifie by noting vnto vs the end, for which the faithfull man is thus spared and priuiledged in a common mortalitie. The end is this, vers. 8.
                           
                              That he may in his owne particular experience and obseruation discerne and acknowledge the truth of this most comfortable doctrine: namely, that the Lord punisheth the wicked who renounce all dependance on him: and spareth in common calamities such as rest confidently vpon him. For thus the Prophet speaketh of the faithfull man, That he shall be a spectator onely of the punishment laid vpon the wicked: himself shall not partake therein: he shall onely witnesse and acknowledge the truth of this doctrine concerning the Lords proceeding in iustice with the faithlesse, and in mercie with the faithfull dependers on him.
                           
                           The Prophet hauing in the ninth and tenth verse comprised the question hitherto disputed by him, doth withall, vers. 9. affoord vs an illustration thereof,
                        
                        8. By a Similitude, thus:

                              
                              
                                 As a place of retrait and dwelling house doe yeeld vnto vs comfort and protection against outward iniuries:
                              
                              
                                 So the Lord, in case of thy dependance on him, will furnish vnto thee reliefe and protection against hurts and discomforts.
                              
                           
                        
                        9. By noting the meanes and instruments vsed by the Lord for our preseruation and deliuerance from discomforts and hurts, vers. 11. and 12: where these instruments are said to bee the Angels. Now this point, which concerneth the Angels, who are appointed by the Lord to be instruments of our preseruation, is amplified:

                              1. From the efficient cause of their imployment in this behalfe: namely, the commission and charge they haue from the Lord to performe this seruice of preseruing the faithfull in all their waies and proceedings, so farre as they are lawfull and iustifiable by the word of the Lord. For these onely are called the waies of the faithfull.
                              
                              2. From the consideration of their extraordinarie care to discharge the Lords commissiō they haue for this seruice. This care in them the Prophet noteth by resembling the action and seruice they performe, vnto the action of a carefull and prouident Nurse: who in the case of perill to the infant whom she nurseth, will take him into her armes, and carrie him so long as shall be feare of danger. And so by the Lords commaundement and direction the Angels proceed with vs in this point of preseruing vs from hurts and discomforts.
                              3. From a comparison of the greater to the lesse, vers. 13. thus:

                                    
                                       By this seruice of the Angels in protecting thee, thou shalt gaine this further aduantage, as to conquer and triumph ouer

the greatest perils and mischiefes. For this is meant by marching vpon those cruell beasts, which are mentioned vers. 13.
                                    
                                       No marueile then if the Angels protect thee in cases of lesse perill and mischiefe.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Hitherto the first member of the position, which the Prophet handleth in this Psalme, hath been debated: namely, our deliuerance from all hurts and discomforts in the case of our dependance vpon the Lord.
                  
                  The second member of the said position is in sense and effect this:

                        That by resting vpon the Lord, we shall be made partakers of all comforts and blessings, vers. 14.15.16.
                        
                     
                  
                  This point of doctrine the Prophet disputeth and cleereth by an argument drawne from a testimonie that is aboue all exception. He concludeth thus:

                        The Lord himselfe doth professe vnder most gracious promises, that in case wee rest vpon him, he will communicate vnto vs all comforts and blessings.
                        Therefore by resting on the Lord, wee shall vndoubtedly be made partakers of all comforts and blessings.
                     
                  
                  Touching this profession on the Lords part, of communicating vnto vs all comforts and blessings, in case we depend vpon him: we are to obserue how the Lord setteth it foorth in those three last verses of the Psalme.
                  
                     Vers. 14. The Lord doth twice inferre and conclude his communicating of all blessings vnto vs, vpon the reason of our dependance on him.

                           His first conclusion is this:

                                 
                                    He resteth on me, saith the Lord.
                                 
                                 
                                    Therefore will I deliuer him. Here vnder the name and title of deliuering vs, we must vnderstand the supplying of al other blessings, as it is expounded by the Lord himselfe in the end of the fifteenth verse, and throughout the sixteenth.
                              
                           
                           
                              His second conclusion is in the later part of the 14. verse: and is in sense the same with the former:

                                 
                                    He acknowledgeth my name, saith the Lord. As if he should say: He doth out of an acknowledgement of my power and promise to helpe him, and of my fidelity in keeping promise, rest vpon me for helpe and comfort.
                                 
                                    Therefore will I exalt him: that is, aduance him from out of trouble into a place of safetie, and likewise furnish vnto him all other blessings.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Vers. 15. The Lord doth expresse and amplifie his said profession by a Logicall proceeding from the lesse to the greater. For first he saith, That he will heare the faithfull petitioner: then (which is a greater fauour) that he will be present with him in his trouble to comfort him: thirdly, that he will deliuer him from it, which is a further degree of fauour: and lastly, which is the highest degree of fauour, that he will glorifie and honour him.
                     
                     Vers. 16. Whereas the Lord in the end of the 15. verse hath promised to conferre glorie and honour vpon the faithfull and confident petitioner: he doth in the 16. verse illustrate this generall by setting downe the parts of the glory and honour, which he will bestow on him. These parts are the blessings of this life, and the comforts of eternall life. The Lord concludeth thus:

                           
                              I will bestow vpon the faithfull and confident petitioner the blessings of this life, and the comfort of eternall life, vers. 16. Where vnder the promise of length of daies, is implied the promise of all prosperitie and

comfort in this life. Vnder the promise of seeing the Lords saluation, the promise of enioying the happines and blessings of eternall life is signified.
                           
                              Therefore will I bestow vpon him glorie and honour, vers. 15. in the end.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PSALM. 94.
               
                  O Lord, who art the mighty God the auenger, the mightie God the auenger, shew thy selfe clearely.
               
                  2 Exalt thy selfe, thou who art Iudge of the world: render to the proude their reward,
               
                  3 Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph?
               
                  4 They belch out and speake rough words: all the workers of iniquitie extoll themselues.
               
                  5 They crush thy people O Lord, and afflict thine heritage.
               
                  6 They slay the widow and the stranger: and murther the fatherlesse.
               
                  7 And they say: the Lord seeth not: neither doth the God of Iacob regard it.
               
                  8 Vnderstand, O ye most vnwise among the people: and yee fooles, when will you be wise?
               
                  9 He that planted the eare, shall he not heare? Or he that formed the eye, shall he not see?
               
                  10 He that chastiseth nations, shall he not correct? He that teacheth man knowledge▪ shall he not know?
               
                  11 The Lord knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanitie.
               
                  12 Blessed is the man, whom thou chastisest O Lord: for him thou teachest in thy law:
               
                  13 Thou doest giue him rest from the dayes of euill, vntill the pit be digged for the wicked.
               
                  14 Surely, the Lord will not faile his people, neither will he forsake his inheritance.
               
                  
                  15 For iudgement shall returne to iustice: and after it, all the vpright in heart shall returne.
               
                  16 Who hath risen vp with me against the wicked? Or who hath taken my part against the workers of iniquitie?
               
                  17 If the Lord had not holpen me, my soule had quickly dwelt in the place of silence.
               
                  18 When I said: My foote slideth: thy mercie (O Lord) staied me.
               
                  19 When I had a multitude of thoughts within me, thy comforts reioyced my soule.
               
                  20 Hath the throne of iniquitie fellowship with thee? which forgeth wrong against law.
               
                  21 They gather together against the soule of the righteous: and condemne the innocent blood.
               
                  22 But the Lord is my refuge, and my God is the rocke of my confidence.
               
                  23 He turneth vpon them their iniquitie: and destroyeth them by their owne malice: the Lord our God destroyeth them.
               
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 94.
                  The Prophet discerning the godly exceedingly oppressed by the malicious proceedings of the wicked, who in the state, where hee liued, managed the places of greatest power and authoritie: And being carried with an affectionate desire to relieue and comfort them in this case of their distresse, hath hereupon indited this worthy Psalme. Wherein,

                        1. He presenteth on the behalfe of the godly an humble motion vnto the Lord against these wicked and proud tyrants, vers. 1.2.
                        2. He doth impart with the godly for their comfort, that (notwithstanding the proceedings of the wicked against them) they rest in a condition of blessednesse, vers. 12.13.14. and so to the end.
                     
                  
                  The Prophets humble motion is set downe vers. 1. and 2. In the second verse that which is sued for, doth direct vs to

the true interpretation of the motion made in the first. He prayeth the Lord in the second, to aduance himselfe into his throne of Iustice, and to proceede with those proud tyrants, who oppressed his people, according to their deserts. This iustice he sueth for in the first verse also vnder these termes: O Lord, shew thy selfe clearely, or cause thy brightnes to shine. The Lord sheweth himselfe clearely and causeth his brightnes to shine, when the glory of his iustice is made manifest in the execution of punishment vpon the wicked. We see then that the motion tendered by the Prophet vnto the Lord against the wicked, is this:

                        That the Lord would be pleased to execute iustice against these proud tyrants, who oppressed his people, vers. 1. and 2.
                        
                     
                  
                  This motion of the Prophet against the wicked, is

                        1. Solicited by propounding some inducements for the grant thereof. From vers. 1. to the end of the 7.
                        2. Accompanied with a defence of the Lords glorie against the blasphemie of the said tyrants, vers. 8. and so to the end of the 11.
                     
                  
                  The solicitation of the said motion is performed by presenting vnto the Lords consideration and remembrance,

                        1. The office, which he challengeth as proper vnto himselfe, of executing vengeance vpon the wicked, ver. 1. and 2.
                        2. The circumstance and length of time, wherein the wicked haue tyrannized ouer the godly, vers. 3.
                     
                  
                  Vpon the former ground and inducement he pleadeth with the Lord, thus:

                        If it be thou onely (O Lord) who art by office the auenger of all iniquitie, and the Iudge of the earth: it may please thee according to this thy office, to execute iustice vpon these wretched tyrants, who oppresse and vexe thy people.
                        But it is thou onely (O Lord) who art by office the auenger of all iniquitie, and the iudge of the earth, v. 1.2.
                        
                        
                           It may please thee therefore according to this thy office to execute iustice vpon these wretched tyrants, who oppresse and vexe thy people, vers. 1. and 2.
                        
                     
                  
                  Vpon the other ground and inducement which is taken from the circumstance or length of time, hee vseth this perswasion with the Lord:

                        
                           These proud wretches haue now a long space tyrannized ouer thy people, vers. 3. Where this their tyrannizing is expressed by a word importing their reioycing and triumphing in the oppression of others: so as the Prophet brandeth them with a note of extraordinarie tyrannie.
                        
                           Wherefore (O Lord) giue an end to this their tyrannie, by executing iustice and reuenge vpon them, vers. 1. and 2.
                     
                  
                  The antecedent of this reason is confirmed by particulating the seuerall sorts of tyrannie practized against the Lords people: thus,

                        If they haue now a long space persecuted thy people both in word and fact: they haue a long time tyrannized ouer them.
                        But they haue now a long space persecuted thy people both in word and fact, vers. 4.5.6.
                        
                        Therefore haue they now a long time tyrannized ouer them, vers. 3.
                        
                     
                  
                  Touching the Assumption: first the seuerall parts thereof are handled: and then the whole is illustrated. The former part, which concernes the persecution performed by words, is declared by these two particular instances:

                        They deliuer out threats of violence and oppression against thy people: and they speake also contemptibly of them, extolling themselues farre aboue them, ver. 4.
                        
                        Therefore it followeth that they persecute thy people in word and speech.
                     
                  
                  The other part, which concernes the persecution performed in fact against the Lords people, is cleared likewise by certaine instances: in the setting downe whereof the Prophet

proceedes by a logicall gradation from the lesse to the greater, thereby to amplifie the greatnes of the persecution and tyrannie executed vpon the persons of the godly. The instances, whereupon the said persecution by way of fact is concluded, are these:

                        
                           They vexe and oppresse thy people by sundrie vniust courses, vers. 5: they murder also the widow, the stranger, and the orphane, vers. 6. Here you see the said gradation. To vexe the godly by vniust courses is a great sinne. To murder them is a greater. But to vexe and murder the widow, the stranger, and the orphane, is a wickednes farre more heinous and capitall.
                        
                           Therefore they persecute thy people by way of fact.
                        
                     
                  
                  Now the said whole Assumption ioyntly with these her parts hath an illustration from this comparison:

                        These tyrants persecute the Lord himselfe by disgorging blasphemie against him, charging vpon him the imputation of ignorance and carelesnes how it succeedeth with the godly, vers. 7.
                        
                        No marueile then if in word and fact they persecute the Lords people, vers. 4.5.6.
                        
                     
                  
                  Thus farre hath the Prophet solicited his sute with the Lord, concerning the execution of iustice vpon these bloodie tyrants.
                  There followeth the Prophets Apologie in the behalfe of the Lords glory against the said blasphemy. The blasphemy is this:

                        That the Lord neither knoweth nor regardeth the proceedings held against the godly, vers. 7.
                        
                     
                  
                  The wicked hauing breathed out against the Lord this blasphemous position; whereby they strip and depriue him of the office which is proper vnto him of gouerning and iudging the world: the Prophet doth hereupon take an occasion to accompany his humble motion with a defence of the Lords glorie. The course he holdeth in his Apology for the Lord, is this:

                        
                        
                           First, he premiseth, vers. 8. a direct contradiction to the said blasphemous position: which contradiction is implied hereby, in that he chargeth these Machiuilian gallants with extreme senselesnes for such their apprehension of the Lord: as if he said vnto them thus: It is a most grosse vntruth which you affirme of the Lords ignorance and carelesnesse touching your proceedings against the godly: so to apprehend of the Lord, argueth in you an exceeding blockishnes.
                        
                           Secondly, hauing thus censured and contradicted in generall these barbarous Machiuilists, he disputeth against their blasphemie, and refelleth it by two arguments. The first whereof is this:
                           
                              
                                 The Creator of each instrument, facultie, and act of all knowledge both in the outward sense and mind, and he who is the punisher of whole nations, doth know and take to heart your tyrannous proceedings against the godly, ver. 9. and 10.
                              
                                 The Lord, whom you thus blaspheme, is the creator of each instrument, facultie, and act of all knowledge both in the outward sense and minde: and it is hee, who is the punisher of whole nations.
                              
                              
                                 The Lord therefore, whom you thus blaspheme, is he who doth know and take to heart your tyrannous proceedings against the godlie. vers. 8. and 11.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  In the Proposition are comprized (as you see) these seuerall branches:

                        1. The discerning of all proceedings by him, who hath made the eare and the eye: that is, the instrument, facultie, and act of hearing and seeing, vers. 9.
                        2. The knowing of all proceedings by him, who hath formed the minde, vers. 10. in the end. Where by that one particular of the Lords teaching knowledge

vnto men, wee must vnderstand likewise his creating the instrument, faculty, and act of this knowledge.
                        3. The taking to heart all proceedings against the godly by him, who is the punisher of whole nations, vers. 10. in the beginning. And this carrieth a comparison from the greater to the lesse. For if the Lord be the punisher of whole nations: what question can be made of his power and will to doe iustice vpon a few tyrants in the common-wealth of Israel?
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is omitted by the Prophet as a point vnquestionable.
                  The Conclusion is apparantly implied, in the 8. verse: where the Prophet vnder a bitter censure and imputation of brutish dulnes laid vpon the wicked for such their phranticke conceit of the Lord, doth contradict and reiect the said blasphemie as a most grosse absurdity.
                  The other argument vsed by the Prophet in this his Apologie for the Lords glory, is a comparison from the greater, concluded thus:

                        Who knoweth the very thoughts of the wicked and the vanitie of them, he cannot but know their outward proceedings against the godly.
                        The Lord knoweth the very thoughts of the wicked and the vanitie of them, vers. 11. Where vnder this knowledge attributed vnto the Lord, wee must vnderstand as meant also his taking to heart such thoughts and plots as the wicked conceiue and deuise against the godly.
                        
                        Therefore the Lord cannot but know their outward proceedings against the godly, vers. 8.
                        
                     
                  
                  Hitherto hath been handled, first, the Prophets humble motion for iustice against these impious oppressors of the godly: secondly, his defence of the Lords glory against their blasphemie.
                  His imparting of comfort vnto the godly, doth follow. For whereas the godly may obiect, that in case they bee thus

afflicted by the hand of the said tyrants, it may seeme that they rest in a miserable condition, such as may occasion them to doubt of the Lords prouidence & to diuert their thoughtes from the rule of pietie: the Prophet in answere to the said obiection doth to the exceeding comfort of the godly, dispute this position:

                        That the godly man, though afflicted by the hand of the wicked, is notwithstanding blessed, vers. 12. in the former part thereof.
                        
                     
                  
                  This position the Prophet doth cleere and determine by two arguments: whereof

                        The first is concluded thus:

                              Whom the Lord by affliction teacheth his law, and fashioneth to patience till the ruine of the wicked, hee, though afflicted by the wicked, is notwithstanding blessed.
                              But the godlie man is he, whom the Lord by affliction teacheth his law, and fashioneth to patience till the ruine of the wicked. The former effect is vers. 12. in the end: the other is vers. 13. Two excellent effects of a sanctified affliction. In the exposition of the 13. verse I follow Beza.
                              Therefore the godly man, though afflicted by the hand of the wicked, is notwithstanding blessed, vers. 12. in the former part thereof.
                              
                           
                        
                        The second is of this sort:

                              To whom the Lords loue is constant and vnchangeable, he, though afflicted by the wicked, is notwithstanding blessed.
                              The godly man is he, to whom the Lords loue is constant and vnchangeable, vers. 14.
                              
                              Therefore the godly man, though afflicted by the wicked, is notwithstanding blessed, ver. 12. in the former part thereof.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  To the Assumption of this later Syllogisme, which concernes the vnchangeablenes of the Lords loue to the godly man, the Prophet hath yeelded this confirmation:

                        
                        If the cariage of all proceedings shall in the Lords good time be so vprightly ordered, as that the godly man shall receiue thereby what is right and due vnto him by the Lords couenant and promise: then is the Lords loue vnto him constant and vnchangeable.
                        But the cariage of all proceedings shall in the Lords good time be so vprightly ordered, as that the godlie man shall receiue thereby what is right and due vnto him by the Lords couenant and promise, vers. 15. Where, first it is said, that iudgement shall returne to iustice: that is, the gouernment and cariage of matters shal be reformed and reduced to a course of right. Secondly, that after it, the vpright in heart shall returne: that is, after this reformation once made, the godly shal returne, that is, partake in the fruite and benefit of the said reformation, they being to receiue thereby according to the Lords gracious promise, deliuerance frō trouble, and such other blessed comforts.
                        
                        Therefore the godly man is he, to whom the Lords loue is constant and vnchangeable, vers. 14.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption of this syllogisme (wherin it is said that the godly man shal communicate in the benefit of the Lords reformation, receiuing thereby such comforts as by the couenant and promise of mercie are due vnto him) hath a double amplification:

                        1. From an instance in the Prophets owne person handled by a comparison of paritie, thus:
                           
                              
                                 The Lord hath giuen to me deliuerance from trouble and speciall comforts otherwise, when I was pressed with the distresses of my heart, vers. 17.18.19. In the 17. he saith: he had died, had not the Lord deliuered him. In the 18, that the Lord vpheld him when he was slipping into destruction. In the 19, that hee receiued comforts from the Lord, when anguish and distresse of heart pressed him.
                              
                              
                                 
                                 Therefore the Lord will in his good time of reformation giue likewise deliuerance from trouble and speciall comforts to other the godly, vers. 15.
                           
                        
                        The former part of this reason is proued and inlarged thus:

                              
                                 No man affoorded vnto me this deliuerance and comfort when the wicked practised against me, vers. 16.
                              
                                 It was therefore the Lord onely that did it, vers. 17.18.19.
                           
                        
                        2. From the consideration of the Lords most iust nature and proceeding. Hereupon the Prophet deduceth this conclusion:

                              
                                 If the Lord should not so order all procedings, as that the godly man may thereby receiue what is due vnto him by the Lords promise: hee should allow the committing of iniustice vpon the godly.
                              
                              
                                 But the Lord will not allow the committing of iniustice vpon the godly, vers. 20. Where vnder an interrogatorie forme of speech it is said, that the throne of tyrannie and oppression hath no fellowship with the Lord: that is, the Lord doth renounce and detest all vniust proceedings, such as iudiciall thrones of that qualitie doe yeeld.
                              
                                 Therefore the Lord will so order al proceedings, as that the godly man may thereby receiue what is due vnto him by the Lords promise of mercie, vers. 15.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption, wherein the Lords vpright proceeding and detestation of iniustice is recommended, is made euident and cleree by a comparison: wherein is laid forth the difference betwixt the proceeding held by tyrants and iniust Iudges, and that which is held by the Lord. The first part of the sayd comparison is a description of the iniustice

committed by tyrannous Magistrates vpon the godly and innocent thus:

                        
                           They forge and contriue all wrongfull meanes whereby to defeate the course of law, vers. 20. in the end: they assemble themselues to consult and conspire vpon the ruine of the iust: they passe sentence of condemnation on him, vers. 21.
                        
                           But the eternall Lord doth protect the godly and the innocent: and he doth execute his wrath vpon the wicked, vers. 22. and 23. In the 22. verse the Prophet by a particular instance in his own person, and by naming one for all of the same kinde and nature, doth imply and note the Lords protecting of the godlie and innocent in generall. For what the Lord is vnto Dauid, as Dauid is a godly and innocent man, the same the Lord is to al innocent and godly men. In the 23. verse, the Lords proceeding in iustice to the destruction of the wicked, is deliuered in expresse termes: and to assure vs thereof, it is thrice set downe: and to make it the more admirable and glorious, it is auouched that the Lord so ordereth his proceeding with them, as that they become the ministers and instruments of their owne destruction.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PSALM. 103.
               MY soule: praise thou the Lord: and all that is within me, praise his holy name.
               
                  2 My soule: praise thou the Lord: and forget not any of his benefits.
               
                  3 Who forgiueth all thine iniquities: and healeth al thine infirmities.
               
                  4 Who redeemeth thy life from the graue: who couereth thee on euery side with mercie and compassions.
               
                  
                  5 Who satisfieth thy mouth with good things: who reneweth thy youth as the youth of an Eagle.
               
                  6 The Lord doth iustice and right to all that are oppressed.
               
                  7 He hath made his waies knowne to Moses: and his works to the children of Israel.
               
                  8 The Lord is full of compassion and mercie, slow to anger, and of great kindnes.
               
                  9 He will not alway chide, neither keepe his anger for euer.
               
                  10 He hath not dealt according to our sinnes, nor rewarded vs according to our iniquities.
               
                  11 For how high the heauens are aboue the earth: so great is his mercie to them that feare him.
               
                  12 As farre as the East is from the West: so farre hath he remoued our sinnes from vs.
               
                  13 With what compassion a father is carried towards his children: the same hath the Lord towards them that feare him.
               
                  14 For hee knoweth whereof wee are made, hee remembreth that we are but dust.
               
                  15 The daies of man are as grasse: as a flower of the field, so florisheth he.
               
                  16 When the winde hath passed ouer it, it is gone: and the place thereof knoweth it no more.
               
                  17 But the louing kindnesse of the Lord is from all eternity, and endureth for euer vpon them that feare him: and his righteousnes vpon their childrens children:
               
                  18 Vpon them that keepe his couenant: and who remember his commandements to doe them.
               
                  19 The Lord hath established his throne in heauen: and his kingdome ruleth ouer all.
               
                  20 Praise the Lord ye his Angels that excel in strength, and doe his commandement in obeying the voyce of his word.
               
                  21 Praise the Lord all ye his hosts, who are his ministers performing his pleasure.
               
                  22 Praise the Lord all ye his workes in all places of his dominion. My soule praise thou the Lord.
               
                  
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 103.
                  There are of this Psalme two parts. In the former the Prophet doth excite and prouoke himselfe to the magnifying of the Lords name: from the beginning of the 1. verse to the ende of the 18. In the later hee inuiteth all other things to a concurrence with him in this duty of praising the Lord: from the beginning of the 19. verse to the end of the Psalme.
                  The subiect then handled in the former part is this:

                        That Dauid ought with his whole heart to magnifie the name of the Lord, vers. 1. and 2.
                        
                     
                  
                  This subiect the Prophet doth propound vnder a forme and figure of speech addressed to his soule and to al the faculties therof: therby stirring vp himself to this worthy dutie of honoring the Lord, not in part or remisly, but most affectionatly and with each faculty of his mind and will. The ground and motiue inducing him to performe vnto the Lord this acknowledgement and seruice of glorifying his name, is (as may appeare by the latter member of the 2. verse) a suruey made by him of the Lords blessings bestowed on himselfe in particular, & on the whole Church in generall. Out of this consideration he reasoneth and concludeth thus in honor of the Lord:

                        Who hath blessed Dauid in particular, and the whole Church in generall, his name ought Dauid with his whole heart to magnifie.
                        But it is the Lord who hath blessed Dauid in particular, and the whole Church in generall.
                        Therefore the Lords name ought Dauid with his whole heart to magnifie.
                     
                  
                  The Prophet first setteth downe the conclusion verse 1. and 2. Then he proceedeth to the Assumption: which consisteth of two branches: The first whereof is verse 3.4.5: the second is from the beginning of the 6. verse to the end of the 18. verse.
                  
                     The first branch of the Assumption concerning the blessings bestowed vpon Dauid in particular, is declared by an induction, consisting partly of spirituall blessings, viz. Iustification and Sanctification, verse 3: and partly of temporall fauours, verse 4. and 5. The induction is concluded thus:

                        The Lord hath bestowed on Dauid pardon of sinnes and sanctification of heart: he hath deliuered him from extreame perils: he so compasseth him on euery side with his fauour, that being deliuered he shall not miscarrie by any accident at any time or place: he doth furnish vnto him in plentifull sort all needfull prouisions for this life: he intertaineth him in vigor and strength of bodie for the lengthning of his daies.
                        Therefore the Lord hath blessed Dauid in particular.
                     
                  
                  The first member of this induction is vers. 3. Where the pardon of sinnes is first mentioned: and then vnder the phrase of healing thy infirmities, is implied the curing of the diseases which are in the vnderstanding and will: which being spirituall diseases, the cure is performed by the Spirit of sanctification. For it is the Spirit of the Lord that worketh vpon the vnderstanding to inlighten it with the knowledge of the Gospell, and vpon the will, to conforme it to some measure of obedience vnto the Gospell.
                  The second is verse 4. in the beginning: where I take it hee meaneth a temporall deliuerance, hauing in the former verse recorded his spirituall deliuerance from sin and the punishment thereof.
                  The third is vers. 4. in the end. Where hee noteth the continuance of the Lords extraordinarie care and fauour towards him being deliuered, which is such as couereth him on euery side, so as he can not miscarie.
                  The fourth and fifth are verse 5: which verse I doe with the French and M. Beza so interpret as I haue set downe. The said fift member of the induction hath an illustration from a Comparison of Similitude, thus:

                        
                        As the bodie of an Eagle is intertained in vigor and strength, whereby it liueth long:
                        So the Lord intertaineth Dauid in vigor and strength to the lengthning of his age.
                     
                  
                  The Prophet hauing handled the first branch of the said Assumption concerning the blessings bestowed on himselfe in particular, doth now in like sort by an induction specifie the benefits bestowed on the Church in generall. The induction is this:

                        The Lord relieueth and righteth the cause of the oppressed: he hath deliuered vnto Moses the lawes and statutes wherein his people are to walke: he hath honoured his people by his sundrie deliuerances of them: he is merciful vnto them in the pardon of their transgressions.
                        Therfore the Lord hath blessed his whole Church in generall.
                     
                  
                  The first member of this induction is, vers. 6.
                  The second and third are verse 7. This verse is so expounded by the French and Beza.
                  
                  The fourth is vers. 8.9.10. where the Prophet with variety of phrase doth set out the excellencie and greatnes of the Lords mercie in remitting the offences of his people. That this is the maine scope of those 3. verses, may appeare, first by the termes and formes of speech vsed by the Prophet. Secondly, by comparing the 8. verse with that which is set downe Exod. 34.7: Numb. 14.18: Nehem. 9.17. Thirdly, by the illustration, which the Prophet in the verses following hath yeelded vnto this point of the excellencie and greatnes of the Lords mercie.
                  Let vs now see how the Prophet doth handle this last member of the said induction. His purpose is (as I haue said) to make knowne vnto vs this sweete and comfortable position, viz.
                  
                     That the Lords mercie in pardoning the sinnes of his people is exceeding great.
                  
                  This point he cleereth:

                        
                        
                           First, by three comparisons of equalitie, thus:
                           
                              1. How great the distance of the highest heauen is from the earth: so great is the Lords mercie in being reconciled vnto those who feare him, that is, vnto his people, vers. 11.
                              2. As farre as the East is from the West: so far hath the Lord remooued from vs our offences, vers. 12.
                              3. With how great and tender compassion a father is carried towards his children: with so great and tender mercie the Lord embraceth his, vers. 13.
                           
                        
                        
                           Secondly, by noting vnto vs a motiue inducing the Lord to the shewing of this exceeding mercie: which is an acknowledgement and consideration on the Lords part of the condition allotted vnto man by creation, vers. 14. A condition, in regard of the matter whereof man was formed, not onely base and contemptible, but most brittle also and apt to dissolution. By the consideration whereof the Lord is the rather moued to proceed with vs, not according to our desert in prouoking him, but according to that course which is most sutable to the glorie and excellencie of his gracious nature: that thereby he might the more magnifie the riches of his mercie, being shewed vpon so contemptible and brittle a worme as man is.
                        
                           Thirdly, by remembring vnto vs the eternitie of this mercie. Which argument is concluded thus:

                              
                                 The Lords mercie to his people for the pardon of their sinnes hath been from all eternitie, and doth endure for euer towards them, vers. 17.
                              
                                 Therefore it is exceeding great. vers. 8.9.10.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The Antecedent is amplified in this sort:

                        
                        1. By a Dissimilitude, thus:
                           
                              
                                 Man quickly passeth away, vers. 15. and 16. Of this sentence there is added an illustration from a double similitude: the one of grasse: the other of a flower of the field. Man is resembled to either of them in this point of his speedie withering and vanishing.
                              
                                 But the Lords mercie to his people is eternall, v. 17.
                           
                        
                        2. By a comparison from the greater: wherein the obiect of the Lords mercie is noted, that thereby we might see the reach thereof. The comparison is this:

                              
                                 The Lords mercie is extended for euer to many generations of the posteritie of his people.
                              
                              
                                 No marueile then if he extend it for euer to the persons of his people.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The first part of this comparison is verse 17. in the ende. Where the Prophet saith that the Lords righteousnes is vpon their Childrens children: meaning by righteousnesse the Lords fidelitie in keeping his couenant of mercie: and consequently the mercy performable by this couenant: which not determining in the persons of parents, but being extended also & presented to their posteritie, it doth thereby discouer it selfe to be very great and excellent.
                  Now whereas it may be obiected that by this course of extending mercy to so many generations, it will fall out to be extended to hypocrites and impious wretches: the Prophet verse 18. doth cleare this point by a description of those, to whom the said mercy is by the Lords couenant extendable. The description of them, is

                        1. From an effect on their part: viz. their obseruing of the Lords couenant made with them: which consisteth in dependance on God, & in obedience to his statutes.
                        
                        2. From their perseuerance in this care and endeuour to glorifie the Lord by their faith and obedience of life. Which I take to be meant by this clause, of retaining alwaies in memorie the Lords statutes to doe them.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Hitherto concerning the first part of the Psalme. The second followeth, wherein he inuiteth a concurrence with him in this dutie of praysing the Lord: so as the subiect handled in this second part is this:

                        That all things whatsoeuer ought to concurre with Dauid in praising the Lord, vers. 20.21.22.
                        
                     
                  
                  The argument to perswade this concurrence is concluded thus:

                        
                           If the Lord doth by his imperiall scepter and soueraigne power gouerne all things in heauen and earth: then ought all things to concurre with Dauid in praising the Lord.
                        
                        
                           But the Lord doth by his imperiall scepter and soueraigne power gouerne all things in heauen and earth, vers. 19. Where vnder these words (He hath established his throne in heauen) is meant the Lords setled and absolute authoritie of commanding and ruling in heauen.
                        
                           Therefore ought all things to concurre with Dauid in praising the Lord. In liew of this generall conclusion, there is set downe an induction of the particulars which are inuited to this dutie of praising the Lord. The particulars are these:

                              1. The Angels: which are described vers. 20.

                                    1. By their exceeding strength.
                                    
                                    2. By their action of executing with all readines the Lords commandements.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              2. All other creatures in heauen & earth: which are described vers. 21.

                                    1. By comparing thē to Armies.
                                    
                                    2. By their imploymēt in the Lords seruice.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              3. All the Lords workes of mercie and iustice in any part of the world whatsoeuer, vers. 22.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               PSALM. 104.
               MY soule, praise thou the Lord. O Lord my God, thou art exceeding great: thou art clothed with glorie and maiestie.
               
                  2 Who couereth himselfe with light as with a garment: who spreadeth the heauens like a tent.
               
                  3 Who laieth the beames of his high chambers in the waters: who maketh the thicke clowdes his chariot: who walketh vpon the wings of the winde.
               
                  4 Who maketh his Angels spirits, and his ministers a flaming fire.
               
                  5 He hath set the earth vpon her foundations: so that it shall neuer be remoued.
               
                  6 Thou haddest couered it with the deep as with a garment: the waters stood aboue the mountaines.
               
                  7 At thy rebuke they fled: at the voyce of thy thunder they hasted away.
               
                  8 They ascended by the mountaines: they descended by the valleis, into the place which thou hast established for them.
               
                  9 Thou hast set them a bound which they shall not passe: they shall not returne to couer the earth.
               
                  10 He sendeth the springs into the valleis, that they might runne betweene the mountaines:
               
                  11 That they may giue drinke to all the beasts of the field: and that the wilde asses may therewith quench their thirst:
               
                  12 That by these springs the foules of the ayre may dwell, singing amongst the branches.
               
                  13 He watreth the mountaines from his high chambers: and the earth is filled with the fruite of thy workes.
               
                  14 He causeth grasse to grow for the cattell, and herbe for the vse of man, making nourishment to come from out the earth:
               
                  15 As wine that maketh glad the heart of man: oyle to make the face to shine: and bread that strengthneth mans heart:
               
                  16 The high trees are therewith satisfied, the Cedars of Libanon which he hath planted:
               
                  
                  17 That the birds may make their nests there: the Storke dwelleth in firre trees.
               
                  18 The high mountaines are for the Goates: the rocks are a refuge for the Conies.
               
                  19 He hath appointed the Moone for seasons: the Sunne knoweth his going downe.
               
                  20 Thou bringest darknes, and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the forrest creepe foorth.
               
                  21 The young lions roare after their pray: and seeke their meate of the mightie God.
               
                  22 When the Sunne riseth, they retire and couch in their dennes.
               
                  23 Then goeth man foorth to his worke and to his labour vntill the euening.
               
                  24 O Lord, how great are thy workes? in wisedome hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy riches.
               
                  25 It is this great and wide Sea, wherein there are things creeping innumerable: small liuing creatures with great.
               
                  26 There walke the ships: and that great Leuiathan whom thou hast made to play therein.
               
                  27 Al these waite vpon thee, that thou maist giue them their foode in due season.
               
                  28 Thou giuest it vnto them, and they gather it: thou openest thine hand, and they are filled with good things.
               
                  29 If thou hide thy face, they are troubled: if thou take away their breath, they die and returne to their dust.
               
                  30 If thou send foorth thy spirit, they are created: and thou renuest the face of the earth.
               
                  31 Glorie be to the Lord for euer: let the Lord reioyce in his workes:
               
                  32 Who looking vpon the earth, it trembleth: and who touching the mountaines, they smoake.
               
                  33 I will sing vnto the Lord all my life: I will praise my God, while I liue.
               
                  34 My meditation will be acceptable vnto him: I will reioyce in the Lord.
               
                  35 The sinners shall be consumed from out the earth: and

the wicked, till there be no more. O my soule, praise thou the Lord. Praise ye the Lord.
               
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 104.
                  This Psalme hath a correspondence in argument with the former. For as in the former the Psalmist prouoketh himselfe and others to magnifie the Lord: so in this hee inuiteth himself and others to the same dutie. The difference of the one from the other is in the qualitie of the inducements vpon which the performance of the said duty is grounded: they being such in the former Psalme as concerne the Church principally: and such in this as concerne all mankind: yea all liuing creatures. The subiect then of this Psalme is this:

                        That out of a reuerent and due acknowledgement of the Lords glorie, we ought to magnifie him, vers. 1. in the beginning, vers. 31. and vers. 35. in the end.
                        
                     
                  
                  In the beginning of the first verse the Prophet addresseth personally vnto himselfe his exhortation to praise the Lord: and in his person, to all others: as may appeare aswell by the nature of the motiues to this duty alleaged by him, they being such as concerne all, as likewise by that, which is set downe verse 31. and 35. In which verses he stirreth vp others to second him in this seruice of tendring praise and honour vnto the Lord. The principall and maine ground of the said seruice is this:

                        If the Lord hath in the creation of things and conseruation of liuing creatures set foorth and published to the view of the world, the glorie of his power, wisedome and goodnes: then out of a due acknowledgement of this his glorie ought we to magnifie him.
                        But the Lord hath in the creation of things and the conseruation of liuing creatures set foorth and published to the view of the world, the glorie of his power, wisedome and goodnes. From the beginning of the second verse to the end of the 30: and more summarily,

vers. 24. where the Prophet speaketh thus: How great are thy workes? in wisedome thou hast made them all: the earth is full of thy riches. In the first member he noteth the power of the Lord: in the second, his wisedome: in the third, his goodnes in the number of the said workes.
                        
                        Therefore out of a due acknowledgement of this his glorie, ought we to magnifie him, vers. 1.31.35.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is handled by the Prophet first in the whole, by an argument drawne from the generall: then in the seuerall parts thereof. In the whole, the handling is thus:

                        
                           All thy workes doe represent and notifie to the world thy maiestie and glorie, vers. 1. Where the Prophet affirming, that the Lord is exceeding great, and that he hath clothed himself with glorie and maiestie, doth thereby meane that his works are this garment wherein he hath as it were imbroidered and visibly represented this his glorie. And so it is expounded by Cal. Marlo. Beza.
                        
                        
                           Therefore thy workes of creation and conseruation doe represent and publish the same. From the beginning of the second verse, to the end of the thirtith: and more summarily, vers. 24.
                     
                  
                  Touching the handling of the said Assumption in the seuerall parts thereof: whereas the said Assumption consisteth of two parts: the one concerning the creation of things: the other, the conseruation of liuing creatures: the Prophet first disputeth that branch of creation, proouing by an induction that in the creation of things we may behold as in a mirror this glory of the Lord. The induction is concluded thus:

                        
                           In the workes of the superiour part of the world, as in the light, the heauens, the clowdes and windes, the Angels: likewise in the workes of the inferiour part of the world, as in the earth and the water, the Lord hath set out and proclaimed vnto vs his glorie. From the beginning of the second verse, to the end of the

ninth verse. What particulars are omitted in this induction, for as much as they are of the same stampe, and serue to the same purpose of representing vnto vs the Lords glorie, they are to be conceiued as set downe to make the said induction perfit.
                        
                           Therefore hath the Lord in his workes of creation published and proclaimed vnto vs his glorie, vers. 24.
                     
                  
                  The first member of this induction concerning the light, is verse 2. where it is amplified by a comparison of Similitude, thus:

                        As a garment doth adorne and set foorth the person who weareth it:
                        So the light doth discouer and set out the glorie of him who created it.
                     
                  
                  The second touching the Heauens, is also verse 2: where it is handled likewise by a comparison of similitude, thus:

                        As the extending of a princely Tent doth set out the magnificencie of him whose it is:
                        So the extending of the heauens setteth out the maiestie of him who made them.
                     
                  
                  The third is of the clowdes, vers. 3. where the clowds are described by the seruice they yeeld vnto the Lord. This their seruice consisteth:

                        1. In that they serue as it were for lodgings and chambers, in which and from whence the Lord doth manifest the glorie of his power, iustice, and mercie. The Prophet, Psal. 18.12. calleth the clowds the Lords tabernacles. And in the 1. of Kings▪ chap. 8.12. the Lord is said to dwell in the clowds. In these clowdes the Psalmist affirmeth that the Lord hath laid the beames of his chambers: that is to say, that hee hath as it were built vnto himselfe lodgings and places, from whence to shew his glorie.
                        2. In that they serue also for instruments of his executions both in the way of mercie and in the way of iustice.

And vpon this ground they are called the Lords chariot, out of an allusion to the ancient vse of chariots in the battailes of Princes.
                        
                     
                  
                  The fourth is of the Windes, vers. 3: where they are described:

                        1. By their swiftnes: which is noted in that wings are attributed vnto them.
                        
                        2. By the Lords imploying of them in his seruices of expedition and speede: which is implied hereby, in that the Lord is said to walke vpon their wings.
                        
                     
                  
                  The fifth member of the sayd induction concerneth the Angels, verse 4. where they are described:

                        1. By the simplenes of their essence: they being called spirits, that is, essences free from all corporall and materiall composition.
                        
                        2. By the strength and agilitie of their essence (they being called a flaming fire:) which is declared by a comparison, thus:
                           
                              
                                 As a flaming fire is of strength to consume, and of a qualitie speedily piercing:
                              
                              
                                 So the Angels are of strength to frustrate all opposition: and they doe with all nimblenes and speede pierce euery where.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The sixt is of the earth, verse 5. where wee may obserue two particulars noted by the Prophet, wherein the Lord hath imprinted a visible testimonie and marke of his glory:

                        The one, the founding of the earth vpon the seas: which the Prophet calleth the bases of the earth.
                        The other, the stabilitie and vnmoueablenes of the earth.
                     
                  
                  The seuenth is of the waters, vers. 6.7.8.9. Where the Prophet obserueth these two things touching the waters:

                        1. Their place in the beginning of the creation, viz. the first day.
                        
                        2. Their place in the processe of the creation, viz. the third day.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Touching their place in the beginning of the creation: it is vers. 6. said to bee the outward superficies and face of the whole earth. Which couering of the earth by them is illustrated by two comparisons:

                        1. The one, a Similitude, thus: As a garment couereth the bodie: so the waters couered the earth.
                        
                        2. The other, a comparison from the greater, thus: The waters couered the highest hils: no marueile then if they couered lower places.
                        
                     
                  
                  Concerning their place in the third day of the creation: the Prophet noteth it verse 8. to be that which the Lord had assigned vnto them, viz, the sea: within the receptacle and limits whereof they are shut vp and confined: as may appeare Gen. 1.10: and Iob. 38.10. This retyring of the waters from the face of the earth into this their place, is described:

                        1. By the efficient thereof: viz. the thundring voyce and commandement of the Lord, vers. 7.
                        2. By their speedines in retyring, vers. 7. which is noted, in that they are said to flie and to hasten away, foorthwith vpon the sense and knowledge of the Lords commandement.
                        
                        3. By their effect of frustrating and ouercomming whatsoeuer might giue impediment to their retyring, v. 8. where it is said, that they ascended by the hils, and descended by the valleis: as if the Prophet should say, That neither hils nor valleis, nor any obstacle whatsoeuer, could hinder their retyring into the place assigned vnto them.
                        
                        4. By their perpetuall residing in the place, whereinto they are retyred. vers. 9.
                     
                  
                  Hitherto of the first branch of the said Assumption concerning the creation of things, and the induction vsed for the demonstration thereof.
                  There followes the second branch of the said Assumption concerning the conseruation of liuing creatures: from

the beginning of the 10. verse to the end of the 30. Here then to prooue that the Lord hath not only in his works of creation, but in other actions of his prouidence sensiblie represented the glory of his name to the eye of the world: the Prophet hath vndertaken to dispute this worthie position, viz.

                        That the Lord by his prouidence doth conserue and intertaine all liuing creatures in the state of nature allotted vnto them, vers. 28.
                        
                     
                  
                  For the cleering of this position, the Prophet vseth three seuerall arguments. The first containeth the meanes and instrumentall causes, whereby liuing creatures are conserued and intertained. Which meanes are euery of them so many excellent workes in particular comprehended vnder that generall action of conseruation. The Prophets conclusion by vertue of this argument is this:

                        Arg. 1.
                        The Lord hath for the vse of liuing creatures furnished vnto them the benefit of springs and riuers, the seruice of raine water, the commoditie of the night and day, the oportunitie of the sea. From the beginning of the 10. verse, to the end of the 26.
                        
                        Therefore the Lord doth by his prouidence conserue and intertaine liuing creatures in the state and condition of nature allotted vnto them, vers. 28.
                        
                     
                  
                  The first particular of the said meanes concerning springs and riuers deriued from them, is set downe vers. 10.11.12. In which verses the said springs and riuers are described:

                        1. By their efficient: who is the Lord himselfe, vers. 10.
                        2. By the place of their current, viz. the valleis, vers. 10.
                        3. By their vse and end, viz. that they might yeeld the commoditie of drinke:
                           
                              1. To the beasts of the field, vers. 11.
                              2. To the birds of the ayre, vers. 12. Where the birds are noted vnto vs partly by their sitting neere vnto the springs and riuers for the purpose of drinking, partly by

their action of singing as it were in praise of the Lord for this their refreshment by drinking.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  The second particular is of the supply yeelded by the Lord of raine water, vers. 13.14.15.16.17.18. This particular of the raine water is described:

                        1. By the place, from whence it is sent, viz. the clowdes, which are called the Lords high chambers, vers. 13.
                        2. By the places, on which it falleth, viz. the mountaines and other parts of the earth, vers. 13.
                        3. By the effect it worketh, viz. the making of the earth to yeeld plentie of fruites, vers. 13. in the end: where it is said, that the earth is filled with the fruite of thy workes, that is, with the fruites growing and produced by thy workes: which are the showers and dewes wrought and caused by the Lord to distill from the clowdes.
                     
                  
                  That the earth by vertue of this raine water yeeldeth plenty of fruites, is shewed by particulating the kinds of fruits produced: which are these, viz.
                     
                        1. Grasse for the vse of cattell, vers. 14. in the beginning.
                        2. Sundrie herbes and plants for the vse of man, vers. 14. in the middest. Where this vse which man receiueth, is expounded to be the nourishment which the Lord causeth to come from out the earth, that is, from the herbes and plants produced by the earth. Now this nourishment, which the Lord causeth the herbes and plants of the earth to produce, is noted in particularitie to be:

                              1. Wine, vers. 15: where it is recommended by the effect of reioycing the heart.
                              
                              2. Oyle, vers. 15: where it is commended by the effect of making the face to shine.
                              
                              3. Bread, vers. 15: where it is commended by the effect of relieuing and fortifying the strength of the bodie.
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           3. All goodly and high trees, as Cedars and Firre trees for birds to breede and rest on, vers. 16. and 17.
                        4. Nourishment in the barrennest and roughest places for the creatures that liue in them, viz. for goates and conies, vers. 18. These barren and rough places are called by the Prophet high mountaines. Here wee must vnderstand that of the high mountaines, which is vers. 16. said of the high trees: namely, that they are satisfied with the raine, which falleth from the clowdes: and so are enabled to yeeld nourishment to the creatures liuing on them.
                     
                  
                  The third particular of the meanes vsed by the Lord for the conseruing and intertaining of liuing creatures, is concerning the night and day. The night and day are described vnto vs:

                        1. By noting the instrumentall causes of the distinction of the one from the other, viz. the Moone and the Sunne, vers. 19. where it is said, that the Lord hath appointed the Moone for seasons, that is, to distinguish the season of the night from the day: And, that the Sunne knoweth his going downe, that is, keepeth a constant course of setting and rising, wherby the day is distinguished from the night.
                        2. By the vse and opportunitie they yeeld by this distinction of the one from the other, vnto wilde beasts and vnto men. The vse of the night for wilde beasts, is the opportunitie of trauelling abroad for their pray, vers. 20.21. The vse of the day for them, is to keepe retired and to rest, vers. 22. The vse yeelded to man from the day, is the opportunitie of imploying himselfe abroad in the duties of his calling from morning to euening, vers. 23. The vse of the night for man, though it be not distinctly expressed by the Prophet, yet forasmuch as it is said that man is to labour from morning to euening, we may by good collection conceiue this vse to be the refreshment and rest of man.
                     
                  
                  
                     The fourth and last particular is of the sea, verse 25. where there is a double vse thereof noted:

                        1. The one, to be a receptacle for fishes, vers. 25.
                        2. The other, to be the subiect of Nauigation, vers. 26.
                     
                  
                  The second argument, whereby to proue that it is the Lord who doth conserue and intertaine liuing creatures, is of this conclusion:

                        Arg. 2
                        At whose hands liuing creatures are by nature directed to attend their intertainment at all times of neede: he it is by whom they are intertained and conserued in the state allotted vnto them.
                        But it is the Lord at whose hands liuing creatures are by nature directed to attend their intertainment at all times of neede, vers. 27.
                        
                        Therefore it is the Lord who doth conserue and intertaine them in the state allotted vnto them, vers. 28.
                        
                     
                  
                  The third Argument alleaged by the Prophet for a further demonstration of the position in hand, is concluded thus:

                        Arg. 3.
                        By whose power and vertue the perishing and reuiuing of liuing creatures in their kinde, is disposed of: by him they are intertained in the state of nature allotted vnto them.
                        But it is the Lord by whose power and vertue the perishing and reuiuing of liuing creatures in their kind, is disposed of, vers. 29.30.
                        
                        Therefore it is the Lord by whom they are intertained in the state of nature allotted vnto them. vers. 28.
                        
                     
                  
                  Thus we see how the Prophet hath disputed this action of the Lords prouidence in conseruing and intertaining of liuing creatures in the condition of nature allotted vnto them. And thus we see how hee hath hitherto prooued that the Lord in the creation of things and in the conseruation of liuing creatures, hath disclosed vnto the world the glory of his power, wisedome and goodnes: whereupon must be inferred this conclusion, That in due acknowledgement thereof we ought to honor & magnifie him.
                  
                  
                     Here the Prophet stayeth not: but for a further prouocation to the tendering of this duty vnto the Lord, he vseth two other arguments: the former whereof is concluded thus:

                        If we ought so to carrie our selues as that the Lord may take delight in his workes, then ought wee with praise to acknowledge the glorie of his name in them.
                        But wee ought so to carrie our selues as that the Lord may take delight in his workes, vers. 31. in the end.
                        
                        Therefore ought we with praise to acknowledge the glorie of his name in them, vers. 31. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is perswaded by the Prophet thus:

                        The Lord is able by his power in a moment to confound whatsoeuer is offensiue and indelightfull vnto him: though it were as vnmoueable as the earth, and as strong and high as any mountaine, vers. 32.
                        
                        Therefore ought wee so to carrie our selues as that the Lord may take delight in his workes, and not repent him that he hath made them, vers. 31. in the end.
                        
                     
                  
                  The last argument vsed by the Prophet to inforce this dutie of magnifying the Lord, is a comparison of equalitie: wherein is offered to our consideration an example and profession on the part of the Prophet, that himselfe during life will not faile to performe the said dutie. His conclusion is this.
                  
                     As for my selfe: I professe that while I liue I will magnifie the Lord, vers. 33.
                     
                     Therefore let all other likewise magnifie and honour him, vers. 31.
                     
                  
                  The Antecedent of this reason is enlarged thus:

                        If this my endeuour to magnifie the Lord, will be a seruice pleasing and acceptable vnto him: while I liue will I magnifie him.
                        But this my endeuour to magnifie the Lord will be a seruice pleasing and acceptable vnto him, vers. 34. in the beginning.
                        
                        Therefore while I liue will I magnifie him, vers. 33.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is in this sort amplified:

                        
                        1. From the efficient of this acceptation concluded thus:
                           
                              
                                 Whose endeuour to magnifie the Lord proceedeth from an heart reioycing in him, his endeuour cannot be but a seruice pleasing and acceptable vnto the Lord.
                              
                              
                                 But the endeuour on my part to magnifie the Lord, proceedeth from an heart reioycing in him, vers. 34. in the end.
                              
                                 Therefore this my endeuour cannot be but a pleasing and acceptable seruice vnto the Lord, vers. 34. in the beginning.
                           
                        
                        2. From the consideration of the Lords proceeding with such as will not honour him, thus:
                           
                              
                                 The Lord will cut off from the earth such as refuse to honour and magnifie him, vers. 35.
                              
                                 Therefore will he accept my endeuour to magnifie him as a pleasing seruice, vers. 34. in the beginning.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               PSALM. 107.
               PRaise the Lord, because hee is good: yea because his mercie endureth for euer.
               
                  2 Let them report, who haue been redeemed by the Lord, and whom he hath deliuered from distresse:
               
                  3 And whom he hath gathered from the regions of the East and the West▪ of the North and the South.
               
                  4 Who wandered in the desert and wildernesse, finding no citie to dwell in,
               
                  5 Both hungry and thirstie, so as their soule fainted in them:
               
                  6 When they cried vnto the Lord in their trouble, he deliuered them from their distresse:
               
                  7 And led them forth by the right way, that they might come to a citie of habitation.
               
                  8 Let them therefore magnifie before the Lord his louing

kindnes, and his wonderfull workes before the sons of men.
               
                  9 For he satisfied the thirstie soule, and filled the hungrie soule with goodnes.
               
                  10 Such as dwell in darknesse and in the shadow of death, bound in miserie and iron,
               
                  11 Because they rebelled against the wordes of the mightie God, and despised the counsell of the most high:
               
                  12 Whereupon he humbled their hart with heauinesse: they fell downe and there was no helper:
               
                  13 When they cried vnto the Lord in their trouble, he deliuered them from their distresse:
               
                  14 He brought them out of darknes and out of the shadow of death, and brake their bandes asunder.
               
                  15 Let them therefore magnifie before the Lord his louing kindnes, and his wonderfull workes before the sonnes of men.
               
                  16 For he hath broken the gates of brasse, and hath cut the bars of iron asunder.
               
                  17 Fooles, who by reason of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted:
               
                  18 Whose soule abhorreth all meate, and they are brought to deaths doore:
               
                  19 When they cried vnto the Lord in their trouble, he deliuered them from their distresse:
               
                  20 He sent his word and healed them, and deliuered them from their graues.
               
                  21 Let them therefore magnifie before the Lord his louing kindnesse, and his wonderfull workes before the sonnes of men:
               
                  22 And let them offer sacrifices of praise, and declare his workes with reioycing.
               
                  23 They who goe downe to the Sea in ships, traffiquing vpon the great waters:
               
                  24 They who see the workes of the Lord and his wonders in the deepe:
               
                  25 How he commanding raiseth the stormie winde, and lifteth vp the waues of the sea:
               
                  26 How they mount vp to the heauens, and descend to the deepe: their soule melteth through trouble:
               
                  
                  27 They stumble and stagger to and fro like a drunken man, all their cunning being gone:
               
                  28 When they cried vnto the Lord in their trouble, he deliuered them out of their distresse:
               
                  29 He turned the storme into calme, and the waues became still:
               
                  30 And the waues being quieted, hee brought them reioycing vnto the hauen where they would bee.
               
                  31 Let them therefore magnifie before the Lord his louing kindnesse, and his wonderfull workes before the sonnes of men:
               
                  32 And let them exalt him in the congregation of the people, and praise him in the assembly of the elders.
               
                  33 He turneth the floods into a wildernesse, and the springs of water into drinesse:
               
                  34 A fruitfull land into barennesse, for the wickednesse of them that dwell therein.
               
                  35 He turneth the wildernesse into pooles of water, and the drie land into springs of water.
               
                  36 There he placeth the hungrie: and they build a citie to dwell in:
               
                  37 And sow the fields and plant vineyards, which bring forth fruitfull increase.
               
                  38 He blesseth them, and they multiplie exceedingly: and he diminisheth not their cattell.
               
                  39 Afterward they are diminished and brought low by distresse, euill and sorrow.
               
                  40 He powreth contempt vpon Princes, and causeth them to erre in desert places out of the way.
               
                  41 He raiseth vp the poore out of miserie, and maketh him families like a flock of sheepe.
               
                  42 Let the vpright see it and reioyce: and let all iniquitie stop her mouth.
               
                  43 Who is wise, let him obserue these things: that they may vnderstand the louing kindnesses of the Lord.
               
                  
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 107.
                  The subiect of this Psalme is this:

                        That the Lord is to be magnified, first by all men in generall, vers. 1. Secondly, by certaine sorts of men in particular. From the beginning of the second verse, to the end of the 42. verse.
                        
                     
                  
                  That the Lord is to be magnified by all men in generall, the Psalmist sheweth by this argument:

                        The Lord is good, vers. 1. in the middest.
                        
                        Therefore all his people ought to magnifie him, vers. 1. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Antecedent of this reason is amplified by a comparison from the greater, thus:

                        The Lord is good: yea (that which is a matter of greater moment and excellencie) this his goodnes doth neuer determine, but endureth eternally, vers. 1. in the end.
                        
                     
                  
                  Hauing declared that all men in generall ought to praise the Lord: he proceedeth to shew that certaine sorts of men are tyed, some of them by a proper obligation of an extraordinary mercy, & some by the regard of a common blessing, to a speciall and praisefull acknowledgement of the Lords goodnes towards them.
                  Let vs see vpon what particular motiue these seuerall sorts of men are to ground this their action of magnifying the Lord.
                  The first sort is of such as haue wandered out of their way in deserts fainting through hunger and thirst, verse 2. to the end of the 9. The inducement for the performance of this dutie of praise by them, is concluded thus:

                        Whom the Lord hath deliuered from distresse, reducing them to places of habitation, and relieuing them against the extremitie of hunger and thirst: they ought to magnifie the Lord for this his mercie both priuatly and publikely, vers. 2. and 3.
                        
                        But such as haue wandered out of their way in deserts,

fainting through hunger and thirst, the Lord hath deliuered from distresse, reducing them to places of habitation, and relieuing them against the extremitie of hunger and thirst, vers. 4.5 6.7.9.
                        
                        Therefore such as haue wandred out of their way in deserts, fainting through hunger & thirst, ought to magnifie the Lord for this his mercy both priuatly & publikely, vers. 8.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Proposition is verse 2. and 3. In these verses the whole sense of the proposition is comprehended. In the second, the action of reporting, that is, of magnifying the Lord is enioyned vnto those who are redeemed by him from distresse. In the 3. verse the particular blessings of reducing them to places of habitation and relieuing them against hunger and thirst, are noted vnder that action of gathering them from the East and West, North and South. For this gathering of them from these regions, is a gathering of them vnto villages and cities: where they might find a double comfort and reliefe: the one, against wandring in deserts by the oportunitie of houses and lodgings: the other, against hunger and thirst, by the commoditie of sustenance suppliable in villages and cities.
                  The Assumption is verse 4.5.6.7.9. In the 4 verse their wandring out of their way in deserts is noted: in the 5, their fainting through hunger and thirst: in the 6, their deliuerance from distresse: in the 7. their reduction to places of habitation, and consequently their reliefe against hunger and thirst: in the 9, this supply against hunger and thirst, is expressed in distinct termes.
                  The said Assumption is in the 6. verse, enlarged by imparting vnto vs one of the causes which moued the Lord to this compassionate regard of these distressed Pilgrims: viz. their humble supplication and crying vnto the Lord.
                  
                  The conclusion is vers. 8. where is enioyned a magnifying of the Lords goodnes, not only in priuate, which the Psalmist calleth a magnifying thereof before the Lord: but also in publike, which hee calleth a magnifying thereof before the sonnes of men.
                  
                  
                     The second sort of persons, who are obliged to this dutie of acknowledging the Lords mercy in all gratefull manner, is of prisoners whom the Lord hath enlarged from out of prison. The reason inducing them to offer vnto the Lord this sacrifice is this:

                        By whom prisoners enlarged from out of prison haue recouered their libertie, him they ought to praise for his goodnes both priuatly and publikely.
                        But it is the Lord by whom prisoners enlarged from out of prison haue recouered their libertie, vers. 13.14.
                        
                        Therefore it is the Lord whom prisoners enlarged from out of prison, ought to praise for his goodnes both priuatly and publikely, vers. 15.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Assumption is amplified by setting forth the greatnesse of this fauour and act performed by the Lord in restoring prisoners to their liberty. The amplification is:

                        1. From the consideration of the contrarie, viz. the qualitie of their imprisonment: which is noted to be accompanied with extreme miserie, in regard
                           
                              1. Of the place thereof: it being a darke dungeon, and as it were the house of death, ver. 10. in the beginning.
                              2. Of the rigor they endured in that representatiue dungeon of death: they being there chained with bonds and fetters of iron, vers. 10.
                              3. Of the cause, for which they suffered: it being no lesse than rebellion against the Lord, and a wilfull contempt of his gracious purpose to blesse them: a crime of so capitall a nature, as might iustly haue occasioned their perpetuall restraint, vers. 11.
                              4. Of the anguish they endured in mind, by reason of this so sharpe affliction, vers. 12. in the beginning.
                              5. Of their vtter destitution and desperate case, there being none to helpe them, vers. 12. in the end.
                           
                        
                        
                           2. From the consideration of the motiue inducing the Lord to bestow this blessing of libertie vpon them, viz. their humble supplication and crying vnto him, verse 13. in the beginning.
                        3. From the consideration of the extraordinarie course and manner of their enlargement: which by breaking the gates of steele and barres of iron is implied to be such, as if without this extraordinary power and force there had been an impossibilitie of their deliuerance. vers. 14. and 16.
                     
                  
                  The third sort of men, who rest bound to honour the Lord for his goodnes towards them, is of such as the Lord hath recouered from the extremitie of sicknes. The argument to perswade them to tender this seruice of thanks vnto the Lord is this:

                        By whom the sicke deliuered from sicknes haue recouered their health, him they ought to magnifie for this mercie both priuatly and publikely.
                        But it is the Lord by whom the sicke deliuered from sicknes haue recouered their health, vers. 19.20.
                        
                        Therefore it is the Lord, whom the sicke deliuered from sicknes ought to magnifie for this mercie both priuatly and publikely, vers. 21.22.
                        
                     
                  
                  This blessing of health mentioned in the Assumption, is set out by making knowne vnto vs,

                        1. The quality of the sicknes endured by them. To which purpose their sicknes is described:
                           
                              1. By the cause thereof, viz. the sinnes of the sick: in respect whereof they are called fooles, v. 17.
                              2. By the extremitie therof: which appeares by two effects:
                                 
                                    1. Their abhorring of sustenance, vers. 18.
                                    2. Their neerenes to death, vers. 18.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        2. The motiue which drew the Lord to the shewing of this mercie, viz. their humble sute and crying vnto him for compassion, vers. 19.
                        
                           3. The manner and course held by the Lord in restoring health to these sicke, viz. the Lords curing of them without ordinarie meanes by his absolute will and pleasure, vers. 20.
                     
                  
                  The fourth sort of persons, who owe vnto the Lord the sacrifice of praise for his extraordinarie mercie towards them, are trauellers on Sea (described vers. 23. by their sailing on the sea, and by the end thereof) who being deliuered from great distresse in their voiages on sea, haue recouered the port of their safety. That these ought to extoll the mercie vouchsafed vnto them herein, is prooued thus:

                        By whom trauellers on sea being deliuered from distresses on sea, haue recouered the port of their safetie, him they ought to magnifie for this mercie both priuatly and publikely.
                        But it is the Lord by whom trauellers on sea being deliuered from distresses on sea, haue recouered the port of their safetie, vers. 28.29.30.
                        
                        Therefore it is the Lord whom trauellers on sea being deliuered from distresses on sea, ought to magnifie for this mercie both priuatly and publikely, vers. 31.32.
                        
                     
                  
                  The blessing of deliuerance from perils on sea (whereof the Assumption speaketh) and of recouering the port of safetie, is amplified by relating vnto vs:

                        1. The greatnes of the distresse whereto the said trauellers were subiect in their voyages on sea. This greatnes of their distresse is first mentioned in general, vers. 24: where by seeing the workes of the Lord and his wonders in the deepe, is meant a visible and present subiection to the dangers growing from the violent windes, raging waues, & strange tossing of the ships: which are the Lords works and wonders in the deepe. Then, the said greatnes of their distresse in being exposed to present losse of life, is set forth in the three verses following, by noting vnto vs,

                              
                              1. The instrumentall causes thereof, viz.

                                    1. The breaking foorth of violent winds and stormes at the Lords commandement, vers. 25. in the beginning.
                                    2. The swelling and raging of the waues by meanes of the winds and tempests, vers. 25. in the end.
                                    3. The mounting on high of the ships, and their sudden precipitation occasioned by the furie of the windes and waues, vers. 26.
                                    4. The extremitie of sea sicknes, inforcing them in a manner to render vp the ghost, vers. 26. in the end.
                                 
                              
                              2. The desperate termes, whereto they are reduced: they failing in all meanes to help themselues, viz. aswell in strength of bodie as in skill and direction by the art of Nauigation, vers. 27. Where in this point of vtter disablement to helpe themselues, they are compared to a drunken man: who discouers by his staggering to and fro, his impotencie and inabilitie to help himselfe.
                           
                        
                        2. An inducement mouing the Lord to reach vnto them his hand of protection, viz. their humble supplication and crying vnto him, vers. 28.
                        3. The manner of their deliuerance, viz. the Lords calming of the windes and his suppressing of the waues. vers. 29.
                        4. The ioy of heart conceiued hereupon by the said trauellers, vers. 30.
                     
                  
                  The conclusion is amplified by noting more distinctly than before, the circumstance of the place and persons, where and before whom this gratefull acknowledgement of the Lords mercie is to bee presented. The place must be such as is appointed for publike meetings: the persons, aswell such as are of honorable ranke and imployment in

the state, vers. 32. in the end: as such as are of meaner qualitie and degree, verse 32. in the beginning. This serueth likewise to set out the greatnes of the blessing bestowed on these distressed trauellers on sea.
                  The fift and last sort of men inuited to magnifie the Lord, is of such as by a common obligation are tyed vnto this dutie: and they are such as hold a sound opinion of the Lords prouidence. For these I take to bee meant by the Psalmist verse 42. in the beginning: vnto whom are opposed in the same verse, such as denie the prouidence of the Lord in the whole or in part. Now the argument whereby such, whose apprehension of the Lords prouidence is vpright and warrantable, are drawne to offer vnto him this dutie of praise, is taken from a suruey made of certaine changes incident to some things and persons. Out of this argument added to the consideration of the Lords proceedings aboue mentioned in the other parts of this Psalme, the Prophet deduceth first a double conclusion: then, an exhortation. Of the conclusions: the one, which is the principall, concerneth directly the said fift and last sort of men, viz. such as acknowledge both the generall and particular prouidence of the Lord: the other, is touching Atheists who deny the same. The Psalmist reasoneth thus:

                        The Lord, besides the euents and proceedings aboue mentioned, worketh and ordreth all changes in things and persons, as namely, barrennes and fertilitie in the earth, wealth and pouertie in priuate men, deiection and aduancement in persons of state, vers. 33. to the end of vers. 41.
                        
                        Therefore out of an obseruation of these proceedings, such as hold a sound opinion of the Lords prouidence, ought with ioyfull hearts to acknowledge and magnifie the same: and such as are Atheists, to surcease all further dispute and replie against it, vers. 42: where the ful meaning of this double conclusion is set downe in expresse termes.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The Antecedent of this reason compriseth sixe seuerall instances, whereby to prooue that it is the Lords hand that worketh and disposeth al changes in things and persons.
                  
                     The first instance is of a fruitfull soyle reduced to barrennesse, vers. 33. and vers. 34. where by flouds, and springs of waters he meaneth the soyle, which by the irrigation of waters hath growne to a qualitie of fruitfulnes. Now this change is set out by the cause which moued the Lord to the effecting thereof: which is noted vers. 34. to be the wickednes of the inhabitants.
                  
                     The second instance is of a barren and fruitles region made fruitfull and commodious for habitation. vers. 35.
                  
                     The third is of the poore raysed to a condition of wealth. vers. 36.37.38. In these verses the Prophet setteth forth

                        1. The instrumentall causes of this wealthie condition, viz. their trauell and industrie
                           
                              
                                 In building cities, for habitation and commerce, vers. 36.
                              
                                 In plowing and sowing fields, vers. 37.
                              
                                 In planting of vineyards, vers. 37.
                           
                        
                        2. The principall cause of the said condition of wealth, viz. the blessing of the Lord, aswell vpon their persons for the multiplication of children, as vpon their stock for increase thereof, vers. 38. Where by that particular of not diminishing their cattell, we must vnderstand in generall the abundant increase of their whole stocke.
                     
                  
                  
                     The fourth is of the rich reduced to a poore and miserable estate. vers. 39. Where the instrumentall causes hereof are noted by these three words, viz. distresse, euill, and sorrow. Which words doe imply and signifie the crosses and calamities, whereby as by meanes and instruments the Lord worketh this change of estate.
                  
                     The fifth instance is of persons deiected from an high degree and state, verse 40. Where the Psalmist maketh knowne vnto vs this deiection by two particulars of abasement: whereof,

                        
                        1. The one is the Lords withdrawing from them all reputation, affection and dutie on the part of the people: which is an ouerture and meane to the degree of abasement following.
                        
                        2. The other is the Lords abandoning of them to all discomfort and miserie: which is implied by this, in that they are forced to wander in deserts, as not finding so much fauour in the world as the commoditie of a place to rest in.
                     
                  
                  
                     The sixt and last instance is of men aduanced from a condition of affliction and basenes, to places of reputation and dignitie: and that which is more, the Lord doth honour them being thus exalted with a mightie dependance: which the Psalmist doth insinuate vnder the blessing of such an issue and posteritie as shall grow into a multitude of families. verse 41.
                  Now the exhortation deduced vpon this argument of the changes wrought by the Lords prouidence in some things and persons, is an exhortation addressed vnto the students of true wisdome, to obserue the Lords proceedings. The Psalmist perswadeth them to this dutie in this sort:

                        
                           If the students of true wisedome may in the Lords proceedings as in a mirrour behold his mercie and iustice, then ought they to obserue them.
                        
                        
                           But they may in the Lords proceedings as in a mirrour behold his mercie and iustice, vers. 43. In this verse the Prophet mentioneth onely the Lords mercie and goodnes: but by a forme of speech wee are to vnderstand also his iustice: as may appeare by considering the instances aboue mentioned: which are instances aswell of the Lords iustice as mercie.
                        
                           Therefore they ought to obserue them, vers. 43. in the beginning.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               PSALM. 116.
               
                  I Loue the Lord: because hee hath heard my voyce and my prayers.
               
                  2 For he hath inclined his eare vnto me, when I did call vpon him in my daies.
               
                  3 The snares of death compassed me: and the distresses of the graue caught me: I found anguish and sorrow:
               
                  4 Then I called vpon the name of the Lord, saying: I beseech thee, O Lord, deliuer my soule.
               
                  5 The Lord is mercifull and righteous: our God is full of compassion:
               
                  6 The Lord preserueth the simple. I was in miserie and he saued me.
               
                  7 Returne vnto thy rest, O my soule. For the Lord hath bin beneficiall vnto thee.
               
                  8 Forasmuch as thou hast deliuered my soule from death, mine eyes from teares, and my feete from falling:
               
                  9 I shall walke before the Lord in the land of the liuing.
               
                  10 I beleeued, and therefore did I speake. When I was exceedingly troubled,
               
                  11 I said in my haste, All men are liars.
               
                  12 What shall I render vnto the Lord? All his benefits are vpon me.
               
                  13 I will take the cup of deliuerance, and set forth the name of the Lord.
               
                  14 I will pay my vowes vnto the Lord foorthwith in the presence of all his people.
               
                  15 Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his beloued.
               
                  16 Behold Lord: for I am thy seruant: I am thy seruant, and the sonne of thine handmaid. Thou hast broken my bonds.
               
                  17 I will offer to thee a sacrifice of praise: and will set forth the name of the Lord.
               
                  
                  18 I will pay my vowes vnto the Lord foorthwith in the presence of all his people:
               
                  19 In the courts of the Lords house: in the middest of thee, O Ierusalem. Praise ye the Lord.
               
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 116.
                  The Prophet in this Psalme hath deliuered a profession of his thankfulnes vnto the Lord for his gracious mercie shewed in freeing him from the distresse and perill of death whereto hee was subiect being pursued by Saul. This his thankfulnes he doth expresse by two seuerall duties: the one, of louing the Lord, verse 1: the other, of testifying this loue by a publike acknowledgement of the Lords mercie towards him in his deliuerance, vers. 13.14. The subiect then of this Psalme is this:

                        I loue the Lord, and will testifie asmuch by my gratefull acknowledgement in publike of his mercie towards mee in my deliuerance from death. vers. 1.13.14. and repeated, vers. 17.18.19.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Psalmist doth expresse his profession of acknowledging the Lords mercie towards him, vnder a varietie of phrase and seuerall formes of speech. In the 13. verse he calleth it, the taking of the cup of deliuerance. For vnder the law, those whom the Lord had deliuered from some extraordinarie distresse, did vse in a solemne banket to take the cup and drink, making a publike and thankfull acknowledgement of the deliuerance, which they had receiued by the hand of the Lord. In the same 13. verse, it is termed, the extolling of the Lords name. In the 14. verse, it is called the paying or performing of vowes: which performance was an apparant testimonie that the author of them being deliuered, did out of a gratefull hart confesse the Lord to be his deliuerer. In the 17. verse, it is named the offering of the sacrifice of prayse: So as these seuerall formes of speech are so to bee conceiued of, as interpreting and importing one and the same action of acknowledging

with a thankfull hart the Lords mercie. Which the Psalmist professeth to perfome in publike. For affirming that he will performe this dutie before all the people, in the courts of the Lords house, in the middest of Ierusalem: what else can he meane but the performance of the said dutie in publke?
                  Let vs now see the ground and inducement of this gratefull and worthie profession made by the Prophet: which is this:

                        When I called vpon the Lord in my distresse, hee heard and deliuered me, vers. 1.2.
                        
                        Therefore I loue him, and will testifie as much by my gratefull acknowledgement in publike of his mercie towards me in my deliuerance, vers. 1.13.14. Also vers. 17.18.19.
                        
                     
                  
                  The whole Psalme consisteth of these two sentences: in the Antecedent whereof the Prophet hath comprised these branches:

                        1. His calling vpon the Lord in his distresse.
                        
                        2. The Lords hearing and deliuering of him.
                        
                     
                  
                  The first branch is handled and verified by relating vnto vs,

                        1. The greatnesse of his distresse
                           ▪ vers. 3.
                        2. The prayer hee presented vnto the Lord for deliuerance from the same, vers. 4.
                     
                  
                  The greatnes of his distresse is verse 3. described by the causes thereof: which are

                        1. His neerenes to death, and the impossibilitie to auoide it by any helpe of man: death and the graue hauing beset him on euery side, vers. 3. in the former part.
                        2. The anguish and griefe, which had seazed vpon his heart, vers. 3. in the end.
                     
                  
                  The prayer presented vnto the Lord by the Prophet in this extremitie, is set out by noting vnto vs,

                        1. The particular sued for and solicited.
                        
                        2. The cause inducing him to make this prayer, viz. the confidence he had for obtaining the grant thereof.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The particular sued for, is deliuerance from the distresse wherein he was, vers. 4. in the end.
                  The cause inducing him to make this sute, being the confidence he had to obtaine the grant thereof, is mentioned, vers. 10. in the beginning. Where the Prophet auoucheth in expresse termes, that his praier for deliuerance proceeded from his faith and the confidence he had to preuaile thereby. I beleeued (saith he) and therefore I spake: that is, I beleeued that the Lord would in his mercie deliuer me from my present distresse: and therefore I tendered vnto him this prayer for deliuerance.
                  This his faith and confidence he discouereth vnto vs by making knowne

                        1. The grounds thereof, and the seuerall conclusion made vpon each of them.
                        
                        2. The combat he had against it through his contrarie distrust in the Lord.
                        
                     
                  
                  The grounds of the confidence he had to preuaile in his sute with the Lord, are:

                        1. A consideration of the Lords readie nature to relieue the distressed.
                        
                        2. A remembrance of the course of mercie held with him by the Lord heretofore for his deliuerance from trouble.
                        
                     
                  
                  Vpon the first ground this conclusion was deduced by him:

                        
                           The Lord is readie to helpe the distressed who trust in him, vers. 5. and vers. 6. in the beginning. This sentence the Prophet exemplifieth by giuing vs an instance in his owne person. The instance is this: The Lord hath in former times deliuered me the Prophet Dauid from distresse, vers. 6. in the end: so as thereby it appeareth that he is readie to relieue the distressed who trust in him, vers. 5. and 6. in the beginning.
                        
                           Therefore, O my soule, be not discomforted, but attend patiently vpon the Lord, vers. 7. in the beginning.

Where the said instance is repeated for an amplification of this cōclusion: the Prophet reasoning thus: The Lord hath in former times been beneficiall vnto me in deliuering me from trouble, vers. 7. in the end. Wherefore, O my soule, be not discomforted, but attend patientlie vpon the Lord, vers. 7. in the beginning.
                     
                  
                  Vpon the second ground, viz. the Lords deliuering of him heretofore from trouble, he formed by a comparison of parity this conclusion:

                        The Lord hath heretofore deliuered me from death, and the discomforts accompanying the same, vers. 8.
                        
                        Therefore I shall not at this time perish, but he will likewise protect and deliuer me from the perill wherein I am, vers. 9.
                        
                     
                  
                  Touching the combat hee had through distrust against his said confidence, he declareth it by setting downe,

                        1. The cause of this distrust, viz. the passion which transported and astonished him vpon the sense of his present affliction, vers. 10. in the end. Where the Prophet speaketh thus: When I was exceedingly troubled, that is, when passion and griefe proceeding from the feeling of my present distresse and desperate case, possessed my heart, &c.
                        2. The time when he fell into it, viz. when he fled in all haste from the presence of Saul, vers. 11. in the beginning.
                        3. The effect wrought by the said distrust, viz. an inconsiderate and scandalous censure of the promise deliuered vnto him by Samuel, vers. 11. in the end. Where by affirming in generall that euery man is a liar: wee must vnderstand that in particular he chargeth the Prophet Samuel therewith: and so meaneth that the promise, which Samuel deliuered touching his aduancement to the Scepter and Crowne of Israel, was delusorie and vaine.
                     
                  
                  The Prophet hauing hitherto, namely from the 3. verse, to

the end of the 11, handled that branch of the said Antecedent, which concernes his calling vpon the Lord in his distresse: he doth now proceede vnto the second, viz. the Lords hearing and deliuering of him. This branch he handleth thus:

                        Who are the Lords beloued children, their life, as being deare and pretious in his sight, he deliuereth from death, vers. 15.
                        
                        But I the Prophet am one of the Lords beloued children, vers. 16. in the former part of the verse.
                        
                        Therefore I am one, whose life, as being pretious in the Lords sight, he hath deliuered from death, vers. 16. in the end.
                        
                     
                  
                  Thus far concerning the said Antecedent and the seuerall branches thereof. The conclusion inferred vpon the said Antecedent is (as hath bin shewed) Dauids profession of louing the Lord, and of testifying so much by his grateful acknowledgement in publike of the Lords mercy towards him. Now to yeeld vnto this worthie conclusion some ornament and amplification, that is to say, to set forth the greatnes of the Lords fauour vnto him in this case of his deliuerance, and withall his owne readines to acknowledge it: hee hath entied a dispute with himselfe what course he is to hold of requitall vnto the Lord. His dispute is this:

                        I must acknowledge the Lords kindnes either by way of praise and thankes vnto him, or by some reall satisfaction and offer.
                        But I rest vnable to acknowledge the Lords kindnes by any reall satisfaction and offer, vers. 12. in the beginning. Where by an interrogatorie speech of what he should render vnto the Lord, he confesseth his disabilitie and insufficiencie in that behalfe.
                        
                        Therefore I will acknowledge it by way of praise and thankes, vers. 13.14. and vers. 17.18.
                        
                     
                  
                  To the illustration of the Assumption the Prophet hath added

the reason of his disabilitie to performe an acknowledgement of that nature. The reason hereof hee concludeth thus:

                        
                           The fauour thou hast shewed me in my late deliuerance is infinitly great, v. 12. in the end. Where the Prophet saith: All thy benefits are vpon me. As if he said, I value thy fauour in this my late deliuerance at so high a rate, as if thou haddest conferred vpon me all the blessings in the world.
                        
                           And therefore I rest altogether vnable to acknowledge it by any reall satisfaction and offer, vers. 12. in the beginning.
                     
                  
                  The verses following are already analysed and dispatched.
               
            
            
               PSALM. 139.
               
                  1 TO the Master of the Quier a Psalme of Dauid. O Lord: thou doest throughly search and know me.
               
                  2 Thou knowest my sitting and my rising: thou vnderstandest my thought a farre off.
               
                  3 Thou compassest my going and my lying downe: and vnderstandest all my waies.
               
                  4 Before there is any word in my tongue, behold (O Lord) thou knowest it wholy.
               
                  5 Thou doest besiege me behind and before: and laiest thine hand vpon me.
               
                  6 Thy knowledge is more wonderfull than that I can deceiue it: it is high: I am not able to preuaile ouer it.
               
                  7 Whither should I goe from thy spirit? or whither should I flie from thy face?
               
                  8 If I ascend into heauen, thou art there: if I lie downe in the graue, loe thou art there.
               
                  9 If I take the wings of the morning and would lodge in the vtmost limits of the sea:
               
                  10 Thither also will thy hand guide me: and there will thy right hand lay hold on me.
               
                  
                  11 If I say: happily the darknes will hide me: loe, the night will be as the light about me.
               
                  12 Yea, the darknes will not hide me from thee: but the night shineth as the day: the darknes and light are to thee both alike.
               
                  13 Thou doest possesse my reines: thou hast couered me in my mothers wombe.
               
                  14 I doe magnifie thee, in that thou hast made me after so strange and wonderfull a manner. Marueilous are thy workes: and my soule doth greatly acknowledge it.
               
                  15 The fashioning of my bones was not hid from thee, when I was made in a secret place, and artificially fashioned in the low parts of the earth.
               
                  16 Thine eyes did see me when I was without forme: and in thy booke were all these things written, and the daies also wherein they were formed, euen then when none of them was.
               
                  17 How pretious therefore are thy thoughts vnto me? O mightie God. And how great is the summe of them?
               
                  18 If I should count them, they are moe than the sand. When I awake, I am still with thee.
               
                  19 Oh that thou (O God) wouldest slay the wicked: to whom I say, ye men of blood, depart from me.
               
                  20 Who speake wickedly of thee: and who causelesly extoll thine enemies.
               
                  21 Should not I hate them (O Lord) that hate thee? and should I not be incensed against those who rise vp against thee?
               
                  22 I hate them with a perfect hatred: I count them for my enemies.
               
                  23 Trie me (O mightie God) and know my heart: prooue me and know my thoughts.
               
                  24 And consider whether there be in me any purpose of molesting any man. And guide me through the way of the world.
               
                  ANALYS. PSALM. 139.
                  
                     Dauid hauing made protestation that he hated and pursued his enemies, not out of humor and passion, but out of a respect to the Lords glorie: and being now charged by

them with the odious imputation of hypocrisy, as if vnder the pretext of pietie and zeale he conueyed the sting of malice and reuenge, doth for his clearing in this behalfe, appeale vnto the Lord, humbly submitting his said protestation and the cariage of himselfe towards his enemies to his vnpartiall examination and triall. His appeale is deliuered in the two last verses of the Psalme: and is in effect this:

                        That the Lord would be pleased to examine and iudge whether his carriage towards his enemies be such as wherewith they charge him, vers. 23.24.
                        
                     
                  
                  In the 23. verse he desires that his thoughts, that is, the affection of his heart and the proceeding which hath issued from thence may be examined, whether in this question of hating and pursuing his enemies, they be of such qualitie as is obiected. In the 24. verse, hee doth more particularly expound his appeale, in that he prayeth examination may be taken, whether in the cariage of his affections towards his enemies hee hath had any deseigne and purpose of wronging and molesting them. As the French interpreteth it. And so closeth vp his appeale with this sute, viz. That the Lord would guide him in the way of the world: that is, that the Lord would guide and support him amongst the troubles and crosses of this world. For so the way of the world may answerably to Dauids present condition be expounded.
                  Now in this appeale the Prophet holdeth this course:

                        1. He rendreth the reason of his appeale vnto the Lord: from the beginning of the first verse to the end of the 18: interlacing in two seuerall places his acknowledgement and praise of the Lords wisedom and power.
                        2. He doth exhibit a summarie declaration of his cause, thereby as it were to informe the Lord. From the beginning of the 17. verse to the end of the 22. And then (as hath been obserued) he tenders his said appeale in the two last verses.
                     
                  
                  
                     The reason of tendering his appeale vnto the Lord is this, and concluded by him thus:

                        O Lord: the whole carriage of my life is perfitly knowne vnto thee, vers. 1.
                        
                        Wherefore I pray thee examine and iudge whether my carriage towards mine enemies be such as is charged, vers. 23.24.
                        
                     
                  
                  The first part of this reason is illustrated first by an induction: thus,

                        My outward actions, my inward thoughts, my words are knowne vnto thee, vers. 2.3.4.
                        
                        Therefore the whole carriage of my life is in euery respect and perfitly knowne vnto thee, vers. 1.
                        
                     
                  
                  The first member of the said induction concerning the Prophets outward actions, is set downe verse 2. in the beginning: and repeated verse 3. In which verses vnder the termes of sitting, rising, going and lying, euery outward proceeding held by the Prophet is noted: which in the ende of the third verse is implied by this generall: Thou vnderstandest al my waies, that is, all my actions and courses. Or, thou art accustomed to all my waies: which is in sense all one with the former.
                  The second member of the induction touching the Lords knowledge of the Prophets thoughts, is vers. 2. implied vnder a comparison of the greater, thus:

                        Thou knowest my thoughts before they be conceiued and formed in my heart, vers. 2. in the end. Where it is said: Thou knowest my thought a farre off: that is, thou knowest my thought, and thou knowest it long before it be formed.
                        
                        No marueile then if thou know my thoughts being conceiued once and formed in my heart.
                     
                  
                  The third member of the induction concerning the Lords knowledge of the Prophets words, is likewise implied vnder a comparison from the greater:

                        
                        Before I forme and pronounce my words, thou doest perfitly know them, vers. 4.
                        
                        No marueile then if thou know them being formed and pronounced.
                     
                  
                  Secondly, the Lords knowledge of the Prophets whole cariage of his life is further declared by this argument:

                        
                           If by any thing I may deceiue and disappoint thy knowledge of the cariage and traine of my life, it is by some thing that can hide me from thy sight and presence.
                        
                        
                           But nothing can hide me from thy sight and presence: vers. 5. In the 5, this sentence is expressed by these two particular formes of speech. The first is, that the Lord doth besiege or compasse the Prophet on euery side, behinde, before, aboue, below, &c. As if he should say: Howsoeuer I dispose of my selfe, or whither soeuer I turne, I remaine alwaies within thy sight and presence. The second is, that the Lord laieth his hand vpon the Prophet: as if he said: Thy hand, or thy prouidence, is euer vpon me to hold me within the compasse of thine eye, so as I can in no place and at no time escape thy sight.
                        
                           Therefore I can by nothing deceiue and disappoint thy knowledge of the cariage and traine of my life: so as it is in euery respect perfitly knowne vnto thee, vers. 1. and 6. In the translation and exposition of the 6. verse I follow Tremellius, who readeth it thus: Thy knowledge is more wonderfull (or greater) than my abilitie is to deceiue it: it is high, or excellent: I am not able to preuaile ouer it, or goe beyond it. And this translation doth best fit the argument in hand.
                     
                  
                  To the Assumption the Prophet hath yeelded this proofe:

                        
                           No place or time of darknes can hide me from thy sight and presence, vers. 7. and vers. 11.12. In the 7. verse it is said in plaine and expresse termes, that no place can hide him from the Lords spirit & face:

that is, from the Lords knowledge and eye. In the 11. and 12. verse hee confesseth likewise, that no darknes whatsoeuer can keep him from the Lords sight.
                        
                           Therefore nothing can hide me from thy sight and presence, vers. 5.
                     
                  
                  The first member of the Antecedent, namely, that no place can hide him from the Lords eye, hath this illustration:

                        
                           If I can retire into no place of the heauen, of the earth, and of the sea, wherein thou art not present: then no place can hide me from thee. The Prophet in particulating these places, doth in generall meane any place of the world whatsoeuer.
                        
                           But I can retire into no place of the heauen, the earth, or the sea, wherein thou art not present, vers. 8.9.10. In the tenth verse, the Lords presence and knowledge is noted by an action attributed vnto him of guiding and laying hold vpon the Prophet, in case he retired into the vtmost limits of the sea.
                        
                           Therefore no place can hide me from thee, vers. 7.
                     
                  
                  Touching the Assumption of this later syllogisme: Whereas verse 8. the Prophet speaketh thus: If I lie downe in the graue, thou art there: we must by the graue vnderstand the most secret and hidden part of the earth: and consequently any place of the earth whatsoeuer. So likewise verse 9. by the vtmost limits of the sea, wee are to vnderstand the most retired angle of the sea: and consequently any place of the sea whatsoeuer. And in the same 9 verse by taking the wings of the morning, we must vnderstand the running of that course which the Sunne runneth. The morning is an effect proceeding from the light of the Sunne: and so by a forme of speech is taken for the Sun, or the beames of the Sunne. The Prophets meaning is this: If I should run the course of the Sun and lodge in the vtmost parts of the sea: thither also shall thy hand guide me, and there shall it lay hold on me.
                  
                  The second member of the said Antecedent, namely, That

no darkenes can hide me from thy sight, is brought in by the Prophet in the beginning of verse 11, vnder the forme of an obiection: and hath this confirmation:

                        If darknes will serue thee for the discouerie of all things aswell as the light, the one and the other being for this vse all one vnto thee: then no darknes can hide me from thy sight.
                        But darknes will serue thee for the discouery of all things aswell as the light, the one and the other being for this vse all one vnto thee, vers. 11. in the end, and verse 12. in the end.
                        
                        Therefore no darknes can hide me from thy sight, verse 12. in the beginning: and this is also implied in the obiection set downe vers. 11. in the beginning: where the Prophet speaketh thus: If I should say: happily the darknes will couer and hide me: meaning hereby that it were madnes so to conceiue of the darknes, and to make this obiection thereupon.
                        
                     
                  
                  Thirdly, the Lords▪ knowledge of the Prophets whole cariage of his life is disputed thus:

                        
                           Thou doest by thy soueraigne and effectuall prouidence dispose of my heart, v. 13. in the beginning. Whereas in this verse the Lord is said to possesse the reines of the Prophet: as wee are by the name of reines to vnderstand the Prophets heart: so by the Lords possessing himselfe of them wee are to vnderstand the Lords absolute power in gouerning them, and his perfit knowledge of them.
                        
                           Therefore the deseignes of my heart and the cariage of them must needs be exactly knowne vnto thee, vers. 1.
                     
                  
                  The Antecedent is demonstrated thus:

                        
                           Thou art he who hath formed me in my mothers wombe, vers. 13. in the end. In reading this whole verse I follow the Geneuian translation: taking this later part of the verse as seruing both to prooue the former: and to occasion the Prophet to fall into

an action of magnifying the Lord.
                        
                           Therefore thou art he who disposeth of my heart by thy soueraigne and effectuall prouidence, vers. 13. in the beginning.
                     
                  
                  Here the Prophet, before hee proceede further, doth out of an admiration of the Lords infinit power and wisedome shewed in forming him, breake forth into an acknowledgement and extolling thereof, vers. 14. In the interpretation of which verse I follow the French. The Prophets magnifying of the Lord in this behalfe, is concluded thus:

                        Thou hast shewed thy selfe in forming me to be of an admirable wisedome and power, vers. 14. in the midst. Where it is said: Thou hast made me after a strange and wonderfull manner.
                        I doe therefore in this regard honour and magnifie thee, vers. 14. in the beginning.
                        
                     
                  
                  The former part of this reason is enlarged thus:

                        I doe obserue and also acknowledge with my heart that thou shewest thy selfe to be of an admirable power and wisedome in all other thy workes, vers. 14. in the last part of the verse. Where it is said: Marueilous are thy workes: and my soule &c.
                        Therefore I marueile not if thou shew thy selfe alike admirable in this particular work of my formation, verse 14. in the middest.
                        
                     
                  
                  The Prophet hauing vpon the occasion remembred, published his acknowledgement and praise of the Lords singular power and wisedome shewed in the forming of him, doth now returne to a further demonstration of the Lords knowledge touching the cariage and proceedings of his whole life. He reasoneth from a comparison, thus:

                        I was knowne vnto thee when my bodie was fashioning into a distinct forme and proportion: nay, when I was a masse vndistinguished and formelesse: and which is more, from all eternitie, vers. 15. and 16. Where I follow the French.
                        
                        
                           No marueile then if now thou know the cariage of all my deseignes and proceedings.
                     
                  
                  The Antecedent containes (as you see) a gradation from the lesse to the greater.
                  The first branch of the said gradation is verse 15. where the Prophet sets out the Lords fashioning of his bodie into a distinct forme:

                        1. By the place where it is fashioned, viz. in the mothers wombe: which is resembled to an hidden place, and to the lowest parts of the earth. Vnder this particular of fashioning his bones, we must conceiue to bee meant the forming of his whole bodie.
                        2. By the admirable workmanship thereof, such as no skill or industrie of imbroderer, or other artificer can attaine vnto.
                        
                     
                  
                  The second branch of the said gradation is verse 16. in the beginning. Thine eyes saw me when I was a lumpe or masse without forme.
                  
                  The third is in the other part of the said 16. verse. Where the Prophet affirmeth that all these things were written in the Lords booke, and the daies wherein they were formed, euen then when none of them was. That is, as Beza expoundeth it, this my fashioning and the time assigned thereto, were set downe in the booke of thy eternall decree and prouidence, before that any part of this workmanship of my bodie was made. By this it appeares that the Lord did from all eternitie know the worke he was to make.
                  Here againe, vers. 17. and 18. the Prophet out of an obseruation made of the Lords knowledge of all things from all eternitie, as likewis
                        •
                      of his admirable wisedome and power shewed in the course of his prouidence towards man, breakes forth into an action of magnifying the Lords proceedings in generall. The arguments vsed by him to this purpose doe note vnto vs two seuerall adiuncts of his proceeding, viz:

                        
                        1. Their incomparable excellencie, vers. 17. in the beginning. Where it is said: How pretious or excellent are thy thoughts vnto me? That is I do reckon and esteeme of thy proceedings for such as are most worthie and excellent.
                        2. The infinitenes of their number, vers. 17. in the end.
                     
                  
                  That the Lords proceedings doe exceed in number, is shewed

                        1. By a comparison from the lesse, thus: vers. 18. in the beginning.

                              
                                 The sands of the sea are innumerable.
                              
                              
                                 But the proceedings of thy prouidence are more in number.
                              
                           
                        
                        2. By an effect which euery new meditation of the Lords proceedings doth worke:
                           
                              
                                 Euery new and reiterated meditation of thy proceedings doth yeeld new matter and argument of thy praise, vers. 18. in the end. Thus doe Caluin and Beza expound the last clause of the 18. verse: When I awake, I am still with thee.
                              
                              
                                 Therefore thy proceedings must needes exceed in number, v. 18. in the beginning: and v. 17. in the end.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Hitherto the reason of the Prophets appealing vnto the Lord hath bin disputed and handled by foure seuerall arguments.
                  Now followeth his exhibiting of the declaration of his cause, thereby as it were to informe the Lord. The declaration of his cause, wherein he sheweth what hee hath to pleade for himselfe against the slanderous charge of his enemies, is comprised by him in this syllogisme:

                        
                           Who are thy professed enemies, those I may iustly hate and hold for mine enemies, ver. 21. Where the Lords professed enemies are noted vnder the title and name of such as hate him and rebell against him.
                        
                           
                           But the wicked (who slanderously charge me) are thy professed enemies, vers. 19. and 20.
                        
                           Therefore these wicked men are those whom I may iustly hate and hold for mine enemies, vers. 22. Where the Prophet saith, that he hateth them with a perfect hatred, that is, with a iust and sincere hatred, an hatred not grounded vpon sinister and malitious respects, but free from them. This exposition agrees with the drift of the Prophet: who was charged to hate and pursue the wicked out of an humour of malice and spleene.
                     
                  
                  The proposition and conclusion of this syllogisme are (as you see) clearely set downe.
                  The Assumption likewise, though it bee not in these distinct termes expressed: yet is it by the Prophet in effect and sense euidently proposed: there being in liew of the said Assumption deliuered a very apparant proofe and illustration thereof vnder a description of the wicked: which is such as doth plainly detect and discouer them to bee the professed and capitall enemyes of the Lord. The description is this:

                        1. These wicked wretches deserue vtter destruction, vers. 19. in the beginning. Which iudgement the Prophet would not wish vnto them, vnlesse they were the Lords enemies.
                        2. They are oppressors and murderers of thy people, v. 19. in the middest, where they are called men of blood.
                        
                        3. They are such whose societie is to be renounced and abhorred, as of men vnworthie to tread on the earth, vers. 19. in the end.
                        4. They deliuer wicked speeches of thee, v. 20. in the beg.
                        5. They doe magnifie (though causelesly) thy enemies proceedings, vers. 20. in the end. Where it is sayd, they extoll the Lords enemies, that is, their deseignes and proceedings: which cannot bee without a speciall approbation of them and concurrence with the plotters thereof.
                     
                  
                  
                     You see now by these fiue particulars how the Prophet hath painted out these wicked wretches (of whom the question is in this Psalme) for such as are the mortall and malicious enemies of the Lord: so as the full and perfect meaning of the said Assumption is plainly and sensibly deliuered.
                  There resteth the close of this Psalme: which is an humble sute wherewith the Prophet doth accompany his appeale. The sute is this:

                        That the Lord would be pleased to guide and support him amongst the troubles and crosses of this world, ver. 24. in the end.
                        
                     
                  
                  The occasion of this motion is the course held by the wicked in pursuing the Prophet with scandalous and malicious imputations. This motion is propounded only, and not vrged.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            The errors of the print are thus to be amended.
            Pag. 7. lin. 23. for and, reade as, in some copies. pag. 21. l. 34. after of, put out the. p. 27. l. 18. for iustie, reade iustice. p. 32. make the title of the 34. Psalme, the first verse thereof. p. 31. lin. 5. after against, put in mine. p. 50. l. 21. for seeth the day, reade seeth that his day is comming. pag. 73. lin. 12. after these words, surprise him, make the point a colon, thus: and not a full point. pag. 74. l. 11. after of, put in the. p. 75. l. 24. for one, reade owne. p. 78. l. 4. for proceeding, reade preceding. p. 91. l. 25. after obseruances put out the point comma, and make it after the word sacrificing. p. 99. l. 2. for as things, reade as a thing. p. 101. l. 6. after vers. 10. adde thereto in the beginning. pag. 101. lin. 19. after these words, the 10. verse: adde and reade in the end thereof. p. 102. l. 15. for pat, reade part. p. 127. lin. 28. for notable, reade suteable. p. 153. lin. 13. for against, reade vpon.
         
         
            
            A Table of the Contents.
            
               That wee ought so to carrie our selues as that the Lord may take delight in his workes: shewed pag. 180. lin. 7.
               
               That wanderers in the deserts reduced home, prisoners set at libertie▪ persons recouered from sicknes, trauellers on sea deliuered from distresse in their voyages, and lastly such as hold a sound opinion of the Lords prouidence, ought to magnifie the Lord: disputed pag. 184. lin. 17. pag. 185. &c.
               That the Lord, besides all other euents, worketh and ordereth all changes in things and persons: handled pag. 190. lin. 25. and pag. 191.192.
               
               That we ought to obserue the Lords proceedings. pag. 192. lin. 17
               
               The Prophets appeale vnto the Lord from the censure of his enemies, praying that the Lord would examine and iudge whether his cariage towards them bee such as wherewith they charge him. pag. 201.
               
               That the whole cariage of our life in thoughts, words, and actions is perfitly knowne vnto the Lord: disp
                     •
                  ted pag. 202.203.204.205.
               
               That nothing whatsoeuer can hide vs from the eye of the Lord: prooued pag. 203. lin. 10.
               
            
         
         
            A PARTICVLAR OF THE SVTES AND MOTIONS PREsented vnto the Lord by the Prophet in the Psalmes analysed.
            
               
                  A Sute to be preserued in the whole traine of his life: solicited pag. 15. lin. 6.
               
               A sute to be deliuered from his enemies. pag. 23. lin. 32.
               
               An inconsiderate and passionate sute, To be taken presently from out this life. pag. 63. and 64.
               
               A sute for the Prophets deliuerance from his present affliction. pag. 66. lin. 3.
               
               
                  A sute for pardon of sinnes. pag. 97. lin. 23. and pag. 104. lin. 21.
               
               A motion for assurance of pardon and reconcilement on the Lords part. pag. 101. lin. 5.
               
               A petition for restitution vnto his former estate of inward grace and sanctification. pag. 101. lin. vlt.
               A petition for reintegration into his former estate of outward fauours and prerogatiues. pag. 102. lin. 32.
               
               A sute for the aduancement of the publike good of the Church and common-wealth. pag. 107. lin. 7.
               
               A sute for the Prophets returne vnto the place of the Lords publike worship. pag. 123. and pag. 26. lin. 25.
               
               A sute that the Lord would teach his people to make a wise vse of their miserie, and withall supplie vnto them a comfortable condition of life. pag. 134.
               
               A sute for the execution of iustice vpon the oppressors of the Lords people. pag. 153.
               
               
                  The course and discourse held by the Spirit for resolution in this question, whether God be good to Israel. pag. 115. lin. 24.
               
               That wee must not iudge of the Lords affection to his people by his outward proceedings with them, but by the light of his word in the Sanctuarie: handled pag. 116. and 117.
               
               What the issue and conclusion is of the dispute betwixt the spirit and the flesh touching this question, whether God be good to Israel. pag. 110. and 117. lin. 15.
               
               The ground of this issue and conclusion, That God is good to Israel, shewed and debated. pag. 117. lin. 27. and pag. 118.
               
               The Prophets passionate longing to returne vnto the place of the Lords publike worship: propounded pag. 123. lin. 3. and debated pag. 124.
               
               The end why the Prophet desires to returne vnto the Lords Sanctuarie. pag. 26. lin. 36.
               
               That they are happie who haue libertie of accesse vnto the place of the Lords publike seruice. pag. 125.
               
               A description (vnder the person of the countrie Israelite) of such as loue to present themselues at the place of the Lords publike worship. pag. 127.
               
               To be partaker of the Lords publike worship, though but for a day and in the qualitie of a doore-keeper, esteemed by the Prophet the greatest happines: handled pag. 129. and 130.
               
               A deploration and picture of mans miserie, set foorth pag. 135. lin. 12.
               
               That they who rest vpon the Lord shall be deliuered from all hurts and discomforts: disputed pag. 143. and 144. lin. 28.
               
               That the Angels are vsed by the Lord as instruments of our preseruation from perils and hurts. pag. 148. lin. 7. and pag. 36. lin. 10.
               
               That the faithfull depender vpon the Lord shall be spared in a common mortalitie. pag. 147.
               
               That by resting on the Lord wee shall be made partakers of all comforts and blessings: handled pag. 149. lin. 13. also pag. 31 in the end, and pag. 32.
               
               The oppression and persecution executed vpon the Lords people by the proude tyrants of the world, set foorth and argued pag. 154. and 155.
               
               
                  The Prophets apologie for the Lords glorie against this blasphemous position of the wicked, who hold that the Lord neither knoweth nor regardeth their proceedings against the godlie: handled at large pag. 55.156.157.
               
               That the godly man, though afflicted by the hand of the wicked, is notwithstanding blessed: disputed pag. 158.
               
               That the Lords loue is constant and vnchangeable to the godlie man: debated pag. 158. lin. 30. and pag. 57. lin. vlt.
               That the cariage of all proceedings shall in the Lords good time be so vprightly ordered, as that the godly man shall receiue thereby what is right and due vnto him by the Lords couenant: argued pag. 159.
               
               The difference betwixt the proceedings held by the Lord, and such as are held by tyrannous and vniust Magistrates. pag. 161.
               
               That the Prophet ought with his whole heart to magnifie the name of the Lord: disputed pag. 163.
               
               That the Lords mercie in pardoning the sinnes of his people is exceeding great: propounded pag. 165. and cleered pag. 166. and 167.
               
               That the Lords mercie to his people for pardon of their sinnes hath been from all eternitie, and doth endure for euer: argued pag. 166. lin. 28.
               
               That all things whatsoeuer ought to concurre with the Prophet in praising the Lord. pag. 164.
               
               That the Prophets continuing in trouble will discourage the godlie, and occasion the wicked to triumph. pag. 31. and 67. lin. 3. and pag. 114. lin. 22.
               
               That such as call vpon the Lord are protected by him. pag. 36. lin. 9. also pag. 90. lin. 20. and pag. 150. lin. 16.
               
               That out of a reuerent and due acknowledgement of the Lords glorie, we ought to magnifie him: disputed pag. 171. lin. 14.
               
               That the Lord hath in the creation of things set forth and published to the view of the world the glorie of his power, wisedom and goodnes: argued pag. 172. lin. 30.
               
               That the Lord by his prouidence doth conserue and intertaine all liuing creatures in the state of nature allotted vnto them: disputed pag. 176. lin. 6.
               
            
            
         
      
   