
      
         
            
            
            THE BALLANCE OF THE SANCTVARIE, SHEWING HOVV VVE MVST BEHAVE OVR SELVES When wee ſee and behold the people of God in miſerie and oppreſsion vnder the tyranny of their ENEMIES.
            WRITTEN By WILLIAM TEELINCK, Miniſter of the Word of GOD at MIDLEBROVGH in ZEALAND.
            IEREMY 9. 12.
            Who is the wiſe man that may vnderſtand this, and who is he to whom the mouth of the Lord hath ſpoken, that hee may declare for what the Land periſheth, and is brent vp like a Wilderneſſe, that no man paſſeth through.
            LONDON Printed by I. D. for WILLIAM SHEFFARD, and are to be ſold at the ſigne of the Starre vnder St 
               Peters▪
                Church in Corne-hill, and in Popes-head Alley. 1621.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧ To the Chriſtian Reader.
            
               GOod Reader, as well the worth of this Worke, as the reſpect that I deſeruedly beare to the Author thereof, both for his ſingular pietie, and other good parts, hath encouraged mee to commend it to thy careful view, as that whereby thou maiſt reape no ſmall ſpirituall profit, if the fault be not thine owne. The Doctrine contained in it is both ſound and ſeaſonable, being (as any judicious eye will eaſily diſcerne) exceedingly wel fitted to the preſent times. And Pro. 25. 11. 
               a word, ſaith Salomon, ſpoken in due time, is as apples of gold, with pictures of ſiluer; both precious and pleaſant▪ True it is, that ſome truth indeede is neuer out of ſeaſon; though more ſeaſonable at ſome times then at other. But yet as true it is, that Falſum ni
                     •••
                   dicere licet, at veri aliquid tacere aliquando eſt utile. Aug. ad Gal. c. 2. & de bon
                     •
                   perſever. ▪ 16. & in Pſal. 5. & Ambr. epiſt. 23. ex 
                     •••
                  . 16. 12. ſome truth alſo is at ſome times altogither unſeaſonable▪ To propound Gods mercy to an obſtinate ſinner, or to aggravate his wrath to a poore dejected penitent, were with thoſe falſe Prophets, (who deliuered yet nothing, it may be,

but truth miſ-applied and miſ-placed) Ezech. 13. 19, 22. 
               to make ſad the heart of the humbled, whom God would haue cheared, and to ſtrengthen the hand of the wicked, who ought rather to haue beene humbled; to ſlay the ſoules of ſuch as ſhould not die, and to giue life to ſuch as ſhould not liue. 
               Esa. 22. 12, 13. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Sophocl. Mu
                        •
                     ca in luctu intempeſtiva narratio. Sirac 22. 6. Et Sophod. Oedip. Tyra. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Apud. Plut. de ethic. vi
                        ••
                     . & Sympos. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . l. 1. c. 5. Matter of mirth and delight, though 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Greg. Naz. ad Eunom. l. 1. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Menand. Bonum malum 
                        •
                     it tempore haud datum 
                        ••
                     , Eraſ
                        •
                      tempeſtiva aliqua volupta, niſit, nocet. H. St
                        •
                     ph. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Iſocr. ad D
                        •
                     mon. Et data non apto tempore vina nocem. Ovid. remed. l. 1. good and honeſt otherwiſe, yet is as fiſh or fleſh out of ſeaſon, neither wholeſome nor wel-reliſhed, when God calleth for mourning by judgements either incumbent or imminent. As alſo on the other ſide, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Greg. Naz. 
                        〈◊〉
                      l
                        •
                     m. l. 1. Nehem 8. 9. Luk. 15. 31. mourning is no leſſe unſauoury, becauſe unſeaſonable, when it pleaſeth God to giue juſt occaſion of mirth. Mat. 9. 15. Ma
                     •
                  . 2. 19. 20. 
               The Children of the bride-chamber, ſaith our Sauiour, ca
                     •••
                  t faſt ſo long as the bride-groome is with them: But the time ſhall come when the bride-groome ſhall be taken away from them, and then in thoſe dayes ſhall they faſt. 
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Pind. Pyth. ode 19. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Man. Pal
                        ••
                     ol. ad fil praecept. 6. Each thing therefore is moſtpoo

pleaſant and moſt profitable, when it commeth in his due ſeaſon and good things doe then moſt good, when they are ſeaſonably adminiſtred Now if wee ſhall but ſlightly caſt our eyes on the ruefull and lamentable face of Gods Church in moſt parts at this preſent, wee may ſoone ſee how ſeaſonably this Diſcourſe commeth abroad. Wherein the Author thereof very learnedly and religiouſly enſtructeth us, how to judge aright of Gods Iudgements either on our ſelues or others, how to be affected with them, and what uſe to make of them▪ miniſtring comfort unto, and confirming the hearts of the afflicted and diſtreſſed; urging to compaſſion with them, and commiſeration of them, thoſe that be yet free; and endeuouring by a due conſideration of Lament. 3. 37, 38. Eſa. 45. 7. Amos 3. 6. 2 Sam. 12. 11. And 16. 10. Iud. 3. 8, 12. And 4. 2. 1 King 11. 14, 23. Gods handy-Worke in all thoſe events that befall both, eyther for good or euil, to bring benefit unto both, as Et magis placandus Deus eſt in adverſis, & minus laedendus in ſecundis: placari quippe debe
                     •
                   cum irascitur; laedi non debet cum placatur. Adverſa enim nobis per iracundiam Dei veniunt, ſecunda per gratiam Sal
                     •
                  ian. de Provid. l. 6. being prouoked to a greater meaſure of ſincere thankfulneſſe by the one, and preſſed to a more ſerious renewing of their repentance, and reformation of life and courſes

by the other. But I feare to doe thee wrong, by detaining thee too long, from that which thou ſhalt here finde far more fully and 
                  •
               ffectually diſcuſſed and diſcourſed o
                  •
               , then I can eaſily relate unto thee. Much race, onely I doubt, the Treatiſe may haue loſt by change of its owne natiue weede. Few tranſlations haue the happineſſe to match their Originals. And each Language hath its peculiar formes and phraſes, which in other Tongues can hardly be ſo fitly or ſo pregnantly expreſſed. But what may this way be wanting, the matter (as I hope it is) faithfully expreſſed may ſufficiently countervaile. Which reſpecting, I ſhall entreate thee to pardon and paſſe by the defects that may be in the Tranſlation (wherein what Work-mans hand was uſed I know not) and ſo to reade this religious Worke intended for thy good, that thou maiſt not miſſe of the benefit by the Author therein intended. Which the Lord grant both to thee and to all others that ſhall meete with it for his mercies ſake, Amen.
            
               Thine in Chriſt Ieſus,
THO: GATAKER.
            
         
         
            
            The Contents of the ſeuerall Chapters handled in this Treatiſe.
            
            
               Chapter 1. AN Introduction to the Diſcourſe of the `Doctrine handled in the Treatiſe. Page 1.
               Chapter 2. That the outward and externall events of this life happen and fall out almoſt, and in a manner alike both vnto the godly and vngodly. Page 4.
               Chapter 3. That Gods proceedings with and towards the Children of men, cannot by man be comprehended. Page 6.
               Chapter 4. Why God ſo ordereth his workes, as we thinke, here in this world, that in a manner they follow of neceſſitie, and ruleth in ſuch ſort, that it is commonly & ordinarily found, that man by his owne wiſdome or power, can neither adde thereunto, nor diminiſh any thing from them. Page 11.
               Chapter 5. That notwithſtanding, that Gods workes done and wrought among the Children of men are ſo wonderfull, and vncomprehenſible, yet we may learne and finde out many ſpeciall things, and reape much benefit, by his ſaid workes ſo wrought and done among them. Page 15.
               Chapter 6. Shewing diuers ſeuerall things, which the Lord hath opened vnto vs in his word, touching his good pleaſure and dealings with the Children of men here on earth, neceſſary to put out of our mindes all doubts concerning the workes of God, and to ſtrengthen them in the contrary effects. Page 19.
               Chapter 7. That there is no cauſe at all, why men ſhould make any doubt or queſtion, when they ſee many vngodly men here proſper in the world, and diuers godly men liue in pouertie and aduerſitie. Page 23.
               Chapter 8. That there is no cauſe why men ſhould be ſo much abaſhed, when they ſhall conſider how the enemies of Gods people, when they incounter in battaile with the people of God, and haue the vpper hand, and ouerthrow them. Page 27.
               Chapter 9. Further iuſtification of the aforeſaid Doctrine, which the Lord ſheweth vs out of his word, touching his proceedings with the Children of men, againſt the people of God in our Age. Page 36.
               
                  Chapter 10. That without contradiction it appeareth by the aforeſayd order of the workes of God, done among the Children of men, that there ſhall be an after-reckoning made, with all the Children of men in the world to come. Page 43.
               Chapter 11. That not all outward proſperitie is aſigne, that the Lord loueth that man to whom he ſendeth the ſame. Page 47.
               Chapter 12. That all worldly croſſes and tribulations are not a ſhew or ſigne that God will refuſe that man to whom hee ſendeth them. Page 50.
               Chapter 13. That we cannot meaſure the ſtate of men, in regard of God, by wealth or pouertie, by proſperitie or aduerſitie, that befalleth them in this world. Page 54.
               Chapter 14. That by all that hath beene ſaid and ſhewed before, wee muſt learne to liue in the true feare of God, and ſincere holineſſe, and more and more practiſe the ſame. Page 65.
               Chapter 15. How we may profit by all the workes of God which he doth vnto vs, and other men in this world. Page 69.
               Chapter 16. Of the diſtinct knowledge of theſe things which God in his word (touching the gouernment of this world) hath manifeſted vnto vs, being very fit and neceſſary for the drawing of ſpirituall profit from the workes of God wrought here among men. Page 72.
               Chapter 17. Of the diligent obſeruation of all Gods workes, among the Children of men, needfull for the drawing of ſpirituall profit out of Gods workes among vs. Page 76.
               Chapter 18. How we muſt compare that which God doth in this world, with that which he hath ſet downe in his Word, that we may draw ſome good fruit from the workes of God for our comfort. Page 79.
               Chapter 19. Of the ſeuer all fruites that ſpring from the ſearching into and finding out of Gods truth, and certaintie declared vnto vs, in his word, and in his workes. Page 83.
               Chapter 20. The concluſion of all, wherein is ſhewed, that wee muſt onely refer our ſelues vnto God, and not forſake a good cauſe, becauſe it ſeemeth not to goe forward as wee wiſh it ſhould. Page 92.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE BALLANCE OF THE SANCTVARY, SHEWING HOW WEE MVST BEHAVE OVR SELVES When we see and behold the people of GOD in miſerie and oppreſsion vnder the tyranny of their ENEMIES.
            
               
                  CHAP. 1. An Introduction to the Diſcourſe of the Doctrine handled in the Treatiſe.
               
                  MAny men beholding the proſperity of the vngodly, and the enemies of the Goſpell, and perceiuing with what violence and crueltie, they oppreſſe thoſe that fight for and ſtriue to defend the truth, are thereby more hardned, and become

crueller, euen in the higheſt degree. And ſome of them thereupon take occaſion, with the foole, to ſay in their hearts, There is no God, Pſal. 14. 1. Making account that thoſe who moſt truſt and relie vpon God, are leaſt regarded of God: others take occaſion to murmur againſt God, becauſe he ruleth not, neither directeth things here on earth, according to their wills and deſires, and with the Iſraelites, ſay in their hearts; The way of the Lord is not equall, Ezech. 18. 25. And others there are who begin thereupon to ſuſpect and call in queſtion, the truth of Gods word, yea, to forſake it, to reiect it, and to cleaue vnto lies; ſaying with Gedeon, though in another ſence, If the Lord be with vs, why then is all this befallen vs, Iudg. 6. 13. Therein doing, and yet they will be eſteemed Chriſtians, like certaine blind Indians whereof we read, who when at any time they are ouerthrowne and deſtroyed by their enemies, are wont to pray vnto and call vpon the Sunne for pardon and forgiueneſſe, and to acknowledge the cauſe of their proceedings to be vniuſt.
               And all this hapneth vnto theſe blind men by the iuſt iudgement of God, becauſe they refuſe to take paynes, and to ſpend ſome time to read and looke into Gods booke, which he himſelfe hath made, touching the proceedings and courſe that he hath determined to vſe & hold with the Children of men here on earth. For if they had done ſo, they ſhould ſoone ſee and know, That there is not any thing done here in the world, nor that happneth vnto the people of God, which God

himſelfe hath not foreſhewed ſhould come to paſſe, and which with his owne hand long before he ſet downe in the ſeuerall Regiſter of thoſe things that are to fall out in the world, that when they come to paſſe, wee might know and vnderſtand that he had foretold it vnto vs, Deut. 31. 19. Iere. 16. 4. Therefore in all ſuch accidents and occaſions we muſt with the Pſalmiſt goe into the Sanctuary of God, Pſal. 73. 17. that in the true Ballance of the Sanctuary, which is Gods word, diligently pondering and examining all the tribulations, troubles, and miſeries that happen to Gods people, wee may truely iudge and aright conceiue therof, and ſo we may continue ſincere and without offence till the day of Chriſt, Phillip. 1. 10. For it is written, Great peace haue they which loue thy Law, and nothing ſhall offend them, Pſal. 119. 165. And this in the Treatiſe following, wee will endeuour ſo to declare, that whoſoeuer he bee that readeth and marketh the ſame with a true and vpright heart, he may ſurely & effectually find that to be true which the Prophet witneſſeth, where he ſayth, that the wayes of the Lord are right, and the iuſt ſhall walke in them, but the tranſgreſſors ſhall fall therein, Hoſ. 14. 9.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. II. That the outward and externall euents of this life happen and fall out almoſt, and in a manner alike both vnto the godly and vngodly.
               
                  SALOMON ſayth, all things come alike to all, there is one euent to the righteous and to the wicked, to the good and to the cleane, and to the vncleane, to him that ſacrificeth, and to him that ſacrificeth not, as is the good ſo is the ſinner, and he that ſweareth, as he that feareth an oath, Eccl. 9. 2. And to the ſame end where the Scripture in one place ſayth, many ſorrowes ſhall be to the wicked, Pſal. 32. 10. in another place it ſayth, many are the afflictions of the righteous, Pſal. 34. 19. This Iob alledged to his friends, who therewith concluded vpon and by the miſeries and troubles that had hapned vnto him, that he was hated of God; Arguing that wee cannot truely iudge of the good will and fauour of God towards men here on earth, nor yet of their ſtate in regard of God, by that which hapneth vnto them in this tranſitorie world, becauſe that the Lord as Elihu acknowledgeth, giueth no account of any of his matters, Iob 33. 13. and dealeth moſt wonderfully with the children of men, ſometime in one manner, ſometime in another, obſeruing no certaine methode: and yet doth all thinges righteouſly; yet as it is teſtified vnto vs that it fareth with the righteous euen as with the wicked,

and with the ſinner as the godly man: ſo it is not to bee vnderſtood, as if euery godly, and euery vngodly man ſhould haue alwaies one and the ſame portion and ſtate of weale and woe heere in this world; for that many godly men heere on earth are ſubiect to great afflictions, and many godleſſe men liue in abundance of pleaſures; and ſo on the contrarie: But the meaning thereof is this, that weale and woe ſhall not onely bee incident to the wicked crew, or vnto the little number of the godly, but that proſperitie and aduerſitie, may both of them be fonnd to happen, and to be giuen, both vnto the vngodly whereſoeuer they bee, and the like againe to the righteous, whereſoeuer they remaine: which both the word of God, and experience teacheth vs to bee true: for in the word of God, doe wee not finde a righteous Abraham, and an vngodly Nabal, and both of them were rich; A righteous Lazarus, and an vngodly ſort of men, Iob 30. 1. 2. 3. 4. that were poore, yea beggars. Againe, are wee not taught this by experience? goe into the tents of Sem, looke into the houſes of the righteous; there you ſhall finde ſome in proſperitie, and ſome in aduerſitie: one houſe rich, another miſerable. Goe into the tents of Kedar, looke into the houſes of the vngodly, and you ſhall finde them in the like manner. All theſe things the Lord doth according to his free will and mightie power, and dealeth with the children of men, according to the abſolute, vnlimitted, and ſoueraigne pleaſure of his will.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. III. That Gods proceedings with and towards the children of men, cannot by man be comprehended.
               
                  THus then it appeareth, that the wayes of God are vnſearchable. For who can iudge of and imagine the reaſon, or cauſe why God ſendeth trouble, aduerſitie, pouertie, and miſerie vnto one righteous man, that feareth God, ſhunneth euill, and liueth as vprightly as any other of his eſtate and degree can or may doe; and on the contrary exalteth and raiſeth another righteous man to great wealth that is not altogether ſuch a one in all degrees as the former? On the other ſide, who can enter into Gods counſell, to know why God ſendeth great trouble and miſery to one vngodly man that is not wickeder then his neighbour: and on the contrary, giueth another vngodly perſon, that in no ſort is any thing better then the other; great wealth, happy ſtate on earth, and all proſperitie? Nor are we to wonder, when we ſhall behold that which oftentimes wee ſee to happen here vpon earth: That on the one ſide, a righteous man that is zealous of Gods honour, fighteth for the defence of Gods cauſe, and ſeeketh to aduance and further the ſame, is many times ſo much croſt and ouerth warted in his proceedings, that it ſeemeth that both heauen and

earth are bent againſt him, and is in ſuch perplexitie, that he knowes not which way to winde or turne himſelfe, as Dauid was when the towne of Ziglag was ſpoyled, and his owne people conſpired againſt him, 1. Sam. 30. 6. On the other ſide, that an vngodly man, that indureth no manner of aduerſitie, is an vtter enemy vnto God, and ſeeketh by all the meanes that the can, vtterly to extirpate and roote out the memorie of his moſt holy name out of the earth, and yet is oftentimes ſo much holpen and ſeconded in his wickednes, that heauen and earth and all things therein ſeeme to hold with him, and hee bringeth his affaires vnto ſo happie and proſperous an end, that he is a terrour and feare to the miſerable and ſmall troopes of the righteous. Who can tell or finde out the true ground of theſe wayes of God? See we not that God many times calleth a righteous man out of this world in the flower of his youth, concerning whom in all mens iudgements it had better, and it might haue beene wiſhed, that hee might ſtill haue continued, and liued longer here on earth, being one that did ſo much good in his owne houſe, in the place wherein he dwelt, and in his calling wherein hee liued: and on the contrary, ſuffereth an vngodly man to liue long and many yeares here in the world, being an vnprofitable member, that fareth like a roaring Lion and a rauening Beare among his houſh
                     ••
                  d, ſpending and conſuming all that hee hath or can come by, wronging his wife and children, defiling the place where hee liueth with

ſcandalous and wicked actions, and which is more, leading many others with him into deſtruction, and by his long life withholding and keeping others out of ſome neceſſarie places of ſeruice, who, were they imployed in the ſame would doe much good: Who can declare or truly imagine the ground of this proceeding? Doth it not oftentimes fall out, that an vngodly man is ſtricken with an apoplexie while hee is buſie about his wicked actions in ſome one kind or other? and alſo that a righteous perſon is ſtricken by the hand of God, while hee laboureth about the furtherance and aduancement of Gods glory and is onely carefull thereof? That the Lord ſtriketh an vngodly Arrius, cauſing his bowels to burſt, and his guts to fall out of his belly, as hee ſitteth vpon the ſtoole to eaſe himſelfe, and ſo dieth; and that the ſame God bringeth a righteous man his aduerſary to the like death: who would not be abaſht thereat, to conſider of ſuch incomprehenſible wayes and workes of God? And when men ſhall obſerue and weigh with themſelues, in what manner of oppoſite condition, they ſee and behold both the godly and vngodly, they muſt needes, and cannot chuſe, but acknowledge and confeſſe that the Lord worketh moſt wonderfully and vnſearchably therein.
               There are two godly men of one ſtate and qualitie, that both liue in great proſperitie and wealth, and two other godly men, that both liue in great trouble, penurie, and miſerie: alſo there are two vngodly men of one calling and condition,

that both liue in great wealth and worldly happineſſe; and two other vnrighteous men, that are vnhappy and indure great miſery. And there are two godly men of one calling, whereof the one proſpereth in all his affayres, the other is croſt and troubled. There are two vngodly men of one condition, whereof the one is croſt in his affayres, the other proſpereth. There is a godly and an vngodly man, who although they be both of one calling in worldly affayres; but yet differ much in their liues and conuerſations touching Gods ſeruice, that both liue in great proſperitie: And there is a godly and an vngodly man, of one condition for worldly matters, that both are croſt and indure much trouble and aduerſitie. There is a godly & an vngodly man, of one ſtate and condition, whereof the godly man hath proſperitie, and the vngodly man aduerſitie: And againe, there is an other godly man and an vngodly man of one calling in the world, whereof the godly man hath much aduerſitie and many croſſes, and the vngodly man great proſperitie. What profoundneſſe of Gods workes are theſe? what wonderfull wayes of God are theſe? Many men paſſe theſe things ſleightly ouer; but thoſe that haue vnderſtanding, and know the word of God, marking and beholding theſe things daily to come to paſſe in the world, thereby note how wonderfully the Lord worketh in things that happen vnto the children of men. Who can enter into the depth of theſe waies of the Lord? who can tell the reaſon thereof?
               
                  In all reſpects then, the workes of God are wonderfull to the children of men, and wholly vnſearchable. He hath his wayes in the Seas, Pſalm. 77. 19. And his footſteps are not knowne, and his waies paſt finding out: There is no wiſedome nor vnderſtanding, nor counſell againſt the Lord, Prou. 21. 30. Our goodneſſe extendeth not to him, Pſalm. 16. 2. Neither can our wickedneſſe hurt him, Iob. 35. 6. 7. 8. Therefore it fareth ſo with the workes of God, that whatſoeuer God doth, it ſhall bee for euer, nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it, Eccleſ. 3. 14; in ſuch manner as experience teacheth, that although thoſe that are moſt diligent and carefull in their affayres, goe forward therewith, yet many times, euen the moſt diligent and carefull men faile and are croſt in their proceedings: ſo that we may well ſay with Salomon; I returned and ſaw vnder the Sunne, that the race is not to the ſwift, nor the battaile to the ſtrong, neither yet bread to the wiſe, nor yet riches to men of vnderſtanding, nor yet fauour to men of skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all, Eccleſ. 9. 11. And therefore conſider wee the time and the chance, which God the Lord hath onely reſerued to himſelfe, Acts 1. 7. ſo that it dependeth wholly on him.
               ⸪
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. IIII. Why God ſo ordereth his workes, as wee thinke, here in this world that in a manner they follow of neceſſitie, and ruleth in ſuch ſort, that it is commonly and ordinarily found, that man by his owne wiſedome or power, can deither adde thereunto, nor diminiſh any thing from them.
               
                  SALOMON expreſly ſetteth downe vnto vs, that God ſo ordereth his workes and heauenly prouidence, to the end that men ſhould feare him. Whatſoeuer God doth, it ſhall be for euer, nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it, and God doth it that men ſhould feare him, Eccleſ. 3. 14. That is, that men ſhould not forſake him nor diſpiſe his workes, neither yet cleaue vnto, nor depend vpon any man, but onely vpon God; That the wiſe man may not glory in his wiſedome, nor the mightie man in his ſtrength, nor the rich man in his riches; but that hee that glorieth, glorie in this, that hee vnderſtandeth and knoweth that God is the Lord, which exerciſeth louing kindneſſe, iudgement, and righteouſneſſe on earth, Ieremie 9. 23. 24.
               By that which before hath been ſaid, touching the admirable and ſtrange workes of GOD, wrought and brought to paſſe among the children of men: We are taught, firſt, not to truſt vpon▪ or vnto our owne wiſedome, diligence, beautie,

ſtrength, friends; riches, nor any other terreſtriall thing whatſoeuer it may bee, which yet are many times eſteemed to bee fit and neceſſarie for the bringing of worldly matters to paſſe, and to further our proiects: but onely to feare the Lord our God, and to remember that hee holdeth a greater hand ouer vs, then all thoſe things doe, Eccleſ. 5. 8. Secondly, before and aboue all things to attend to his good will and pleaſure, touching the euent thereof, as much as in vs lieth, and as much as poſſibly we may, in all the meanes and wayes which God ſetteth before vs, and which he will haue the children of men to vse, and whereby alſo he commonly vſeth to proſper their actions, and to bleſſe them. And herein wee muſt the rather be ſpecially carefull, for that the peruerſe children of men, who by nature are wickedly bent, vſe to draw another concluſion from this point of doctrine, that all things do in ſuch manner depend on God, for they conclude not from therice, that therefore aboue all things they muſt onely depend vpon the Lord their God; but on the contrary, that they need not therefore refraine from euill doing, but that they may ſtill follow after their owne luſts, and take their pleaſures as long as they can: They take likewiſe further occaſion thereby, to walke moſt careleſly and diſſolutely here on earth, with more greedineſſe to commit ſinne and wickedneſſe, and deſperately to enter into all kind of miſchiefe; reaſoning thus with themſelues, and ſaying, How can I helpe it, ſeeing all dependeth vpon God? my reſolution
                  
                  is therefore to lay hold on the time, and to take my pleaſure while I may. Whereas on the contrary, they ought rather to learne much more to feare the Lord, and call to mind and ſay, that, ſeeing all dependeth on God, hew much ought I to feare that God who onely can do good or euill vnto me. Yea, ſo would they both thinke and doe, if they beleeued, that this wonderfull God, is alſo a good God. But doing other-wayes they ſhew thereby, that they ſollow the nature and ſteps of the Deuill that expecteth no good from the hands of God.
               This conceite of the vngodly muſt bee cleane baniſhed from vs; and we muſt remember that all things depend vpon God, and therefore ſo vſe the meanes, that before & aboue all things wee ſeeke and labor to haue God on our ſide in euery thing that we doe. We muſt alſo feare him in ſuch manner, that we muſt hold and eſteeme all that God doth to be good, right, and well done, although we cannot ſee nor perceiue the cauſe or the reaſon of his actions. A Childe ſeeth his Father doe many things in the houſe whereof hee cannot conceiue the reaſon, and yet neuertheleſſe he reapeth benefit, and fareth the better thereby; So muſt we alſo 
                     〈◊〉
                   and often times thinke with our ſelues, tha
                     •
                   
                  Gods thoughts are not our thoughts, nor our wayes hi
                        •
                      w
                        ••
                     es; for as the heauens are higher then the earth▪ ſo his wayes are higher then ours, and his thoughts then our thoughts, Eſa. 55. 8. 9. And conſequently, that although Gods wayes vnto fleſhly men ſeeme not to be right; yet we muſt not with the Iſraelites ſay, the way of the Lord is not
                  
                  equall, Ezech. 18. 25. Nay, although God ſuffer the vngodly to liue in great wealth, proſperitie, and pleaſure, here in this world, and on the contrary maketh the godly to turne his backe vpon the enemie, letting them that hate them ſpoyle them, giuing them like ſheepe appoynted for meate, and ſcattereth them among the Heathen, ſelleth them for nothing, and doth not increaſe his wealth by their price, maketh them a reproch to their neighbours, a ſcorne & a deriſion to them that are about them, maketh them a by-word among the Heathen, a ſhaking of the head among the people, ſo that their confuſion is continually before them, and the ſhame of their faces doth couer them, for the voices of thoſe that reproch and blaſpheme them, by reaſon of the enemie and reuenger, Pſal. 44. 10. &c. Yet we muſt thinke well of the wayes of God, & muſt not murmur againſt him, nor ſay, that hee hath wrought iniquitie, Iob 36. 23. Neither muſt we by any meanes thinke or conceiue, That God ſhould doe wickedneſſe, or that he ſhould commit iniquitie, Iob 34. 10. or that the Iudge of all the earth ſhould not iudge right, Gen. 18. 25. or that the wiſe God that giueth the labourer wiſedome to plow his Land, thereby to reape a good harueſt thereof, ſhould himſelfe vſe no wiſedome in the framing of his Children, to make them fruitfull, Eſa. 28. 23. 24.  But on the contrary, although wee cannot conceiue the depth of the wonderfull wayes of God towards the ſonnes of men, yet we muſt hold this for a generall rule, that all the workes of God
                  
                  are done in truth and righteouſneſſe, Pſal. 1
                     •
                  1. 8. and that our God is the rocke, his worke is perfect; that all his wayes are Iudgement; a God of truth, and without iniquitie, iuſt and right he is; and that they haue corrupted themſelues, and it is a blot to them that they are not his Children, but are a peruerſe and crooked generation, that turne away from him for any cauſe whatſoeuer, a fooliſh and vnwiſe, Deut. 32. 4. 5. and therefore when any ſuch difficulties enter into our mindes, if we will conceiue aright thereof, we muſt not forget the Lord, nor deale falſely in his couenant, we muſt not turne our harts from him, nor our ſtepps from his wayes, Pſal. 44. 17. 18. And in all theſe actions and proceedings how ſtrange and wonderfull ſoeuer they ſeeme vnto vs, we muſt be dumb and not open our mouth, becauſe it is God that doth it, Pſal. 39. 10.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. V. That notwithſtanding, that Gods workes done and wrought among the Children of men are ſo wonderfull, and vncomprehenſible, yet we may learne and find out many ſpeciall things, & reape much benefit, by his ſaid works ſo wrought and done among them.
               
                  AS it is a moſt godly and holy thing, and very commendable, for men in all accidents that happen here on earth among the Children of men, to note the finger of God to bee therein, and to aſcribe the ſame to Gods powerfull

prouidence; ſo we muſt not ſlightly refuſe or neglect, to conſider what God the Lord in his wonderfull wiſedome hath ſecretly purpoſed and intended by this or that courſe, croſſe, or calamitie, that hee bringeth in ſundrie wiſe vpon his choſen people, ſeeing experience teacheth vs, that the ſeuerall things that happen vnto vs during our liues many times produce ſtrange, and far other effects, then men expect from them. It ſeemed that our caſe once would haue gone but hardly, and would haue beene but ſorily ſupported or countenanced, when as long ſince, hee on whom wee then much relied, and vnder whoſe protection wee hoped to reſt quietly, by a wicked blow was taken from vs; And yet neuertheleſſe, ſince that time it hath gone with vs better and better. We were likewiſe once perſwaded, that when ſuch or ſuch of our friends ſhould grow ſtronger, that our affaires would then haue better ſucceſſe, and goe more proſperouſly forward, and yet ſecretly it fell out otherwiſe.
               This might moue ſome men to conceiue and ſay, that ſeeing it is ſo with the workes of God that are wrought among the Children of men, that his wayes and his proceedings are ſo ſtrange and vnſearchable, how can we then out of Gods workes learne any certaine or ſpeciall thing, touching and concerning our owne ſtates, and our duties towardes God in his workes, whereunto notwithſtanding, we are ſo earneſtly, and oftentimes exhorted, and incited in the holy Scriptures, Pſal. 92. 6. 7. Eſa. 28. 23. 24. Hoſ. 14. Pſal.
                  
107. Eſpecially, ſeeing it falleth alike with the godly and vngodly man, in all their worldly proceedings, wherein oftentimes ſo vnexpected things happen and fall out, how can we take occaſion thereby to prayſe and glorifie the Lord, or to humble our ſelues before him, in regard of his extraordinary works, as if he had done ſome ſpeciall thing for vs, when as we fare no better then other men commonly do, and it is yet vncertaine what will further proceed thereof?
               I anſwere, although inſtantly by Gods ordinary or extraordinary workes wee cannot conceiue Gods fauour and affection towardes men, nor mans ſtate in regard of God, thereby to take occaſion, ſpecially, for the ſame to prayſe the Lord our God, and to ſeeke after him; notwithſtanding when we once well know & perceiue mans ſtate in regard of God, and our owne or any other mens ſpeciall ſtate in that kind, wee may by the ordinary workes of God here done amongſt men, learne and conceiue many good things; as for example, when we know a man to be one that truely feareth God, and yet ſee that notwithſtanding many croſſes and troubles befall him, and happen to him in this life, we may thereby learne, That God the righteous Iudge of all the world, findeth cauſe & matter enough, when it pleaſeth him, To try the beſt men that liue here on earth, by laying great tribulations vpon them, and by many miſeries to proue their patience, Iob 4 Whereby alſo we are further admoniſhed, That although we are commanded to liue holily, and

as much as in vs lyeth to ſeeke to doe the ſame, yet that we muſt not perſwade our ſelues, that all things therefore here on earth ſhall fall out well & proſperouſly with vs according to our deſires; but rather muſt make our account that neuertheleſſe many tribulations and croſſes may fall vpon vs here in this world, and thereupon prepare and arme our ſelues patiently to endure them. But that we may the better perceiue and vnderſtand how to reape much profit by Gods workes done among the Children of men, we muſt know that although they are things that are vnſearchable by men, to conceiue why God dealeth ſo diuerſly with one vngodly man, in reſpect of another vngodly man, that is like vnto him, that the one fareth cleane contrary to the other, as for example, giuing the one vngodly man much wealth and proſperitie, and laying much aduerſitie, and many plagues vpon the other, as alſo why God impoſeth as much, and the very ſame on a righteous man, that he doth on an vngodly man, and maketh no difference in outward ſhew betweene them therein, giuing both the one and the other, eyther wealth or pouertie at his good will and pleaſure, yet we may by the word of God find out and know, why God doth ſo vnto them, or to any other man that is godly or vngodly; For the Lord our God, that is a wiſe God, hath opened many things vnto vs in his Word, concerning his will & dealings with the Children of men, which if we marke and well conſider the ſame, wee ſhall learne many things touching the ordinary workings

of God among men; whereof in the next Chapter I will make a further declaration out of the ſame Word.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VI. Shewing diuers ſeuerall things, which the Lord hath opened vnto vs in his Word, touching his good pleaſure and dealings with the Children of men here on earth, neceſſary to put out of our mindes all doubts concerning the workes of God, and to ſtrengthen them in the contrary effects.
               
                  FIrſt, and before all other things, God in his word openeth vnto vs, That he loueth men freely as they are men, Titus 3. 4. Which he witneſſeth, that he doth by being the Sauiour of all men, 1 Tym. 4. 10. Therefore alſo the Pſalmiſt witneſſeth, that God preſerueth both man and beaſt, Pſal. 36. 6. And Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe ſayth, that God maketh his Sunne to riſe on the euill, and on the good, and ſendeth rayne on the iuſt and on the vniuſt, Math. 5. 45. When wee ſee therefore that the wrath of God is reuealed from heauen, againſt all vngodlineſſe and vnrighteouſneſſe of men, Rom. 1. 18. we may thereupon certainely conclude, That there is ſomething wanting in men, and that for many cauſes man deſerueth puniſhment for ſin, which God diſliketh, Rom. 3. 23. and thereby we may further learne, that ſinne is the mother of all

miſeries, and that there is nothing in the world which we ſhould with more care & caution, hate, ſhun, and abhor, then ſinne, as the onely thing that moueth our Creator to diſlike of vs, and maketh all vs that are his creatures abhominable in his ſight.
               Secondly, God in his word ſheweth vs, that he hath a care of thoſe that feare him, and of ſuch as are godly; and ſeeketh to do them good, but how any of vs are made godly and righteous, all of vs by nature being wicked and loſt ſheepe, Rom. 4. 3. Epheſ. 2. 5. Is not at this time to be ſpoken of; and on the contrarie, that he hateth the vngodly, and powreth out his wrath and indignation vpon them. The eyes of the Lord are vpon the righteous, and his eares are open to their cry; The face of the Lord is againſt them that doe euill, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth, Pſal. 34. 15. 16. which he ſayth he will do when he thinketh good, when the dayes of viſitation, and of recompence are come, Hoſ. 9. 7. Exod. 32. 34. Then he will wretchedly deſtroy thoſe wicked men, Mat. 21. 41. And on the contrary, when the righteous call, the Lord heareth and deliuereth them out of all their trouble, Pſal. 18. 27. Thereby vnderſtanding, that hee deliuereth them, by taking them like a wiſe workeman, out of the furnace of aduerſitie, when they are ſufficiently purified and clenſed; That is, in the time of need, Heb. 4. 16.
               From whence it followeth without contradiction, in regard that God is ſo diuerſely affected towards the godly and vngodly man, that in that

reſpect, when he ſendeth one and the like proſperitie and aduerſitie, both on the godly and vngodly, hee doth it not for one ſelfe ſame intent, nor to one end. That which God himſelfe witneſſeth vnto vs, on the one ſide, that whatſoeuer tribulation or miſery hee ſendeth to the godly man, it is for his good and great benefit, yea euen the croſſes themſelues are ſo; for God inlighteneth their darkeneſſe, Pſalm. 18. 28▪ and ſo it falleth out, That all things worke for the beſt to them that loue God, Rom. 8. 28. So that the troubles of the godly, are vnto them as an entrie into life euerlaſting, an earneſt penny, and as it were the firſt fruites of heauenly ioyes, Pſal. 23. 6. As alſo the croſſes of the godly, are vnto them as a precious medicine to heale their ſoules, and a true meanes to prepare the way for them to enter into the kingdome of heauen, Acts 14. 22. And in this manner all things are a bleſſing to the godly; For godlineſſe is profitable vnto all things, hauing the promiſes of this life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4. 8.
               On the other ſide, whatſoeuer the vngodly indure, it is altogether a curſe vnto them, for God carſeth their bleſsings, Matt. 2. 2. So that whether it bee proſperitie or aduerſitie, it happeneth vnto them, it falleth out amiſſe with them: for all things are vncleane vnto them; becauſe their mindes and conſciences are vncleane, Tit. 1. 14 Deut. 8. 15. The aduerſity then of the vngodly is a feeling of, & a preparatiue to euerlaſting condemnation, an earneſt penny, and the firſt fruits of the paines of hell, Iud. 5. 7. and their proſperitie is like a poyſoned

drinke vnto them, for by their wickednes, the more they abuſe their proſperitie, the more they ſpoyle their owne ſoules, and ſo it become a powerfull meanes to carrie them vnto hell, and to the kingdome of darkeneſſe, Apcc. 18. 7. This God openeth vnto vs plainly in his word, whereby wee may openly learne and vnderſtand that the ſtate of the vngodly, whether it bee aduerſitie or proſperitie, is altogether miſerable; and on the contrarie, that the aduerſitie or proſperitie of the godly, is a happines vnto them. For it is moſt certain, that if the vngodly man doth not in time repent and amend his life, at the laſt hee ſhall bee ſure of after condemnation, and the godly man of euerlaſting ioy and felicitie, as wee haue a manifeſt example thereof in the ſtate of the rich man, and of poore Lazarus, Luk. 16. 19. And who ſeeth not, that the rich man for all his wealth and worldly proſperitie, was an accurſed wretch, and that poore Lazarus in his greateſt miſerie was happie and bleſſed? what man is hee, that would not rather chooſe, looking into the end of them both, to liue in this world in the ſtate of poore Lazarus, then in that of the rich glutton?
               So you ſee, that from theſe different affections of God, both vnto the godly and the vngodly, which hee hath ſhewed vnto vs in his word, and by their laſt ends which thereupon enſue, the grounds of the hope and comfort that the godly haue and receiue in the midſt of their aduerſitie and troubles: And the grounds of the feares and miſeries, which the vngodly are like to fall vnto,

whiles they poſſeſſe worldly proſperity and pleaſure. But hearken yet further, what the Lord himſelfe ſaith vnto his ſeruants and meſſengers touching them both: Say vnto the righteous that it ſhall bee well with him, for they ſhall eate the fruite of their doings: Woe vnto the wicked it ſhall bee ill with him, for the reward of his handes ſhall be giuen him, Eſa. 3. 10. 11. Now if wee conſider this well, and take good heed, and earneſtly marke the end, both of the godly and of the vngodly, we ſhall be throughly perſwaded, from the doubtfull conceite that wee haue in our mindes, touching the workes of God done here vpon earth among men, when we oftentimes behold and ſee the vngodly to proſper ſo much in this world, and the godly liue in pouertie and aduerſitie, which for that it is a matter of great importance, in the next Chapter I will more at large open the ſame vnto you.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VII. That there is no cauſe at all, why men ſhould make any doubt or queſtion, when they ſee many vngodly men here proſper in the world, and diuers godly men liue in pouertie and aduerſitie.
               
                  THere are two ſpecial reaſons, that moue men to become careleſſe and licentious here in the world, when they ſee and behold how it fareth, both with the godly and vngodly in this world. The firſt is,

that many times they ſee, that thoſe that feare God are in great miſerie and calamitie, and the vngodly proſper and abound in wealth. This many men cannot brooke, while they are perſwaded, that it ſtandeth not with the great Maieſtie of the God-head, and the Iuſtice of God to deale in ſuch manner; and the reaſon is, becauſe they looke vpon nothing but the outward ſhew, and conſider not the end for which God doth it; for if in the leſt degree they did but thinke and remember, that God meaneth well to the godly, and that their oppreſſions are wholeſome medicines for their ſoules, the better to prepare them for the life to come: And on the contrarie, that the proſperitie of the vngodly is like the Quale
                     •
                   to the children of Iſrael, that died while they were in their mouthes, then they would preſently ſee and perceiue that they haue no cauſe to doubt of, or to miſconſter and ſtumble at the workes of God. For to ſpeake the truth, who is he that will longer ſtumble at, or thinke it ſtrange to ſee, that God loſeth and ſlacketh the bridle to the children of the world, but tu
                     ••
                  reth, holdeth in, reſtraineth inſtantly, and ſuffereth not his children to haue their wills, when hee remembreth that the Lord doth it to his children, to the end that they may become the more ſpirituall and better prepared for the kingdome of heauen: doe wee not the like in matters of leſſe importance, continually in our houſes to our children, wee ſuffer our dogs that we
                     •
                   breed in our houſes, to runne at libertie looſe and vntied, and haue no

regard what they doe, nor how it fareth with them, but is it not our manner to looke narrowly to our children, to keepe them ſhort, to teach and inſtruct them; and why doe we ſo, but onely to bring them vp to all vertuous actions, and for their better preferment. So that it is to a ſpeciall end, that wee haue ſo great a care of our children, which in no wiſe wee doe intend to our dogges, but let them runne where they liſt.
               The word of God therefore aduiſeth vs, to caſt off all doubts and feares touching the workes of God, and to rid vs thereof, willeth vs not to looke onely vpon the outward end of the children of men, and to conſider of nothing elſe, but the courſe of this preſent world, euen as the ſtate of the rich glutton, and of poore Lazarus, is ſet downe and declared vnto vs by Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe, Luk. 16. So the Apoſtle Saint Paul warneth vs, ſaying; Remember thoſe that haue the rule ouer you, who haue ſpoken vnto you the word of God, whoſe faith follow, conſidering the end of their conuerſation, Heb. 13. 7. And to the ſame end Saint Iames ſayth, Behold wee count them happy which indure; you haue heard of the patience of Iob, and haue ſeene the end of the Lord; for the Lord is very pittifull, and of tender mercy, Iames 5. 11.
               Touching the proſperity of the vngodly, who would be grieued thereat, when wee marke and thinke vpon their endes; they ſtand vpon ſlipperie ground and ſoone fall downe: and then comes in the hard and heauie reckonings which they

muſt make at the latter day, ſee the 49. Pſalme; What is hee that grudgeth at the good that men doe to thoſe that are condemned to die, or at the friendſhip that is ſhewed vnto them by ſome, when they are led to execution to be broken on wheeles? or who would not chuſe to paſſe thorough a troubleſome and durtie way, to inioy a great inheritance, then thorough a faire and pleaſant way to goe to execution? doe not many honeſt houſholders, diſlike of ſwaggering companions, that dayly and hourely haunt the beſt Innes and Tauernes in the Citie, and conſume their wealth in banket after banket, as long as their credits laſt? and doe they not thinke them men of little wiſedome or conſideration? and is it not found to bee ſo when they make vp their reckonings at home in their houſes? So it ſtands with the proſperitie of the vngodly many times here in this world, they haue great wealth and abundance: but they ſpend vpon their owne ſtockes, and a hard reckoning followeth after it: whereas on the contrary godly men, that in this world are kept ſhort and ſpend vpon their fathers purſe, whether it be ſuperfluouſly or otherwiſe, as their father thinkes it good, haue no feare of an after reckoning, all is freely forgiuen them: Thus their ends differ much one from another. This when the Pſalmiſt conſidered, although before touching this point of the workes of God, how the vngodly proſper, and the godly liue poore and miſerably, hee was ſomewhat troubled, and muttred thereat, yet at laſt hee was perſwaded, as hee

himſelfe witneſſeth, ſaying; When I thought to know this it was too painefull for mee, vntill I went into the Sanctuary of God, then vnderſtood I their end, Pſalm. 73. 16. 17.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. VIII. That there is no cauſe why men ſhould bee ſo much abaſhed, when they ſhall conſider how the enemies of Gods people, when they incounter in battaile with the people of GOD, and haue the vpper hand and ouerthrow them.
               
                  YET this is not all, that which cauſeth greateſt diſlike in the hearts of many men, touching the workes of God done among the ſonnes of men; the chiefeſt reaſon conſiſteth herein, that men oftentimes ſee and behold, that not onely many vngodly men liue in great proſperitie, and many righteous men in great miſerie, but that men ſee and obſerue that the vngodly oftentimes oppreſſe the godly, and that when Gods people and their enemies, encounter in battaile and fight together, many times their enemies haue the victorie and ouercome them. This is the point that produceth greateſt difficultie, and many men cannot be reſolued, how it ſhould come to paſſe that the ſeruantes of the moſt high God, that haue his cauſe in hand, that are iealous of his

glory, and fight for his truth, ſhould be ouercome by thoſe that are Gods enemies, that Gods cauſe ſhould turne the backe, and falſhood and deceit haue the vpper hand; this by many men cannot be conceiued nor conſidered as it ſhould bee, for that as things are brought to paſſe, they ſee nothing but contrary effects. The vngodly are hardened in their vngodlineſſe, and the godly weepe and mourne, all thinges are worſe and worſe, and the name of the Lord by this meanes ſlandred, and euill ſpoken of, and his truth blamed.
               I anſwer, we muſt needes confeſſe and acknowledge, that theſe are moſt profound wayes of God, but the Lord alſo in his holy word hath giuen vs to vnderſtand, what the meaning is of theſe his moſt wonderfull workes, and telleth vs that he hath reaſon ſo to doe, both in reſpect of the godly, and the vngodly, and of his people, and their enemies; and firſt giueth vs to vnderſtand, that in theſe occurrents hee is patient, and long ſuffering, Luk. 18. 7. That he is not ſo haſtie as wee are, Pſal. 116. 11. Hee can indure that his cauſe, and his peoples cauſe ſhould ſometime bee hindred, and that the vngodly ſhould domineire, as if Baal or Aſ
                        •
                     aroth, and not the God of Iſrael ruled and gouerned the world, and teacheth vs further that he ſuffereth it ſo to bee, thereby the more to aduance his honour, when hee once begins ſo to riſe vp, that his enemies are driuen backe, and that he lifteth vp againe the heads of his people, which before were deiected and caſt

downe. Thus he witneſſeth, that for the ſame cauſe he ſuffereth his people of Iſraell to be humbled, that afterward he might aduance them, and that ſo all the world might ſee that it was neither their policie, wiſedome, nor power, but his bleſſings that had releiued, and rayſed them vp, Deut, 8. 9.
               Here what the Lord to this end ſayth by the Prophet; The earth mourneth and languiſheth, Lebanon is aſhamed and hewen downe, Sharon is like a wilderneſſe, and Baſan and Carmell ſhake off their fruits; now will I riſe ſayth the Lord, ſeeing my people are ſo much confounded, and euery man thinketh, that they are wholy ouerthrowne, now will I be exalted, now will I lift vp my ſelfe, Eſa. 33. 9. 10. I haue a long time houlden my peace, ſayth he, I haue beene ſtill and refrayned my ſelfe, now will I cry like a trauelling woman, I will deſtroy and deuoure at once, Eſa. 42. 14. the enemies of my people. This is Gods purpoſe when he ſuffereth his people for a time to be ouer-run and maſtred by their enemies: which if we conſider well, we will no longer bee abaſhed thereat, nor ſtumble at Gods workes, though things goe neuer ſo croſſe for a time with Gods owne people, and that the enemies of the Goſpell thereby ſeeme to growe ſtrong.
               When we reade of the proſperitie of Hammon the cruell and ſworne enemy of Gods people, and vnderſtand that he proceeded ſo farre, that all the people of Iſraell were iudged to die, and that hee being their greateſt and bittereſt enemie, had the

execution thereof committed to him, would not men therby conclude, looking vpon the outward vntoward proceedings, that the Lord had abandoned and forſaken his people of Iſraell; yet we know in the end, that the higher that Hammon the enemie of Gods people did clime, the neerer the deſtruction of the Children of Iſraell ſeemed to be, and the more the enemies of Gods people being diſappointed of their purpoſes were confounded, the more honor the Lord did then reap vnto himſelfe, by the deliuerance of his people. So wonderfull is God the Lord in his workes: wherby it appeareth, that euen then when he ſuffereth the cauſe of his people in a manner to fall vnto the ground, he ſtill houldeth the rudder in his hand, and hath an eye on them, and a care that they ſhall not altogether be ouerthrowne.
               And ſo all the miſ-vnderſtanding, wrong iudging, miſ-conſtruing & ſtumblings at Gods workes conſiſts herein, that we onely looke vpon exterior things, and neuer remember to goe into the Sanctuary of God, to looke into the end of his wayes, and what his ſecret meaning is therein. Marke what I ſay. Queene Eſter that was a great friend to the people of God, and ſought what meanes ſhe could to deliuer the people of Iſraell from that danger, and to bring Hammon to confuſion, what courſe did ſhee take. Shee inuited the King and Hammon with him to be her gueſts, ſhee receiued and intertained him friendly, and Hammon could perceiue no other but that he was very welcome to the Queene, and boaſted thereof to his friends;

And yet that was not enough, Heſter bad him to be her gueſt the ſecond time, and ſhewed him a fayre countenance from time to time. Now what might the Iewes that knew not Queene Heſters meaning, haue conceiued and iudged hereof? might not they haue thought, that Heſter alſo conſented with Hammon to helpe to root out and confound the Iewes? But the meaning was cleane contrary: ſhee ſought to bring Hammon to confuſion, and to deliuer the Iewes from death; the iſſue thereof ſheweth it plainely, Heſt. 5. 7.
               Thus the Lord our God many times worketh with the enemies of his people, hee ſeemeth for a while to draw them on, and to leaue his owne people, to make them the more confounded and aſhamed, when vnexpectedly hee ouerthroweth them, and deliuereth his people from them. Touching theſe wayes of God therefore wee muſt attend Gods pleaſure, and in the meane time patiently expect his leiſure. And this God declareth vnto vs in his Word touching his ſtrange workings aforeſayd, which to men ſeeme ſo offenſiue, yea, which is more, our good God ſheweth vs yet more ſpeciall and waightier cauſes, wherefore at ſometimes he ſuffereth his owne people to be oppreſſed by their enemies, and letteth them fall into great miſeries and troubles, whereof ſome conceiue, the enemies of Gods people, others Gods people themſelues. Touching his owne people, ſomtimes he ſuffereth them to fall into the hands of their enemies, and by that meanes ladeth them with a heauie yoake; becauſe they did not endeuour

themſelues wiſely, and as it became them, to beare his Fatherly yoake on their necks. Heare what the Lord to that end ſayth to his people: Becauſe that thou ſerueſt not the Lord thy God with ioyfulneſſe, and with gladneſſe of heart, for the aboundance of all things; therefore ſhalt thou ſerue thine enemies, which the Lord ſhall ſend againſt thee, in hunger, and in thirſt, and in nakedneſſe, and in want of all things, and he ſhall put a yoake of iron vpon thy necke, and all this the Lord doth, as hee himſelfe alſo witneſſeth, that his people might know what difference there is betweene ſeruing of him, and ſeruing the Kingdomes of his enemies, 2 Chro. 12. 8. Therefore for that his people by the ſubtiltie of Sathan, the temptations of the world, imbecilitie and careleſneſſe ſometimes eſteeme not of the ſweete yoake of Chriſt, and calme running water of Shilo as they ſhould doe, the Lord layeth a heauie yoake vpon them, and bringeth them into deepe, and many waters of oppreſſion; wherein what ſtrange thing doth the Lord? What doth he I ſay, that ſhould moue men in any manner to diſlike? When we vſe to do the ſame (and thinke and perſwade our ſelues that we doe wiſely) with our owne Children; that ſometimes wee put to hard Schoole-maiſters, and cruell teachers for a tyme, that they might learne and know how eaſie a yoake they beare on their ſhoulders in their Fathers houſes, which yet when we doe, it is out of meere loue, and for the good and profit of our Children.
               On the other ſide, touching the enemies of

Gods people, although then they ſeeme ſpecially to bee happie and bleſſed, when in that manner they get the vpper hand of Gods people, and deuoure them like bread; yet the truth is, that no greater plague can happen vnto them, then when they are permitted to oppreſſe and wrong the people of God, and to waſh their hands in their bloud; which the Lord in his great wrath ſometimes permitteth to be done, when hee determineth to ſuffer them to fill vp the meaſure of their wickedneſſe, and to haſten their Iudgement, and vtter deſtruction. Euen then when they ouercome and ſpoyle the people of God, and lead them Captiues away with them as a prey, They doe nothing els but in a manner heap vp a great deale of wood, ſtubble, and ſtraw, with coles of fire vnder them, which at the laſt burnes them all vp. For ſo the Lord himſelfe witneſſeth, ſaying; In that day will I make the wilderneſſe of Iudah like a harth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a bundle of ſtraw, Zach. 12. 6. And againe, And in that day will I make Ieruſalem a burthenſom ſtone for all people; all that burthen themſelues with it ſhall bee cut in peeces, though all the people of the earth bee gathered together againſt it, Zach. 12. 3. Hearken what the Lord in this reſpect againe and againe commaundeth, and oftentimes willeth his Prophets to ſhew to the world: Thou Son of man ſayth he, Propheſie to the mountaines of Iſraell, and ſay; Ye Mountaines of Iſraell, heare the word of the Lord; Thus ſayth the Lord; Becauſe the enemie had ſayd againſt you, Aha, euen the auncient high places are ours
                  
                  in poſseſſion, Therefore propheſie and ſay; Thus ſayth the Lord God; Becauſe they haue made you deſolate, and ſwallowed you vp on euery ſide, that you might be a poſſeſsion vnto the reſidue of the Heathen, and yee are taken vp in the lips of talkers, and are an infamie of the people, Therefore yee Mountaines of Iſraell, heare the word of the Lord God; Thus ſayth the Lord God to the mountaines, and to the hills, to the riuers, and to the valleyes, to the deſolate waſts, and to the Citties that are forſaken, which are become a prey and deriſion to the reſidue of the Heathen, that are round about. Therefore thus ſayth the Lord, ſurely in the zeale of my ielouſie I haue ſpoken againſt the reſidue of the heathen, and againſt all Idumea, which haue appoynted my Land into their poſſeſsions, with the ioy of all their heart, with diſpitefull minds, to caſt it out for a prey, Propheſie therefore concerning the Land of Iſraell, and ſay vnto the mountaines, and to the hils, and to the riuers, and to the valleyes; Thus ſayth the Lord God, Behold I haue ſpoken in my ielouſie, and in my fury, becauſe you haue borne the ſhame of the heathen, therefore thus ſayth the Lord God, I haue lifted vp mine hand, ſurely the heathen that are about you they ſhall beare their ſhame. But yee O Mountaines of Iſraell, you ſhall ſhoot forth your branches, and yeeld your fruit to my people of Iſraell, for they are at hand to come, Ezech. 36. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. And for that the Lord intendeth to deale in this manner with his owne people, and with their enemies when they ouercome and oppreſſe them; he pronounceth a woe vnto Aſſyria, by the Prophet Eſay; & that for this cauſe, becauſe they were to ouer-run and oppreſſe

the people of Iſraell for a tyme, like durt in the ſtreete; ſaying, O Aſſyrians the rod of mine anger, and the ſtaffe in their hand is mine indignation. I will ſend him againſt an hypocriticall Nation, and againſt the people of my wrath, (where hee vnderſtandeth his owne people, that becauſe of their ſinnes had a long tyme ſore offended him) I will giue him a charge to take the ſpoyle, and to take the prey, and to tread them downe like the mire in the ſtreets, Eſa: 10. 5. 6. To this end alſo the Lord witneſſeth, that hee delayed to take reuenge for the bloud of his Children, vntill more of them were ſlaine for his truth ſake, that at one time he might viſite the enemies of his truth in their owne houſes & make a iuſt reckoning with them, Apo. 6. 9 10. 11. Wherby it is manifeſtly to be ſeene, That the Lord ſuffereth the enemies of the truth ſomtimes to haue the vpper hand, becauſe that alreadie by reaſon of their great ſinnes and offences committed againſt him, they haue in ſuch manner offended him, that in his wrath he thinketh it fit to ſlacke the bridle vnto them, and to ſuffer them to proceed from bad actions to worſe, for their heauier iudgement and condemnation.
               This alſo muſt be vnderſtood and conceiued in matters of leſſe moment, wherein the Children of the world without reaſon and lawfull ground, get the vpper hand ouer the Children of God, as when they meete together in battaile in the field, or in any towne, or in prayer, or at a marriage, or ſuch like, and there are ſlaine, murthered or ſpoyled, & in all other ſuch like occurrents. And thus

the Lord findeth occaſion both in regard of his owne people, and of their enemies, now and then to make his people the foote and not the head, that he ſuffreth them to lie vnder feete, and the enemies of the truth to tread vpon them; which whoſoeuer well waigheth and conſidereth with an vnderſtanding heart, hee ſhall ſoone perceiue & ſee, that there is no cauſe of doubt to be made, or ſcandall to be found in theſe workes of the Lord.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. IX. Further Iuſtification of the aforeſaid Doctrine, which the Lord ſheweth vs out of his word, touching his proceedings with the Children of men, againſt the people of God in our age.
               
                  THat wee may further Iuſtifie this poynt touching Gods proceeding with his people, and their enemies, and diſcuſſe the difficulties and troubles which in theſe times are in diuers places brought vpon Gods people by their enemies, we muſt after the like manner, with due reſpect ſpeak generally, both of the proceedings of the people of God, and of their enemies.
               That the light of the Goſpell hath long tyme ſhone moſt clearly in this age, as thoſe that know any thing as they ought to doe, can tell; and that

the ſame hath beene ſleightly regarded, both by friendes and foes, all thoſe plainely ſee it, that haue receiued any light at all from the Lord our God. Many both great and ſmall, both mightie Potentates and meane men, long ſince and oftentimes, with all their mights, haue ſtrouen againſt the ſame, and ſought vtterly to dam and ſmother it vp, by all the meanes they could; eſteeming that to be a falſe light, which is only able to lead and guide them to the way of ſaluation. Others, that in ſome ſort had a liking thereunto, haue made no great account nor eſtimation thereof, but haue ſuffered it in ſuch ſort to ſhine, and ſo ſerued their turnes therewith, that they were content to liue where it was, and ſometimes to come where it ſhoane, without making any reckoning to accept, or, to make profeſſion thereof. And amongſt thoſe that proceeded ſo farre, that they haue accepted thereof as a rule of their faith, and an order of liuing well; there are many found that haue no care orderly, and as they ought to doe, to walke in the light thereof: ſo that on this ſide alſo many lamentable offences haue beene miniſtred, and doubts beene raiſed to cauſe controuerſies and errours.
               This the Lord God, the Father of lights hath ſeene and beheld from the higheſt heauens, the place of his holy habitation; and it grieued him much to ſee and perceiue, ſuch great vnthankfulneſſe and ingratitude for ſo excellent a gift, then the which (next vnto ſaluation it ſelfe) no better hath beene giuen by God vnto the children

of men: For which cauſe hee hath ſuffered the vnthankefull world, and that would not accept the loue of the truth, to fall into ſtrong deluſions and great doubts, whereby they tooke occaſion, to cleaue vnto and beleeue lies. So that in this our age, wee haue ſeene in the reformed countries of the world, many great and very dangerous diſputations to ariſe, and controuerſies to grow touching religion: whereby many men, that looke no further then vpon the outward ſhew and face thereof, were ſo much amazed and abaſhed thereat, that they began more and more to diſlike it, and to leaue it: Theſe are deepe wayes of God, which therefore ought to haue mooued all Chriſtian hearts to ſearch into the intent and meaning of God; and withall to take occaſion to ſhake off the aforeſaid vnſauoury ingratitude, and to bend their mindes vnto a more wholeſome courſe of obedience. But this hath beene practiſed by very few, and at this day is yet too much neglected.
               For which cauſe the wrath of God hath beene more and more kindled, and his out ſtretched arme hath not holden backe; but in his anger he is gone foorth, and hath ſuffered the vngodly world that hardeneth it ſelfe, to fall into more hardneſſe and deluſion; as euery man knoweth how much the blind world now hardneth and imboldneth it ſelfe, each one in his errours, vpon occaſion of the preſent troubles that daily happen to the people of God in theſe dayes: for the enemies of the Goſpel, thereby take occaſion to

thinke and perſwade themſelues, that they haue done great and good ſeruices vnto God and yet doe, when they perſecute and ſeeke to roote out the protectours and profeſſours of the truth, and thoſe that haue halted betweene both, thinke themſelues happie that they (as many others) haue not throwen their lot into the lap of thoſe whoſe chance they thought might alter and change. Thus the Lord as he hath threatned, letteth it raigne ſnares, fire, and brimſtone, and a horrible tempeſt vpon the vngodly, Pſal. 11. 6. wherein they ſhalbe taken & ſpoyle themſelues. For in all theſe things, thoſe wretched men doe not once remember, that when to fulfill their owne pleaſures they doe ſo, they iudge vniuſtly of Gods truth, and thereby offend againſt the generation of his Children, Pſalm. 73. 15. How oftentimes was Iſrael troubled and vexed with contentions and warres amongſt themſelues, yea and ouer-runne alſo by the Philiſtines and other enemies? whereas notwithſtanding, the Iſraelites were the onely people of God, and onely had the light of ſaluation among them: What inuaſions and incurſions haue the cruell Heathen diuers times made vpon the Chriſtians? and yet wee know that the Chriſtians, and not the Heathens haue the truth on their ſide.
               But theſe things the Lord ſometimes ſuffereth, to fall vpon and come againſt his owne people, to cleanſe them, to try their faiths, & to the end that thoſe that remaine obſtinate might haue that which they haue deſerued. 1. Corinth. 11. 19.

                  Matth. 18. 7. And thus it falleth out that ſuch miſerable men, that glorie and take moſt delight, to behold the troubles & perſecutions of Gods people, that boaſt off and perſeuer in their enmitie and peruerſe proceedings, are thoſe certainely that are moſt plagued thereby; for that by ſuch meanes they are hardened in their errors and deluſions, which lead them into perdition. Can greater plagues then theſe bee any wayes bee thought on? and all this alſo is iuſt and righteous with God, that thoſe that receiued not the loue of the truth, that they might be ſaued, might fall into ſtrong deluſions and beleeue lies, 2. Theſ. 2. 10. 11. And that thoſe that are the cauſes of reuolting and doubts raiſed, and ſometimes ſtrongly mainetaine them, ſhould haue the ſame meaſure mett vnto them, and thereby fall into perdition.
               Thus it fares with them (by the wonderfull prouidence of God) as the Pſalmiſt ſaith; As they loued curſing (for they delighted in errour) ſo let it come vnto them, Pſalm. 109. 17. Beſides all the curſes that yet hang ouer their heads, for the oppreſſion, ſhame, diſgrace, and wrongs by them done vnto the children of God in their troubles and aduerſities: for it is moſt true and certaine, that although the Lord God ſuffer his people for a while to bee oppreſſed by their enemies, when he hath once finiſhed all his workes vpon Mount Sion, and ſufficiently puniſhed his people, he will goe to viſite their enemies in their owne houſes, and caſt the rodde of his anger into the fire, Eſa.

10. 12. Behold how excellently the Pſalmiſt ſetteth this forth, ſaying, When God heard this (that is, that his children many times rebelled againſt him,) hee was wrath and greatly abhorred Iſrael; ſo that he forſooke the Tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent that he had placed among men, and deliuered his ſtrength into captiuitie, and his glory into the enemies hand, he gaue his people ouer alſo vnto the ſword, and was wrath with his inheritance. The fire conſumed their young men, and their maidens was not giuen to marriage, their Prieſts fell by the ſword, and their widdowes made no lamentation. Thus farre it went on Gods enemies ſide, as we read, 1. Sam. 4. but marke what followeth: Then the Lord awaked as one out of ſleepe, and like a mightie man that ſhooteth by reaſon of wine: and he ſmote the enemies in the hinder parts, hee put them to a perpetuall reproch, Pſalme 75. 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. 64. 65. 66. which alſo wee read in the firſt of Samuel the fifth, This is the heritage of the ſeruants of the Lord, and their righteouſneſſe is of mee, ſayth the Lord, Eſa. 54. 17. That the Lord God in his time ſhall recompence tribulation to thoſe that trouble them, and giue reſt to thoſe that are troubled, 2. Theſſ. 1. 67. euen in the time of need, Heb. 4▪ 16. And thus it appeareth alwayes, that although the Lord ſeemeth to haue forſaken his people for a while, and to hold with their enemies, yet in truth, and certaintie this ſtandes firmely, That God will not caſt away righteous man, neither will hee helpe the euill doers, Iob 8. 20. how much ſoeuer he ſeemeth to ſtand againſt his owne people, and to ſtrengthen the hand of the vngodly.
               
                  Theſe are the wonderfull wayes of our God and this is the certaintie of his workes done among the children of men, which mooued the Pſalmiſt, that had a ſpirituall eie in ſome meaſure, to looke into the waies of God, and to ſet downe the truth thereof, to breake out into this ſpeech and ſay; O Lord how great are thy workes, and thy thoughts are verie deepe, a brutiſh man knoweth not, neither doth a foole vnderſtand this, Pſalm. 92. 5. 6.
               Thus wee may ſee, that although the workes of God, done among the children of men, for the moſt part are hidden from vs, and incomprehenſible, yet that which our good God hath openly made knowne vnto vs in his word, inſtructeth and inableth vs with ſpeciall profit, fruit, and comfort, to marke and looke into the workes of God. It remaineth then, that wee ſet downe and further ſpeake of certaine notable fruits that grow out of that which wee haue before ſet downe; which wee will doe in the Chapter following. (⸪)
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. X. That without contradiction it appeareth by the aforeſaia order of the workes of God, done among the children of men, that there ſhall bee an after reckoning made, with all the children of men in the world to come.
               
                  SEEING, that it is euidently knowne, that God the Lord is a righteous Iudge; For the workes of man ſhall bee rendred vnto him, and he will cauſe euery man to finde according to his wayes, Iob 34. 11. and that it is alwayes found, that the Lord in this world maketh no euen reckoning with the children of men, when hee ſuffereth a godly man all his life time to liue in great trouble and aduerſitie, and to dye therein; and ſendeth great riches and ioy to an vngodly man all his life long; and they haue no croſſes, but their ſtrength is firme, Pſal. 17. 14. and Pſal▪ 73. 4. And alſo by experience in the common courſe of the world, it is found that many of the deare children of God, are perſecuted and euilly dealt withall, onely becauſe they take Gods cauſe in hand, are iealous of God honour, ſeeke the ſpreading abroad of the Goſpel, and the proſperitie of his people, and that it oftentimes fareth ſo with them, that they are oppreſſed and loſe their

liues: therefore, as it happeneth alſo to many other Martyrs of God, and faithfull witneſſes of his truth, Apoc. 2. 13. wee muſt of neceſſitie therefore hence conclude, That God for certaine will make an after reckoning in the world to come, for it can by no meanes ſtand with the righteouſneſſe and goodneſſe of our God, that hee ſhould indure or ſuffer his owne children, and his faithfull ſeruants, who for the fulfilling of his will, did not refuſe to yeeld their liues into the enemies handes and to dye, and that for his cauſe were ſhamefully handled, curſed, abaſed, and ſlaine, ſhould not be reuenged, Luke 18. 7. 8. Apocal. 6. 9. 10. 11. Could a iuſt and an vpright Prince endure that his truſtie ſeruants and officers, ſhould be aſſayled, perſecuted, and ſlaine by his ſubiects, becauſe they ſeeke to mainetaine and vphold his lawfull commandements, and to ſee them executed, without taking their cauſes in hand, reuenging their blood, and puniſhing the offendours as they had deſerued? Much leſſe, will the Lord ſuffer the hard dealing with, and handling of his children that are ſlaine and murthered in this world, to goe vnreuenged.
               Therefore, if there were no other reaſons then that onely, for which God ſhould make a common reckoning with the children of men at the latter day, yet were this cauſe enough for it. So the Apoſtle ſetteth downe the neceſſitie of the laſt day of iudgement, to conſiſt vpon this; That the godly are here oftentimes ſo cruelly oppreſſed by the vngodly, and ſaith to the Theſſalonians,
                  
that it is a manifeſt token of the righteous Iudgement of God, that yee may be counted worthie of the kingdome of God, for which yee alſo ſuffer, ſeeing it is a righteous thing with God, to recompence tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you who are troubled, reſt with vs, when the Lord Ieſus ſhall bee reuealed from heauen with his mightie Angells, 2 Theſſ. 1. 5. 6. 7. Then alſo it ſhall be made manifeſt, though it bee neuer ſo much forgotten here in the world, and how little regard or knowledg ſoeuer ſeemes to be taken of the godly, and thoſe that are righteous, That God harkened, and heard it, and a booke of remembrance was layd before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought vpon his name, and accordingly it ſhall then alſo be knowne, what difference there is betweene the righteous and the wicked, betweene him that ſerueth the Lord, and him that ſerueth him not, Mala. 3. 16. 17. 18. Herewith the godly alſo muſt comfort themſelues, as the Prophet alſo witneſſeth; and take heede, that they partake not with the vngodly, of whom Salomon ſayth, Becauſe ſentence againſt an euill worke is not executed ſpeedily, therefore the heart of the ſonnes of men is fully ſet in them to doe euill, Eccl: 8. 11. But they muſt rather, ſeeing God here in this world permitteth things to paſſe in ſuch manner, bee thereby more certainely aſſured, that hereafter there ſhall come a great day of judgement, wherein all things ſhall be made right, and ſet ſtraight, and euery one ſhall be rewarded according as hee hath done, whether it be good or euill, Act. 3. 21. and 2 Cor. 5. 10. And accordingly the more croſſely

and confuſedly we ſee things done and executed here in this world, the more muſt wee learne to make reckoning of the great day of Iudgement, make full account thereof, and prepare our ſelues for it, holding for certaine, as Salomon alſo in the aforeſaid place witneſſeth, That though a ſinner doe euill an hundred tymes, and his dayes be prolonged, yet ſurely I know, it ſhall be well (not with the vngodly, but) with them that feare God, which feare before him, Eccl. 8. 12.
               This therefore ſhould moue all the godly to long for the laſt day, & the comming of the Lord, when we ſhall not onely be reuenged for all their hard ſpeeches which vngodly ſinners haue ſpoken againſt him, Iude 15: And all inſtruments that are formed againſt vs ſhall not proſper, Eſa. 54. 17. But beſides that all the partes and pieces of that great worke of the prouidence of God ouer the things of this world, that here are ſo confuſedly caſt together vpon a heape, ſhall be ſeene to be laid very orderly, by the wiſe and powerfull hand of our God, and from them wee ſhall ſee a moſt notable peece of worke to bee framed and brought forth, wherein the vngodly with their wicked workes, ſhall ſerue as ſhadowes, Eccl: 8. 13. to ſet more beautie and luſter vpon the great glory of the Children of God, who ſhall then gliſter like the Sunne. Mat. 13. 34.
               As alſo the godly are to expect the ſame for this cauſe, that howſoeuer they cannot here conceiue why this or that thing comes ſo to paſſe, yet they may aſſure themſelues, when the Lord ſhall come

to Iudgement, to make all ſtraight, and to bee glorified in his Saints, 2 Theſſ. 1. 10. Hee will then bring forth ſo glorious a peice of worke, and ſhew it vnto vs, that wee ſhall alwayes reioyce therein, and prayſe and glorifie our God for the ſame world without end.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XI. That not all outward proſperitie is a ſigne, that the Lord loueth that man to whom he ſendeth the ſame.
               
                  SIth by all that which is ſaid before it manifeſtly appeareth, that God many times ſendeth great wealth and proſperitie to the vngodly, it is euident and not to be contradicted, that not all wealth & proſperitie is a ſigne or token that God fauoureth that man to whom he giueth it, for the Lord our wonderfull God giueth in his wrath and anger to ſome men that which they wiſh and deſire; as he gaue Quailes to the Children of Iſraell at their deſire, but they dyed while they were eating of them, Numb. 11. Many a man hath earneſtly deſired, and alſo obtained that which in the end was his ouerthrow. So that it is moſt certaine, that the wealth and proſperitie of the vngodly is nothing elſe, but as it were a paſturing of Beaſtes for the day of ſlaughter. This God taught Ieremie, when touching the proſperitie of

the vngodly hee looked into and ſearched the wayes of God; Righteous art thou O Lord, when I plead with thee, yet let me talke with thee of thy Iudgements. Wherefore doth the way of the wicked proſper? Wherefore are all they happie that deale very trecherouſly? Thou haſt planted them, yea, they haue taken roote, they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit, thou art neere in their mouth, and farre from their reines. But thou O Lord knoweſt me, thou haſt ſeene me and tryed mine heart towardes thee. Put them out like ſheepe for the ſlaughter, and prepare them for the day of ſlaughter, Iere. 12. 1. 2. 3. This is the cauſe why thoſe that proſper in this world reioyce, though they are vngodly, they glory in themſelues becauſe all things goe well with them, and are perſwaded, that it ſhall alwaies be ſo with them, yea, and that God fauoureth and liketh them, which notwithſtanding is not ſo. The Lord often times in this life giueth great wealth and proſperitie, and whatſoeuer they wiſh or deſire, vnto thoſe, to whom after this life he will giue hell and vtter damnation for their reward: Gods wayes in theſe thinges are not like the wayes of men: to thoſe that men hate and cannot abide, they wiſh no good, no not ſo much as may continue the twinckling of an eye. But it is not ſo with our God, hee endureth the veſſels of wrath with great patience, & beares long with the vngodly, to ſee if they will once repent and turne from their wicked waies, and feare that good God, from whom they haue receiued ſo many good things, which if they doe not, but 
                     •••
                  ll continue in their wickednes, Then vndoubtedly,

ſuch is the caſe of the vngodly, that the more wealth and proſperitie they haue in this world, the more hated and accurſed of God they are. For this is moſt certaine, that there can come no greater plague in the world then this to the Children of men, when doing euill it falleth out well, as they imagine with them: for thereby they imbolden themſelues in their wicked wayes, and take ſuch a courſe that they ſhun no wickedneſſe, and then that draweth more vnto them, which the Pſalmiſt ſayth, When the wicked ſpring like the graſſe, and when all the workers of iniquitie flouriſh, it is that they ſhall be deſtroyed for euer, Pſal. 92. 7. Therefore the Prophet cryeth out againſt the Children of this world, in this manner; ſaying, O that they were wiſe, that they vnderſtood this, that they would conſider their latter end, Deut. 32. 29. Reioyce not then, you Children of the world, becauſe you flouriſh and proſper here, for behold and ſee that it ſtandeth thus with you, as long as you feare not the Lord, for you can finde nothing to make for you out of any place in the word of God, but that Gods intent and meaning is, to feed you in this fatt paſture for the day of ſlaughter, Ier. 12. 3. And that in this world hee will bring that vpon you which you deſerue; as it hapned to Abſolon, Hammon, and others. This is moſt certaine, you ſtand vpon ſlipperie ground, and God that iudgeth you is ſtrong, and in the twinckling of an eye can throw you downe. God, I ſay, whom you feare not (and therefore is againſt you) comes to Iudgement as a theefe in the night. Therefore

looke before hand, that you ſtand vpon your gard; turne ſpeedily vnto him, and repent, leaſt with the couetous rich man, for a ſhort and tranſicorie worldly life you bee ſoone carried away from hence into euerlaſting paine and damnation.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XII. That all worldly croſſes and tribulations are not a ſhew or ſigne that God will refuſe that man to whom he ſendeth them.
               
                  SEeing that by the reaſons and proofes aforeſaid it is cleare and euident, that God alſo ſuffereth croſſes and tribulations, to fall vpon the moſt godly men that are here in this world, it appeareth thereby alſo without contradiction, that all tribulations and troubles are not a croſſe of God, neither an argument, that God will ouerthrow, and at once conſume vs, when he layeth tribulations vpon vs; but on the contrary, God ſometimes ſuffereth his owne louing and deareſt children, whom he liketh well, and approueth of, to fall into great miſeries and calamities ſometimes. So wonderfull is God in his workes to mankind; thoſe that he loueth, and moſt certainely determineth to giue vnto them the kingdome of heauen, and euerlaſting ioy, yet them giueth hee oft

into their enemies hands, Ier. 12. 7. For ſo hee witneſſeth vnto vs in his word. And he is wont to Chaſten as many as he loueth, Apo: 3. 19. For whom the Lordloueth hee chaſteneth, and ſcourgeth euery ſonne whom he receiueth, Heb 12. 6. Yea, becauſe hee loueth them, and becauſe hee liketh them, therefore he inſtructeth and chaſtneth them the more: hearken what he ſayth to that purpoſe to the Children of Iſraell, his darlings; You onely haue I knowne of all the families of the earth, therefore I will puniſh you for all your iniquities, Amos 3. 2. He will come to viſite you at home, to make you better, that you may not periſh with the wicked world, 1 Cor. 11. 32.
               This might abaſhe thoſe that are ſo plagued, and yet are happie, who otherwiſe in their weakneſſe many times when croſſes fall vpon them are wont to ſay as Sion ſayd in her griefe, The Lord hath for ſaken me, and my God hath forgotten me, Eſa. 49. 14. But what ſayth Gods anſwer? Can a woman forget her ſucking Child, that ſhe ſhould not haue compaſsion on the ſonne of her wombe? though they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold, I haue grauen thee vpon the palmes of my hands; thy walles are continually before me, thy Children ſhall make haſt, thy deſtroyers, and they that make thee waſt ſhall goe forth of thee. I ift vp thy eyes round about, and behold, all theſe gather themſelues together, and come to thee, as I liue ſayth the Lord, thou ſhalt ſurely cloth thee with them all as with a raiment, and bi
                        ••
                      them on thee as a bride doth; for thy waſt and thy deſolate places, and the land of thy deſtruction ſhall euen now be too narrow,
                  
                  by reaſon of the Inhabitants, and they that ſwallowed thee vp ſhall be far away, Eſa. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19.
               Therefore all you godly people, that are in any trouble or aduerſitie, remember this, and perſwade your ſelues hereof, that Gods heart, Gods loue, and Gods fauour is not with-drawne from you, although it appeareth, that your outward ſtate is changed; the Lord loueth you now as well as he did when you were in your greateſt proſperitie. God loued Dauid as well when hee was in trouble, and hunted vp and downe like a hound, as he did, when he ſat vpon his Princely throne. Yea, Gods fatherly heart (if I may ſo ſpeake with reuerence) is then more friendly vnto you, when your ſtate is moſt croſſe and feeble-ſome, as wee ſee that a louing mother is much more mooued to pittie and compaſſion, to ſeeke reliefe for her Childe, when it is ſicke then when it is whole and ſound. This did Iob beleeue, and therewith comforted himſelfe, and boldly ſayd vnto God, that then ſhewed ſo ſtrange a countenance towardes him (as Ioſeph did ſeeme to ſhew a ſtrange countenance towardes his brethren, as if hee would haue puniſhed them, and yet meant it not, Gen: 42. 7.) and theſe things haſt thou hid in thine heart, I know that this is with thee, Iob 10. 13. and therefore concludeth, and ſayth; Though he ſlay mee, yet will I truſt in him, Iob 13. 15. So the Lord alſo himſelfe witneſſeth, that hee doth not willingly ſuffer his people to fall into any trouble, but is moued thereunto, that he may doe them good at the latter end, Deut. 8. 16. Vpon this ground did Dauid
                  
alſo comfort himſelfe in all his troubles, and ſaid to his afflicted ſoule; Why art thou caſt downe, O my ſoule? and why art thou diſquieted within mee? hope thou in God: for I ſhall yet prayſe him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God, Pſa. 42. 11. Yea, at the laſt it ſhall for certaine goe well with the godly; and to that end heare what the Pſalmiſt ſaith, Marke the perfect and behold the vpright: for the end of that man is peace. But the tranſgreſſours ſhall bee deſtroyed together; the end of the wicked ſhall bee cut off. But the ſaluation of the righteous is of the Lord; hee is their ſtrength in the time of trouble. And the Lord ſhall helpe them and deliuer them; he ſhall deliuer them from the wicked, and ſaue them, becauſe they truſt in him, Pſalme 37. 37. 38. 39. 40. And although the godly here in this world endure tribulation and anguiſh with Lazarus, yet they ſhall receiue the more comfort, Luke 16. 25. All teares ſhall be then wipt away from their eyes, Apoc. 7. 17. and euerlaſting ioy ſhall bee vpon their heads, they ſhall obtaine ioy and gladneſſe, and ſorrow and ſighing ſhall flee away Eſay 53. 10. and 51. 11. Therefore, let the godly comfort themſelues with theſe words, in all their ſorrowes and troubles. (⸪)
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XIII. That wee cannot meaſure the ſtate of men, in regard of God, by wealth or pouertie, by proſperitie, or aduerſitie, that befalleth them in this world.
               
                  BY all that hath beene ſaid and ſhewed before, it plainely appeareth, that in this world it fareth (for the moſt part) alike, both with the godly and vngodly: from whence it followeth vndoubtedly, and cannot be denied; that we cannot meaſure the ſtate of men, in regard of God, by that which happeneth vnto them here on earth. Iobs friends may imagine, becauſe hee was ſo ſore plagued, that certainely hee was a very wicked man, and hated of God. And men by nature are much addicted by outward appearance, to iudge of the ſtate of a man in regard of GOD, looke touching this, Acts 28. 4. 5. 6. Luk. 13. 1. 2. Deut. 29. 19. 20. And marke wee how contrarily the blind Idolaters being of this opinion, iudged of their ſtate to God-ward in Ieremies dayes. But we will certainely (ſay they) doe whatſoeuer thing goeth foorth out of our owne mouthes, to burne incenſe to the Queene of heauen, and to poure out drinke offerings vnto her as wee haue done, wee and our Fathers, our Kings and our Princes, in the Cities of Iuda, and in the ſtreets of Ieruſalem: for then we had plentie of victuals, and were well, and ſaw no euill: But ſince we 
                        〈…〉
                      off to burne incenſe to the Queene of heauen, and 
                        〈…〉
                      drinke offerings out vnto her, wee haue wanted
                  
                  all things, and haue beene conſumed by the ſword, and by famine, Ier. 44. 17. 18. But Chriſtians muſt neither doe nor thinke ſo, elſe they ſhall often by occaſion of ſuch actions, M
                        •
                     ke the heartes of the righteous ſad, whom the Lord hath not made ſad, and ſtrengthen the handes of the wicked, Ezechiel 13. 22. Since that wee haue now ſufficiently ſhewed, that the Lord oftentimes in his anger ſendeth men proſperitie, and in his fauour aduerſitie. Muſt we, may ſome ſay, make no account at all of that which happeneth vnto the children of men here in this world be it proſperitie or aduerſitie, but paſſe it ouer as it is, I anſwer; no, we muſt haue a due reſpect and regard to that which befalleth men, and marke what proſperitie or aduerſitie happeneth vnto them, and how it fareth both with them and vs; yet not to this end, by the exteriour accurrents of this life, to iudge what the ſtate of man is towards God: but on the contrary, by the aduerſitie or proſperitie of men, to know what we are to conceiue of the worke of God wrought amongſt men, and by the knowledge of the ſeuerall accidents of proſperitie or aduerſitie, that happen vnto the children of men, in what manner ſoeuer they bee laid vpon them, or receiued by them, learne to know Gods affection, intent, purpoſe, and ſpeciall marke whereat he aymeth in ſending proſperitie or aduerſitie: As for example, ſome great croſſe and tribulation befalleth a godly man, by which yet wee muſt not iudge that he himſelfe, or his cauſe is bad, but that the ſame trouble which happeneth

vnto him, is ſent for a further triall and purging of him. 1. Pet. 1. 6. 7. Tribulation alſo falleth vpon an vngodly man, that therein hardeneth his heart towards Gods puniſhments: herevpon wee muſt conclude, that the trouble that falleth vpon ſuch a man (as farre as we can iudge) is as it were a conſuming fire, and ſmoke of the eternall fire, 1. Sam. 2. 25. and Chapter 4. Againe, ſome godly man hath much ioy and proſperitie; this when we behold, we muſt conceiue that it is a bleſſing that God beſtoweth vpon him, to incourage him the more to goe forward in the way of godlineſſe, Pſalme 1 18. and ſome other man that is vngodly, hath great wealth and much pleaſure, and yet hee is rather worſe and more wicked then he was before, Deut. 29. 19. Wherevpon we may conclude, that his proſperity (as farre as we can coniecture) is a meanes of fatting him for the day of ſlaughter, Ier. 12. 3.
               In like manner, when the people of God ſometimes forget themſelues, touching their proceedings in their good courſe of religion; by meanes whereof, many times they doe not follow the ſame ſo earneſtly as they ſhould, and is conuenient to be done, and that as they march in battaile againſt their enemies, they are not warie, according to the counſell of the Lord, to keepe themſelues from euery wicked thing, Deut. 23. 9. it happeneth that God, who is more ſpecially iealous ouer his people, and is wont to viſit their offences home in their houſes, Amos 3. 2. For that cauſe, many times ſuffereth them to be ouerthrowne in

a cauſe which otherwiſe is good; as it happened twiſe to the children of Iſrael, fighting againſt the Beniamites, Iudg. 20. Now when any ſuch thing happeneth, the people of God vpon that occaſion muſt not doubt of, or call their religion into queſtion, but they muſt looke into their own proceedings in that action touching the defence of their religion in a good cauſe, and thereby take occaſion to inquire, what thing either in generall or particular, hath beene done among them in their proceedings, that might diſpleaſe God; in regard whereof hee hath ſo croſt them, and hauing found it out, humble themſelues before God, and amend their faults. And if in that caſe, they cannot finde any thing, which they may conceiue to be the cauſe of their ouerthrow, then they muſt aſcribe the ſame vnto Gods wonderfull prouidence, which is not to bee comprehended by vs, but muſt by euery man, with all humilitie and ſubmiſſion bee accepted and well thought of, Iob 13. 23. 24. Iob 24.
               Thus the word of God teacheth vs, how to iudge of thoſe tribulations and that proſperitie that befalleth the ſonnes of men, which if ſome worldly wiſe men would looke well into, they would not ſo vnaduiſedly ſcoffe at the actions of Gods children; who, when they haue had a glorious victorie ouer their enemies, therevpon conclude, not that their cauſe was good (which the other in their wrong iudgement doubt of) but that God hath graciouſly holpen them in their good cauſe; and hauing receiued any ouerthrow,

thence conclude; that the Lord for their ſinnes, thereby humbleth them, and that by ſuch hard blowes he would awake and rouze them vp: not to make them imagine that their good cauſe is bad, but to mooue them to amend their ſinfull liues, that they may not thereby hinder their good cauſe, and to cauſe them in all occurrents to depend vpon the truth, and when they proſper, to giue God the Lord the honour and glory, and when they are ouerthrowne and puniſhed, to aſcribe the fault thereof to themſelues: this, I ſay, no worldling would ſcoffe at, as they vnaduiſedly doe, if they had learned this infallible truth of God. Which neuertheleſſe is true, that is, that by the knowledge of the ſeuerall chances, that happen vnto the children of men, wee muſt meaſure the meaning and intent of God, in ſending proſperitie and aduerſitie vnto men: for it is true, that Gods children, as wee finde in the holy word of God, alwayes praiſed the Lord, when they had the victorie ouer their enemies, as Dauid ſaith; Lord, I know that thou loueſt mee, in that thou haſt not deliuered me into the handes of mine enemies; nor giuen them occaſion to triumph ouer me. Pſal. 41. 11. And againe, humbled themſelues for their ſins, when they were ouerthrowne, Lament. 3. 39. not once in regard thereof making any doubt of their religion, or imagining that Idolatry had iuſtly gotten the vpper hand, againſt the true ſeruice of God. Beſides this, we muſt further know, that the thinges of this world haue not their iſſue and effect, alwayes according to their owne nature and

properties, but as the Lord (who ruleth them all) pleaſeth to order them. By meanes whereof it falleth out, that aduerſitie (which of it ſelfe is hurtfull) yet procureth great good to the godly, and that proſperitie (which of it ſelfe is pleaſing) doth yet bring great hurt to the vngodly. And hereby it commeth to paſſe, that all things worke together for the good of them that feare God, Rom. 8. 28. And on the other ſide, that all things worke together for the worſt to them that hate God; in regard that their mindes and conſciences alſo are vncleane and accurſed, Tit. 1. 15. Let an vngodly man be aduanced, and ſet aboue all his other neighbours; he will become proud and inſolent, and ouer-throw himſelfe thereby▪ Againe, let a godly man haue any tribulation befall him; hee will humble himſelfe and become better thereby; and ſo to the pure all things are pure, but vnto them that are defiled, nothing is pure, or profitable, Tit. 1. 15. And this proceedeth from hence, that the godly on the one ſide, are a godly plant, and a heauenly branch, hauing ſo great and admirable a power in it, that the man that is godly is ſo framed by Gods grace, that whatſoeuer hapneth vnto him, or is layd vpon him, how troubleſome, aduerſe, hurtfull, or miſchieuous ſoeuer it be of it ſelfe by nature, is turned to the beſt vnto him, and to his good and proſperitie; for, Godlineſſe is profitable to all things, hauing promiſes of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4. 8. And on the other ſide, the vngodly being a plant of he Deuill, and a branch of hell, hath ſo venimous a

ſtalke, and ſo poyſonfull a nature, that the man who is rooted therein, and will not be brought to leaue and abandon it, but ſtill keepeth it by him, it is certaine, that whatſoeuer happeneth vnto him, how good, profitable, and beneficiall ſoeuer it be by nature it turneth to his hurt and deſtruction, in ſuch manner, that euen the pleaſing and ſweet ſauour thereof, is contrary vnto him, and is with him the ſauour of death vnto death. And whereas the godly, ſauour life euerlaſting in Chriſt, and eternall ſaluation: The vngodly ſauour nothing but death in Chriſt, and euerlaſting condemnation, 2. Cor. 2 16.
               Hence it euidently appeareth, that by outward things which happen vnto men, wee muſt not by any meanes meaſure, nor iudge their ſtate to Godward at the firſt daſh; but on the contrary by their ſtate to God-wardes iudge, what we are to conceiue of the outward thinges that happen vnto, and fall vpon them.
               By this that hath beene ſaid, may many men learne to reforme their erronious opinions: and not thoſe only of whom we ſpake in the eleuenth Chapter, who are wont to take occaſion by their outward proſperitie, to boaſt themſelues of their actions, and are perſwaded that both they and their actions pleaſe God well, becauſe outwardly they haue wealth and proſperitie, whereas they ſhould not iudge their ſtate in regard of God, by their outward proſperitie, but their proſperitie by their ſtate.
               But others alſo, that are perſwaded and imagine

that all men, when ſoeuer any trouble or aduerſitie falleth on them, and that they are many wayes moleſted, as ſtricken ſicke on their beds, or troubled by their enemies, are wont thereupon to flatter, and ſooth vp themſelues, and to grow thereby into ſome good perſwaſion, that hereafter they ſhall fare the better for the ſame, becauſe they haue endured ſo much here in this world, and that it be certainely concluded thence, that they are Gods Children, & that God loueth them well, becauſe they are troubled, and much tribulation here befall them. But this is no certaine token that God liketh well of vs, becauſe he ſendeth vs trouble and aduerſitie, for hee doth the ſame to the vngodly, as wee haue alreadie declared. And therefore wee muſt not by outward things, which happen vnto men, either our ſelues or others, iudge or cenſure our owne or their ſtate to God-ward; but on the contrary, by our ſtate to God-ward, we muſt iudge the ſtate of ſuch outward things, whether they bee ſent vnto vs as ſignes of Gods grace, or of his wrath.
               It behooueth all thoſe then whom God ſuffereth to fall into any tribulation, or miſery, to be certainely perſwaded, that by the ſame (as the godly vſe to doe) they ought to become better and better, and to be purged and cleanſed, that doing ſo they may bee certainely perſwaded in their conſciences, that they are puniſhed by God in loue. To which purpoſe our heartie wiſh and prayer vnto God is, that all thoſe that beare the name of Gods people, would take occaſion by

the viſitation which the Lord God ſendeth vpon his people in theſe our dayes, to weigh well, and conſider ſeriouſly their owne preſent eſtate, and to looke diligently into themſelues, that they might find out their owne ſinnes and miſdeedes, for it is moſt certaine, that no man can haue any true comfort from the ground of Gods word in any tribulation, that falleth vpon the people of God, but he who findeth himſelfe to be thereby ſo affected, that he doth not onely grieue for the common miſery of Ieruſalem, but is alſo ſtirred vp to amend his owne life in whatſoeuer he findes amiſſe in himſelfe, for ſo it is written, that we ſhall then know, & be certainely perſwaded, that God puniſheth vs out of his loue, when by the puniſhments of God we become better, and more zealous towardes him. As many as I loue I rebuke and chaſten, be zealous therefore and repent, Apoc: 3. 19. And this we muſt bee ſo much the more perſwaded of, for that although the Lord vſeth ſo to deale with his people, that he ſendeth them ſome reliefe, and in part eaſeth them of their troubles, when they are fallne into them, and in them call vpon him; yet that his arme is ſtill ſtretched forth, and his wrath is not aſſwaged, vntill his people put away from them, and cleane caſt off that which diſpleaſeth and diſliketh him, and for which hee doth viſite them. Which with all our hearts wee wiſh might by euery one bee well and earneſtly thought vpon. It is not to be doubted, but that all the troubles which in our tymes haue fallne vpon the people of God, haue had their beginning

from hence, that we haue not ſo thankefully (as we ought to haue done) receiued the holy Goſpell, and the truth of Gods word. For we haue many tymes begun to neglect the light of Gods truth, which hath grieued the Lord, and for the ſame he hath viſited vs at home, which wee haue alſo in part begun to obſerue and acknowledge, and haue thereupon made a ſhew as if wee would amend and reforme it, and haue humbled our ſelues before God with faſting & prayer, making diuers faire ſhews and promiſes, as if we meant to become better and better, and to earry our ſelues with more obedient hearts towardes God then formerly we had done. Whereupon the Lord our God, who is good and long-ſuffring towards vs, hath againe begun to bleſſe vs, done great things for vs, and according to our hearts deſire filled vs with great hope and expectation, that he would more and more lift vp our heads, and giue vs many good things. But in all theſe things wee doe not once remember, or thinke on our promiſes and vowes that we made ſo ſolemnely vnto him, both in the beginning of our troubles, and now alſo in theſe latter dayes, while we were in trouble and neceſſitie, Pſal. 68. 14. For what I pray you hath ſince that time beene amended? Who hath ſince begun to be more zealous for the honour of God? Who hath begun to put forth his hand for reformation of the notable abuſes that are common amongſt vs, which euery man noteth, which euery man complaineth of, which euery man diſliketh, and yet no man amendeth? and yet wee

made promiſe and vowed vnto God euery man for his particular, to looke vnto it. Now while the dayes of our faſting and humiliation laſted, and brought ſuch ſolemne power and promiſes with them, by meanes of thoſe promiſes and vowes, for a tyme we procured the threatning hand of God to hold vp, and a beginning of ſuch great matters appeared. But ſince that wee haue not performed thoſe promiſes made vnto God, neyther haue come any thing neere vnto the performance of them, as at this day it appeareth, what wonder is it now, when wee are not true of our word; when we ſuffer all things to run at ſix and ſeuens, and as they will, and doe not as we ſhould, begin to pay our vowes and promiſes vnto the moſt high God, and euery man to amend that which is amiſſe with him, from the particular houſe-houlder, and ſo vpward to thoſe of higheſt degree: what wonder, I ſay, now is it, that God hath begun to lift vp his threatning hand againe, and that he ſuffereth vs to fayle of that we hoped and expected, and ſends vnto vs hard meſſages, that may againe warne vs in Gods name to pay our vowes, and keepe our promiſes with God, or that els he will execute his Iudgment vpon vs, & thruſt vs out of all that we haue, as one that is our creditor, and with long patience hath borne with vs, whom we haue ſtill payd with faire words, but haue not once beene moued in our hearts to find the meanes to keepe our promiſes, and to moue 
                     ••
                  m to mercies, whereon notwithſtanding our ſa
                     •
                  etie, & well-fare ſpecially conſiſteth, yea, wholy dependeth?
               
                  Therefore once againe I ſay and wiſh with all my heart, that this may be well & carefully lookt into, for it ſtands vs vpon and importeth vs much. And if that we ſhall be ſerious and earneſt therein, then all the aforeſaid proſperities of the Children of God will powerfully ouer-ſhadow vs; and we ſhall alwayes finde that the Lord is with vs, and that it is all in vaine for our enemies to ſeeke to deſtroy vs; for, If the Lord be with vs, who can hurt or harme vs? Rom. 8. 31. Pſal. 27. 1, 2.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XIIII. That by all that hath beene ſayd and ſhewed before, we muſt learne to liue in the true feare of God, and ſincere holineſſe, and more and more practiſe the ſame.
               
                  SEeing the caſe then ſo ſtandeth, as moſt euidently appeareth, that whatſoeuer men doe, whether they liue holily and godlily, or wickedly, and irreligiouſly, yet it auaileth them nothing in this reſpect, to wit, that they cannot thereby wholy free and deliuer themſelues from all troubles and aduerſities of this life, nor yet bereaue themſelues vtterly of all outward wealth and proſperitie, but that the ſame things may happen vnto them whither they liue godly or wickedly, & that alſo it further ſtandeth ſo with men that if they liue godly

both their proſperitie and aduerſitie are bleſſings vnto them, and on the contrary, that if they liue wickedly, as well their proſperitie as their aduerſitie is a curſe vnto them; and that to either of them in ſo high a meaſure and degree, that the proſperitie and aduerſitie of the godly are either of them a furtherance vnto them to euerlaſting ſaluation, and as it were, a pawne, that hereafter both here and for euer it ſhall goe well with them Pſal. 23. Phillip. 1. 28. 2 Theſſ 1. 5. 6. 7. Whereas vnto the vngodly, both their proſperitie and aduerſitie are a meanes to further their eternall damnation, and as it were, a pawne and aſſurance vnto them, that hereafter both here and eternally it ſhall goe euilly, and hard with them, Leuit. 26. Luke 16. 19. Apoc. 18. 7. We muſt learne therefore, and be admoniſhed hereby, if we haue not made a couenant with hell, and giuen our ſelues ouer to the Deuill, to forſake and abandon wickedneſſe, which is ſo much accurſed, and ſo damnable; and on the contrary to cleaue vnto godlineſſe, which is ſo happie, and ſo much bleſſed; and in this regard ſhould we in this manner argue and reaſon with our ſelues;
               I know very well that a godly courſe of life and conuerſation, is much better then a looſe vngodly, and wicked courſe, as yet I haue ſo much feare of God in me, and if I can in any ſort effect that which I deſire by good and honeſt meanes, I rather deſire ſo to liue, then to follow lewd, wicked, and vngodly courſes, and to vſe wicked, wrong, and euill practiſes to obtaine onely ſome profite,

pleaſure, credit, furtherance, and benefit, which thereby I hope to get. But now I am taught, that in reſpect of the outward things of this life, it fareth almoſt alike both with the godly & vngodly, therefore I may much better attaine vnto an vpright life by the way of godlineſſe, then by the way of vngodlineſſe. And withall, if I conſider it well, I cannot but remember, that to the godly, both proſperitie and aduerſitie are bleſſings; and on the contrary, that to the vngodly, both proſperitie and aduerſitie are curſes, for that there is an after-reckoning to bee made in the world to come, wherein euery one ſhall bee rewarded according to that which he hath done, whether it be good or euill, and after that followeth the eternall Iudgement, whereby the vngodly are diſpoſed of, and preſently ſent downe to the bottome of hell, where there is weeping, and wailing, and gnaſhing of teeth, world without end; and on the contrary, the godly are taken vp into heauen, where all joy aboundeth, and happie life eternall is obtained for them by our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt. And if in any wiſe I ſhould doubt of theſe things to come, yet the ſame are of ſo great waight and conſequence, that it behooueth euery man earneſtly to thinke on them, and to haue a care to make ſure worke thereof, ſeeing that wiſedome teacheth vs, not to prepare onely for difficult inconueniences, which wee know certainely will come, but to bee carefull alſo to preuent ſuch as may come vpon vs▪ and the rather cauſe to ſeeke to attaine vnto theſe outward things that I deſire

by godly meanes, for that by following godlines in true faith, without feare of any aduerſitie, my meate will not be leſſe ſauory, nor my ſleepe leſſe ſweete, yea, all my actions will thereby bring and procure more fruit and comfort vnto mee; and how much more, ſince that then I ſhall liue without feare of death and hell, and in an aſſured hope of heauen, and eternall ſaluation? In regard hereof therefore I am fully determined to leaue and aband on all vngodlineſſe, and to follow godlineſſe, and to deny my ſelfe, and to giue my mind wholly to ſerue the Lord my God, and no longer to fullfill the deſires of the fleſh, whereon ſo many miſeries do depend, but to follow the will of God, (which onely is good) during my mortall dayes, that hereafter I may alwaies liue eternally in heauen. In this manner, or the like by thinking vpon the things before declared, ſhould we ſet our harts vpon the way of godlineſſe and the feare of God, & ſo caſt our lot into the lap of the godly, knowing that without doubt it ſhall goe well with ſuch men. And to the end that wee may bee enduced and enabled the more diligently to follow godlineſſe, by meanes of Gods workes done here vnto vs and others, which he bringeth to paſſe in this world, wee will endeuour further to declare and ſhow how, and in what manner wee muſt prepare our ſelues, to know, learne, and reape ſome good out of Gods workes, for the furtherance of the feare of God and godlineſſe in vs, and what ſpeciall fruits we may reape thereby.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XV. How wee may profit by all the workes of God which hee doth vnto vs, and other men in this world.
               
                  THat we may reape good and conuenient fruit here on earth, by the workes of God done among men, wee muſt by that which happeneth vnto vs, as alſo to others, yea and out of all things that are done in the world, and which are known vnto vs; diligently conſider, and be thereof thoroughly perſwaded, how true euery word and ſillable of Gods holy word is, how firmely and certainely it is fulfilled, and how conſtantly and peremptorily that daily proceedeth and falleth out in this world, which he ſaith in his word, that hee will bring to paſſe: that in all things, and at all times we may ſay with the Church of God; As we haue heard, ſo haue wee ſeene in the Citie of the Lord of hoſts, in the Citie of our God, God will eſtabliſh it for euer, Selah, Pſalm. 48. 8. And with Salomon ſpeaking to the Lord; That which thou haſt promiſed to him, and ſpakeſt with thy mouth to thy ſeruant Dauid, my father, and haſt fulfilled it with thy hand, as it is this day, 2. Chron. 6. 15.
               And to the end that this may bee thus effected to our comfort and benefit, we muſt indeuour our ſelues in the whole courſe of our liues, narrowly and earneſtly to marke and conſider whatſoeuer

falleth out, of any weightie conſideration, that we here ſee done, or ſuffer in this life, be it temporall, or ſpirituall, and whatſoeuer is againſt vs that is done in the world, and commeth to our knowledge, and compare them with that which God hath made manifeſt in his word, and proteſted that he 
                     〈…〉
                  , bring to paſſe, or effect; and accordingly n
                     •
                  t
                     •
                   and conſider ſeriouſly and vndoubtedly, that what ſoeuer God hath foreſhewed in his word, hee daily bringeth to paſſe in his workes.
               To this purpoſe, God hath giuen vs a liuing ſoule, and hath taught vs more then the beaſts of the earth, and made vs wiſer then the fowles of heauen, Iob 35. 11. to this end hee hath ſet vs vpon the ſtage of the world, that wee might plainely ſee and marke (for our comfort and conſolation) the waies of the children of men here vpon earth, together with the ſeuerall euents, that proceed and ſpring from thence by Gods heauenly prouidence. Vnreaſonable beaſts that liue here among vs, as Dogs and Catts, ſee what is done in the world, and ſee it with as cleere eyes, and many times better and plainlier then men doe. If man then doe not endeauour himſelfe (with the inward eyes of his vnderſtanding) not onely to ſee and marke what is done, or what paſſeth in the world, but which is more, to marke the finger of God to bee therein, and thereby to learne the truth and conſtancy of God, ſuch a man differeth not much from a beaſt or an vnreaſonable creature, Pſal. 49. 21. Pſal. 32-11. in regarde of

ſpirituall life, whereon the difference betweene the one and the other wholy dependeth, yea hee is therein, worſe then an vnreaſonable beaſt, for heauie plagues hang ouer the heads of ſuch careleſſe and brutiſh perſons as haue no regarde vnto the workes of the Lord. Heare what the Pſalmiſt ſayth; becauſe they regard not the workes of the Lord nor the operation of his handes: hee ſhall deſtroy them and not build them vp: Pſal. 28. 5. which in truth is a moſt fearefull threatning and ſheweth that God eſteemeth and holdeth ſuch careleſſe men to bee moſt wicked: To which purpoſe alſo Salomon ſayth: Wicked men regard not that which is right, but thoſe that feare the Lord marke all things: Pro. 20. 5. For this cauſe wee are often times warned and aduiſed to this diligent marking in holy Scripture, Seeke you out of the booke of the Lord and reade, noe of theſe ſhall fayle, none ſhall miſſe her mate, for his mouth it hath commaunded, and his ſpirit it hath gathered them together: Eſay 34. 16. Ioſu. 23. 14. this alſo Iobs friendes and Iob himſelfe alſo marked diligently, in the whole courſe of their liues, as in the whole booke of Iob it is ſufficiently declared; And all the miſvnderſtanding that they had among themſelues, touching Gods workes partly conſiſted heerein, that they vnderſtoode not the word of God ſo plainely as wee doe, and partly alſo by reaſon of the extraordinary ſtrange and vnaccuſtomed dealing of GOD with IOB, which hee as then for a time layd vpon him, for a warning comfort and ſtrengthening of all his people as long as the world ſhould endure, as alſo

to that end he cauſeth it to bee written, Ier. 4. 13. Now from hence alſo it further appeareth, that to the end wee may truely to our comfort, and with ſome fruite conſider of all the workes of▪ God wrought among the children of men, there are 4. thinges ſpecially, and very neceſſarily to bee obſerued. Firſt, ſome diſtinct knowledge of Gods proceedings manifeſted vnto vs in the holy Scriptures. Secondly, a diligent marking of all Gods workes, wrought heere among the children of men. Thirdly a comparing of that which he doth in this world, with that which hee witneſſeth in his word. Fourthly a conſtant noting of the ſeuerall fruites, that ſpringe from the finding out of the truth of God opened vnto vs in his word and works. And of all theſe 4. in the chapters enſuing, wee will ſpeake ſome what more at large.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XVI. Of the diſtinct knowledge of theſe things which God in his word (touching the gouernement of this world) hath manifeſted vnto vs, being very fit and neceſſarie for the drawing of ſpirituall profitt from workes of God wrought heere among men.
               
                  THat the certaine knowledge of the will of God opened vnto vs in the holy Scriptures touching the gouernment of the world, is neceſſarily to be had, that wee may reape

profit by the works of God done among the children of men, it is manifeſt, for how can any man elſe knowe and vnderſtande whether that which happeneth in the world, agreeth with that which God hath written in his word? Since it muſt needs be that if a man doe not vſe to reade Gods word, nor know what God therein ſetteth downe vnto vs, they muſt of force erre when they take▪ vpon them to iudge of Gods workes, and to them it may be ſayd, as Chriſt ſayd to the Saduces, You erre not knowing the Scriptures, Mat. 22. 29. For this cauſe as many learned men, that are well read in the letter of the holy Scriptures, yet many times can not well iudge of the actions and proceedings of men, becauſe they haue not vſed to compare that which God hath ſpoken in his worde, with that which dayly by his hand hee bringeth to paſſe in the gouernmēt of the world, ſo it is certaine that thoſe that are not accuſtomed to reade & peruſe the holy Scriptures, and therefore know them not, can not with any ſpirituall vnderſtanding or profit, marke Gods works here on earth among the ſonnes of men.
               It is neceſſary therefore for euery one, that wil diſcharge and vnburthen his conſcience therein, to be conuerſant in the holy Scriptures. And it is a moſt notorious in gratitude, vnthankefulnes, and a damnable careleſſe ſlouth, among great & ſmale, young and old, that ſeeing God our great God (the maker of the whole world) that ſetteth vp and puileth downe Kinges. Dan. 2. 12. hath vouchſafed as it were with his owne hande to

write a booke for vs, touching the order that hee doth, and will hold and obſerue in the gouerning of this worlde, that thereby wee might certainely and ſufficiently knowe his meaning and order our wayes, and by the light of the ſame booke, might be holpen well and wiſely to iudge of all Gods workes touching the gouernment of the world for our comfort and conſolation, Rom. 15. 4. that wee miſerable poore and wicked children of men, that many times are ſo curious to ſearch into and to read the Hiſtories and Iournals of mortall mens actions, that ſcarce haue trauelled through any ſmall parte of the world, and that would eſteeme it a great honor and fauour, and would with all thankefullnes embrace and run after it, If wee might be permitted to enter into the ſtudie of a great potentate of this worlde, to reade Arcana Imperij the order that hee holdeth in his gouernement, that yet I ſay, we poore ſimple wretches are found to be ſo ſlow and careleſſe of the looking into Gods booke, whereas notwithſtanding the ſame booke ſo highly, both in generall and perticular ſpecially concerneth vs, being that which ſetteth downe vnto vs, the ſtate of our euerlaſting ſaluation, or condemnation, and how wee muſt heere on earth behaue our ſelues vnder the gouernement of our God, that heereafter in the worlde to come, wee may alwayes and for euerliue with him in heauen, Iohn 3. 39. This in truth is an vnreaſonable ingratitude, and a moſt woefull and damnable contempt.
               
                  Therefore if hitherto we haue beene ſlow and careleſſe of making diligent ſearch into the Bible, which is the Booke that God himſelfe, that made vs all, hath made; let vs with all ſpeede amend that fault all of vs▪ euen from the higheſt to the loweſt. For Kings and Princes themſelues, how great ſoeuer their affayres here in this world are, muſt not neglect this Booke of God the King of Kings, to reade it diligently all the dayes of their liues, as in Gods behalfe, in his owne booke it is expreſſely commanded, Deut. 17. 18. 19.
               Now concerning the ſpirituall order of Gods workes wrought among the Children of men, as is opened and manifeſted vnto vs in Gods Word, by diligent ſearch it muſt be more and more learned and found out▪ and to that end the expoſition made in the whole Diſcourſe of this Treatiſe, will be helpfull, and giue men ſome light how they from henceforth may iudge and diſcerne of the order of Gods workes, wrought among the Children of men, and be more and more comforted therein. ⸪
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XVII. Of the diligent obſeruation of all Gods workes, among the Children of men, needfull for the drawing of ſpirituall profit out of Gods workes among vs.
               
                  THe ſecond thing that is needfull and requiſite hereunto, that out of Gods works done among the Children of men, we may more & more learne the feare of God and godlineſſe, is that we ſhould narrowly marke & conſider of all ſuch his works. If any man though well ſeene and learned in that which God himſelfe witneſſeth vnto vs in his word, that he intendeth to doe among the Children of men touching the gouerning of the world, ſhould withdraw himſelfe, like an Hermite into ſome ſolitary place of this world, where hee 
                     •
                  ould ſee no man, nor haue the company of any, or ſhould ſhut himſelfe vp whole dayes, weekes, and moneths in his ſtudie, ſtill poaring vpon his Books, or if he were ſo continually taken vp with the cares of this world, that with blind eyes hee ſhould looke into that which is done and hapneth in the world among the ſonnes of men, ſuch a man notwithſtanding all the knowledge that he could haue of Gods word, could draw no fruit, nor comfort, out of the workes of God done among the Children of men.
               It is neceſſary therefore, for men narrowly to

marke what is done, and hapneth in the place where they dwell and abide, as namely, how it fareth with the good and the bad, as well in generall as in particular, when they are ſound in the way of righteouſneſſe or wickedneſſe, as they are in proſperitie or aduerſitie, how both the one and the other behaue themſelues therein, and how they liue, what they doe, what their vpriſing, going forth, and proceedings are; all this men muſt warily and narrowly note, in the places where they liue; as alſo, the condition, conuerſation, employments, bleſſings, puniſhments, ſickneſſes, diſeaſes, death and ends of the Children of men, and conſider thereof; for there is no working, no proceeding, nor any thing that is done in this life touching proſperity or aduerſity, from the which a Chriſtian man, like a Bee, may not draw ſome good fruit. That man therefore that hath any iudgement, muſt note and marke all things in ſuch manner, that from day to day hee may bee more and more inſtructed, and become wiſer: and to that end the Pſalmiſt ſayth, That it is a wiſe mans worke to make all theſe things, that he may vnderſtand the louing kindneſſe of the Lord, Pſal. 107. 43. And Salomon ſheweth vs that it was his practiſe to conſider all things, euen vnto the field of the ſlothfull, and to that end ſayth; I went by the field of the ſlothfull, and by the vineyard of the man voyde of vnderſtanding, and loe, it was all growne ouer with thornes, and nettles had couered the face thereof; and the ſtone wall thereof was broken downe: then I ſaw and conſidered it well, I looked vpon it, and receiued
                  
                  inſtruction, Pro. 24. 30. 31. 32. But eſpecially, it concerneth a Chriſtian, narrowly to note and marke Gods proceedings, and dealings with and concerning himſelfe, and how it fareth with him in the courſe of his life, whether hee followeth Gods will and Commandements, or is careleſſe thereof. And we muſt euery one of vs particularly conſider, how ioyfull and good a thing it is, to behold a childe of God haunt Gods houſe, to be releaſed and freed from the dulneſſe of his peruerſe nature, and from the gouernment of ſinne and Sathan, to be ſhrowded vnder Gods wings, and to haue him for his protection and defence, and how gratiouſly he then dealeth with vs when we ſo doe, preſerueth vs from a thouſand burdens of heauie and grieuous ſinnes, whereunto otherwiſe we were wholly addicted, and would eaſily haue fallen into, how comfortably he maketh vs to grow vp and encreaſe in knowledge and grace for the more aſſurance of his fauour towardes vs, and of our eternall ſaluation. And wee muſt yet narrowly and ſpecially marke and conſider on the one ſide, What bleſſing, what comfort, and what peace wee haue found for our ſoules in all occurrents of proſperitie or aduerſitie, as long as wee ſerued God, and that our hearts were not turned backe, neither did our ſtepps decline from his way, Pſal. 44. 18. Ier. 6. 16. And on the other ſide, into what troubles, griefes, perplexities, diſquietneſſe of Conſcience, diſtruſt, and feares we haue fallen, when by any temptations, we fell from the Lord our God, and how after our fall when wee truely

conſidered the ſame, and humbled our ſelues before the Lord our God, and againe turned vnto him with true repentance, with all our hearts, and a true deſire to ſerue him, we were againe by him receiued into grace, and reſtored into our former bleſſed, and comfortable ſtate, as the ſame is at large notably ſet downe vnto vs in the ſtory of the prodigall child.
               Thus euery one of vs muſt particularly enter into the Cloſet of his owne Conſcience, and well & narrowly marke in what proceedings we haue beene beſt furthered and thruſt forward to a ſpirituall life, which is the ſpeciall marke that wee ſhould ayme at, and what comfort we haue thereby receiued and therein found for our ſoules, that we may with the Church of God ſay, when wee haue forſaken our God and gone aſtray, I will goe and returne to my firſt husband againe: for then it was better with me then now, Hoſ. 2. 7.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XVIII. How we muſt compare that which God doth in this world with that which hee hath ſet downe in his word, that we may draw ſome good fruit from the workes of God for our comfort
               
                  THe third thing that is needfull hereunto, that out of the workes of GOD done among the Children of men, we may know the truth of God ſet downe in his word for our comfort and conſolation

is, that we collect and gather together whatſoeuer by diligent ſearching into the word of God; and narrowly marking of Gods workes, touching Gods proceedings and dealings with the ſonnes of men, we haue learned, that by comparing ſpirituall things with ſpirituall things, by meanes thereof we may duely and clearely begin to perceiue and vnderſtand the truth and certaintie of Gods word, and how that heauen and earth ſhall ſooner paſſe away then one tittle of Gods word ſhall fayle; ſo that we may be able to ſay being holpen by the aforeſaid obſeruation. That this was done in England, this in France, this in Germany, this in our Countrie, in our towne, in our village, in our houſe, according to that which the Lord witneſſeth in this or that place of his Booke, that it ſhould fall out ſo and in ſuch manner, although in mens opinions it was otherwiſe expected to be done. Now further, that wee may bring theſe things the better about, and thereby to reape that profit and fruit, which we deſire to doe by theſe thinges that are done and happen here in this world, we muſt ſpecially adde theſe two thinges thereunto.
               Firſt, and before all that we accuſtome our ſelues in all things that happen to fall out, and come to our knowledge, to note the finger of our God to be therein, and withall hold this for certaine, and moſt true, that as in all things that we ſee and behold men to doe, not the body of man worketh onely, but the ſoule eſpecially which we ſee not, ſo that likewiſe the Lord our God, which gouerneth

all things by his mightie Word, hath his finger ſecretly in all things that are done, much more then Ioab had his hand in the buſineſſe of the woman of Tekoa, 2 Sam. 14. though in an holy manner, and that altogether incomprehenſible, whereby he alwayes worketh well, and produceth much good, euen by meanes of the wickedſt inſtruments in the world, by vngodly Aſſur, that is, the rod of his anger, and by the Deuill himſelfe, whom hee vſeth often times to plague his people by, Eſa. 10. 5. 6. and 1 Chron. 22. 20. So that we muſt endeuour to bring our ſelues to ſee the working of Gods finger to be alwayes in euery thing that is done in the world, and to thinke and perſwade our ſelues, that it is the Lord our God that hath done this, thus and in this manner, either by furthering, or by hindring the ſame in this or that manner, and cauſing or ſuffering it to fall out the one way or the other. And accordingly whatſoeuer hapneth to croſſe the proceedings of Gods children, learne alwayes to ſay vnto our ſoules, behold, this our God hath done, or permitted to be done. This the vngodly vſe not to doe: they doe not once marke the finger of God in any thing that hapneth vnto the Children of men; but their manner is, to aſcribe it to the loweſt and neareſt cauſes, and to depend wholy thereupon, looking no higher, nor further then the gates of the Towne wherein they dwell, vnleſſe it be a thing that is vnaccuſtomed, and ſuch as doth not vſually fall out; and then it may be they will ſuppoſe, that it proceedeth from God, as the ſorcerers

of Egypt, marked the finger of God to be in the lice that Moſes brought vpon the Egyptians, becauſe they could conceiue no naturall cauſe whereby it might be effected, Exod. 8. 17. 18. 19. but ſuch as are godly and know Gods word, note the finger of God in all things, as that which is moſt neceſſary to bee conſidered, they thereby may obſerue the workes of God, to fall out according to his word, and may draw and reape conuenient fruits from the ſame.
               Secondly, that we accuſtome our ſelues when any thing worth the noting falleth out in the courſe of our liues, that is, againſt our ſelues, or others, whether they bee particular perſons, or whole Nations, to quicken our witts thereby, and to ſtirre vp our memories, to call to mind and remember, whether there be no one place of Scripture, that witneſſeth ſomething touching the ſame, whereby it is foretold, or whereunto it may be likened: as for example, we ſee a man run vp and downe about his worldly affayres vpon the Sabboth day, and when he hath done, we ſee all that he did was in vaine; heare ſhould we remember, what is ſayd vnto vs, Exod. 16. 27. to wit, And it came to paſſe that there went ſome of the people on the Sabboth day (which was the reſt of the Lord) for to gather Manna, and they found none. This was the practiſe of Chriſts Diſciples, and God gaue them vnderſtanding thereby: ſee Ioh. 2. 16. 17. 22. and Ioh. 11. 16.
               Now to finde conuenient places of Scripture, touching theſe thinges that may bee compared

with that that hapneth in the world, wee muſt in that that is done diligently conſider what the ſpeciall cauſes were why thoſe things fell out and came ſo to paſſe as they did, as namely, why ſuch and ſuch things hapned ſo well or ſo ill; and wherein they finde themſelues to haue a part in the gracious promiſes of the Lord, and the Lord hath promiſed ſuch good to come to them, as they then finde, or wherein they feele and know themſelues culpable of the threatnings of God, whereby things haue ſo happened vnto them as they haue fallen out. And if we can finde no certaine ſpeciall cauſe thereof, but the contrary rather, then we muſt, as in Iobs caſe, aſcribe the event to the mighty power of God, and accordingly behaue our ſelues therein.
            
            
               
                  CHAP. XIX. Of the ſeuerall fruites that ſpring from the ſearching into and finding out of Gods truth, and certaintie declared vnto vs, in his word, and in his workes.
               
                  THe fourth and the laſt of the foure neceſſary points required hereunto, that by the workes of God done among the ſonnes of men, we may be enduced to lay more hold vpon the feare of God, and godlineſſe is, that wee diligently note and conſider the ſeuerall fruites that are hereby reaped, and which by finding out

Gods truth, and the certaintie thereof, are declared vnto vs in his Word, which muſt be earneſtly and well conſidered of, becauſe this is the ende, ſcope, and ſpeciall marke whereunto all tendeth, that hath formerly beene deliuered.
               Now the fruites that ſpring from the aforeſaid conſiderations are notable, both many and great, whereof ſome (that we may orderly place them in certaine ranckes) concerne the holy Scriptures themſelues; by the light whereof wee may bee able to proue and to iuſtifie all the aforeſayd arguments and declarations, other ſome concerne Gods workes, and a third ſort our obedience, which wee are to yeelde and ſhew vnto the word of God and the holy Scriptures. Touching the firſt ſort of fruites concerning the holy Scriptures they are three.
               For in the firſt place, wee learne out of the aforeſayde conſiderations, the truth of the holy Scriptures, that the ſame is moſt certaine and immutable, and that it ſhall neuer faile in any one tittle thereof, therein contained.
               And heereby are wee confirmed and aſſured in our conſciences, as by experience we find, that what ſoeuer the Lord hath ſpoken, by his owne mouth in his worde, that with his hand hee effecteth and bringeth the ſame to paſſe in gouerning of the worlde. Now this is a moſt notable fruit; for vntill ſuch time as that wee doe dewly and truly marke how true Gods word is, and how truely God performeth & bringeth that to paſſe continually in the gouerning of the world, which

in his word hee hath promiſed and threatned to doe, wee ſhall neuer eſteeme of feare, nor ſubmit our ſelues vnto Gods worde, and on the contrary, when by our owne dilligent obſeruation, wee find out and are perſwaded of the truth and certaintie of Gods worde, wee are thereby at all times led and induced to the loue of Gods word, and incouraged to beleeue it, and to eſteeme well thereof, Iohn 2. 12. It is ſayd that the worde of God, is quicke and powerfull and ſharper then any two edged ſword. Heb. 4 12. Now no man doth eaſily beleeue this, but hee that by feare of the word of God is moued therunto in his heart, Acts 2. 37. and 1. Cor. 14. 24. 25. and he that is ſo affected, doubteth no more thereof, then hee doth that the Sunne is bright and cleare; and he that hath this feeling of the worde, working in his ſoule, hath vndoubtedly already made a good entrance into the way to Gods kingdome, for this is moſt certaine and ſure, that all the ſinnes and miſdemeanours which thoſe men commit that withſtand the written worde which is the liuely truth of God, proceede from this, that they do not beleeue that the ſame word is ſo true and certaine as it is.
               The ſecond fruit is, that wee learne by the aforeſayd declarations, the abundant largeneſſe and copiouſnes of the holy Scriptures, pſal. 119. 96. It is not to be ſpoken (if wee woulde apply our minds earneſtly and as wee ought to find out places in the Scriptures, that may bee applyed to thoſe things that happen and are done in this

world) what a rich mine of gold wee ſhould find the Scriptures to bee, and ſhould hardly, after we had once conuerſed therein, fayle of ſome one fitt place or other therein that might bee applyed to all the thinges that while wee liue we ſhould haue neede of, or are to be done by vs, 2. Tim. 3. 16. which if the Papiſts had done, they would ſoone haue perceaued and knowne that there was no neede nor neceſſitie, to finde out and invent many new Lawes and Rules for the ordering of mens liues, thereby to bring men to ſaluation, as they haue done, whereby the holy Scriptures are by them brought into contempt, and in a manner abandoned and thruſt wholy out of vſe.
               The third is, that we are by the aforeſaid conſiderations holpen and better furthered in the vnderſtanding of the holy Scriptures. It is not to be expreſſed nor ſpoken how the earneſt and ſerious marking of Gods proceedings with the children of men, and with our owne ſoules, giueth a ſingular great light to the true vnderſtanding of many places of holy Scriptures, whereof otherwiſe, thoſe that haue no experience nor knowledge of things touching and concerning a ſpirituall life, can neuer conceiue any thing, as may appeare in many places of the Pſalmes, which otherwiſe cannot ſo well bee conceiued how they hang and depend one vpon another; we can truely witneſſe, that ſometimes from the mouthes of ſimple plaine men, wee haue receiued a verie fit and conuenient ſence and interpretation of ſome places, which otherwiſe were very intricare,

which they by their owne obſeruations haue learned and found out, to be ſo and in ſuch manner vnderſtood: and it falleth out often times that vpon occaſion of that which we haue heard & ſeene to happen among men, we were aduertiſed, and haue beene taught the meaning of diuers places of Scriptures, which touched vpon ſuch occaſions, and whereof before we could not finde out the true meaning. This is expreſſely taught in the proceedings of Chriſts Diſciples, of whom it is ſayd, that notwithſtanding that Chriſt ſpake plainely of his death & reſurrection, yet that they could not vnderſtand it, nor diue into the depth thereof, Luk. 18. 33. 34. but that afterwardes by obſeruing the event of things, they vnderſtood it, Ioh. 2. 22. And thus a godly heart that is wont to looke into Gods workes, becommeth an Interpretor to it ſelfe of many places of holy Scriptures.
               Touching the ſecond ſort of Benefits concerning Gods workes, we reape hence this ſpeciall fruite, in that we learne by the declaration aforeſayd, not to become ſo peruerſe, nor reſolute concerning many things & actions that are done and happen in the world, whereas many ſimple men, that haue not buſied their braynes about looking into the word of God, nor in marking of the courſe of Gods workes, become obſtinate thereby, and grow careleſſe and ſlacke to regard the ſpirituall life, in regard of the proſperitie of the vngodly, and the aduerſitie of the godly, which at the firſt they could not vnderſtand, nor

conceiue; and therefore gaue a wrong interpretation of them, becauſe they entred not into the ſanctuary of the Lord, which now is his worde, for when wee wholy relie vpon the word of God in all worldly accidents, wee attayne vnto the right vnderſtanding of things that belong vnto God, and are not thereby hardened, but rather inſtructed and made better; pſal. 92. 6. 7. pſal. 73. Iob. 17. 8. 9.
               Touching the third ſorte of fruits concerning the manner of our obedience, which according vnto the word of God, wee owe vnto him, there are three fruites. In the firſt place wee are by the aforeſayd declaration, inſtructed to diſcerne our owne and other mens ouerſights, and are therby aduertiſed both how ſinne on the one ſide, by careleſneſſe of liuing, the pleaſures of the worlde and all maner of wicked actions doth oftentimes procure diuers inconueniences and perplexeties, vnto thoſe that are adicted thereunto, and in all occurrents, makes their proſperitie a curſed vnto them, which putteth vs in great feare & doubt to enter into that way, that is ſo full of danger & ſo troubleſome as that we our ſelues by our own experience can ſay vnto our ſoules; Oh my ſoule enter not into this way, I haue ſeene many fall therein I my ſelfe haue often beene hardly beſied therein, and ſo long as wee will goe into this way, our proſperitie will become a curſe vnto vs, and be a meanes to ouerthrow vs, and if wee can ſay thus much by our owne experience to our ſoules, it will be a powfull meanes to diuert vs from the way of the vngodly,

and againe on the other ſide, when by the aforeſayd declaration, wee finde and ſee that the feare of God, conſtancie, righteouſneſſe, good workes and godlineſſe, for certaine haue the promiſes of this life and the life to come, yea and that thoſe that are indued therewith, haue great peace of conſcience, and are preſerued from many miſchances whereinto wickedneſſe and ſinne draw men, and that in all dangers and perplexities they are comforted and imboldened, we can not but be therby ſtrongly prouoked and effectually drawne to the practiſe of godlines, ſo that we can ſay vnto our ſoules, Surely this is a good way, it hath beene proſperous vnto the end, to all thoſe that followed it, and all thoſe that enter into it ſhall endure vnto the end: Heb. 13. 7. and if any aduerſitie or tribulation happeneth vnto vs, yet wee ſhall bee of good comfort and imboldned: for God will then be with vs, his Rod and his Staffe ſhall comfort vs, Pſal. 23 4. 5.
               The ſecond is, that wee are alſo by the aforeſayd conſiderations made very prouident, learned, and wiſe, for that by thoſe thinges that are paſt, and which wee haue well conſidered of and beheld how they were done, we learne to know and find out what will follow vpon, and proceed from ſuch & ſuch the like actions, and what good or euill we are to expect, if we doe ſuch and ſuch things, and ſo we obtaine the gift of Approbation, Phil. 1. 9. and become wiſe as the children of Iſraell were (to counſell our ſelues and others what at other times is beſt to bee done, or not to be done. 1. Chro. 12. 33. as for example, wee haue in former

times found that vppon Maſſe dayes and other Papiſticall feaſt dayes, much hurt hath beene done, by drunkenneſſe, fighting, quarelling, and other mildemeanors, which for the time to come we thereby learne to be warie of, and are warned to ſhunne them vpon other maſſe dayes, and to withdraw our ſelues and others from them, wee are alſo taught, that the healths which are drunke in ſigne o
                     •
                   loue, haue cauſed much trouble at feaſts and banquets, and induced great inconueniences, and therefore we learne to ſhunne them, and as horne Beaſts, to baniſh them out of our feaſts, Exod. 21. 28. 29. 30. And thus by meanes of the aforeſaid declarations (Gods grace helping vs) we learne how to guide and carrie ourſelues in theſe wicked and dangerous dayes, that are ſo full of inducements, ſtopps, ſtumbling blockes, and offences, holily and ſafely into the way of peace, and therby daily fit and further ourſelues in our iourney towardes Gods kingdome in heauen, the place that we aſpire vnto.
               The third is, that we are likewiſe by the aforeſaid conſiderations made alwayes prompt and readie in all the things aforeſaid, and in all other things that belong to a ſpirituall life, and the ſeruice of the moſt high God, to direct our ſelues, & to goe forward therein with all boldneſſe, confidence, and ſpirituall ſtrength. For touching boldneſſe, and courage, when by experience with Dauid we haue found, that Gods word and workes agree ſo well together, ſtrengthen ſo much one the other, and keepe ſo friendly and faſt the one

to the other, We are not affraid to ſpeake thereof before Kings and Princes when neede requireth, Pſal. 119. 46. Yea, then with all boldneſſe we will vphold, defend, and aduance Gods cauſe, being well aſſured, that maintaining the ſame wee ſhall not be aſhamed thereby. Secondly, we ſhall alſo doe it with confidence of heart, not as thoſe that heare of it onely by report, but that by our owne experience and good knowledge ſpeake and further that which we doe. The Apoſtle witneſſeth, that being confident in the feare of the Lord, hee moued many to the like confidence, 2 Cor. 1. 10. And it is ſtrange to conſider, how certainly they haue ſpoken of heauen, of hell, of the comfort of the holy Ghoſt, of guiltineſſe of Conſcience, of the joy of the godly, and of the helliſh liues of the vngodly, that haue noted and marked ſuch things, and haue found them true by experience in themſelues, or in others: laſtly, wee ſhall alſo doe all this with ſtrength, and that not in this regard onely, becauſe doing it with boldneſſe and confidence, we ſhall thereby the more forciblie worke vpon mens mindes; but further alſo in that being holpen by the aforeſaid experience, we ſhalbe able the more fitly to apply the places of holy Scripture to the vnderſtanding of thoſe wee ſhall haue occaſion to deale with, whereby they may the better perceiue and know, that God ſpeaketh by vs, and may thereby be moued to fall downe on their knees, and honor God, 1 Cor. 14. 24. 25.
            
            
               
               
                  CHAP. XX. The concluſion of all, wherein is ſhewed, that we muſt onely refer our ſelues vnto God, and not forſake a good cauſe, becauſe it ſeemeth, not to goe forward as we wiſh it ſhould.
               
                  BY all that hath formerly beene ſayd, we may alſo learne to be contented with that condition, ſtate, and manner of life, whether it be proſperous or not proſperous (or whatſoeuer it be) that the Lord ſhall be pleaſed to allot vnto vs, and to expect a good end and iſſue thereof. For by that which we haue before ſhewed, wee may plainely ſee and perceiue that wee are not wiſe enough to rule and gouerne our ſelues, that wee haue not earneſtly ſought the ſame, but refuſed it, which we now wiſh that wee had obtained, yea, that often times with might and maine wee haue ſought to put that from vs which afterward wee haue found to be very needfull and neceſſary for vs, and might haue done vs much good, and that the Lord our God hath alwayes much better directed our cauſe, then we could either deuiſe, or had power to conceiue, yea, and that in our greateſt troubles a bleſſing hath beene caſt thereupon, and that wee haue beene ſo careleſſe and heedles thereof, that it was our owne faults that wee perceiued it no ſooner, but rather that our hearts for

a tyme haue in a manner beene ouercome with griefe and heauineſſe.
               Againe, thus may we be alſo comforted in all tribulations, and aduerſities, when by our owne experience our ſoules are able to ſet before themſelues the gracious care which our Lord God hath alwayes had of thoſe that are his people, in all their neceſſities, and although matters ſeeme to be prolonged, and our deliuerance to bee delayed, yet we muſt not doubt thereof, for we haue learned by the former conſiderations, that the Lord is wont oftentimes to goe round about, and to fetch matters a farre off, in the comforting and helping of his people, that ſo hee may haue the more honour, and may miniſter more cauſe of comfort to his Children, when vnexpectedly hee helpeth them, and by one meanes or other vnlooked for, procureth their deliuerance, as it euidently appeared in the Children of Iſraels cauſe in Hammons tyme, as alſo in Ioſephs, Dauids, and others cauſes, whom he intended to exalt; and yet daily in many accidents that befall Gods children in this age, yea, and in our owne affayres, for how often haue wee alſo before this tyme beene layd in the mire to the very knees and ell-bowes, and trod vnder feete by proud perſons, and yet at the laſt hath the Lord lifted vp our heads, and hath made vs a free people, as at this day it appeareth; So that in this reſpect when it ſeemeth to goe againſt vs, wee may ſpeake of the Lord our God, vnto our ſoules, as Naomi ſaid to Ruth of Boaz, Sit ſtill my daughter vntill thou know how
                  
                  the matter will fall out, for the Lord will not be at reſt vntill he haue brought it to a good end, Ruth 3. 18. And we muſt learne with all patience and quietneſſe of minde to commend all our affayres to God, as we ſee that the Lord Ieſus Chriſt did, who in the greateſt dangers, and thoſe that ſeemed to be moſt preiudiciall to Gods cauſe, was ſtill and quiet, and committed the matter vnto God, that iudgeth righteouſly, as when he was tolde that Herod the King had cut of the head of Iohn his forerunner, a cruell deed, and ſuch a one as ſeemeed to be very preiudiciall to Gods cauſe, he put it vp peaceably, ſuffered it to goe on, tooke care for himſelfe and his Diſciples, and the better to ſecure them, & to get out of cruell Herods handes, went apart into another place, but proceeded ſtill in his vocation, and the worke which his heauenly Father had appoynted him to doe.
               And thus beeing holpen by the conſideration aforeſayde, and the experience which thereby wee haue reaped, to the comfort and conſolation of our heartes in all troubles and oppreſſions, wee may alwayes bee aſſured of this, that all the troubles that be fall the children of God, is vnto them as the trouble of Ioſeph, as the holy Scripture calleth it, that is, ſuch manner of trouble as whereby great ioy proſperitie and great promotion is layd vp in ſtore for them. For wee knowe all right well, that all the miſeries and troubles that fell vpon Ioſeph, all the misfortunes and tribulations that for a time hapned vnto him, the hatred of his brethren againſt him, their ſelling

of him, his bondage, his falſe accuſation, of adultery by Potiphers wife impoſed on him, and his wrongfull impriſonment that followed there upon, that all theſe things did altogether worke for and procure Ioſephs good, Rom. 8. 28. and did altogether ſtrengthen him, and was a great furtherance of his promotion and aduancement, as wee may reade in Gen. 37. 39 40. 41. 42. And of the like nature are all the troubles and miſ▪fortunes, which Gods people and his Church indure for a time, which in the end therefore ſhall turne to their good, and are nothing meane while, but as a preparatiue to their future aduancement. And therefore are the troubles of Gods Church and children, their cruell perſecutions, their great ouerthrowes, the death of Martyrs, and what ſoeuer elſe ſeemeth moſt of all to croſſe them, by the Prophet termed in a ſpeciall manner the troubles of Ioſeph, Amos 6. 6.
               This wee muſt ſeriouſly thinke vpon, and with long ſuffering and patience bend our ſelues and abide, and in all our aduerſities aſſure our ſelues, that when the Lord hath done all his workes vpon Mount Sion and among his people, hee will then riſe vp, and lift vp his peoples heads againe, in the fit time of their neede, as he did with Ioſeph when the time of his aduancemēt was come, and ſtrike their enemies in the hinder partes, and lay a perpetuall ſhame vpon them: Furthermore this may teach and inſtruct vs, that what troubles ſoeuer fall vpon the people of God, we muſt not doubt of their good cauſe and religion, nor abandon

a good matter, and withdraw our handes from it, becauſe it proceedeth not well at the firſt, but remembring that the Lord our Lord hath not eyes of fleſh, nor ſeeth as men doe, Iob 10. 4. wee muſt thereupon conclude, that the Lord ſuffereth ſuch troubles to fall vppon vs▪ thereby to proue vs, and to ſee whether wee will cleaue vnto him, and holde with his people, not onely when they are in wealth and proſperitie, but then alſo when they are in trouble and aduerſitie, and withall part with and impart to them of our meanes, as much as conueniently we may, for the eaſing and helping of the poore oppreſſed Saints and ſeruants of God: and ſuch as haue no meanes to doe it, muſt earneſtly endeuour by their prayers vnto God, beſeeching him to ayde his people, and to fight for them, when they are in diſtreſſe, praying in the Spirit, as Gods people doe, when they haue no other meanes, and ſaying to the Lord with them▪ 
                  Remember this, that the enemies haue reproched thee O Lord, and that the fooliſh people haue blaſphemed thy name. O deliuer not the ſoule of thy turtle Doue, vnto the multitude of the wicked, forget not the congregation of thy poore for euer, haue reſpect to the Couenant, for the darke places of the earth are full of the inhabitations of crueltie. O let not the oppreſſed returne aſhamed; let the poore and needie prayſe thy name; ariſe O God, plead thy owne cauſe, remember how the fooliſh man reprocheth thee daily; forget not the voyce of thy enemies; the tumult of thoſe that riſe vp againſt thee encreaſeth continually, Pſal. 74. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23.
               
                  But thoſe that haue better meanes muſt employ all their meanes to that end, as thoſe godly Princes OBEDIAH and NEHEMIAH; and as all the Iudges of ISRAELL did, who tooke the cauſe of GODS people in hand when it was in greateſt diſtreſſe, and by GODS bleſſing brought it to a happie ende, to their owne prayſe, and the peoples comfort: for which their names alſo ſhall be bleſſed to the worldes ende.
               Whereas on the contrary, a fearefull threatning is denounced againſt EDOM, Iſraels brother, euen that he ſhould bee rooted out, For his violence againſt his brother Iacob. And obſerue I pray you what this his violence was, at ſuch tyme, ſayth the Lord, as thou ſtoodeſt on the other ſide, in the day that the ſtrangers carried away captiue his Forces; and forreners entred into his gates, and caſt Bolts vpon Ieruſalem, euen thou waſt as one of them. And let euery man marke this laſt ſentence concerning the manner of his ruine and rooting out, and thinke well thereupon; Therefore ſhall ſhame couer thee, and thou ſhalt bee cut off for euer, Obadiah, verſes 10. and 11. And no marvell: For Meros was curſt, not becauſe it holpe the enemies of GOD, but onely becauſe it did not ayde GODS people; Curſe yee Meros, ſayth the Angell of the Lord; Curſe yee bitterly the enhabitants thereof, becauſe they came not to the helpe of the Lord, to the helpe of the Lord againſt the mightie, Iudges the 5. Chapter▪
                  
and the 23. verſe. Ruben alſo th
                     •
                   eldeſt of the Children of Iacob, from whom moſt helpe was expected, was gently admoniſhed, and that for with-drawing himſelfe; ſaying, Why abodest thou among the Sheepe-foulds, to heare the bleatings of the Flockes, for the diviſions of RVBEN there were great thoughts of heart, Iudges the 5. Chapter, and verſe 14.
               To conclude, Let all godly hearted men therefore in the neede and neceſſitie of Gods people, thinke ſeriouſly vpon the Commaundement of the LORD, which hee giueth when his people are in trouble; ſaying, The Inhabitants of the Land of TEMAN brought water to him that was thirſtie; they prevented with Bread him that fled. For they fled from the ſword, from the drawne ſword, and from the bent Bow, and from the grieuouſneſſe of warre, ESAY 21. 14. 15.
               And hauing ripely waighed and conſidered all thinges, follow MOSES the Prince of ISRAELL; Chooſing rather to ſuffer affliction with the people of GOD, then to enioy the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon: Eſteeming the reproch of Chriſt greater riches then the treaſures of Egypt, Hebr. 11. 25. 26.
               Yea, this will all thoſe doe that haue the eye of Fayth with MOSES; For he had reſpect vnto the recompence of the reward, which by Grace is prepared for all thoſe, that following

                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
GODS counſell, come to helpe his people in their neede, and rightly judge of their afflictions; For ſo it is written, Bleſſed is hee that conſidereth the poore, the Lord will deliuer him in the time of trouble. Pſal. 41. 1. ⸪
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   