
      
         
            
            
               
               Archaioplutos. OR THE RICHES OF Elder ages. 
Proouing by manie good and learned Authours, that the auncient Emperors & Kings, were more rich and magnificent, then such as liue in these daies.
            Heereto is annexed, the honours of the braue Romaine Souldiours; With the seauen Wonders of the Worlde.
            Written in French by Guil. Thelin, Lord of Gutmont and Morillonuilliers: and truely translated into English.
            
               Patere aut Abstine.
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by I. C. for Richard Smith, and are to be sold at his shop, at the West doore of Paules. 1592.
         
         
            
            
            To the Right Honourable and vertuous Lord, Gilbert, Lord Talbot, the honourable Earle of Shrewesburie, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter. &c. The fulnesse of content in all his heroycall desires.
            
               
                  I Offer to your Honour, the paines of a Noble Frenchman, how vnskilfully by me turned into English, I leaue to your wonted honourable consideration: who beeing enriched with so many singuler perfections, will not frowne on the good endeuours of an humble well-willer. I haue no meane whereby to excuse my boldnes, but onelie this, a reuerend and vnfained affection to your honour, with forward zeale in duetie to doe anie thing you shall commaund me: if this may excuse me, it is as much as I desire, and which heereafter I wil better imploy my selfe to deserue.
            
            Your honours humble affectionate, An: Monday. One of the Messengers of her Maiesties Chamber.
         
         
            
            To the courteous Reader.
            
               IF thys harshe and vnpleasant translation, (courteous Gentlemen) may passe wyth your wonted kind acceptance: expect a worke from the Presse very shortly, more aunswerable to your humours, namely, the sweet conceited Historie of Orlando Amoroso. Though farre inferiour to that already extant of Orlando Furioso, doone by so rare a Scholler of the Muses: yet what wants in cunning, good wyll shall supply, to compleat Orlandos vvhole Historie together.
            
               A. M.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A briefe extract of certain Histories, wherin is declared, that the Emperours and Kings of elder tymes, were more rich and magnificent, then such as liue at thys day; taken from the Volumes of sundry good Authors.
            
               
                  The tryumph of Salomons Temple, and what the making thereof valued.
               
               
                  WEE reade in the first Booke of the Chronicles, the twentie two chapter, that Dauid saide to Salomon. My Son, comfort thy selfe, plucke vp thy hart and be strong, dreade not, neither be discouraged. For according to my pouertie haue I prepared
                  
                  for the house of the Lord, such dispence as shall be needfull to make vp the same: to wit, an hundred thousand Talents of Golde, and a thousand thousand Talents of Siluer, which is one Million, with three thousand Talents of Gold of Ophir, of the best choise.
               
               Thys sum is infinite and not to be numbred. An hūdred thousand Talents of gold, doe value three-score thousand Millions of Crownes. The Million of Talents of siluer, valueth sixe hundred Millions of Crownes, according to the estimate of Budaeus in hys Booke of Coynes. Where speaking of the tryumphes of Caesar, he saith, that he caused to be brought into the publique Treasurie, three-score and fiue thousand Talents of siluer, which valued nine and thirty Millions of Crownes. He maketh also the like mention, where he speaketh of Cyrus King of Persia, who tooke Craesus and his treasure, amounting to fiue hundred thousand Talents of siluer, which value three hundred Millions of Gold.
               It is written in the second Chapter of the third booke of Kings, that in the time of Salomon, he had so much siluer out of Iudea, as there was not any account made thereof.
               The shyps belonging to Salomon & king Hyram, went by three and three yeerely to

                  Tharsus, whence they brought great quantitie of Gold and siluer; in so much that (as the Text saith) there was such store of gold and siluer in Ierusalem, as the King esteemed therof no otherwise then of stones: the Vessels and all the vtencelles together of the house of Lybanon, was of fine Gold.
               
                  Iosephus in his seauenth booke of Antiquities, witnesseth, that Dauid when he deceassed left greater riches, then any other King, were he Hebrewe or Gentile, which was hydden within his Sepulchre, as also in the Coffer or Vessell monumentarie, wherin the bones and ashes of the Kinges were wont to be kept, so that his treasure was verie hard to be found.
               Likewise in the ninth Booke of the Euangelicall preparation, he sayth, that hee hath read in Eupolemus an auncient Historian, that the King of Tyre and of Phoenicia, with many other beside, were tributaries to King Dauid: from whom hee conquered these Treasures by force of Armes, and by the Diuine fore-pointment, the place was shewen him where the Temple shoulde be builded. But because hee had soyled his hands with blood-shed in warre, it was told him that he should not builde the fore-saide Temple. Wherefore he prepared so great aboundance

as he could, of gold, siluer, brasse, stones, Tymber of Cipres and Cedar, and sent it into the Ile which hee called Urpha, situate in the Red-sea, which was wonderfully stored with Mines of Gold, and from whence was brought an innumerable quantitie.
               After his deceasse, Salomon wrote Letters to the King of Egipt named Uafres, after this manner. Salomon King of Iudea, to Vafres his friende King of Egipt, perpetuall health. Knowe, that by the grace of God, and from King Dauid my Father, this kingdome is discended vnto me: he in his life time gaue mee in charge, that I should builde a Temple to the Creator of heauen and earth: for which cause I haue written to thee, that thou wouldest giue me comfort and assistance in this busines. Therfore I require thee to send me Maisters of Masons, Stone-cutters, Carpenters, and workmen, who may erect for me the said Temple.
               
               These Letters receiued by the King of Egipt, were in this manner answered. I sende thee eyght score thousand men, such as are expert & chiefe in erecting of buildings, euen such as thou hast required of me. Like Letters wrote Salomon, to Suron King of Tyre, receiuing like aunswere, and like number of Maisters in workes and buildings.
               
                  
This History written by Eupolemus an Historian Gentile, agreeth in euery part with the holy Scripture, as in the fift Chapter of the thirde booke of the Kinges: and there is no other difference, but onely that concerning Tyre, where he calleth the king of Tyre Suron, the Scripture nameth hym Hyram.
               
               
                  Iosephus in the eyght Booke of his Antiquities, saith, that these two Epistles or Letters of King Salomon and King Hyram, were in his tyme intirely sound and perfect, both in Tyre and in Iudea.
               
               
                  Eupolemus passeth further, and sayth, that all the gold which was imployed about the Temple, the Colloms and Vessels of Gold, amounted to foure Millions, and sixe hundred thousand Crownes: The siluer for the nayles and other thinges, valued twelue hundred and thirtie two Talents.
               After the work-men were contented, & they of Egypt sent home into theyr Countrey, as also the men of Tyre, the sum that was gyuen to each one for his paines, was tenne Talents of Gold.
               The dispence of the Temple, according to Budaeus, amounted to twentie seauen Millions, nine hundred thousande Crownes of the Sunne, and twelue hundred thirtie-two

Talents of siluer: which come to seauen hundred, thirty seauen thousande Crownes of the Crowne.
               Yet is not comprised in this sum, what was giuen to three-score and ten thousande Labourers, of whō mention is made in the 5. chapter of the 1. Booke of the Kings: nor of 3000. & three hundred Maisters, that ruled and ouer-sawe the worke: nor the charges offraights and carriages: nor how much the brasse and yron cost: nor what rewarde was giuen to eyght 
                     〈◊〉
                   thousande men more, sent him for handy-crafts men by the King of Egipt. Wherfore we may well imagine, that Salomons Temple was a worke of wonder, and the cost thereon bestowed inestimable.
               It is written in the second booke of the Chronicles, the fourth Chapter, That all the Vessels, Basons, Candlesticks, Censors, Lampes, Organes, and other musicall instruments of the Temple, the Alsar, the Ports, the Tables, and Hindges were of pure gold.
               
               Wee reade likewise in the first Booke of the Chronicles, the nine and twentith chapter, that the Princes and Fathers of the linage of Israell, also the Captaines of thousands and hundreds, offered willingly, and gaue for the seruice of the house of God, fiue thousands Talents, and ten thousand peeces of Golde, tenne
                  
                  thousand Talents of siluer, eighteene thousande Talents of Brasse, and one hundred thousande Talents of yron. And they with whom precious stones were found, gaue them to the Treasure of the house of the Lord.
               
               
                  Salomon caused to be made three hundred Shieldes of fine Golde, that is to say, couered with Gold, framed in fashion of Plates, accounting each Plate worth sixe hundred sicles: which value two thousand and foure hundred Crownes of the Sunne.
               Three hundred Targets, which are little light Shieldes, of the purest purified Gold, and placed them in the house of Lybanon.
               
               
                  Eupolemus adioynes heereto a thousande Shieldes of Gold.
               It is written in the tenth Chapter of the third Booke of the Kings, that Salomon made a great seate royall of Iuorie, and couered it with the best Gold. And the seate had sixe steps, and the top of the seate was round behind, and there were Pommels on either side of the seate. And there stoode twelue Lyons on the steppes, sixe on a side: there was neuer like worke seene in any Kingdome.
               
               Salomon sacrificed at one time to God, two and twentie thousand Oxen, and an hundred & twentie thousand Sheepe. His ordinary expence day by day, was thirtie quarters of fine Manchet
                  
                  flower, and three-score quarters of other meale: ten stalled Oxen, and twentie out of the Pastures, an hundred sheepe, besides Hartes, Buckes, Wilde-goates, and Capons.
               
               
                  And Salomon had fortie thousande stalles of Horsses for Chariots, and as many Heards of Horsses, he had likewise twelue thousand Horse-men: according as it is written in the thyrd Booke of the Kings, the fourth Chapter.
            
            
               
                  The riches of Darius.
               
                  
                     QUintus Curtius, Plutarch, Strabo, and other Historians, haue supposed & written, that Alexander the great, after his conquest of Darius king of Persia, found in the Treasurie of his conquered enemie, twenty-nine thousand talents: which valued an hundred and eight Millions of Crownes of the Crowne.
               So choysely and deerely did Darius account ofhis pleasure in the night, as he lodged in a Chamber betweene two great Hals, hys bedde beeing spred foorth very sumptuously, and couered with a Vine of Gold, in manner of an Arbour, enriched with Grapes

hanging thereon, which were most curious and costly precious stones. The richnes of the very pillow of his bed, was woorth fiftie thousande Talents, which doe amount to thirtie Millions of Crownes.
               When Alexander gained the battaile against him in Cilicia, he was then but fiue & twenty yeeres old, and sent his Lieuetenant Parme
                        •
                     o to the Citty of Damas, where Darius had with-drawne a gre
                     •
                   part of the afore-named Treasure, there he found foure hundred and twenty-nine Ladies his Concubines, well skild in Musique, which hee brought with him into his Hoast for his delight and pastime, with sixe and forty workmen, that wrought vpō flowers, making curious Trammels and Chaplets for Ladyes most odoriferous: two hundred, three-score and seauenteene Cookes: twenty Potters, that made Pots & other necessaries of earth, for the daily vse of the Kitchine: nine chiefe Maisters of the Paistrie: three-score & ten sluggerds of one sort, and seauenteene of an other, whose labour was to mixte the Aromatique wines, to blende and temper the sweet delicious licquors, and most arteficiall drinkes, thorow bagges and such like fit for the purpose: & forty other work-men, that made sweet odours & sauours, both dry and

licquid.
               If then the King of Persia had so much store of delights in warre, when he was prepared to a fight so full of hazard & danger: what may we imagine he had at other times, and in what aboundance of pleasures he lyued, when he held hys assured quiet in Babilon? a Citty exceeding in all superfluities and vices, yet florishing & abounding plentifully in wondrous wealth.
               
                  Herodotus in the third booke of hys Historie, deuided the Realme of Persia into twenty Gouernements or Prouinces: the principall was the Kingdom of Lydia, wherof the rich Craesus was King, that afterwarde was vanquished by Cyrus, and brought into captiuitie.
               
                  Plinie, speaking of the estate of the Persians in his tyme, sayth, that the Empire of the Persians, which as then was translated to the Parthians, contained eyghteene Kingdomes.
               
                  Herodotus in the Booke before named, sheweth by iourneyes & lodgings, that from Sardis beeing in Lydia, to Susa, which was the chiefe seate and aboad of the Kings, was full three Monthes iourney.
               
                  Quintus Curtius sayth, that in two Citties of Persia, to wit Susa & Persepolis, Alexander
                  
found an hundred, three-score, & ten thousand Talents of siluer, in one heape, which himselfe tearmed a summe innumerable: an hundred thousande Talents, valued three-score Millions of Crownes.
               The sayd Darius had one of the fayrest women in the world to hys Wife, who was likewise taken with her two daughters: ten thousand Talents he woulde haue giuen for to haue them againe, and one halfe of hys Countrey, which would not be graunted, yet Alexander intreated them very honourablie, and wythout any reproche.
               Hee neuer afterward sawe his wife and daughters, but once: and in short while after, himselfe was traiterously slaine by Bessus, who had the principal charge vnder him.
            
            
               
                  The liberalitie of Alexander the great, to his men of warre.
               
               
                  
                     ALexander the great, after his conquest and returne out of Asia, beeing aduertised that hys Souldiours and men of warre were indebted by hys seruice: caused their debts to be payde, and bringing money into the midst of hys Campe, according to the affirmation

of each one how much he owed, so much in ready pay was deliuered them: the sum amoūted to sixe Millions of Crownes.
               He was studious & of great knowledge, hauing euer-more vnder the pillowe of hys bed, the poesie of Homer.
               
               He wrote a Greeke Epistle to Aristotle, which is reported by Plutarch in his life, the forme thereof beeing thus. Alexander vnto Aristotle greeting. Thou hast not done rightlie or well, in putting forth the bookes of the Acroamaticall sciences: for wherein shal I excell any other heereafter, if the science wherin I was instructed by thee, be taught and made common to euerie one. As for my selfe, I woulde thou shouldest know, that I make more account, and had rather goe beyond all men in excellencie of of learning and knowledge, then in greatnesse of power, or deedes of Armes.
               
               He commaunded Aristotle to write fiftie bookes of the nature of beastes: gyuing hym for hys paines, as sayth Atheneus a Greeke Authour, eyght hundred Talents, which value foure hundred and foure-score thousand Crownes. A president howe learning was esteemed in elder tymes, where now, Schollers paines are neither rewarded nor regarded.
               Hee sent likewise, fiftie Talents to Xenocrates,
                  
which he refused, saying, hee had no neede of so much money to maintaine hys poore estate. Whereat Alexander was offended, saying, he was vnciuill to refuse his gift: though hee needed it not himselfe, yet he might take it and bestowe it among hys friendes.
               The same Atheneus, in his fourth booke of the banquet of the Sages, following the aduise of the Persian Histories, sayth, that in what soeuer place Alexander was, he would customably sitte at the Table at supper, (after his conquest of Asia) and eate among his Friendes in a common Hall, hauing alwaies with him the number of three-score and ten at the least. To maintaine thys custome, he appointed for the ordinary dispence therof, an hundred Attique Mynaes, which value a thousand Crownes.
               But King Dauid (saith he) who was conquered by hym, had a custome diuers times, to make publique banquets apparantlie in hys Court, which alwaies was in the open Halles, where were present to the number of fifteene thousande. And for euery such banquet as we now speake of, the estate ordained & appointed for the dispence of the Table, two hundred and forty Myriades, which amount to two Millions, and foure

hundred thousand Crownes: for euery Myriade valueth ten thousand, whereof an hundred Myriades make a Million, and fortie Myriades, four hundred thousand Crownes.
            
            
               
                  The riches of Mydas and Cyrus.
               
                  
                     PLinie in hys three and thirty booke, sayth, that Mydas king of Phrigia, and Craesus King of Lydia, which at thys daie is called Natolia, a Prouince in Turkie: were enriched with Golde, beyonde number or measure.
               
                  Cyrus also King of Persia, who tooke Craesus and his treasures, had infinite wealth, for he spoyled all Asia: so that by his victories he gained fiue hundred thousande Talents of siluer: to wit, talents of Egypt, which value (as he sayth) each Talent, foure-score pound weight of siluer. And thys summe is reported according to the great Iacke or Tankarde belonging to Semiramis, which weighed fifteene Talents.
               Thys summe or quantitie of siluer, is the verie greatest that Budaeus remembreth to be

gathered in money at one time together, which amounteth to three hundred Millions of Crownes: and rating them after the Talents of Egypt, as saith Plinie, there shall be sixteene parts ouer & aboue, which com to fiftie Millions.
               Nor is it to be meruailed that he gathethered so much, for he had vnder his power the auncient Treasures of Assiria, which was translated from the Medes, and many other Countreyes beside: so that heere among hee had the old riches of Dauid and Salomon.
               
               He reporteth moreouer, that there was an auncient King of Cholchos, named Esubopes, that first of all made opening of the Mynes, and founde the richnes of the earth, where-out hee drewe innumerable store of Golde and Siluer.
               He likewise had victory against Sosestres King of Egipt, who wonderfully abounded in wealth: so that this King of Cholchos had in his house, the pyllers, roofes, doores and vaultes of pure Golde. On the wonderfull riches that was in this Countrey, was inuented the fable of the Golden Fleece.
            
            
               
               
                  The riches of Sardanapalus.
               
                  
                     SArdanapalus, who liued two hundred yeres after Salomon, and by hys deceasse brought an ende to the Kingdom of the Assirians, according as Atheneus the Greeke writer recordeth: beeing seated in his Pallace and house royall by Arbaces hys Lieuetenant of the Medes, there burned himselfe and his Concubines.
               
                  Ctesias reciteth, that when the sayd king Sardanapalus liued, hauing no meanes left to with-stand the siedge, and that all kynde of victuales wexed scant: hee caused to bee made in a seperate place from other resorte in his Pallace, a frame of Carpenters worke, containing the height of four hūdred foote, in manner and fashion of a Pyramides, in the middest wherof, he commaunded to be placed an hundred and fiftie Couches of Gold, which serued to make most sumptuous and magnificent banquets vpon, agreeing wyth the custome of old. By the sides of them, or els vpon them, was deuised as many Tables

of Gold: thys doone, heere would he entertaine his Wife, hys Concubines and Ladyes of hys Court, such as he best affected, they not knowing or doubting what he intended to doe: after them he followed, making fast the doore, without any hope to return back againe.
               But before hee thus lockt vp himselfe among thē, hee caused to be brought thether (as sayth the History) a thousand Myriades of Gold, and a Myriade of Myriades of siluer, with a great number of habillements for men and women of purple, with sundry other very sumptuous accoustrements.
               When he was inclosed, by his cōmaundement his Eunuches and Groomes of hys Chamber, put fire to the huge frame of Carpenters worke, which endured burning the space of fifteene dayes: such as behelde thys wondrous flaming fire, supposed that he was sacrifycing to the Gods.
               Thus ended Sardanapalus his licentious life, and all the rest that were with him, consuming there likewise a thousand Myriades of Gold, which value an hundred Millions; For-beare we then to estimate the Myriade of Myriades of Siluer, the Couches of gold, the Tables of gold, and other costly habillements. As also three thousande Talents of

gold, which value eyghteene hundred thousand Crownes, which he sent from his seate royall to King Nynus, to whom hee had gyuen his Chyldren in keeping.
            
            
               
                  The riches of the Emperour Anthony the Triumuire, and the magnificence of his Queene Cleopatra.
               
                  
                     PLutarch sayth, that the Emperour Anthony the Triumuire, spente in one yeere, two hundred thousand Talents, which value six-score Millions of golde: that the estates of Asia had yeelded him, for the offence they committed against him, in maintaining and bearing fauour to his enemies Cassius & Brutus, in the Countrey of Macedon: in such an amercement were they taxed for two yeeres, albeit the fine was determined for nine yeeres.
               This summe was imployed in payment of a largesse and gyft, promised to his Souldiours, which vvas (as Plutarch reporteth) fiue thousand Drachmes for each one, which come to twentie thousand Sestertiaes, esteemed

fiue hundred Crownes. His Army was eyght and twentie thousande Legionaries, and ten thousand men, beside the Horsmen.
               The estimation of Anthonies gift to hys men of warre, amounted for an hundred thousand men, fiftie Millions of Crownes, which value fiue thousande times fiue hundred.
               And for seauenty-thousand that rested from the afore-named number, remained thirtie fiue Millions, which are in sum, four-score and fiue Millions. Without counting an ouer-plus for the Centurions, that had double wages, the Horse-men that had treble, and the Trybunes great summes, as we may reade in the Histories that make mention of such largesses.
               
                  Anthonie leueying money vpon Asia, Hybraeas the Oratour being Deputed by the Countrey, thus spake to him. My Lord, if it be so, that you haue both force and feare in your hand, whereby to execute your will & pleasure, easily may you sit downe and exact two imposts for one yeere. But if yee will doe so, it is reason that you shoulde likewise make vs to haue two Summers, two Autumnes, and two Haruests in one yeere: to the end we may twise a yeere gather the fruites and reuenewes of the earth. Asia hath paid the two hundred thousand Talents, if
                  
                  this summe of money be come into your Coffers, and is all imployd about your affaires: then vnderstand we well there is no remedie, but force will compell vs to find another pay, and this to do, we must scrape together what is left amongst vs. But if you find, that all hath been wel paide on our behalfe, and yet notwithstanding is not come to you: we thinke it necessarie, that first and formost you shoulde call an account of your Treasurers, and rather addresse your selues to them that haue managed these affaires, th
                        •
                     n to vs that once alreadie haue truelie made our payment.
               
               
                  Anthonie hauing vnderstood the great thefts and robberies of his Officers, thus vnder-trust committed against himselfe: appointed for them very seuere punishments.
               
                  Cicero in his Phillippides which he wrote against Anthony, sayth, that he tooke & carried away from the Temple of Ops, seauen thousande times, seauen hundred thousande Sestertiaes, which Iulius Caesar had placed there for more assuraunce. The summe amounteth to seauenteene Millions, and fiue hundred thousand Crownes.
               
                  Plutarch saith, that he sent to commaund Cleopatra to appeare personally before him, because shee had giuen succour to his enemies. And she came, not fearefull, trembling

or in meane estate, but along the Riuer Cydnus in a Gallion, the Poope whereof was of gold, the Oares of siluer, the sailes of purple: her selfe lay vnder a Pauillion of Golde, accompanied with sweet singers, and most excellent Musitions, all the attendants of her house beeing attired in very sumptuous Lyueries.
               VVhen Anthonie sent to inuite her to sup with him, she sent to commaund him to come and sup with her, so much did shee stande vpon the priuiledge of her beautie, behauiour & quaintnesse in speech: which she deliuered with such maiestie, and had so delicate a pronounciation, as her tongue seemed like a curious instrument of manie stringes.
               Shee could alter her speech to what language shee pleased, or as occasion serued: she spake to the Arabians, Sirians, Hebrewes, Medes, Parthians, Ethiopians, and Troglodites, without any Interpreter.
               Then was Anthony so rauished wyth the grace which she had in deuise and vrbanitie, her heauenly wordes, gesture and most exquisite demeanour, as also the royaltie and magnificence of her feastes: as beeing confounded with meruaile and astonishment, he saide and confessed, that the estate of hys

house, and the manner of his assemblies, was but rusticall in comparison of Cleopatraes.
               
               After which time, they liued together in such pleasures, aboundance and delights, as it is vnpossible to be expressed: such as beheld theyr extraordinary vanitie, euen the verie chiefe of theyr fauourers and wel-wyllers, sayde that they led a most hatefull and contemptible kind of life.
               
                  Cleopatra made him one banquet, which was esteemed to haue cost, two hundred & and fiftie thousande Crownes: by reason of a Pearle which shee dissolued in a cuppe of Wine, that weighed (as Plinie recordeth) halfe an ounce.
               
                  Plutarch sayth, she gaue to Anthonie, to make warre against Octauius, twentie thousand Talents of gold, which are twelue Millions of Crownes: & besides furnished him with two hundred shyps for warre, and victuales for his Army. Notwithstanding, hee was afterwarde vanquished, and in despayre slew himselfe in Alexandria.
               
            
            
               
               
                  The tryumphes of Caesar.
               
                  
                     APpian, in his seconde booke of the ciuil warres, sayth, that in the tryumphes of Caesar, after all his great victories, for the space of fortie dayes together: was brought into the publique Treasurie, threescore and fiue thousand Talents of siluer, and eyght hundred Crownes of golde, which weighed twentie thousand poundes of Golde. The Talents of siluer valued nine & thirtie Millions of Crownes, and the Crownes of gold two Millions.
               VVith thys money Caesar payd thorowly what hee had promised to hys auncient bandes of men, and to the Common people of Rome: that is to say, to each Legionarie fiue thousand Drachmes, which value fiue hundred Crownes of the Crowne: to the Centeniers a double sum: to the Knights double of the Centeniers: and to each Romaine three hundred Sestertiaes, which hee had promised at the beginning of the Ciuill warres.
               Because he had not payd them so soone as he would, hee gaue an hundred ouer and

aboue, as interest (as it were) for the forbearaunce, which was for each man ten crowns. He gaue more-ouer to each one ten Tunne of Corne, which are ten bushels according to them of Paris, and ten pounds of Oyle, he made three feasts for the people, beside other liberalities.
               The sum that he gaue to his souldiours, amounted to ten millions of crownes. All this sum, or the most part thereof, was brought from the Gaules as we may reade in the Hystories, and specially in Suetonius.
               
               Hee made fiue tryumphes, which hee brought pompeously into the citty of Rome. The first & most excellēt, was the tryumph of Gallia: the seconde of Alexandria: the third of Pontus: the two other were of Africa and Spaine.
               
               In the first, amongst other things of magnificence, hee had forty Elephants, on the right hand & left of his Chariot triumphant, that caried Torches and Lanthorns.
               
                  Plutarch sayth, that this aboundance of riches and treasure, Caesar brought from the spoyles of his warres in Gaule.
               
               He gaue to Curio Tribune of the people, twelue hundred and fiftie thousande Sestertiaes, which value fifteene hundred thousand Crownes.
            
            
               
               
                  The lyberalitie of the Emperour Augustus.
               
                  
                     SUetonius speaking of the testament of the Emperor Augustus, sayth, that hee left by hys will to the people of Rome, eyght hundred, and fifty thousande Sestertiaes, which amounteth to a Million of Golde. To the Tribunes hee left three-score hundred & fifty thousand Sestertiaes. To the men of warre that made aboade in Rome, to each one fiue hundred Sestertiaes. To them that were of his Guard, commonly called Pretorians, to each one a thousand Sestertiaes. To them that were of his Legions in the Prouinces, to eche one three hundred Sestertiaes, whom he would haue paid without making any account. And yet hee left (notwithstanding all these sums) to hys inheritours, three Millions, seauen hundred and fifty thousand Crownes.
               Hee gaue at one time to the Temple of the Capitoll, sixteene thousand poundes of gold, with a great nūber of precious stones and pearles, estimated woorth ten hundred and fiftie thousand Sesterriaes: which sums

amount to three Millions of gold. And Budaeus sayth, that Augustus imployed in the beautifying of the Cittie of Rome, the Empire, and things for publique profit, beside building of Temples, Theaters, Pallaces, and buildings of magnificent construction, four-teene thousand times, four-teene hundred thousand Sestertiaes, which value thirtie fiue Millions of Crownes.
               In his tyme, a Burgesse of Rome named Lentulus Augurius, was so high in his grace and fauour, as Seneca sayth, that he cōmaunded to be giuen him at one time, four thousand times Sestertiaes, which value ten Millions: who seeing himselfe so forwarde in authority, would often-times say to the Emperor (in reproche as it were) that in respect of his seruice, he had left the pleasure & delight of studying good Letters, which hee prized & esteemed more then al the pompe of inordinate riches. This ingratitude was well punished afterward by Tyberius, as writeth Suetonius.
               
               
                  Tarius Ruffus, a man of base condition, by good fortune and great industrie, got in the seruice of Augustus, a thousand times Sestertiaes: which amount to two Millions, and fiue hundred thousand Crownes.
               
                  Plinie sayth, that Augustus, to increase

the good and honor of such as hee knewe to be well minded people, sent them as Gouernours into hys Prouinces, giuing them verie honest meanes whereby to make them great.
               
                  Eusebius in his Chronicles, saith, that after the tryumph at Actium, Augustus made the goodly number before the Censors: & there were found foure Millions, an hundred and sixtie thousand Cittizens of Rome.
               
               And after the natiuitie of our Sauiour Iesus Christ, hauing adopted Tyberius, and they two beeing Censors, the number vvas made: when was sound nine Millions, three hundred and seauentie thousand Cittizens, within the Cittie and Subbarbes.
               In thys time, as Iuuenall witnesseth in his ninth Satyre, this order was helde in Rome, that when the children of the Cittizens were borne, within three daies after, one shoulde goe to the Temple of Saturne, where the Treasure of the Consines was kept, & there in the Register Court, before the Maisters and Keepers of the riches, the infants name was enrolled.
               Heereby they knew the age of euery one, and what number of infants the Cittizens had: nor was he to be reputed or thought a man, vntill he came to the age of 17. yeeres.
            
            
               
               
                  The tryumph of Pompey.
               
                  
                     PLutarch speaking of Pompeyes triumphe, which was decreed for hym, by reason of the victory he had against the two kings Tygranes and Mithridates, the one king of Armenia, the other of Pontus: saith, that by the goodly Wagons and Chariots, wherein was drawne along thorowe the Cittie the treasure of his spoyles, as also the semblances and portratures of the Kings & Countries conquered: appeared publiquely to euery one, of what Nations subiected thys tryumph was ordained.
               In euery Chariot were titles written of great faire Letters, whereby they were signified and manifested. The Nations ouer whom he tryumphed were these that folow: the kingdomes of Pontus and Armenia: the Coūtry of Paphlagonia, of Cholchos, Spayne, Albania, Syria, Cilicia, Mesopotamia, Phaenicia, Palestine, Iudea, & Arabia: yet not cōprising his victories on the Sea, where he preuailed often and very farre of.
               
                  
Hee adioyned to the Romaine Empire a thousand strong places, & about nine hundred Citties, and tooke eyght hundred ships from Pyrats.
               
                  Plinie in the thirty-seauenth booke of hys naturall hystorie, reciteth the order & magnificence of thys Tryumph, which hee saith is reported in the Registers of the Capitall. To wit, on the day of his natiuitie was hys tryumph, when ryding thorowe the Citty, hee brought to the publique Treasurie, a Checker or table-boorde to play on, made of two precious stones: beeing foure soote long, and three soote broad, was neuer found like stones of such greatnesse.
               He had in the order of his tryumphe, in one Chariot a goodly booke, of mighty and huge volume▪ he had three beddes of golde seruing to make banquets on, each one lying after the auncient fashion: vessel of gold and precious stones, to serue nine cupboordes: three statues of Gold, of Mars, Pallas and Iuno.
               
               After followed a Mountaine of Golde, foure square, whereon was Harts, Lyons, and fruites of all sorts, garnished and enuironed round with a Vine of Gold, & a Chappell in the midst, dedicated to the Muses, which was made all of Peavles, and on the

toppe thereof was a very sumptuous Horologe. In another Chariot was an Image of Pompey, which likewise was made of pearls.
               
                  Plutarch sayth, that thys tryumph was deuided into two dayes: and yet the tyme would not suffise to make declaration of euerie part thereof.
               
                  Pompey brought to the Treasure in gold, siluer, and vessell, all which came by hys spoyles, twentie thousande Talents, which value twelue Millions, beside that which he gaue to his men of warre, of whom he that had least, had a thousande and fiue hundred Drachmes Attique, which value an hundred and fiftie Crownes.
               The Romaine subsidies after the tryumph of Pompey, valued four-score and fiue Millions of Drachmes, which make eyght Millions & fiue hundred thousand crownes.
               
                  Pompey in the Playes which he made for the people, after his seconde Consulship, amongst other strange thinges, brought into the place called the great circle, by the Latines Circus maximus, sixe hundred Lyons, whereof he had three hundred and fifteene all the Iubilie.
               Therefore not without cause said Cicero in hys Officiis, that these were the most magnificent playes, that euer were before

him. And when hee brought these beastes to be seene, it was to make them kil one another, or to make them fight against men, that were condemned to thys punishment.
               
                  Sylla was the first that shewed thys manner of fight to the people, beeing of an hundred together, yet Pompey brought into the Theater beside these Lyons, foure hundred and ten Panthers at one tyme.
               
                  Augustus shewed four hundred & twentie, and Caesar foure hundred Lyons. Afterwarde by the Emperours and Princes, thys kinde of pastime was very much vsed, and was called the chasing of wilde beasts, for the peoples pleasure.
            
            
               
                  The charges that Ptolome was at for the ayde of Pompey.
               
                  
                     BUdaeus writeth, that one named Ptolome, succoured Pompey in the conquest of Iudea, who at his owne proper cost, gaue pay to eyght thousande Horsemen: and made a feast, whereat was present a thousand men sette at the Table, euery one hauing his Cuppe of gold, and each one changed at euery messe

that was serued, a Cup of gold of a new and contrary fashion.
               This riches commeth some-what neere to that of Pytheus of Bithinia, who gaue to King Darius of Persia, a Plane tree of gold, with the Vine of golde, whereof is stil reserued such fame and memory. Afterward he receiued Xerxes sonne to Darius, into hys houses, with his Armie of Souldiours, consisting of eyght hundred thousand men whē he discended into Greece.
               
               
                  Herodotus in his seauenth booke, saith, that after he had feasted them, hee gaue thē munificent gyfts: and offered the King to stipend his men during this warre, as also to furnish them with Corne.
               Then Xerxes abashed heereat, demaunded who was the man that could make hys vaunt of so great a matter. He was answered, that it was Pytheus the rich, who gaue hys Father the Vine and Plane tree of Gold, when he passed that way, and was the verie richest man in all Asia next the King.
               Heere-vpon Xerxes demaunded what summe of money hee could haue so great, as hee shoulde thinke sufficient to wadge hys Hoste: whereto Pytheus thus replyed.
               
                  Sir, when I vnderstoode that you woulde discend into Greece, to make it tributarie vnder
                  
                  your power: I regarded wel what summe I haue made count of. Before, I was determined to giue you all, therewith to disfray your charges. In the end of my account, I found that I had two thousand Talents of siluer, and in gold four hundred Myriades of Stat
                        •
                     r Dari
                        •
                     ks, wanting seauen thousande peeces. All this Sir, I giue you franckly: as for my selfe, & to maintaine my estate, I only reserue the industrie of my seruants and slaues, with the reuenue of my labor, which is sufficient enough for me.
               
               When Xerxes had considered the liberal mind of Pytheus, in brauery and iolitie of hart, he returned him this aunswer.
               
                  My friende, I giue thee all againe, and beside, will furnish thee with the seauen thousande Daricks, which wants in thy number, to make vp the summe and account euen. And nothing els will I demaund of thee, but onely to continue my good and faithfull subiect.
               
               This summe amounteth to sixe & thirty Millions of Crownes of the Crowne.
               
                  Budaeus sayth, that Xerxes ordinarily vsed for the payment of his Armie, euery Month two Millions, and foure hundred thousande Crownes of the Sun: giuing three Crownes to each one, as well the foote-men as the Horsemen.
               Albeit this Pytheus was so rich, yet notwithstanding

                  Plinie is of the opinion, that he was not to compare with Craesus king of Lydia, who had such store of Gold, as the value was not to be numbred.
            
            
               
                  The Tryumph that Lucullus made in Rome.
               
               
                  
                     LUcullus in hys Tryumph that he made in Rome, among other things, brought to the Treasurie a statue of gold, liuely figuring Mithridates, whom he had cō
                  quered: it was sixe foote long, hauing a a shield embellished and adorned with many precious stones. Moreouer, twenty Coffers full of siluer vessell, carried on mens shoulders, and thirty-two other Coffers, full of Vessell and Armours of golde, and golden money. Then followed eyght Mules drawing Coaches of golde, and fiftie sixe Mules loden with siluer, and an hundred and seauen Mules loden with money readie stamped: which amounteth to two hundred, three-score and ten Myriades, according as

the Greeke note of Plutarch maketh mention, which are two Millions and seauen hundred thousand Crownes.
               Hee gaue aboundance of treasure to hys Captaines and men of warre.
               After he had made many banquets to the Cittizens of Rome, and to the neighbouring Villages about it: he with-drew himselfe, to leade the rest of his life in his studie.
               He made one of the very fayrest & costliest Lybraries that euer was.
               
                  Plutarch sayth, that one day Pompey and Cicero beeing together, found Lucullus sette in the publique place of Rome, where he was musing, and they comming to him: after he had saluted them, hee inuited them to sup with him. But because they knew howe aboundant and lauish he was in expence, they protested that they wold not goe wyth him, except hee woulde first promise them, not to sende any person home to hys House, to make readie any thing more then ordinarie.
               When Lucullus perceiued theyr intent, he said to them, I will fulfill your request, yet suffer me onely to aske in what Hall we shall sup: and then cryed aloud to one of his seruaunts, that he should spreade the Table in Apollos Hall.
               
                  
The estate of his house was ordained according to the expences he made, and hee had seuerall Halles, distinguished for the receiuing and feasting of his guestes, wherein he had composed theyr names.
               Thys Supper cost twelue hundred and fiftie Crownes.
            
            
               
                  Of the Emperour Nero, and of Seneca.
               
                  WEE reade in the 13. Booke of Cornelius Tacitus, that Seneca, Schoole-maister to the Emperour Nero, was in great authoritie, managing all the asfayres of the estate for a certaine time: during which while, he gathered great wealth, which did beget him many enemies, and amongst all, one Suyllius, who was highly in the Princes fauour, and therefore spake to the said Seneca in the presence of Nero, these words.
               
                  By what wisedome, by what instructions and doctrine of Phylosophy, wherein thou makest thy selfe studious, hast thou within lesse then the space of four yeeres, while the King hath borne thee fauour, and shewen thee signes of loue, gotten
                  
                  together, three thousande times Sestertiaes, which value seauen Millions and fiue hundred thousand Crownes?
               
               Notwithstanding, Seneca for that tyme escaped the conspiracie & accusation of hys enemies, but four yeeres after, seeing the authoritie he had, taken from him, and hys former fauours diminished, aduertised likewise what charges and crimes were laide against him, and that the King easily lent hys eare to his enemies, and all things went very contrary on his behalfe: of his owne accord he came to Nero, and spake to him by way of Oration, to saue his life, and to preuent the Kings crueltie.
               
                  It is four
                        •
                     teene yeeres or there-about (O King) since I came to yee, and eyght yeeres of this time haue you beene Emperour, in which space by you I haue gained such goods & honors: as there remaineth nothing for me more happie and full of felicitie, then by moderation and wisedome to knowe howe to escape too much.
               
               After he had declared, wherein consisted riches and the aboundance of goods: he began to accuse himselfe, that he had not kept the statutes of written knowledge, and liued onely in Phylosophie, which woulde haue taught him to be contented with a little, or enough: he thus proceeded.
               
                  
                  Notwithstanding (my Lord) heerin I can alleadge some collour, or rather deliuer a lawful excuse: in that I coulde not well or honestlye withstande your liberalitie, or gaine-saie so high a will, proceeding onely by nobilitie of hart.
               
               
                  But nowe the matter is come to thys passe, as both the respects haue fulfilled their measure: for so much as a Prince could giue to a man being great in his grace, haue you giuen to me, and strained foorth your selfe euen to the vttermost: I likewise haue receiued such aduauncement by you, as anie man what-soeuer coulde receiue of his Prince, continuing in such esteeme with him.
               
               
                  But no we there remaineth one thing, for I can-not endure anie further without your ayde and comfort, nor can I sustaine the burthen of swaying and gouerning the great reuenewes I haue, not hauing the safety and assurance of such mightie and opulent treasure.
               
               
                  Wherefore in this age I am weakened: and when no longer I can beare the weight of care & good husbandrie, I stand in greatest neede of your ayde and succour.
               
               
                  Let it then be your pleasure to take from me this charge, and commaunde your Officers to make seasure on all, and deliuer it into your hande, to whom it appertaineth: otherwise, I shall fall downe vnder this burthenous and oppressing loade, For I see the time is come, when I
                  
                  ought recall to me my sences, & the neerest parts of my vnderstanding is not to be troubled with anie contrary thoughts.
               
               These wordes spake Seneca, onely to escape death, yet Nero caused him be put to death, as of long time hee had practised and sought the occasion to doe it.
               
                  Pallas a seruaunt to Nero, in little while after he was at liberty: knew himselfe to be worth three thousande times Sestertiaes, as saith Cornelius Tacitus, which value seauen Millions, & fiue hundred thousand crownes.
               
                  Suetonius, speaking of the great prodigalitie of Nero, sayth, that the King Tyridates of Armenia, came to see him in the Cittie of Rome, to whom Nero gaue ordinarilie daie by daie for maintenaunce of his estate, eyght hundred thousand Sestertiaes, which amount to twenty thousand Crownes of the Crowne: and gaue him at his departure thence, two Millions, & fiue hundred thousand Crownes.
               
                  Cornelius Tacitus in the seauenteenth Booke of his Histories, saith, that during the fourteene yeeres while Nero was Emperour, hee spent in vnreasonable gyfts and liberalities, two and twentie thousand times Sestertiaes, which amount to fiue and fiftie Millions of Crownes.
               
                  
                  Galba the Emperour that succeeded him, would haue made recall from such, to whom Nero so prodigally had giuen the goods of the Empire, and so haue left thē the te
                     •
                  thes: but he found that they had spent all, and followed their Maister in 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               
                  The prodigalitie of Tyberius.
               
                  
                     SUetonius reciteth, that Tyberius the successour of Augustus, guyded by violent auarice and tyrannie, gathered in twenty three yeeres, while hee was in the Empyre, seauen and twentie thousand times Sestertiaes: which summe was asterward spent in one yeere by Calligula his next succeeder. The aforesaid summe amounteth to three-score & seauen Millions, & fiue hundred thousand Crownes of the Crowne.
               
                  Seneca in his Booke of Consolation, speaking of the Emperor Calligula, & of his prodigalitie, sayth: that at one feast or banquet,

hee caused to be spent, and hundred tymes Sestertiaes, which value two hundred and fiftie thousand Crownes of the Crowne.
            
            
               
                  Of a Ladie called Lollia Paulina.
               
                  
                     PLinie in the ninth Booke of his naturall Historie, saith, that hee sawe in Rome at a meane banquet, a Ladie named Lollia Paulina, who somtimes was wife to the Emperour Calligula: that had her head, her necke, her breast, and her hands couered with Pearles and Emeraldes, knit and curiouslie laced together. The least value heereof was iudged woorth foure hundred times Sestertiaes, which is a Million of Crownes of the Crowne.
            
            
               
                  Of the houses that Calligula and Nero caused to be built about the Cittie of Rome.
               
               
                  
                     PLinie in his sixe & thirty booke saith. We haue seene the Cittie of Rome to be enuironed, and (as it were) walled about wyth houses, by the two Emperours,

                  Calligula and Nero.
               
               But albeit theyr houses were full of cost & great expence: yet the Theater of Scaurus a Romaine Cittizen, surmounted the excesse of theyr prodigalitie, and yet it was made but for one Moneth onelie, no longer then the tyme as the Playes endured.
               This peece of workmanship defaced the magnificence and memorie, not onely of the afore-named houses, but beside, it was found to be more sumptuous, as also of farre greater statelines, pompe, & cost, then any building whereof memory is left.
               The Scene of the Theater consifted of three Stages, whereon were three hundred and three-score Marble pyllers of Africa. They that were vnder-neath, were also of one peece, beeing eyght and thirty foote in height: the Scence was crosse-parted with Marble, and the Stage in the middest all of Glasse: neuer was any thing so much talked of and wondred at.
               The plaine place where the people were appointed, was able to containe foure-score thousand persons: three thousande Images of Copper, did beautifie and adorne the place for Playes.
               For the rest, such was the wonderfull riches of apparell, Tapistries of Gold, Tables

and auncient renowmed Pictures: as the true report thereof would seeme incredible.
               
                  Suetonius and Plinie, speaking of the golden house of Nero, which commonlie was called the house of Golde: saith, that there were within the Galleries three Stages, beeing each of them a thousand paces long.
               Also there was a Ponde so great, as it seemed to be a Sea enuironed with buildings: resembling in euery poynt a goodly Cittie.
            
            
               
                  Of the Treasure found
                        •
                      in Tolosa.
               
                  IN the Cittie of Tolosa, (as Strabo sayth) was founde fifteene thousande Talents, in golde and siluer, beside the vessels: which amount to nine Millions of Crownes. So likewise reciteth Posidonius, and there were founde the hallowed Nets, wherewith neuer anie man fished, to preuent that the rich Pyllers should not be discouered.
               The Romaines sold the fish of these Nets after they had subiected the Countrey, notwithstanding they were dedicated to the

Gods: the Merchants by this occasiō found the Gold, which therein had beene cast in a mighty masse or heape.
               
                  Cicero in his third Booke of the nature of the Gods, sayth, that it was decreed by the Senate, that punishment should be inflicted on such as had taken away the treasure from the Tolosians.
               
               
                  Iustin in his two and thirty Booke, sayth, that it was Cepio a Consul of Rome, who had committed this sacriledge: and that all they of his companie, which shared or had portion in thys Gold, dyed very miserably.
               Hee sayth more-ouer, that among thys Treasure was found beside, an hundred and ten thousand pounds of Gold, and fifteene hundred thousand pounds of siluer: which is (as it were) a treble summe to that before named.
               
                  Aulus Gellius, in the third booke of hys Uigillia Attica, sayth, that when any one fell into some notorious or detestable mis-fortune, or dyed an euill death, they would presently say vnto him: Hee tooke parte of the bootie in Tolosa.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Of the condemnation of Gabinius.
               
                  
                     CIcero sayth in one of his Orations, that Gabinius a Cittizen of Rome, was condemned in tenne thousande Talents, to the Common-wealth: which doe amount to the summe of sixe Millions of Crownes.
            
            
               
                  Of the Emperour Adrian.
               
                  
                     ADrian the Emperour, gaue to to his Legionaries, three thousand tymes Sestertiaes: which are seauen Millions, and fiue hundred thousande Crownes.
               
                  Budaeus sayth, that in the life of Adrian, is made mention, howe hee gaue vnto them tenne Millions of Golde.
            
            
               
                  The reuenue of Crassus.
               
                  
                     CRassus a Cittizen of Rome, had as his reuenue yeere by yere, according to the description of Plinie, two hundred and fiftie thousand Crownes.
            
            
               
               
                  The reuenue of the Kingdome of Egipt.
               
                  
                     STrabo a Greeke Authour, in the seauenteenth booke of his Cosmographie and discription of the worlde, declareth, that the reuenue of the Kingdome of Egipt, which afterwarde was brought into a Prouince by Augustus: valued in the tyme of Ptolome, sirnamed the Fluter, twelue thousande and fiue hundred Talents, which are seauen Millions and fiue hundred thousand Crownes.
               Hee was chased out of Egipt for his dissolute life: afterwarde, re-established by Pompey, and not long after slaine by hys Sonne.
            
            
               
                  Of Cato.
               
                  IT is affirmed, that Cato brought with him, from the Country of Egipt, to the Treasurie of Rome, foure Millions and two thousande Crownes: by way of a confiscation, because Ptolome of Cyprus, had conspired against Claudius the Romaine Tribune.
            
            
               
               
                  Of Lucrius.
               
                  THE afore-named Greek Authour Strabo saith, that Lucrius of the Countrey of Auuergue, was so rich, as to make estimation and shewe of hys wealth, diuers tymes he would mount into a Chariot, and cause himselfe to be drawne along the fieldes, where he would spread or scatter money, both gold & siluer, by means whereof, he was continually followed with a great multitude of people.
               Hys Father named Bytius, with his Armie of two hundred thousand men of warre, fought in a maine battaile against two Romaine Consulles.
            
            
               
                  Of the Emperour Vespasian.
               
                  
                     VEspasian the Emperour, (as Budaeus sayth) leueyed such Subsidies and Taxes on the Empire, as the sum amounted to fortie thousand tymes Sestertiaes, which come to an hundred Millions of Crownes.
               Hee sayth, that this was to reforme the

publique estate, which his predecessours Calligula and Vitellius, two dissolute Princes, had ruined, and waste-fully destroyed the goods of the Empyre, treading vnder foote the dignity thereof.
            
            
               
                  Of the Hierd of Syria.
               
                  EXceeding great, (saith Strabo) was the Hierde of Beastes which they had in Syria: wherin were thirty thousand Mares, and three hundred light Stallions: these were the first people that tamed Horsses, and therefore had wages of the Kinges.
            
            
               
                  Of Seuerus.
               
                  ONE Spartianus an auncient Hystorian, saith, that Seuerus at hys decesse, left to the state publique, a Canon of Corne for seauen yeeres: the manner therof was, to furnish for each day, three-score and fifteene thousand Vesselles called Tunnes, with Corne.
               The Romaine and Attique Tun, resembleth very neere the measure or bushell of

                  Paris, where-with a man may maintain himselfe eyght daies: whereby wee may easilie gather, that three-score & sisteene thousand such Tunn
                     •
                  s of Corne, will 
                     〈◊〉
                   day by day to nourish sixe hundred thousand men.
               This Canon of Corne was first instituted by the Emperour Tra
                        •
                     , and then re-established by Seuerus, according to the opinion of Lampridius, sette downe in the lise of Heltogabalus.
               
               This Canon of Corne was such an excellent thing, as thereby was furnished euery daie a like quantitie of Corne, to serue openlie the Market, & distribute to the people: beside the reuenue of each one, & what else was brought in by the Country into the publique Market.
               And thus they tooke vp in Alexandria, Africa, Sicilia, and diuers other places, great aboundance of Corne: which was thus ordained against the lacke of Corne, because in Italic the dearth thereof manie tymes happened: by reason of the warres and troubles, which hindered mens labours in tylling the earth, so that the whole Countrey lay long tyme together fallowe and vnmanured.
            
            
               
               
                  Of Spayne abounding in Mynes of Gold, and of that which Haniball had.
               
               
                  BOthe Plinie and Strabo doe record, that Spayne hath abounded in rich Mynes of Gold & Siluer: especiallie, Granado and Andalozia, which Strabo calleth by the name of Betica.
               
               
                  Polibius sayth, that in his tyme neere to Carthage the ninth, coasting the Leuant Sea, towards Africa, and from thence to the floode of Hyberia: there was a Myne of siluer, which yeelded daily to the Romaines, twenty hundred thousand Drachmes, which are fiue and twentie thousand Crownes.
               
                  Plinie saith, that Haniball had a Mine of Siluer, named Bebetus, which yeelded to him day by day, three hundred pound weight of siluer, which commeth to three Millions of Crownes: and that in Asturia, Gallicia, and Portugall, he gathered yeerely twenty thousand pounds of Gold.
               This summe amounteth to thirty thousande Markes of Golde: whereby wee may

plainly perceiue, that golde and siluer was more plentifull & aboundant in elder times, then they are at this present.
               These two Mettalles are diminished by succession of time: for continually it perisheth by vse, workmanship, shyp-wracks, by hyding and burying treasure in the ground, and otherwife. Also the Mynes are robd, spoiled, lost and come to nothing, as euery day it is witnessed before our owne eyes.
            
            
               Of the Crownes, recompences and other rewards which the Romaines gaue to their Souldiours: and the punishment of the offenders. Comprehending therein an excellent good order for warre, as also the gouernment of the Common-Wealth.
               
                  YEE may read in diuers Authours, that the Romaines euer vsed, not onely to gratifie and rewarde theyr Captaines with ordinarie wages: but likewise in doing them infinite other graces, by gifts and presents. They woulde honour them in diuers and sundry manners, as with Crownes and Iewels, holding them in particuler esteeme

and reputation, according to the desert of their deedes of Armes, so were they wont to respect and regard them.
               VVhen a Captaine had gotten victorie in any notable battaile, were it vpon the Sea or on the Land, or that by force he had taken any Cittie, or doone anie other singuler enterprise: they had a custome immediatly after, to make dilligent enquirie of the prowesses of the particuler Bands & Squadrons. Then mounting vp into the Theater, where after they had giuen thanks to the Gods for the victorie obtained: in generall they wold make commendation of their whole Armie, and specially, they would praise and extoll those Bandes or Squadrons, which in fight had most valiantlie behaued themselues.
               Then naming the particuler men of that Companie by their names, publiquely they woulde commende theyr vertue and valour, according to their deserts, calling thē friends to their Countrey, and saying that the Common-wealth was very much bound to them. This doone, they bestowed gifts on them, of Gold, siluer, of Crownes, Girdles, Bracelets, Iewels, Armours, and verie excellent Horsses, with other thinges of most exquisite workmanship: beside, with such prohibitions and defences, as it was permitted

that no person should enioy the like except hee had deserued to haue them in this manner.
               The Histories are plentifullie enriched with these matters, and namelie Titus Liuius, lib. 10. and 30. 
                  Titus Liuius, speaking of the Consull Paperius Censor, that gaue Bracelets of golde to fourteene Centurions, and to one Squadron hee gaue I knowe not what ornaments: the like is said of Scipio, when he was in Spayne and other places. The Crownes they gaue, had diuers significant names, according to the degrees of their deserts: they had Corona Obsidionalis, Corona Tryumphalis, Corona Oualis, Corona Ci
                        •
                     ica, Corona Muralis, Corona Naualis, and Corona Castrensis.
               
               
                  Plinie lib. 16. et 22. Aul. Gel. 5. 
                  Plinis and Plinie lib. 16. et 22. Aul. Gel. 5. 
                  Aulus Gellius saie, that the most esteemed and excellent of all, was the Crowne Obsidionall, which came from the circle or seate of the Campe, and was gyuen onely for hauing deliuered an Hoast of mē besiedged in a close Citty, or in a Campe verie strictlie enuironed: so that by such deedes of Armes, that part or men of warre, reputed themselues deliuered from prison or from death: for no other cause what-soeuer it were, could any man receiue this prize of honour.
               This Crowne was made of greene hearbs,

they not esteeming or respecting to make it of Gold or other Mettall: but onelie of the hearbes of the fielde, from whence the enemie had beene chased. With this Crowne was crowned the great Quintus Fabius, because when Haniball stood against Rome, he both defended & deliuered it frō the siedge. Aemilius Scipio was so crowned likewise in Africa, for hauing deliuered the Consull Manlius, with certaine Bands of men. Calfurnius obtained the like in Scicilie: & likewise the valiant Romane L. Cincinatus Dentatus, with diuers other.
               
                  Corona Ciuica, or the Cittizen Crowne, was a Garland made of the leaues of an Oaken bough, with the fruite vpon it: and this was giuē to him, that in extreame peril saued a Cittizen, killing his enemy, and defending still manfully the place where the occasion happened. This Crowne or Garlande was so much esteemed, as readily a man shoulde be founde that had saued a Romaine Cittizen, who at his deliuerance had slaine two of his enemies: but because hee coulde not maintaine and defende the place, according as it was appointed, they doubted whether they had deserued this Cittizen Crowne or no. Notwithstanding it was concluded, that such a one should be dispensed withall, and

it was graunted him, seeing he had deliuered the Cittizen and slaine two ofhis enemies in a place so dangerous: that (beyond his power) he should not stand to defend the same, albeit the poynt of the Law consisted therein.
               And although one had deliuered a King, or a Captaine of the Confederats & friends, yet might not this Garlande bee giuen him, without he had deliuered a Romaine. I finde that Plinie saith, that the selfe same Crowne was giuen to him, who slewe the first enemy that mounted on the walles of any Citty or Fortresse defended by the Romaines.
               
               Then was this Cittizen Crown the most excellent, next after the Obsidionall, and it might be worne at all times, & in all places. And if hee that had deserued this Crowne, were of such esteeme, that in feastes or Theaters he alwaies had his place neerest to the Senate, & when he entred, the Senate would rise on foote to doe him honour: he was also exempt & free from any office or charge what-soeuer, vnlesse himselfe pleased to accept thereof: and by reason of his exemption, so was his Father and Grand-father, if they liued.
               Many Romaines obtained this Crowne, and especially the most valiant Cincinatus
                  
                  Dentatus heere-to-fore named: hee wonne foureteene of them. The younger Capitolinus had sixe: and to Cicero (by particuler dispence) was graunted one, because he defended Rome from the conspiracie of Catalme. These Crownes whereof wee haue spoken, although they were but of hearbes & leaues, which more properly may be tearmed Garlandes, or (according to the French) Chaplets of flowers: yet neuerthelesse they were more esteemed then they that were of gold.
               As for the Crowne Murall, that was of gold, and it was giuen to him, who at the assault of the wall of a Cittie or Castell: moū
                  ted first on the Ladder and freed the wall, standing there still like a Bulwarke for defence thereof. The first (according to Plinie) that obtained this Crowne, was Manlius Capitolinus. Scipio also gaue it to Quintus Trebelius, and Sextus Digitus, because they two together before any other, wun first the walles against the enemy.
               
                  Corona Castrensis, was giuen to him that in the fight entred first within the enemies barre: this Crowne was likewise of Golde, made like to the Rampiers or Bulwarkes in the fielde of warre.
               Of selfe same Mettall was the Crowne Nauall, which was giuen to the first that (in

fight on the Sea) boorded the enemies vessell: and it was made in forme of a prow or poynt of a Ship. Marcus Varro did not disdaine this Crowne, when it was offered him by Pompey the great, in the warres of Corsica. Octauius presented the like to Marcus Agrippa, and to Sylla, beside diuers other which heere I name not. And when any Romame Souldiour, were he noble or vn-noble had made any other proofe of his bodie, eyther by course of the Launce, or in single Combat: the Romaine Captaines, (as testifie Plinie and Suetonius) were wont to gyue him Collers of golde and siluer, or Bracelets, or Gyrdles, as I haue before saide, with other priuiledges and preheminences.
               These or such like prizes, they might giue to their friends that had ayded them in warre: but as for the Crownes, they were reserued onely for the Romaines, of all which things we find notable examples in the Romaine Histories.
               
                  Suetonius writeth, that Octauius permitted Marcus Agrippa to beare a banner of Azure, because of a victory he obtained on the Sea against Sextus Pompeyus. And if I shoulde say, this was hee which deuised the Collers, the rich coates of Maile, and other gyfts, which were particularly appointed for

these affaires: it woulde require too large a discourse to declare the whole matter and manner thereof. Neuerthelesse it is to bee noted, that the Romaines were so valiant, as euerie one gained the honor of these things, or at the least the greater part: for Plinie & Solinus naming diuers, amōg others affirme, that Marcus Sergius attained the greater part; And in the battaile of Thrasimen and Treuia, where the Romaines were vanquished by Hanniball, he won Corona Ciuica, & likewise in the ouer-throwe at Carinas. This man was so valiant, that hauing lost his right hand in the battaile, he behaued himselfe so wel with the left, as also with a hand of yron, which hee caused to be made in sted of that hee had lost: as in one day hee defied foure men in the fielde of battaile, one after another, and vanquished thē all: in which Combats and other fights, he receiued onelie on the fore-part of his body, three and twentie woundes.
               Yet not this Marcus Sergius, or any one beside, won or deserued so much, as Lucius Cincinatus Dentatus, Tribune of the people, of whom we spake before: of him writ Plinie, Solinus, Ualerius the great, and Aulus Gellius, who say, that in Iewels and presents of prize, some greater then other, he won by

braue deeds of Armes, three hundred twentie and more: that he entred with nine Captaines, in making their tryumphes, & whom he had ayded in their victories. He had a great number of broken Launces, or Trunchions of Speares, & Pykes without yrons, whereby he wonne great honour: hee had eyghteene Collers of gold, foure-score and three of siluer, of harnesse & accoustrements for Horsses, heereto particulerly deputed, fiue and twentie, an hundred & forty bracelets, fourteene Crownes Cittizen, eyght Castrensis, three Murall, one Obsidionall, and I know not how many Nauall.
               
               He was wounded in these battailes with forty fiue wounds, all on the fore-part of his body, and but one behinde, hee had thirtie foure times disarmed and despoyled his enemie, and had been in sixe and twenty foughten Battailes: he was so valiant & fortunate in Armes, as he was named the Romaine Achilles: and albeit these deedes of hys may seeme incredible, yet the number and conformitie of Histories doe plainely iustifie them.
               The Romaines for these great exployts of Armes, graunted them yet other honours & preheminences: as the power of publique iudgement, seating them in the yuorie

Chaire called Curialis, which was the seat of the Ediles and Pretors, as it was permitted to Scipio: & oftentimes they yeelded to souldiours the greatest authorities, according as it was lawfull for the people to doe it, beeing a degree of estate subiect to the liberty of the Fathers conscript, and of the people. It was lawful for the Captaines to erect tryumphal statues, and to clothe or deck them as if they had beene Consuls.
               The Senate permitted by manner of reward and congratulation, that they might bring to the Temples, the Armes & spoiles of the enemies vanquished by them in Battaile: and these things were named Manubiae, that is to say, the booties gotten from the enemies. The Romaines had another laudable custome, which was, to giue to the chyldren of such as had been slaine in warre, like wages as they gaue their Fathers when they liued: and to the old Souldiours, which had long time followed seruice, they would giue so much good and substantiall lande, as they might very wel liue thereon: suffering them to dwell in Citties and Prouinces that had beene conquered, euen as themselues pleased to like or chuse.
               In this sort the Citty of Ciuill was made by Caesar a Romaine Colonie: from which

tearme we may easily deriue our french saying, of a newe habitation or transmigration of people. Cordo
                        •
                     
                   was also made a Colonie by this meane, and infinite other in dyuers Prouinces.
               In breese, the Romaines neuer left any good turne vnrewarded, and without great priuiledge: for which cause was founde amongst them the most valiant men, that euer haue beene in any Nation, because each one stroue to attaine these degrees onelie by vertue.
               I leaue many other sorts of rewards, which the Romaines vsed in case of Armes, in that I imagine I haue spoken sufficiently: notwithstanding, it is a thing certaine, that if they haue gone beyond all other Nations, in reknowledging & remunerating such good actions: it cannot likewise be denyed, but in learning & punishment of disorders, they haue doone much more. For if any one were not acquainted with honour and vertue, yet shame and feare of punishment, with-helde him from doing any vile deede, were it thorow necessity or in hope of gaine: because the paines were so great & rigorous against such as did badly.
               For if they lost any honour wherto they had been called, or that they had been whipped

euen to the blood: they were thrust into yrons as they had beene slaues, and if they had fled, leauing their Captaines in the battaile, they were eyther thrust vpon a spyt, or otherwise extreamely handled, and so according to theyr offence was the punishment inflicted.
               
                  Titus Liuius writeth, that a Squadron of Appius Claudius, to whom hee had in charge the keeping of a certaine place, forsooke it and lost it: which he being desirous to punish, yet notwithstanding mercifullie, it was graunted him to sunder them in tenne to a company, afterward Lots were cast, and they to whom the chaunce happened, were punished with death for safetie of the other. Iulius Frontinus sayth, that Marcus Antonius dyd the like to a Band of hys, which had not defended his Rampiers, but suffered the enemies to set them on fire.
               They vsed sundrie other punishments to to their disobedient Souldiours, whereof would aske a long tyme to speak: wherfore onely I say, that as in those times there was no default in honoring & rewarding goodnesse, so likewise was there no defect in punishing wickednesse.
            
            
               
               Of the seauen Wonders or Meruailes of the World.
               
                  
                     SVch as haue read the auncient Historians, Oratours, and Poets, haue founde mention made in sundrie of their writings, of seauē Meruailes or Wonders of the World, which were in diuers and contrary places. All they that haue written, doe agree on sixe, but about the seauenth they hold variable opinions, and likewise there is difference in placing one before another. Notwithstanding, I intende first to speake of the walles of Babilon, which are placed in number of these Meruailes, and that for good cause: because the greatnesse of the place, and compasse of ground dooth seeme incredible.
                  Let vs leaue to speake of the diuersitie of tongues, which was there where Nemrod builded the Tower of Babell, whereby the Citty first tooke name. The walles we now speake of, according to the most soundest opinion, as of Trogus Pompeus, and Iustin in

the first Booke of his abridged Hystories: was founded by the famous Queene Semiramis, Mother to Ninus. Diodorus Scicilianus, in his third booke, Amianus Marcellus in his 23. booke, Paulus Orosius in his second booke, maintaineth the same, with the greatest part of the Authours among the Gentiles: yet notwithstanding, S. Austine in his first booke of the Cittie of GOD, and Iosephus in the sixt booke of his Antiquities, say, that they were builded by Nemrod, being ay ded by his proude and mighty Giants: but were it the foundation or reparation which Semiramis did, it suffiseth that she was greatly ennobled thereby.
                  The plot of this Citty was a plaine on the one side, the other passed by the Riuer of Euphrates: the draught or figure of thys Cittie, was in a Quadrangle, the wals maruailous high, and wrought with very cunning workmanship: the thing it selfe was of stone, ioyned with white lyme and Morter, which grew in the Quarries of the Country, especially in the great Lake of Iudea: where sometime stoode Sodome and Gomorha, named Asphaltida or Mare mortuum, which casteth forth earth like Pitch or Glewe, the very strongest that can be found. The Historians doe disagree about the height and

largenes of the compasse of the wals: which might easilie happen, by reason of the diuers measures they made.
                  
                     Plinie sayth, the circuite of the walles, was three-score thousand paces, so that one of the squares was fifteene miles-long: hee saith likewise, that they were two hundred foote in height, one of which feete exceedeth by three singers the measure of the Romaine foote: in thicknesse they were fifty foote of the same measure, which in trueth is a thing very admirable.
                  
                     Diodorus the Scicilian, sayth in his thyrd booke, that the walles of this Citty, had in compasse, three hundred and three-score Stades, euerie Stade containing in length, sixe-score & fiue paces: and that they were so broade or large, as sixe Chariots might passe thereon along together, without the one hindring the other. The bridges, rocks, Towers and Gardens Semiramis caused to be made, were to very wonderfull astonishment: and it is found written, that shee had in daily pay to this worke, three hundred thousande men, of all the Kingdomes that were subiect to her.
                  
                     Quintus Curtius adioyneth heereto eight Stades more in length, and an hundred cubits more in height: but Paulus Orosius faith

in his seconde booke, that they were foure-hundred and foure-score Stades long, which amount (taking sixe-score and fiue paces to euerie Stade) to three-score miles, agreeing with Plinie.
                  
                  
                     Strabo in his sixteene booke affirmeth, that they contained in length three hundred, eightie fiue Stades, and so large as so manie Chariots might passe ouer them, as we haue already named, without hindering each others way. Beside, these Authours declare a meruailous thing, that the Gardens were vppon the Arches and Towers, hauing Trees in them of wonderfull height: Iulius Solinus confirmeth the same, with Plinie and other Authours.
                  Some of these Writers record, that without, they were enclosed with Ditches full of water, beeing so broade and deepe as an indifferent Riuer.
                  In thys Citty were an hundred Gates of Mettall very strange, and for conclusion, what-soeuer is written cōcerning the height and largenes of these walles, is to be credited: because in trueth it was the proudest Cittie in the worlde, and long time held the vniuersall Monarchie, which is no meane argument of the greatnesse, declared by Aristotle in the thyrde Booke of hys Pollitiques,

saying, that if any one were taken at one side by the enemie, they which dwelt on the other side, could not heare thereof in three daies space.
               
               
                  The second Wonder of the Worlde.
                  
                     NExt, in the seconde place, and for the second Wonder of the VVorlde, I poynt out the huge Colossus of the Sun, which was in Rhodes: being the statue or figure of a Man, offered by the Gentiles to the Sunne, some say to Iupiter. It was made of Mettall, the greatnes incredible, & the height as if it were a wondrous Tower: so that it was to be admired, howe it was there framed and erected.
                  
                     Plinie who discourseth on all thinges, sayth, that it was seauentie cubits high, and albeit for the making there were many good workmen busied about it: yet vvas it twelue yeeres in perfecting, and cost in value three hundred Talents: he that vndertooke this worke, was Cares the Indian, the scholler of Lysippus.
                  
                  
                     
This statue was so vnreasonable great, as it seemed the earth could not long tyme vphold it: because, according to Plinie & Paulus Orosius, it stoode but sixe and fifty yeres, at the end of which time it fell, by reason of a great trembling of the earth. After the fall, and the tyme named by Plinie, many went to see this meruailous thing, and few men were found (saith he) that coulde fadome or embrace the great fingers of this statue: so that the very least of the fingers, were bigger thē any other statue it selfe.
                  Yet speaketh he of an hundred other Colosses of lesse quantitie, which likewise were in Rhodes, but they are nothing to our purpose: vnlesse some one perhaps will say, because of the one great & the other lesser, the Rhodians should be named the Colossenses or Colossians. Yet that opinion is not approued by Erasmus, for he saith that the Colossians to whom S. Paule wrote, were people of a Cittie in Phrigia, named Colossas.
                  
                  Returne we then to thys meruailous Colossus, I say that it remained there ruined on the earth a long time, euen vntil Pope Martin the first: which was in the yeere six hundred, when the Infidels and the Soldane of Egipt theyr Captaine, came vpon the Rhodians, and according as Platina writes in the

life of Pope Martin, and Anthonie Sabellicus in the third part of his booke: they report, that he found the Reliques of this Colossus, and that nine hundred Camels were loden away with the Mettall thereof.
                  The other Colosses that were in Rhodes, and other places, not so great, wee will not speake of them: because in thys discourse, wee must onely intreat on seauen Wonders of the World.
               
               
                  The third wonder of the world.
                  
                     FOR the third, I think meete to set downe the Piramides of Egipt: which in truth, if that which so many learned Historians haue written, may be tearmed trueth, was a thing very admirable. These Piramides were certaine buildings, which began in forme of a Quadrangle, or foure square, & ascended so vp to the highest in large proportion, according to the maner of a poynted Diamond: yet were they of such greatnes and height, containing such & so many stones, and in such perfection, as it is very hard to be set downe, but more hard to cause each one giue credite thereto: notwithstanding,

they are so authorised by Authours both Christians and Gentiles, and them that are the best approoued, as none can deny what they haue written.
                  These Piramides then are like high Towers, finishing at the top spire and sharpe, the Etimologie of the name, commeth of Pyr in Greeke, which is to say, fire: because it seemeth that the highest of these building doe flash out flames of fire.
                  Amongst all other Piramides, the Historians make particuler mention of three that were in Egipt, neere the Cittie of Memphis, which at this day is the Caire, and the Ile that foundeth Nilus, named Delta: one of which three, is placed in ranck among the seauen Meruailes of the world, for it is saide, that at the making thereof, continually and dailie laboured, three hundred and three-score thousand men, for the space of twentie yeres together.
                  Many doe affirme this, and particulerlie Plinie, speaking amply thereof, in his thirtie sixe booke and twelfth Chapter, and for hys assuraunce, alleadgeth twelue sounde Authours; Beside, Diodorus in his first Booke, Strabo in his last booke, Pomponius Mela in his first booke, Herodotus in his seconde booke, Amianus in his second booke, and

many other. Some say, that the plot and foundation of this Piramides, spred foorth and couered eyght daies iourney of ground: let me leaue to your imagination, what space that may be. Some other say, seauen dayes iourney, but the least yeeldeth to sixe, and as much or rather more in height.
                  
                     Plinie sayth, that each square contained eyght hundred, foure-score and three foote, the stones were of Marble, brought out of Arabia, and Pomponius Mela saith, that the most part of thē were three foote large. Heereby may we easily gather, that so many thousand men might be imployed: some to carry stones, some to hew and cut them, and others to place them, beside the multitude that wrought in the yron workes, and about other necessary occasions.
                  Of the other Piramides it is thus saide, the least of the two was made by the vanitie of the Kings of Egypt, which were the richest in all the world: as well by the fertility of the earth, as also that in this Countrey no person possessed any thing in proper, but the King onely. And this was since the time, that Ioseph the sonne of Iaacob councelled Pharao, to preserue the Corne for 7. yeres aboundance, regarding the time of famine: during which space, by the meanes of thys

Corne, hee had all the Countreyes his Vassailes. Thinke then whether these Kinges were rich or no, when they made theyr Subiects attend on them like seruaunts.
                  And the Historians say, that the Kings in thys respect caused these Piramides to be builded, because they would giue to eate to their people that laboured: as also least they should leaue their riches to their successours, for they had rather thus spend it among their people, then any of their heyres should be aduantaged by their death, inheriting theyr goods and money.
                  It is found also written, that these Piramides serued for Sepulchers to the Kings: and who so will consider the multitude of the Hebrew people that serued in Egypt, by whom the Kings caused to be builded Citties and Fortresses: they will not bee abashed heereat, seeing it is a thing verie certaine, that sixe hundred thousand men, beside great multitude of women and young children, endured the seruitude, all which were imployed and serued in these meruaylous workes.
                  So then it is no matter of meruaile, howe these buildings should be made, for it is said, that in Turnops, Garlike and Scallions, to maintaine this number of workmen, were

spent eighteene hundred Talents, which valued the price of each daies worke, a Million and four-score thousand Crownes.
                  
                     Diodorus sayth, that all the cōpasse therof and very farre about, there was not so much as one little stone, nor apparance that any person had beene there, nor signe of any foundation, but the Grauell verie small and fine as any salte: so that it seemed this Piramides was there set by the hand of God, and that it was naturally created, the top therof resembling as if it touched heauen.
                  If wee set aside the old auncient Bookes, yet shall we find witnesses in our owne later tymes, for Peter Martyr of Millaine, a man learned, that was Ambassadour for the Princes Catholique, Don Ferdinand and Dame Isabell, to the Soldane of Egipt, in the yeere one thousande, fiue hundred and one, made a booke of what he had seene & done in his Embassade: therein he reciteth, as if it were by word of mouth, that he sawe these Piramides, and agreeth with what the auncient Authours haue written. And particulerly he speakes of two which hee had seene, that were of incredible height: he sayth, hee measured the squares of one, and found each to be three hundred and fifteene paces, and about thirteene hundred in compasse: that

on euery side, there were such huge great stones, as each one seemed a building of it selfe.
                  He sayth moreouer, that certaine of hys company got vp on one of them by great labour, and (though in long tyme) they reached the top: saying, that on the verie highest of all was one onelie stone, so great and broade, as thirty men might easily stand vppon it. And when they were belowe, they said they supposed themselues to haue been in a Clowde, they were so high: and they seemed to haue lost the light, their braynes wheeling about and turning downe-warde. Whereby he saith, that the number of people is not to be doubted, nor yet the expence which is saide to be consumed about these things.
               
               
                  The fourth wonder of the world.
                  
                     THE fourth Miracle, was that of Mausolus, made by Artemisia, wife to the said Mausolus king of Caria, a Prouince of Asia the great.
                  This Queene, according to Aulus Gellius, in the tenth booke of his Ati. Nox: and diuers other Historians, so deerely loued

her husbande, as euerie one sette her downe for a notable example both of loue & chastitie.
                  The King dying, for hys death she vsed teares and extreame complaints, other then the custome of womē now is: & she would make him a Sepulcher, conformable to the great loue she bare him, & such a one it was, as it is placed among the seauen Wonders of the world.
                  The stone of all this building was of an excellent Marble, which had the compasse and circuit of four hundred & eleuen foote, and twentie fiue cubits in height: it had about it sixe and twentie pillers of stone, cut with wonderfull cunning. It was open on all sides, hauing Arches of seauenty-three foote wide: and it was made by the handes of the most exquisite work-men that coulde bee found. The part toward the East, was made and grauen by Scopas: the North-side, by Briax: the South part, by Timotheus: and the West by Leochares.
                  
                  The perfection of this worke was such, and the building so faire and sumptuous, as is was called Mausolus, after the King for whom it was made: so that all other Sepulchres, that vntil this day haue been builded, for the excellent workmanship of this one,

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
are likewise called Mausolaea. Heerof made mention Plinie in his thirty-fiue booke and fifth Chapter, Pomponius Mela in his first booke, Herodotus and Strabo in his seauenth booke, Aulus Gellius likewise heerof keepes memorie, and many other Historians beside. It is recorded, that Artemisia after the death of her husbande, liued continually in teares and pensiuenes, and that she dyed before her work was finished, hauing drunken in powder the bones of her husbande, which shee caused to be burned for this purpose, and so made him a Sepulchre of her owne body.
               
               
                  The fift Wonder of the World.
                  
                     LIttle contention needeth about the fift of these Meruailes, for that was the Temple of Diana, whom the Gentiles thorow follie adored for a Goddesse: and builded this Temple in the Citty of Ephesus in Asia, in the Prouince of Ionia. Plinie in his sixteene booke and thirtie foure Chapter, writing of this Temple, saith, that it contained foure hundred and

twentie fiue foote in length, and two hundred and twentie in breadth. The worke was of such meruailous cunning, as it was two hundred and twentie yeeres in perfecting: and it was builded in a Lake, to preuent the danger of the earth-quaking, on the foundation beeing layde harde powder of coales, and there-vpon wooll, to keepe the place moyst and marshie.
                  It had an hundred and twentie seauen Colloms of excellent Marble, they beeing each one three-score and tenne foote in height, and euery Collome was caused to be made by a seuerall King of Asia, thirtie seauen of them was grauen with meruailous cunning skyll, they all beeing of most choise Marble.
                  The principall Maister of this worke, according to Pinie, was Dresiphon, and after Strabo in his four-teene booke, Archiphron: notwith-standing, this diuersitie of opinion is to be borne withall, considering how long time was required about it, and therefore it had more then one Maister, especially for the trymming by diuers, & in sundry times.
                  
                     Solinus in hys fourteene Chapter, and Pomponius Mela in his first booke, say, that the Amazones builded and dedicated thys Temple. Moreouer Solinus saith, that when

the puissant King Xerxes went to the conquest of Greece, and that hee burned all the Temples, yet he reserued this onely.
                  All Historians doe agree, that the Pyllers of this Temple helde vp the plauncher of wood, so arteficially wrought as was possible to be doone: and that it was couered with Cedar, according to Plinie in his sixt booke, and 49. chapter, the Gates & seelings beeing of Cipres. Afterward, a villaine seeing this sumptuous and admirable building, he was desirous to burne it, and so hee did: when beeing taken for thys offence, he confessed he dyd it for no other intent, but to leaue a renowne of hymselfe to the world.
                  But Ualerius the great, and Aulus Gellius in his second booke say, that to spoyle this villaines desire of renowne, it was forbidden vnder great and greeuous paine, that none should write his name; to the ende he might faile of the fame and glory he expected. But thys serued to small purpose, for Solinus and Strabo say, that he was named Erostratus, & of him came the Prouerbe: that when anie one would be famous for a vicious acte, they would say, This is the renowne of Erostratus.
                  
                  Againe, it may bee spoken for a notable thing, that the same day the Temple was burnt, Alexander the great was borne, who

conquered all Asia: Heereof are Authours, Plutarch in the life of Alexander, and Cicero in his seconde Booke of the nature of the Gods, there it is reported in many places, & likewise in the booke of Diuination▪ and it is said, that while the Temple burned, the Sages prognosticated the destruction of all Asia, as afterwarde it happened by Alexander.
                  
                  Some say the Temple was re-edified againe, farre more great and excellent then it was before, and that the Maister of the work was named Democrates.
                  
               
               
                  The sixt Wonder of the World.
                  
                     COncerning the sixt meruaile, it was the Idoll or Image of Iupiter Olimpus, which was in his Temple in Achaia, betweene the Citties of Elis and Pisa, the place being named Olimpia: and likewise the Temple, because of Iupiter Olimpus, of whom Strabo in his eyght booke, and Pomponius Mela in his seconde booke, say, that thys statue or Image which was in the Temple, was renowned, as well for the

perfection and admirable workmanship, as also for the greatnesse thereof.
                  It was made of Porphire, some say Iuory, by the hande of Phidias, the most excellent Engrauer and Image-maker that euer was.
                  
                     Plinie in hys thirty fiue and thirtie sixe bookes, makes mention of it, so doe manie other beside.
                  
                     Strabo sayth, the excellencie thereof was in the greatnesse: and that which makes it more admirable, is, that it was of Porphiry, cut in an infinite number of peeces.
                  It is saide, that Phidias was toucht with one onely imperfection, which was, that hee had not well compassed the proportion of the Image with the Temple, because it was in such sort placed, and so huge, as when one considered what might be the height thereof, ifhe were vnderneath vpon hys feete, he would imagine nothing more could be contained within the Temple. Notwithstanding, the renowne of this Image was highly aduaunced, and made the Temple more known then otherwise it would haue beene: because in that place was the sports and Games called Olimpia, & hence it came, that they accounted the yeeres by Olimpiades, whereof they madè fiue yeeres in fiue yeres. The games were first instituted by Hercules,
                     
afterward when they had left them off, they were restored and re-established by Emonies, after some Authours, by Sphyron, four or fiue yeeres after the destruction of Troy, according to Eusebius, & there beginneth the yeere of the s
                        •
                     st Olimpiade.
                  
               
               
                  The seauenth Wonder of the World.
                  
                     LAstly, for the seauenth wonder, some say that it was the Tower in the Ile of Pharos, neere to the Cittie of Alexandria in Egipt. Pharos was a little Ile long and straite, seated on the coast of Egipt, & directly against the mouth of Nylus, which in times past, as saith Pomponius Mela in his second booke, and Plinie in his fift, was altogether inclosed with firme Lande: and afterwarde, to the times of the selfe same Authours, it was embraced wyth the mayne Sea, saue onely a bridge, wherby they passed from the one Ile to the other.
                  In this firme Land is the great Cittie of

                     Alexandria, builded by Alexander the great, which Cittie was afterwarde a Colonie to Iulius Caesar.
                  
                  In this Ile called Pharos, after the name of a great Pilot to Menelaus, who was there buried: the Kings of Egipt caused to be builded a Tower of Marble, meruailous in height and work-manship, vpon a Mountaine enuironed with water. The laboure thereon bestowed was such, as it cost eyght hundred Talents, which value foure hundred and four-score thousand Crownes, according to the computation of Budaeus: and it was builded for no other purpose, then to alight a fire in the night on the top thereof, for guyde and direction to the shyppes that came to take port there.
                  Thys Tower, according to the most great opinion, was builded by Ptolomeus Philodelphus, King of Egipt, and the chiefe Archetect that made it, was named Sistrates, as we are certified by Plinie in his fiue and thirty Booke.
                  
                     Caesar in his Comentaries, greatly commendeth the height & worke of thys Tower, and sayth it was called Pharos, taking name of the Ile: so saith Amianus Marcellinus in his first booke, treating of the Historie of thys Tower, and Solinus in his Polyhistor,
                     
in the end of the thirty foure Chapter, that al Towers which were made afterward, were named Pharos, after this one: as was the Pharos of Messina, and else where. Againe I thinke, that the fires which are ordinarily carried in Ships, to guide them in the night from others, by thys occasion, are named Pharos.
                  
                  Thus thys Tower is the last of these seauen VVonders, albeit that by many it is not placed among the number of them: but in sted thereof is named the high grounded Gardens of Babilon, whereof already wee haue spoken.
                  
                     Lactantius Firmianus, holdeth so, & saith that these Gardens were vppon the Arches and Towers, admirable in greatnes, with a number of Fountaines: the forme of which building is amply set downe by Diodorus the Scicilian.
                  
                  
                     Caelio the Rhodian, discoursing on the seauen Wonders, agrees not that this seauenth is the Tower of Pharos, or the high hanging Gardens: but the Obelisque of Semiramis, which was made after the same fashion and structure of the Piramides, for it began so in a Quadrangle, and finished in a sharpe point: nor was there any difference between the Obelisque and the Piramides, but that

the Obelisque was onely of one peece, and therfore could be nothing so high as the Piramides. It is found written, that certaine of them were so great as Towers, and of a very faire stone: there is one at this day in Rome, named Caesars Needle, which was brought out of Egipt, and is a very meruailous thing to beholde, as well for the greatnesse and to consider the manner howe it was brought thether.
                  Of the Obelisque of Semiramis, which Caelio (as I haue said) numbreth amongst the seauen Meruailes, it is iustified in wryting, that it was an hundred & fifty foote high, as also four and twenty foote broade in a quadrangle, so that the whole compasse thereof was ninety foote. And this stone so beeing whole & sound, was taken from the Mountaines in Armenia, and by the commaundement of Semiramis brought into Babilon Caldea: but in trueth when we consider how it was drawne, carried and lifted vp, it seemeth altogether a matter incredible, if the tymes of antiquitie had not like thinges or more strange, whereof we are truely certified by Authours worthy of credite, and other very great Obelisques, which the Kings of Egipt cause to be made. Plinie in his sixt booke, eyght and ninth chapters, shewes the maner

of drawing these stones forth of the Quarries and Mines of stone. Of these Piramides, Obelisques, Statues and Colosses, maketh mention the learned Polyphius, in the beginning of his Hypne-rotomachia.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Of the great Treasure found in Pouilla.
               
                  IN the time of Robert Gu
                        •
                     scardo, in Pouilla was found a statue of Marble, which had about the head in manner of a Garlande, a circle of brasse, wherein was engrauen these Latine wordes.
               
                  Calendis Maii, oriente Sole, aurum caput habebo.
               
               Which is to say, In the Calends of Maie, at the rising of the Sunne, I shall haue a heade of golde. Robert searched long to know the signification of these words, yet coulde hee not find any one to instruct him in the true vnderstanding: vntill at last there was a Sara
                        •
                     en, well skilled in the Magique Arte, being prisoner to Robert, hauing 
                     •
                  st demaunded his liberty in recompence of the interpretation, he offered todisclose the wordes written on the statue. His deliueraunce being graunted by the Duke Guyscardo, he declared

them in this manner, to wit. On the day of the Calendes of May, at the rysing of the Sun, he obserued and marked the place where the shadow of the statues heade finished on the ground, and there he commaunded thē to dig very deepe, by which meanes should be vnderstoode the meaning of the word.
               
                  Robert caused a deepe digging to bee made in the appointed place, where in little while was discouered and founde a mightie masse of Treasure, which gaue him good & principall ayde in his meruailous enterprises. And for the Saracen, beside other recō
                  pences he receiued of Robert: the recouery of his liberty was the most ioyfull thing, which in al the world could happen to him.
               
                  These three last discourses, were translated out of the diuers Lessons of Pierre Messie, and Antonie du Verdier Sieur de Vaupriuaz.
                  
               
            
            
               An aduertisement to the Reader.
               A Man can hardly haue knowledge of the estate of the Romaine Empire, nor lykewise of the Kingdomes, Signories and principalities that are in Greece and Asia: vnlesse he vnderstande their moneyes, manners and behauiour in speech, which hath bred

heer-to-fore a generall error and confusion. For they that haue written an hundred times Sestertiaes, meant and signified an hundred times an hundred thousand Sestertiaes: the which custome and kinde of speeche, hath brought the Interpreters and Translatours of good Authours, since within a thousande yeeres, into great doubt and errour.
               There were some that imagined and thought them to be the same indeede, and therfore spake thereof indifferently: others there were that either vnderstood them not, or else could not comprehend thē, and so by reason of their weakenes & doubting, there hath ensued very great disference and alteration.
               But the verie trueth is, that this manner of speech came in vse, by abbreuiation of the language: for when they woulde signifie a great sum, to cut short the word, they would say an hundred times Sestertiaes: in sted of saying, an hundred times an hundred thousand Sestertiaes. And foure hundred tymes Sestertiaes, in sted of four hundred times an hundred thousande: twelue times Sestertiaes, meaning twelue thousande Sestertiaes. &c.
               
                  
                  
                     To know summarily the declaration and meaning of the summes contained in the Histories: I haue according to the account of Budaeus, gathered the notes, and abridged them as followeth, to be knowen after our owne English money, or after the value of the French Crownes.
                  
                  
                     THE As, valueth foure small French Deniers, not so much as an English farthing.
                  Thys As, is the very least peece of coyne or currant Money that is.
                  In signification according to the Latine, it is taken for a pound weight, consisting of twelue ounces.
                  In diuision of solid thinges, as of Lande or inheritance, it is likewise takē for the whole part or portion.
                  There is required sixe Sextans to make or value an As.
                  
                  A Sextan is a coyne lesse then that which is called a Quadran by the third part.
                  It likewise is a certaine poyse or weight, being two ounces, after some called Obolus, after other, the sixt part of a pound.
                  It is the sixt part of any measure, summe or quantity, that is deuided into 12. parts.
                  It is somtime likewise taken for 2. inches.

Also the sixt parte of Iugerum, which is so much grounde as one yoke of Oxen wyll eare in a day. It containes in length, two hundred and forty foote, and in bredth one hundred and twenty foote, which multiplied, riseth to 28800.
                  It may bee vsed for our English Acre of grounde, which neuerthelesse containeth more, &c. or for a furlong.
                  
                     Obolus is also a small peece of Coyne, but variable, according to the Coūtry: in France it is a little brasse peece, the sixt parte of a Souse: with vs in England it is a half-penny. Yet Iunius taketh it for a penny and farthing of our money.
                  It is also a weight containing three Carrets, that is, halfe a Scruple.
                  It is sometime vsed as Obolus terrae: fyue foote in breadth and tenne in length, which containes siftie foote square.
                  A Quadran, in coyne is a brasen piece called Triunx or Teruntius, the fourteenth part of Denarius, or as wee in England count, the fourth parte of a penny, which is our farthing.
                  It is the fourth part of an As, that is three ounces, and a quarter.
                  Also the fourth part of any nūber or measure: or three inches.
                  
                     
It is vsed diuers waies, as Quadrans operae Col, the fourth part of a daies work.
                  
                     Ex quadrante haeredem facere. Ulpian, to make heire of the fourth part.
                  
                     Quadrans vini. Cels. sixe ounces of Wine, after Budaeus. After Physitians foure ounces and a halfe.
                  Four Quadrans or Quadrins, value an As.
                  
                  The Libella or little booke, as it is tearmed, is a coyne likewise valuing one As.
                  
                  Of this coyne there were two sorts, one the tenth part of Sestertius, another the tenth part of Denarius.
                  
                  Of English money it is no more thē three farthings.
                  It is taken some time for a pound weight. Sesquiobolus valueth not halfe a Souse french.
                  It is diuersly taken in other Countreyes: but in England it is likewise no more then three farthings.
                  Also it is a poyse containing three parts of a Scruple.
                  The little Sestertius valueth ten Deniers & a halfe.
                  This coyne was among the Romaines, whereof Denarius contained foure, and is so called, quasi Semitertius: for it contained two and a halfe of the brasen coyne called As, and is marked with this figure H. S.
                  
                  
                     
Of English money it is estimated woorth two pence, I meane the little Sestertius.
                  
                  The Drachma valueth three french Souses or Sols, whereof there be three-score in a French Crowne.
                  It is otherwise called three Shillings and sixe pence, of this peece there is mention made in the Gospell of S. Mathew.
                  
                  This Drachma is a coyne figured with a Bullocke, counterpoysing an olde sterling Groate of eyght pence to the ounce.
                  It was diuersly taken by the name of Solidus amongst the Romaines: sometimes for a coyne of brasse containing twelue ounces, a shylling: sometime for Drachma in siluer.
                  
                     Aureus solidus in Alexanders tyme, was two Drammes of gold, afterward, in the time of Iustinian, sixe of them made an ounce: they being of the weight of our olde English Nobles.
                  After Aiginea Iun. a shilling. Attica Iun. seauen pence. Auri twelue siluer Drammes, that is, an ounce and a halfe of siluer.
                  The Sicle valueth two Drachmaes.
                  
                  It is a coyne in value about foure English Groates, when eyght went to an ounce.
                  
                     Siclus Hebraicus, vel argenteus, according to Iun, was two shillings foure pence.
                  
                     
It is also a weight beeing halfe an ounce in poyse.
                  The Didrachma, valueth two of the former Drachmaes.
                  
                  The Denier valueth foure Sestertiaes, which according to some, are woorth three shyllings sixe pence.
                  It was a dayes wages for a Labourer, as it is sayd in the twenty Chapter of Saint Mathew.
                  
                  After the Latine, Denarius is an olde pennie, worth tenne peeces of siluer, or tenne Asses.
                  
                  According to some other Countries, it is reckoned worth eyght pence.
                  The word interpreted after our English, is vsed for a penny of our common coyne.
                  
                     Iunius saith, it is a coyne as much as eyght pence of our coyne.
                  The Romaine penny likewise, was worth foure Sestertiaes, and it went in pay for ten Asses.
                  
                  Of it were three sorts: one, the sixt parte of an ounce, which was more by the thirde part then the Greeke Drachma.
                  
                  Another was, the seauenth parte of an ounce, weighing a Dramme, & the seauenth part thereof, and twentie and foure went to a pounde.
                  
                     
The third was the eight part of an ounce, equall to the Greeke Dramme: in value a sterling Groate, when 8▪ went to an ounce.
                  The Sportula valueth an hundred Quadrans or Quadrines.
                  
                  After the Romaines, they termed it ten Sestertiaes, which they vsed to bestowe in a small drinking or banquet, on such as came to salute them.
                  After our English account, by our farthing: it is worth two shyllings & a penny.
                  The Mina valueth an hundred Drachmaes.
                  
                  These hundred Drachmaes are of our old sterling money, three and thirtie shyllinges and foure pence.
                  After others account, which take Denarius Rom
                           •
                        nus, which is all one with the Drachma: whereby they reckon it to be woorth fifty eyght shillings and foure pence.
                  It is also takē for a poyse of weight, weighing twelue ounces and a halfe, so that it is more then the Romaine pound by 4. Drachmaes.
                  
                  It is likewise a measure of ground, contayning one hundred and twenty two foote in length, and as manie in breadth.
                  Ten thousand Sestertiaes, or tenne great Sestertiaes, amount to two hundred and

fifty Crowns of the Crowne, the best French Crowne next the Sun Crowne.
                  A thousand Sestertiaes make twenty fiue Crownes French, which is fiue pound sterling of our English money, wherby the rest may easily be valued.
                  The Myriade valueth 10000. Crownes.
                  Twenty thousande Sestertiaes, come to fiue hundred Crownes.
                  Forty thousande Sestertiaes, amount to a thousand Crownes.
                  A hundred Sestertiaes, that is to say, an hundred thousand, doe value two thousand fiue hundred French Crownes.
                  Two hundred Sestertiaes, are fiue thousand Crownes.
                  Eyght hundred Sestertiaes, come to twentie thousand Crownes.
                  A thousand great Sestertiaes, make fyue and twenty thousand Crownes.
                  Twelue times Sestertiaes, are thirty thousand Crownes.
                  Fortie times Sestertiaes, make an hundred thousand Crownes.
                  A hundred times Sestertiaes, value two hundred and fiftie thousand Crownes.
                  A thousand times Sestertiaes, amount to two Millions, and 500. thousand Crownes. Ten thousand times Sestertiaes, are fiue and

twenty Millions.
                  Twenty thousand times Sestertiaes, come to fifty Millions.
                  A Talent of Gold, valueth sixe hundred Crownes.
                  Ten Talents, are two hundred and fortie thousand Sestertiaes, which come to sixe thousand Crownes.
                  Twenty Talents, are foure hundred and foure-score thousand Sestertiaes, which amount to twelue thousand Crownes.
                  Fifty Talents, are twelue times Sestertiaes, that is to say, twelue hundred thousand, which value thirty thousand Crownes.
                  An hundred Talents, are soure and twentie times Sestertiaes, beeing three-score thousand Crownes.
                  Fiue hundred Talents, are six-score times Sestertiaes, beeing three hundred thousand Crownes.
                  A thousand Talents, are tweluescore times Sestertiaes, which come to sixe hundred thousand Crownes.
                  Foure thousande Talents, are nine hundred & sixtie times Sestertiaes, which make two Millions and foure thousand Crownes.
                  Tenne thousande Talents, are two thousande and foure hundred tymes Sestertiaes, which amounteth to sixe Millions.
                  
                     
Fifty thousand Talents, are twelue thousand tymes Sestertiaes, which come to thirty Millions.
                  An hundred thousand Talents, are foure and twenty thousand times 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , which amount to three-score Millions. &c.
               
               
                  To make a briefe account of our English money, from the small pennie, to the pounde of twentie shillings, I thought it necessarie, for helpe in the former great summes.
                  A Penny is the least coyne among vs, saue the halfe penny, now vsed.
                  Foure pence make a Groate.
                  Three Groates make a Shilling.
                  Fiue Shillings, a Crowne English, or an ounce Troy.
                  Sixe Shillings eyght pence, a Noble.
                  Thirteene Shillings four pence, a Marke.
                  Twentie Shillings, a pound tale, &c.
                  And by these names all summes of money are commonly reckoned with vs.
                  We vsed to call our Siluer coyne sterling: because in one quarter it had the picture of the bird, which we call a Stare or Starling.
                  The Gold coynes, may without any great errour be valued after the rate of our Angels, except where any notable difference

is. The Romaine Siluer coyned tyll Uespasians raigne, is iustly valued at fiue shillinges, three pence halfe penny the ounce Troy: but for the speedier supputation, I allot vnto it sixteene Groates, making no great account of the halfe-penny, which is otherwise some-what supplyed.
                  Other siluer coynes may be valued at the same rate, sauing that the latter Romaine coyne is a little baser then the rest.
               
               
                  Of Measures for Corne and other thinges.
                  THE Mina measure, containeth sixe Bushelles.
                  The Medimnum, after Budaeus, contayneth two Amphoras, which is almost two Bushels of our measure English.
                  The Amphora, containeth eyght Congios, and fortie eyght Sextaries, which is as much as nine Gallons of our English measure.
                  
                     Amphora Atticus containeth thirty Gallons and a halfe.
                  The Congius containeth sixe Sextaries, which is of our English measure a Gallon & a Pynte.
                  The Sextarius is a measure, whereby (according

to Budaeus) all other Measures may be made, and certaine tryall by weight and measure.
                  The Romaine Sextane, containeth of wine or Wheate two pound Romane, that is foure and twenty ounces: a pounde and a halfe of Haber du poise weight, lesse then the Paris pynt by eyght ounces.
                  Ye may try it following Glareans rule, by making a measure foure inches long, by squire three inches deepe, & as many broad, which is the true Sextarius.
                  
                  According to this account, it is iust our pynt English, and a halfe: for in our Wine pinte is but sixteene ounces.
                  Physitions assigne but eyghteene ounces, or at the vttermost twentie to Sextarius: & then it is but two or four ounces more then our pynt.
                  
                     Sextarius (after George Agricola,) contayneth two Heminae, one pounde measure and eyght ounces, that is, twenty ounces or inch measures.
                  
                     Sextarius is in weight of Oyle, sixteene ounces, fiue drammes, and one scruple: of Wine fifteene ounces and an halfe, two Siliquaes, and two third parts of a graine.
                  The Hemina containeth nine ounces & two Quartarios, that is, three quarters of a pint.
                  
                     
                     Quartarius is the fourth part of Sextarius, containing two Acebatula, a quarter of a pounde.
                  
                     Siliqua, is the Scruple, whereof three make a Dramme, & is now called a Coract, vsed of finers of Gold and siluer.
                  The Greeke Tunne and Romaine, agreeth with the Vessell of Paris.
                  
                  A pynte is the least measure that hath a peculier name with vs in England.
                  Two of them make a Quart.
                  Two Quarts a pottle.
                  Two Pottles a Gallon.
                  Of these are the greatest Measures, which for Ale, Beere and Wine be indifferent.
                  The Firkin of Ale holdeth eight Gallons.
                  Of Beere nine gallons.
                  The Kilderkin of Ale sixteene gallons.
                  Of Beere eyghteene gallons.
                  The Barrell of Ale thirty two gallons.
                  Of Beere thirtie-sixe.
                  Of VVine but thirtie one and a halfe.
                  The Wine Tierse holdeth forty two Gallons.
                  The Hogshead sixtie-three.
                  The Tertian eyghty-foure.
                  The Pype or Malmesie Butte, one hundred and twenty sixe.
                  The Tun two hundred and 56. gallons.
                  
                     
In the measure for Graine, two Gallons make a pecke.
                  Foure Pecks, a Bushell or Strike.
                  Foure Bushels, a Cowmbe or Cowme, a Cornock, a Rasor.
                  Two Cowmes make a quarter.
                  And for the playner declaration of smaller measures, I suppose three quarters of a pint to be a pound in measure, deuided into 12. ounces, euery ounce according to the Goldsmithes assise: which pounde containeth of pure Oyle a pound. &c.
               
            
            FINIS. A. M.
            
            
         
      
   