
      
         
            
            
               
THE BEAVVTIES of BETH-EL.
            
               Containing: Sundry reasons why euery Christian ought to account one day in the courtes of God, better then a thousand besides
            
               Preached in Cambridge, and now published especially for the benefite of those that were the hearers.
            AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld, for Thomas Man, and are to be sold at his shop in Pater-noster-row, at the signe of the Talbot. 1609.
         
         
            
            
            
               To the right worshipfull Maister FRENCH, Maior of the Towne of Cambridge and the rest of the hearers of the Parish commonly called St. Peters: Grace and all good things.
            
            
               RIGHT WORshipfull and Christian friendes, so soone as God gaue me a calling to become your teacher; I bethought mee which might bee the fittest course and carriage of my Ministrie, both for your best profit and mine owne discharge: and after a little deliberation, I easily resolued of three thinges. 1. to call you

to a loue, and a cheerefull frequenting of the holy exercises of Religion in the house of God; by which as by a praeface I entered into my labours, and this from the example of Dauid. Psal. 84. 10. 2. to teach you how to behaue your selues being present before God. from the example of Cornelius, Act. 10. 33. 3. to preach Christ vnto you; which by Gods mercy I haue also performed out of Peters Sermon following frō 
               ver. 33. to 44. Wherin I haue 
                  〈◊〉
                intreated of the most fundam
                  •••
               al points of our Christian Religion: indeauoring in all these to approue my heart vnto the Lord, and my desire of your profiting euen to your selues. Of the first of these I haue here giuen you a further view and account; the other two depend one vpon the other, & containe a labour of longer time; besides that the eye of our experience hath seene what a surfet & lothing

this our age hath taken of sound practical diuinity: & therefore onely thus much I haue presumed for your sakes to publish, to the purpose that each of your families might haue a coppy for the helping of your memories; not intending any further view of clearer light. But if the Printers haue ouer-intreated me to make the benefit (as they tearmed it) more common; then I shall desire of such as for whome these thinges were not principally prepared, the forbearance of any curious censure, seeing it was plainly fitted and preached vnto a plaine auditory, and not intended to behold such an open light. Wherein yet it may afford this vse, that being a subiect in which I haue obserued none going before me by way of treatise; it may yeeld both occasions and groundes to some more able instrument to inlarge and adorne so necessary and so profitable

an argument. Which heartily I wish; the rather, because in these desolate daies of ours, these beauties of Gods house, are by so many men, & so many meanes obscured, as that nū
               bers giuen-ouer to Atheisme and liberty, are bold not onely to moue (which were too much) but strongly defend that our Saboth is either not to be kept, or not so straightly: that either our Sermons neede not to bee heard or not so frequently: & that to walk according to the light here shining, at least so accurately & strictly 
                  Ephe. 5. 15 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . as the Apostle prescribeth, is too much precisenes: the which with sundry other disguised conceites of vayne men, if they shall preuaile so far as they threaten, surely our Bethels in shorte time will become Bethavens; our houses of God, dens of theeues, and the voice of our Church will be no other then that of Naomi. 
               Ruth. 1▪ 20 
               Call mee no more beautifull;
               
               for why should yee call me so, seeing the Lord hath humbled mee, and the almighty hath brought mee vnto aduersity, how glorious a worke thē would it be to ioyne in the preseruing of the beauty of the kingdome of Iesus Christ? and that not by any artificiall paynting of the face of this chaste spouse (for that is fitter for the Romish Harlot) but by a plaine manifestation of her owne face and natiue beauty out of the word, which preferreth her beauty before that of the Rose of the field, 
               Cant. 2. 1 and the Lilly of the vallies, and affirmeth that the Lilly among the thornes doth not so surpasse in beauty as she doth among the daughters. Surely such a glorious worke as this shal not want a glorious reward. But to returne to you ye hearers, these briefe notes being properly yours, to you they are of right directed as a testymony of my loue and inward affection

vnto you: the which (if the Lord had thought meet) I desirously would haue still testified by voice among you, rather then by this my writing: by which I recommend these few lessons to your Godly learning, and my self vnto your praiers.
            
               Yours in the Lord. THOMAS TAYLOR.
            
         
         
            Christian reader seeing that partly by the vnacquaintance of the workeman with my hand, and partly by the ouersight of the Corrector, some faults are escaped, I haue noted such as chiefly alter the sence, leauing the other to thine owne humanity, and curtesie to correct.
            Page 8 line 24, for ruthes read ruines. p. 15. put out of the margent Vse 1. p. 16. 24, for ayrie r. straite. p, 18, 1, for their, r these, p, 19, 22, put out in. p, 21, 7, put out and. p. 29, 23, for caules, r. coates p, 31, 1, for fortified, r. forfeyted, p, 60, 11, for couering, r▪ couenant, p, 65, vlt, and 66, 15, for perfection, in both places, r. protection, pa, 71, 22, for there, r. the, pa, 225, 19, for truth, r, tents & l. 20, for countries, r. courteyns
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Psal. 84. 10.
               For a day in thy courts is better then a thousand: I had rather bee a doore keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tabernacles of wickednesse.
            
            
               THE Prophet Dauid being through the practise and tirannie of his enemies debarred frō all accesse vnto the publick worship & seruice of God, amongst the rest of the people of God, he maketh a mournfull and greeuous complaint of this his banishment, in the former part of this Psalme, accounting his estate in this regarde, more miserable then some of the bruite creatures themselues, which had liberty to build their nests, and lay their young neere the altars of the Lord, which benefit now he was depriued Verse. 3. of. And recounting with himselfe the condition of such persons as then enioyed those liberties & priuiledges,

hee pronounceth vpon them one blessednesse in the neck of another; yea if with much inconuenience, through Vers. 4. 5. drought and wet, which are signified by the valley of Mulberries, and the raine couering the pooles; yea with much toile and difficulty they could enioy Vers. 7. 8. such an earthly happinesse. In the second part of the Psalme, hee lifteth vp an earnest request vnto the Lord, to turne his eare, vers. 8. and his eye vnto him, vers 9. that so he would be pleased to draw him out of this necessitie: of which prayer this verse containeth one reason. In which consider two things; first the meaning, second the doctrines.
            
            First by the Courts of God, and The meaning. 
               the house of GOD, is meant all one thing: And although by the house of God is meant some-time the Church triumphant, Iohn 14. 2. In my fathers house are many mansions, that is, in heauen where the Saints enioy the presence of GOD: and some-times the Church Militant, 1. Tim. 3. 15. That thou mayest know how to behaue thy selfe in the house of God, which is the Church
               
               of the liuing God. Yet here is it taken in neither of those sences, but more specially signifieth such a part of the Church militant, as where Gods people haue obtained liberty and freedome to worship God purely; ioyning together in the confession of their sinnes, and of their faith, in hearing the worde, receiuing the Sacraments, publicke prayers, &c. Thus Salomon calleth the Temple the house of GOD almost twentie times, in 1. Kings 8.
            Thus Dauid here calleth the tabernacle, first the Courts of God, alluding to the stately courts of Kings, in which were sundry courts, and among them one for the people to assemble into, seperate from the Sanctuarie: and secondly the house of God. 
               Exo. 29. 45
            
            First because herein the Lord had promised to dwell among his people, euen as a man dwells in his house continually. For which cause the Arke, (a signe of his presence) was set in the Sanctuarie, which the Lord calleth by his owne name; Ioshua 4, vers. 13. Fortie thousand went before the Lord
               
to battle against Iericho, that is before the Arke of the Lord. 2. because hee especially reueiled himselfe here, and gaue speciall testimony of his presence vnto such as purely sought him, in ye excercises of his worship. For where can a man be either sooner or surelier found then at his owne house? hence was the place of Gods worship called the face of God, which wee are commanded to Psal. 27 8. 
               seeke, from which Caine was cast out. Not that in such places were any false Gen 4. 14 vizors or formes whereby God might bee remembred: but because his pure worship, praescribed by himselfe, and accordingly by his children performed, is that ordinance, in which his face is seene glorious, and not out of it.
            In this Court of God, in this house of God, Dauid wished hee might alwayes dwell, and that neither 1. vnaduisedly, as Peter in Christs transfiguration. Maister it is good being here: let vs make three tabernacles: but hee wist not 
               Luk. 9. 33. 
               what he said. Neither 2. formally or for fashion, but most affectionately: yea so ardently that the very vehemencie of his desire, conflicting with deniall of it,

brought leannesse into his flesh, drynesse into his bones, and consumption into his parts; for so much the word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in the second verse implyeth; that he was euen wasted with the sighing & groning out these most inward desires of his soule: nor yet 3. doth he propoūd his wish in simple forme of speach, for that would not serue him to expresse more then ordinary affectiō: but as one most superlatiuely affecting aboue all other things this one; he instituteth a double comparison. The former is drawne from the consideration of the time. One day spent in these Courts of GOD, is better then a thousand elsewhere: as though he had said. It were no great difficulty for me being a King and the head of all Israell, to passe the whole terme of my life in the Pallaces of the mighty, and in aboundance of earthly pleasure; If I could (with the most of the world) account these the matters of highest honor, and truest happinesse. But might I obtaine one day, that is, neuer so little a time of the daies of my pilgrimage within thy Courts & tabernacle: where with the rest of thy

people I might ioyne in ye pure worship of thy name; I would account my selfe more honorable & happy, then to spend thousands of dayes in the company of the prophane, although neuer so great. The latter comparison is drawne from consideration of the estate & condition of men: of whom some are in eminent place and dignity, some in meaner and baser degree. Dauid although he had good experience of both: yet with all his soule, hee would make exchange of all his greatnesse & glory, with a meane and contemptible outward estate; so be hee might enioy God in his ordinance with it. And therefore although he was a king, yet all that greatnesse did not so take vp his heart, neither lift it vp: but that he could be contēted, nay desirous to be a doore-keeper in the house of God, rather then to dwell in the tabernacles of wickednesse; resoluing that he would rather hold the meanest roome in the tabernacle; then without it to possesse the highest place of the earth: for where Gods tabernacle is not, there can be nothing but tabernacles of wickednesse. It may be true here which some lerned obserue, that Dauid in mention of a doore-keeper
               
               in Gods house, had respect vnto the Chorits, to whose custody this psalm was comitted for their incouragemēt against the contempt of lewd men: but whether he had or no, their office being to keepe the doores of the tabernacle, the truth 1. Chr. 9. 17 & cap. 26. 1 is, he yt had preferred the very sparrows and swallows aboue himselfe, in this regard that they might resort to the tabernacle, & make their nests there; did much more account the Chorites far more happie then himselfe, because they by their office were tied to be euer, day & night in their courses about the tabernacle: wc priuiledge himselfe in this his flight (whether before Saul or Absolon) could not enioy. Thus the Prophet enforceth his request and petition vnto God: that therefore he would please to vouchsafe him a comfortable returne vnto the holy exercises of religion, that he might pertake in the publick duties thereof with his people: because hee accounteth this blessing the greatest happines vpō earth, yea next to heauen it selfe, although 1. neuer so little a while. 2. in neuer so meane a condition. So much of the meaning: the instructions follow. It is a note 
               
                  Doctr. 1. 
               of a good heart, to account the wante
               
               of the word and ministery, the greatest 
               The want of the word most lamentable of al wants. 
               want and heuiest burthen of al other. Dauid for such affections was called a man after Gods owne hart: so earnest and so frequēt they were with him: in Psal. 27. 4. he was in many wants, was driuen from house and home, yea destitute of all earthly comforts: yet he felt none of thē in comparrison, neither wished the supply of any of them: But one thing he wanted, which he desired of the Lord, euen that hee might dwell in the house of the Lord all the daies of his life, to behold the beauty of the Lord & to visit his temple. And this was not so peculiar vnto this man of God; but that it is cōmon also with other ye Saints of God. Ieremy bewailing ye estate of the Iewes in captiuity, Lamen. 1. 4. beginneth his lamentatiō there where was greatest matter of mourning. The waies of Sion lament because no man commeth to the solemne feastes, all her gates are desolate, her priests sigh: Infinite were the ruths which were vppon the citty besides, in al that eighteen monthes while the siege continued, as plague; famine, in which the pittifull women were glad to seeth and eat their
               
               fruite, and children of a span long: and Josephus. antiq. Iud. lib. decimo. cap. decimo. wherin those that were arraied in scarlet were glad to imbrace the dung: much more lamentable was that blood-shed when Ierusalem was taken, the Kinges son slaine before his face; yea the King him-selfe taken, his eies put out, his Ier. 52. 6. 11. 13. feet put in fetters, and him-selfe carried to Babel. Infinite and vnspeakable was the losse both of the Cittie & Temple, when both of them were burnt downe, almost to the ground: and yet the Prophet conceiuing of these as farre lesser euils, mentioneth none of them, vntill he hath groned out most pittifull complaints, for that the worship of GOD was ceased among his people, and that which was a place of Gods presence, & delight; was now become a den of heathenish Idolatry. The like wee see in Dan. 9. 1. 2. 16. 
               Daniel, who when by reading in books he vnderstood that the terme of this captiuity was accomplished: he turned his face vnto the Lord, and sought by prayer, and supplication with fasting, & sack-cloth and ashes; that the Lord would turne away his anger, and wrath from the Citty of Ierusalem, and in that

long prayer hee intreateth not, that he with his people might bee returned into their former possessions and inioy their houses, landes, orchards, vineyards and commodities: but the greatest losse of all seemed to eat vp all the remembrance of these, euen the fayling of Gods publike worship amongst them; this was wholy in his eie, and this took vp all his requests. He prayeth indeed for the Cittie Ierusalem: But because it was Gods holy mountaine Vers, 16. and because it was the Cittie where-vpon his name was called. Vers. 18. 19. yea herein he could neither contain, nor yet scarce expresse his seruency, but with strong cryes intreated the Lord, for the Lords sake, that is, for his Christ sake, he would cause his face to shine vppon his sanctuary which then lay waste: and this may be obserued not onely in the Prophets of the Lord, but also in the Lords people, who, how-soeuer before their captiuities it was hard to say whether they more despised Gods holy ordinances, or imbraced their outward profits; yet in their afflictions & wandrings in strange countries, the Lord taught

them this wisdom: that they looked not so much to their land and country as to Psal. 137. 1. 5. 9. the Temple, to Ierusalem, to Sion.
            
            Now who can deny that those are good hearts which are thus disposed, Why a good heart so esteemeth it. for 1. they are such as highly prize, and worthyly esteem these ordinances of God, as the holy meanes to beget and confirm faith in the soules of beleeuers, yea the meanes whereby ordinarily the fellowship of the Saints with God, and their mutuall Communion one with an other is heere begun in the Kingdome of grace, and shall be perfected in the Kingdome of glory. 2. they are such as see the necessity of Gods ordinances in the Ministry: in the want of we, people must needs perish; as such as want both ye rule and guide to direct & lead them vnto true felicity. 3. They are such as haue tasted (in som measure) how sweet ye Lord is in these ordināces; or els could they neuer thirst after the liuing God: they haue met with God in Sion who hath enlightned their minds, perswaded their harts; cōforted their consciences; furnished thē with coat-armor of proof, against satans subtilties and batteries,

fortified them against their owne weaknesses, supplyed them with preseruatiues against the poison of euill example, which as a corrupt ayer infecteth not a few: beutified them with the graces of faith, hope, loue, humilitie, patience, sobriety and the rest, clothed thē with the righteousnes of Christ whom their faith hath clasped and wil not let go, in comparison of whom al gain is losse, and al abundance meer necessity and beggery.
            This doctrine serueth to reproue a nū
               ber 
                  Vse. 1. Vndervaluers of the word reproued. of men who account of the word and the ministry of it so meanly, as the things which they can be best without: and therfore where God in mercy hath vouchsafed them, many esteem of them as a sixt fingar, a superfluity, a burden: & speake of them as the vnthankful Israelites of Mannah: we see nothing but this Mannah there is too much preaching, and what should so much of it do? And againe where God in iudgement hath denied this blessing of a faithful Ministery vnto a people, it is neuer asked after: but in many ignorant townes and parishes, scarce shal we heare of a man

that stirres vp himselfe to seeke after God. In the want of neuer so base an outward commodity, men can complaine, yea and lay their counsels and purses together, to get their want supplied in season. Hence is it that men are much in such complaints. Oh we want such a commoditie in our country, such a benefit in our parish, such a necessary in our houses, and will be diligent with much money to redeeme it! but neuer a word of the want of instruction, of the want of a painfull teacher, of the want of the knowledge of God, of the want of the practise of piety either in the parish, or in the familie. Which argueth the fleshlinesse of mens hearts, which in their desires can soare no higher then earth and things below. A pitifull thing it is that in the dayes of such grace, a man may ride so many miles together, and behold so many people as sheepe dispersed without faithfull shepheards, to bring them into the folde of Christ, or as so many goodly fields ready and white vnto the haruest, and yet scarce any labourer to inn them, and bring them into the barne

of Christ: of whom a mā may say, to the sorrow of his soule, as Christ of Ierusalem, yt the things of their peace are hid from their eies: & further many who are not without all knowledge nor the means, but take themselues to haue better part in Christ then the former, may here finde the vnsoundnesse of their soules: for many reputed christians because they are not only within the visible church, but pertak also in al the outward exercises of religiō, hear the word read, preached, receiue the sacraments, contēt themselues in these works done, without any great inward affection to any of them: men they are of great indifferency; if they be vnder the ministery, they see good reason to submit their outward man vnto it, & to giue it now and then some good words, and vpon occasion a meals meat: if it were absent they could also vppon short warning frame themselues to indifferency, & carry the matter without much impatiēce: wc if euer they had intertained in such affection as they that haue tasted the sweetnes of God in it; they would wish to want the aire to breath in as soon

as these sweet meanes no lesse necessary to a comfortable christian life then the aire to a natural.
            To such men therfore I say, that lette 
                  Vse. 1. them make what profession they wil; let them reioice in the peace and liberty of the church: if in the church inioying the word and exercises of religion thou prizest any thing in the world aboue them in thy affection; yea if any thing be so sweet vnto thy taste as these bee; thou now by vnder-valuing these vnvaluable priuiledges of Gods people declarest thy selfe (for all thy profession) to bee no better then cockle in the field, or chaffe on the floore of Christ. And againe if in the want of these holy ordinances of GOD; thou esteemest not (with Dauid) that the greatest want is vppon thee that can befall thee; thou art but an vnsound member; yea rotten at the coare of thy heart.
            This doctrine teacheth further yt it is a iust cause of mourning when the word 
                  Vse. 2. Lament the want of the word abroad. & Ministery either decay amongst any people or are interrupted, for this

bringeth the greatest want that any people can be exposed vnto: the dissoluing of the ministrie is the peoples decay, Prou. 29 18. Where vision faileth, people perish. Hosee. 4. 6. My people are destroyed for want of knowledge. Can there by any greater losse then the losse of a mans soule? or can there bee a greater want then for a man to be starued to death? or if this losse, this want, be brought vpon any man, can any recompence bee made vnto such a party answerable vnto either? what a griefe then should it bee to a godly heart to see whole townes lye vnder that curse of God, Amos 8. 11. euen vnder a famine, not of bread and water, but of hearing the word of the Lord? for although religion and exercises of it bee safe in the places where wee dwell, yet if the absence of it else-where greeue vs not, we lay not to heart the distresses of Gods people as we ought, our bowels are too ayery, wee are too priuatly minded, and further if we heare or see any faithfull ministrie interrupted, wee must lament that the free passage of the Gospell is hindered: that that meanes

wherein the Lord conueyeth all his goodnesse into faithfull soules is taken away, and so a doore opened to all iniquitie: yea a flood-gate vnto all impiety. If any mans outward estate were broken, his wealth by force and violence snatched out of his hands, here would be sence and sorrow (more then inough) for the losse: shall then thy inward state be crackt? the liberties of the ministerie, and of the assemblies be infringed? the sanctuarie of God desolate? the exercise of pure religion together with Gods worship be hindred or abolished, and all this cause no sorrow, nor set any griefe to thy heart? Is this such a dispositiō as becommeth him who professeth himselfe to be the Lords? no surely: for such (as they haue cause) fill their mouthes with complaints of the desolations of Sion. 
               Psal. 79. 1. 10 & 74. 1. 2. 6. A iust cause of sorrow was it to Dauid, when he saw the enemie lift vp axes, and hammers to breake downe the carued worke of the Sanctuarie. As iust a cause when such a man as Ioseph shall be euill intreated, who hath beene a meanes to releeue a whole towne in the time of

famine. If at any time by their or such other meanes Sion shall sit in the dust; the childen of the Church must shew their compassion in their mothers miserie, weeping when shee weepeth, and no more bee able to reioyce in her sorrow, then the Iewes could compose themselues to sing Hebrew songs in Psal. 137. 
               Babilon, when they remembred Sion.
            
            
               Eli a good old man (notwithstanding his weaknesse towards his sonnes) when the Arke was carried to the battaile against the Philistines, it is said his heart feared for the Arke of God, (1. Sam. 4. 13.) and when tidings came that the battaile went against Israell, that Hophni & Phineas his sonnes were slaine and the Arke taken: it is sayd when he heard of the Arke he fell from his seate and brake his neck: it was not the sorrow for his sonnes, but for the Arke that brake his heart, that it failed him. Hee had likewise a good daughter in law Phineas his wife, who when she heard of all these tidings, the text noteth also of her, that it was not the death of her father, her brother, nor her owne husband all at once, yt so went to her heart: but this was it which her

minde and tongue ranne vpon, and made her refuse all comfort; because the Arke of God was taken, and the glory was departed frō 
               Israel. vers. 21.
            The like is worthy noting in that faithfull Captaine Vriah, who when he was called and commanded by Dauid to goe home and eate and drinke and company with his wife, hee vtterly refused, because the Arke, and Israell and Iudah were in tents, and his Lord Ioab and his seruants in the open fields: and therefore hee could take no delight in any thing at home, because it was not well with the Arke and Israell abroad. 2. Sam. 11. 11. Euen so should wee neuer thinke our selues well, when it is not well with the Church, nor when the Gospell runneth not with free passage: which consideration should abate much of our present carnall reioysing in, as it did in worthy Vriah.
            
            
               Daniel was well enough, highly in fauour with the King, had libertie of conscience euen in that Idolatrous kingdome, to worship the GOD of Israel purely, he was in no bondage nor affliction: but yet so long as GODS people were in calamitie

Gods temple in desolation, Gods worship in contempt, he could not but sorrow, fast and pray in their behalfe. The like wee read recorded of that faithfull captaine Nehemiah, he was a great man in the Court of King Artaxerxes, in an office very honorable and neere the Kings person, for he was his Cup-bearer; yet when enquiring of his people, he found they were in great misery and reproche, and that the wall of Ierusalem was broken downe, and the gates of it burned with fire, his zeale stirred vp exceeding sorrow, euen such as hee could not hide, but that the King (before whom no mournefull spectacle might come) did read the deepe sorrow of his heart in his countenance: his owne aduancement and honour could not comfort him, so long as hee saw God dishonored abroad, the Citie dedicated to his name, now defaced by Heathen Princes: that religion which by himselfe was prescribed to serue him by, now decayed, and that people which was his owne peculiar, now to become seruants to strange Lords. Nehem. 13. wherein wee read our owne lesson,

that our selues enioying the pretious libertie of our assemblies, we ought to pitty the distresse of our countrymen, who sit still in the shadow of death, & by our prayers and best meanes, to releeue them, groning out the desires of our hearts, and that all Israell, euen in our owne country, might be saued.
            Thirdly, if the want of the word, and exercises of it, be the greatest want of 3. Vse. all other: then such as haue it must be wise hearted to make precious account of it: and while they enioy it, store Make much of the ministerie setled. them-selues with such necessaries as shall after-wards besteed them. Men are not so carelesse as to forget or fore-slack their markets vpon the market day: neither neede many spurres to reserue some-thing (as wee say) against a rainie day.
            Why then doe not such as professe themselues the children of wisdome, fore-cast and prouidently fore-see their future necessities? especially seeing this ouer-sight will cost them so many teares, so much sorrow as their spirits shall scarce bee able to sustaine them. How is it that we haue not the wisdom

of men in vs ▪ to say within our selues, a rainie day may be vpon vs or euer we be aware: it may be the sorrows of our mother the Church are not farre of: perhaps a famine of the word; a want of the ministerie; a black darknesse like that of Aegipt is neerer vs then we thinke off. For we haue seene as bright gleames as ours ouer-cast: yea as cleare sunnes of the Church set and fallen in the firmament, as that in the light of which wee now walke: witnesse the Churches of Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Philippi, the seauen Churches in lesser Asia, all which were farre afore vs in the Gospell: but now vnder the Turke and Pope are sunke to hell, in the profession of Mahometisme and Anti-christianisme: yea of golden Candle-stickes which once held out the glorious Gospell and word of truth, are become the very cells and dennes of diuells. Or if the Lord for his owne name and truths sake, forbeare the remoouing of our Candle-sticke, yet the sorrowes of mine owne soule may come vpon mee, as the trauell of a woman: the Lord may let loose, and set

my sinnes in order before mee to the breaking of my heart; and vexe mee with fearefull visions: or else sicknesse may assaile mee, and bring mee downe to the gates of death; my owne deaths day, and consequently my iudgement day is at doore, and cannot bee farre off. Let now euery Christian well bethinke himselfe, whether in any of these straites hee shall not need oyle in his lampe: whether hee shall haue no vse of faith, of direction, of comfort, of patience, of sence of Gods loue, of assurance of pardon of his sinne, of strength against such temptations, as hee (perhaps) neuer buckled withall before. I assure thee that which thy owne experience shall at that time become thy mistresse in: that whensoeuer the Lord shall begirt thee, and lead thee into any of these conditions; if the word bee not thy comfort, thou art sure to perish in thy trouble; and that all thy life had beene time little enough, to haue furnished thy selfe against that day, yea if thou hadst begun to bee heauenly couetous, when thou beganst first to breath.
            
               
Wouldest thou then be armed against sinne, superstition, heresie, popery in thy life time; and close vp thine eyes in that holy religion of GOD which thou hast learned, and beene brought vp in: yea if times and religion should alter? Wouldest thou not in the day of thy sorrow be found vnfurnished, and nakedly layde open to all terrors of conscience, accusations of sinne, and temptations of Sathan? Wouldest thou not bee giuen vp to impatience, to a sence of Gods wrath, to shutte vp thy dayes in an horrible apprehension of an hell in thy soule afore-hand? Oh then now while God offereth his grace in the ministerie of the word, acknowledge the acceptable time and day of saluation: laye holde vpon wisdome while shee calleth; giue her answer while shee yet knocketh; open the doore of thy heart, to giue the best enterteinment thou canst to this deare Daughter of GOD: Store thy soule with knowledge; but especially with faith and good conscience.
            Make roome in the house of thy

hart by remouing all the trash in it, such as is infidelity, impenitency, earthlynesse, voluptuousnes and whatsoeuer sauoureth of the flesh: then lay vp in it prouision for thy necessity; that it may become a little granary, or treasury to which thou maist alwaies resort, when either the publike meanes may faile thee, or thou maist bee debarred from them. Be dilligent in gathering this Mannah while the sixe dayes last, before that day come wherein though thou seekest it, yet shalt not finde it. In these seauen yeares of plenty, lay vp (like a prouident Ioseph) for thy selfe corne for the seauen yeares of famine: wherein seauen leane kine shal eat vp the seauen fatte kine, and bee neuer the fatter. Passe not thy Summer singing with the foolish Grashopper, but with the Emmet prepare thy Winters store. When Agabus prophesied Pro 30. 25. of a famine, Act. 11, 28. the bretheren were carefull to prouide against it: so thou now hearing that a time of dearth will come, in which thou shalt stand in need of great store of grace; get thee a stocke before hand to spend vpon; least

when the time ouertaketh thee vnprouided, Store thy selfe while thou hast the word. thou begin to late to houle and say: O the time was when I had the Word, the Sacraments, the Ministry, whereby I might haue not meanely inriched my selfe, and haue bene able to haue bene helpful to others, rather then my selfe to be vtterly destitute of prouision in such times as this is: and this is my griefe, I had warning that these daies of straightnesse would come vppon me. Alas that euer I should so haue lost my time, that euer I should haue refused wholesome counsell: oh that I might once more inioy the meanes againe! Oh for one day in the courts of Gods house! I would neuer neglect so great saluation.
            And herein the folly of our nature bewrayeth it selfe that we are wiser in the want, then in the fruition of good things; and that we cannot so rightly prize a present benefite, as sighe after it when wee haue negligently depriued our selues of it.
            
               Caine cared not for the worship of The folly of such as slip their oportunity herein. God all the while he was in his fathers familie, till hee was cast out of it; and

then too late he cryed out, that he was cast out from the face of God. Esau contemned his birth-right and blessing till it was bestowed, and then could seeke it with teares when it was too late. Saul forceth not of Samuels prayers for him till the Lord was departed and had cast him off. The Prodigal son careth not for the dainties of his fathers house, till he was driuen to feed among Swine; and then he can desire to bee among his fathers herd-men. The prophane of the world take daies with the Lord: If they can be at leysure to heare him another time with Festus, so it is, but for the present they cannot intend it. Many Professors wil not foule their dainty feete now for the word; who I doubt not would afterward seeke the blessing (if God should once deny it) & yt with tears: the case being ye same with vs as somtimes it was with Israel when Number. 14. 40. they had with GODS Commandement all the incouragements which Moyses could vse to speed them forward vnto Canaan; they would not go, but back again into Egipt in al the hast: the text saith they refused ye land, v. 21.

But when once sentence was past, that they should neuer see yt good land. Thē they rose vp early in the morning, & were ready to go to the place which the Lord had promised: now was there no stay with thē: neither ye Lords reuealed wil, nor Moyses perswasion could so pale them in or preuaile with them, but that they presumed obstinatly to go forward. The same people before the captiuity, had the Temple, the Arke, the Sacrifices, the Oracles, they cared not greatly for them; it seemes the times were much like ours wherein to call men to the house of God, to speake of Pastors, preaching, Scriptures and holy exercises is to glut and surfet men, and so driue them from the loue of all: but the time commeth on, that the Lord requireth this contempt wc they dearly buy, hee casteth them among Idolaters, and Scoffers, by which humiliation Psal. 137. 1. he bringeth backe things past to their remembrance. By the riuers of Babel we sat and wept in remembrance of Sion. What Sion? their cheekes were dry ynough before: but now in Babell they can weepe, now away with musicke,

now can the harpes hang vppon their willow trees without a finger to touch them; neither their sweet melody of instruments, nor their pleasant walks, nor their christall riuers can affect them with ioy, seeing they were now banished and excommunicate from the publike exercises of religion before the Lord at Sion. And it were to be wished Vers. 44. that euen such as belong to the Lord did not vnderprize such gratious pledges of Gods presence in the presence and plentifull fruition of them; who yet can with sighs mourne after them, being withdrawne from their eyes, no otherwise then when all Israel lamented after the Lord when the Arke was in Kiriath-iearim, 1. Sam. 7. 2.
            The Lord Iesus woing his Church most louingly intreateth entrance into her. Open vnto mee my well beloued for my head is full of dew, &c. Oh no shee hath putte of her caules, shee will not disease her selfe so farre as to put them on; shee hath waesht her feete, and meaneth not to foule them: while shee may haue Christ at the threshold she giues her selfe leaue to sleepe a little Cant. 5. 2. 3.
               
longer, & in her sleep she slips that most sweete oportunity: Christ leaues her to her ease which might not be dislodged: but shortly after her soule awaking, and shee bethinking her selfe of her vnkind answer, steps to the doore to let him in; but he is gone in displeasure; now her heart is gone with him and smiteth her more then before; she seekes him, but finds him not; calleth him, but receiueth no answer: he is too neere to be let in and receiued while hee is at the doore; and therefore shee must trudge vp and downe after him, with much labour, & more greefe, inquyring of euery one she meeteth, whether they haue met with him whom her soule loueth or no. By which example seeing that too much of this folly is boūd vp in the harts of the best of vs; let vs striue to become more wise-harted in intertaining our priuiledges whilst they be offerd.
            The Centurion could say when Christ was dead; this was the son of God, hee should haue said so when he was aliue. Let vs acknowledge Christ while he is present, & reioice in Gods face, in the assemblies, in the ministry, least whē our

vnthankfulnes hath fortified them, wee lament the losse when it cannot be supplied: & this is the rather to be thus vrged Ier. 7. 13. and beaten vpon; because it is with many a mā, as it was with the people of Act. 20. 24. 
               Ephesus: whē 
               Paul was taking his leaue of the Elders of Ephesus, he told them that he knew they should see his face no more: thē they wept abundantly, but especially were sorry at these words, that they should see his face no more, euen so a number of men are neuer sorry nor weepe, are without al affections to the Ministry & Ministers, til they be taking their leaue and say they shall see their face no more; and then they wish that they had taken more good by their presence; and then if occasion were offred again they would be more careful, and not forslow such oportunities: these consideratiōs are so much ye more seasonable to you the present hearers, yt now at the first entrance of this blessing you may lay hold of it, so as your increase in the end may be much more abundant.
            The second point of instruction out of the word, is this: that it is a note of a 
               
                  Doctr. 2. 
               good man more to reioice in the prosperity
               
               of the Church and the holy exercises of 
               A good heart reioiceth in the prosperity of the Church & Ministery. 
               the ministry, then in al the delights among the sonnes of men besides. For who can condemne in this holy man of God such an holy desire as this is? Nay who can deny but that our affections & wishes ought to be in some measure sutable vnto his? And therefore that it is our part with him, to prefer the reioycing and comfort of one day within the Church, aboue a thousand elsewhere, not excepting the Pallaces of Princes: yea and that wee might bee so happy in the fruition of this desire, to choose a very meane estate with it, rather then the most glorious condition of the earth without it.
            But what moued the prophet Dauid, 
               Ques. or what did he see or find in this assembly, or in the Ministery that could so rauish and affect him? For men of common eies cannot see any such extraordinary thing in them so violently to draw them; it may seem there was some secret force, which drew out such affectionate desires in him.
            It was indeed a secret force of the spirit of GOD, from whom such setled Ans.
               
and sanctified desires can only proceed: and yet wee may not conceiue such to bee immediate motions, and vngrounded flashes, but such as the Spirit raizeth by meanes: Both first causing the beauty of GODS house to appeare bright to their eyes: and second, reuealing to them the priuiledges which Gods people there partake, and cannot againe meete with them in any society besides.
            The former appeareth, Psalm, 27. 4. One thing I desired of the Lord, and I will desire it, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the daies of my life.
            
            But what mooued Dauid thus to wish this one thing? That I might see the beauty of thine house: and although the beautie of the Sanctuary so farre forth as it was externall, in regard of the matter, of the forme, of the whole ordination of it: yea and all the vtensils euen to the very pinnes of it, which all were of the Lords owne inuention & institution, and might therefore haue drawne carnall mindes vnto it (as at this day the sensible and plausible splendor and beauty of the Church of Rome doth

many superstitious people) yet was neuer any good and sincere heart (such as Dauids was) satisfied with externall things in Gods worship: well knowing that as God is a spirit; so nothing is there pleasing vnto him which is not spiritual: there are therfore other beauties which the stranger entreth not into ye beholding of; yea such as cānot be beheld but with eyes as cleare as christall.
            
               
                  Quest. What are the beauties you speake of? Answ. They may be reduced Beauties of the house of God. vnto these two heads: They are seene partly in respect of the parties present: and partly in the things performed in such holy assemblies.
            
            
               The persons present; are, first; GOD 
                  1 the presence of God. 
                  himselfe: whence such places are called Bethells, as Dauid here thy house: thy courts: and are no other then the presence chambers of this euerlasting King of glory. Here he sitteth in a chaire of Estate, as formerly he sate between the Cherubins: How can it then bee but that the glory of the Lord should fill euery such house of his, as once it did the Temple 1. King. 8. 11. or where can a faithful soule more securely, more

ioyfully rest it selfe, then in Gods owne resting place?
               Secondly, Christ himselfe is heere present: 
                  Math. 18. 20. Reue. 1 17. Luk. 2, 96. 2. The presence of Christ. for wheresoeuer two or three are gathered togither in his name, he is in the midst of them. Hee walketh in the midst of the seauen golden Candelsticks: And no where else (if hee bee missing) can his parents and kindred finde him then in then Temple.
               Now is not this a greater beauty then any which can else-where bee espied? wherein the second Temple passed the glory of the former: & yet ours exceed the second! For how could the second Temple wanting 1. Gods presence between the Cherubins. 2. the Vrim and Thumim. 3. the inspiration & raizing vp of extraordinary prophets. 4. the Arke it selfe the seat of God, which was taken in the captiuity. 5. fire from heauen to consume their sacrifices: how could (I say) the second Temple wanting all these, be truly said to exceed the glory of the former, which had thē al? But only in regard of Christs bodily presence which by entring into it was to beautifie it? And yet the effectuall presence

of his spirit now with vs, is farre more powerful and glorious, then was his bodily presence in that Temple.
               Now seeing that Christ is the churches welbeloued, and is more then other 
                  Cant. 5. 9. 10. 
                  welbeloueds, euen the cheefe of ten thousand; and hath not left vs direction to meet him any where, saue in the tents of sheapheards, and in the steps of the flockes: 
                  Cant. 1. 7 should any christian soule (which is knitte vnto him in spirituall wedlocke; the contract beeing alreadie made, and the daye of their marriage apointed, and approching) desire any socyetie more then his? Nay ought not euerie beleeuing soule to wish one houre spent in his socyetie and fellowshippe, rather then ten thousand with any besides? So as hitherto Dauid was not wide in his wish and reioycing.
               Thirdly, the holie spirit of GOD is present in our assemblies; most plentifullie 3. The presence of the holy spirit of God. pouring out of his full buckets the treasures of wisdome and grace; yea the variety of graces accompanying saluation. Neither doth this spirit ordinarily display him-self else-where: who

although hee bloweth where hee listeth in regard of the free and vndeserued graces which hee poureth out: yet is it ordinarily by meanes of the Word, Sacramentes, Prayer, Censures publikely exercised and administred according to the will of God.
               Hence is it that wee reade still of the VVord and Spirit: and water and the Spirit ioyned together, because the spirit ordinarily putteth forth the grace of regeneration in the meanes of the word and sacraments. Now who hath not good cause, to wish (if not all his time) yet the most of it there spent; where by the worke and presence of the spirit, he may so happily inrich himselfe vnto life euerlasting, rather then else-where, where is nothing but spiritual pouerty, nakednesse, and beggery?
               Fourthlie, the holie Angels of God are here present in our assemblies. Whence 4. The presence of the Angells. the Apostle 1. Cor. 11. 10. wisheth the woman to haue power ouer her head because of the Angells: that is, the woman in the congregation must couer her head, as for other reasons, so for this which is not the leaste; in

that the Angels are present, and behold the order and behauiour of men & women. But why are the Angells present wil some say? I answer not onely in way of Ministery and seruice vnto the Lord, vnto the elect, and vnto his Ministery, sundry waies both assisting and helping it forward, and withstanding such enmities as otherwise resist it: but also after a sort to solace, and reioyce them-selues in the beauty of GODS house, so 1. Pet. 1. 12. VVhich things the Angells desire to behold; speaking of the 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      desirous to stoope downe. Misteries published in the Gospell.
               To which maketh that interpretation of the place in Hebrews. 12. 16. Yet once more will I shake not the earth only, but also heauen. The meaning of which words by the iudgement of some excellent Diuines, is this: that the voice of God in the deliuery of the law did cause the men on earth that hard it to quake and tremble; but now in the preaching and deliuery of the Ghospell, the verie Angells in heauen, are after a sort shaken beeing rauished & rapt into the admiration of it. Are there then such beauties in the assēblies as that very Angels

themselues admire? & shall not men for whom they were instituted seek both to espy, & be affected with them? and who can b
                     •
                  ame him that can come to prize these beauties aboue all that the earth can afford besides? Seeing the Angells themselues who are stript frō all earthly desires and delights, are said to admire these, but neuer the other: such a man indeed is come nere to Angelical perfection. Fiftly, The Saints of God here present Psal. 16, 3 Psal. 122. 4 5. The presence of the Saints of God vpon the earth. themselues in whō 
                  al our delight ought to be. For as the Tribes of the Lord vsed to goe vppe to his house, that they might worship before him in his Tabernacle & temple: euen so now the people of God assemble themselues in our congregations to the same purpose. Now when I say the people of God, I mean not al hand ouer head, who promiscuosly come together; not withstanding they all are his people by right of creation and preseruation, & yet of them some are openly & professed prophane ones; Neither all those who ioyne in externall profession and exercises of religion: of whom yet many are not inwardly purged: in which sence the old world called them

sonnes of GOD. That is, all the posterity of Seth and Enosh, opposed to the daughters of men voyde of all religion and pietie. But I meane those of GODS election; that are called of his purpose, that haue obtayned mercie, and who proceede on in the waies of sanctification vnto saluation.
               These are called in Scripture an holie people, a chosen generation, a people by purchase, the doue of Christ, his vndefiled, his treasure: and their propertie is described, that they flye as a clowde, and flocke as the Doues vnto 
                  Isay. 60. 8 
                  these windowes. Which prophesie although it bee properlie to bee vnderstood of the vniuersall and generall calling and concurse of the Gentiles vnto the Church, who should come with such celerity and swiftnesse as if a cloud were with violence of windes carried from one side and region of heauen to the other; and in such flockes and multitudes, as if a whole flight of piegeons (driuen either by tempest, or by an Eagle, or some other birde of prev) should scoure vnto their columbarie, and rush into the windowes:

yet this propertie is so peculiar vnto persons once called and conuerted, as by which the holie Ghost pleaseth to expresse them, rather then by any other title, that they are such as flocke to the windowes of the Church, by which the Lord conueyeth to his people his light of instruction, of consolation, of grace, of glory. So else-where, the scriptures note them to bee such as seeke the Lord in his ordinances, such as seeke the face of the Lord, such as call one another to the house of the Lord, and such as cheerfully and couragiously march on, and will not giue out, vntill they meete the Lord in Sion.
               
            
            
               
                  Obs. If it be here obiected, that these are but a few in comparison of the multitude which resort vnto the house of God: who belong no otherwise vnto him, then reteiners vnto their Lords or maisters, they weare his cloath, and now and then giue some formall attendance, but are no houshold seruants.
            
            
               
                  An. I answer. That true it is that the best part for the most part, is the least part, if wee consider the truth of the thing: but yet Christian loue bindeth

vs to iudge the best of all that ioyne with vs euen in the outward seruice of God, for wee cannot enter into their hearts, but must leaue them to stand or fall to their owne Lord, and forbeare to iudge them before the time.
               Secondly, wee must (notwithstanding the multitude of prophane & hypocriticall persons in the congregation,) frame our iudgements vnto Gods, who esteemeth the assemblies frō the better part, and not from the greater; he knew well that many moe who were but Iewes without, and in the letter resorted vnto the tabernacle; thē those who were Iewes within; yet it still retained the titles of Gods house, & Gods courts.
               
               Thirdly, It is a glorious thing to be admitted euen to the outward profession of religion, notwithstanding all are not of the Church that are in it. In which regard Ioshua calleth all Israell the Lords possession, euen because his tabernacle Iosh. 22. 19 Num. 23. 9 Zeph. 3. 9. dwelt amongst them. And thus was it prophecied by Balaam himselfe, that Israell should dwell alone, and should not bee numbred among the nations, for Israell was a people of a pure language.
                  
In all which the nation of the Iewes were aduanced aboue all other people, because they were distinct and seperated from all other; both in their religion, lawes, rites and condition of life, all of them appointed and established by God himselfe.
               How much more beautiful then and glorious are the cōgregations of Gods people, in regard of such who are truly the Lords holy ones? allied vnto Christ, Saints by calling, and begin to lead euen an heauenly life vpon earth? What is it that maketh the Court more louely and glorious, then all the rest of the pallaces of the land besides? It is not so much the stately building or other braueries, but the presence of the King, Queene, Prince, Lords, Ladies, and other their attendants answerably Gods courtsmore glorious then the courts of Princes. where the exercises of religion are established, are beauties no whit inferiour, but farre passing the former. Salomon describing the glorious condition of the church, compareth it to the Courts of Kings and Monarches of the earth, but infinitely aduanceth it aboue them all, euen in this consideration.
               
                  
                  There are threescore Queenes, and fourescore Concubines, and Damsells without 
                  Cant. 6. 7 
                  number. As though hee had said: If in any Court of the world insteed of one Queene (for ordinarily there are no moe) there were three-score, and all attendance proportionall, though this were such a glorious and beautifull a sight as neuer man saw, yet were it not comparable to the beauty of the Church, euery true member of which is a King ouer his lusts, and heire to the crowne of heauen.
               True it is that this beautie of the Saints which beautifieth the assemblies is partly blemished and stained, and partlie hidde and couered. The former by many prophane Esaus, that thrust themselues into the profession, who a while seeme to bee liuing stones; but after appeare but stubble laid vpon the foundation. These are spots in our meetings, who so farre as in them lie, make the Church resemble Nebuchadnezers image; whose head was of gold, but the belly and feete of Iron and clay, which will not bee tempered together but fall a sunder.
               
                  
The latter, partly because this Kings daughter is glorious; but within, her comlinesse is like the Curteines of the Causes why the beauty of the Saints is not seene of the most. tabernacle, which outwardly were of courser stuffe, but within costly for the matter, and curious for the exquisite workmanshippe, and like to the beauty of Christ him-selfe in whom men sawe neither forme nor beautie, partly because their infirmities cloude their beautie, and darken them in mens eyes, when yet they remaine most deare vnto God: and partly because the sunne of affliction and persecution looketh much and often vpon them, which maketh them seeme blacker then they are, and thus Christ him-selfe was despised because men iudged him as plagued and smitten of God. Isa. 53. 4, and Iob counted an hypocrite of his friends. No meruaile then it is, that such eyes as are not annointed with the eye-salue cannot prie into this inward and secret obiect: no meruaile if eyes thus accustomed to false glasses be distempered; no wonder if eyes still gazing vpon such clouds bee held from seeing the hidden glory of the Saints, no otherwise then

                  Elishaes seruant was, who could not see the glorie which shone rounde about him. But such as are the Lords must herein expresse the vertue and image of their heauenly father, who delighteth in his people as in his portion; whom hee accounteth beautifull as the Lilly, and sweete as the Rose. Euen so all our delight should bee in the Saints which excell in vertue: let them be by infirmities, by afflictions blacke, yet in our eye they must bee comely: the shining graces of God in them ought as by strong cordes to draw our affections vnto them: and if in our priuate course we ought to edifie our selues by this, & by our conuersing with them, partake of their graces and encrease or stir vp our owne: much more should we with all cheerefulnesse partake with them in the publicke worship of God, by whose presence, behauiour and praiers our ioy is more full, and our seruice more acceptable. Especially seeing this whole Psalme sheweth how our Prophet from this consideration did not a little prouoke his heart and best affections vnto the assemblies.
               
                  
Now to end this point, seeing wee are taught that here is the Court of the King of glorie, the holy God sitteth here in the holie assemblies, the holy Angels of God are heere present; the holie Saints of GOD stand here vpon this holie ground: how is it that wee cannot conceiue these meetings to bee the most beautifull places of the earth? How are wee yet as blinde as Moles, if wee espie not and turne not our eyes vnto such beauties? what a fearefull delusion is befallen them, who are so easily wone to the painted beautie of an harlot, and despise the natiue beautie of the spouse of Christ? What a certaine damnation abide such, as by scorning the holy exercises of our publicke meetings, and reproching the Preachers, and Ministers of them, seeke to turne this our glory into shame? but more of this in the vses following the doctrine. Thus much wee haue spoken of the honorable persons present in our congregations, the dutifull respect of whō (if we wanted othermotiues) were forcible enough to draw Godly hearts with cheerfulnesse vnto our meetings.
               
                  
Now the things which are performed in the congregation, are of the same qualitie; euen holy things: namely the whole publike worship of God, standing especially in the Ministerie of 1. Word, 2. Sacrament, 3. Prayer, 4. Keyes of the Church: of none of which can any that knowes them affirme truly, that it wanteth power & perswasion to draw any godly heart vnto it.
               And first in these meetings it cannot bee denied, but that wee enioy a most comfortable and pretious treasure of Benefits by the publick reading of the word. the worde of God, and that both reade and preached, the weaker of which meanes wanteth not his fruitfull vse in the Church, that whosoeuer ascribeth not much vnto the publicke reading of the Scriptures: well considereth not the necessity of that ancient ordinance of God, who of olde would haue Moses reade euery sabboth, and instituted a lecture of the law and Prophets. The which Act. 15. 21. Act. 13. 15. ordinance of God, not onely the holie Apostles: but the sonne of God himselfe graced, yea honored not with his presence onely; but also with his ministery; for (as his custome was) hee went 
                  Luk. 4, 16.
                  
                  into the synagogue on the Sabboth day, and stood vp to read. And if here it bee asked, what are the speciall benefits reaped by this ordinance instituted out of the wisdome of God: I answer. First, It is a notable meanes to come to the knowledge of the history of the Scriptures, wherein the chiefe workes that euer the Lord did in the Church are recorded, whether of iustice or of mercie, especially those of our fall in the first Adam, & recouery by the second. Secondly, to confirme our faith in all the points of Christian faith and religion: the maine grounds of which we haue fore-prophecied of in the old testament, and are fulfilled in the new.
               3. To direct our iudgements in proouing of all things; and holding that which is good, as the Baereans searched the Scriptures, to see whether the things were 
                  Act. 17. 11. 
                  so as Paul preached, which if it bee a fruite of priuate reading (as the rest also are) much more of publicke.
               Fourthly, to traine vs to the more profitable hearing of the word preached. Fiftly, to acquaint vs with the phrase of the Scripture; so as wee can both

vnderstand, and speake the language of Canaan.
               
               But who can speake of the glory of The benefits of the word preached. our ministery, in regarde of the worde preached: which as a more ordinary and principall meanes leadeth vs along vnto saluation, by a more full manifestation of the promise of life: yea not onely explayning things to cleare them to the vnderstanding; but applying them vnto the heart and affection, and vrging them vpon the life and conuersation of a Christian. The blessed worke of which institution will euidently appeare, if wee consider the obiects vpon whome it worketh; and those bee eyther the vnconuerted, or conuerted, or both.
               
               In regarde of the vnconuerted, it is the ordinarie meanes to beget them to God, by enlightening their eyes, opening their eares, mollifying their hearts, and working faith in their soules, which commeth by hearing. And what a blessed worke is this Rom. 10. whereby the sonnes of wrath become the sonnes of GOD? whereby those who are layd lowe in hell by sinne, are

raised vnto the glory of the highest heauen? and whereby the iust heyres of damnation are entituled into the state of saluation, to receiue inheritance among those that are sanctified, In this excellent vse is it called a Ministerie of reconciliation, of peace, a word of grace, of saluation, and of life. 2. In 2. Cor. 5. 18 Eph. 6. 15. Acts. 14. 3. Act. 20. 32 respect of those who are conuerted: It is a powerfull meanes of the spirit; First to encrease their knowledge, by the daily clearing of their iudgements from error, and ignorance; and leading them into all necessarie truths. Secondly, to strengthen and encrease their faith, bringing it with dayly progresse from the infancie and weaknesse of it, till the beleeuer attaine his tallnesse and strength in Christ.
               Thirdly, to call them from their dayly wandrings and strayings, and settle them in a godly course.
               Fourthly, to preuent their falles, whilest they are heere partlye furnished with Christian Armour against temptations; for through the Ministerie of the worde, Sathan falleth like lightning from heauen.
                  
and his strongest holdes are cast downe: 
                  Luc. 10. 18 2. Cor. 10. 4. partly while they are counselled in their doubts, finding the word in this Ministerie, especially the man of their counsels. Partly while they are admonished of such wayes as are disagreeable to such an high calling as they haue vndertaken. Fiftly, to raise them out of falls, by discouering vnto them the nature and danger of sinne, the working of their owne infirmities, the bitter roote of originall corruption: the poysoned fruites of it: and by many motiues continually prouoking their repentance, which was the scope Christs fore-runners Sermon; yea of his owne preaching, and of his Apostles. 
                  Math. 3. 2. Marc. 1. 15 Acts. 2. 38 Sixtly, most absolutely to direct them through their whole Christian course. If they be alone, it affordeth them matter of holy meditation; that they are neuer lesse then alone, when they are most alone, except those can be alone, who walke with God. And if they bee to deale with others, it enableth them to become great lights; ready and furnished to instruct, and comfort abroade, to bee as eyes to the blinde:

and feete to bring the lame to Christ: and at home to teach and pray with their family, so as their houses become little Bethels, and houses of GOD, in which the Lord is truely and constantly worshipped, and both themselues and the Churches in their houses, dayly edified vpon their most holy faith.
               Now in regarde both of the wicked who are by the worde preached, more hardened, and of the godly whose number by the same meanes are dayly augmented and accomplished, the appearing of Christ vnto Judgement is hastened, which the Saints ought to long after, as in which they expect, and shall attaine their full redemption.
               Secondly, in the Sacraments wee drinke yet deeper of the Lords bountie, Comfort by the holy sacraments. who contenteth not himselfe to bring his children vnto the faith by the former meanes, vnlesse also hereby hee raise them vnto a full growth in Christ. As a tender mother accounts it not enough to bring forth her child, except shee also nursse and cherish it

vp vnto mans estate. So hath the Lord in these sacraments to shew the aboundant sweetnesse of his loue in Christ, after hee hath in the word preached, made the couenant of grace knowne vnto men; hee also doth most surely seale it vp vnto their soules, by those Rom. 4. 11. 
                  seales of the righteousnesse of faith. The former sealing vp their vnion, ingrafting and fellowship with Christ, from whom as from a roote, they draw and sucke the moysture of grace, without which they are but dead, and withered branches. The latter assuring their continuall grouth, and encrease in him, till they become tall trees of righteousnesse, and both of them further helping both our vnderstandings as glasses by which we see clearer into the mistery of our redemption; as also our memories, as monuments before our eyes, with which sence of learning our God would haue vs taught, as well as by the other of hearing: as in the third place both of them not onely spurring vp euery beleeuer to the performing of the couenant; but also strengthening him to euery good duty, whereby

hee may magnifie this grace of God.
               Thirdly for prayer, how vnspeakable By publicke prayer how God is glorifyed. is the glory of GOD rendred by the Church, gathered together, and how wonderfull are the blessings which are vouchsafed the Church from God, in and by meanes of this holy dutie, especially when they are assembled in the house of prayer? In the former regarde Psal. 65. 2. is it sayd by the Prophet, Praise waiteth for thee in Sion. For what greater honour can befall the Lord, then first in petition to bee acknowledged the giuer of euery good and perfect gift? to bee depended vpon for all comfort, instruction and euery good grace: to bee acknowledged the author and finisher of our faith, the beginner and accomplisher of all our workes, in vs and for vs? and in the confession of our indignity and misery (euen the best) to haue his free grace amplified, and his prerogatiue yeelded him, whose priuiledge it is to say; I will forgiue? Secondly, in prayses to be magnified by his whole Church for

the fruites of his free loue, manifestlie shining in his workes of creation, redemption, preseruation, and saluation of his Church: yea and when his people haue done all they can in way of thankfulnesse for them; yet euen the best of them shall acknowledge, that they cannot finde what to render vnto him for his vndeserued loue: Thus the Tribes goe vppe to Ierusalem to praise the name of the Lord. Psa. 166. 18 Psal. 122. 4
               
               In the second respect, what a singular priuiledge is it that wee haue leaue giuen vs by our requests to speake and commune with our God? and where-as the riche treasures of grace and good things are with him The members of the Church aboundantly enriched. surely kept as vnder locke and key: how happily may wee by this meanes vnlocke and open them all vnto our selues? Yea that when wee cannot by any thing in vs or from vs demerite the least blessing (wee beeing lesse then the least mercy) yet if wee can but lift vppe one request of faith wee haue preuayled, and ouer-come God himselfe in the greatest.
               
                  
And if the prayer of one righteous man can preuaile so much as the scriptures testifie of Moyses, Iacob, Elias: how much more when two or three consent togither in priuat prayer? But when publike prayer is presented vp by many, yea the whole church; how can that but exceed in strength? For as in experience we see, many flowers bound together yeeld the stronger sent; and compound water is sweeter thē simple; many sticks make a great fire; and vnited force more forceable: so euery christian alone and a part in this duty is acceptable vnto God; but when many ioyne in holy society, they are much more pleasing vnto him, much more ioyfull among them-selues, and much more mutually incouraged to the practises of piety, & loue one towards another.
               Publike breaches are soone made vp if many Moysesses stand vp in the gap. Publike peace if it be wanting is speedily and happily procured when many Eliases lift vp requests vnto the Lord, Prayers of the faithful are the vvals and munition of a people. euery one of which are as strong as the Horsemen and Chariots of Israel. Publike blessings are easily obteyned when

many Iacobs wrastle together with the Lord: Fully resolued not to lette him goe vntill hee haue giuen them a blessing. The publike ministry is successefully Rom. 15. 30. 2 Cor. 1. 11. both setled and exercised when the Saints striue with their Ministers by prayers to God for them: and when the faithfull labour together in praier for the same purpose.
               The priuate necessities also of any one priuate member of the Church, are sooner supplied by the instance and importunity of the whole; and such as cannot come vpon their owne feet (as the man sicke of the palsie) are lette downe by the cordes of the churches prayer Luk. 5. 19. and sette before Christ. A powerfull and preuayling thing is it with the Lord when a number of beleeuers are in one place, and one accord, of one heart, and one soule as it were in many bodies, to whom hee hath giuen one heart and one way, yea one pure language to cal on his name and serue him with one shoulder. Fourthly, if vnto Zep, 3. 9. Act. 2. 46. & ver. 32. Ier, 32. 39. the three former we shal ad the last part of the ministry performed in our holy meetings, we shall see both the glory of

God further inlarged, & the benefit of the church amplified. For here we haue also to our vnspeakable good, the Keyes of the Kingdome opening and shutting heauen; the power of binding or loosing of sinners. The authority of deliuering to Satan the obstinate sinners and releasing the penitent. Now what glory is it to the almighty when his iust sentence is before hand denounced against the vngodly of the earth? Where by him-selfe is cleared in his iudgement and the sinner more iustlie wrapped vp in the bandes of death which he had no care to preuent.
               And on the other side no lesse comfort it is for the humble soule in the same Ministerie of the Word preached to bee fully released from sinne, and absolued from all his vnrighteousnesse, and assured that whatsoeuer such sentence is rightly pronounced in Earth is ratified also in Heauen.
               These thinges beeing of such an high nature, as in which the publicke worshippe of GOD is performed to his so great glorie, and our

own so great good, no marueil if Dauip be so instant in his desire: & yet these things were after a sort vailed and but shadowed in that ministry of the sanctuary. For the Arke it selfe was with curtaines, and there lay no high way vnto it, no not for Dauid him-self: only men must look towards it in their prayers. And within that Arke were 1 Kings. 8. 9. hidde and chested vppe the tables of the couering representing the VVord, read and preached: In the Tabernacle also was the golden potte of Mannah a speciall type of our Sacraments: and the rod of Aaron shadowing the rod of the church Discipline. How much more should wee (were wee not so blockish as men hewne out of hard okes) reioyce in such an open and glorious face of Iesus Christ? Yea with the Prophet account it our Blessednesse to dwel Vers. 4. in the Lords house, where we may euer praise him: because hereby wee come nearest vnto the life of iust and perfect men in heauen; to the which while wee frame our selues afore-hand, wee haue entred into some degree of their blessednesse, as also of our owne.
               
                  
Thus farre wee hetherto discouered those beautyes of the house of God, both in respect of Persons present and holy thinges performed: which if men could see with bodily eyes, (as they cannot bee perceiued but by such as haue cleared eies) they would excite admirable loue and affection towardes them.
               Now we are to intreat of the priuiledges, and benefits which Gods people The priuiledges of Gods people in the assemblyes. reape by frequenting the same: and the rather that such as perhaps little regard the glory of God, shining in his ordinances, brighter then the Sunne in his strength, might yet for their owne aduantage and profitte bee perswaded with diligence and reuerence in this his house to seeke the face of the LORD.
               
               Now although the priuiledges be as manyfold in number, as excellent in their quallity: yet I will content my selfe to note foure of them: and these foure rather then any other, because I see them to bee such as moued in the Prophet Dauid aboue all other these holy and ardent desires; as in euery of

them will plainely appeare.
               First, the benefit of light and instruction. The first work that the Lord doth 1 Instruction. in these little worlds (as once in the great) is to seperate light and darknes in such as are in Christ created againe vnto good workes. For which purpose the Lord him-selfe by his spirit becommeth the Schoolmaister of his people, teaching them to know him in himselfe in his Christ: to beleeue, to worke and walke. Heere in his house (setting a coppy to all maisters of familyes what to doe in their houses) hee openeth his treasures of wisdome, and teacheth no triuiall matters: But first, for their necessitie, matters of life and death. Second, for their dignitie such misteries as flesh and blood can neuer attayne vnto; partly concerning God, as the doctrine of the Trinity. Partly concerning Christ, as of his incarnation, conception, vnion of his natures, and partly concerning our selues. As our resurrection, life eternall all which are matters of faith. Third, for their vse such as perswade

the truth, preserue frō error, raize such as are faine, strengthen those that stand, comfort the afflicted, pacifie the conscience, confirme the certaine hope of life eternall, and deliuer the deeds of it into our hands: & indeed the benefit of our redemption and whole saluation by Christ were little worth without these holy meanes whereby it is reuealed and applyed vnto vs.
               This is that benefit which our Prophet expresseth in the beginning of the verse following. For the LORD GOD is the Sunne That is look what the Sunne is to the World, that is the LORD GOD to his Church the Sunne of the World is not so necessary to lighten the day, as this Sunne of the Church to lighten the darkenesse and dungeon of the soules of men: without wc (seeing all our heauenly lght is from it) our estate is far more vncomfortable then that of the Egiptians in their Exod. 10. 23. three daies darkenesse: for here no man can all his dayes stirre out of the place where his naturall corruption hath sette him. And where shines this Sun

but in the church, this is the Goshen 
                  Downe go Dagon and Diana before the Arke. where this light is: In the ministry especially it displayeth the beames of it.
               Secondly, necessary prouision both for sustenance and safety of soule and 2. Sustenance and safety. body. First for the susteining of the soule heere, is milke, and stronger meat: here wee haue the Lord pouring out all his goodnesse: Here the great King prepareth a great supper, killeth his fatlings, prepareth his milke and wine, spreadeth his table, setteth on it Iesus Christ the bread and water of life: whose flesh is meat indeed; whose blood is drinke indeed: Here he by his ministers inuiteth and intreateth men to ye banquet: here he filleth the hungry and thirsty soule with good things: worketh new strēgth of life and grace; as reioycing in God; peace of good conscience, ioy in the holy Ghost, watchfulnesse against sinne, comfort in tribulation, quicknesse and strength in good duties, boldnesse in good causes, and a life led and finished in faith and obedience. Here the Lord clotheth the naked soule, and putteth on it the Lord Iesus Christ, whose righteousnesse

becommeth the costly and comely rayment of it. Heere hee inricheth the poore soule with treasures of grace and godlynesse. Heere by the fire of his spirit hee warmeth and reuiueth the staruen soule. Here is the tree of life for the sicke soule, the leaues whereof serue to cure the nations. In a word; Christ offered and receiued in the Ministry, is food and Phisicke, cloth and warmth, wealth and health, life and length of daies, yea all in all vnto the soule of all his beleeuing ones. And 2. for bodily food and rayment with other necessaries for the life present, although those who ar without ye church inioy them; yet they haue them not in that speciall blessing and comfort, as the members of the church; who 1. haue them by vertue of that special promise: First seeke the Kingdome of God, and other things shal be cast on you: & 2. hold them by a right and title in Christ: and 3. are taught how to imploy them to the glory of the giuer, all which make these blessinges good to them as they are in them-selues.
               Secondly, for perfection and safety:
                  
1. Spiritual, here is a shadow & sweete Satan foyled, armies of his forces discomfited. refuge against the whole wrath of God appeased by Christ: here we see sin subdued, death vanquished, righteousnes purchased, great deliuerance wrought for the soules of beleeuers: here we haue strength in temptation, and victory ouer our selues: for here is Gods grace reueled which is sufficient for vs.
               Now this saluation of God is not elswher to be heard off, but in the tidings which we bring; nor reuealed vnto any but the true members of the church. In Mount Sion & in Ierusalem shall be deliuerance. As for temporal perfection: Ioel. 2. 32. whereas when men are cast out of the Icr. 15. 2. sight of God (as vnbeleeuers who are without the pale of Gods protectiō) they ly opē vnto the sword, famine, captiuity, to the dogs to teare, to the foules of heauen, & the beasts of the field to deuour: so on the contrary the neerer God the surer of safety; for iudgements flye farre frō God. Hence is it that to the members of the church, safety is promised vnder the shadow of the winges of the almighty, especially while they are in the performāce of publick duties before the Lord, and it is worthy our

obseruing that the Lord in making that law of the three feastes, wherein all the men three times euery yeare must repaire before the Lord & continue each A far iourney of many daies trauel. A seruice of long continuance, seuen daies at a time, their wiues might be indangered, their virgins violated, their goods spoiled. time in his worshippe together many daies, preuenteth all their obiections: for they might say, but wil not this giue great aduantage to the enemy to watch such times to win their coūtries again, Which in any one of those three times in our so long absence from our houses, leauing none to defend thē but women & childrē they might easily enter vpō? Or were it not fit if there must be three such meetings yt the people of one prouince should assemble at one of them, & they of another at the second, and so in the third: then to leaue the whole coū
                  try at once without men, and strength exposed to such certaine danger? No saith the Lord: come before me euery man thrise a yeare, for no man shall desire thy land, when thou shalt appeare before the LORD Exodus, 34. 24, himself would be the strength of it at yt time, & so watch it as the enemy should not so much as desire it: the like we may obserue in their gathering of Mannah euery day in ye morning wc was not only an obediēce vnto gods cōmandemēt

but a special resemblance and shadow of seeking Iesus Christ in ye parts of his worship. Now herein seemed to lie no smal danger towards them; For either the enimies wc were continually troublesom vnto thē might take their camps whilst the whole host was abroad gathering Mannah, or else they might lye in ambush in the wildernes for the host about ye place wher the Mannah fell: yet for al their danger (& notwithstanding they had many skirmishes in ye wildernes) wee neuer read yt this was any disaduantage vnto thē. The Lord so watched them & theirs, that neuer by their gathering of Mannah nor in that time and place they wer disparaged, no nor set vpon: for the eye of the Lord is most vpon them yt ar nearest vnto him. Set thy selfe to gather Mannah in the ministry thou shalt not faile of Gods protection. And this the Prophet Dauid in the second place teacheth in the vers following. For God is the Sun and shield. And hereby he prouoked himself often into the presence of God in the assemblies, and the rather in that now he was so hunted out of euery corner;

and euery day brought him more danger then other, that there was often but a step between him and death; hee had great cause to long after that defence and safety which the Lord reacheth out to such as haue libertye with good heartes to worship before him in his Temple. Thirdly, strong consolation for al conditions of life, euen such as otherwise 3 Comfort for all conditions. would be most vncōfortable. For when the people of God are compassed with such iudgements and terrors, whether without or within them, as they cannot tell what way to turne them; when changes of sorrowes come thicke and threefold one in the neck of an other: when whole armies of temptations besiege them; so as they see no way of issue & escape: here are they incouraged to set their eies vpon ye Lord; who pittying them as a father the child which he loueth; wil not suffer them to sink in their sorrow; but holds them vp by the chin, that they perish not in their trouble. For heere come they to know 1. that the Lords manner is first to giue strength, and then the burden wc shal not bee aboue that strength. 2.

that the Lord must rule in his house, and necessarily must administer out of his iustice as wel correction as reward, and draw euen his deare ones vnto him as well by the rods of men, as by the cords of loue; which is a singular prop vnto their patience. So as they can be wel contented vnder it. 3. yt though their troubles be neuer so great, yet he will deliuer them out of al in due seasō. 4 that he wil make these afflictions soueraign and wholesom vnto them; and turn euen their sufferings to their best; all things fall out to the best to them that 
                  Rom. 8. 28. 
                  loue God. Thus the Lord maketh good his promise to such as conscionably seeke him in his ordinance, as one whom his mother comforteth so shall you in Ierusalem. Isa 66. 13. Psal. 119. 92. Whereas if the word were not their comfort they were sure to perish in their trouble.
               Besides here the people of GOD reape the comfort of their prayers; for as a King receiueth petitions at the Court; or as a maister of a family is ready to heare and receiue all the complaintes and requestes of his children and seruantes: euen so the

LORD in this house giueth free accesse vnto him-selfe; and for their incouragement herein freely promiseth, that hee will bee ready to heare their prayers, behold their sighs, put their teares into his bottle, send no man awaie emptie, and cast none in the teeth for his importunity so it bee guided aright.
               Seeing thererfore that heere are such consolations to bee attayned as the whole Worlde besides cannot giue, nor take away; so certaine, so seasonable, so spirituall, so perpetuall: Which of vs haue not as much reason to wish the fruition of such a gratious presence of GOD were it but for one day, aboue all other all our dayes as Dauid did? This holy man well knewe that one day was but short in comparison of many dayes: But yet their reioycing with the Church in the Church assemblyes for one daie was worthily to bee preferred before the reioycing of many dayes without the Church; in that the waight of this ioy recompensed the shortnes of it

self; & counteruailed the length of the other, being vnspeakably glorious. This third priuiledge is that wc he in the third place mentioneth as a steele spur to his affection: where in the next vers he addeth that the Lord is (not onely the Sun & shield) but grace in his church, that is, gratiously accepteth in his Christ, 1. the persons, and then the prayers of such as are assembled in spirit & truth to worship him and call vppon his name.
               Fourthly, Blessednes and saluation wc is not ordinarily out of these assemblies 4. Eternal happines. to be attained. A true saying it is, that, none can haue God his father, that hath not the church for his mother, neither can any testifie himselfe a childe of the Church; but by the dutiful acknowledgment of hir whensoeuer God shewes hir face. Whē 
                  Iacob was awake out of his sleepe in which the Lord had appeared vnto him: Hee said, This is the house of GOD, this is the gate of heauen, in like manner may Gen▪ 28. 17. wee conceiue and speake of these places in which it pleaseth the LORD so gratiously to appeare vnto vs; this is no other then the gate; these are

surely the suburbes of heauen. Out of 
                     Per portam ecclesiae intramus in portam paradifi August, de tempore serm. 137. the Church is no saluation, whosoeuer remained without the Arke, (a tipe of the visible Church) was drowned. The Lord sauēth none whom he first addeth not vnto the Church. And the Scriptures attribute saluation (but yet ministerially) to the wombe, brests, and lappe of the Church, which is the Mother of vs 
                  Gal. 4. 26. 
                  all. And of Sion is it sayd, that many are borne in her. And this last was not the Psal. 87. 5. least motiue which stirred in our holy Prophet these instant desires. The Lord is grace and glory; not onely because the Lord is the glory of his people, here and hereafter; Nor that onely in the Church the Lord reueileth his glorie, but also because he leadeth his children vnto it by the meanes there by his wisdome appointed.
               Now considering the places whereon our feete stand are holy ground, the persons present holy and glorious; the duties performed holy and spirituall; the priuiledges of Gods people so preacious and aboundant in all these regardes, can we doe lesse then wish our portions and shares in them? and doth

it not now seeme a most reasonable and religious wish to spend if it were but one day here, rather then a thousand else-where? or shall wee still neede many goads to prouoke vs to loue, or rejoyce in Ierusalem, where wee may thus suck and bee satisfied with the brest of her consolation, where wee may milke out and bee delighted with the 
                  Isa. 66. 11. 
                  brightnesse of her glory?
               
               If wee would haue our hearts iustifie vs in this holy reioysing, our labour Vse. 1. must bee to see dayly further into these beauties of Gods house, which may rauish our hearts with the loue of it aboue all other places in the earth.
               The Scriptures not in a few places aduanceth and highly extolleth such assemblies A good hart would turne their eye to the beauties of Gods house as wherein God and his people are mette together to the former purposes; and all that our hearts and affections might bee mooued to enquire and finde out such excellencies here, as the mouth of the Lord himselfe hath so frequently recommended vnto vs.
               
                  
The Prophet Isay saith, that the Isa. 2. 2. house of the Lord is prepared in the top of the mountaines, and exalted aboue the hills. Which place may receiue some light by that comparison, which the Prophet Dauid maketh Psal. 66. 16 betweene Mount Sion and mount Basan, and many other great hills. Why hoppe yee so yee hills? this is Gods hill. By Mountaines are meant the greatest Empires, and most flourishing Kingdomes of the earth abounding with wealth and power; which all in Basan are made inferiour to Sion: not that either in spaciousnesse of ground, or multitude, or goodnesse of people, or strength, or riches, or outward pompe and glory, Sion was comparable to any of them: for the kingdome of Israell was the least and fewest, and as badde and wicked 
                  Deut 7. 7. & 9. 4. 6. as any people vnder heauen: It was bounded and shutte vppe in a small modell and compasse of ground, and for strength and power, came farre short of the great kingdomes of Assyria, Aegipt, &c.
               
               
                  
How then was it so aduanced and exalted aboue the mountaines? surely herein. This is Gods hill; and so made high aboue all nations, in praise, name, and glory. Gods dwelling in it was the wealth, strength and beauty, yea I adde the blessednesse of it: for blessed is that land whose God is the Lord. Thus also was Capernaum said to be lifted vp vnto heauen, onely in regarde of the presence, doctrine, and miracles of Christ. So in our Bethels God himselfe is the beauty and glory of euery of them: his administration here farre excelling Salomon in all wisdome, the owner of it being the true Salomon, the God of Israel, who as a great housholder, out of his goodnesse fostereth, out of his wisdome teacheth, out of his power ruleth, and out of his rich mercy tendreth the complaints and requests of euery one within his gates. In this house all the houshould seruants haue one liuery and garment, the righteousnesse of Christ to cloath them; all feed at the selfe same table, and eate childrens bread: all haue one elder brother Iesus Christ the first borne of many

brethren: all haue one sort of seruants, the Angels who not onely goe before them and at their heeles, but as a guard are pitched about them: all haue one inheritance, and become heyres and fellow heyres with Christ himselfe. The wisdome & glory of which whole administration if we could as well behold as the Queene of Seba did the orders in Salomons Court: we could not but account them blessed, that might here be admitted into place of seruice; to heare the wisdome of the King of glory, and Prince of peace, who dwelleth within these euerlasting doores: Which heauenly delights while men know not, no maruaile if they affect them not. But on the contrary, one comming to behold them in any euidence, as little maruaile is it, if with Dauid they would enioy them with exchange of all earthly pleasures. For who is it which hath neuer so little tasted of the goodnesse of God, that loues not the Lords habitation, and the place where his honor dwelleth? yee that thirsteth not after God and his presence, as the Hart brayeth after the Psal, 42. 1.
                  
riuers of water?
               Secondly, if our hearts bee sound Vse. 2. in this reioysing, then can wee not but in heart and affection ioyne our selues vpon all good occasions vnto the Church of God in her meetings, as such as would pertake of her priuiledges, for this is a note of a conuerted person. The beleeuers continued 
                  Act. 2. 42. 
                  in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread and prayers. And if such multitudes of sundrie sortes of people, and such as could not finde their names in the genealogie, came out of Aegipt, and out of Babilon with the Israelites, onely because they saw GODS blessing following that people: How much more should wee bee prouoked to ioyne our selues to such societies as are assembled to worshippe him in spirit and truth: seeing it is not any temporall blessing which runnes into our eye, but spirituall and eternall; neither any out-warde priuiledge, which wee alone may make account of (as they) but such as is inwarde

and heauenly, yea such as rayseth vs vnto the condition of the sonnes of the liuing God, 
                  Hose. 1. 10
               
               But those mens hearts are not right within them that neede but the Con
                        •••
                     t. wagging of a strawe to keepe them from Church, much lesse of those who place their felicitie in turning away from GOD, from his ordinances, and the place of his true worshippe, what-so-euer their pretences may bee. And heere it shall not bee amisse to meete with some of them, especially such as are scarcely to be mette with-all euen there where some writers haue to verye fruitefull Preachers plea. purpose set them-selues to answere the most obiections of this kinde.
               1. And first to admonish such as neede no other thing then theyr owne wilfulnesse to excommunicate and banish them-selues from the house of God, and assemblies of the faithfull. Of these the first sorte professe themselues touched with zeale of the Seperators. glory of GOD: they haue obserued

the wilde beast of the Forrest to haue broken downe our hedge, throwne our pale to the ground; and with a prophane foote, troden downe and rooted vp all our holy things; they see no beauty, but all deformity and nakednesse in our Churches; which yet they will not vouchsafe that name; but sties of vncleane beasts, cages of filthy birds, and rudiments of Babilon. Thus they vexe themselues aboue measure, in seeking Ministers, callings, people of God, and Churches: and because they cannot finde a man in the market, they seperate from our assemblies.
               To which I answer, that though it be It is inough for thy Church to be without spotte or wrinckle in heauen. not the condition of our or any Church to be free from all blemish and spotte, yet is hee as blinde as a Mole, and palpably deluded, that can espy no beautie therein. What? is our Mother so black as shee hath no comlinesse? or because perhaps she wants some beautie, hath shee lost her face? sure I am, that where there is the face of God in the midst of his people there is a face of the Church: and where God is present, there is the house of God: But in our

assemblies wee haue God present teaching his people: yea wee haue Christ present in the word and Sacraments, euen crucified before our eyes, who is the image of his Father. Wee haue the presence of the blessed spirit of God (which they cannot deny) enlightning the vnderstandings, softning the hearts, comforting the consciences; powring forth his graces of faith, of hope, of loue, and that in aboundant manner in this his owne ordinance vpon many thousand soules which are dayly added vnto the Church: and therefore whatsoeuer wee yet want, let vs thankfully acknowledge that wee want not the presence of God, nor the house of God, nor the face of God, before which his people present themselues with liberty, and protection ioyning together in the pure worship of his name, to his endlesse praise, and their owne vnspeakable comfort.
               Howsoeuer therefore Sathan worketh according to his accustomed craft to trouble our sight; let vs bee more wise and wary then to bee ledde from the beholding of the face of God, and

so wilfully depart from this our reioysing.
               And let such as are so readye to bee mislead, acknowledge with thankfulnesse their spirituall father that begat them to God: their Mother the Church that bare them: her brests the Testaments that gaue them milke, and that shee is not since their birthe so weakened, but that shee is as able to preserue them as to bring them forth: and to feede them with stronger meate, so to bring them to their tallnesse in Christ.
               2. An other sorte of them who Reeusants. wilfully by excommunicating themselues out of our assemblies, deliuer them-selues to Sathan, are Popish minded persons, who because they cannot see neither their little breaden God in our Sacraments; nor their wooden guilded Gods in our worshippe: and because they cannot heare GOD speake Latin in our Churches; nor our Ministers inuocating Saints and Angels in our Prayers: therefore sure heere are no foote-steppes of GOD:

nor so much as the rudements of his worshippe and seruice: hence they refuse all communication with vs in Papists must see their God because they cannot beleeue him. worde, Sacraments, Prayers, and Church seruice; and ioyne themselues in a worshippe wherein they neede not bee at the paines to seeke a God sitting so high as in the heauens, seeing they can haue him at home in a boxe; who if hee chance to putrifie or corrupt; or bee deuoured of Mice, they can haue a new one made by the Priest and Baker together euery day.
               A worshipp in which if they haue Implicit faith. no knowledge, no faith of their owne, the knowledge and faith of the Church will besteede them; nay if they can beleeue as the Church beleeues, although they knowe not what the Church dooth beleeue: a worshippe wherein if they neyther can praye them-selues, nor yet gette CHRIST to bee an intercessor for them: yet they canne procure a thousand Mediatours besides of

Saints, Angels; and if these should faile, they haue the Virgin Mary at a dead lift to command her sonne in the right of a Mother to clemencie. A worship wherein if they can neither abstaine from sinne, nor yet repent of it in truth, yet if they can pay well, a little pennance shall acquit them. A worship wherein if they neuer were good, nor did good: yet their Church hath a treasurie, which (vpon another condition,) can supply them of good workes, which some man who in his life time was too good bequeathed to such purposes. Oh vaine worship, and full of delusion, not more plausible to the corrupt nature of man, then dishonorable to the high Maiestie of God!
               And were these things true, who could blame him that hath resolued to liue and dye a Papist? but alas that poore soules should bee held in such chaines of darknesse and death! The Lord in his good time open the prison doores, and strike off the boults from so many as belong to him, that

they may see them-selues set free from such woefull estate, as wherein they laye bound by Sathan and his instruments euen vnder damnation.
               And yet more fearefull is the condition of such of them as haue had their error discouered by the cleere sunne-shine of the Gospell, and yet are setled vpon their lees, vpon no better ground then like so many Barzillaes, 
                  2. Sam. 19. 35. that they haue beene so long accustomed to the worse, that they despise the better; their sences are past them, they cannot taste the truth, they cannot see the wisdome of GOD shining round about them, they cannot heare the voyce of the charmer; in Gilead they will dye, before they will choose to liue in Ierusalem: in superstition they began; they continue in error; they will dye in wilfull blindnesse, and will bee buryed in the graues of the idolatrie of their fore-fathers.
               The Lord once appeared to Iacob, but hee was not aware of it, the Gen. 28. 16
                  
reason was because hee was a sleepe: the Text saith. Then Iacob awooke out of his sleepe and said, surely the Lord is in this place and I was not aware, and this is the case of many a superstitious person.
               God appeareth vnto his Israell in Bethel in his house: but they are not aware of him, they see him not, they will not beleeue hee is among vs. But what is the reason? not because hee is not there; but because they are a sleepe and in their dreames; but if euer GOD awaken them, they will bee able to vtter Iacobs confession: and vpon better aduise to say: How fearefull is this place? It is no other but the house of God, and this is the gate 
                  Verse. 17. 
                  of heauen.
               
            
            
               3. Others are more prophane and secure, then wilfull and refractarie, and though not so much hatred, yet little more loue bewrayeth it selfe in them then in former sortes: and least they should seeme also to bee madde with-out reason; they are not without sundry coulours and pretenses which they thinke are reasonable

inough to absent them-selues from our assemblies. And therefore they aske; What can wee not bee Christians Ob. vnlesse wee trotte so often to Church? haue wee not the Scriptures and other good bookes at home to reade vppon, can wee not praye at home?
            
            
               
                  Ans. They may aswell aske; Can Good christians cannot be heauie to the Church. wee not haue an haruest vnlesse wee haue a seede time; and raine, yea the first and latter raine? or can wee not liue vnlesse wee haue meate? I say no: No more canst thou bee a Christian vnlesse thou take the ordinary meanes appointed by GOD, and vnlesse thou subiect thy selfe to that pollicy and order which God hath set in his Church. Wouldest thou goe for a good subiect, and yet not submit thy selfe to any of the Kings lawes? God hath set vs a publicke ministerie in his Church, and hath appointed Pastors, & teachers for thy gathering if thou belongest to life: and is it meet that any priuate exercise should crosse so publicke ordinances?

No the wisdome of GOD admitteth no such inconuenience in making his lawes, and deliuering his orders vnto his Church.
            
            
               
                  Ob. But though it cannot bee denied, but it is some-times good to goe heare a Sermon: yet what neede so much preaching? what, would men haue vs Saints on earth? our fore-fathers (who wee hope are well, and wish our selues no better) neuer were troubled with Sermons, and our selues haue liued some thirtie, fortie, fiftie, or A needlesse allegation that so much preaching is not needfull. sixtie yeares in good case and credit, and yet were neuer so forward to run to Sermons; wee hope to GOD wee can learne to loue God aboue all, and our neighbour as our selues, and pray to God, and carry good hearts to God-ward without all this a doe.
            
            
               
                  Answ. Can I beleeue any man that saith he seeth, when I see him shut his eyes? can I thinke that a man hath any true knowledge of God, who desireth not to growe in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord IESVS CHRIST? How can I beleeue that that man is in earnest, or if hee bee

that hee is in his wittes that shall thus plead against his life; I hope I haue eaten meate ynough heretofore, and got strength ynough and now I need no more: and therefore I will neuer eate more, nor drinke more while I liue: if a frantick man should come to such conclusions, any man might say well thou shalt then liue but a while. Dost thou not see this holy Prophet who was aduanced both in knowledg and holynes aboue the most liuing; and dwelt as an Angell in the World; yet did not he acknowledge himselfe greatly to stand in need of stirring vp by these meanes giuen of God for that end? And yet thou a man of little or no faith, a nouice and pettie in the schoole of Christ, if yet yu euer entredst into it, art so ful and complete as thou canst or needest go no The ignorance of our age more dangerous then of our fore-fathers, theirs was simple, ours affected. further.
               As for thy fore-fathers they had not the meanes as thou hast: and if any of them perished without them, yet their stripes are fewer then thine shall bee who contemnest them. If they had had ye meanes offred, it is likely they would haue beene more fruitfull in them, or

If not, it had not bene for their case (no more then thine) to haue dispised them. And lamentable it is to see how men suffer satan to ouer-reach them in a matter of such moment as is their freehold in heauen. If any man had house, land or legacy befalling him, would he reason thus? Why I care not for it I haue liued now 40. or 50. yeares well ynough & in good credit without it; I am too old now to change my estate although for ye better; neuer man made such a foolish reason: & yet such fooles are men that vppon this ground they stand against their greatest, spiritual and eternall good. Wheras if they had the wisdome of men in them, they should rather thus conclud: haue I al this while liued without knowledge of God, faith in Christ, consciēce of my waies? oh it is high time now to awake out of sleepe.
               And to such as can easily learn to loue God aboue all and the neighbour as Not easily lerned to loue God aboue al & thy neighbour as thy selfe. themselues; it is not a thing so soon lerned as they pretend. Is euery man a good mason or carpenter that can say, I know as much as the best workeman can teach or tell me, to build an

house is but to lay the foundation, and lay on the roof: or is he therfore a good husbandman yt can say, I know as much as the best husbandman can teach me; for what is husbandry else but to sow and to reape? But heere a meane conceit will reply and say, yea but there are very many thinges required before a man can do either of these two workes: which if you know not you can neuer bee commendable neither in the one nor the other. So I say a number of thinges go before the loue of God and the neighbor, as faith, repentance, prayer, knowledge of Gods will and word, knowledge of Christ in whome our workes must finde acceptance: & more these duties of loue must bee expressed in infinite actions through the whole life, all which if a man bee not particularly instructed in, his loue of God and his neighbor is but in word and tongue, but there is noe deed nor truth in either.
               And for their prayer which the hope they can acceptably performe, the truth is, let them pray and fast to it, so long as they turne their eares from hearing the
                  
                  law: such prayers are not only reiected but abhominable. As acceptable as the Pro. 28. 9. feruent prayers of those deuout women that would haue stoned Paul. And lastly, wheras their hearts ar so good to God-ward, in that also ye spirit of God giueth them the lye, who affirmeth that without knowledge the minde is not good.
               
            
            
               
                  Ob: But if I had an Angell to teach me, or some more excellent and powerfull meanes then this of hearing a weak and fraile man; then I would heare, beleeue and obey.
            
            
               
                  Ans: This indeed is an old subtiltie of the diuell by which hee hath 
                     Gods ordinance to teach man by man, not by an Angell.
                     I say, 49. 6.
                   in all ages mightely hindered the worke of the word in the heartes of vnbeleeuers.
               The prophets them-selues seemed in the eyes of the people too small to raize vppe the tribes of lacob, and to restore the desolations of Israel. And the rich mans brethren would rather bee taught by one from the dead, then by Moyses and the Prophets. And therefore seeing this deceipt secretly stealeth vppon many a man; and is not so euidently discouered

as it profitably may bee; I will indeuor the more fully to manifest both the folly and falshood of it.
               And first I say this is a foolish conceit of restlesse spirits, who yet take vppon them to bee wiser then God himselfe: who (howsoeuer the word might seeme to carry much more authority in the mouth of an Angell, then of an ordinary Minister, who is but a weake man yet) herein bewraied his infinite. 1. mercy. 2. loue. 3. wisdom, in establishing this holy ordinance, & no other perpetually to continue in his church vnto the end of the world.
               His mercy shineth out in this; that knowing our infirmity, and wherof we Gods mercy herein. are made, it pleaseth him to condiscend vnto it. Hee might by terrible voyces, out of lightnings, thunders and earthquakes, such as would breake the rocks them-selues before him, force our obedience, or send his Angels furnished with power and strength for the present execution of vengeance vppon all such as deny their present obedience to their word: but in compassion vnto vs hee chooseth to teach vs by a stil

voyce; by a more familar and fitte instruction for vs, euen by such as our selues, of our owne nature: farre meeter for our weakenesse then if he should either in his owne Maiestie teach vs; or by natures fo farre superiour vnto vs as the Angels. And this appeared plainely in giuing the law, when the people once hearing the voyce of God came trembling to Moyses, and made request in these wordes. Talke thou with vs and wee will heare, but lette not 
                  Exod, 20. 19. 
                  God talke with vs, least wee die: and it was generally receiued of old; that if any man did either heare this voyce; or see the face of the great God: the great Dut, 5. 26. Iudg, 13. 22. glory would so ouerwhelme him, that surely hee could not liue after it. Yea Moyses him-self could not haue beheld the back-partes of the LORD, if the LORD had not hidde him in the cleft of a Rocke, and couered him with his hand till he passed by.
               
               His loue towards man manifesteth it selfe heerein: that hee vouchsafeth Gods loue herein. to putte his voyce in the mouth of man, rather then of Angels. What an aduancement is it to the nature of man,

that the high GOD should sanctifie their tongues, to deliuer his good pleasure to the sonnes of men? to be trust them with such high misteries, and matters of such blessed and sauing vse to 1 Tim, 4. 16. 
                  them-selues and others?
               
               His wisdome discouereth it selfe in this ordinance sundry waies. 1. In that The wisedom of god herein. teaching man by man hee preuenteth the danger of deceipt and delusion which wee should lye open vnto if we should bee taught by reuelations, or visions, or appearance of Angels. For Satan is an Angel of light; hee can also assume him a body, and in it by Gods permission broch lies, and as though he were among the sonnes of God, father them vpon God. Blessed be that wisedom of God yt hath deliuered vs a more certain word of the Prophets & Apostles, shutting out al rouing Enthusiasmes & reuelations not contained within it selfe; and hath sette vppe a Ministry in which his Church shall bee taught by man, subiect indeed to error but farre lesse dangerous then the former: in that wee haue a certaine rule to trye the Spirites by

whether they bee of God or no: according to which rule and worde if they speake not, there is no light in them.
               Second, hereby hee sheweth the mighty power of the word which (although it seeme in the hand of a weake man, a foolish meane of mens conuersion) yet by this foolishnes of preaching the Lord saueth such as beleeue: This Paul teacheth. VVe haue this treasure in earthen 
                  2. Cor. 4. 7. 27. 
                  vessels that the excellency of that power might bee of God (that is knowne to bee of God) and not of vs: and this one thing hath confounded all the wisdome of flesh, to see such weake and vile and dispised thinges bring such great things to passe. 1. Cor. 1. 27.
               
               And thus all the glory of the worke of conuersion, redoundeth vnto God, to whome indeed of right it appertaineth. Thus the Apostles vsually turned off that praise & glory which men preposterously would haue fastned vppon them; that all the power of their word and workes might bee ascribed vnto God. When Peter had healed a Cripple that lay at the beautifull gate of the Temple, all the people came running, Act▪ 3. 12
                  
and gazing on him and Iohn, too much admiring their persons from whome they had seene such an euident worke: which when Peter perceiued, he checketh their ignorance. Yea men of Israel, why looke you so stedfastly on vs as though we by our own power or godlines had made this man go? And wisheth them to look vpward to the God of Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, who had glorified his sonne Iesus; in whose name they had done this miracle.
               
               So likewise when Paul at Lystra had healed an other lame man: the people Act. 14. 11. 15. conceiuing that the Gods were come downe in the likenesse of men, brought their Buls with garlands, & their chiefe Priest to offer sacrifice to him and Barnabas: which when the Apostles saw, they rent their clothes and staid them from yt horrible Idolatry. Oh men why doe yea these things? VVee are euen men subiect to the like passions that ye bee, and so proceeded to preach the true God, and his son Christ vnto them. Euen so when men behold such mighty power in that word which is dispenced by men subiect to the same passions with

them-selues; that it is able to conquer the whole world and bring it to the knowledge and obedience of christ; to subdue nature and corruption of it; yea battereth the strongest holds of satan and destroyeth his Kingdome: easily may they conceiue there is more power with it then any can bee in such poore men, and that is indeed the power & strong arme of almightie God.
               3. The wisedome of GOD hereby would proue and try our obedyence, whether we will heare his Ministers beeing men like our selues, no otherwise then wee would heare himselfe, or Christ, or an Angel speaking from heauen. Whether we wil receiue his Ministers as the Galatians did Paul. 
                  Gala, 4. 14. Hee came and preached in the frailtie and weaknesse of flesh, yet they dispised him not, nor abhorred him; but receiued him as an Angel of God, yea as Christ him-selfe: not considering so much the meanes of their persons, as ye truth of their doctrin, which must be as carefully receiued, and as certainly held as if Angels from heauen, or Christ

him-selfe did deliuer it. Yea the Apostle Paul is peremptory that if an Angel should come from heauen and crosse any whit of his doctrine by teaching either a contrary, or another doctrin then he did, he must be held accursed. Gal, 1. 8.
               
            
            
               
                  Ob. It will bee heere alledged that indeed they might so certainly receiue Pauls doctrine on his word, for he was priuiledged that he could not er in deliuering itas our ordinary ministers may.
            
            
               
                  An. To which I answer that euen we (secondarily) are to be heard and receiued with the same respect and certainty so farre forth as wee follow and deliuer to the Church the doctrine of the Apostles. For herein we also are the Angels of the Lord of hostes, and Ambassadors 
                  Malac, 2.7, 2 cor, 5. 21. 
                  in the stead of Christ.
               
               And all the partes of the Ministry in our hands (wee following the word) are as sure and infallible, as if an Angel or Christ from heauen should execute them. If we threaten it is as if ye Lion of ye Tribe of Iudah should roare: if we cōfort it is as sure & sweet to the beleeuing soule as if the Angels should comfort vs as they did Christ in his

agonie. Yea or Christ him-selfe from heauen, as hee did the women that sought him after hee was risen. If wee admonish, exhort, perswade, it is all one as if Christ should do it, who hath said: he that heareth you, heareth me. And in euery of these the sheepe of Christ heare his voyce, who is the great pastor of the sheepe, and not so much ours, and with Iohn, 10. the spouse of Christ saith: this is the voice of my welbeloued.
               
               4. Hereby the wisedom of God would giue vs to conceiue that seeing wee are taught by man; the one half (as ye Queen of Sebah spoke of Salomon) of the blessednesse prepared for them yt loue God is not, nor cannot while we liue here be made known to vs; seeing it cannot enter into the heart of man, much lesse be vttered with his tongue. And therfore we should raize vp our hearts after that blessed reuelation, wherein Christ himselfe shall become our teacher, and reueale The office of Angels is not to preach but to set men & protect them in Preaching. vnto vs our full happinesse.
               And further as the mercy, loue and wisedome of God hath established this ordinance, so also it will not be amisse in a word to see how hee hath euer

maintained this his owne order in his Church.
               And first the Angels haue another office designed them by God in the Church then to vsurpe the Ministry. And although the LORD imployed them in priuate messages vnto priuate persons; yet I remember not that euer in the publicke Ministry their office was to preach, but to set men on preaching, and preserue them in teaching: we read that they were to reueale from God to his Prophets some part of his will: which the Prophets were to deliuer to the Church, but the Church was not to depend on the ministry of the Angels but on ye Ministry of man. One Zach. 2.4. Angel commaundeth another to teach Zachary a prophecy which he must deliuer vnto the church concerning the building and repayring of the Citty and Temple, Go tell this young man. But nether of the Angels might publish this prophecie vnto the church.
               So the Eunuch sitting in his Chariot Act. 8. 26. reading the Scriptures and not knowing what hee read; an Angel sendeth Philip to teach him. But why

did not the Angel teach the Eunuch him-selfe? Was it because he could not? Or if he could might not hee in such an extraordinary time haue saued Philip that tedious iourney between Gaza & Azotus, which were distant a sunder about six & thirty miles? Yes hee could haue taught him, but hee would not, nor might not; but sendeth him an ordinary meanes, teaching vs that if there be a Philip wee must from him seek instruction, and not from the mouth of an Angel.
               In like manner an Angel in a vision Act, 16. 9. stood before Paul like a man of Macedonia, & praied him saying, come & helpe vs in Macedonia; which was a calling of Paul to teach that people in the way of God. But why did not the Angell him-selfe in whose mouth the Word would seem to carry much more authority, and who would haue beene much more respected then Paul; why doth not hee go and preach in Macedonia? Surely because it was as farre as his calling extended to set Paul to this businesse; and he would not meddle with a calling destinated vnto man.
               
                  
The Lord Jesus him-selfe when he vndertook that function in which hee declared himself the chiefe Doctor of his church; would first take flesh and become man; and in that flesh declare his fathers name to his brethren. To which purpose the Apostle saith: that God in these last daies hath spoken by his son: that is very familiarly by his son made man. Yea further when he was ascended into his glory, hee would from thence shew him-selfe powerfull to Paul to the casting him to the ground, to ye humbling Act, 9. 6. of his heart by terror & astonishment, and so to the preparing and fitting of him vnto instructiō: but when he comes to be taught he sendeth him into the Citty: he leaueth al yt function vnto Ananias. Wherin he expresly in his own example teacheth that it was his good pleasure that, that ministry of Pastors, and teachers which hee hadde a little before his ascension established in the Church, for the gathering together of his Saintes, for the worke of the Ministry and the edification of the body of Christ should bee inuiolably Eph, 4. 12, 13.
                  
preserued in the Church till his comming againe, wherein wee shall all meete together in the vnity of the faith and knowledge of the sonne of GOD, vnto a perfect man and vnto the measure of the age of the fulnesse of Christ.
               And lastly as we haue already sufficiently Vntrue that those who would bee taught by Angels would beleeue. shewed the folly of such who wil needs be wise aboue and against God, so also in one word the Scripture sheweth vs how false that is which they alledge. For those who haue Moyses and the Prophets and will not beleeue thē, neither would they beleeue if one shoulde come from the dead. So we say that those who will not beleeue the Lord speaking in our Ministery, lette an Angel come from heauen, lette a diuell come from hell, yet will they not beleeue. And the reason is plaine; because in the begetting of faith wee must not consider the maked word; but as it is ioyned and accompanied with the spirit of GOD whose worke properly it is. Now seeing that the spirit ordinarily worketh in the meanes

appointed by God; it followeth that who-soeuer despiseth the meanes in which the spirit worketh, wanteth that spirit of God which ordinarily worketh not without those meanes, which spirit so long as they want, they would not beleeue Angels nor men, dead nor liuing, neither Moses, nor the Prophets, Obiections of idle and lazie protestants. neither Peter nor Paul, no nor Christ himselfe if he were liuing againe vpō the face of the earth. And thus hauing somwhat more largely satisfied yt allegation, we come to take out of the wayes of two sorts of protestants such Lions as they faine, to lye betweene them and the Church. The former sort are idle and lazie Protestants, that are so farre from being at the cost of seeking and sending for the worde: that when it commeth to seeke them, and freely offereth it selfe vnto them; yet will they not disease them-selues to stirre ouer their threesholds for it. Saluation commeth almost euery day euen into their houses, but they by shutting it out of doores make themselues vnworthy of it, nay rather they will liue starke beggars, and die in their spirituall

pouertie, then receiue our treasures offred them freely. And truly too common is the experience of the lamentable fruites hereof in very many (in their owne and others account) Christians, whose hearts and loues are full fraught with noysome lusts threatning destruction; that the field of Salomons sluggard was neuer more ouer-growne with weedes and thistles, and nettles; then the thoughts and courses of these idle and sluggish Protestants with weedes of earthlinesse, voluptuousnesse, pride, enuie, atheisme, hypocrisie, and such other not a few, most noysome both for their sight, and sent vnto God and his people; and all is because their sinfull negligence suffereth them not to come vnder Gods pruning knife in the ministery of the word.
            
            
               
                  Ob. But that wee may see that idlenesse hath sewed her selfe some pillows to lay her head on; they alleadge it is an vnreasonable wearisome thing to bee tyed to two sermons euery Sabboth day, and perhaps to one beside in the weeke day: they know those (whom they trust to God come to heauen) and

yet haue sermons but once a moneth at the most, or once in the quarter, and one sermon well learned, were farre better then all this preaching.
            
            
               
                  Answ. To which I answer: first; if such men and women conceiued aright of this ordinance of God, and that in it the Lord of this great house had appointed vs his stewards to breake vnto his family the bread of life; they would bee farre enough from such prophane reasonings, sauouring so rankely of the flesh. For did wee euer heare a man in his wittes reason thus madly? why I hope wee may liue with a great many fewer meales, then two euery day. I hope to eate meate once in a moneth, or once in a quarter were very sufficient; and one meale well eaten were better then all these meales. Now if wee would thinke him mad that in earnest should thus reason against his life: how can wee thinke him any better, that vpon no other ground is resolued to starue his soule being his better part? which yet no lesse needeth his dayly bread then the bodye doth. The Iewes must go forth euery morning to

seeke Mannah, and to gather it; which they did cheerefully: for although they some-times vnthankfully fell out (like children with their meate,) yet it seemes they grudged not their labour of gathering it dayly: nay whereas they were commanded to gather it only on the sixe dayes, and in the sixt day double for it selfe and the seauenth, yet they runne out the seauenth day too, against the commandement to gather Exo. 16. 27. it. God might haue giuen them an haruest of Mannah once a yeare, as hee doth of graine vnto vs, or once a quarter, or once a moneth: but his wisdome saw it good to put them to more paines to gather it once a day. And wherefore? not onely because hee would haue them depend vpon him for their daily bread: but also because it was a type of Christ himselfe, who is that true bread which came downe from heauen: 
                  Ioh. 6. 48. whome both they and all beleeuers were dayly to hunger after, and dayly to seeke in such means as himselfe hath appointed: as whose obtaining and finding is well worth our dayly paines and industry. And surely the very Iewes

shall rise vp in iudgement against all such Christians who will bee at no paines to seeke and finde Iesus Christ the true bread of life, of whom whosoeuer tasteth hee shall liue for euer: whereas the other were so painfull, without reasonings to meete with that foode which was but a shadow leading vnto him: and of which our Sauiour saith; Your Fathers eate Mannah in the 
                  Ioh. 8. 49 
                  wildernesse and are dead.
               
               Secondly consider whether the ancient Ancient beleeuers at more pains then vve. beleeuers came to heauen so easily as our daintie Protestants meane to doe. Wee read that those who were to worship in the old Testament, must rise and get them out of their houses, and build altars vnto the Lord: they must bee both at paines and costes in the Gen. 12. 7. 8 & cap. 26. 25. & cap. 35. 3. seruice of their God. So did Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, and the Patriarches: and after them all the while that the ceremoniall law stood in force, euery male must thrice a yeare appeare before the Lord at Ierusalem, were his dwelling neuer so remote or distant from the temple: yea they could goe marching forward with-out fainting through

droughts and droppes, and would not giue ouer vntill they mette the Lord in Sion. Now if they tooke so much paines to seeke Christ in shadowes and obscurity in comparison; it is surely worth our double paines to enioy the substance, truth, and shining brightnesse of Christ, as at this day wee doe through the blessing of GOD in admirable euidence and clearenesse. But although the Lord hath granted vs liberty to make shorter cuttes, and neede not so tire out ourselues in wearie pilgrimage to seeke his face, this is our condemnation that wee will not scarce goe out of our doores to meete with our GOD. The Queene of Saba that measured so many miles to heare the wisdome of Salomon, shall certainely rise vppe in iudgement against our people, who hauing a greater then Salomon here, are so farre from admiring, that they despise and contemne his wisdome.
               But not to goe further in this point where bee the spirits of the faithfull martyrs of the former age, who haue passed the fire and water, and sword,

and banishment, and all to enioy our liberties, which a number of vs (their posteritie) count so slightly of as of the paring of our nailes?
               Yea, where are become our homeborne, and ancient professors, who in the beginnings of the Gospell haue accounted foure, sixe, tenne, or more miles, a small Sabboth dayes iourney to heare a Sermon? such sweetnesse they found in the word, such a sweete face of God they beheld in his house, that they would haue gone a foote, nay bare-foote, rather then haue missed of that comfort. Surely the Lord hath either taken away ancient professors without succession; or else our eyes doe see a fearefull apostacie.
               Thirdly, consider here whether euer any idolaters were so idle and secure Idolaters more painfull in their Idolatrie then we in the truth. in the worshippe of their false Gods, as many Christians professing the worshippe of the true GOD. And heere I might marshall the rankes of olde and latter ones, to whome no labours, no paines, no losses were accounted tedious or burdensome: euen while they offered

their sweat and bloud also in sacrifice to the Diuell. What shall I speake of those who mingled the pittifull cryes of their tender children with their Musicke, while they were cast into the fire to bee burnt vp in sacrifice vnto the idoll Molec? what of the trauells and paines of the Scribes and Pharisies, that would compasse sea and land to make a Proselite? What of Baals Priests lancing and cutting their flesh, before their idoll?
               The blinded Papists at this day whip them-selues, make their faces leane with fasting, waste and consume their bodies with tedious pilgrimages to see some dead and rotten bones, and visit some apish idolls: shall now these satanicall seruices bee so auaileable to harden the vnbeleeuer against any crosses and bitternesse; that they will refuse no paine to goe to hell? and shall not the Lords owne ordinances and true religion carry so much power with them, as to bring those who professe them-selues his people out of their gates to knowe the right waye to heauen?
               
                  
Fourthly what doth this heauinesse vnto these ordinances argue but hearts out of heart with the best desires? for what we loue and desire, no paines seemeth painfull for it. Many of these same persons will bee well content to toyle day by day, fare hard, breake their sleepe, eate the bread of carefulnesse; & all to lay a little money and wealth together; and some-times they scarce knowe for whome: and yet all this paines from day to day, is but a pleasure vnto them, because their hearts and affections are carryed vnto and set vpon things below. In like manner did the loue of God and Christ take vp the heart of any man (as euery member of the true Church is sicke of this loue) the sweetnesse of the exercises of religion, in which it is more and more conueyed into beleeuing soules, would bee sweeter then wine: that is, then most tastefull outward delights. Nay this loue would shew it selfe stronger then death, nothing Cant. 8. 6. but death (if death it selfe) can dissolue it; much water cannot quench it, many floods cannot drowne it▪
                  
that is; Many crosses, afflictions, trialls cannot vtterly ouer-come or extinguish it. Yea a mans whole substance will bee contemned in regarde of it. This sparckle of heauenly fire and seruencie will constraine a man, to cleaue vnto the Lord in his ordinance, and groweth in time to such a burning desire of the glory of God as is able to carry a man beyond himselfe, yea euen to consume him, as Dauids zeale to Gods house did consume him.
               And would to God all such secure Christians would at length begin to A glasse for secure christians to see their danger. conceiue of their danger, which is fearfull to such eyes as can behold it. For first, they are for the present destitute of the spirit of God, and so of all sauing graces, and lye vnder a fearefull damnation. Which truth is euident, in that wheresoeuer the spirit of God delighteth to dwell, there hee stirreth vp the heart to some good measure of cheerefulnesse in well-dooing, and keepeth it in a readinesse, and preparednesse to euery good worke. For the office of the spirit is not onely to enlighten the eye of the soule, that it can behold

the beauties of Gods house, which it could neuer prie into before: but also to worke the will, and make it of vnwilling a willing wil. So as if before the presence of the spirit a man were as loth to heare, pray, read, as a Beare to the stake; now he is changed by that spirit which will not be idle: and is become a man wanting often power and abilitie; but to wil that which is good is present with him: the reasonings of the flesh, are partly subdued: the vnreadinesse which foiled his good duties before is in part foiled, & according to the measure of knowledge and faith, is the measure of his obedience daily increased: which things whosoeuer: hee bee that findeth them not in himselfe, hee hath not the spirit of Christ, and consequently is none of his.
               2. They are lead by the spirit of sathan who ruleth in the hearts of the disobedient, whose old pollicie it is by this very perswasion of ease, to keepe such from the pure worship of God, as hee would make seruiceable in all manner of vnrighteousnesse. When the Lord had commanded all Israell that

they should appeare before him to worship him in spirit and truth at Ierusalem: the diuell deuised a tricke, of which hee made Ieroboam his instrument, 1. King. 12. 28. which indeed turned to the corruption of all the ten tribes with most horrible idolatrie. He pitties the paines of the people; and it is too much for you to goe up to Ierusalem. It is a more Vers. 27. easie course and cutte to make two Calues, and set vp one at Dan, and an other at Bethel, and worship there. By this argument drawne from their ease, hee wonne all the people of God from their allegeance and seruice of their true GOD, to the worship of two Calues: and yet all was but out of pollicie, for hee feared if the people should goe to Ierusalem to worship, that their hearts would bee turned to their LORD euen to Rehoboam. Euen so the Diuell hauing taken captiue vnder his power such as are wilfullye departed from GOD, hath no waye to keepe them vnder his girdle, but by keeping them from sacrifizing at Ierusalem, hee feareth if they should diligentlye frequent

the holy assemblies, and ioyne with other of the people of GOD in the word, prayer and Sacraments, that by this meanes they would returne to their naturall Lord. And therefore hee dayly suggesteth and perswadeth them to fauour them-selues, it is too great paines to goe to Church, you can pray at home, read at home, goe some time to Church to auoyde danger of lawe, and reproche of men, and it is enough. And as hee then preuailed, that the people went euen to Dan, so at this day, a number make Chappels of ease of their owne houses; others can pray as well (as their horses I had like to haue sayd, but) on their horse backes, as in the Church, whom for my part I can easily beleeue.
               3. They haue a seale of perdition vpon them, whosoeuer forsake carelesly the assemblies of Gods people here in earth, they shall certainely bee seperated from them, when too late they shal wish they had been wiser then to haue accounted their wayes foolish. Let vs not forsake our fellowship as the manner 
                  Heb. 10. 25 
                  of some is, saith the holy Apostle.
               
                  
Why what danger is there now and then to keepe from Church, I hope we may bee good Christians for all that? The Apostle tells vs a reason, because this is a with-drawing of our selues to 
                  Verse. 39. 
                  perdition. It is to walke in the high waye to destruction. And indeede what other can such sworne enimies of Christ looke for, when cold Christians are sent away with such colde comforte euen from the dooing of those duties, which the other eyther neglect or contemne? for if the Lord threatneth his people, that although they might serue him in some outward seemely sorte, yet if they did it not with cheerefulnesse, and a good 
                  Deut. 28. 47. 
                  heart, they should serue their enemies: if such shall bee sent away with a cursse on their heads, can such as will neither haue part nor fellowship in this businesse, euer looke to bee heyres of blessing? Let them repent therefore of these their wickednesse, and praye GOD, that if it bee possible, the thought of their hearts may bee forgiuen them.
               
               Lastly, what paines takest thou

here but for thine owne profit? thinke not that thy godlinesse benefiteth Thy paints in religion profiteth thy selfe, not God. GOD, but thy owne selfe: as thy Atheisme hurteth not him but thy owne soule. Thou hereby bringest thy selfe where thou mayest beholde the face of thy GOD, whereby thy paines is plentifully returned with recompence. This face of God when it was yet vayled, did so draw the hearts of ancient beleeuers, that neither distance of place, nor difficultie of way, nor tediousnesse of weather, nor weaknesse or wearinesse of body could with-holde them from the beholding of in the place where hee had put his name.
               And is the sight of the face of the Lord so happilye vncouered in our Ministerie, not worth the paines of looking vpon? thy paines in this behalfe may entitle thee to all the priuiledges of Gods people before mentioned. And if those were not inough for thee, yet the God whom thou seekest (if thou so seeke him as hee is found of thee) hee is liberall and louing inough to make thy cup to runne

ouer aboundantly aboue all that wee haue spoken or can thinke, and though all thy seruice is but dutie and farre vnder that, yet the LORD will not take thy labour for naught. Hee challengeth the seruants in his Temple, whether euer any of them did so much as open the doores, or Malac. 1. 10 kindle a fire for sacrifice freely and without wages; no hee allowed them liberallye for such vnder-seruices. How then may wee thinke will hee requite such as are continually about him in his eye, and still behold his face in the presence-Chamber of his Church?
               The latter sorte, which is also the last of which wee propounded to speake, are timerous and fearefull Christians, who thinke it better sleeping in a sound skinne, then in a sound conscience: and because this diligent frequenting of the Church, which we call them vnto, is not without some reproche among the prophane and wicked Ob. of the world: they are lothe to pull their warme hands out of their bosome to sette to this Ploughe.

They will not in such a way as men coūt 
                  Timerous & fearfull protestants 
                  haeresie; or Praecisenes serue the God of their fathers, they will keepe an euen course and a good report while they haue it, and Sermon-gadders, and Sermon-mongers they will not bee counted.
               
                  Ans. Weerevnto I answer that as it is not amisse to cast our costes aforehand, yet must wee so lay our counters as that we desist not from building vppon our foundation: & in casting these costes wee cannot say that this course is exempted from reproch: Nay seeing Satans mallice is no whit abated neither in him-selfe, nor in his instruments, wee affirme that there cannot a childe so soone be borne into the Church, but the Dragon standeth before the woman to bee deliuered, to deuoure her childe so soone as euer it is brought forth: and if he cannot do that, he casteth out of his 
                  Reu, 12. 4. 16. 
                  mouth water like a flood, that she might bee carryed away of the flood. But yet the comfort is they are the rebukes of Heb, 11. 26 & cap, 13. 13. of Christ, both because they are vttered against him: hee accounteth them as against himself & he helpeth his seruants

to beare them, becommeth a porter putting vnder his shoulder, as also disburdeneth no lesse displeasure against thē then if they were done against his own person. And this is rather a matter of reioycing, to partake of Christs sufferings yea, it is a peece of the blessednesse 
                  1 Pet, 
                        •
                     . 13. 14. & 2. 
                  of Christians to suffer for well doing and to bee railed vppon for Christes sake: And therefore a Christian must with Moyses esteeme these rebukes of Christ his greatest riches, although hee hadde the treasures of a Kingdome before him; else will hee neuer bee able to hold out vnto the end of his saluation: Neuer therefore professe the name of Christ into which thou art baptized, if thou beest ashamed of it before men, neuer professe loue to Christ any longer, if thou canst not indure a word for his sake; neuer professe, so fast to cleaue vnto him that thou wilt rather die with him then deny him, if thou beest Meanes against the former feare. affraid of euery damosels speach, putte on humility of heart that thou maist bee contented with abasement for his sake; that if any Michal shall mocke thee in thy reioycing before the Lord

thou maist resolue that thou wilt yet bee more vilde; indure more lashes of the tongue, and more forrowes then soe, if GOD call thee vnto it, rather then misse of such comfortes and matter of true ioy as before the Lord thou maist meete withall. And pray for courage and resolution to hold thee on, vndaunted in thy godly course. And seeing thou maist bee bolde so long as thou haste a good cause and a good conscience, putte on Nehem, 6. 10. 11. the spirit of that worthy Nehemiah. When hee had a prophecy (though a false one) that if hee did not take the Temple for his sanctuary that night, the enemies would come and slay him: his answer was: shoulde such a man as I flee? who is hee that beeing as I am would goe into the Temple to liue? I will not goe in. So should such a man as I who professe the Ghospel, who haue giuen my name to Christ, who knowe the Commaundement of GOD, and that this is the beaten way to heauen; troden by all such seete as euer walked in faith and obedience; should such a one as I forsake the assemblyes

of Gods people? And that for the blasts of such as are of satans sinogogue: If it stood vppon my whole estate, my liberty, and losse of life it selfe, I would not doe it. I know whatsoeuer men accoumpt of mee whose corrupt iudgements would condemn euen the innocency of Christ him-selfe if hee liued againe vpon the earth, if hee should bee dilligent at Sermons, yet seeing ye Lord hath honoured mee so highly as to become one of his houshold; and seeing his word doth iustifie my waies & my dilligence in his house, I am at a poynt, I care not what man can say, I feare nothing hee can doe against me. I haue a soule to saue, I must looke to that.
               3. Vse. If our hearts delight be in these Reioyce that others inioy these liberties with vs. assemblies, then wee cannot but breake out into the praise of God where euer we see these ordinances established: we cannot but reioyce when others inioy them with vs as beeing the meanes by which men are redeemed vnto God, and made Kinges and Priestes vnto him. If Dauid were aliue againe he would lead vs ioifully to Church. Of whom we neuer read that he danced but before the

Arke. The Communion of Saints cannot but cause and raize our hearty reioycing for the greatest good which can befall the Church.
               Now what is yt greatest blessednesse that God him-selfe can either promise or performe to the sonnes of men liuing in earth? surely euen this, to set his tabernacle amongst men, to dwell with them; & 
                  Leu, 26. 11. 12. 
                  become their God. This is the knitting vppe of all his mercies.
               But what speake I of the Saints vpon earth, seeing the Saints in heauen make it the matter of their heauenly songes, that out of all kindreds and tongues, Reu, 5. 9. and people, and nations, men are redeemed vnto God. Dost thou see the desolate haue children as well as the marryed wife? Dost thou see the truth of the church inlarged? seest thou ye 
                  coūtries of 
                  Isa, 54. 1. 2. 
                  hir habitatiō spred out? Perceiuest yu the increase of her on the right hand and on the left? Examine here whether thy heart breaketh forth into holy reioycings, in that the barres are put into the rings of the Arke, whereby the glory of the Lord, after a sort walketh amongst his people; in that heauen is filling apace,

by the accomplishing of yt number of the elect, & in yt the comming of lesus Christ hastneth for the final redemption of his body. Til thou findest this yu hast not found that affectiō of the Prophet heere commended vnto thee.
               2. The truth of this affection will make vs call others to haue their parts Call others herevnto with vs in these priuiledges. The Prophet Dauid though he was a King yet became such an humble companion of all them that feared the Lord, that hee Psal. 12 2. 1. thought it no disgrace to bee called by his people to ye Tabernacle. Some great Kings would haue thought it no great pollicy to haue giuen answer to such popular motions: or if hee had seene his people go, it were ynough as for himselfe he might haue greater matters in hand. But oh how doth religion beate downe high conceits! And maketh euen Kings take the Kingdome of God like little children? Dauid disdained not, but reioiced when they said to him Come let vs go to the house of the Lord. He lost no honor; no it was his truest honor in the eies of God, and hearts of his people; yt he gaue them contentmēt and incouragement, in such an honorable

motion as yt was. Faith in the heart will not so retire it selfe, but it will bee kindling, & calling on others: whence it is that we read in so many places of the Prophers, yt when people are conuerted to the faith, these voices should be soū
                  ded from thē. Up let vs go & pray before the Lord & seek the Lord of hoasts; I wil 
                  Zach, 8, 21. Isay, 2. 2. Micca, 4. 1. 
                  go also: And, vp let vs go to the mountaine of the Lord, to the house of the God of Iacob & he wil teach vs his waies, and wee wil walk in his paths: but especially it forceth Especially their owne family. vs to bring our own families carefully to ye place of worship, as those for whom we must bee more countable: it bringeth vs to yt holy resolution of Ioshua: that although none wil ioin with vs in such waies; let them at their perill do as seemeth them good: our selues and Iosh, 24. 15. our housholds wil serue the Lord.
               
                  Vse. 4. If our chief delight be in the A meane estate with these liberties to bee preferred before a better with out them. assemblies of Gods people, then wee cannot but prefer a meane outward estate with the fruition of the exercises of religion before a wealthy and glorious conditiō in the want of them: as our Prophet here preferred the meanest office, euen of doore-keepers, who were to be first, & last in ye tabernacle, before

a glorious and easie life in the Pallaces of the mighty in which hee should bee deteyned from the places of Gods worship. Euen so whosoeuer would carry such an heart as Dauid (who was a man according vnto the Lords owne heart) must esteeme of a poore life vnder a powerfull Ministry, more happy and comfortable, then a rich condition in places of ignorance, which want the meanes of their spiritual consolation. Moyses was of this minde he would rather suffer (aduersity, want, reproch,) with the people of GOD, then inioy the treasures of Egypt by forsaking them.
               It was also alwaies a mark of ye people of God to follow him into the places of his true worshippe, where hee went Heb, 11. before. If in Shiloh, if in Ierusalem; thither do all the Tribes repaire, euen such as set their face to seeke the Lord. But how do men proclaime that this reioycing 2 Chro, 11. 16. neuer entred into their hearts, who with Lot chuse Sodom before Canaan, and delight rather in the Mountains of Samaria then in Sion hil which indeed is the fruitfull part of the earth?

Some choose habitations for friends, ayre, waters, woods, walkes, fruitfulnesse, and some other speciall commodities, and hence commend them and there seate themselues and set downe their staffe, although Gods habitation be not there: the Ministrie is counted as an hang-by: if that bee there they count it neuer the better; if it be absent it is neuer a whit the worse, they care but a little too liue in the common ayre of Gods people, the familiaritie of Gods friends, the pleasures of Gods house, the sweete fruites of the spirit of God are not enquired after, nor tasted. Others retaine to atheists, scorners, papists; swearers, and if Peter can warme himselfe still by Caiphas fire hee can sweare and forsweare as they doe. They neuer aske themselues that question which the Lord asked Eliah, What doost thou here Eliah? they say not, what doe 1. King. 19. 9. I here in this caue? this is not a place where I should bee, to liue where the Diuell dwelleth, or where God dwelleth Reu. 2. 13. not: they heare not the Lords voyce speaking to them as vnto Eliah. Vp, get thee to Sarepta, I haue appointed there 
                  1. Kin. 17. 9.
                  
                  one to feed thee: They are well content to be fed by Rauens still. But here is a fearefull brand vpon such who are contented to make exchange of heauen for earth, and haue resolued that they will be gainers in the world, though it bee to the losse of their soules. Whosoeuer therfore thou art, yt hast any care of thy soule; neuer liue if it be possible vnder an idoll, but where the worde is setled, and the ministery duly discharged. Buy the truth whatsoeuer it cost, yea with the losse of many outward things: be a meanes to thy abilitie to procure a standing Ministry to thy selfe & thine: what comfort couldst thou haue to liue and dwell in a wildernesse among wild beasts, without men, or other comforts, in such a barren soile as no paines can ouer-come the inuincible stifnesse of the ground? and yet in such a place were it more comfortable for a godly heart to liue, then amongst a wicked people wanting meanes of grace and instruction. And if thou wouldst dwell in the loueliest part of the earth; choose such a place as which the Lord hath chosen to manifest his presence in, and

wherein hee hath set his tabernacle. The tribe of Beniamin was of all the tribes the beloued of the Lord, as Beniamin 
                  Deu. 33. 12 Gen. 44. 20 himselfe was the dearest to his father. But wherein consisted this louelinesse? in this, that the Lord should dwell betweene his shoulders. In which Metaphor the whole possession of Beniamin is compared to a body; and the metropolitane, which was Ierusalem, to the head set betweene two shoulders, in which the Lord delighted to dwell. If any place therefore in earth should draw our affections aboue others, it is that in which the Lord in his ordinances draweth nearest vnto vs: and if our delights bee in the places where the Lord delighteth not to shew the presence of his grace, our affections come short of our example here commended vnto vs. The face of God shining in his ordinance must be our Naomi, to which we must say, Where thou goest I will go, and where thou dwellest 
                  Ruth. 1. 16 
                  I will dwell.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   