
      
         
            
            True louing Sorow, attired in a Robe of vnfeigned Griefe, presented vpon occasion of the much bewailed Funerall of that Gracious and Illustrious Prince Lewis Steward Duke of Richmond and Linox, Eearle of Newcastle and Darnely, Lord of Torbolton and Methuen, Baron of Settrington, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, Lord high Admirall, and great Chamberlaine of Scotland, Lord high Steward to the Kings most excellent Maiesties most Honourable Houshold, Gentleman of his Maiesties Bed-Chamber, and one of his Maiesties most Honourable Priuy Councell for England and Scotland; Who departed this life at White-Hall on Thursday the 12. of February, whose Obsequies were solemnly and Princely Celebrated, on Munday the 19. of April, described in forme as f
                  •
               lloweth. Dedicated generally to all his worthy Friends, and louing Seruants; and particularly to that trusty and well-beloued Seruant of his Arthur Neassmith.
            
            
               ANd first my Muse findes, that his Graces name
               Significantly makes an Annagram.
               
                  LEWIS STEWARDE, Annagram VERTV IS WEL EAS'D.
               
               His Vertues such continuall paines did take
               For King and Country, Church and peoples sake:
               That for Earths courtly toyle, to him 'twas giuen
               His UERTU IS WEL EAS'D i'the Court of Heauen.
            
            
               GReat God, that to thyselfe wilt take thine owne
               By sundry wayes, and meanes to Man vnknowne,
               Whose Eye of prouidence doth still perceiue
               When, where, why, who to take, or else to leaue,
               Whose mercy, and whose Iustice equall are,
               Both Infinite, to punish or to spare,
               All men doe know, that men to dye are borne,
               And from the Eearth, must to the Earth returne.
               But Time and Circumstance coniecture may,
               For some great cause thou took'st this Duke away.
               Amongst vs lurkes so many a foule offence,
               Which giues thee cause to take good men from hence:
               And that this Prince was Good as well as Great,
               
               His life and timelesse losse doth well repeat.
               Deuout and zealous to his God aboue:
               True to his King, as did his seruice proue:
               Discreet in Counsell, Noble in his minde,
               Most Charitably, Honourably kinde.
               So Affable, so Hopefull vnto all,
               And so Repleat with vertues generall,
               That we may say, this Land in losing Him:
               
               Hath lost a gratious Peere, a prop, a limbe.
               It must be true, that well he spends his dayes,
               Whose actions doe attaine all peoples praise:
               And surely I suppose he doth not liue,
               Who of this Duke a bad report can giue.
               So full endu'd he was of all good parts,
               With noble Courtesie he wan all hearts,
               To loue and honour his admired minde
               So well adicted, and so well enclinde,
               That as a Diamond in Gold transfixt
               His vertues with his Greatnesse was so mixt,
               That he as one of an immortall Race
               Made Vertue vertuous, and gaue Grace to grace.
               Then since his goodnes, was so generall,
               The losse of him is Gen'rall vnto all:
               This being true, let's recollect our spirits
               And weigh his worth, with our vnworthy merits;
               And then our frailties truly will confesse
               God tooke him hence for our vnworthinesse:
               
                  Death was in Message from th'Almighty sent
               To summon him to Heau'ns high Parlament,
               
               He chang'd his Gracious Title transitorie,
               And (by the grace of God) attain'd true Glory;
               And as his King had his integritie;
               So did the Commons share his Clemency,
               Which was so pleasing to his Makers sight,
               That Bounteously he did his life requite
               That Lambe-like, mildely hence he tooke him sleeping,
               To his Eternall euer-blessed keeping.
               Thus as his name includes, so God is pleas'd
               (From worldly sorrowes) VERTV IS WEL EAS'D.
               
               No sicknesse or no phisicke made him languish,
               He lay not long in heart-tormenting anguish,
               But as Gods feare was planted in his brest,
               So at his Rest, God tooke him to his Rest.
               When like a good Tree, laden full of fruit,
               Of Grace, of Vertue, Honour, and Repute:
               Euen in his best estate, too good for Earth,
               Then did his soule put on a second Birth.
               And though his part of fraile mortality,
               In Monumentall Marble here doth lie:
               Yet thousands weeping soules, with deepe laments,
               As his most wofull mourning Monuments,
               I daily see, whose visages doe show
               That He's inter'd within their hearts below;
               Whose faces seemes an Epitaph to beare,
               That men may Reade who is intombed there.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        Epitaph.
                        GOod, Gratious, Great, Richmond and Linox Duke,
                        God, King, and Countries seruant here doth lye;
                        Whose liuing Merits merit no rebuke,
                        For whose liues lesse lamenting Memory,
                        Our hearts are groning Graues of grieses and cares,
                        Which when we die, wee'le leaue vnto our heires.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Me thinkes the Sable Mourners did appeare,
               As if in forme they numbring Figures were;
               As 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9.
               Whilst all that view'd, like Ciphers did combine
               Their mourning with the Mourners to vnite,
               Which made their Lamentations infinite.
               And Infinite are now his Ioyes Aboue
               With the Eternall God of peace and loue:
               Where for a mortall Dukedome he hath wonne,
               (Through boundlesse merits of th'Almighties Sonne)
               A Kingdome that's immortall, where he sings
               Perpetuall praise vnto the King of Kings.
               Thus what the Earth surrendred, Heau'n hath seaz'd
               Most blest LEWIS STEWARDE, UERTU IS WEL EAS'D.
               
            
            
               The manner of the Funerall.
               Eight Conductors with black staues, and poore Gownes, 100.
               Seruants to Gentlemen and Esquires in Cloakes 50.
               Seruants to Knights, 46.
               Seruants to Baronets, 10.
               Three Trumpeters.
               Then came the Standard borne by Sir Gerrard Samms
                   Knight, accompanied with an Officer of Armes.
               The first Horse couered with blacke cloth garnished with Scutchions, Shaffron and Plumes led by a groome.
               Here went Seruants to Barons youngor Sons, and some others of like qualitie in number 15.
               The seruants to Knights of the priuy Councell, 30.
               Seruants to Earles younger sonnes, 24.
               Seruants to Viscounts eldest Sons, 6.
               Then the Schollers of Westminster in Gownes and Surplises, their Masters following in mourning Gownes.
               Three Trumpeters.
               The Guidon borne by Sir Andrew Boyd Knight, accompanied with an Officer of Armes.
               The second Horse led by a Groome, and furnished as the former.
               Barons seruants 60.
               Bishops Seruants 10.
               Earles eldest Sonnes seruants, 15.
               Viscounts Seruants, 10.
               Marquesses eldest Sonnes seruants.
               3. Trumpers.
               The Banner of the augmentation borne by a Knight, accompanied with an Officer of Armes.
               The third Horse led by onother Groome of his Graces Stable furnished as the others. Earles seruants: Marquesses and Dukes seruants, The Lord Priuie-Seales seruants.
               
                  
                     
                        President of the Councel,
                        Seruants.
                     
                     
                        Lord Thresurors,
                     
                     
                        Lord Keepers,
                     
                     
                        And Lord Archbishops,
                     
                  
               
               3. Trumpets. The, Banner of Steward, borne by Sir Iohn Steward accompanied with an Officer of Armes.
               The 4. Horse led by a Yeomen of his Graces Stable furnished as the other.
               Seruants to his Grace in Cloakes: Officers to his Grace in Gownes.
               3. Trumpeters.
               The Banner of Steward and the augmentation quartered with it borne by a Baronet accompanied with a Herald of Armes.
               The fist Horse led by a Yeoman of his Graces Stable furnished as the former.
               Serieants of seuerall Offices in his Maiesties House, and other Esquires, his Maiesties Seruants of good quality. The Gentlemen of his Maiesties Chappell in Surplices and rich Copes, the Sergeant of the Vestry accompaning them. Chaplaines. Doctors of Physicke. Doctors of Diuinity. Knights. Gentlemen of the Priuie Chamber. Gentlemen of the Bed-Chamber to the Prince. Baronets. Barons younger Sonnes. Knights of the Priuie Councell. Viscounts eldest Sonnes. A veluet Cushen carried by an Esquire, The Comptroller, Treasurer, Steward, and Chamberlaine to his Grace, bearing white Staues. Barons of Ireland, Scotland, and England. Bishops. Earles eldest Sonnes Viscounts. Earles of Scotland, and England. The Duke of Lennox eldest Sonne. The Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. The Mace, The Purse, The Lord Keeper Preacher. Sergeant Trumpetter, and foure Trumpets. The Great Banner borne by an Earles Sonne, accompanied with an Herald. The chiefe Mourning Horse couered with blacke Veluet, and garnished with Eschochens of Taffata, with Shaffron and Plumes led by Mr. 
                     Hatton Clauell. His Graces Hatchiuements borne as followeth. The Gauntlets and Spurres, the Helme and Crest, and the Sword borne by three Heralds. The Targe and Coat of Armes, borne by two Kings of Armes. Then the liuely Effigies or represention of his Grace, drawne in a Chariot by sixe goodly Horses garnished as the former, couered with a Canopie of blacke Veluet, the Pall supported by two Earles Sonnes, and two Marquises Sonnes. The Footmen going on each side the Chariot and likewise to small Banners, carried by to Knights, 5. of Scotland, and 5. of England round about the Chariot, two principall Gent. riding at his head and feet in the said Chariot. Then followed Garter principall King of Armes accompanied with a Gent. Vsher who went bare headed. The Duke of Lennox chiefe Mourners. The L. Treasurer, & L. President of the Councell, his supporters. 10. Other assistants. The L. Priuie Seale, and D. of Buckingham. The Marquis Hamilton, and Earle Marshall. The L. Chamberlaine of his Maiest. House, and the E. of Sussex. The E. of Southampton, and E. of Essex. The E. of Salisbury, and E. of Exceter. The Mr. of the Horse to his Grace in close mourning, leading the Horse of Honor, most richly furnished. Thus past, this sad Shew from his Graces House in Holborne to Westminster, where the Funerall Rites being solemnly ended, his Graces liuely Effiges, was left in the Abbey of St. Peter vnder a Rich Hearse.
            
            Iohn Taylor.
         
      
      
         
            Printed for Henry Gosson. 1624.
         
      
   