
      
         
            
            
            Of the Imitation of CHRIST,
            Three, both for wisedome, and godlines, most excellent bookes; made 170. yeeres since by one THOMAS of KEMPIS, and for the worthines thereof oft since translated out of Latine into sundrie languages by diuers godlie and learned men: now newlie corrected, translated, and with most ample textes, and sentences of holie Scripture illustrated by THOMAS ROGERS.
            Iohn. 14, 16.
            I am the waie, the truth, and the life.
            Mark. 8, 34.
            Whosoeuer wil folowe me, let him forsake himselfe, and take vp his crosse, and folowe me.
            1. Cor. 11, 1.
            Folowe me, as I folowe Christ.
            Imprinted at London, by Henrie Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the signe of the Starre.
            
               Cum priuilegio Regie Maiestatis.
            
         
         
            
            DOMINO THOMAE BROMLAEO, EQVITI AVRATO, NON MINVS EGREGIA PIETATIS, MORVM, AC LITERARVM LAVDE, QVAM SVMMI IN ANGLIA CANCELLARIATVS AMPLITVDINE ILLVSTRI; THOMAS ROGERIVS HOS VERE QVIDEM AVREOS DE CHRISTO IMITANDO LIBELLOS, A SE E LATINO CONVERSOS, CASTIGATOS, ET VARIIS, AC MVLTIPLICIBVS SS. SCRIPTVRAE SENTENTIIS INSIGNITOS, IN GRATI ANIMI TESTIMONIVM CONSECRAVIT.
         
         
            
            The first Epistle of the Translator touching Christian imitation in general, to the faithful Imitators of our Sauior Christ in England, S.
            
               WHO entereth intoMa
                     •
                   by nature is giuen to imitation. a due consideration of mans nature, shal easilie perceaue that most stranglie it is addicted vnto Imitation; and, though in truth, we should liue by lawes not by examples, that examples doe more mou
                  •
               , than doe lawes. Seruants in a familie; soldiers in an armie; subiects in a Common-weale maie confirme what I saie. For seruants wil imitate their maisters; soldiers their capitaines; subiects their gouernors Ecclus. 10 verse. 2., be they good, be they bad, yea get they praise or get they infamie, profit or hurt therebie: thinking their liues to be a lawe; and that to be wel done which is done after their example Hieron. in Epist. ad Heliodo..
            1. Wherebie I note, first, that they

should haue great regard vnto themselues, who are anie waie, either for birth, or for office, or for calling, whether it be spiritual or temporal better than other men. For they cannot sinne without great hurt, and danger to the Common-weale saie I of them, as once spake Cicero of iudges Cic. act. 2. in Vetrem.. Whence it is, that mightie men shal mightilie be tormented 
               Wisd. 6, 6..
            2 Secondlie, that, seing our nature is such, we are to take special heede whome we folowe, or imitate. For euerie one maie not be folowed; neither shal the vngodlie behauior of others excuse vs before God. For we must al appeare before the iudgement seate of Christ 2. Cor. 5, verse. 10. Reu. 22, 12. to receiue according to our owne deeds 
               Ps. 62, 12. Mat. 16, 27. Rom. 2, 6.. The licentious life of the Magistrate shal not quite the subiect, if he liue not vnder lawes; nor the wickednes of maisters excuse the seruant, if he be vngratious; nor the il conuersation of the preacher, be a cause to saue the hearer, if he be vngodlie. For that soule that sinneth, be he what he be maie, shal die 
               Ezec. 18, verse. 4..
            The precept therefore which is giuenWho are to be folowed. to an imitator of Orators, I could wish were folowed of a Christian Imitator. In oratorie imitation two sortes of examples

there be: one alwaies, and most necessarie to be folowed 
                  Sturmius in ca. 1. lib. sui de Imitat. Orat. Oratorie Imitation. Demost. Cicero. Poēts. Historiographers. Christian imitation. Christ alwaies to be folowed. Good mē but sometime and in somethings to be folowed, and why; Foure sorts of examples of good men mentioned in the holie Scripture., the other but sometime and in somethings. The example alwaies necessarilie to be folowed of an Orator is among the Graecians Demosthenes, Cicero among the Latins: they who are but sometime, and in some things to be folowed, are Poëts and Historiographers.
            So in Christian imitation two sortes of examples there be: one to be folowed and that both necessarilie, and alwaies, which is our Sauior Christ; the other but sometime and in some things, as are good men and women, whether they be aliue or dead.
            Strange perhaps it maie seeme, that the good but sometime and in some things should be imitated. Yet is it not so strange as true. For euerie example of theirs may not be folowed of vs. For the better conceauing whereof it is to be noted that foure sortes of examples, yea of the elect, and righteous we maie reade of in the holie Scriptures.
            1 The first we maie behold to imitate: as Abrahams faith Gen. 15, 5. 6. Rom. 4, 9. 10, &c.; Iosephs chastitie Gen. 39, 7 8. 9, &c.; Dauids zeale Psalme. 119, 14, 20, &c.; Tobias pitifulnes toward the poore Tobit. 1, 16. 17. 18. Tob. 2, 2. 3. 4.; and such like wherewith the Bible is most singularlie replenished.

These are set before vs, that we should not be slothful, but folowers of them Heb. 6, 12 which through faith & patience inherite the promises.
            
            2 Other examples there be which are wicked: as the incredulitie of Moses and Aaron Nomb. 20 verse. 12. Nomb. 27, verse. 14. Deut. 32, 51 52.; the adulterie of Dauid 2. Sam. 11 verse. 2. 3. 4. 5.; Peters denial Matt. 26, verse. 69. 70, &c.; the ambition of the Apostles Luke. 22, verse. 24. 25, &c. &c. which are placed before vs, but for diuers ends. First to keepe vs from that vane opinion which in these daies hath mightilie crept into the minds of manie, that the elect and regenerate sinne not. For that ech of these, yea and al these too were elected, I thinke the most fantastical wil not denie, and yet that they sinned in most 
                  •
               ainous manner is apparent.
            Secondlie to make vs the more warelie to looke vnto our footing. For, if they so highlie in Gods fauor, & so singularlie adorned with his heauenlie giftes, did fal and defile themselues so filthilie with sin, with what great feare and trembling ought we to make an end of our saluation Phil. 2. 12., who are nothing comparable in spiritual gifts vnto them; least as God either punished (as he did Moses Deut. 34, verse. 1, &c. 4. 5., Aaron Nomb. 20 verse. 25. 26. Nomb. 33, verse. 38., and Dauid 2. Sam. 12 verse. 10. 11. 2. Sam. 16, verse. 22. with temporal punishment) or reproued (as Peter Lu. 22, 61., and the Apostles Mar. 10, 42 Luk. 22, 25. 26, &c.) them to their amendment:

so he punish vs eternalie to our vtter confusion!
            Thirdlie, though we sinne, that we neither go on foreward, and proceede in wickednes, nor despaire of Gods mercie, no more than they did. For the Lord is rich ouer al Ro. 10, 12 that cal vpon him, & repent. Therefore ought no man to despaire. For it is a true saieng 1. Tim. 1, verse. 15. and by al meanes worthie to be receaued, that Christ Iesus came into the world to saue sinners 
               Matth. 9, verse. 13. Mark. 2, 17., wherebie manie haue attained mercie, vnto the ensample of them 1. Tim. 1, verse. 16. which shal in time to come beleeue on him vnto eternal life.
            
            Last of al they are set before vs to this ende, that as God is merciful; so should we be Luk. 6, 36.. And as he is readie to receaue such into fauor as repent Luke. 15, verse. 20. 21. Ecclus. 2, verse. 18. 19. 20. 21.: so should we be merciful towards al men Matt. 18, verse. 21. 22. Matt. 5, 44. Luke. 17, 3. 4., that in his iudgement, we maie find mercie Matt. 5, 7.. Wherbie certaine both Heretikes, as the Catharans, or Nouatians, who taught that none which sinned after they were regenerate, could be saued Cypr. lib. 4. Epist. 2. Epist. Euseb. lib. 2. cap. 43.; and Atheists, as Machiauel, & his fauorers, who think that iniuries receaued should neuer be forgiuen Theorem. 6. lib. 3. Cō
                  ment. cōtra Machiauel. page. 314. 315. 316, &c., are confuted.
            3 Other things were wel done by good men in times passed, which in these daies

cannot be folowed of vs without offence to God. As they circumcised their male children the eight daie Leu. 12, 2, 3., which is vnlawful for vs to do Actes. 15, verse. 1. 5, &c. Gal. 5, 1.; they offered sundrie, and manie sacrifices, I meane blodie sacrifices, vnto the Lord Leuit. 17, verse. 3. 4, &c. Leui. 22, 17. 18. 19, &c., we maie not so do Coloss. 2, verse. 20. Hebr. 9, 1. Heb. 10, 1. 2, &c.; one brother in those daies married the wife of another Deut. 25, verse. 5. 6, &c. Ruth. 4, 3. Mat. 22, 24. 25, &c. Mar. 12, 19. 20, &c., so to marrie now were incest.
            4 Finalie some deedes we maie read of which were singular, such as neither we may, nor others in those days might folow without the special and extraordinarie motion of the holie Spirit. As was Abrahams readines to kil his owne and onelie sonne Isaac Gen. 22, 1 2. 3, &c.; as likewise was the spoile which the Iewes made of the Aegyptians by deteining their iewels of siluer, and iewels of golde Exod. 12, verse. 35. 36.. The doing whereof was commendable in them, because they were commanded Gen. 22, 1. Exod. 11, 1. 2.; but most damnable should be in others, for that there be commandements to the contrarie Deu. 5, 17. Exod. 20, 13. Matth. 5, 21. Deut. 5, 19. Exod. 20, 15. Rom. 13, 9., but none to do so.
            Wherebie it is apparent that good men are not in al things to be imitated. But as S. Paule would be so folowed, as he folowed Christ 1. Cor. 11, 1.: so should they be.
            
               Therefore our Sauior is the exampleChrist alwais necessarilie to be folowed, & why; of vs to be folowed, and that alwaies, and necessarilie: alwaies, for that he was most perfectlie good Esai. 53, 9 Iohn. 8, 46. 1. Pet. 2, 22. 1. Iohn. 3, 5.; and necessarilie, because both himselfe Matt. 11, verse. 29. Ioh. 13, 15. 34. Ioh. 15, 12., and his Apostles 1. Cor. 11. verse. 1. Ephes. 5, 1. 
                     •
                  . Philip. 2, 5. 1. Pet. 2, 21., haue commanded vs to do so.
            But here mistake me not, I beseech you. For albeit I saie our Sauior Christ is alwaies; yet do I not saie in al things: and though necessarilie to be folowed; yet not as he was God. For he fasted fourtie daies and fourtie nights Matt. 4, 2.; he rebuked the waues of the sea, and the windes, and they cessed raging Luk. 8, 24 25. Mark. 4, 39.; he walked on the sea as on drie land Matt. 14, verse. 25.; with seuen loaues and two litle fishes he fed foure thousand men Mar. 8, 9. besides women and children Matt. 15, verse. 34. 38. at one time; at another with fiue loaues and two fishes, he fed about fiue thousand men Ioh. 6, 10., beside women and children Matt. 14, verse. 19. 21.; he restored sight to the blind Matth. 9, 27. 28. 29, &c.; health to the sicke Marke. 5, 25. 26, &c. Matth. 4, 23. 24. Matth. 9, 35.; to the dead life Iohn. 11, 43. 44. Marke. 5, 35. 41. 42.; and manie other miracles by the almightie power of his Godhead he wrought, which are vnimitable (as I maie saie) of mortal man. In somuch that they offend greatlie, whether they do it of superstition, as Papists; or of meere zeale, as did the God of

Norweigh One so called for his fasting 40. daies, which he did more than once: of whom John Wierus in a treatise of his De Jeiunijs Comentitijs, pag. 125., who dare enterprise to imitate our Sauior in anie thing which he did miraculouslie as a God. My reason is, because there is neither commandement that we should, nor example of anie disciple or Apostle in holie Scripture that would, or durst so do. For we are not commanded to make a new world, to create things visible or inuisible; no nor in the world to do miracles, and to raise the dead, said Augustine August. de verbis Domini. Wherein Christ is to be imitated., and so do I.
            Our Sauior Christ therefore in those things which he did as a God must religiouslie be worshipped; and folowed zelouslie in what he did as a man. He that loueth and hateth what Christ as a God, doth loue and detest, imitates Christ as much as man maie imitate God Theodor. lib. de Actiua virtute.
               ▪ he that doth that which Christ did as a man, doth folowe Christ as a Christian should.
            What that is, this booke at large most notablie, and Bernard in few wordes doth showe, namelie Bernardus li. Sent., to abhor the vanitie of the world, and that couragiouslie; For Iesus, because he would not be elected a King, fled fro the multitude: to repent, and that hartelie; For Iesus was killed as a Lambe: to haue true charitie; For Iesus praid for his enimies.
            
            
               1 And herevnto we are moued, as byReasons why wee should imitate, or folowe our Sauior Christ. the commandements both of Christ himselfe, and of his Apostles Paule and Peter, of which afore: 2 so partlie because we are called Christians; but Christians haue their name of Christ, therfore is it meete that as they be coheires of his name, so they shold be folowers of his holines, so Bernard Bern. lib. Sent.; and No man is rightlie called a Christian, who to the vttermost of his abilitie doth not resemble Christ in his conuersation, so Cyprian Cyprian. de 12. ab
                     •
                  
                  sionibus.; finalie, Who doth not imitate Christ, maie wel be called a Christian, but he is none, so Augustine August. de vita Christiana.. For what doth it profit thee to be called, what thou art not▪ & to vsurpe a strange name? If thou louest to be called a Christian, shew the fruites of Christianitie, and then wel maist thou take the name of a Christian vnto thee, saide the same Augustine In the foresaide place.. 3 Partlie for that he is our God. Therefore is it our partes to imitate him, whome we worship and serue. 4 Partlie, because we are by nature giuen to imitation. Wisedome would therefore we should imitate the best. 5 And partlie because we are Englishmen, who of al other people are most famous,

and infamous too for imitation. A shame were it therefore for vs to imitate so painefulie as manie do in eloquence Cicero; in philosophie Aristotle; in lawe Iustinian; in Physick Galen for worldlie wisedome; yea to imitate, as most do, the French in vanitie, the Dutch in 
                  •
               uxurie, in brauerie the Spanish, the Papists in idolatrie, in impietie and al impuritie of life the Atheists, and not to folowe our Sauior Christ in heauenlie wisedome, and in al godlines of manners.
            That we maie so do, he from whom euerie good gift, and euerie perfect gift doth come Iam. 1, 17., the Father of lights grant, who with the Sonne, and holie Ghost, be praised euermore both in our harts, mouths, and conuersation, that others seeing our good workes maie glorifie our Father which is in heauen Matth. 5. verse. 16. 1. Pet. 2, 12. Amen.
            
               
                  the 30. of Iulie, An. 1580.
               
               Farewel in him whom we are to folow, Tho. Rogers.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ A second Epistle concerning the translation and correction of this Booke.
            
            
               
                  SEbastian Castellio hauing translated this booke into Latine, thought it good by waie of Preface to giue some reasons, both why he had translated the same being in Latine alreadie; and why so he had translated it, leauing somewhat of the Autor out.
            The case standeth with me as it did with Castellio. Therfore am I to yeeld some reasons both why I haue translated this book into English being in English alreadie; and why so I haue translated it, leauing somewhat out, as I haue done.
            For the first I saie, that neither is my doing for noueltie strange; nor am I (as I trust) to be reproued therefore. For both I haue examples of good men in al sciences, and professions, who to their great cōmendation haue done the like; as maie witnes the sundrie and diuers

interpretations of the workes of Aristotle, and Plato for philosophie; of Demosthenes and Isocrates, for Oratorie; of Galen and Hippocrates, for Physick; for Diuinitie of the sacred Bible: and also I haue taken the translation thereof vpon me, not so much to translate, as to illustrate the same with places of Scripture. For doubtles great pittie was it, that a booke so plentifulie, or altogether rather fraighted with sentences of the Scripture, was either no whit, as in some, or no better, as in the best impressions, quoted. Besides, I haue not onlie shewed the chapter, but the verie sentence also of euerie chapter where what is written maie be found: a thing which, that I heare of, none afore me hath done. The bringing of which to passe, how paineful it hath bene to me, he alone can best report, who either hath done or doth go about the like; how not comfortable onelie, but profitable besides it wilbe to others▪ they shal finde that zelouslie do reade the same.
            And this whatsoeuer I haue done, was taken in hand at the motion of

the Printer hereof; whose zeale to set forth good bookes for the aduancement of virtue, and care to publish them as they ought to be, would some printers folowe, neither would the sale of good workes be mard manie-times for lack of wel handling; nor vaine and vile bookes to the dishonor of God, the infamie of this land, to the confirming of the wicked in naughtines, and alienating of the wel disposed from virtue, I saie, to the discredite of the Gospel, and abuse of printing would not dailie be so broacht as they are.
            In which my translation I haue rather folowed the sense of the Autor, than his verie wordes, in some places; the which also I haue studied, as nigh as I could, to expresse by the phrase of the holie Scripture, supposing it to be a cōmendation, as to Ciceronians to vse the phrase of Cicero: so to Christians most familiarlie to haue the words of the holie Scripture in their mouthes, and bookes.
            Now touching my correction, I trust no good man wil mislike the same. For I haue left out nothing

but what might be offensiue to the godlie. Yet is it neither for quantitie much, nor for number aboue foure sentences. The first whereof is this In the second booke, chapt. 12, in the beginning almost. 
               Hoc signum crucis erit in coelo, cùm Dominus ad iudicandum venerit. According to Castellios translation: Atque hoc erit signum crucis in coelo, cùm Dominus ad iudicandum veniet. In the English copie set foorth by Edward Hake, thus, And this signe of the crosse shalbe in heauen, when the Lord shal come to iudge the world. Which sentence, for somuch as I see neither the Scripture, nor anie good writer doth confirme the same, I haue left out altogether.
            The second is this In the foresaide chap., Sed nec inimicum Diabolum timebis, si fueris fide armatus, & Iesu cruce signatus. According to Castellio, Quinne Diaboli quidem inimicitias timebis, si fide armatus, & Iesu cruce signatus eris. In the English translation, Naie thou shalt not feare the enimitie of the Diuel neither, if thou be armed with faith, and marked with the crosse of Iesus. What needes these words, And marked with the crosse of Iesus? I haue therefore not mentioned them.
            
               The third is In the same chap., Non enim flat meritum nostrum, & profectus status nostri in multis suauitatibus, & consolationibus, &c. According to Castellio, Ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   enim in copia voluptatum & consolationum situm est meritum nostrum, officij
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   profectus, &c. In the English translation, Neither is our merit, and the comming forward in our dutie consisting in plentie of pleasures and comfortes▪ &c. Which I haue thus Englished, Neither doth our comming forward consist in the stoare of pleasures, and comfort, &c. leauing out the worde merit. Because both the scripture is cleene against our meriting, and the Autor too in manie places As most principalie in the third boke chap. 26, cha. 52, pag. 227, chap. 58. condemnes the same.
            The fourth In the 3. booke chapt. 20, in the midle thereof., Sed neque qui tunc iusti erant, & saluandi ante passionem tuam, & sacrae mortis debitum, coeleste regnum poterant intrare. According to Castellio: Quinetiam qui tunc iusti, seruandi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   erant, ij ante supplicium tuum sacrae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   mortis meritum in coeleste regnum intrare non poterant. In Hakes translation, Naie also euen those who then were iustified, and in the state of saluation could not enter the kingdome of heauen before thy passion, and the
               
               merit of thy pretious death. Where then were they? In hel? I thinke none wil saie it. In Abrahams bosome, as some Catech. Trident. vpon these words of the Creede, Descendit ad inferos. Bern. in festo omnium Sanct. serm. 4, in Lymbo patrum, as other Papists D▪ Tho. in 4. dist. 45. q. 1. Art. 3. Jauellus philosoph. Christ. p. 8. Tract. 4. cap. de locis infoelicium damnat. do saie? but that wil not easilie be proued. Wherefore as that which otherwise might offend the godlie, I haue cleane omitted, & left out that sentence.
            And as I haue ouerpast without mentioning these, which sauor of superstition: so haue I added some godlie sentences, which haue bene omitted both by Castellio, and such as folowed him, as maie appeere both in the 47. according to Castel. as in mine the 48. chap. within three sentences of the beginning; and also in the 63. as in mine the 64. chap. somewhat after the midle thereof.
            So that I maruel, both why these were omitted, and the rest not amended by such as haue taken the translation of this booke vpon them. I grant they haue done the dutie of translators: yet sure I am they haue neglected a greater dutie than of translatorship. For my part I had rather come into the displeasure of man, than displease

God; and rather moue the obstinat heretike, than offend the weake & simple Christian.
            It maie be obiected that I might haue giuen some note by the waie, and so let them passe; as doth Erasmus in his translations. Surelie Erasmus might better do so in Latine, than I maie in English. For asmuch as most are learned, & haue iudgement which read his; and I do that which I do for the simpler sorte. And were other bookes, that I could name, excellent for manie good points, yet for some things superstitious, purged and corrected, sure I am, both God would greatlie like therof, and manie men would then reade them, who now reiect them; and much profit would be reaped, whereas now there is either litle or no profit at al taken.
            One chapter you shal find in this my translation more than is in other bookes. Yet haue I added no chapter, but diuided the 6. chapter of the third booke. For asmuch as it comprehendeth partlie a thankesgiuing vnto God for his benefites, and partlie a commendation of charitie, which aptlie, me thinkes,

makes two chapters.
            Now he, who principalie both stirred the Autor to make this booke, and me to do what I haue done, euen God almightie grant that both you, and I, and euerie of vs maie vse it to the comfort of our soules, Amen.
            
            
               Yours in Christ Tho. Rogers▪
               
            
         
         
            
            A godlie Preface made by him, whosoeuer he was, that translated this booke out of the Latin tongue into French.
            
               IF this booke, which concerneth the following Christes example, haue heretofore yeelded some frute to such as haue giuen them-selues to the reading thereof; I thinke it wil yeeld no lesse hereafter, specialie now that it is rid and clensed from a number of imperfections that were in it afore.
            And although it be apparent, that the conuersation of such as cal themselues Christians, is woonderfulie corrupted: yet notwithstanding because God is so good, that he wil euermore drawe some one or other of an infinite multitude from it: it maketh me that I am not altogether out of hope.
            Againe, like as in great and sore diseases, al the best remedies that can be deuised, are wont to be applied with al speede: euen so the more we see wickednes and vngodlines to abound, the more ought we to consider by what meanes they may be remedied, that some may be saued among so manie thousands, which are hardharted and enimies to al good warnings.
            It must needes be granted, and experience prooueth it sufficientlie; that there was neuer anie age, wherein Christians

haue bin more out of order, nor haue had lesse regard of godlines, than they haue at this daie: yet notwithstanding, this ought not to bar vs, from hoping that God wil drawe some continualie to himselfe. On the other side, like as among a great sort that are striken with extreame sicknesses and diseases, some doe alwaies scape as it pleaseth God: so is it to be hoped, that among an infinite number of false Christians, God wil touch some to bring them backe from the filthines and corruptions of the world, and to leade them to the fearing of himselfe.
            Moreouer, it is not to be doubted, but that God hath alwaies some seruants of his, as it were couered vnder the great number, which by the power of his holie spirit, doe liue continualie in al purenes & vndefilednes, without cleaning or consenting to the vngodlines & disorderednes of the wicked.
            And this is it which confirmeth me in my hope, that this little booke shal not be vnprofitable nor fruteles.
            Neuertheles, this booke is not ful of great cūning, nor beautified with flowers of humane wisedome, neither doth it discourse or treate of high or darke things▪ neither is it stuffed with subtil questions and arguments, nor indited with eloquent style, as those commonlie be which are propounded and set foorth to the world, rather for boasting and vainglories sake, than for anie desire to doe other men good. This booke is plaine, and without anie great gainesse; but yet so ful of good

and wholsome instructions, that I dare wel auow, that whosoeuer readeth it with a right disposed mind, without respect toProfit of this booke. anie other thing than God and the saluation of his owne soule, which is the onelie marke that we must leuel at: he shal reape singular profit thereby.
            As for my part, I can witnes of my selfe, that God hath oftentimes made it to serue me for a spurre, to quicken and waken me vp from my slothfulnes and dulnes, and to kindle in me a desirousnes of his seruice; and I hope that the like shal befal to al such as shoote at none other mark, but to knowe, feare, and loue him with a pure, right meaning, and single minde; and to leade a holie conuersation before him.
            And in good sooth, it may wel be said,Good bookes as ladders to climbe vp to heauen. that vnto true Christians, good and holie bookes are as ladders to climbe vp to heauen; as sparks to kindle the heate of the spirit, when it is quenched or waxed colde in them; and as props to staie vp their faith that it may take increase.
            I speake of true Christians. For as for them that are Christians but in words and ceremonies: some of them be so bereft of al true feeling of God and of their owne conscience, that they neuer enter into the considering of the thing that might be auailable and necessarie to the wel instructing of them in the truth, and to the training of them to some godlie behauior; but are wholie giuen to the things of this life, as though there were none other after it▪ And othersome haue their mindes so tied to the letter, that they can make none account

of anie other bookes, but such as may make them skilful, eloquent, sharpewitted, and subtile, and consequentlie woonderful among men, despising al such works as may make them better by moouing them to the exercises of their profession. And of this sort the number is verie grear nowadaies; of whom nothing can be said, sauing that (as the Apostle speaketh of them) they can welynough say with their mouth that they knowe God, but in their deedes and workes they renounce him Tit. 1, 16..
            And trulie we be come to a time, wherin we be more giuen and more hastie to reason and dispute of our religion, than to be religious in deede; more giuen to make great and large discourses of it, than to put it in practise, and to shew the truth and purenes of it by our holie conuersation; & at a word more giuen to talke than to doe: insomuch that we may wel perceiue, that the Christian profession is nothing else nowadaies, but a lipwisedome, and a skil to hold talke among such as make their vaunts of it.
            But what▪ doe I terme it a lipwisdome▪ Nay, would God it were not rather turned into a fleshlie and licentious loosenes▪ as we may partlie see alreadie by too manie effects thereof.
            But so doth it alwaies befal to such as hauing receiued Christs doctrine, applie not themselues foorthwith to the forsaking of themselues, without the which it is not possible for vs to be Christs true disciples Matth. 16, verse. 24.. For as the light cannot match

with darknes 
                  ▪2. Cor. 6, verse. 14.: so cannot Christs Spirit match with sin and the lusts of the flesh: insomuch that if the practise thereof be omitted, there is none other thing to be looked for, but a kind of libertie whereby men shaking off al yoke, shal giue them selues ouer to al euil, & sooth themselues in their sinnes. Not that they keepe not stil some outward shew and countenance of godlines: for vnles it be some Epicures and godles men, they neuer proceede so far as to doe awaie and to giue ouer al seruice of God.
            But yet are al such shewes and outward countenances in vaine, & of none account before him which requireth mens harts Deut. 6, 5. Matt. 22, 37, and contenteth not himselfe with the onelie outward deedes Iohn. 4, 22. 23., wherewith notwithstanding they thinke to quiet their owne consciences, and to auoide the feeling of Gods wrath for their sinnes▪ which thing may wel serue for a time in the behalfe of the ignorant, and of such as haue no better skil; but as for those which knowe wherein the seruing of God consisteth, they cannot but be maruelouslie abashed, if they fal to examining of their owne wicked conuersation.
            For then there is no ceremonie (howe faire a shew so euer it beare, no not euen though it be of the number of those which God hath inioined for the keeping of order in his Church) that can satisfie the conscience which is trobled with the feeling of it owne sinne, and make it sure before the iudgement of God, who wil not iudge vs according to ceremonies, but according

to our works 2. Cor. 5, 10.
            We reade what Iesus Christ wil saie to such as shal haue cast out Diuels in his name Mat. 7, 23, prophesied in his name, and wrought manie other great things in his name: Away from me (wil he saie to them) yee workers of wickednes. How much more then wil he saie so, to such as occupieng themselues alonelie in some ceremonies, & not in the true godlines which the Apostle saith is profitable to al things 1. Tim. 4, 8, shal haue giuen themselues to folowe their flesh and the world!
            To be short, we must come to this point, that forasmuch as Christianitie is not an outward profession, ne a thing that consisteth in outward ceremonies, (so as it may suffice to busie our selues about it,) or in words (as who would saie it were ynough to haue the skil to talke and discourse of it as men doe of other worldlie sciences;) but it is the verie power and might of God Rom. 1, 16. 1. Cor. 1, 18., whereby God intendeth to renew, and as it were to create againe his owne image and likenes in man, who is falne from it by his owne fault, and to set it againe in the former brightnes and perfection, that he may attaine againe to the blessed immortalitie: it is not to be doubted but that the same is the thing whereon we ought to fixe and settle the eies of our mind, and wherevnto we ought to applie al our wits, straining them earnestlie and to the vttermost of their powers to attaine therevnto. Otherwise we shal but lose our labor in seeking after this or that; and al that euer we can doe shal serue to no purpose,

but onelie to traine vs the further from the marke that is set before vs.
            I knowe wel it wil be replied herevnto, that the thing which I speake of can not be obteined in this life, wherein we be subiect to so manie infirmities Genes. 6, 5., and are so corrupted and fraile, that it is vnpossible to attaine thereto.
            Neither doe I say, that we can attaine so farre as to be set perfectlie againe in our former vncorruptnes, so long as we be hild wrapped in this mortal bodie Wis. 9, 15.: That is reserued for the world to come, wherein al things shal be reduced to the highest perfection Reu 21, 1. 2, &c.. But my meaning is onelie to declare, that the thing which shal be accomplished there, must be begun in such wise here, as we may not cesse to drawe neerer and neerer vnto it Phil. 3, 13. 14., by shortening our waie continualie.
            And surelie the Scripture teacheth vs manifestlie, that none shal become partakers of the glorious rising againe Rom. 6, 5. 4., wherin consisteth the ful measure of our felicitie, but those which haue endeuored here to die vnto sin, and to liue againe in newnes of life, (which is called the first resurrection,) euen by ye Spirit of Christ whom al true Christians haue clothed themselues withal: which haue mortified the deedes of the flesh Gal. 5, 19. 20. 21. Roman. 8, 4. 5. 2. Corin. 7, 1. Coloss. 3, 5.; which haue put off the old man Eph. 4, 22. 24. with al his works; and put on the new man according to the image of him that created vs; and which haue clensed themselues here from al vncleannes both of bodie and soule.
            And that is the reason why saint Paule Colos. 3, 4. 5.,

hauing said that when Christ appeereth, we also shal appeere with him in glorie; doth foorthwith warne vs to mortifie our members that are vpon earth: whereby he doth vs wel to vnderstand, that this mortification must go afore in vs here, if we purpose to attaine to glorie.
            The same Paule telleth vs that our bodies shal be quickned by reason of Christs spirit Rom. 8, 11. which shal haue dwelled in vs here, and whereby we shal haue repressed al our froward affections.
            Also Saint Iohn protesteth 1. Ioh. 3, 3., that whosoeuer putteth his trust in Christ, doth purge himselfe after ye example of Christ.
            To be short, there are infinite texts touching this point in the holie Scriptures. And though there were no mo but this one which they vtter so often, namely that the vnrighteous shal not inherit the kingdome of God 1. Cor. 6, 9.; it might be ynough to content vs withal, & to put vs in feare, and to moue vs to the true and earnest repentance.
            But alas▪ We be so loth to yeeld to this point, and our flesh breedeth vs so manie hinderances, that we doe what we can to eschew that burthen, and to shake it from our shoulders. But in so doing what do we else, but striue against our owne soulehelth, and resist Gods grace, who cōmeth to saue vs, howbeit by such meanes as he himselfe hath ordeined, and by such waie as he commandeth vs, and not by meanes or waies of our owne choosing!
            Wel said, God hath commanded vs to beleeue in his Sonne, and for our beleeuing

on him he promiseth vs euerlasting life, so as al they which beleeue in Christ, taking him for their Sauiour, and applieng to themselues al the benefites which he hath purchased for vs by his death: are in the right waie.
            But who be these beleeuers▪ Euen they (saith the Apostle) which walke not after the flesh but after the spirit Rom. 8, 1.; they which take paine to frame themselues to the wil of Christ; into whose bodie they be graffed, and vnto whom they be knit together as his liuelie members Eph. 3, 17. 18. 19. Ephes. 4, 15. 16.; they which endeuor to loue God, and to giue ouer the loue of themselues Luk. 9, 23. and of the world 1. Iohn. 2, verse 15. 16.; they which haue their whole conuersation in heauen Phila. 3, 20; they which loath their former life, and for feare of falling thereinto againe, doe the more watch, and looke the warelier to their thoughts, deuises, words, and deedes: they which feeling their owne weakenes and infirmitie, make incessant praier to God for the spirit of strength and stedfastnes 1. Thes. 5, verse. 17.; & which feeling their coldnes and vnlustines, doe craue the spirit of feruencie and earnestnes; they which in aduersitie do keepe themselues from murmuring, and endeuor to be patient Rom. 5, 3. 4. 5. Iames. 1, 3. 4.; they which bethinke themselues of Gods benefits, and yeeld him thankes for them Psal. 116, verse. 12. 13.; they that straine themselues to succur their neighbors both in bodie and soule Rom. 12, 4. 5, &c. 1. Cor. 12, 12 13, &c.; and at a word, they which crucifie the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof Colos. 3. 5..
            Insomuch that they in whom these fruts are not found, ne make not the talent of faith to preuaile in such maner as I haue

told you, cannot be said to be in the number of the true beleeuers & faithful ones, notwithstanding that they pretend some countenance of honestie, and therefore much lesse can those be said to be of that number, in whom the works of the flesh Gal. 5, 19. 20. 21. are apparent.
            But some fleshlie Christian wil saie stil,Imputation of righteousnes. that as for him, he is clothed with the righteousnes of Christ; that the perfect obedience which Christ hath yeelded to God his Father in satisfieng the law, is imputed vnto him, as if he himselfe had yeelded it; and (to be short) that he is reckoned for righteous by his faith, so as none of al his imperfections are to be made account of.
            If thou listest to beguile thy selfe, thou maist: but it wil be to thy harme and confusion. In deede Christ laieth not our sins to our charge, if we beleeue aright in him, neither shal al our imperfections hinder the vertue and efficacie of his death. But to beare thy selfe in hand, that Christ holdeth thee for righteous, when thou giuest thy selfe to vnrighteousnes, and hast none other care but to follow thine owne inordinate lusts: it is not onely a dooing of great dishonor vnto him, but also a scorning of him for his redeeming thee.
            And I praie thee, what man of good and sound iudgement, dareth say, that Christ holdeth him for lowlie, which is puffed vp with pride▪ Or for liberal and charitable, which is ful of niggardlines, distrust, and vnkindnes▪ Or for a louer of God, which is ful of selfe-loue and loue of the world▪ Or

for a worshipper of God, which maketh no right account of him▪ Or for a delighter in God, which hath none other care but to satisfie his owne pleasures and delights▪ Or for a man mindful of Gods benefits, which is vnthankful▪ Or (to speake more homelie) a whooremonger for a chaste person, or a glutton and a drunkard for a sober and moderate feeder▪ I beleue that euen thou thy selfe (if thou consider it throughly,) wouldest be ashamed to thinke it, and much more to speake it. For how is it possible yt a man shoulde be righteous without righteousnes, good without goodnes, vertuous without vertue!
            Saint Iohn saieth manifestly, that as Christ is righteous 1. Ioh 3, 7. 8.; so he that worketh righteousnes is righteous; and that he which sinneth is of the Diuel: yea and he saith moreouer, that the thing wherein the10. children of God doe shewe themselues to differ from the children of the Diuel, is that the one sort worke righteousnes, and the other sort worke sinne.
            And of a truth, I cannot tel how Gods true children, who are al true Christians, coulde otherwise be better marked out, thā by their applieng of themselues night and daie, to do whatsoeuer is pleasant and acceptable to their heauenlie Father; whom because they knowe to be righteous, they also doe wholie endeuor themselues to do righteous things, wherin they shew themselues to be borne of him, as S. Iohn sheweth yet further. If ye knowe (saith he) that God is righteous, knowe ye also that whosoeuer worketh righteousnes,

is borne of him 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 29..
            Moreouer, how can it come to pas, that the true Christians should not giue themselues to righteousnes, seeing they haue Christs spirit, (for he that hath not Christs Spirit (saith the Apostle) is no Christian,) which being holie of himselfe, cannot but driue forewarde the partie to al holines, whom he possesseth? It cannot be but that he must needs bring forth his fruts, which are Gal. 5, 22. 23. louingnes, gladnes, quietnes, mercifulnes, meekenes, faithfulnes, mildnes, and staiednes. To be short, it cannot be, but that he must needes alter the whole man both within and without, to make a newe creature of him.
            But see to what point Satan and our owne nature bring vs: namesie, to fal a sleepe, and to sooth our selues in our vices, and to make vs to let the bridle lie loose on our necks, & al vnder color that Christ imputeth not our sinnes vnto vs 2. Corin. 5, verse. 19., Naie, he imputeth them vnto vs if we continue in them Tit. 2, 11. 12.. For he died not to leaue vs in them stil, but to take vs out of them really and in very deede Rom. 6, 5. 6, &c., as witnesseth further saint Iohn, who telleth vs plainlie 1. Ioh. 3, 5. that Christ appeered to take awaie our sinnes. In which place he intendeth not to speake (as I take it) of the forgiuenes of our sinnes past, but to saie that Christ doth really and in verie deede take away their sining in works, which do beleeue on him; which cannot be done, but that he must also therewith put into them, and imprint in them the loue of righteousnes.
            Neuertheles, I will not straine my selfe

any further about this matter, which would require a whole booke rather than a Preface. And in good sooth, I had not spoken so largelie thereof, but that I hoped to do some men good therby, who vnder pretence that they deserue not aught at Gods hand, do make so smal account of the good works which God requireth at our hands, that they giue ouer the exercise of al godlines, and do weede out of their harts al regard of good life, and of seeking their soulehelth with feare & trembling Phili. 2, 12 Rom. 11, 20. as they shew wel ynough by the sequele.
            Furthermore, I thought by that meanes to drawe on the readers to the receiuing of this little treatise the more willinglie; wherein as there is not anie thing conteined, but such as may serue to teach vs to order our life wel; so was it also requisite to shew, yt there is no point of Christianitie in vs, vnles we set our whole hart thervpon. And on the other part, forasmuch as the ground hereof is how we may folowe the example of Christ: it was verie conuenient to warne Christian folke to inforce thēselues thereto, without flattring themselues, & without foding themselues with vaine opinions that might turne them frō the right waie, or hinder them in it.
            For sith hat Christes life was not set foorth vnto vs alonely to make a legend of it, or to make a wondring at it in words, but to be followed by vs: it is the marke wherevnto we must tend, in drawing to perfection as neere as is possible, and as much as our frailtie can affoord. And otherwise, seeing we be tolled there vnto by

Iesus Christ himselfe, not onelie in words but also by examples, which are as liuelie portraitures of the life which we ought to leade here, in waiting for his glorious cō
               ming againe; we cannot exempt our selues from it without preiudice of our saluation, no nor yet without bewraieng that we haue no list to it. For were we rightlie desirous to become happie, and to attaine to the endles life which is promised vs in Christ: we could not shew it better, than in taking the waie thereto, whereby we both may and must attaine vnto it.
            And that waie is none other, than to beleeue in Christ, and to walke as he walked. And that is Saint Iohns meaning where he saith 1. Iohn. 2, 6, that he which saith he dwelleth in Christ, ought to walke as he walked, yt is to say, he ought to indeuer to liue as he liued.
            There are alwaies ynow which boastBoasting Christians. themselues to beleeue in Christ, or to be Christians. But the verie meane to knowe them, is to mark whether their whole endeuer be to folowe Christ or no, which is as the badge of this so excellent profession, or as it were the faire colored liuerie whereby we shewe and declare our selues to be the same in deede which we report our selues to be.
            And certes it is not possible that they which are vnited and knit vnto Christ as his members, should not be touched with a desire to resemble him and to folowe his steps. For the verie thing wherein the vnion and coniunction are shewed, is that the members doe shewe themselues to be of the selfe same that the head is. And where

that is not done, it is an euident proofe that the member is rotten, senseles, and void of the life which is in the head.
            And in this behalfe I report me but to the iudgement of man, who is wise ynough of himselfe to attaine easily to this reason.
            Not without cause therfore doth Saint Paule saie, that wee must be of the same minde which Iesus Christ was of Philip. 2, 5.. For thereby his meaning is to do vs to vnderstand, that we which are mēbers of Christ, must be answerable to him in vnitie of affection and wil. Which thing he teacheth yet more plainly in another place, where he saith Rom. 6, 5. that we be graffed into Christ after the likenes of his death and resurrection; meaning thereby, that we which are 
                  •
               oined vnto Christ as an imp is to the stock of a tree, ought so to liue of his life, as there may not appeere any deformitie in vs; but that as he hath died, so we must die also; and as he is risen againe, so we must rise againe likewise: we must die (I say) vnto sin, and rise againe vnto newnes of life; for that is the death and the life which he speaketh of.
            Which thing I haue said to the end that we which boast our selues to be Christes members, should vnderstand that our vanting of that title is in vaine, if we labor not to resemble him in al our whole life. And in what things? Not in raising the dead Ioh. 11, 43; in giuing sight to the blinde Mat. 9, 28 29▪ 30.; in healing the sick Mark. 2, 3. Luke. 5, 18. Matt. 4, 23. 24., or in fasting fortie daies Luke. 4, 1. 2, &c.; (for these are miracles which he wrought both by himselfe, and by his Apostles, for the confirming of his doctrine among men,

that they might receiue it as heauenly and comming from God; and he wrought them once for al, without any neede of hauing them done againe by vs;) but in folowing his virtues, as his faith, his obedience, his patience, his constancie, his temperance, his lowelines, meekenes, mildnes, gentlenes, perseuerance, diligence, earnestnes in praieng and thanksgiuing, and many other things.
            Al the which he did, not to make a shew of them to vs, but to traine vs to the same by his owne example: not to impute them after such a sort vnto vs, that we should be hild sor such as he himselfe is, without being so in deede; but to the intent that as he did them, so we should do them too, as he himselfe saith Matt. 11, verse. 28. 29.; and as Peter saith 1. Peter. 2, verse. 21., to the end we should folow his footesteps.
            And how shal we knowe that we be in him, and are made partakers of his graces; but by our endeuoring of our selues to keepe his commandements? And soothlie the onelie meane to knowe and to be assured in our selues that we dwel in Christ & Christ in vs; is our keeping of his commandements, as Saint Iohn teacheth 1. Ioh. 2, 3. 4. &c.; adding further, that our knoweing that he dwelleth in vs, is by the Spirit which he hath giuen vs; because that by that Spirit, we endeuor to folowe him, and to frame our selues to his wil, whereby we yeelde proofe of the vnion that is betweene him and vs. For euen as the children of this world, do witnes themselues to be al one with the world, by folowing their worldlie lusts 1 Iohn. 2, verse. 15. 16., ambition, couetousnes, and pleasures,

which thing I saie also of the members of Satan: so in like case, the Christians shew themselues to be made one with Christ by his holy Spirit, when they folow Christ step by step, and make his life to serue them as a most perfect rule to leade their life by.
            What remaineth then to be done in this 
                  •
               ase? Soothly that we on our part doe inforce our selues, by eschewing al slothfulnes, which being hurtful and noisome in al things, is most hurtful and noisome in this behalfe, forasmuch as it is of such importance, that we cannot neglect it without wilful disappointing our selues of our saluation and soueraigne felicitie.
            This waie is narrow and rough, I confesse it is so, as al Christians doe, and so doth Christ himselfe say it also Mat. 7, 14.. For in asmuch as thereby we must sorsake our selues to folowe Christ Luk. 9, 23. (which is verie painful & hard to the flesh which desrreth nothing but hir owne pleasures and commodities:) no doubt but we feele it to be very bitter and burthensome. But what for that? Yet must we take that waie, without stepping aside one waie or other. For that is the onelie way which after many labors and hard pinches, leadeth in the end vnto life. As for the other way, it is very broade Mat. 7, 13, faire, & accompanied with great pleasures but the end thereof (saith he) leadeth vnto death. Now, it is much better to go by labor to rest, by tribulation to ioie, and by death vnto life: than contrariwise to go by rest to labor, by ioie to tribulation, and by life to death: for looke what

things commeth last, shal be euerlasting.
            What thing then should hold vs back or hinder vs in this race? If it be the world with al the goodes, honors, and pleasures thereof; let vs vnderstande that al those things passe awaie 1. Co. 7, 31. 1. Ioh. 2, 17. like an arrow which is shot at a white, the trace whereof is not perceiued any more when it is once past. If it be the roughnes and vneasines of the waie: let vs consider how there is nothing so vneafie, nor so rough, which becommeth not easie and smooth by continual vse. If it be the infirmitie and weakenes of our nature; let vs thinke vpon him which hath promised to stand by vs, to helpe vs, and to strengthen vs; who being good wil helpe vs; and being almightie wil also strengthen vs, conditionalie that we praie to him continualie. Aske (saith he Luk. 11, 9.) and it shal be giuen vnto you; seeke, and ye shal finde; knocke at the doore, and it shal be opened vnto you. Prouided alwaies that we on our side doe straine our selues Matt. 11, verse. 12.: for he helpeth not them that are idle and doe nothing. He giueth his Spirit; but it is to such as feeling their owne feeblenes, and being displeased with it, doe earnestly desire and craue his Spirit Luke. 11, verse. 13.. To such as nothing aske, nothing he doth giue. It is euen he that worketh in vs; howbeit, not so long as we our selues sleepe, not so long as we fold our armes acrosse, and much lesse so long as we resist him.
            The kingdome of GOD, (saith Iesus Christ,) suffereth violence Matt. 11, verse. 12., and the violent plucke it to them. And who be those violent? Those which being inflamed with

great desire and zeale to facion themselues like to their head, do offer violence and force to themselues, to the intent that their nature and flesh being restrained and brideled, may not cast any impediment in the way of Gods Spirit, which worketh in them; which feeling themselues cold and lasie, whether it be in praieng to God, or in giuing him thankes for al things, or in any work of godlines either towards God or towards their neighbors, doe quicken and stir vp themselues, without suffering themselues to go on, and to be ouercome of their flesh; which take paines to marke al their owne thoughts and affections, and to restraine them frō passing their bounds, & from rouing astray, setting a sure watch vpon their mind, and folowing the counsel of the wise, because that from the mind commeth the welspring of al euil Matt. 15, verse. 11. 18. 19. 20.; which knowing how easie it is for them, to slip aside at euery least occasion in the world, doe set good gard vpon themselues continualie, laboring to subdue aud ouercome themselues; and finalie which by Christs Spirit do incessantly crucifie the flesh with the lusts thereof.
            And of a truth, we be of our owne nature so contrarie to God, and so bent to the seeking of our owne selues; and our affections are so heady and vehement, and we be haled vnto euil with so great force by our flesh, that we must not thinke that God can haue his dominion in vs, vnles we vse great force to ouercome and subdue our selues to him.
            Yet notwithstanding, there are some

nowadaies, yea and a great some, who without taking much paine, (I wil not say, without taking any atal) cesse not for al that to brag afterwarde, that they be of Gods kingdome. But they deceiue themselues. For seeing that Gods kingdome is righteousnes, peace, and ioie through the holie Ghost (as saith saint Paule Rom. 14, verse. 17.:) how can it haue place in them which suffer vnrighteousnes to raigne in them! And verilie it is a suffering of it to raigne, when they represse it not, according also as they shew in effect by their cōuersation, which is no better than the conuersation of those whom they condemne.
            I know wel they haue their shifts for it, saieng that we haue no power atal, that we shal be flesh stil, as long as we be in this life, and that we cannot proceede far forward in this great frailtie and weaknes of our nature; but that Christ wil supplie al our wants, and not lay our sinnes to our charge. Yea verily; but when they say so, or rather flatter themselues after that maner; perceiue they not how they disgrade themselues from the degree of Christians? For if they cannot obey God, and do the thing that he commandeth, they haue not Christs Spirit Rom. 8, 5.: and if they haue not Christs Spirit, then are they not Christians. Saint Paule saith wel, that the flesh neither wil nor can obey Gods lawe: but9. yet he addeth therewith, that Christians are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit. You be not in the flesh, (saith he) but in the Spirit; at leastwise if Gods Spirit be in you.8. Whervpon it must needes folow, that they

which cannot obey God are in the flesh, and those (saith he) cannot please God.
            Which reason may serue also to this saieng of theirs, that we shal alwaies be flesh. For if we be alwaies flesh, we shal alwaiesWho are fleshlie. be stil vnchristianlike, because that to be flesh, and to be Christians, are things that can by no meanes match together, I meane to be flesh in such wise as to make none other trade than to folowe a mans owne lusts. For otherwise I denie not, but that the flesh is stil in vs, (so long as we be wrapped in this mortal bodie) to prouoke vs vnto euil, and to make war against the Spirit: but not to folow the froward motions of it any more. For this standeth true, that whosoeuer foloweth them, is not to be registred in the number of Christians. And therefore Saint Paule threateneth euerlasting death, to such as liue after the flesh Rom. 8, 13, specialy after they haue bin taught that they be alwaies subiect to damnation.
            As touching our frailtie and weakenes, wherewith they thinke to preuaile continualie against such as presse them with their dutie: surely I confesse with them, that it is great, and such as maketh euen the holiest to be ouerthrowen and vanquished oftentimes by Satan and their owne flesh, which thing they lament and bewaile: but as for to make a sheeld or a defence of it to sooth themselues in their vices, and to take licence to folowe their lusts; it is for such folke to do, as seeke al maner of occasion to doe euil, and to rid away al regard of vpright dealing & righteousnes:

which thing cannot agree with true Christians, whose whole studie is to maintaine themselues in good workes, as they that know how il it beseemeth those which professe themselues to be made cleane by the blood of Iesus Christ Heb. 9, 14., to turne back to the defiling of themselues againe.
            Moreouer, to say that Christ wil supply al our wants, and not charge vs with our sinnes, wherevnto we haue yeelded our selues so freely and willingly after we haue knowen him, seemeth in my iudgement to tend to none other thing, than to make Christ a cloake for our vices, and to take occasion of his grace, to flatter and maintaine our selues in them: which cannot be done without manifest wickednes. For seing that Christ maketh vs partakers of his grace, vpon condition that we shal leade a life both pure, holie, and beseeming him; and to bring the same to passe, doth promise vs his Spirit, so we aske it of him in faith: if we doe the contrarie, it wil not be without dooing him wrong. Wherethrough it wil come to pas, that we shal bereue our selues of the benefite of our redemption, and make our selues vnworthie thereof. For (as Saint Iohn teacheth vs,) Christes blood maketh none cleane, saue those which walk in the light as God is light 1. Ioh. 1, 7. 9..
            But I beseech these men in the name of God, to consider these things aduisedlie, and to think earnestlie vpon this saicng of Christs, That not al they which say Lord, Lord, shal be saued, but they which do the

wil of his heauenlie Father Mat. 7, 21. Neither words nor ceremonies do proue folke to be Christians, children of God, faithful ones, members of Christ, and chosen of God, (which are titles wherewith they deck themselues as with things which belong peculiarly and alonely vnto them) but their deedes, and their loue proceeding from a pure hart, from a good conscience, and from an vnfained faith.
            Let vs then conclude, that the onelie true marke of Christians and right beleeuers, is loue; without the which, a man may wel talke of Christ, and of the Gospel, and he may wel haue the Sacraments, and al the godlie ceremonies that can be deuised; and yet al shal be nothing 1. Co. 13, 1 2. 3..
            And would God that the Christians of our time, as wel the one sort as the other; (for alas they be diuided asunder) had put it wel in vre these former yeeres. For then should we not see now so much hatred, hartburning, crueltie, medling, sedition, part-taking, treason, trecherie, desire of reuenge, and other infinite mischeues that raigne among vs. Neither should blood haue bin shed after such a sort and in so great aboundance as it is; and yet stil shalbe, vnles God vsing his absolute power restraine mens mindes, which are now fiercely bent and fleshed one against another, as they may not be able to bring their desires and passions to passe: and that they also on their side do suffer themselues to be bowed by acknowledging their faults, and by hauing recourse to the remedie of repentance, which is the only

meane to appease Gods wrath so kindled against vs; and (at a word) doe turne their rage and crueltie into mildnes & charitie.
            And to lay foorth the matter yet moreMarkes of christianitie. particularlie; the Christians are those which crucifie the flesh with the lusts and affections there of Gal. 5, 24.. The children of God are they that are led by Gods Spirit Rom. 8, 14., and not by the Diuels spirit, nor by their owne affections. The faithful are they, which not onely repenting themselues truely, doe trust in Gods mercy through Iesus Christ, but also do exercise themselues in al good works, and (as saith Saint Peter 2. Pet. 1, 5.) do indeuer to shew, in their faith, strength; in their6. strength, skil; in their skil, staiednes; in their staiednes, patience; in their patience,7. godlines; in their godlines, brotherlines; and in their brotherlines, louingnes. The members of Christ, are they that take paine to frame and facion themselues like to their head, as much as can be in this life; assuring themselues that it is not possible for the head to be of one wil, and the members of another Eph. 1, 22. 23.. Gods elect or chosen, are they that endeuor to be holie and vnblamable before him in loue.
            Those, those be the markes where by a man may & ought to discerne them from the vnbeleeuers, the heathenish, the vnholie, the children and lims of the Diuel, & finalie from al kinds of false Christians.
            In respect whereof it is not amis to alledge the saieng of S. Augustine. The wicked man (saith he August. de laude charitatis.) may haue baptisme; he may haue the gift of prophesieng; he may receiue the Sacrament of the bodie

and blood of our Lord; he may beare the 
                  •
               ame of a Christian & haue Christs name 
                  •
               n his mouth; and he may haue other virtues: but charitie is the thing which the wicked cannot haue; it is peculiar to the true Christians. And therefore (saith he) 
                  •
               et euerie man examine himselfe what he 
                  •
               oueth 1. Cor. 11, verse. 28., and thereby he shal find to what citie he belongeth. If he loue the world and worldlie things, that is to wit, fleshlines, monie, or honor; he is a citizen of Babylon: but if he loue God, he is a citizen of Ierusalem. He is good and righteous, and therefore he must not doubt, but that God wil at that day▪ giue vnto him the crowne of righteousnes, Amen.
            
            
               A. G.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  
                     BLESSED ART THOV O LANDE,WHEN THY KING IS THE SONNE OF NOBLES ECCLES 10.17
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            The first Booke of the Imitation of Christ.
            
               
                  Chapter. 1. That al worldlie things are vaine, and to be contemned.
               
               
                  HE which followeth me, saith Christ Iohn 8, 19., doth not walke in darknes, but hath the light of life: by which words we are iniomed to imitate his manners, and conuersation, if we desire trulie to be inlightened, and deliuered from al blindnes of hart.
               Wherefore, it is our parts most earnestlie to consider what the conuersation of our Sauior was.
               The doctrine of Christ surpasseth al the lerning euen of the best men Ioh. 7, 46.; & a man endued with his Spirit, findeth an hidden, and heauenlie Manna Reu. 2, 17. Iohn. 14, 26 in his words: but for want of the Spirit of Christ Ioh. 16, 13 many though much they heare, yet litle they profit by the preaching of the Gospel.
               Wherfore if any would fullie vnderstand,

and with pleasure attaine to the knowledge of our Sauiors words, he must endeuor to frame his life after his example.
               What auaileth it thee subtilie to dispute about the Trinitie, if thou lacke humilitie, and so displease the Trinitie?
               Doubtles darke saiengs make not an holie man: but a virtuous life bringeth into the fauor of God.
               For my part I had rather finde my selfe conuerted from sinne, than cunninglie define what sinne is.
               If thou hast the whole Bible, yea & the saiengs of al Philosophers too at thy fingers end 1. Cor. 13, 2 3., what art thou the better if thou be out of charitie, and the fauor of God?
               Vanitie of vanities, and al is vanitie Eccles. 1, 2. Eccles. 12, 8., saue onelie to loue, and to serue God syncerelie.
               When al is done, the true wisedom is 1. Cor. 1, verse. 20. by contemning the worlde to go on towards heauen.
               It is vanitie for a man to seeke transitorie riches Mat 6, 19. 20, and to trust in them Psal. 49, 6. 7. Psal. 52, 7. Eccles. 2, 9. Prou. 11, 7..
               It is vanitie to hunt after preferment, and to be puffed vp Pro. 16, 18. Psal. 52, 1. 5. Psal. 62, 9..
               It is vanitie to folow, and fauor the lustes of the flesh Prouer. 6, vers. 25, &c. Galat. 5, 16. 2. Cor. 10, 6., which one daie

thou wilt rue ful greeuouslie.
               Vanitie it is to desire a long life Wisd. 4, 8 9., and not to care for a good life Rom. 8, 12. 13..
               It is vanitie to behold the time present, and not to foresee what wil come hereafter Sira. 18. 23.
               And vanitie it is to couet those things which passe awaie most swiftlie 2 Pe. 3, 10., and not to hasten thither where is ioie without end Reu 5. 16. 17..
               Forget not the Prouerbe Eccles. 1, 8., The eie is not satisfied with seeing, nor the care with hearing.
               Wherefore endeuor thou to withdrawe thy selfe from the loue of this world 1. Ioh. 2, 15. Coloss. 3, 1. 2. Hebr. 11, 14. 15. 16., and looke on things which are not seene 2. Cor. 4, 18. For they which giue the raines to their desires Iam. 1, 14. 15., both defile their consciences with sinne, and slaie their soules through Gods displeasure Wisd 1, 3. 12. 15..
            
            
               
                  Chap. 2. Against vaine glorie in spiritual things.
               
               
                  AL men naturaly desire to know: but what is knowledge without the feare of God 1. Cor. 13,  2. Cor. 8, 7?
               The simplest country

swaine fearing God, is better than a proude Philosopher which stareth vpon the Stars, and careth not for himselfe Luk. 12, 56 57..
               Hee which knoweth himselfe throughlie esteemeth of himselfe but lightlie Luk. 18, 13, and waieth nought y• praise of men.
               If I had al knowledge and had not loue 1. Cor. 13, 2, what would that profit me afore God, who wil iudge me according to my deedes Psa. 62, 12. Matt. 16, 27. Rom. 2, 6. 2. Cor. 5, 10. Reue. 22, 12?
               Studie not ouer ernestlie for knowledge: for that is but a vexation of the Spirit Eccle. 1, 17 18., and a deceauing the minde.
               For learned men commonly would be knowne, and counted wise 1. Cor. 8, 1..
               Many things there be which knowen but litle, if they doe anie thing, profit the soule: and he is extremely foolish that casteth his minde vpon anie thing which tends not vnto his euerlasting welfare Mat 6, 33. Luk. 12, 31..
               Much wordes doe not satisfie the mind; but a good conscience is a continual feast Pro. 15, 15. 1. Pet. 2, 19., and maketh a man with boldnes to approach before God 2. Cor. 1, verse. 12. 1. Ioh. 3, 20. 21..
               By how much thou knowest mo, and better things than other men, by so much shal thy paines be greater,

and more greeuous Luk. 12, 47 Luk. 19, 23. 24. Iames. 4, 17. than others, vnles thou liue by so much better than other folkes.
               So then let none Art, nor knowledge make thee proud; but hauing knowledge be thou more humble Eccl. 1, 13. Rom. 11, 20..
               And if, in thine opinion, thou knowest much 1. Tim. 6, 3 4., knowe thou that far moe things there he which thou knowest not: and neuer be proude, man, but confesse thine ignorance.
               Why preferrest thou thy selfe before others Ier. 9, 23, 1. Cor. 1, 19. 20, &c. 1. Tim. 1, 7., seeing that many there be better learned, and more skilful than thy selfe?
               If thou wilt be learned, and knowe in deede, then studie to be vnknowen, and to be obscure 1. Cor 2, verse. 1, &c..
               For the true & perfect knowledge, is to know, and debase our selues: and he which wil esteeme lightly of himselfe, & greatlie of others Phili. 2. 3. Rom. 12. 10 Matth. 8, 
                        •
                     . Matth. 23▪ 6, is doubtles a wise, and perfect man.
               When thou seest one openlie to offend Roma 11, vers. 17, &c. Roman. 14, verse. 
                        •
                     , &c., and greeuouslie to transgresse, conceaue not by and by better of thy self than of him: for thou knowest not how soone thou maist fal thy selfe 1. Cor. 10, verse. 12..
               For in verie deed we are al fraile Iam. 3, 2. 13.: but think none more fraile than thy selfe Galat. 6, 1..
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 3. Of true knowledge, or knowledge of the truth.
               
               
                  HAppie is that man whom the truth it selfe VVisdo. 9, verse. 4 &c. 17. Iohn. 14, 6., not letters, nor figures which vanishe, doth teach. For our owne opinions, and senses 1. Corin. 2, verse. 1, &c. doe many times deceaue, and seldome profit vs.
               What auaileth it 1. Cor. 2, 6. 1. Cor. 13, 2. subtily to dispute about obscure and dark things, the ignorance wherof shal be none hinderance vnto vs at the daie of iudgement?
               Certeinlie it is egregious follie to bend our wits vnto curious, and hurtful things, neglecting profitable and necessarie matters: to haue a thorow insight in prophane affaires, and to haue no sight at al in Gods wil, and worde Mat. 13, 13 Mat. 23, 16. 17, &c..
               What should we passe for termes, and questions Titus. 3, 9. 2. Tim. 2, 16? For he is rid from sundrie opinions, whom the euerlasting word doth speake vnto.
               For by one worde al things were made Iohn. 1, 3. 2. 1. Hebr. 2, 10.; and one word al speake; one worde which was in the beginning

speaketh vnto al, without whom no man Luke. 10, verse. 22. can either iudge, or vnderstand the truth.
               Now he, to whom al things are but one thing; which draweth vnto one thing al things; and seeth al things in one thing Ioh. 17, 21., doubtles abideth both constant in minde, and continualie in God.
               O God, which art the truth Iohn. 14, 6., make me one with thee in perpetual charitie 1. Ioh. 4, 16!
               Many times to reade much, and to heare much it irketh me: whatsoeuer I can either wish or desire, it is in thee Mat. 23, 8. 10..
               Al teachers be ye silent Zac. 2, 13., & al creatures hold your peace Haba. 2, 19, but speake, Lord, speake thou onlie vnto me. For the nigher one is to himselfe, and the lesse he wandereth abrode, the more easilie he conceaueth, and the more excellent things; because he taketh the light of his vnderstanding from aboue.
               A pure mind, and a constant, is not distracted diuers waies; because it doth al things vnto the glory of God, & laboreth earnestlie to be free from selfe-loue Matth. 6, vers. 22, &c.. For what doth more hinder, and hurt a man than the vnrulie

affections of the minde Eph 4, 22. Iames. 1, 13. 14.?
               A good, and godlie man before he goeth about any matter, consulteth first with himselfe Sirac. 37, verse. 16.; and is neuer drawen awaie by wicked affections, but maketh them to serue at the commandement of reason.
               Of al combats the sorest is to conquer our selues; and of al cares the cheefest should be to waxe strong against vice, and continualie to profit more & more in virtue, and holines Ephe. 4, 11. 12. 13, &c. Coloss. 1, 9. 10, &c. Coloss. 2, 1. 2. 1. Pet. 2, 12. 2. Pet. 3, 18..
               The greatest perfection of this life is not without imperfection Roman. 7, verse. 18, & when we are best learned we are ignorant in many things 1. Cor. 13, verse. 9, &c..
               To conceaue modestlie of our selues Pro. 3, 34. Galat. 6, 3. is a readier waie vnto happines, than earnestlie to studie to be deepelie learned 1. Cor. 13, verse. 2..
               And yet is not science, or knowledge to be contemned, because being rightly considered it is good, and alowed of God 1. Cor, 12, verse. 8. 1. Cor. 1, 5. 1. Tim. 4, 6.: But for al that, the goodnes of a man Pro. 19. 22 2. Cor. 1, 12. is better than his knowledge, and a good life is to be preferred afore learning Sira. 19, 23.
               But because many desire to know, rather than to please God, it falleth out commonlie that they er; & reape either no frute, or verie litle by al

their studie 1. Cor. 4, 19 20..
               Now would they be as earnest in rooting out vices Matt. 3, 7. 8. Matthew. 7, vers. 15, &c. Matt. 12, 33. 34., and in planting virtues, as they are diligent in proposing questions, certainlie both the rude multitude woulde be more virtuous, and the learned sort more sage than they are.
               Assuredlie at the daie of iudgement we must tel, not what we haue read, but what we haue done Matt. 25, vers. 34, &c. Rom. 2, 6. 2. Cor. 5, 10. Reu. 22, 12.; and how religiouslie we haue liued, not how rhetoricalie we haue persuaded.
               Go to then, where be now those masters so famous, and so pointed at in their life time 1. Co. 1, 20
                  ▪ whose places such haue as perhaps neuer think on thē? In their life time, who but they? now, where are they? So quicklie vanisheth the glorie of this worlde Eccles. 1, verse. 2, &c. Eccles. 2, verse. 1, &c.. Now, if they had liued according to their knowledge, (and knowen rightlie the word of God,) then had they studied to their euerlasting praise & profit Psa. 112, 6..
               Alas, how many euen of the learned sort perish in this world for lack of the feare of God Esai. 28, 13 14. Esai. 33, 18. 1. Cor. 1, 20. 21, &c.! And because they couet to be rather famous than virtuous, they are caried awaie with vaine imaginations Roman. 1, vers. 21, &c..
               So that in truth he which loueth

much Col 3, 14. Ephes. 3, 17. 19., is famous; he which despiseth glorie Matth. 23, verse. 8, &c. Matt▪ 18, 4., is glorious; he which humbleth himselfe, is honorable Pro. 15, 33 Luk. 18, 14.; hee which counteth al things but dung to win Christ Phili. 3, 8., is prudent; & he is learned in deede, which abandoneth his owne wil to doe the wil of God Ioh. 7, 16. 17. 18..
            
            
               
                  Chap. 4. Wisedome must be vsed in al our dealings.
               
               
                  BEleeue not euerie saieng, or spirit 1. Ioh. 4, 1., but examine the matter wiselie by the word of God.
               For, alas, naturalie we are giuen Gen. 6, 5. both to thinke and speake rather il, than wel of others.
               But good men beleeue not euerie mans words: because they know how that we are prone alwaies vnto euil Gen. 8, 21., and that the best offendeth with his tong Ps. 116, 11. Sirac. 19, 16. Iames. 3, 2..
               It is a point of great wisedome to be neither heddy Tob. 4, 18. Iames. 1, 19. in our actions, nor obstinate in opinion Pro.: 7, 12.. As great wisedome is it, neither to beleeue euerie mans wordes Ioh. 22, 11. 12. Sirac▪ 19, 4. Pron. 17. 4., nor by and by to rehearse that which hath bin told Sirac. 19, 7. 8.
               
                  Take counsel of a godlie man Sirach. 37, verse. 12. Prou. 2, 20. whom thou knowest to keepe the commandements of God: and folow the counsel of the wise Pro. 12, 15. before thine owne fancies. A good life maketh a godlie wise man Pro. 9, 19..
               The more a man humbleth himselfe afore God Prou. 1, 4. Prou. 15, 33 Sirac. 3, 20., the more wise he is and quiet in al his affaires.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 5. How to reade, and studie the holie Scriptures with profit.
               
                  LOoke in the holie scriptures for truth, not for eloquence: & reade them with that minde wherewith they were written, for thine euerlasting profit Ioh. 5, 39. 1. Tim. 3, 16. 17., not for a polished phrase.
               Studie as wel godly bookes though they be rude 1. Corin 1, vers. 17, &c. 1. Cor. 2, 13. 2. Pet. 1, 16. Rom. 1, 16., as workes both eloquent for stile, and profound for method.
               Respect not in the autor either learning or ignorance, but let y• pure loue of the simple truth allure thee to reade Psal. 43, 3.: and neuer mark who speaketh, but what is said.
               Men die Psa. 89, 48. Psal. 49, 10.; but the worde of God

shal stand for euer Esai 40, 8. Psal. 100, 5. Psal. 117, 2: and God sundrie waies speaketh vnto vs not respecting our persons Galat. 2, 6. 1. Pet. 1, 17. Deut. 10, 17.
               Many times through our owne curiositie we profit litle in the reading of good bookes, whilest we stande to discusse those thinges which ought simplie to be ouerpast.
               If thou desirest to reape commoditie, reade with al humilitie Esai. 66, 2., simplicitie, and zeale: and neuer couet to be counted learned Ier. 9, 23. 24. 1. Cor. 1, 29. 31..
               Be questioning alwaies with godlie men, and harken with silence vnto their saiengs Sirac. 6, 36. Prou. 13, 20.; be not offended with the darke speech of thine elders, for they neuer speake without cause why.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 6. That inordinate, and carnal affections must be mortified.
               
               
                  WHensoeuer a man doth couet a thing immoderatelie straight waie his minde is out of quiet Pro. 18, 14. Esaie. 48, 22 Iames. 1, 13. 14. 15..
               The proude & the couetous be euer vexed Pro. 13, 10 25. Prou. 15, 6. Eccles. 5, 9.: but he which is poore Matt. 5, 3., and meeke in spirit Mat. 11, 29 liueth at great ease Pro. 15, 16 Matt. 11, 30..
               He which doth not mortifie the inordinate

affections of his mind Rom 8, 
                        〈◊〉
                      Galath 6, 
                        •
                      Coloss. 3,, may easilie be caried awaie to wickednes, and with trifling things be ouercom.
               He that is weake, worldlie, and carnal Roman. 
                        •
                      verse. 5, & can no waies withdraw himselfe from earthlie desires Galath. vers. 17, &: and therefore when he resisteth them, it greeueth him; when he is contraried, he fretteth; and if he fulfil his mind he sinneth, and by and by doth wounde his cons ience Iames. 1, Roman. verse. 5, 
                        •
                     
                  , because he foloweth his desires, which in steede of that peace which he looked for, bring continual disquietnes Pro. 14, Esai. 57,.
               Wherefore the true quietnes of mind is attained, not by folowing, but by resisting wicked affections 1. Pe. 2,; & remaineth in him which is feruent, and godlie zelous Gal. 5,, not in carnal, and worldlie men Rom. verse..
            
            
               
                  Chap. 7. Against vaine hope, and vaine glorie.
               
               
                  IT is a vaine thing to trust either in man Psalm verse. 1 Ierem., or in any other creature Psal. 2.
               Be not ashamed to be in subiection to others Gala. for Christes

sake; nor if thou be poore in this present life Matt. 5, 3..
               Depend not vpon thy selfe, but put thy confidence in the Lord Prou. 3, 5. Psalm. 2, 12.. Doe thy part notwithstanding and GOD wil blesse thine indeuor Matth. 25, vers. 14, &c..
               Trust not to thine owne knowledge, neither doe thou repose any confidence in the wit of man Psa. 118, 8., but only in the Lord Psa. 56, 11. which exalteth the humble, and bringeth downe the proud Iames. 4, 6. 1. Peter. 5, 5..
               Glorie thou neither in thy riches Iere. 9, 23. 24. 1. Cor. 1, 31., if thou haue much; nor of thy friends, if they be mightie, but in the Lorde, who both giueth al things Iam. 1, 17. Rom. 8, 32., & gladly would giue himselfe afore al things.
               Be thou proud neither of thy beautie, or bignes Ier. 9, 23.. For a litle sicknes doth both deforme the one, and consume the other Iob. 2, 7. Iob. 14, 2. Psal. 39, 11..
               Like not ouer wel of thy selfe, if thou haue a good wit, least y• offend God thereby, which gaue whatsoeuer good thing thou hast by nature 1. Cor. 4, 7.
               Thinke not thy selfe better than other men Luk. 16, 11 12. Matth. 7, 3. 4., least God, who knoweth what is in man Iohn. 2, 25 Rom. 8, 27. Psalm. 7, 9., condemne thee vtterlie for thine arrogant conceit.
               Doest thou wel? Take heede of pride. God iudgeth not as man doth 1. Sam. 16, verse. 7.. For that commonlie displeaseth

him which pleaseth man Esai. 55, 8 9.
               If thou hast anie goodnes in thy selfe, think that another hath more 1. Cor. 13 verse. 4: so shalt thou alwaies reteine the true modestie of minde.
               To debase thy selfe euen vnder al men, can neuer hurt thee; but to prefer thy selfe afore one man, may easilie condemne thee Luk. 18, 1 1
                        •
                      1
                        •
                      Mat. 20, 1
                        •
                      1
                        •
                     
                  .
               The humble man is alwaies in quiet 1. Pet. 5. 
                        •
                     
                  : but the hautie minde fumeth commonlie with indignation Iam. 4, 
                        •
                     
                  .
            
            
               
                  Chap. 8. What companie is to be folowed, or refrained.
               
               
                  OPen not thine hart vnto euerie man Sirac. 8,, but communicate thine affaires with the wise and godlie Sira. 37,.
               Acquaint thy selfe with reuerend old men Sirac. 8,, and delite not much in the companie of youth, and strangers.
               Flatter not the welthie Sira 13,; and take heede of the mightie Pro 23 Sirac. 13,; ioine thee to thine equals Sira. 13, 17, 
                        •
                     
                  , which are godly 2. Sam. verse.; andPsal. 18, do that which is honest 1. Tim., and for the publike welfare Ephes. vers. 11,.
               Be familiar with no woman vnlawfulie

                  Prou. 5, 3. 8, &c.; but generalie commende as many as are good Pro 31, 30 1. Peter. 3, verse. 6, &c..
               Wish to be familiar but with God onlie, and his holie Angels Phili. 3, 20: and vtterlie auoide the companie of some men Pro. 22, 24 Prouer. 23, verse. 6, &c. 20. 21. Pro. 29, 24. Sirac. 19, 3..
               Haue peace with al men Rom. 12, verse. 18. 1. Thes. 3, 12, but not familiaritie 1. Cor. 5, verse. 9, &c. Psal. 26, 4. 5..
               Many times it falleth out, that we loue a stranger through the report of others, whom afterward we hate, hauing tried his conditions: And many times we displease others by our leud behauior, whom we thought we shold please right wel, if we had but their acquaintance.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 9. For obedience, and subiection.
               
               
                  IT is greatlie for our behoofe to liue vnder others 1. Pe. 2, 13. 14., not as we list our selues; and at more ease liue subiects, than rulers.
               Many obeie for feare Ephe 6, 6. Colo. 3, 22. rather than for loue; & grudginglie, not gladlie. But such can neuer haue the libertie of minde, before they obeie both for

conscience Rom. 13, 5, and for the Lords sake 1. Pet. 2, 1
                        •
                     
                  .
               Wheresoeuer thou becommest looke neuer to liue at ease, vnles thou keepe thy selfe within thy calling, and obeie thy superiors.
               The opinion, and change of places hath deceaued many a man.
               Euerie man by nature would folowe his owne minde, and fauoreth such as are of his opinion: but, if we feare God, we wil sometime change our mindes for quietnes sake Psa. 34, 1. Rom. 12, 3 Roman. 14 verse 1, &c.
               For who is so wise, that he knoweth al thinges Rom. 12 verse. 6, &c 1. Cor. 12 verse. 8, &c? Therefore trust not too much vnto thine owne opinion Prou. 3, 
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     
                  , but willingly giue eare to the iudgement of others Pro. 12, 
                        •
                      1
                        •
                     
                  .
               And albeit thou stande in a good matter: yet, if it be more expedient to haue it otherwise, alter thy minde, and thou shalt doe better 1. Cor. 
                        •
                      verse. 1, &c 19, &c.
               I haue heard many times that it is easier, yea better to heare, and take, than to giue counsel Pro. 17, 2 2: and he bewraieth his pride, and pertinacie Pro. 21, 
                        •
                     
                  , which wil sticke in an opinion, though it be good, if wiser than himselfe through deeper iudgement and circumstances would haue it altered.
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 10. Against idle meetings, and vaine talke.
               
               
                  SHun the common meetings of men Matth. 14, verse. 23., as much as thou canst. For to talk of worldlie matters Pro. 10, 19 doth greatlie hurt vs, meane we neuer so wel.
               The reason is. We are easilie drawne awaie with vanitie. And for my part I haue wished many times that I had bin both silent, and absent.
               Now if anie woulde examine the cause why so gladlie we chat, & prattle together, seing we seldom speake without offence to God, and hurt to our conscience, he shal finde it to be euen comfort forsooth, & recreation. For y• more earnestlie we couet, and desire a thing; or the more certainlie we knowe anie euil to be towarde vs, the more vehementlie we loue to talke and thinke therof, albeit commonly to smal profit, and purpose.
               For this outward comfort, doth not a litle hinder the inner consolation.
               Wherefore we are to watch and praie Mat. 26, 41 that we spende not the time idlelie Matth. 12, verse. 36.: and if we wil, or must of necessitie

speake, let our speech be good to the vse of edifieng Eph. 4, 29. that it may minister grace vnto the hearers.
               To babble much we should not vse, both because the custome thereof is naught, and for that in many wordes there cannot want iniquitie Pro. 10, 19. But godlie speech greatlie auaileth to a virtuous life Pro. 10, 11 Pro. 18, 21. Luke. 6, 45., especialie where men of like mindes and spirit, are copled together in the Lord.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 11. How to come to quietnes in minde▪ 
                  and to a godlie life.
               
               
                  WOulde wee not intermedle 1. Tim. 5, verse. 13. with other mens dooings, and saiengs, we might liue at great ease & quietnes. But how is it possible that he should be quiet which busieth himselfe with those matters that touch him not? which picketh occasions to goe abroade; and litle, or sildome can keepe himselfe at home? Blessed are the meeke Matt. 5, 5 for they haue much rest Matth. 11 verse. 29.
               In old time manie attained vnto singular perfection, and were zelouslie

addicted to the contemplation of heauenlie things. And how so? They mortified their earthlie members Colos. 3, 5. 2. Pet. 1, 4.. We loase the bridle to al beastlie desires, and care altogether for temporal trash Luk. 21, 34 1. Corin. 7, vers. 32, &c.: Sildome, if at al, we subdue one affection in deede, neither desire we to profit more and more dailie in wel dooing. If therfore we remaine in religion either cold, or lukewarme Reu. 3, 15., what maruel?
               But were we dead vnto our selues Rom. 6, 2. 2. Pet. 2, 10., and not entangled inwardlie with perturbations, doubtles wee should taste the vnspeakeable sweetnes of a godlie life, and be inflamed with a burning desire of celestial things.
               For in verie deede the greatest, if not the whole, let from godlines is, because we are in bondage to vile affections Rom. 6, 12 Romanes. 7, verse. 4, &c. Romanes. 8, verse. 1, &c., and labor not to folowe the footesteps of the faithful.
               Hence it is that if we be neuer so lightlie touched with aduersitie, we are maruelouslie dismaied, and seeke helpe of man Luk. 8, 43. Mark. 5, 26. Esaie. 30, 16., which commeth from the Lord Psalm. 44, verse. 1, &c..
               Now would we keepe our places Ephe. 6, 10 like valiant soldiors, the Lord would helpe vs from aboue. For he is readie to assist them which serue him 1. Cor. 10, verse. 13; and

wil giue vs victorie, if we fight his battel Iam. 1, 12.. But if we place our religion in dooing these outwarde things, in short time our religion with them Col. 2, 22. wil vtterlie decaie.
               Wherefore the axe must be laide vnto the roote Mat. 3, 10., and our wicked affections cut of; which is the onelie waie to finde rest for our soules.
               If euerie yeere we would roote out a vice from our minds, oh how quicklie should we prooue good men! But alas we see by experience that after manie yeeres wee are woorser than when at the first we professed religion. And he is a holie man counted now a daies, which can reteine a part of his first & former zeale: yet should the fire of godlines encrease dailie, and be inflamed more and more.
               The remedie whereof is at the beginning to straine our selues, so shal we afterward do al things at pleasure.
               I confesse in deede it is harde to leaue old woonts Luk. 9, 59.: and as harde, yea harder for a man to bridle his affections. At the beginning therfore striue with thine inclination, and leaue a wicked custome, least otherwise when you would you cannot so easelie. For it is impossible that he should vanquish

& subdue mightie, which cannot ouercome light, & trifling things.
               Oh, if thou wouldest consider what quietnes to thy selfe, and ioie to others thou shouldst bring by godlie, and good behauior Luk. 15, 7. 10., doubtles thy cheefest care would be, how to liue in the sight of God religiouslie, and honestlie in the eies of man!
            
            
               
                  Chap. 12. Of the profite gotten by aduersitie.
               
               
                  IT is good for vs sometime to suffer affliction. For it maketh vs to knowe our selues in this world Ps. 119, 67 71., and to repose no confidence in anie creature 2. Chr. 10, verse. 7. Psalm. 118, verse. 5, &c. 2. Cor. 1, 9..
               It is good for vs sometime to be il spoken of Mat. 5, 11., & il thought of, although we deserue not the same. For that bringeth to humilitie 2. Sam. 16, verse. 10. 11. 12. Rom. 5, 3., and driueth from pride. And the more earnestlie we cal for the testimonie of God in our conscience Rom. 8. 16 17. 1. Pet. 4, 14. 1. Ioh. 3, 21. when we are contemned among men, & of no credit.
               So that euerie man ought so to depend vpon God Psalm. 94, vers. 17, &c. 2. Cor. 1, 9., that he neede not

care for anie worldlie comfort.
               For a good man the more he is trobled either outwardlie in bodie, or inwardlie in minde, the more he considereth how greatlie he standeth in neede of Gods assistance, without which he seeth he can doe no good Phili. 2, 13. Then he sorroweth, and sobbeth, and desireth to be deliuered from miserie; then it greeueth him to liue anie longer Rom. 7, 24; and wisheth to be loased, and to be with Christ Phili. 1, 23.; and then he perceiueth ful wel that in this life we cannot finde perfect peace, and securitie Ioh. 16, 20 Reu. 7, 16. 17..
            
            
               
                  Chap. 13. That no man either is, or hath bin without tentation, and how both to suffer and resist the same.
               
                  AS long as we liue in this worlde we cannot be without tentations, and trobles. And that made Iob to cal mans life here on earth a warfare Iob. 7, verse. 1, &c..
               Wherefore it standeth euerie man vpon to thinke hereof, and to watch in praier Mark. 13, verse. 33. 37. Matth. 26, vers. 41, &c., that the Diuel haue no vantage against vs, which neuer sleepeth,

but rangeth about alwaies seeking whom he maie deuoure 1. Pet. 5. 8. Reu. 12, 12..
               The best man is tempted sometime Sirac. 2, 1. 1. Cor. 10, verse. 13. Hebr. 12, 8.; and to be vtterlie without tentation it is impossible.
               Yea expedient is it sometime that we be tempted Iames. 1, verse. 2, &c., though we like not thereof Hebr. 12, verse. 11. Psa. 119, 67. 7
                        •
                     .: for thereby we are humbled, purged Iob. 5, 17. 18. Wisd. 3, 5., and instructed Hebr. 12, verse. 5, &c. Sirac. 18, 12.
               Al the holie fathers haue endured tentation, and bin schooled thereby 1. Pet. 1, 6. 7. Iudit. 8, 25. 26. 27.; but they which fainted vnder the same, are vtterlie cast awaie Luk. 8, 13. Hebr. 12, 8..
               There is no calling so holie; nor place so solitarie, but you shal finde there both trobles to trie you, and aduersitie to disquiet you: no, let not man looke in this life to be free from temptation. For we haue that in our selues which tempteth vs Iam. 1, 14. 15., in asmuch as wee are borne in concupiscence, and conceaued in sinne Psa. 51, 5..
               Tentations come vpon tentations, miseries vpon miseries, and alwaies we haue somewhat to suffer: because we are fallen from the state of our felicitie Gen 3, 24..
               Manie whilst they shun some trobles, fal into woorser Matth. 26, vers. 70. &c.. For they are not auoided by flight onlie Mat. 26, 56, but by patience Esai. 30, 18 Luk. 21, 19. Iames 1, 2. 3. 12.; and true modestie maketh

to preuaile ouer enimies.
               He which onelie outwardlie shunneth tentations, and plucketh not vp ye roote from whence they doe spring; is so far from escaping them, that they assaile him the sooner, and make him much worser than he was before Matth. 12, verse. 45. Hebr. 6, 4. 5. 6. 2. Pet. 2, 20. 21..
               By sufferance, through Gods grace, thou shalt more preuaile Roman. 5, verse. 3, &c. Iames. 1, 12., than by stubbernes, and resistance 1. Cor. 10, verse. 10..
               In thy trobles vse counsel. If thy neighbor be afflicted, giue him no il wordes Galat. 6, 1., but comfort rather Iob. 6, 14., which thou wouldest haue thy selfe, if thou wert in his case.
               The cause of al wicked tentations in vnconstancie of mind, and lacke of faith Mat. 8, 26. Matt. 14, 31.. For as a ship without a sterne is carried to and fro with winde, and weather: so the wauering Iam. 1, 6. 8., and vnconstant man is diuerslie tempted.
               As fire trieth iron: so tentation trieth man Wisd. 3, 6. Sirach. 2, 5. 1. Pet. 1, 7.. What we are able to do we know not manie times: but what we are, tentation shewes 1. Cor. 3, verse. 13. Iames. 1, 12..
               To auoide tentation it is good to be circumspect at the beginning of the same. For the enimie is the more easilie ouercome, when we shut the doore of our vnderstanding against him, and meete him at the threshold

as soone as he begins to knock. And therefore saide a certaine Poet right wel to this effect Ouid in his 3. booke de Arte amandi. Learne before thou speake, and vse physicke or euer thou be sick. Sirac. 18, 18.
                  :
               
                  If thou beest sick, preuent the wurst,
                  And seeke for remedie at the furst.
                  For when a sicknes hath taken roote,
                  If thou take Physick, it wil not boote.
               
               For first cometh into our minds aThe steps to sinne. bare cogitation of euil; then followeth a strong imaginatiō; out of which proceedeth a wonderful delectation; wicked motions, and assent vnto sin: and so by litle and litle the malitious enimie entreth in, when at the first he might easilie be kept out.
               Wherby this we get, that the longer we tary before we resist, both we are ye weaker when we do resist, & our enimie ye strōger whom we must resist Iam. 1, 14. 15..
               Some as soone as they begin to amend their liues, others at their end, & diuers al their life time are tempted, and afflicted: againe there be, which are but lightlie assalted, which thing God, who worketh al things for the salfetie of his elect Rom. 8, 28., bringeth to passe according to the wisedome, and equitie of his heauenlie wil.
               And therefore wee must not despaire, when we are tempted, but so

much the more earnestlie praie vnto God that he would vouchsafe to help vs in al extremities, and, according to ye wordes of Paule 1. Cor. 10, verse. 13., giue issue that we maie be able to beare our tentation.
               So then in al tentations, and trobles let vs humble our selues vnder the mightie hand of God 1. Pet. 5, 6: Iam. 4, 10.. For he exalteth the humble and meeke Iam. 4. 6. Prou. 3, 34..
               In aduersitie man is tried 1. Cor. 3, 13, how he hath profited in wel doing, and so he getteth not onlie fauor before God 1. Pet. 1, 6. 7., but also fame among men. For it is no great thing for a man in prosperitie to seeme deuoute, and zelous: but he which continueth patient in the time of aduersitie Rom. 5, 3. Iames. 1, 3., wil doubtles prooue a perfect man.
               Manie ouercome great trobles, which are ouercome by smal, and dailie: but such cannot trust to themselues in great, which are so weake in trifling things.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 14. Against rash iudgement.
               
                  LOoke into thy selfe, and iudge not other men Matth. 7, 1. Luke. 6, 37.. For in iudging others we labor vainelie, er commonlie, and

easilie offend Iam. 4, 11.: but in iudging and examining our selues 1. Cor. 11, verse. 31. we reape singular commoditie.
               As we fancie a thing, so we iudge thereof: and blinded with priuate affection we commonlie giue partial sentence Rom. 2, 1..
               Now were the loue of God alwaies, and our onlie guide, our senses, which are enimies to truth, would not so easilie troble vs. But commonly somwhat either lurketh within, or chanceth without which carieth vs awaie.
               Manie in their doings vnwittinglie seeke themselues; which are so long quiet in minde, as they enioie al things according to their wish: but if anie thing fal out otherwise than they would, they chafe, fret, & fume.
               Great dissension riseth manie times euen among frends, and contriemen, yea among the godlie and zelous too through diuersitie of opinions. For, such is our nature, wee can hardlie breake an old custome; and farder than he seeth no man wil gladlie go. But if we cleaue, or depend more vpon reason and sense Iohn. 3, 3. 4. than vpon that virtue which bringeth vnder the obedience of Christ, let vs neuer looke to be enflamed with the light of Gods

holie Spirit. For God wil be serued not with a peece of man, but with whole man Deut. 6, 5. Luk. 10, 27. Mark. 12, 29 30. Mat. 22, 37.; neither doth he alowe reason to iudge of religion.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 15. Of the workes of charitie; and how to do good workes.
               
               
                  WE ought not to do wickedlie for any thing Rom. 3, 8., nor for anie mans sake Rom. 8, 38 39.: albeit in respect of the weake 1. Co. 9, 20 21. 22. a good worke may be vndone sometime, or done otherwise. And that is not to neglect a good worke, but leaue one good worke to do a better.
               If thou haue not loue, thine outward deedes profit nothing 1. Co. 13, 3; if thou haue loue, be thy works neuer so smal, and simple, they profit much. For God respecteth not what is done, but how, & with what affection a thing is done Luke. 7, vers. 40, &c..
               He doth much that loueth much Luk. 7, 47.; He doth much that doth a thing as it should be don Mat. 26, 10. And he doth so, that seeketh the common welfare before his owne profit 1. Co. 13, 5..
               It manie times seemeth a charitableCarnal works, what; deede, which in deede is a carnal For that which is done, as commonlie

works are done, either of affection; or desire of gaine; or hope of rewarde, which are carnal inclinations, is doubtles a carnal, and not a charitable worke.
               A man endued with perfect charitieFruites of charitie. serueth not his owne turne, but onlie in al things seeketh the glorie of God 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16 17. Iames. 4, 4.: He enuieth not 1. Co. 13, 4. For he loueth no priuate ioie Iere▪ 9, 23.; neither wil reioice in himselfe, but in the Lorde 1. Co. 1, 31: whose blessing he desireth before al things. He ascribeth no goodnes vnto anie, but acknowledgeth al things to come of God, from whom euerie good gift, & euery perfect gift doth proceede Iam. 1, 17., and in whom al the Saints doe rest in perpetual blisse Reu. 7, 15. 16. 17.. Finallie he which hath but a spark of this true charitie, accounteth al worldlie thinges but meere vanitie Eccles. 1, verse. 3, &c. Philip 3, 8..
            
            
               
                  Chap. 16. That men which offend must be borne withal sometime.
               
               
                  THat which thou canst not amende neither in thy selfe, nor others, must patientlie be suffered 1. Thess. 5, verse. 14., til GOD otherwise worke Esai. 30, 18 Luk. 21, 19..
               
                  Thinke with thy selfe, that perchance God doth it to trie thy patience Rom. 5, 3. 4. 5. Iames. 1, 3. 4. without which our merits doe litle auaile: notwithstanding in thy trobles thou oughtest to beseech almightie God to assist thee with his grace, that patientlie thou maist endure his crosse, and trial Luk. 17, 5. Iames. 1, 5..
               If anie being diuers, and sondrie times admonished, wil not amend Titu. 3, 10., deale with him no more, but commit the whole matter to God, that his wil, and glorie may appeere in al his creatures Mat. 6, 10. which knoweth wel how to turne al things to the best.
               Endeuor thy selfe patientlie to beare the faultes, and infirmities of other men whatsoeuer they be Galat. 6, 1. 2. 1. Thes. 5, 14: forasmuch as thou art faultie thy selfe Iames. 3, 2., and must be borne withal. And if thou canst not be such as thou wouldest be, thinkest thou to make another according to thy minde?
               We wish that others were godlie, and yet we amend not our selues Matt. 7, 3. 4. 5. Rom. 2, 1. 2. 3.. We would haue others seuerelie corrected Matth. 7, 1., which we refuse our selues. We find fault with the licentiousnes of others, and we our selues wil not be gaine-saide. We seeke that others should be bridled by lawes, and we

our selues refuse obedience. Whereby it is euident how we loue not our neighbor as our selues Mat. 7, 12. Luke. 6, 31. Tob. 4, 15..
               If al were perfect, what should we suffer at other mens hands, for Gods sake Mat. 5, 10. 11. 1. Pet. 4, 14.? But now it pleaseth God, that we must beare one anothers burden Gala. 6, 2.; & that because no man is without fault; no man but hath his burden; no man that can liue by him selfe; no man but lacks aduise somtime; & therfore we ought one to suffer with another 1. Cor. 12, vers. 26, &c.; to cōfort one another; to help, instruct, and admonish one another.
               And neuer shal the virtue of a man be so knowen as by occasion of aduersitie Iam. 1, 12.. For occasions make not a man fraile, but shew what he is 1. Pet. 1, 6. 7..
            
            
               
                  Chap. 17. The waie to quietnes both temporal, and eternal.
               
               
                  THou must bridle, & breake thy wil in many things, if thou wilt liue a quiet life Psa. 120, 7. Matth. 5, 5.. And if thou wouldest stande vpright, and go forward in godlines, account thy selfe in this world but a banished man, and a pilgrime Ps. 119, 19 Heb. 11, 15. 16. 1. Pet. 1, 17. 18.. And if thou desirest to be a Christian, thou

must prooue a foole before men 1. Cor. 1, vers. 23, &c. 1. Cor. 3, 18. 1. Cor. 4, 10. for Christes sake.
               A hoode, or a shorne head maketh not a religious man: but an alteration from vice to virtue Eph. 4, 22. Iames. 1, 21. 26. 27., and a mortification of the lustes Rom. 13, verse. 12. 13. 14..
               He which loueth any thing besides God, and the saluation of his soule Psa. 119, vers. 29, &c. Mark. 12, 30 Luke. 9, 23. 26., shal find nothing but miserie, and sorowe.
               And let not him looke to be long in quiet, which laboreth not in the sight of man to be most abiect and inferior to al Iam. 4, 6. Matth. 20, vers. 24, &c.. For thou art in this life to serue Mat. 20, 28 Philip. 2, 7., not to rule; and called to suffer Luk. 9, 23., and to labor Gen. 3, 19., not to loiter, and to liue at pleasure.
               For men are tried in this world as gold is in the fornace Iob. 23, 10 Wisd. 3, 6. 1. Pet. 1, 7. Psal. 66, 10.: and let no man looke to stand here vpright, vnles with al his hart he humble himselfe for the Lords sake 1. Co. 4, 10.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 18. The virtuous life of the holie Fathers.
               
               
                  BEholde the examples of those holie fathers, in whom true religion, and perfection did shine, and you shal

easilie perceaue how litle, and in a manner nothing it is which we doe. Alack, what is our life compared with theirs!
               Those holie men, and friendes of Christ did serue the Lord in hunger, and thirst 2. Cor. 6. verse. 4, &c. 2. Cor. 11, vers. 27, &c., in cold and nakednes, in wearines, & painfulnes, in watchings, and fastings, in praiers and meditations, in manifolde persecutions, and trobles Hebr. 11, vers. 36, &c..
               What, and how great miseries did the Apostles, and Martyrs, and Confessors, and Virgins, and al which at any time folowed the steps of our Sauior Christ, endure? For they hated their liues in this worlde Ioh. 12, 25 Matt. 10, 39 Matt. 16, 25. Mark. 8, 35. Luke. 9, 24. Luk. 17, 33. that they might saue them for eternal life.
               O what an hard, and seuere life did those holie fathers leade in deserts! what long and greeuous tentations suffered they! How often did the enimie assaile them! how zelouslie did they offer the sacrifice of praier vnto God! with what seueritie did they tame their bodies! what studie spent they to profit in religion! what conflicts had they with vices and wickednes! How vprightlie did they spend their time before God!
               In the daie time they labored, in the

night they praied, and at no time cessed they from deuout meditations Eph. 6, 18. Colos. 4. 2. 1. Thes 3, 10 1. Thes. 5, 17. Finallie no time was idlie spent, and al houres that they consumed seemed verie short, insomuch, that many times for to profit their soules, they litle did regarde the reliefe of their bodies Mat. 14, 15 Mark. 6, 35. 36. Luke. 9, 12.. And as for welth, autoritie, promotion, friendes, and kinsfolkes they renounced them Mat. 19, 27 Mark. 10, 28 Luk. 18, 28. Actes. 2, 44. 45., together with al worldlie things.
               So that in mans eies they were poore Matt. 5, 3. Luke. 6, 20., but in the sight of God, and in respect of their virtues most mightilie rich; outwardlie they seemed needie 2. Cor. 6, verse. 10., but inwardlie they were refreshed with Gods heauenly grace, & comfort Psa. 94, 19.; in the world meere strangers Ioh. 16, 2., but to Christ friends, and familiars Ioh. 15, 15.; in their owne iudgement most vile Ioh. 13, 6. 8., & odious to the world Ioh. 15, 19, but to almightie God deere and pretious Ioh. 16, 20 22..
               They were humble, and obedient, and friendlie, and patient: whereby they found good successe in the spirit, and grace before God 2. Cor. 9, verse. 13. 14..
               Therefore should al godlie men folow their steps, and be more mooued by ye example of them to virtue, than of luke-warme Christians, though they be infinite, to wickednes.
               
                  Oh what zeale had the godlie in ye primatiue Church Actes. 4, vers. 10, &c.! what deuotion to praier Acts. 2, 46. 47.! what contention to excel in wel doing! what seuere discipline! what reuerence, yea what obedience showed they to the doctrine of their teachers! Their monuments to this daie shewe, that they must needes be most singularlie perfect, which haue so valiantlie subdued the world Heb. 11, vers. 36, &c..
               But now a daies if a man can but keepe himselfe from grosse offences, or refraine from reuengement, he is accounted a good, and perfect man.
               O the securitie of our time, which haue so quicklie declined from our first heate Reuel. 2, 4., and loathed life because we are luke-warme Reu. 3, 16., & wearie Matth. 24, vers. 48, &c.! But surelie it is a manifest argument that we are dead from wel dooing, which see so many examples of godlie men before vs, and folow none of them.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 19. The exercise of a true Christian.
               
                  THe life of a Christian shoulde be adorned with al virtues; that he may be inwardlie such, as he outwardlie appereth

to the worlde Matt. 5, 14 16. 20. 47. 48.: yea more virtuous should he be, than he seemeth; inasmuch as God seeth our harts 1. Sam. 16▪ verse. 7. Psal. 33, 15. Reuel. 2, 23. Hebr. 4, 13., whome we must entirelie reuerence wheresoeuer we are, & before whome we must walke vprightlie as Angels.
               Euerie daie we should renounce our mindes Rom. 12, 2, and as though we were but newlie conuerted from sinne, we ought to enflame our zeale, and saie:
               O my Lord and God, assist me I humblie beseech thee, in this my good purpose, and zeale; and giue me grace euen at this present time godlie to enter into thy seruice. For what hetherto I haue done, is nothing.
               In this our race, and going forward in godlines we must vse great diligence, if we minde to finish our course as we should. For if he which couragiouslie goeth on, is tired many times; what wil become of him which either sildome, or faintlie setteth forward?
               Manie things cause vs to change our good mindes: but we neuer so lightlie omit spiritual exercise, but we greatlie hinder our selues therby.
               The purpose of the iust dependeth vpon the fauor of God Philip 2, verse. 13., not vpon their owne wisedome Prou. 3, 5., on whome

they trust in al their enterprises. For man may purpose Prou. 16, 9 33., but God disposeth; neither can man of himselfe bring anie thing to passe.
               If we omit our accustomed exercise, either for religions cause, or to profit our brethren, we maie easilie attaine therevnto againe: but if careleslie of sloth, or faintnes of mind we neglect the same, we do both highlie displease God, and greatlie endammage our selues Iames. 1, verse. 22. 23. 24..
               Let vs do our best, yet shal we offend in manie things Iames. 3, 2. Albeit it wilbe good to shoote at some certaine thing, and especialie against those vices which hinder vs more than others. We must examine, and set in order aswel outwarde, as inwarde things, for both are necessarie to our proceeding Ephes. 4, vers 20, &c. Coloss. 3, 17.
               If thou canst not at al times take an accompt of thy selfe, yet do it somtime, and at the least once a daie, to wit, at morning, or at night.
               In the morning consider how thou wilt spend the time til euening: and at night cal into mind how thou hast past the daie, & what thy thoughts Psal. 19, 14, wordes, and deedes haue bin. For therby we commonlie both displease

God, and offend man.
               Girde thy loines like a man Eph 6, 14. against Satan 1. Pet. 5, 8; bridle thy riotous appetite Prou. 23, vers. 31, &c. 1. Thess. 5, 6, so the more easilie shalt thou bring vnder al the vnrulie desires of the flesh.
               Be thou at no time idle altogether Prouer. 6, verse. 6, &c., but alwaies either reade, or wright, or praie, or meditate, or doe somewhat for the publike welfare.
               The bodie must be exercised with iudgement. For al exercises be not for euerie man. Priuate exercise must not be vsed in a publike place. Albeit thou art to take heede that thou be not to publike slowe, and swift vnto priuate: but hauing done thy dutie according to thy calling, if anie leisure be gotten betake thee to thy self, as thy profession doth require.
               Al men cannot vse one exercise: but that is for some, which is not for others.
               Againe, according to the diuersitie of times we thinke of exercises. For some like vs on holie-daies, some on working-daies; some in the time of warre, some in the time of quietnes; some we minde when we are pensiue, and some when we reioice in the Lord 1. Cor. 1, 3
                        •
                     
                  .
               
                  Good exercises should oftentimes be renewed especialie on holiedaies, as though we then were departing out of this life, and going to the euerlasting daies of rest. And therefore at such times especialie we should show our selues most deuoute, and most carefullie execute Gods hestes, looking, as it were presentlie for a reward of our labor from God. Which if it be deferred, let vs think with our selues that we are not sufficientlie prepared, but vnworthie so great glorie to be reuealed vnto vs at a time conuenient, and prepare our selues more diligentlie to our ende.
               Happie is that seruant, saith our Sauior Christ Luke. 12, verse. 43. 44., whome the Lorde when he commeth shal finde watchful: know yee of a truth, he wil make him ruler ouer al that he hath.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 20. Of solitarines, and silence.
               
                  SEeke a conuenient time to meditate; and oftentimes cal the benefites of GOD into minde.
               Omit curious thinges: and chuse

such matter as maie rather stirre vp thy minde vnto godlines, than busie thee too much.
               Withdraw thy selfe from speaking vainelie Matth. 12, verse. 36. Philip. 4, 8. 9.; from gadding idelie; from listening vnto rumors and nouelties, and thou shalt finde good leisure, and sufficient for thy spiritual exercise: & that after the example of the most godlie, who shunned the companie of men, as much as they might, and choase to liue apart vnto God.
               One said Seneca., I neuer came among men, but I departed more wicked than I was afore. And this we finde true when we talke much together.
               It is easier to be altogether silent, than not to exceede in words; and to tarie at home, than not to offend abroade, it is easier.
               Wherefore he which would be zelous, and godlie, must auoide companie with Iesus Matth. 14, verse. 23. Mark. 6, 46..
               No man salfelie doth go abroade, but he which gladlie can abide at home; no man salfelie doth gouerne, but he which gladlie can be in subiection Matth. 20, verse. 26. 27.; no man salfelie doth command, but he that hath learned willinglie to obeie Rom. 13, verse. 1, &c. Coloss. 3, 22 23.; no man salfelie is merie, but he that hath a good conscience

                  Prou. 15, verse. 13. 15 2. Cor. 1. 12.; and no man salfelie can speak, but he that willinglie can hold his peace.
               And yet hath not the securitie of good men, at anie time bin without ye feare of God Pro. 28, 14: neither did their excellent, and heauenlie giftes make them anie whit proude, but the more humble Rom. 12, verse. 16. 1. Cor. 4, 6. 7.. But the securitie of ye wicked, as it ariseth of pride Pro. 28, 25. 26.: so it turneth to their destruction Esa. 48, 22..
               Neuer looke to liue at thine harts ease in this world, seeme thou neuer so godlie, and religious Psa. 34, 19. Acts. 14, 22..
               It falleth out manie times that they fal greeuouslie through pride, which in mans opinion were most religious men Luke. 18, vers. 10, &c.: whereby it is euident, that tentation is verie good for some Ps. 119, 67 71. Lames. 1, 1. 2.; both to keepe them from pride 2. Cor. 12, verse. 7., and outward consolation.
               O, if man would auoid vaine pleasure, and not loue the world 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 15. 16. 17.; what a good conscience should he alwaies reteine! If man would cast awaie al vaine cares, and thinke onelie vpon heauenlie things, and trust wholie in God Psalm. 3, verse. 1, &c. Psalm. 4, 7. 8. 1. Pet. 5, 7. Esaie. 26, 4, what a continual ioie should he feele in his minde!
               No man shal finde anie spiritual comfort, except he occupie himselfe

diligentlie in stirring vp his minde vnto godlines Esaie. 26, 8. 9.: the which thou shalt the more easilie attaine, if thou enter into thy chamber Matth. 6, 6., and shut thy selfe from trobles of the worlde, as it is written Psalm. 4, 4., Examine your owne hart vpon your bed, and be stil.
               For commonlie thou shalt finde that in thy closet, which thou wouldest leese abrode.
               The more thou vsest thy closet, the more thou wilt like it: the lesse thou comest thereinto, the more thou wilt loath it. But frequent the same rightlie, and tarie therein at thy first conuersion from wickednes, and afterward thou shalt do it with exceeding pleasure.
               Solitarines, and quietnes is good for him that would proceede in virtue, and learne the mysteries of holie Scripture. For there shal he finde euen flouds of teares Psal 6, 6., whereby he maie wash, and clense himselfe euerie night, that he maie by so much be nigher vnto his maker, by how much he is farder from the resort of men.
               So that God with his holie Angels commeth vnto him, which withdraweth himselfe from his freendes, and acquaintance.
               
                  It is better to liue in a corner, so a man haue a regard to himselfe, than without care of his owne saluation euen to worke miracles Matt. 7, 22 1. Cor. 13, 2..
               It is no shame, but praise for a godlie man seldome to go abroade Psal. 102, verse. 6, &c.; to shunne to be seene, and not to loue to see.
               Why lookest thou on that, which is not lawful for thee to haue Exo. 20, 17? The worlde passeth awaie, and the lust thereof 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 17. 1. Cor. 7, 31..
               The desire of pleasure maketh thee to roaue abroade: but when the pleasure is past, which is quicklie gone, what gettest thou thereby but repentance, and a wandering soule?
               A merrie out going bringeth commonly a morneful returning home; and a mery euening watch is signe of a louring morning: euen so the ioie of this world entereth pleasantly, but endeth bitterly Prou. 14, verse. 13. Prou 23, 31 32.. What canst thou see in another place which is not here? Behold the heauen, & the earth, and al the elements: for of these do al things consist. What seest thou in any place that abideth euer 1. Cor. 7, verse. 31. 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 17.?
               Perchance thou thinkest to satisfie thy self with contemplation; but thou shalt neuer do so.
               
                  What if thou sawest euen al things before thine eies? it were but a vaine sight Eccl. 1, 14.
               But lift vp thine eies, man, vnto God Psal. 25, 1. Psal. 121, 1.; and aske pardon for thine offences Sirach. 17, verse. 23..
               Leaue vaine things to vaine folks; and giue thou thy mind to do the wil of God Deut. 11, 1 Eccle. 3, 12..
               Shut thy selfe within thy doore Matt. 6, 5., and cal thy welbeloued Iesus vnto thee Salamons songs. 2, 14. Sal. songs. 3, verse. 4.. Tarie with him in thy chamber: for else where thou shalt neuer finde so great quietnes.
               Haddest thou not gone abroade, nor listened vnto rumors and tales, thou mightedst the better haue enioied quietnes: but now because thou giuest thine eares to heare newes, thou art trobled greatlie, and vexed in minde.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 21. Preparatiues vnto Godlines.
               
                  WIlt thou come foreward in godlines? Then feare God Prou. 1, 7. Prou 9, 10. Psal. 19, 9. Ps. 111, 10. Sirach. 1, 16; & be thou not ouer loose in behauior, nor giuen to vaine pleasure Prou. 9, 17 18., but keepe vnder thy senses

by discipline.
               Prepare thy selfe to vnfeined repentance Rom. 12, 2, and thou wilt proue religious. For repentance bringeth vnto godlines, and negligence quicklie doth forgo the same.
               It is maruel that any man can hartelie reioice in this life, which considereth his banishment, and the manifold perils of his soule 1. Pet. 1, 6..
               Through ye weakenes of our minds, & securitie, we feele not the sorowes of ye minde, but oftentimes we laugh, when in deede we should weepe Matt. 5, 4. Luke. 6, 21..
               There is no true libertie, nor good mirth; but in the feare of God ioined with a good conscience 2. Cor. 1, 3. 4. 12. 1. Pet. 3, 15. 16. Prou. 15, 15.
               Happie is that man which casting of the lets of al worldlie busines, can giue himselfe wholie to the stirring vp of his minde. Happie is he that can keepe himselfe from al those thinges which may either defile or burden his conscience 2. Cor. 1, 8 9. 10..
               Fight like a man 2. Tim. 2, 1; custome is ouercome by custome.
               If thou mindest not to medle in other mens matters; they for their partes, wil not medle in thine.
               Take not vpon thee another mans charge; neither troble thy selfe in the

affaires of thy betters.
               But looke vpon thy selfe Matth. 7, verse. 1, &c.; and before thy deerest frendes giue thy selfe counsel.
               If thou lack the good wil of men, take it not heauilie; but if thou behaue not thy selfe wel, and circumspectlie as becommeth the seruant of GOD, and a true Christian Luk. 8, 21. Rom. 2, 8. 9., houle and weepe Iames. 5, 1..
               It is good for a man not to haue much comfort in this life, especialie worldlie comfort. As touching heauenlie, if we either feele it not at al, or but seldome, the fault is in our selues, which neither seeke occasions to stir vp the minde, nor forsake transitorie, and external comfort 2. Cor. 1, verse. 9. Heb. 12, 1..
               Thinke with thy selfe not onely that thou hast not deserued any heauenly comfort, but also that thou dost deserue great miserie, & affliction Luk. 18, 13▪
                  .
               A man set on fire with the sparkes of true godlines loueth not 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 15. but loatheth the world Philip. 3, 8▪
                  , and al that is therein 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 16..
               A good man continually findeth occasion to weepe, and mourne. For whether he behold himselfe, or other men, hee seeth that no man liueth without miserie in this world. Yea the

more earnestlie he considereth himselfe, the more abundantlie doth he shed teares Luke. 23, verse. 28.. And in deede our manifold sins, and transgressions Esai. 59, 2. wherwith we lie so wrapped that hardlie we can behold celestial things, shold moue vs so to do.
               Thinke more often of thy death Sirach. 7, verse. 36., than of a long life; & doubtles thou wilt giue thy selfe more earnestlie to repentance, than thou doest. Againe cal into thy minde the paines of hel, when God shal turne away his face Sirach. 18, verse. 23.; and it wil make thee both to lament thy sinnes, and to take aduersitie in good part.
               But because these things come not into minde Prou. 14, 9; and we folow the vaine pleasures of this transitorie worlde; we go on, God knowes, coldlie and slowlie in religion, for lacke of the spirit of God Gal. 5, 18. 22. Roman. 8, vers. 12, &c.; whence it is that our wretched bodies do so easilie complaine.
               Wherfore make thine humble petition vnto almightie GOD, that he would enflame within thy brest his heauenlie fire Psalm. 51, verse. 6, &c., and saie with that Prophet Psal. 80, 5. Psal 102, 9.: Feede me, O Lord, with ye bread of teares, and giue me teares to drinke with great measure.
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 22. A viewe of the miserie of mankinde.
               
               
                  WHersoeuer thou art, & whethersoeuer thou turnest thy self, thou art miserable, vnles thou returne vnto God Psa. 84, 10. 11. 12..
               Why art thou trobled? Because things fal not out according to thy minde? But who is he that hath al things at his hartes desire? Not I, not thou, nor any mortal man: no doubtles, man is not without miserie and troble, no not a King, nor the proud Pope himselfe.
               Who is then in best estate, & condition? Euen he which for Gods cause can suffer affliction Matt. 5, 10 11. 1. Pet. 3, 14. 1. Pet. 4, 14..
               Weake, & foolish people saie commonlie, See how happie he is; how welthie; how mightie; in what auctoritie; of what a goodlie stature; how faire is he! But looke vpon heauenlie giftes, and thou shalt finde that these things are not to be accounted of. For they are vncerteine Matt. 6, 19. 1. Iohn. 2, 16 17., and burdensome Mark. 4, 
                        •
                     9 because they can neuer be kept without carefulnes & feare Luk. 12, 33 34..
               Man shoulde not thinke that in

abundance of these worldlie thinges an happie life doth consist 1. Tim. 6, 17 18. 19. Luk. 12, 21.; but he is to content himselfe with a meane estate Psa. 37, 16, and to thinke that as long as he liueth in this world he is miserable.
               The more a man hungereth after godlines, the more he abhorreth this life 2. Cor. 12, verse. 10.; because he perceiueth more sensiblie, and more euidentlie seeth the sinnes of mans corruption. For vndoubtedlie to a man zelouslie addicted, & desirous to be loased from sinne Rom. 7, 24., to be with Christ Phili. 1, 23, it is a miserie & troble euen to eate, to drinke, to sleepe, to rest, to labor, and to be subiect to other thinges necessarilie incident vnto mortal man. For these things do greatlie suppresse the mind of man Wisd. 9, 15.. Therefore most humblie doth that Prophet desire to be deliuered from them on this wise, Drawe me out of my necessities, O Lord.
               But miserable are they which see not their owne miserie: but more miserable which loue this miserie Luk. 6, 24 25., & mortal life, in which some so delight (albeit with al their carking, and care they can hardlie prouide things necessarie for themselues) that, were they sure to liue alwaies in this

world, they would not set a point by the kingdome of God Matt. 6, 21. Luk. 12, 16. 17. 18. 19.. Which mad, and faithles wretches, so deepelie drowned in the earth that they can thinke vpon nothing but earthlie thinges, shal one daie to their paine vnderstand, how vile & vaine it was which they loued Philip. 3, verse. 19..
               But those men of God, and frends of Christ, looked not on those things which pleased the flesh, & florish for a time Phili. 3, 7. 8.: but they coueted after euerlasting riches with al desire, & greedines; yea with their whole hartes they longed for things on high, not seene 2. Cor. 4, verse. 18. 1. Pet. 1, 8., that y• desire of things which are seene, might not draw them vnto things below.
               Despaire not, brother, to come forward in godlines; thou hast yet time, and space Psal. 32, 5. 6. Esaie. 55, 6. 7.. Deferre not therefore thine amendment Eccles. 12, verse. 1, &c. from daie to day: but rise, and out of hand begin, and reason with thy selfe on this wise, Behold now is the time to worke, now to winne the field, now is the time to amend 2. Cor. 6, 1. 2. Galat. 6, 9. 10.; in aduersitie the time is to deserue wel.
               Through fire and water thou must passe, before thou canst come to the place of comfort Psa. 66, 12.. Except thou offer

violence vnto thy selfe Matth. 11, verse. 12., thou shal
                     •
                   neuer triumph ouer sinne.
               As long as we beare about fraile, and earthlie bodies, let vs not looke to liue without griefe, and sorow Roma. 7, verse. 24.
               In deede we coulde wish to liue quite from miserie: but forasmuch as through sinne we haue lost our innocencie Rom. 5, 15, our felicitie, and quietnes is gone therewithal.
               Wherefore let vs be patient Luke. 21, verse. 19., and expect the mercie of God, vntil our wickednes be put awaie, & this mortalitie be swalowed vp of life 1. Cor. 15, verse. 54..
               O Lord, how great is mans frailty! How is man proane continually vnto sinne Gen. 6, 5. Gen. 8, 21. Sirac. 17, 14.! To daie thou doest confesse thy sinnes Matt. 6, 12 13. Luke. 11, 4., and tomorow thou wilt sinne as fresh as earst thou didst. Now thou art purposed to offend no more, and yet by and by thou doest so wickedlie, as if thou hadst neuer ment to do wel Roman. 7, vers. 15, &c..
               So that great cause we haue to debase, and to thinke humblie of our selues, being so fraile, and subiect to offending Iames. 3, 2. Iames. 4, 1..
               Againe, if with litle negligence we leese that, which by great labor could hardlie be obteined; what wil become of vs at the end which so soone

waxe cold Luk. 9, 59 61.?
               Wo to vs, if we so go on vnto rest, as if now there were peace and securitie 1. Thess. 5, verse. 6. 7., when in verie deede as yet there appeareth no token of godlines in our behauior.
               Then vndoubtedlie wee must be trained vp afresh, like yong soldiers 2. Tim. 2, 4, if we hope to returne vnto goodnes, and to proceede in godlines.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 23. That man ought to thinke vpon his end.
               
               
                  SEing the life of man is so fraile, and short Iob. 14, 1., consider wiselie what thou takest in hand.
               To daie a man, to morowe none Sirach. 10, verse. 11.: and being out of sight, thou art out of mind Eccl. 1, 11. Eccles. 9, 5..
               Oh the dulnes, and hardnes of mans hart, that thinking of thinges present, hath no care of the time to come Sirac. 7, 16 17. Sirac. 18, 23!
               It were thy part so to behaue thy selfe in al thy deedes, and thoughts, as though thou shouldest depart out of this world by and by.
               Haddest thou a cleere conscience, y• wouldest not greatly feare death Rom. 8, 23 2. Cor. 1, 8. verse. 9. Sirach 41, 1..
               
                  It is better to auoide sinne, than to flie death.
               If thou art not readie to daie, how wilt thou be to morow? The next day is not certaine Matth. 24, vers. 36, &c. Matt. 25, 13. Mark. 13, 32 33. Luk. 21, 34.. And againe, howe knowest thou that thou shalt liue til to morow?
               What are wee the better to liue long, if we prooue not better by our long life? Assuredlie long life doth not make vs better to God ward, but the farder from God Rom. 2, 4. Iames. 5, verse. 1, &c..
               Oh wel were we, if we had liued wel but one daie in this worlde! Manie keepe in minde how long they haue fauored good religion, but they neuer thinke what fruite they haue shewed worthie amendment of life Matt. 3, 8..
               If thou thinke it irksome to die, thou shalt find it more perilous and dangerous to liue long.
               Happie is that man which alwaies thinketh of his ende, and prepareth himselfe dailie for to die 2. Cor. 4, vers. 16, &c..
               When thou seest a man to die, consider by and by that thou must depart the same waie Heb. 9, 27 Sirac. 41, 3..
               In the morning thinke not to liue til night; & at night looke not to liue til morning: and alwaies liue so circumspectlie, and be so godlie prepared,

that death maie find thee readie whensoeuer he shal come.
               Many before they looke for death, depart sodeinlie Luk. 12, 20: for the Sonne of man wil come in an houre when men looke not for him Luke. 12, verse. 40. Matth. 24, verse. 50.. But when that houre shal come, then wilt thou begin to thinke otherwise of thy life past than thou hast done, and then wilt thou bitterlie bewaile, that euer thou wast so sluggishe, and negligent Mat. 7, 22 23. Matth. 25, vers. 41, &c..
               Happie is that man which endeuoreth to seeme such in this life, as hee would appeare at ye houre of death Luk. 12, 37.
               He which hateth the worlde perfectlie 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 15.; and fauoreth godlines zelouslie Reu. 3, 15 16.; and wil be admonished willinglie Prouer. 2, verse. 1, &c.; and endeuoreth to amend his life seriouslie Luk. 3, 3, Matth. 3, 8. 10.; and can obeie his superiors gladlie Ti
                        •
                     . 3, 1. Colos. 3 22 23.; and denie himself thoroughlie Marke. 8, verse. 34. Luke. 9, 23.; and take affliction for Christes sake patiently Matth. 10, verse. 38. Matt. 5, 10. 11. 1. Pet. 3, 14. 1. Pet. 4, 14., giueth most notable tokens that he wil die a good man.
               Whilest thou art in health thou maist doe manie good deedes; but when thou art sicke, I see not what thou art able to do. For in the time of sicknes fewe amend: and they which deferre their amendment til then, do

hardlie come into the fauor of God.
               Better is it to amende, and while time is Gal. 6, 10. 2. Cor. 6, 2. to liue wel, that hereafter thou maist liue for euer Reu. 7, 15. 16. 17. 1. Cor. 2, 9.. But if thou forgo so good opportunitie, thou afterwards wilt seeke it, when it is too late: and perhaps desire but an houre, or two to repent, and they wil not be granted.
               Wherfore consider diligentlie both what perils thou shalt escape, and what miseries auoide Prou. 14, verse. 27., if alwaies like a wise man, thou thinke vpon thine end. And endeuor so to liue in this world, that at the houre of death thou maist reioice rather thā feare Psal. 23, 4..
               Now, while time is, learne to die vnto the world, that then thou maist liue with Christ Rom. 6, 
                        •
                     8.. Now, while time is, learne to contemne the world 1 Iohn. 2, verse. 15. Luke. 14, 26 33. Matt. 10, 37, that then without let thou maist go vnto Christ. Nowe, while time is, beate downe thy bodie 1 Cor. 9, verse. 27. by repentance, that then thou maist haue an assured boldnes.
               Ah foole, what thinkest thou to liue long, seing thou art not sure to liue one daie Luk. 12, 17 18. 19. 20. 40.? How manie haue bin deceaued & sodeinlie taken out of this world Eccles. 9, verse. 12.?
               Thou hast heard, I am sure, and that

oftentimes, how one was killed by the sword; another drowned; another brake his necke with a fal; another as he was at meat; another at plaie; another with a knife; another of the sicknes; another of theeues. Thus al die Sirac. 41, 3 (though not after one sorte), & mans life passeth awaie like a shadow Iob. 8, 9. Iob. 14, 2. Psa. 102, 11. Psa. 144, 4..
               Who after death wil helpe thee, if in thy life time thou leese good opportunitie Luke. 16, vers. 24, &c.? Now, I saie, now or neuer is the time to doe wel 2. Cor. 6, 2., while both thou knowest not the houre of thy death, and maist do good to thy selfe in time.
               Now, while time serues, laie vp euerlasting treasures for thy selfe in heauen Matth. 6, verse. 20. Luk. 12, 33.; thinke of nothing but on heauenlie things Coloss. 3, verse. 1. 2., and care for nothing but thy saluation. Now, I saie, while time serues make freendes, which after death maie receiue thee into euerlasting habitations Luk. 16, 9.
               Account thy selfe on the earth but a pilgrime, & stranger Hebr. 11, vers. 13, &c., vnto whome the affaires of the world do nothing apperteine. Get thee a quiet conscience, & lift vp thy minde vnto God Coloss. 3, 1: because in this worlde thou hast no continuing cittie Heb. 13, 14 Micah. 2, 10..
               Thether direct thy praiers, and dailie

groanes with teares, that after death thy spirit maie goe to God in blisse Psal. 31, 5. Luk. 23, 46. Acts. 7, 59,.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 24. Of the last iudgement; and of the punishment for si ne.
               
               
                  WHatsoeuer thou takest in hand remember thine ende Sirac. 7, 36, and how thou must appeere before a seuere iudge, in whose sight nothing is hid Heb. 4, 13., which neither is pleased by reward, nor admitteth vaine excuses; but rightlie & indifferentlie iudgeth al men 1. Pet. 1, 17.
               O fond man, & miserable wretch, what answere wilt thou make vnto God, who knoweth al thy sinnes Iob. 9, 3. 14., which oftentimes fearest euen the lookes of an angrie man?
               Why doest thou not looke to thy selfe against the daie of that iudgement, when no man shal excuse, or defend another Rom. 14, verse. 12. 2 Cor. 5, 10.? for euerie man shal haue enough to answer for himself Psa. 62, 12. Rom. 2, 6. 1. Cor. 3, 8. Galat. 6, 5.
               Now maist thou doe good, if thou take paine; now wil thy teares be accepted, if thou weepe; now maie thy groanes be heard, if thou sigh Psal. 32, 6. Esaie. 55, 6., and both pacifie God, and purge thy self.
               
                  And in deede thoroughlie is the patient man purged, which being iniuried, doth bewaile the wickednes of the inferrer rather than the iniurie offered to himselfe; praieth for his enimies Matt. 5, 44. Luk. 23, 34. Actes. 7, 60. 1. Cor. 4, 13.; forgiueth them from his heart Matt. 6, 12. 14. Mark. 11, 25 Sirac. 28, 2.; asketh pardon speedily of others whom he hath offended Matt. 5, 24; is more easilie moued to pittie than to anger; offereth often violence vnto himselfe Matt. 11, 12; and laboreth earnestlie to bring his bodie into the subiection of the Spirit 1. Cor. 9, verse. 27.. And these things must not be deferred, but be done while we liue, and that with speede Gal. 6, 10.. But we deceaue our selues through an inordinate desire of the flesh Rom 8, 12 13..
               That hel fire Matth. 25, verse. 41., what else wil it burne but sinnes? The more thou hast loued thy selfe, and pampered thy flesh, the more shal be thy paines, and ye more substance to burne thee haste thou laie together Luk. 12, 20 Luke. 16, vers 19, &c. Iames. 5, 3.. For in what things a man hath sinned, in the same he shalbe punished Wisd. 11, verse. 13., according to the greatnes of the offence.
               There idle persons shalbe pricked with burning forkes; gluttons there shalbe tormented wt extreeme hunger, and thirst Luk. 16, 24 25.; there epicures and voluptuous persons for their sweete

delights shal haue burning pitch to boile them, and stinking brimstone to anoie them; the enuious there shal howle like mad dogs; & no vice but shal haue his torment. There the proude shal haue shame; and the couetous churle shal haue miserable penurie.
               To be short; one houre of paine in that place shalbe more greeuous, than al ye time they had in this world to amend their manners. For there is no rest Esai. 66, 24 2. Thess. 1, 8.; comfort there is none: here sometime their sorowe ceassed, and sometime they receiued comfort of their freends.
               Wherfore haue a care of thy selfe whilst thou art aliue, and bewaile thy sinnes, that in the daie of that iudgement thou maist safelie reioice with Gods elect Luk. 16, 25 Wisd. 3, 3. Matt. 25, 34.
               For then shal the righteous with great boldnes stand against such as haue vexed, and oppressed them Wisd. 5, 1. Psalm 1, 
                        •
                     .. Then shal he sit to iudge Matth. 19, verse. 28., which now is content to be iudged of men. Then shal the poore Matt. 5, 3., and meeke Luk. 14, 11 Luk. 18, 14. triumph, when the proude shal quake on euerie side Prou. 16, verse. 18.. Then shal they saie, He was wise, which for Christ his sake seemed a foole and abiect 1. Cor. 4. verse. 10.. Then

shal the memorie of miserie patientlie susteined be sweete Ps. 126 5. Esaie. 25, 8., when in the meane while the wicked shal sob, and sigh Reu. 21, 8.. Then shal the godlie reioice, and be glad, but the reprobate shal howle and weepe Mat. 25, 46 Iohn. 5, 29. Dan. 12, 2.. Then shal the afflicted more triumph, than if continualie he had bin in ioie Roma. 8, verse. 18.. Then shal the base apparel be glorious 2. Cor. 5, 2, & the proude attire infamous. Then shal the poore cottage be more commended 2. Pet. 1, 13 14. 2. Cor. 5, 1., than is the gilded palace praised. Then shal constant patience more preuaile Esai. 30, 18 Luk. 21, 19. than al the power of the worlde. Simple obedience shal more be commended then, than al the subtiltie of man Esai. 29, 16 1. Cor. 1, 20.. Then shal a cleere and good conscience more reioice a man Esaie. 33, verse. 14 15., than profounde skil in Philosophie. The contempt of riches shal do more good Matt. 5, 3. then, than al the riches in the world. Then shal a zelous praier bring more delight Sirach. 35, vers 13, &c., than euer did fine cates. Thy silence kept in thy life time shal more chere thy hart at that time Esa. 30, 15., than long babling Matt. 6, 5. 6. 7.. Good workes then shalbe more respected Roma. 2, verse. 10., than copie of sweet wordes. And then shal thy paines taken to reforme thy manners more delight Prouer. 11, verse. 3, &c. than coulde al the pleasure

in the worldeWisd. 5, 8..
               Wherefore learne in this life to suffer smal thingsRom. 8, 18 35., that in the world to come thou maiest escape great, & greeuous dangers. Trie first in thy life time, what thou canst suffer after thou art dead. And if thou canst not endure but light things in comparison now, how wilt thou beare afterward euerlasting tormentes? And if now so litle paine can make thee impatient, what wil the fire of hel doo? For perswade thy self, thou canst not be twise happie, that is, enioie thy pleasure in this lifeLuk. 16, 25, and raigne too with Christ in the worlde to come. Now suppose thou hast liued hetherto in perpetual honor and pleasure, what good would these things doo thee, if thou shouldest die out of handLuk. 9, 25. Luk. 12, 20.?
               Seest thou not how al thinges are vaineEccle. 1, 2. Eccles. 12, 8., saue onelie to loue and to serue God
                     
                        •
                     . Pet. 1, 10?
               For he which loueth God with al his hart, feareth neither death, nor paine, nor iudgement, nor damnationRom. 8, 38 39.. For perfect loue maketh a man with boldnes to appeere afore God1. Ioh. 4, 17 18.. But maruel it is not though, he which delighteth as yet in sinne Rom. 6, 12 14.
                  
doo both feare death, and the daie of iudgement.
               Notwithstanding, if the loue of God cannot allure thee vnto godlines, yet let the feare of hel fire driue thee from wickednesProu. 14, verse. 27. Luke. 3, verse. 7, &c.. But if neither the loue of God, nor the feare of hel cannot better thee one iot, then looke not to stande in a good thing long, but quicklie to fal into the snares of Satan.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 25. That we must earnestlie endeuor to amend our liues.
               
               
                  BE thou zelous, and earnest in the seruice of God: consider with thy self wherfore thou wast made, and wherefore thou hast renounced the world, euen to liue to GodRom. 7, 4., and to become a good manEphe. 2, 10.
               Therefore endeuor thou zelouslie to go forward. For yet a litle while and thou shalt haue a reward of thy labors, and neither feare nor sorrow shalbe about theeEsai 25, 8. Reuel. 7, 17. Reuel. 21, 4. Matth. 5, 4..
               Labor but a while longer, & thou shalt find great, yea euerlasting restRom. 8, 18.
               
                  If thou continue faithful, and diligent vnto the endeMatth. 24, verse. 13. 2 Thess. 3, 13 2. Tim. 2, 5., God wil showe himselfe faithful, and bountiful in rewardingMatth. 25, vers. 21, &c..
               Hope wel to winne the garlandRom. 8, verse. 24. 2. Tim. 4, 7. 8, but shun securitieMatth. 24, vers. 42, &c. Matth. 25, 8 Luk. 12, 42., both to auoide wearines, and pride.
               A certaine man tossed betweene hope and feare, on a daie in his praiers vttered these words, Oh if I knew certainly that I should perseuere! and forthwith he seemed to heare these heauenlie words in his minde: What if thou knewest as much; wouldest thou continue in the course thou hast taken? wel go to, Do that which thou wouldest do, & doubt not to perseuer. With which comfortable wordes being encoraged he straight waie committed himselfe to the wil of God; & from thence forth neither wauered anie more in mind, nor labored curiously what might become of him, but bent himselfe wholie to do that was agreeable to the wil of God1. Ioh. 2, 17, & most necessarie for his going forward, and continuing in the race of virtue.
               Trust thou in the Lord, and doo good, (saith the ProphetPsal. 37, 3.) so thou shalt dwel in the land, and be fed assuredlie.
               
                  One thing there is that withdraweth manie men from proceeding in virtue, and earnest amendement of their manners, and that is the horrible hardnes, and the painefulnes to subdue our seluesMatth. 19, vers. 21, &c. Marke. 10, vers. 21, &c. Luke. 18, vers. 22, &c..
               But who profit more than others in wel dooing? Not they whome such thinges dismaie, but they which endeuor valiantlie to ouercome those counterbuffsPs. 27, 14. 2. Tim. 2, 1.. For the more a man ouercommeth, & by Gods assistance subdueth himselfe2. Pet. 2, 9., the more he goeth forward, and commeth the more into the fauor of God.
               How be it al men haue not like power to ouercome, and to mortifie themselues. Yet this I saie, he which hath lesse habilitie, if he vse diligence in this point, shal more preuaileMatth. 19, vers 27, &c. Luk. 18, 13., than another which is slothful, though perhaps otherwise he seeme virtuousMatth. 19, verse. 20. Luk. 18, 11. 12. 21..
               Now there be two thinges, that make much to a mans amendment, namelie, to withdraw our selues violentlie from such things, wherevnto by our wicked nature we are enclinedMat. 11, 12; and to bend our selues wholie to the attaining of that good, which we stande in neede ofPsal. 37, 3. 4.. Also those

thinges are especialie to be taken heed of, and auoided, which we commonlie mislike, or condemne in other men Matt. 7, 3. 4. Roman. 2, verse. 
                        •
                     , &c. 1. Cor. 11, 31.
               Take profit of euerie thing. If thou hearest, or seest examples of virtue, folowe them; if of wickednes, auoide them. As thou priest into other mens manners: so do others into thine Matth. 7, 4. 2..
               Oh what a ioieful and comfortable thing is it to see professors of Christianitie, folowers of Christes doctrine 1. Cor. 13, verse. 3 4. 1. Tim. 1, 5. 19.! Againe what a lamentable, and greeuous thing is it that such as would be counted Gospelers liue looselie, and contrarie to their calling!
               How hurtful is it to alter the purpose of thy profession, and to encline to those thinges which are not commanded thee 1. Tim. 4, verse. 1, &c. 1. Tim. 5, 13. Coloss. 2, 20!
               Remember thy profession, and alwaies haue in minde Christ which was crucified Gal. 6, 14. 1. Cor. 1, 23.; when thou seest his life be ashamed of thy selfe, that hast so long a while professed Christianitie, and yet so litle, if anie whit, folowed the example of Christ 1. Cor. 11, verse. 1. 
                        •
                     . Pet. 2, 9. 21..
               He which attentiuelie, and carefullie thinketh vpon the life, & death of Iesus, shal finde sufficiencie of al

necessarie, and profitable thinges in the same; neither shal he neede to seeke any better thing without Iesus Roman. 8, verse. 1, &c. Coloss. 2, 12 13. 14..
               If Iesus crucified came into our mindes, quicklie, and sufficientlie learned we should prooue 1. Cor. 2, verse. 1, &c..
               The delite of a Christian is in the Lawe of the Lord Psal. 1, 2. 1. Iohn. 5, 2., and therein doth he exercise himselfe: but if he once waxe negligent, and luke warme Reu. 3, 15. 16., then miseries come which oppresse him, and trobles that vexe him, because he is voide of inwarde consolation, and forbidden to seeke anie outward comfort Esaie. 57, verse. 3, &c..
               And doubtles he which passeth the boundes of Christes doctrine, is greatlie subiect to a greeuous destruction Prou. 1, 24 25. 26.; and he that loueth a loase, & secure life, is neuer in quiet Esa. 57, 20 21.; for some thing euermore displeaseth him.
               Rather folow the streight, and virtuous life Matt. 7, 13 14. of the Apostles, and Disciples of Christ 1. Cor 11, 1 1. Thess 1, 6. 7. 1. Thess. 2, verse. 14. 2. Thess. 3, 9 Hebr. 13, 7.; and in so dooing, doubt thou not, but that God of his wonted mercie wil giue thee strength to do wel. This is the waie to be ful of hope, and strength; this is the way, euen the heauenlie waie so to proceede,

that thou maiest despise al worldlie things Psa. 56, 4 ve. 10, & 11..
               And would to God we had no let, but that we might praise God euen with hart, and mouth Psal. 34, 1. 2., and keepe his commandements Psa. 119, 5.! would to God we were quite rid from al worldlie busines, and did set our affections on heauenlie things Coloss. 3, 2! For when man is come to that point, that he careth for no worldlie comfort Psal. 86, 7 8. Psal 2. 0, 7. Psal. 56, 11. Rom. 8, 38. 39., then beginneth he to tast the sweetenes of God; to take al things in good part, howsoeuer they fal out; to be neither ouer iocunde in prosperitie, nor too pensiue in aduersitie Psal. 30, 7. 8.; but euermore confidentlie to hope in God Psal. 37, 3. 4., who is al in al Ro. 11, 36. 1. Cor. 8, 6 1. Cor. 12, 6. 1. Cor. 15, 28, to whome nothing dieth, but al things liue, and continualie obeie at his beck Ps. 104, 1..
               Alwaies remember the end Sirac 7, 36; and thinke that time lost wil neuer come againe Eph. 5, 15. 16. Galat. 6, 10..
               Without care, and diligence thou shalt neuer attaine to godlines Rom. 12, 6 vers. 7, & 8 2. Cor. 11, 23. If thou waxe faint, thou shalt euerie daie be worse & worse Luk. 9, 62 Iohn. 5, 14. 2. Pet. 2, 1. vers. 12, &c.: but go thou zealouslie forwarde Mat. 25, 10 ve. 21, & 22. 1. Pet. 3, 10. 11. Psal. 34, 12. 13., and thou shalt find both great peace, and pleasure in thy wel dooing, both because God fauoreth thee, & thou fauorest virtue.
               
                  An earnest, and zelous man is prepared vnto al thinges Rom. 8, 35 38. 39. Ephes 6, 12.. It is more paineful to resist vices, and perturbations of the minde, than to sweate againe with bodilie labor: and he which in time taketh no heede of smal sinnes, by litle and litle falleth into great offences Iames. 1, verse. 13. 14..
               Thou shalt euermore be merie at night, if thou hast behaued thy selfe godlie in the daie.
               Watch for thy selfe 1. Cor. 16, verse. 13.; stir vp, and admonish thy selfe; whatsoeuer becommeth of others, haue a regard to thy selfe 1. Tim. 6, verse. 11. 12.; For so doest thou profit, as thou offerest Mat. 11, 12 violence vnto thy selfe.
            
            Thus endeth the first Booke.
            
         
         
            
            The second Booke of the Jmitation of Christ.
            
               
                  Chapter. 1. Of the inward life of man.
               
                  THe kingdome of God is within saith ChristLuk. 17, 21.
               Turne thee vnto the Lorde with al thine heart, hauing forsaken this wretched worlde, and thou shalt finde rest for thy soulePsal. 4, 8. Psalm. 15, 1. Matt. 11, 29..
               Learne to contemne outwarde thingsLuke. 17, verse. 20. 21., and to addict thy selfe to spiritual; so shalt thou perceaue the kingdome of God to come into thee.
               For the kingdome of God is righteousnes, and peace, and ioie in the holie GhostRo. 14, 17., which the wicked enioie notEsai. 57, 21.
               Christ wil come vnto thee, & comfort theeIohn. 14, 23, if thou make a fit resting place for him within thee. For al his glorie, and beautie is withinPsa. 45, 13; there doth he gladlie abide.
               With the inner man doth he oftentimes

walke; and reason sweetelie; and delight himselfe pleasantlie; and agree notablie; and familiarlie continueProuer. 8, vers. 32, &c..
               Go to now, O faithful soule, prepare thine hart for this bridgroomeSal. song. 5, verse. 4. 2. Cor. 11, 2, that he may come vnto thee, & dwel within thee. For thus he saithIoh. 14, 23, If anie man loue me, he wil keepe my worde, and my Father wil loue him, and we wil come vnto him, and wil dwel with him.
               Wherefore keepe out others, and let Christ haue roome: if thou hast him, thou hast enoughRom. 8, 17 Philip. 3, 8.. For he wil haue a care of thee, and so faithfulie ouersee al thine affaires, that to put anie confidence in man thou shalt not needePsa. 37, 3. 34. 39. Hebr. 13, 6..
               For men quicklie are changed, and speedilie departePsal. 62, 9 Psal. 39, 11. Psal. 116, 10. 11.: but Christ abideth for euerHeb. 13, 8., and continueth by his vnto the endeMatt. 28, verse. 20.. Neither set any great affiance on mortal and fraile man, albeit he be deere vnto thee, and maie doe thee goodPsa. 118, 8 9▪
                  ; and if sometime he gainesaie, and troble thee, be not ouer pensiue.
               They which take thy part to daie, to morowe maie be thine enimies, & afterward thy frends: for they change

manie-times like the winde.
               But put thy confidence in ye Lord1. Pet. 5, 7. Psal. 43, 5., and see thou serue, and loue himMatth. 22, verse. 37. Mark. 12, 29 30.: he wil handle thy cause right wel, and set it in good orderPs. 73, 24..
               Here thou hast no continuing cittieHeb. 13, 14, & wheresoeuer thou goest, thou art a stranger, and pilgrime Heb. 11, 13 vers. 14, &c., neuer finding rest til thou art fast ioined vnto ChristEphe. 2, 19.
               Why doest thou here gaze about, seing this is not the place of thine abode? In heauen should be thy conuersationPhil. 3, 20, as for earthly things thou shouldest behold them onelie to see how they passe awaie1. Cor. 7, 31 1. Iohn. 2, 17, and thou with themPsal. 90, 5 verse. 6, &c.. So looke vpō them, that thou loue them not1. Iohn. 2, verse. 15. 16., least thou perish being taken with vaine delight.
               Cast thy cogitations vpon the most hie God1. Pet 5, 7; & praie vnto Christ without ceassingPsa. 55, 16 17. Luke. 18, 1. Coloss. 4, 2. 1. Thess. 5, verse. 17..
               If thou canst not meditate on deepe and heauenlie mysteries, rest thy self in the paines of Christ, and abide willinglie in his wounds1. Pet. 2, vers. 21, &c. 1. Pet. 4, 13.. Run thou zelouslie vnto those healthful wounds, and stripes of Christ, and thou shalt finde a great comfort in aduersitie, yea thou shalt not set a rush by the reproches of men, but take al slaunders

in good part1. Pe. 2, 19 20. 1. Pet. 3. 9, 14..
               Christ himselfe was despised of men in this worldPsal. 22, 6. Matt. 27, 31 Iohn. 15, 18. 19. 20. Hebr. 12, 2. 3.; yea at a great extremitie his verie freendes forsooke him, and fledMat. 26, 56 70. 72.. Christ himselfe suffered, and was contemnedEsaie. 53, verse. 3, &c. Luk. 18, 32.; and wilt thou complaine? Christ himselfe had aduersaries, and backbiters 1 Pet. 2, 23 24.; and wouldest thou haue no enimies, nor be il spoken of?
               How shal thy patience be crowned, if thou sustaine no aduersitie 2. Tim. 2, 3 4. 5.? And if thou wilt not be contraried in anie thing, how wilt thou be the freend of Christ Ioh. 15, 13 14. 20.? But make thou an account to suffer tribulation both with Christ Rom. 8, 17, and for Christ 1. Pe. 4, 14, if thou desire to raigne with Christ 2. Tim. 2, verse. 11. 12..
               Oh haddest thou but once entered into the secrete closet of Iesus, and felt but euen a verie litle of the heat of his loue, thou wouldest not onelie make none account either of prosperitie, or aduersitie in this worldLuke. 5, 11 Luke. 9, 23., but also euen reioice when thou art defamedActs. 5, 41.! For the loue of Christ makes a man euen to despise himselfe Roman. 8, vers. 35, &c. Philip. 3, 8..
               I saie the true spiritual man, which is voide of inordinate desires, and loueth Iesus vnfeinedlie, can both turne himselfe freelie vnto God, and

rauished in spirit aboue himselfe, quietlie enioie him Phil. 3, 20..
               He, to whome al things seeme as they are in deede, not as they are esteemed in ye vaine opinion of man, is doubtles a wise man, and rather taught of God Esa. 54, 13. Iohn. 6, 65., than of men.
               He that hath learned to abide within, and to make smal account of outward thinges, neither seeketh a place 1. Tim. 2, 8, nor expecteth leisure to exercise himselfe in godlines Galat. 6, 9. 10. 1. Thess. 3, 10. The inwarde man can quicklie cal himselfe home, inasmuch as he neuer is altogether abroade. Neither outward labor can let him, nor necessarie busines staie him for a time: but as euery thing falleth out, so doth he applie himselfe Rom. 8, 38 39..
               He that is wel prepared, and reformed inwardlie, is nothing trobled with the wonderful, and peruerse behauiour of the worlde Psal. 56, 4. 1. Cor. 4, 3.. Looke how greatlie a man draweth busines vnto himselfe, so much is he hindred, and distracted.
               Wert thou wel setled, & throughlie purged, al things would be for thy good, and profite Rom. 8, 28. But for that thou art not plainlie dead vnto thy selfe 1. Pet. 2, 1. 2, 3. Coloss. 3, 5., nor separated wholie from earthlie

things, manie things displease, and troble thee often-times.
               Nothing doth so defile, and snarle the minde of man, as the impure desire of earthlie things Titus. 2, 12.
               Wherefore if thou wilt despise the consolation which this world doth minister 1. Ioh. 2, 15, thou shalt more easilie both behold celestial things, and inwardlie reioice.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 2. Of Patience, and humilitie, two virtues necessarie to be in a Christian.
               
                  CAre not greatlie who is on thy side, or against thee Psal. 56, 4. 2. Cor. 1, 12., but care to please God in al thy dooings, and to haue a good conscience: so wil God defend thee right wel. And whom he defendeth, none can hurt Rom. 8, 31.
               If thou hast learned to holde thy peace, and to be pacient Psa. 27, 14, doubt thou not but God wil aide thee frō aboue. He knoweth when to deliuer thee 2. Pet. 2, 9.; therefore oughtest thou to commit thy selfe to his pleasure.
               It is God that aideth Psa. 121, 2., and deliuereth man from shame, and rebuke.
               
                  It is manie-times good, to bring vs more and more downe, to haue our vices knowen, and reprehended of others Ps. 119, 67 71..
               When a man humbleth himselfe for his offences, he easilie pacifieth such as are offended, and with smal adoe commeth into fauor againe.
               The humbled man doth GOD protect, and saue Psa. 34, 18; to the humble he humbleth himselfe, yea the humble hath manie things at his handes Iam. 4, 6; the humble he exalteth vnto glorie 1. Pet. 5, 6. Prou. 22, 4.; and to the humble he both reuealeth his secretes Luk. 10, 21, and offereth himselfe Esai. 66, 
                        •
                     .. The humble man, be he neuer so much iniuried, or backbited, is alwaies quiet in mind: because he trustethin God, not on the world Psal. 23, 4..
               Thinke not to come forwarde in religion anie whit, vnles thou thinke thy selfe inferior vnto al Iames. 4, 6.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 3. That we ought to be at peace both with our selues, and with al men.
               
               
                  BE first of al at peace with thy selfe Psa. 51, 12 13.: and then shalt thou pacifie others Matt. 5, 9..
               A quiet man doth

more good, than a learned.
               The contentious construeth a good thing on the il part, and harkeneth vnto euil Prou. 17, 4: But a good, and quiet man turneth al thinges to the best Pro. 15, 18. The quiet man conceaueth sinisterlie of no man 1. Cor. 13, verse. 5.: but the vnquiet, and suspicious, wil neither be quiet himselfe, nor suffer others to be at rest; he both speaketh that manietimes which he ought not, and doth not that which he should; he considereth what is another mans dutie, and neglecteth his owne Ioh. 21, 21 22..
               Wherefore doo first thine owne dutie: and then looke that another man doo his Matt. 7, 5..
               Thou hast the tricke how to color, and excuse thine owne deedes Rom. 2, 1. 3. yet wilt thou not alow the excuses of another. But reason would, thou shouldest excuse another, and accuse thy selfe Pro. 10, 12. Prou. 17, 9. 1. Pet 4, 8.. If thou wouldest be borne withal, be are thou with another: and see how far thou art as yet from true patience, and charitie, which fretteth and is offended with none but with it selfe 1. Cor. 13, verse. 4. 5. 6. 7..
               To dwel with good, and quiet men it is no hard matter, for al men naturalie do like thereof, and euerie man

desireth quietnes, and loue such againe as loue them Matt. 5, 46. 47.. But to liue quietlie with crabbed, and froward felowes, with enimies, and il conditioned men, is doubtles the part of a man in deede deseruing commendation Mat. 5, 44 45..
               Some are at peace both with themselues, and with others Roma. 12, vers. 18, &c.: Some wil neither be quiet themselues, nor suffer others Prou. 6, 19. Rom. 3, 17.; these are ill to themselues, but woorse to others. Againe some both keepe themselues in charitie Prou. 3, 30, and studie to bring others vnto concorde Matt. 5, 9..
               And yet al the peace which wee haue in this miserable life, doth rather consist in patient suffering Luk. 21, 19, than in not feeling aduersitie.
               The more a man knoweth how to suffer miseries, the more quietnes doth he enioie: and such a man is a victorious conqueror of himselfe Matt. 5, 38. 39.; a Lord of the world Rom. 8, 37; a freende of Christ Ioh. 15, 13 14.; and an heire of heauen Rom. 8, 17 32. Matth. 5, 10..
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 4. Of purenes in minde, and plainenes in meaning.
               
               
                  MAn is carried ouer earthlie thinges with two wings, to wit with plainenes Matt. 6, 16, and purenes Matt. 6, 22 2. Cor. 1, 12.. Plainenes is of meaning, purenes is of the minde; that mindeth God, this apprehendeth, and tasteth what he is Matth. 5, 8 Psalm. 24, 4..
               No good action shal hinder thee, if thy minde be free from al inordinate affections Matt. 6, 22 23..
               If thou onelie seeke, and minde to please God, & to profite others, thou shalt enioie the freedome of mind Psal. 1, 2. 3. Psal. 27, 14..
               Were thy minde vpright, ye whole world were nought vnto thee but euen a glasse to frame thy life, and a booke of godlie instructions Rom. 1, 19 20.. For nothing is there so smal, & vile, but it representeth the goodnes of God Psalm. 8, 2. Psalm. 19, 1. 2..
               And if thy minde were good, and pure, thou shouldest easilie behold, and wel perceaue al things Matt. 6, 22.
               For a pure mind penetrateth both into heauen Matt. 5, 8., and hel: & as a mans mind is, so doth he iudge of things Matt. 6, 23.
               If there be any ioie, the man which

hath a pure heart doth enioie the same Psal. 51, 10. 6: and if there be anie sorowe, and miserie, he hath it which hath a guiltie conscience Esa. 57, 20 21. Esai. 48, 22..
               As fire taketh awaie the rust from iron, and maketh it bright: so doth repentance wipe awaie wickednes, & maketh of a sinner a new man Deu. 4, 29. 30. 31..
               A man that is but warme in godlines, flieth euen the least paines, and seeketh outwarde comforte Pro. 19, 15 24.; but would he once earnestlie begin to subdue himself, and stoutlie take the readie waie to a virtuous life, doubtles those things which at the first he counted greeuous, wil seeme light, and easie Matth. 11, verse. 29. 30..
            
            
               
                  Chap. 5. Of the consideration of a mans selfe.
               
               
                  WE ought not ouermuch to trust to our selues Prou. 3, 5. Luk. 18, 11. 2. Cor. 1, 9.: for manietimes wee lacke both grace, and wil.
               Smal is the iudgement which we haue Iohn. 1, 9., and that also we maie easilie forgo by negligence Matt. 25, 8.
               And yet, so blinde are we, manietimes we perceaue not so much: and

manie-times when we sinne, we excuse our wickednes; yea, & through a blinde affection, suppose it to be zeale, which is woorst of al 1. Cor. 2. 14.
               We reprehende others for smal things: and ouerpasse great offences in our selues Matt. 7, 4.. We can quicklie see when we are iniuried, and wil not easilie put vp wrong: but how we iniurie others our selues we neuer cal into minde.
               Assuredlie would a man rightlie, and wiselie consider his owne dooings Matth. 18, verse. 32. 33. Luk. 7, 37. 38. 39., he should finde no cause why to condemne another.
               The godlie man hath a greater care of himselfe, than of anie thing beside: and he which looketh to himselfe diligentlie, wil speake but litle of another.
               Looke not to prooue godlie, and religious, vnles thou bridle thy tong from talking of others, and haue a through insight into thy selfe 1. Cor. 11, verse. 28. 31. 2. Cor. 13, 5..
               If thou giue thy minde wholie to know thy selfe, and to doo the wil of God, no outward thing shal mooue, or troble thee Phil. 3, 7. 8. 2. Cor. 4, 16.
               Where art thou while thou art not with thy selfe? or when thou hast ouerpast al things, what art thou the

better, if thou neglect thy selfe Mat 16, 26 Mark. 8, 36. Luke. 9, 25. Ioh. 12, 25.? Thou must of necessitie neglect al other things and thinke hereof, if thou mind to attaine vnto peace, and quietnes: yea thou shalt mightilie encrease, if thou cast of worldlie cares Mat. 6, 25. Luk. 12, 22. Philip. 4, 6.; & contrariewise as greatlie decrease, if thou make anie account of earthlie things 1. Tim. 6, 8. 9. 10. 1. Pet. 5, 7..
               Count nothing woonderful, nothing excellent, nothing grateful, nothing acceptable, but either God, or yt which is of God 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 15. 16. 17. 1. Ioh. 4, 21.: as for worldlie pleasure deeme it but vaine 1. Cor. 7, verse. 30. 31. 1 Iohn. 2, 15. 17..
               The soule which loueth God, in respect of GOD, contemneth al things Phili. 3, 7. 8.. God alone which is eternal 1. Tim. 1, verse. 17., infinite Iob. 11, 7., and incomprehensible 1. Kings. 8, verse. 27., is the comfort of the soule, and the true ioie of hart 1. Ioh 4, 16 Sirach. 1, 11. 12..
            
            
               
                  Chap. 6. The ioie of a good conscience.
               
                  THe glory of a good man consisteth in the testimonie of a good conscience 2 Cor. 1, 12.
               If thy conscience be good, thou hast continual ioie Prou. 15, verse. 15..
               A man that hath a good conscience

endureth much Roman. 8, vers. 35, &c., yea reioiceth in aduersitie Iames. 1, verse. 2, &c.: but a wicked man is euermore timorous Gen. 3, 8., and vnquiet Gen. 4, 5. 6. Esai. 57, 20. 21..
               Sweete wilbe thy sleepe, if thy conscience accuse thee not Psal. 3, 5..
               Reioice not, but in wel dooing 1. Cor. 13, 6.
               Wicked men at no time reioice in deede, neither feele the peace of a godlie mind: for, as saith the Lord Esa. 48, 22. Esai. 57, 21., There is no peace vnto the wicked. And though they saie they liue in peace, & can neuer be molested with aduersitie, nor iniuried by man, beleeue them not. For suddenlie shal the heauie displeasure of God so fal vpon them Rom. 1, 28 Rom. 2, 8. 9. 1. Thess. 5, 3., that both their dooings shal come to naught, and themselues vtterlie consume awaie.
               For a godlie man to reioice in tribulation is no hard thing Rom. 5, 2. 3. 2. Co. 12, 10 Galat. 6, 14. Iames. 1, 2.: and so to reioice, is to reioice of Gods fatherlie care.
               Vaine is the praise which is either ascribed, or receiued of men Ioh. 5, 41. 44. Iohn. 12, 43. The praise of the righteous is in their conscience 2. Co. 1, 12, not in the tonge of men. The righteous reioice of GOD, in God Psal. 9, 2. 14. Ierem. 9, 24. 1. Cor. 1, 31 2. Cor. 10, 17, and in the truth 1. Cor. 13. verse. 6..
               He that seeketh for true, and eternal glorie, contemneth worldlie praise Ioh 8, 54. Galat. 6, 14.: but he that either coueteth,

or doth not contemne temporal, he doubtles waieth but litle celestial glorie Ioh. 12, 43..
               Great quietnes hath he that careth neither for praise, nor dispraise 1. Cor. 4, 3.. And he is wel content and quiet whatsoeuer his condition be, which hath a cleere conscience 2. Cor. 1, 12.
               If thou beest praised, thou art not the better; nor the worser, if thou art dispraised: what thou art, thou art; and greater thou art not, than God accounteth thee to be 1. Sam. 16, verse. 7▪
                  .
               Consider what thou art within, & waie not what thou art thought to be abroade 1. Cor. 4, 3.
               Man beholdeth the countenance, but God the hart 1. Chr. 28, verse. 9 Psalm. 7, 9. Iere. 11, 20. Iere. 17, 10. Iere. 20, 12. Rom. 8, 27.: and man iudgeth of the deedes, but God of the minde, and intent.
               Euermore to do wel, and to count baselie of a mans owne selfe Roma. 12, verse. 10., is a singular token of a modest minde. So is it an argument of rare integritie, and faith, to contemne the comfort of worldlie things.
               He that seeketh no recorde elsewhere Ioh. 5, 34. 41., hath doubtles wholie addicted himself to the seruice of God. For he that praiseth himselfe, saith Paule 2 Cor 10, verse. 18., is not alowed, but he whom

the Lord praiseth.
               To deale with God in minde Psal. 16, 7▪ 8. 9. Actes. 2, 26. 46. 47., and neuer to be moued outwardlie with anie perturbation, is the propertie of him that is a spiritual man.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 7. That our Sauior Christ is to be loued aboue al things.
               
               
                  BLessed is he which knoweth what it is to loue Iesus, and for his cause to contemne al things Mark. 8, 34 35. Luke. 9, 23. 24..
               For loues sake euen the beloued must be left: in asmuch as Iesus wilbe loued aboue al things Matt. 10, verse. 37. Luk. 14, 26..
               The loue of earthlie things is deceiptful, and fraile: but the loue of Iesus doth endure, and continue. He which loueth worldlie thinges, shal perish therewithal 1. Ioh. 2, 17: but he that embraceth Iesus abideth euer Ioh. 3, 16..
               Loue him, & reteine his good wil, which when al things vade awaie wil neuer forsake thee Mat. 28, 20 Iohn. 14, 16., nor suffer thee to perish Iohn. 6, 37 38. 39. 40..
               Wil thou, nil thou, one daie thou must leaue this world Iob. 14, 5. Psalm. 39, 5.: and therefore sticke to Christ both in life, and

death Rom. 14, verse. 8, &c. Phil. 1, 21. Reue. 14, 13, commit thee vnto him which alone can helpe thee when al things faile.
               This thy freende is of that nature, that he wil onelie be loued, he alone claimeth thy minde for himselfe, and he alone wil sit there like a King in his throne.
               Therefore haue thou no felowship with earthlie thinges Luk. 9, 24. Luke. 19, 8. 9., and Iesus gladlie wil abide with thee.
               Thou shalt find that wel nigh lost, whatsoeuer is spent vpon anie besides Iesus.
               Neither trust, nor staie vpon a wauering reede 2. King. 18, verse. 21. Esaie. 36, 6.. For al flesh is grasse, and al the grace thereof, is as the floure of the field Esaie. 40, 6..
               If thou trust in man Iere. 17, 5 thou shalt easilie be deceaued: yea if thou seeke comfort, and profite by anie other thing, thou shalt sustain great losse Phil. 3, 7..
               If thou seeke Iesus in al things, thou shalt finde Iesus; but if thou seeke thy selfe, thou shalt finde thy selfe, but to thy damnation Matth. 10, vers. 37, &c. Matth. 16, vers. 24, &c. Iohn. 12, 25..
               For whosoeuer seeketh not Iesus, doth more hurt himselfe, than al the world againe, and his enimies besides can doo.
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 8. Of the familiaritie with Iesus.
               
                  WHile Iesus is present al thinges go wel, and seeme comfortable: but when he is absent, nothing is sweete Iohn. 16, 6. If Iesus speake not in the minde of man, litle good can worldlie comfort doe him: but speake he but a worde, and great ioie shal he feele Ioh. 16, 22. So Marie Magdalene arose quicklie from the place where she wept Ioh. 11, 29 28. as soone as she heard by Martha that the Master was come, and called for hir. Happie is the houre wherein Iesus calleth from teares vnto the ioie of the Spirit Ioh. 16, 22.
               How hard, and drie art thou without Iesus Iohn. 15, 6? How vaine, and foolish if thou desire anie thing without Iesus? Greater shal be thy losse if thou doo so, than if thou shouldest leese the whole worlde Philip. 3, 8. 1. Iohn 2, 17 Matt. 16, 26.. For what can the world do without Iesus Mat. 28, 18 Iohn. 17, 2.?
               To be without Iesus is a bitter death: but to abide with him, is euen a pleasant life Psal. 27, 1. Iohn. 14, 6..
               If Christ be with thee, what enimie

can hurt Rom. 8, 31 38. 39 Iohn. 10, 28.?
               He which findeth Iesus, findeth a good treasure, or rather the cheefest felicitie Coloss. 2, 2 3.: he which leeseth Iesus, leeseth too much. What saied I too much? He leeseth more, than if he lost the whole world Mark. 8, 36.
               He that liueth without Iesus, is most miserable Matth. 19, vers. 21, &c.: but he whom Iesus fauoreth, is for riches most welthie Ioh. 17, 2. 3..
               To liue with Iesus, is great cunning; and to know how to keepe him is most singular wisedome Ioh. 8, 31..
               Be thou meeke, and lowelie Matth 11, verse. 29., and Iesus wil come to thee. Yea, be thou godlie, and quiet, and Iesus wil abide with thee Iohn. 14, vers. 15, &c..
               But turne thou once vnto outward thinges Galat. 4, 9. Coloss. 2, 20, and thou doest make him forsake thee, and so leese his fauor. And if he once forsake thee, vnto whome wilt thou flie Iohn 6, 68. Hebr. 6, 4. 5. 6.? or what freendes wilt thou finde?
               Without a freende thou canst not long liue: and if Iesus be not thy freende before al others, thou shalt mourne without measure, when he once doth leaue thee Sal. song. 5, verse. 6.. And therfore thou doest foolishlie, if thou either trust, or reioice in anie besides him Iere. 9, 23. 24. Ierem. 17, 5 Galat. 6, 14..
               Better were it to haue the whole

world against thee, than Christ Iesus alone Rom. 8, 31 38. 39..
               Wherefore before al things which thou louest, loue Iesus best Matth. 10, verse. 37. Luk. 14, 26.: loue others for Iesus sake, but loue Iesus for his owne.
               He alone must singularlie be loued, because he alone is the good and faithful freende Iohn. 15, vers. 13, &c. 1. Iohn. 3, 16 1. Iohn. 4, 10 19.. For him, and in him thou must loue both freende, and foe Matth. 5, vers 43, &c.; and praie him, that al men 1. Tim. 2, 1. maie know, and loue him.
               Neuer couet thou anie singular praise, or loue Iere. 9, 23. Dan. 4, 34.; for that belongeth vnto God, who hath none equal Dan. 3, 29.. Neither wish to haue anie bodie addicted vnto thee 1. Cor. 3, 3 verse. 4, &c., nor do thou in ordinatelie loue anie man 1. Cor. 7, verse. 23.: but let Iesus be in thee, and in al good men Gal. 1, 10..
               Haue thou a pure minde Matt. 5, 8., voide from al hinderance of worldlie thinges Iam. 1, 21.. For thou must be pure, and bring an vpright minde vnto Iesus, if thou wilt behold, and see how sweete the Lorde is Matth. 5, 8. Psal. 34, 8. Psalm. 24, 4..
               And doubtles thou shalt neuer come to that point, vnles God preuent thee, and drawe thee Iohn. 6, 44., whereby thou maiest reiect, and renounce al things, & be coopled to him alone Luk. 5, 11. For if thou be in Gods fauor, nothing

is there, which thou cāst not do Marke 9, verse. 23. Philip. 4, 13.: but if that be gone, thou art poore, and feeble, & left as it were to the whip Ps. 104, 29.
               Now if thou feele the want thereof, thou oughtest not to cast downe thy selfe, or despaire Iames. 1, verse. 2, &c. 12., but patientlie abide the good pleasure of God, and beare al chances to the praise of Christ Iesus 1. Pet. 1, 6. 7.. For sommer followeth winter; & after night daie comes; and faire weather after stormes Tob. 3, 22.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 9. Of the want of comfort.
               
                  IT is none harde thinge to contemne worldlie cōfort, while thou feelest heauenlie Psa. 94, 19.: but to lack both worldlie, and heauenlie consolation Matth. 27, verse. 46., and willinglie to beare the bannishment of the minde for the glorie of God; and neither to seeke thy selfe in anie thing, nor to respect desert, is doubtles a great matter, or rather the greatest of al.
               For what great thing is it to be merie, and godlie, while God fauoreth Psa. 94, 19.? who doth not wish to see that houre?
               He rideth cheerefullie, whom the

grace of God carrieth: and what maruel if he feele no burden, which is borne of the almightie Esa. 10, 20. Mat. 11, 28. and led by the best guide?
               Greatlie do we delight our selues with some one thing of this world or other, and hardlie can man forsake himself altogether Matth. 19, vers. 22, &c. Luke 9, 23. Luk. 18, 22.; therfore mightilie, and a long while must he striue, before he can learne to subdue himselfe, and drawe al his senses vnder the obedience of God.
               As long as man dependeth on himselfe he wil easilie slide vnto worldlie delights: but the vnfained louer of Christ, and earnest follower of virtue, nether inclineth vnto those comfortes, nor seeketh such delight of senses, but rather vehement exercises, and sore labors for the loue of Christ Luk. 9, 23. 24. 2. Corin. 4, verse. 8, &c. Galat. 6, 14..
               Therefore if at anie time spiritual comfort be giuen thee from aboue, receaue the same with thankes-giuing, and thinke that it is Gods gift 1. Cor. 4, 7, not that thou doest deserue it, and be not puft vp therewithal Coloss. 2, verse. 18..
               Be not high minded, or proude because of thy gift Roma. 11, verse. 20., but so much the more humble rather, and in al thy dooings circumspect, and feareful.

For the time of comfort wil passe awaie, and tentation wil folowe.
               And though thy consolation be gone, despaire not out of hande, but looke for helpe from aboue and that with modestie, and patience Rom. 5, 3. Rom. 15, 4. Iames. 1, 2. 3.. For GOD is able to endue thee with a more ample benefit, & consolation 2. Corin. 1, verse. 3, &c..
               Neither is this a newe thing, and strange to such as treade in ye pathes of godlines Psalm. 94, verse. 1, &c. 2. Cor. 7, 4. 5. Acts. 14, 19.. For men of greatest holines, and the old Prophets haue tasted such alteration manie times Ps. 34, 19..
               And therefore said one vpholden by the power of God, on this wise Psal. 30, 6., In my prosperitie I saide, I shal neuer be moued.
               But what happened vnto him when that was taken awaie, he ioineth afterwarde in these wordes: But thou7. diddest hide thy face, and I was trobled.
               Yet for al that he despaired not, but so much the more earnestlie praied vnto God, saieng: Then I cried vnto8. thee, O Lord, and praied to my Lord.
               At the last he obteined the end of his praier, and confesseth that he was heard, when he saide: O Lord my2. God, I cried vnto thee, and thou hast restored me. But wherein? Thou hast11.
                  
turned my mourning into ioie, thou hast loosed my sacke, and girded me with gladnes.
               Now if these things haue happened to men of such wonderful holines, we miserable and poore soules should not despaire Rom. 15, 4 Reuel. 3, 19. though we be sometime in cold, and sometime in heate, asmuch as the spirit goeth, and commeth at his pleasure Iohn. 3, 8.. Therefore saith Iob Iob. 7, 17. 18.: Thou doest so magnifie him, that thou settest thine hart vpon him; and doest visit him euerie morning, and triest him euerie moment.
               So then in what thing should I hope, or to whom should I trust, but onelie to the infinite, and heauenlie mercie of almightie God Psalm. 5, 11 12. Psal. 20, 7. Psal. 28, 7. Psal. 56, 11. Psalm. 146, verse. 5, &c.?
               For be it that I haue about me good, and godlie brethren, and faithful freendes, and holie bookes, and pleasant speech, and sweete musick, yet litle doth al this helpe, litle doth it comfort, if, being forsaken of God Ps. 119, 50. 92. 2. Cor. 1, 3. 4., I am left to my selfe. At that time the best remedie is patience Luk. 21, 19., and the denieng of my selfe Luk. 9, 23▪
                   according to the wil of God.
               For my parte I neuer yet founde man so religious, that hath not felt sometime the lack of Gods assistance,

and at sometime bin cooler in zeale than at others: Neither hath anie godlie man bin so carried aloft, and illuminated, but either sooner, or later, or at one time or other he hath bin tempted Roman. 7, vers. 14, &c. 2. Cor. 12, 7 Galat. 5, 17. Iames. 1, 2..
               He is not worthie to beholde God in deepe contemplation, who hath felt no miserie for Gods sake Iob. 5, 17. Matt. 5, 10. Iames. 1, 12. For commonlie the tentation that goeth afore, is a signe of cōsolation to come afterward Psa. 94, 12 13. 2. Cor. 1, 7.. And they, which are tried with tentation, are promised the ioies of heauen Iam. 1, 12. Matth. 5, 10. To him that ouercommeth, saith the Spirit Reuel. 2, 7, wil I giue to eate of the tree of life.
               Furthermore God sendeth his cō
                  fort, that man maie be the stronger to beare aduersitie Rom. 5, 2. 3. Iames. 1, 3. 4.. And tentation foloweth, that he waxe not proud of his gift 2. Cor. 12, verse. 7..
               Satan sleepeth not 1. Pet. 5, 8., and the flesh is not yet dead Rom. 7, 23 Rom. 8, 5. Galathi. 5, vers. 16, &c.: therfore at al times prepare thy selfe vnto battel 1. Tim. 6, verse. 12. 2. Tim. 2, 3. 2. Tim. 4, 5.: for on euerie side thou hast troblesome enimies Psal. 91, 7..
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 10. Of thankefulnes vnto God for his benefits.
               
               
                  WHat seekest thou for quietnes, seing thou art borne vnto labor Gen. 3, 19. Iob. 5, 
                        •
                     .?
               Giue thy selfe to patience Luke. 21, verse. 19. rather than to pleasure; and to beare the crosse, than to delectation Eccle. 7, 4..
               For what worldling is there which would not willinglie enioie spiritual comfort, if he might at al times? as that which surpasseth al the ioies of the world, & pleasures of the flesh Ioh. 16, 22. Philip. 4, 7.. For all worldlie delights are either vaine, or vile 2. Pet. 2, vers. 13, &c.: but the ioies of the Spirit are onelie sweete, onelie honest, springing of virtue, and powred into pure mindes of God himselfe Roma. 14, verse. 17. Rom. 15, 13. 32. 1. Iohn. 1, 4..
               But these heauenlie consolations are of that nature, that no man can keepe them at his pleasure; forasmuch as tentation ceasseth not anie long time Luke. 4, verse. 2 &c. 2. Cor. 12, 7..
               Two things are great enimies to this heauenlie ioie, false freedome of the minde Esai. 66▪ 3., and too much confidence in our selues Ierem. 17, verse. 5, &c..
               
                  God doth wel, which bestoweth on man the benefite of his comfort; but man doth ill, which doth not with thankesgiuing 1. Thess. 5, verse. 18. acknowledge God to be the giuer of the same 1. Cor. 4, 7. Iames. 1, 17..
               Hence it is that God powreth not his benefites vpon vs; euen because we are vngrateful, and sende not al things backe vnto the spring of the fountaine 1. Cor. 12, verse 6, &c. Hebr. 2, 6. 7. 8..
               He which giueth thankes, beggeth a newe benefit: and that is commonlie taken from the proudlie vngrateful Matth. 18, vers. 32, &c. Matt. 25, 28, which is bestowed vpon the modestlie thankful.
               I like not that comfort which taketh from me all sorowe for sinne Luk. 6, 24 25. 26.: neither desire I that knowledge that makes me forget my selfe 1. Cor. 8, 1.
               For al that is hie, is not holie; neither is euerie desire pure; nor al that is sweete, wholesome; nor euerie thing that liketh man, pleaseth God Luk. 16, 
                        •
                     3.
               But those benefites are welcome vnto me, which make me humbler than I was before Luk. 9, 48. Rom 11, 20 1. Corin. 3, vers. 18, &c.; and readier to forsake my selfe Luk. 9, 23..
               He whom God hath schooled both by prosperitie, and aduersitie, wil arrogate nothing vnto himselfe 1. Cor. 4, 7: but

confesse rather his nakednes, and miserie Iob. 1, 21. Eccles. 5, 14 1. Tim. 6, 7..
               Giue vnto GOD that which is Gods, and ascribe vnto thy selfe, that which is thine: that is, giue GOD thankes for his benefits 1. Thess. 5, verse. 18., and ascribe sinne to thy selfe Dan. 9, 5. 8., & for sinne thinke thou deseruest punishment Deut. 28, verse. 15. 16, &c..
               Take the lowest roome, and the hiest shal be giuen thee Prou. 25, 6 7. Luke. 14, 8. 9. 10. Mat. 23, 12.: for without the lowest, there cannot be highest.
               Those whome God accounteth chefest for holines, they esteeme thē
                  selues for vilest: and the more glorious they are, ye more humblie they behaue themselues, being ful of celestial truth and glorie 1. Cor. 1, 31, not of vain glorie desirous.
               They which depend vpon God, neuer waxe insolent; and they, which ascribe vnto God whatsoeuer good thing they haue, receiue not praise one of another Iohn. 5, 44, but seeke it of God, whome they wish might be extolled aboue al things, both of themselues, and of al other holie men; and to him warde alwaies they tende Psal. 34, 3. 9. 11. 1. Thess. 5, 11 14. 15..
               Wherefore be thankeful in smal thinges, so shalt thou be meete to attaine greater Matth. 25, verse. 21. 23..
               
                  Albeit account euen the least, and vilest giftes, for glorious and greatest. For if you respect the maiestie of the giuer Iames. 1, 17; no rewarde or gift ought to seeme vile, or litle.
               For that is no smal gift which the most hie God giueth, whatsoeuer it be: yea if he giue thee stripes, and correction, thou oughtest to receaue it in good worth, inasmuch as it maketh alwaies to our welfare whatsoeuer he sendeth or suffereth to come vnto vs.
               He that would keepe the fauor of God, let him both be thankeful for benefits giuen Coloss. 3, verse. 17., and patient if they be taken aware Colo. 1, 11; that they may come againe, let him praie: and least he lose them when they are come, let him be wise, and humble.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 11. The smal number that loue Christ vnfeinedlie.
               
               
                  CHrist hath now adaies manie that loue his heauenlie kingdome Luk. 9, 59 Luke. 18, 18. Matt. 19, 16. 22. but fewe that wil beare his crosse: manie that desire comfort, but fewe

aduersitie Matt. 7, 13. 14.: manie partakers of his meate Iohn. 6, 26 27., but fewe of his continencie. Al men would reioice with Christ Matth. 20, vers. 20, &c., but few sustaine aduersitie with him Matth. 26, verse. 56. Mar. 14, 50.. Manie folowe Iesus euen to the breaking of bread Iohn 6, 26.; but fewe to drinke of his cup Luke. 22, verse. 54.: Manie honor him for his miracles Mar. 7, 37.; but fewe folow the shame of his crosse Gala. 3, 13.: Manie loue him, while prosperitie doth last Marke. 10. verse. 37, 38.; and manie praise, yea & thanke him while they receaue anie comfort at his handes Iohn 6, 14. 15.: but if he but hide himselfe, and forsake them for a while, they fal either to bitter complaining, or to vtter despaire.
               But they which loue Iesus, not for anie pleasure that they looke to find, but for Iesus sake, they as wel in miserie, and sorowe, as in prosperitie commend him Mat. 5, 10. 11. 12. Actes. 5, 41. Rom 5, 3. Rom. 12, 12., and thanke him euermore: which they wil alwaies do, albeit he should neuer giue them anie comfort at al. Such is the force of the vnfeined loue of Christ, it seeketh neither outward profite, nor it selfe 1 Cor. 13, 5.
               So that as manie as seeke alwaies for pleasure maie rightlie be termed hirelings Ioh. 10, 12. 13.: and such as hunt after profite and lucre Matth. 10, vers. 37, &c. Iohn. 12, 4. 5. 6., loue themselues,

more than Christ out of doubt. How manie wil serue Christ freelie without gaine Matt. 10, 8.? Or who is so spiritual that wil forsake al Luk. 18, 28 Matt. 19, 27? I saie, who can finde him that is truelie poore in spirit Matt. 5, 3., & bare from al worldlie things? that pretious felow may be sought the whole world ouer.
               If a man feede the poore with al his goodes 1. Cor. 13, verse. 3., he hath yet done nothing; and if he chastise himselfe with sorow for his sinnes, it is yet too litle; and though he knew al secretes, and2. al knowledge, he is yet far from the marke; yea were he most singularlie3. virtuous, and could burne for religion, yet lackes he something, euen one thing which is needeful Luke. 10. verse. 42.. And what is that? Euen that, when he hath forsaken al things, he forsake himselfe Luk. 5, 11. Luke. 9, 23.; and going wholie out of himselfe, reteine no peece of selfe, or priuate loue within him Matth. 10, verse. 37. 38, &c..
               When he hath done, which he knowes should be done, let him think that nothing he hath done; neither let him glorie in that he maie be great, but confesse rather that he is an vnprofitable seruant, euen as the truth it selfe doth saie Luke. 17, verse. 10.: When yee haue done al things, which are commanded

you, saie, We are vnprofitable seruants: We haue done but that which was our dutie to doo.
               Then at length wil he finde himselfe needie, and naked in spirit Matt. 5, 3., & may saie with that Prophet Psal. 86, 1., I am poore and needie. And yet notwithstanding none is richer, none freer, none mightier than he which can forsake the world, and himselfe too Luk 5, 11. Luk. 18, 29. 30., and debase himselfe euen vnder the basest things Phil. 2, 5. 6. 7. 8..
            
            
               
                  Chap. 12. Of patient bearing the crosse of Christ.
               
               
                  THis seemeth a hard saieng to manie, Forsake thy selfe Matth. 16, verse. 24. Mark. 8, 34. Luke. 9, 23., take vp thy crosse, and folowe mee: But those last wordes wil be much harder Matth. 25, verse. 41., Depart fro me yee cursed into euerlasting fire. For they which now gladlie do heare, and folowe the saieng of the crosse, shal not then dread the heauie sentence of eternal punishment Psa. 112, 6. 10..
               Then al the seruants of the crosse, which haue liued after the example of him yt was crucified, shal approach

vnto Christ with great boldnes Wisd. 5, 1. Matt. 19, 28 29. Luk. 22, 28..
               Why then fearest thou the crosse, which is the waie vnto heauen Luke. 24, verse. 26 Rom 8, 17. 2. Tim. 2, 11. 12.?
               In the crosse saluation is; in the crosse, life; in the crosse, aide against enimies; in the crosse, celestial comfort; in the crosse, strength of minde; ioie of the spirit is in the crosse; in the crosse, the chiefest virtue; perfection of holines is in the crosse; finalie without the crosse there is neither saluation of the soule, nor hope of eternal life Gala. 2, 19. Galat. 6, 14..
               Wherefore take vp thy crosse, and folowe Christ, and thou shalt go vnto eternal life Luk. 9, 23 24. Iohn. 12, 25. 26.. He went before thee bearing his one crosse Ioh. 19, 17, and for thy sake died on the crosse Gala. 3, 13. 1. Pet 2, 24., that thou also mightest beare the crosse, and desire to die vpon the same 1. Pet. 2, vers. 21, &c.. For if thou die with him, thou also shalt liue with him; if thou suffer with him, thou shalt also reigne with him 2. Tim. 2, 11 12 Matt. 19, 28. Luk. 22, 28 29. For knowe this, in the crosse, and in dieng al things do consist, neither is there anie other waie vnto life and quietnes, than by the crosse, and dailie mortifieng of thy selfe Rom. 6, 3. 4. Galat. 6, 14. Coloss. 3, 5..
               Whersoeuer thou turnest thy selfe, or castest thine eies, thou shalt finde neither aboue, nor beneath, a better

waie vnto blisse, than by the crosse Luke. 24, verse. 26. Acts. 14, 22..
               Though thou set al things in neuer so good order, yet can it not be auoided, but something thou must suffer either voluntarilie, or against thy wil Sirac. 2, 1., & alwaies run vpon the crosse. For either sicknes of bodie, or sorowe of minde wil vexe thee. Either God wil forsake, or man afflict, or (which worser is,) thou wilt be a burden to thy selfe: and that in such sorte, as no remedie can salue, nor comfort quite thee, but of necessitie thou must bear it, as long as God thinkes good Phil. 1, 23..
               For it is Gods wil to haue thee suffer miserie without comfort Matth. 27, verse. 46., that thou maist submit thy selfe wholie vnto him, and be more humble thorough aduersitie Ps. 119, 67 71..
               No man so feeleth the paines of Christ in his mind, as he which hath suffered the like himselfe Gal. 6, 17. Philip. 2. 17. 30..
               So that the crosse is prepared, and abideth for thee in euerie place, neither shalt thou escape it, run where thou wilt Ioh. 16, 1. 2. 20. Galat. 6, 12: for wheresoeuer thou becommest, thou bearest thy self about, and shalt finde thy selfe alwaies Rom. 7, 14.
               Turne thee vpwarde, turne thee downeward, turne thee outward, or turne thee inward, eueriewhere thou

maist finde the crosse; and alwaies thou must haue patience, if thou wilt enioie the peace of minde, & crowne of rest Luk. 9, 24 Luk. 21, 19..
               If thou wilt carrie the crosse willinglie, the crosse wil carrie thee euen to ye desired end, namelie where miserie hath an ende Reu. 7, 17., which wil not be in this world Ioh. 16, 20 33.. But if thou beare it grudginglie, thou doest encrease thy burden, and presse downe thy self the more, and yet must thou beare it do what thou canst Prou. 14, 14. If thou escapest one miserie, thou shalt assuredlie fal into another Matth. 19, vers. 22, &c. 2. Tim. 3, 12 13. Iudith. 8, 11. 14., and perhaps into a woorser.
               Thinkest thou to escape that which no mortal man could euer yet Iob 5, 7. 17. Iob. 14, 1.? What man euer liued in the worlde without his crosse, and miserie Ps. 34, 19. Actes. 14, 15. 22.? Yea euen our Lord & Sauior Christ was no one houre without griefe, & troble while he liued here on earth Luk. 9, 22.. For Christ suffered Luke. 24, verse. 26., and so entered into his glorie, and wilt thou seeke another path: and not walke in this kinglie hie waie? The whole life of Christ was euen a meere crosse, and vexation Esaie. 53, 3 Iohn. 7, 7. Iohn. 15, 18., and wilt thou seeke for rest, and quietnes?
               Thou art out of ye waie, surelie thou

art out of the waie, if thou lookest for anie thing but miserie in this world: seing the whole life of mortal man is ful of trobles, and compassed about with calamities Iob. 14, 1. 22.. And the more godlie a man is, the more often doth he suffer aduersitie, for the soarnes of his affliction encreaseth through his loue of God Rom. 8, 35. 36. 2. Co. 12, 10 Philip. 1, 14. 20. 21..
               And yet is not this man of whome we speake without comfort, inasmuch as he beleeueth that by this crosse he shal reape much frute Psa. 94, 19. Rom 5, 3. Iames. 1, 3..
               For whilest willinglie he commeth vnder the crosse, it falleth out that the whole burden of trobles is turned vpon the confidence of Gods heauenlie comfort Psal. 34, 22 Psalm. 91, 2. 9. 2. Cor. 7, 11.: and the more the flesh by calamitie is weakened, the more the Spirit is confirmed by the comfort of minde Roman. 7, vers. 23, &c. Roman. 8, vers. 10, &c. 2. Cor. 4, 16.. Yea so is he strengthened manie times through the feeling of trobles, and aduersitie (of such force is his loue which suffereth after ye ensample of Christ 1. Pet. 2, 21,) that he would not wish to be without sorowe, and affliction Rom. 6, 5. Rom. 8, 35. 2. Tim. 2, 3. 11. 12.. For he beleeueth that he is the more acceptable to God, the more he can suffer for his sake Acts 5, 41. 2. Cor. 4, 16. 17. 18..
               And yet is it not by the power of

man, but of the mercie of God, that he can in his fraile flesh loue, and through the zeale of the spirit set vpon those things Gal. 5, 16. 24. Phil. 4, 13. 1. Tim. 1, 12., which man by nature doth flie, and abhor.
               For man of himself cannot endure the crosse, loue affliction, tame and bring vnder the bodie, shun promotion, abide to be reuiled, despise himselfe, yea couet to be despised, beare aduersitie, and contemne the prosperitie of this world Luk. 22, 32 40. 46. 2. Cor. 4, 7. 8..
               If thou depende vpon thy selfe 2. Cor. 1, 4. thou shalt do none of these things: but if thou trust in God, he wil sende thee comfort from aboue Iohn. 16, 7., whereby the world, & the flesh shalbe brought vnder thy subiectiō 
                  2. Co. 12, 9. 10.. Yea thou shalt not feare the malice of the Diuel Psal. 91, 5., if thou be stedfast in faith 1. Pet. 5, 9..
               Thou therefore suffer affliction as a good soldior of Iesus Christ 2. Tim. 2, 3, who for thy sake was crucified 1. Pet 2, 24.
               Prepare thy selfe to suffer much aduersitie, and sundrie incommodities in this miserable life: for as much as such is thy lot wheresoeuer thou becommest, or lurke where thou wilt, yea by no meanes shalt thou escape these trobles, but must beare them of necessitie Luke. 21, verse. 19.
               
                  Drinke hartilie of y• Lordes cup Mat. 20, 22 23. if thou desirest to be his freend and companion.
               And as touching consolation, refer that to the wil of GOD, let him giue it at his discretion: but yeelde thou thy selfe to the bearing of aduersitie, and let it be thy ioie Acts. 5, 41. Iames. 1, 2.. For the afflictions of this present time, are not answereable to the glorie which shal be hereafter Rom. 8, 18, though thou couldest beare them al thy self.
               After thou art come vnto that passe, that thou canst with pleasure & ioie endure aduersitie for Christes sake, thinke thou art an happie man, which hast founde the kingdome of heauen here on earth Matt. 5, 10. On the otherside, as long as it greeueth thee to beare it, so long art thou in il case, vexed euerie where with the flight of miscrie Prou. 10, verse. 29.. But do thy dutie, that is, prepare thy selfe to the crosse, and to die, and in short time shalt thou be assisted, and finde quietnes 1. Pet. 4, 12 13..
               If thou wert taken vp euen into the third heauen with Paule 2. Cor. 12, verse. 2., yet wert thou not assured, that none aduersitie shal come to thee. I wil showe him, saith Christ Acts 9, 16., how manie things he must suffer for my Name sake.
               
                  So that of necessitie thou must suffer, if thy minde be to loue, and serue Christ euermore Luk. 9, 23..
               And would to God thou wert counted woorthie to suffer for the Name of Iesus Acts. 5, 41; then what glorie to thy selfe Rom. 5, 2., ioie to the Sainctes of God 1. Cor. 12, vers. 26, &c., and profit to mankind Colos
                        •
                     . 1, verse. 24. 2 Tim. 2, 1
                        •
                     ., would arise! For al commende patience, though fewe wil suffer Matth. 26, verse. 56.. Doubtles there is great cause why thou shouldest endure a litle for Christ, seeing thou canst suffer a great deale more for the world 1. Cor. 9, verse. 25.. And know this for a truth, that thou must liue by dieng to thy selfe Roman. 6, verse. 8, &c. 2, Tim. 2, 11.. And the more a man dieth to himselfe, the more he liueth to God.
               No man is meete to comprehend celestial things, vnles he can be content to beare aduersitie for Christ his sake Rom. 8, 35.
               To conclude, nothing is either more acceptable in the sight of God, or profitable for thy selfe in this life, than willing lie to suffer aduersitie for the Name of Christ; insomuch that, if choise were giuen, thou shouldest chuse to suffer for Christ rather than to be refreshed with much consolation Rom. 12, verse. 12. Galat. 6, 14.: for so shalt thou become the more like to Christ Ioh. 15, 20 1. Pet. 2, 21., and al his holie

seruantes Matt. 5, 11. 12..
               Neither doth our comming forward consist in the store of pleasures, and comfort, but rather in bearing great euils, and aduersitie Rom. 5, 3. Iames. 1, 2..
               And if any thing had bin better, or more expedient for man than to suffer miserie Ioh. 14, 27., doubtles Christ would haue showen ye same both by wordes, and deedes. But now in plaine words he doth counsaile both his owne disciples, and as manie as are desirous to folow him, to beare the crosse, in these wordes Matth. 16, verse. 24. Mark. 8, 34 Luke. 9▪ 23. Luk. 14, 27.: If anie man wil folow me, let him forsake himselfe, and take vp his crosse, and folow me.
               Therfore al things being read ouer and ouer, and put in practise, let this be the end of our speech Actes. 14, verse. 22.: By manie afflictions we must enter into the kingdome of God.
            
            Thus endeth the second Booke.
            
         
         
            
            The thirde Booke of the Jmitation of Christ.
            
               
                  Chapter. 1. Of the spiritual communication betweene Christ, and the faithful soule.
               
                  I Wil ha
                     •
                  kē what the Lord within me wil saie Psal. 85, 8.. Blessed is y• soule, which heareth the Lord speaking within her, and from his mouth receaueth the word of comfort.
               Blessed are the eares, which can heare when God whispereth, and do naught regard the noise of y• world Psa. 38, 13. 14.. Yea blessed are the eares, which listen not to the outward sound, but to the truth speaking to the hart Psa. 94, 12. Matt 16, 17 Iohn. 8, 43..
               Blessed are the eies which are close from seeing outward, but open to behold inward things.
               Blessed are they who pierce vnto spiritual things, and prepare themselues more and more by dailie meditations Psalm 1, 1. 2. to come vnto the knowledge

of Gods heauenlie mysteries.
               Blessed are they who reioice in seruing God, & cast of al those things as maie withdraw them frō so dooing Luk. 10, 41. 42..
               O my soule, consider these things, & banish frō thy mind carnal affections Gal. 5, 19. 20, &c., so shalt thou vnderstand what thy Lord God wil saie within thee Psal. 85, 8..
               Thus saith thy freende: I am thy Saluation Ephes. 1, 7. Ephes. 2, 5., thy peace Ioh. 16, 33., and thy life Iohn. 14, 6.; sticke vnto me, and thou shalt find quietnes Matth. 11, verse. 28. 29. Ephes. 2▪ 14.. Leaue al worldlie things Luk. 16, 13 Luk. 12, 15. 16, &c. Matth. 6, 24. 25., and seeke after heauenlie Luk. 12, 31 Coloss. 3, 2.. For what are al things in this world, but vaine Eccl. 2, 11.; or what good can they doo, if God forsake thee Mat. 16, 26. Mark. 8, 36. Luke 9, 25.?
               Wherefore, al things renounced, seeke vnfeinedlie to please God Eccle. 12, 1 13. Rom. 12, 1. 11., that thou maist attaine vnto the true felicitie Re
                        •
                     . 2, 26..
            
            
               
                  Chap. 2. That the truth speaketh inwardlie without noise of wordes.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     SPeake Lord; for thy seruant heareth 1 Sam. 3, verse. 10..
                  I am thy seruant: O giue me vnderstanding Ps. 119, 34, that I maie learne thy statutes.
                  
                     Incline my soule vnto the wordes of thy mouth, euen vnto thy wordes which stil downe like the dewe Deut. 32, 2.
                  The Israelites saide vnto Moses in old time Exo. 20, 19 Deut. 5, 27. Hebr. 12, 18. 19, &c.: Talke thou with vs, and we wil heare, but let not God talke with vs, least we die. But I praie not so, Lord, I praie not so, but with the Prophet Samuel rather I beseech thee, saieng 1. Sam. 3, verse. 10. Psal 85, 8.: Speake Lord, for thy seruant heareth.
                  And let not Moses, nor anie other prophet speake to me, but thou Lord, which inspirest, and lightenest al the Prophets 2. Pet. 1, 21 
                           •
                        ohn. 1, 9., speake thou to me. For thou canst instruct me without their helpe, but they can profite nought without thee 1. Cor. 3, 7..
                  They maie sounde outwordes in mine eare, but they bring not the Spirit Ioh. 14, 16 Iohn. 15, 26 Iohn. 16, 7.. They can speake trimlie, but, if thou hold thy peace, they inflame not the mind Matt. 7, 28. 29.. They teach the letter, but thou openest the meaning Reuel. 5, 9. They talke of deepe things, but thou vnlockest the sense of that which was sealed vp Rom. 16, verse. 25. 26. Coloss. 1, 26 27.. They pronounce the commandements, but thou helpest to fulfil them. They showe the way, but thou giuest strength to walke in the same 2. Pet. 1, 3. They deale outwardlie

with the senses, but thou teachest and lightenest the mindes Ephes. 1, vers. 15, &c. 18.. They water, but thou giuest the increase 1. Cor. 3, 6 7.. They crie with open mouthes, but thou giuest wisedome vnto the hearer Ioh, 6, 68..
                  So then, let not Moses talke with me, but speake thou my Lord, & God, which art the euerlasting truth, least I die, and proue vnfruteful: and least, being outwardlie admonished, and not inwardlie inflamed, the worde heard, not done Mat. 7, 26 27. Matt. 13, 19.; knowen, not loued Rom. 2, 8. 13.; beleeued, not obserued Iam. 1, 22. 23, &c., make vnto my condemnation.
                  Wherfore speake Lord, for thy seruant▪ heareth 1. Sam. 3, verse. 10.. For thou hast the wordes of eternal life Ioh. 6, 68.. Speake to me euen that which maie be to the comfort of my soule; to the amēdment of my life; and to the aduancement of thine euerlasting glorie,
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 3. That the wordes of God with al reuerence should be heard; and that they are not vnderstood of most men.
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     SOnne heare my words, for they are most comfortable, and excel the knowledge

of Philosophers, and wise men of this world Prou. 9▪ 10 1. Cor. 1, 18..
                  My words are spirit, and life Ioh. 6, 63., and are not to be waied by the sense of man, nor drawen to serue for vaine pleasure, but must be heard with silence, and receaued with humilitie and greedines.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  Blessed is the man Ps. 94, 12. 13., whome thou chastisest, O Lord, and teachest in thy Lawe, that thou maist giue him rest from the daies of euil, whiles the pit is digged for ye wicked.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  I both inspired the Prophets in old time 2. Pet. 1, 21 2. Tim. 3, 16., and ceasse not in these daies to speake vnto al: but manie are deafe and wil not heare my wordes Esai. 42, 19 20.. Most harken vnto the world rather than to God, and more gladlie obeie the desire of the flesh Rom. 8, 5. 6 Galat. 5, 16. 17., than his heauenlie wil.
                  The world promiseth but temporal, and smal things, and they serue it euen with greedines Luk. 16, 13 14.. I promise most excellent, and eternal things Esai. 64, 4 Esaie. 23, 18 Matt. 7, 11. 1. Cor. 2, 9., and men care not for them.
                  Who with such a desire serueth, & obeieth me in al things, as they serue the world Matt. 7, 13. 14., and the Prince thereof Ioh. 14, 30? Be ashamed hereof, & if thou wouldest know why, hearken: For smal

wages manie run a great waie: but for eternal life fewe wil once step their foote out of doores Matt. 7, 13 14.. Filthie gaine is earnestlie sought for; for one pennie sometime they shamefullie contende; for a vaine thing, and smal reward men feare not euen to wearie themselues night and daie: but for goodes immutable, for a rewarde vnestimable, for honor endles, & immortal glorie, they wil take no pains.
                  Wherefore blush I saie, thou slothful, and whining seruant, that they shal be more readie to fal into the pit of hel, than thou to come vnto heauen; that they shal take more pleasure in vanity, than thou in the truth.
                  Againe they manie-times misse of their purpose: but what I promise I fulfil, & he that trusteth in me speedeth wel Ps. 37, 34. Psal. 22, 4. 5.. That which I promise in wordes I performe in deede Esa. 46, 11., to him which continueth constant vnto the end in louing me Matth. 10, 22. Mark. 13, 13. I reward al good things, and I am a diligent examiner of al religious men Hebr. 11, vers. 36, &c..
                  Write my wordes in thine hart, and meditate earnestlie thereupon. For in the time of tentation they wil doo thee good Ps. 119, 92..
                  That with reading now thou doest

not conceaue, in the time of curing thou shalt vnderstande. And two waies I am wont to cure mine elect, to wit, by tentation, and by comfort 1. Sam. 2, 6. 7. Psal. 66, 8. 9, &c. Psal. 94, 12. 13. 19. Tob. 13, 2. Wisd. 16, 11. 13.: and two waies I instruct them dailie, first by reprehending their wickednes, then by exhorting to proceede in virtue, and godlines.
                  He that heareth my wordes Ioh. 5, 24. 29. Ioh. 12, 48. 2. Cor. 2. 15 16., and despiseth them, hath that whereby he shal be condemned in the daie of iudgement.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 4. A praier for the attaining of the true knowledge of Gods heauenlie wil; a
                        •
                     d for zeale in religion.
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O Lorde my GOD, which art al my goodes and riches, what am I that I dare speake to thee? I am thy poore seruant, & a vile worme Iob. 25, 6., yea much more vile, and poore, than I either know, or dare showe forth Luk. 18, 13.
                  And yet, Lord, remember euen this one thing, that I am nothing, that I haue nothing, that I am nothing worth. Thou alone art good Mat. 19, 16 17.,

thou alone art righteous Iob. 9, 32. Sirach. 18, 1., thou alone art holie Deu. 32, 4., thou canst al Iob. 11, 7. 8, &c., thou doest al Esai. 44, 6. 7, &c., thou fillest al 1. Kings. 8, verse. 27. Psal. 139, 7. 8, &c., onelie the wicked thou sendest emptie awaie 1. Sam. 2, 7. 8. Luke. 1, 53..
                  Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies Psal. 25, 6. Psal. 98, 3. Luke. 1, 54., and fil me with thy fauor, thou wilt that none of thy workes should serue in vaine. For how can I stand vpright in this wretched worlde, vnles thy mercie and fauor do hold me vp Ps. 119, 41. 76. 77, &c.?
                  Turne not thy cheereful countenance from thy seruant Ps 51, 11.; defer not to heale me from daie to daie; withdraw not thy comfort, that my soule be not as the thirstie land Ps. 143, 6..
                  O Lord, teach me to do thy wil Ps. 143, 10 8., teach me to walke woorthilie, and humblie in thy presence. For thou art my wisedome 1. Cor. 1, verse. 30., and knowest me in deede Psa. 139, 1. 2, &c.. Yea thou knewest me not onelie afore I was conceaued in my mothers wombe, but also afore the verie world was made Psal. 90, 2
                           •
                        
                        ▪ Rom. 8, 29. 30.. So be it.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 5. That we must walke syncerelie, and humblie before God.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     SOnne, walke thou vprightlie in my sight; & seeke me alwaies in singlenes of minde Matth. 5, 8.
                  He that walketh vprightlie, walketh salfelie: for the truth deliuereth him from deceauers, and slanders of the wicked. And if the truth shal make you free Ioh. 8, 32. 36., you shal be free in deede, and feare nought the vaine wordes of men.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  Truth Lord: therefore I beseech thee deale so with me, that is, let thy truth instruct me, defend me, and bring me to a blessed ende Psal. 43, 3.. Yea, let the same thy truth deliuer me from al wicked lustes, and inordinate affections: so wil it come to passe, that I shal enioie a wonderful freedome of the minde 1. Ioh. 3, 19.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  And I wil teach thee what is right, and acceptable in my sight Psal. 25, 4. 5..
                  Cal thy sinnes to remembrance continualie, & that with hartie sobs, and sorow Ioël. 2, 12. 13. Ezec 18, 30 31. 32.; and neuer brag of anie

good deede which thou hast done 1. Co. 4, 6. 7.. For in verie deede thou art a sinner Ps. 143, 2., and subiect to manie infirmities of the minde; yea by nature alwaies thou tendest vnto vanitie Gen. 6, 5. Gen. 8, 21., and maist easilie fal, easilie be ouercome, and easilie troden downe, and cast to the grounde Rom. 3, 23.
                  Finalie thou hast nothing wherein to boast 1. Cor. 4, 7.: but manie things to make thee hūble; being much more weake than thou canst perceaue. So then looke that none of thy deedes seeme great in thy sight, or excellent, or pretious, or wonderful, yea count nothing excellent, nothing glorious, nothing commendable, and to be sought for in deede, but onelie that which is eternal Ps. 119, 14. 24. 35. 50, &c..
                  Let the euerlasting truth like thee aboue al things Psal. 57, 9. 10. Psal. 108, 3. 4. Psal. 117, 1. 2.; & thine extreeme vilenes mislike thee 
                        
                           •
                        s. 108, 12..
                  Feare nothing, flie nothing, mislike nothing so much as thy sinnes, and wickednes Psal. 119, verse. 128. 136. 1
                           ••
                        . 158. Psa. 139, 19, 20. 21, &c., they should more disquiet thee, than the losse of the deerest thing in the world.
                  Some behaue themselues not syncerelie enough towardes me, seeking out earnestlie, through curiositie and pride, my secretes, and mysteries,

neglecting themselues and their saluation Rom. 1, 21 Rom. 2, 17. 18, &c. 1. Cor. 13, 2.: these fellowes, by reason of their pride and curiositie, fal manietimes into greeuous tentations Rom. 1, 26 28. 2. Thes. 2 11 12., through my displeasure.
                  But stand thou continualie in awe of the heauie sentence of the almightie God Psa. 90, 11. Prou. 28, 14 Philip. 2, 12.; and search not out the workes of the most Hie, but search out painefullie both how much euil thou hast committed, and what good thou hast left vndone.
                  Somes religion is altogether in their bookes, or in pictures, or in some outward signes, and ceremonies Matt. 23, 5. 23, &c.; some haue it in their mouth Mat. 7, 21. 22. 23. Esai. 29, 13., but not in their hart. And contrariewise some being cleere in minde, and pure in hart Matt. 5, 8. Iohn. 4, 23. 24., do couet alwaies after heauenlie things Col. 3, 1. 2., hearken vnwillinglie vnto earthlie matters, & serue the necessities of nature with griefe, and sorowe: and these men perceaue what the Spirite of truth speaketh within them, how it teacheth them to dispise earthlie and to desire celestial thinges, to contemne the world, and to wish for heauen night, and daie Psal. 1, 1. 2. Philip. 3, 8. Colos. 3, 2..
               
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 6. A praise and thankes-giuing to God for his benefits.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     OCelestial father, father of my Lorde Iesu Christ 2. Cor. 1, 3, I praise thee for vouchsafing to remember me a poore, and sinful wretch 1. Cor. 15, verse. 9. 10..
                  O father of mercie 2. Cor. 1, 3, and God of 
                        •
                     l comfort, I yeelde thee humble 
                        •
                     hankes, for refreshing me, vnwoor
                     
                        •
                     hie al comfort, with thine heauenlie 
                        •
                     omfort 2. Cor. 7, 6.
                  Euermore wil I praise, and magni
                     
                        •
                     ie thee together with thine onelie 
                        •
                     egotten Sonne, and the holie Ghost 
                        •
                     he comforter 1 Ioh. 5, 7. for euer and euer 1. Tim. 1, 17.
                  O Lord my God, which louest me 
                        •
                     o holilie, I wil reioice with mine 
                        •
                     hole hart, when thou shalt come 
                        •
                     nto my minde.
                  Thou art my glorie, and the ioie of 
                        •
                     ine hart: thou art mine hope and 
                        •
                     efuge in the daie of my troble Ps. 59, 16..
                  But forasmuch as yet I am weake, & of smal power, I haue great neede of thine assistance, and comforte:

wherfore visit me oftener Ps. 106, 4., & schoole me with holie discipline.
                  Set me free from wicked affections of the minde, and heale my soule of al vnbridled desires, and sinnes, that being inwardlie healed, & purged thoroughlie, I maie be made fit to loue, strong to suffer, and constant to continue Psal. 23, 4. Psal. 59, 9. 17.,
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 7. The praise and force of godlie loue.
               
               
                  LOue is a gret thing, doubtles loue is an excellent thing; it can make y• which is heauie light Rom 8, 35 1. Cor. 13, 4. 5, &c.; and carrie that equalie which is vnequal. It beareth a burden and feeleth it not; and conuerteth al sower things into sweete and sauorie: I saie that noble loue of Iesus driueth one to aduenture great things, and forceth alwaies to come vnto perfection Ephe. 3, 17 18, &c..
               Loue wil be aboue, and cannot be kept▪ downe by anie abiect thing The force, and power of true loue you may behold as in a glasse, Rom. 8, 35, &c. Rom. 14, 1. &c. Ro. 15, 1, &c. 1. Cor. 13, 1, &c. 1. Tim 1, 5. 2. Pet. 1, 5, &c. 1. Ioh. 2, verse. 7, &c. 1. Iohn. 4, 7. Actes. 2, 42. 44. 45 46. 47.. Loue wil be free, and loose from al worldlie affection, that neither hir inward sight be dimmed, nor she be

either entangled by worldlie prosperitie, or subdued by aduersitie. Loue is most sweet, most strong, most hie, most large, most comfortable, most perfect: nothing is better than loue either in heauen aboue, or in earth beneath. For it ariseth from God 1. Ioh. 4, 7 16., and resteth on God aboue al things.
               He that loueth, flieth, runneth, reioiceth, is free and cannot be bound; he giueth al for al, and hath al in al, as he which resteth in one aboue al which is most hie 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 5, &c., from whome euerie good thing doth spring, and arise Iam. 1, 17.. He respecteth not giftes, but looketh on the giuer aboue al.
               Loue knoweth no measure, but burneth aboue measure. Loue feeles no burden, waies no labor, contendeth aboue strength, and considers not whether a thing maie be done or no, for it counteth nothing hard, or vnpossible. Therefore loue can do al things; and he that loueth bringes manie things to passe, if he faint, and tire not.
               Loue waketh, and sleeping slombreth not; laboring tires not; loaden faltereth not; terrified dismaieth not, but as a quicke flame, and

burning touch breaketh forth vpward, and falselie pearceth out.
               He that loueth, knoweth what this meaneth. A great crie in the eares of God, is the ardent affection of the minde, while it saies, O my God, my loue, thou art al mine, I am wholie thine. Raise vp in me a vehement loue, that I maie taste Psal. 34, 8. with ye inner mouth of mine hart, how sweete it is to loue, and swimme as it were in the streames of loue.
               Grant that I maie so burne in loue, that through the heate of desire I maie exceede my selfe Psal. 18, 1. Psa. 119, 97. 103.: that I maie sing the ballad of loue, folowe thee my louer aloft, and set forth thy praises with such a zeale, that euen my hart maie faint againe: that I maie loue thee more than my selfe; yea neither loue my selfe, nor anie other, that loue thee vnfeinedlie, but in thee, and for thee, euen as the law of loue that shineth out of thee commandeth, and doth require.
               Loue is swift, syncere, godlie, pleasant, and fruteful; it is strong, patient, faithful, wise, long suffering, & manlie; loue seeketh not hir owne 1 Cor. 13, verse. 5.. For there loue perisheth, where anie serues himselfe.
               
                  Loue is circumspect, modest, iust, not daintie, not light, not giuen to vanities, but sober, chaste, constant, quiet, and temperate in al the senses.
               Loue obeieth betters, despiseth it selfe, feareth, thanketh, trusteth and hopeth alwaies in GOD, yea when God seemes to abhor it For without paine, none liue in Loue..
               He that is not prepared to suffer al things, and to yeeld himselfe to the pleasure of his freend, is vnworthie to be called a freend.
               To conclude, a freend must receaue al, euen hard, & bitter things in good parte for his freendes sake, and neuer leaue him in the time of aduersitie Rom. 5, 7. 8, &c..
            
            
               
                  Chap. 8. How to trie a true freend; also, how to resist the enimie.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, as yet thou art not a stoute, and prudent louer.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  Why Lord?
               
               
                  LORD.
                  For as much as a litle assault makes thee to leaue off 1. Iohn. 4, verse. 18., and ouer greedilie thou seekest consolation.
                  
                     A valiant louer endureth tentations, and giueth no eare to the subtile persuasions of the enimie: and therfore he so liketh prosperitie, yt with aduersitie he wil not be trobled Psal. 16, 8. Actes. 2, 44. 1. Pet. 5, 10..
                  A wise louer respecteth not so much the gift of the louer, as the loue of the giuer; he looketh more on the minde, than on the thing; and waieth no gifts in respect of his freend.
                  The noble louer resteth not in the gift, but in me aboue al gifts.
                  Neither must thou by and by be out of hart, though sometime thou thinke not so reuerendlie, as thou wouldest, either of me, or my seruants.
                  That good and sweete affection wherewith thou art delighted now and then, is an affection of present fauor, and a certaine fore-taste of the celestial contrie, on which fore-taste thou must not too much depend, because it altereth manie-times. But to striue against the wicked motions of the minde, and to despise the inticements of Satan 1. Pet. 5, 8. 9., is doubtles a valiant exploit, highlie pleasing God.
                  So that no cause is there why these

absurd imaginations, which are wont to arise of euerie trifling occasion, should so torment thee: perseuere constantlie in thy purpose Psal. 25, 2. Psal. 27, 14., & serue God with an vpright affection.
                  Neither is it an illusion, that thou sodeinlie sometimes art rauished vp on hie, and by and by cast downe vnto the old vanities of the minde 2. Cor. 12, verse. 7.: which, for asmuch as thou sufferest them rather against thy wil Roman. 7, vers 17, &c.; than willinglie, as long as they displease thee, & thou strugglest against them, they are rather profitable than hurtful.
                  Know this for a certaintie, the drift of the olde enimie is to hinder thy studie of godlines, and to withdrawe thee from al exercise of religion 1 Pet. 5, 8., that is to saie, from the godlie remembrance of the paines of Christ, from the care of thy saluation, and from thy purpose to go forwarde in wel doing Matth. 13, verse. 25. 39..
                  Manie wicked cogitations doth the enimie bring into thy minde Matth. 13, verse. 25. 26., to make thee to loath & abhor praier, and the reading of yc holie Scripture. He cannot abide an hūble confession of sins, & if he could, he would withdraw thee also from the cōmunion.
                  
                     But beleeue him not, though manietimes he laie snares to entrap thee, care not for him. Turne them vpon his owne pate, when he prouoketh thee to wickednes, and saie vnto him Mat. 4, 10.: Auoide Satan, thou vncleane Spirite, blushe thou cursed wretch, thou whiche puttest these things into my head, auoide I saie; thou wouldest carrie me awaie frō my God, but thou shalt not. For Iesus wil assist me, and so thou shalt but get a shameful foile. I had rather die, and suffer anie thing, than consent to thee Roman. 8, vers. 35, &c.. Wherefore be quiet, and hold thy peace, for I wil not heare thee though thou trouble me neuer so much Matt. 16, verse. 23.. The Lorde is my light, and my saluation Psal. 27, 1, whome shal I feare? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whome shal I be afraide? Though3. an hoste pitched against me, mine hart should not be afraide, the Lord protecting and deliuering me.
                  Thou therefore striue couragiouslie as a good soldier 2. Tim. 2, 3: and if at anie time of infirmitie thou fal, take a better hart vnto thee, and doubt not of mine especial fauor Psal. 91, 2. 3.: and in anie wise beware of pride, and arrogancie, a cause why manie are led into error,

and fal into blindnes almost incurable manie times Rom. 1, 21. 24, &c..
                  Let the fal of those proude ones, foolishlie arrogating too much to themselues Rom. 11, 18 19. 20. 1. Pet. 5, 5. Luk. 18, 14. Esai. 14, 10. 11, &c. 2. Pet. 2, 4., be a continual warning to thee to beware of pride.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 9. Of modest concealing the benefites of God.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     SOnne, it is good & profitable for thee to keepe close the zeale of religion that GOD has giuen thee, not to commend the same too insolentlie with words, or to praise it out of measure, but rather to despise thy selfe, and, as one vnworthie those so excellent gifts, to feare Ro. 11, 20. 1. Cor. 4, 6. 7..
                  Thou must not stick too much vnto that affection, which maie easilie be changed into the contrarie.
                  Thinke while thou hast the fauor of God, how miserable and wretched thou shouldest be without his fauor Rom. 3, 24 Rom. 5, 1. 2, &c. 1. Co. 15, 10 Ephes. 3, 7.: and thinke not that thy comming forward in godlines consisteth onelie in hauing the benefit of Gods

heauenlie comfort, but also if thou canst patientlie, and quietlie endure the want thereof Rom. 5, 3. Iames 1, 2. 3. 4., in such sort that thou faint not in praier, nor omit altogether thine accustomed exercises, but aswel as thou canst, discharge that which is in thee to do, and neglect not thy dutie for the vnquietnes of minde which thou feelest in thy selfe.
                  For manie, when things fal not out euen as they would haue them, are by and by either impatient, or careles Luk. 8, 13..
                  It is not alwaies in the power of man to dispose his affairs at his pleasure Ierem. 10, verse. 23., but God it is that both giueth and comforteth Phil. 2, 13. Rom. 9, 16., both when he wil, and what he wil, and whome he wil, and as he wil himselfe.
                  Some through a blinde deuotion haue cast themselues awaie, whilst, endeuoring aboue their strength, they consider not the corruption of their nature, but folowe the affection of their minde, rather than the iudgment of reason: the which, because they tooke in hand more than Gods wil was they should, did quicklie forgoe the fauor of God: & they which made their nests in heauen, became

poore, vile, and forsaken Esa. 14, 10 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. Luke. 1, 51. 52., that the afflicted and poore might learne not to flie with their owne winges, but with my feathers.
                  As for such as are but yonglings, and not trained vp in the waie of the Lord, they vnles they harken to the counsel of the wise, may easilie be deceaued, and ouerthrowen Prou. 12, 1. Prou. 13, 1. 14. 18.: yea if they folowe their owne braine before such as haue experience, they are in the greater danger, because they wil not be withdrawen from their opinion once conceaued Pro 21, 29..
                  It is seldome seene that selfe-wise men wil yeeld to anie.
                  And therefore better is it to haue smal wisedome with modestie, than profounde knowledge with a proude minde: yea better is it to haue litle, than hauing much to waxe proude Prou. 11, 2 Prou. 15, 25.
                  He dealeth not circumspectlie enough, that giues himselfe wholie vnto pleasure, forgetting his old aduersitie, and the chaste feare of the Lord, the propertie whereof is to be alwaies warie that it leese not benefites receaued Rom. 11, verse. 20. 21..
                  And he is not virtuouslie wise, that in ye time of miserie despaireth ouer much, and reposeth lesse confidence,

and trust in mee, than he should. He which in the time of peace is too secure, in the time of warre is out of hart commonlie, and of no courage.
                  Haddest thou the waie to behaue thy selfe modestlie, and lowlie Matt. 11, verse. 29., and to gouerne thy spirites aright, thou couldest not so easilie fal into peril, and blame.
                  It is a point of wisedome while thou art hot in the spirit, to consider what would fal out, if the light should go awaie Iob. 17, 11. 12.: & againe, when that comes to passe, to thinke that it may returne againe, being therefore withdrawen by me that both you thereby maie be the wiser Ps. 119, 71., and I the more glorious.
                  For commonlie thou shalt finde such trial more profitable Iam. 1, 2. 1. Pet. 1, 6. 7., than if continualie thou enioiedst prosperitie at thine harts desire.
                  For thou art not virtuous though thou haue heauenlie visions, & consolations 1. Cor. 13 verse. 1, &c., learning, and hie degree, vnles withal thou haue true modestie Matth. 5, verse. 5, christian charitie 1. Cor. 13, verse. 2, &c., and zeale of religion 1. Cor. 10, verse. 31. Coloss. 3, 17, vnles thou vnfeinedlie despise thy selfe, and reioice that others do despise, & contemne, rather than honor and commend thee Mat. 5, 11. 1. Pet. 4, 14..
               
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 10. That man must debase himselfe in the sight of God.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     I Dare speake vnto my Lord, though I am but dust and ashes Gen. 18, 27.: and if I should make anie better of my selfe, thou standest against me, and my sinnes beare witnes against me Iob. 9, 20. 30. 31., which I cannot gainesaie.
                  But if I make none account of my selfe, but, laieng aside proude imaginations Luke. 1: 8, verse. 13. Iames 4, 6. 1. Pet. 5, 5. Prou. 3, 34., esteeme my selfe for dust, as I am in deede, then wilt thou be fauorable, and thy light shal shine vpon mine hart: then wil it fal out, that if I esteeme neuer so litle of my selfe, euen that litle, I being pressed downe to nothing, wil vanish vtterlie.
                  And here thou wilt showe me to my selfe euen what I am, what I haue bin, and whence I came, to wit, nothing from nothing. And being left to my selfe I am nothing but mere infirmitie Psal. 8, 4. Psalm. 39, 9. Gen. 2, 7..
                  But if thou shine vpon me with thy

fauor, I am straight waie made strong Ps. 104, 30., and filled with newe comfort.
                  And this is a woonderful strange thing, that so sodeinlie I should be lifted vp, when thou doest so gratiouslie embrace me, which of my selfe alwaies am carried downeward Wisd. 9, 15 Rom. 7, 23. 24. vnto earthlie things. This is a frute of thy loue, which freelie preuenteth me Ps 59, 10., and saueth from so manie trobles Psalm. 89, verse. 1, &c. Psal. 59, 16., and preserueth from greeuous dangers, and deliuereth me, to saie the truth, from so infinite euils.
                  For louing my selfe inordinatelie I cast awaie my selfe Luk. 15, 13: but after once I sought and loued thee syncerelie, I both found thee, and my selfe Luk. 15, 21, and by that loue also I brought my selfe the more to nothing.
                  For thou, O my sweete Sauior, thou bestowest moe things vpon me Psalm. 89, verse. 1, &c., than I can deserue, and a great deale more than I dare hope for, much lesse desire.
                  Wherfore I thanke thee, my God, which, albe I am vnwoorthie the least of al thy blessings, yet of thine honor, & infinite goodnes, ceassest not continualie to loade euen the vngrateful Mat. 5, 45 Luk. 18, 13. 14., and thine enimies with benefites. O Lord, thou which art our saluation

                     Exod. 15, verse. 2. 2. Sam. 22, 2 Psal. 18, 2. Esaie. 12, 2., our strength, and our shield, conuert vs, we beseech thee, that we maie prooue grateful, humble, and godlie in thy sight,
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 11. That al things are to be directed vnto God, as to the principal end.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     SOnne, if thou desire to be happie, thou must make mee thy cheefest and principal ende Rom. 11, verse. 36.. Herebie shal thy nature be purified Gen. 6, 5. Gen. 8, 21., which most commonlie bendeth vnto it selfe, and to things created.
                  For as soone as thou seekest thy selfe in anie thing Mat 15, 3. 1. Cor. 3, 18. 19. by and by thou faintest, and witherest in thy selfe.
                  And therefore thou must refer al things to me alone, which gaue al Iam. 1, 17., and sende al, and therefore vnto me, as to the chiefe spring, al things must returne Ro. 11, 36..
                  Out of me the smal as wel as the great, the poore as wel as the rich do drawe the water of life Psal. 36, 9. Esaie. 12, 3. Iohn. 4, 10. as from a liuelie fountaine: and they which frankelie and willinglie serue me,

they shal receaue one benefite vpon another Ioh. 1, 12.. But if anie wil glorie, or delight in anie priuate thing besides me Iere. 9, 23. 24. 1. Cor. 1, 31. 2. Co. 10, 17 18., he at no time shal feele true ioie, and comfort in his mind, but fal into sundrie discommodities, and trobles.
                  Therefore thou must ascribe no goodnes, nor godlines neither to thy selfe, nor to anie mortal man, but al to God 1. Cor. 3, 6. 1. Cor. 1, 30. without whose blessing man hath nothing Iam. 1, 17. 1. Cor. 4, 7..
                  I gaue al, I chalenge al of right, and I looke to be glorified for al Rom. 11, 36.
                  This is the truth, whereby the vaine glorie of man is put to flight.
                  And who so hath the fauor of God, and true charitie Rom. 5, 5. Rom. 8, 35., he is neither enuious, nor faint harted, nor proude 1. Cor. 13, verse. 4, &c.. For heauenlie loue subdueth al things, and stretcheth foorth al the powers of the minde Rom. 8, 37 1. Cor. 13, 7.
                  Wherefore if thou beest wise, thou wilt reioice and trust in me alone, euen as God alone is good Matth. 19, verse. 17., who aboue al and in al is to be praised for euermore 1. Tim. 1, verse. 17. 1. Tim. 6, 16,
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 12. That it is a sweete thing to serue God, and to despise the world.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O Lord, I wil speake againe, I cannot hold my peace, and in the eares of my God, my Lorde, and my King dwelling in the hie heauens, this I saie. O Lord, how great is thy goodnes which thou hast laide vp euen for them which feare thee Psal. 31, 19? Much more then for them which loue thee, yea much more for them which honor thee with al their harts.
                  Trulie vnspeakeable is the sweetenes of thy contemplatiō, which thou impartest on such as loue thee Esai. 64, 4. 1. Cor. 2, 9..
                  And herein cheefelie thou declaredst the force of thy loue, in that, when I was not, thou madest me Gen. 2, 7. Iob. 10, 8. 9, &c., and after, when I went astraie▪ thou broughtst me home againe; and commandedst that I should serue Ps. 119, 4., and loue thee.
                  O fountaine of euerlasting loue, what shal I saie of thee? or how can I forget thee: that hast vouchsafed to

remember me? Who beyond al hope hast bin merciful to me thine owne, euen when I was dead Ephes. 2, 5., and cast awaie: and at such time as I deserued naught, didst bind me vnto thee thorough thy fauor and freendship.
                  Now what shal I render for this thy bounteousnes Ps. 116, 12.? Surelie I wil serue thee. But that is no great thing to serue him, whome al creatures of dutie must obeie Matth. 28, verse. 18. 1. Cor. 15, verse. 27. Hebr. 2, 8.. This rather is wonderful, and strange, that thou vouchsafest to take and admit so vile a wretch, as I am, into thy seruice among the number of thy beloued Rom. 11, verse. 17..
                  Lo, whatsoeuer I haue to do thee seruice withal, it is thine Matth. 25, verse. 14. 15 1 Cor. 4, 7.. But what? me thinkes you serue me, more than I you? For behold, heauen and earth, which thou hast made for the vse of man Psal. 8, 3. 4, &c., are present, and continualie discharge the dutie which thou hast enioined them Psalm. 18, verse. 7, &c.. Yea the Angels also thou hast created, and ordeined for the vse of man Psal. 34, 7. Matt. 18, 10. Hebr. 1, 14.. But of al other things this is most wonderful, that thou wouldest debase thy selfe so much as to serue man Matth. 20, verse. 28. Mark. 10, 45, and hast promised to giue thy selfe for him Iohn. 6, 5.
                  For these thy benefites what shal I render vnto thee Ps. 116, 12? Oh that I could

serue thee al my life long! Yea, wold to God I could serue thee euen one daie syncerelie! Trulie thou art worthie al seruice, al honor, euerlasting praise 1. Tim. 1, verse. 17.. Doubtles thou art my Lord, and I am thy poore seruant Luk. 17, 10, bound to serue thee with al my strength Luk. 10, 27 Deut 6, 5., and to sing out thy praises without ceassing Deu. 11, 18 19. 20.. And surelie so I wil, or would at least-wise, but what I cannot, supplie thou, O Lorde, of thy goodnes.
                  A great honor, a great preferment is it to be thy seruant, & to contemne worldlie thinges for thy sake Matth. 10, vers. 37, &c. Iohn. 12, 25. For great shalbe their reward which voluntarilie submit themselues to this holie seruice Mat. 5, 11. 12. Roman. 8, vers. 35, &c.; and they shal feele the sweete comfort of the holie Spirite, who through the loue of thee haue despised the pleasures of this present world 2. Cor. 1, 3. 4.. Great freedome of minde shal they come vnto, which entering into the narrowe waie Mat. 7, 13. 14. Luk. 13, 24., haue cast aside worldlie cares, and cogitations Matth. 6, vers. 25, &c..
                  O how sweete, and comfortable is the seruice of God, whereby a man is made free, and holie Roman. 8, verse. 15.! O the holie state of Gods seruants, which maketh men equal to Angels Heb. 1, 14., acceptable

to God Matth. 5, verse. 3, &c., to the Diuels terrible Mat. 10, 8. Acts. 19, 15., and honorable among the faithful Eccles. 10, verse. 20. 21. 25.! O noble seruice, and alwaies to be wished for, whereby both the cheefest felicitie is gotten, and ioie without ende obteined Ioh. 12, 25 Iohn. 17, 2.!
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 13. That the desires of the minde must be examined, and bridled.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, thou hast yet manie thinges to learne.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  What are those, Lord?
               
               
                  LORD.
                  That thou make thy desire obedient to my commandement, and be no more a freend to thy selfe, but desirous to obserue my wil Luke. 22, verse. 42. Iohn. 4, 34. Iohn. 5, 30..
                  Manie times thou art inflamed, and vehementlie driuen on through desires: and when thou art so, consider with thy self; whether thou seeke more my praise, than thy profit Luke. 22, verse. 24. Iohn. 5, 44. Iohn. 12, 4. 5. 6.. For if thou couet a thing for my sake, thou wilt take in good parte that which I shal sende: but if couetousnes cause ye same, then art thou kept backe, and pressed downe Luke. 9, vers. 23, &c. 59. 61. Luk. 18, 22. 23..
                  Wherefore take heede that thou

leane not too much to thy conceaued desire, I not being of counsel Prou. 3, 5. 7., least afterward thou buie it ful deerelie; and that at another time displease thee, which at the first thou didst like, and long for Luk. 9, 59. 61. Luk. 18, 18.. For euerie affection that seemeth good, must not be followed, nor the contrarie sodeinlie auoided.
                  Sometime it is good to bridle euen good motions, and desires, least either thou passe thy boundes through importunitie of minde; or offend others through thine intemperancie; or thou sodeinlie fal through the resistance of them.
                  Otherwhiles it is expedient to vse violence Matth. 11, verse. 12., and to resist the appetite, and not to waie what the flesh either likes or mislikes Gal. 5, 16. 17, &c. Rom. 6, 12. Roman. 8, vers. 12, &c., but rather to vse diligence that it be constrained to obeie the spirite, and so long be kept vnder in bondage, til it be pliant vnto al things; and haue learned to be content with a litle, and simple estate, and neuer to murmur for anie affliction.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 14. The waie to patience, and to fight against fleshlie desires.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     THen, my Lord and God, as farre as I perceaue, I haue much need of patience Luk. 21, 19. For manie contrarie things happen in this life: in so much that albe I desire quietnes by al meanes, yet is it impossible for me to liue without war, and troble Iob. 7, 1. Iohn. 16, 20. 22..
               
               
                  LORD.
                  Thou saiest true, my sonne. Yet I wil not haue thee to seeke after that peace which is without tentations, and trobles: but then to thinke thou hast founde peace, when thou shalt be tried with manifold miseries and vexations Iam 1, 2. 3. 1. Pet. 1, 6. 7..
                  Now if thou saie, thou canst not suffer much, tel me, my sonne, how then wilt thou suffer the euerlasting torments of hel fire Matth. 7, verse. 23. Matt. 25, 41.? Of two euils alwaies the lesser must be chosen. Wherefore to auoide those euerlasting paines, studie to endure the miseries of this present world patientlie for the Lordes sake Matt. 5, 10 11. 
                           •
                        . Pet. 4, 14..
                  
                     Thinkest thou that the men of this world feele either none aduersitie, or but litle? If thou doest, thou art in a wrong opinion, for they which liue most delicatelie, liue in miserie Gen. 3, 10. 11. 17. Iob. 14, verse. 1, &c..
                  But thou wilt saie: They haue their delights, and they folow their fancies, & therfore be they litle touched with their miseries. Wel, suppose euerie thing fals out according to their wish; how long wil that last Luke. 12, verse. 20. 45. 46. 1. Thess. 5, 3? Verelie euen as smoake shal they consume awaie Psa. 37, 20. 2. 9. 13, &c., which are welthie in this world Luk. 6, 24. 25. 26., so that of ioies passed there shalbe no remembrance Psal. 37, 9. 10. 20, &c..
                  Yea, while they liue too they enioie them not without sorow, troble, and feare. For of what things they take pleasure, of the same they receaue sorow manie-times. And deseruedlie. For they which beyond reason folow vaine delightes, euen reason would that they should not haue them without paine, & grief Prou. 14▪ verse. 13.. And their pleasures too are but verie short, and deceitful, and dishonest, and filthie. But this they perceaue not, they are so drunken and blinde▪ but like brute beasts, for a litle pleasure in this worlde, they cast their soules into euerlasting paines Ps 49, 12▪ 13, &c..
                  
                     Wherefore, my sonne, folowe not thou thy lustes Eccles. 18, verse. 30. 31. Galath. 5, vers. 16, &c., but renounce thine owne wil Luke. 9, vers. 23, &c.. Delite thy selfe in the Lord Psa. 37, 4., and he wil giue thee thine hartes desire.
                  For, know this for a truth, if thou wouldest trulie reioice, and receaue much comfort at mine handes, thou muste vtterlie despise al worldlie things, and contemne those vaine delightes Iere. 9, 23. 24.. For therein true felicitie, and ample reward of comfort doth consist. And the more thou withdrawest thy self from worldlie pleasure, the sweeter consolations shalt thou finde in me Ps. 94, 19. 2. Cor. 1, 3. 4. Iames. 1, 2.. But, as I saide before, thou shalt not attaine therevnto without sorow, and labor Acts. 14, 22.
                  For there is against thee old custome, but that wilbe foiled by a better custome: the flesh, but that wilbe bridled Roman. 8, verse. 
                           •
                        , &c. Galat. 5, 16. 17. by the heate of the spirit: the old serpent 2. Cor. 11, verse. 3. Reu. 12, 9. 12. 17. Satan, but he both at thy praier wil flie, and by godlie exercise runne awaie 1. Pet. 5, 8. 9. Mat. 26, 41..
               
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 15. Of obedience to our betters, after the example of Christ.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     SOnne, he that withdraweth himselfe from obediēce, driueth himselfe out of Gods fauor Deut. 11, 1. Deut. 21, 18 19, &c.: and he that seeketh priuate, forgoeth publike things.
                  He which gladlie, and voluntarilie Ephes. 6, 6 Coloss. 3, 22 obeieth not his better, showeth plainelie therebie, that he hath not yet brought his flesh in subiection, but that it wincheth backward, and murmureth manie-times Tit. 3, 1. 3..
                  Wherefore learne with al speede to submit thy selfe to thy superior 1. Pet. 2, 13 14., if thou desire to tame thy flesh 1. Pet 2, 11.. For the outward enimie is the more easilie ouercome, if the inner man be sure, and strong Matth. 26, verse. 41. Luk. 22, 40. 46..
                  Thou hast none so il, and troblesome an enimie to thy soule, as thy selfe, if thou be out with the spirit Gal. 5, 16.. For thou must vnfeinedlie contemne thy selfe, if thou wilt be master ouer blood, and flesh. But forasmuch as thou louest thy selfe as yet immoderatelie,

thou abhorrest to commit thy selfe who lie to the wil of another Luke. 9, vers. 23, &c..
                  But, O earth & ashes Eccl. 10, 12, what great thing doest thou, if for the Lordes sake thou obeie man 1. Pet. 2, verse. 13.; when I the Almightie and most Hie, who of nothing created al things Col. 1, 16. Iohn. 1, 1. 2. 3., submitted my self humblie to man for thy sake, and was most vile & contemptible Matt. 20, verse. 28. Philip. 2, 6. 7. 8., that thou by mine humilitie mightest ouercome that pride of thine Matth. 11, 29.?
                  Learne to obeie, O dust Eccles. 10, verse. 12. Gen. 3, 19.; learne to bring downe thy selfe, O earth, & slime Gen. 2, 7., and to throwe downe thy selfe vnder al mens feete. Learne, I saie, to breake thy wil, and humblie to submit thy selfe to al Eph 5, 21. 1. Pet. 2, 13,. Waxe hot against thy selfe, and suffer not pride to haue place within thee: but showe thy selfe so lowlie, and simple, that al maie treade thee vnder feete like myre in the streetes Esai. 10, 6..
                  What hast thou, O vaine man, to complaine? How canst thou, O wicked wretch, speake againe to them which dispraise thee, seeing so oftentimes by offending GOD thou hast deserued the paines of hel Matth. 18, verse. 21. 22, &c.? But I gratiouslie haue spared thee Rom. 2, 4. 1. Pet. 1, 3. 2. Pet. 3, 9. making no smal account of thy soule, that thou perceiuing this my loue to thee

wardes, mightest alwaies showe thy selfe thankeful for my benefits Ps. 116, 12 13. 17., and euermore, being giuen to true obedience, and modestie 1. Pet. 1, 17, take it patientlie when thou art contemned 1. Pet. 2, vers. 20, &c..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 16. That we are to consider the secret iudgements of God, least we waxe proude in his gifts.
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O Lorde, when thou thunder est foorth thy iudgments against me, thou makest al my mē
                     bers to shake, & quake for feare, & terrifiest my mind aboue measure Iob. 4, 17. 18. 19. Psalm. 6, 1. Psal. 38, 1. 2, &c..
                  Astonished I consider that the verie heauens are not cleane in thy sight Iob. 15, 15.. And if thou foundedst follie in thine Angels, and therefore diddest not spare them, what shal become of me Iob. 4, 18. 19.? If the verie starres did fal from heauen Esa. 14, 12., what shal I that am but ashes and dust Eccle. 10, verse. 12. hope for? They whose works seemed commendable, haue vtterlie bin confounded Matth. 11, vers. 20, &c. Matth. 23, verse. 3, &c.; and such as were fed with the bread of Angels, I haue seene to be

delighted with the huskes that swine cate Luk. 15, 16.
                  So that there is none holines, if thou, Lord, draw back thine hand, no wisedome helpeth, if thou gouerne not 1. Cor. 1, vers. 17, &c.; no strength doth good, if thou assist not; no chastitie is sure, if thou defend not; & no custodie can keepe safe, if thou watch not Psal. 127, 1..
                  For being forsaken, alas, we drowne, and perish Matth. 8, verse. 25 Luke 8, 24.; but if thou care for vs we liue, and prosper. We are of our selues fraile, but strong through thee; and of our selues neither hot nor cold, but zelous through thee Luk. 17, 5..
                  Doubtles it is my part to conceaue most humblie, & baselie of my selfe: and though I seeme to haue some goodnes, yet must I not waie the same Luke. 18, vers. 11, &c 1. Cor. 4, 7.. I saie, it is my part to submit my selfe to those bottomles iudgements of thine Psal. 19, 9. Psal. 119, 7. 30. 52., seing I find my selfe to be no better than nothing of nothing.
                  O waight without measure! O sea vnpassable Psal. 36, 6., where I find my selfe to be nothing but altogether nothing! Where is then the couert of glorie? Where is the vaine concept of glorie? Al vaine glorie is swalowed vp in the gulfe of Psal. 9, 16. Ps. 119, 120. thy iudgements ouer

me. What are al men in thy sight? Euen as claie in respect of the potter Esa. 29, 16.
                  Can he waxe proude with vaine praises, whose minde is trulie obedient to the Lord? No, though al the world should extol him, seeing he is in seruice to the truth; he wil not be moued Iere. 9, 23. 24. with their commendations, whose trust is fixed vpon the Lord. For euen they al, who vtter his praises, are nothing, and together with the sound of their words, shal vanish awaie Ps. 89, 48. Psal. 49, 10.. But the truth of the Lord endureth for euer Esai. 40, 8. Psal. 117, 2..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 17. What wordes, and manner we should vse in desiring anie thing at the hands of God.
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     SOnne, in thy praiers thou must vse these wordes: Lord, be it euen so, if it please thee I am. 4, 15. Actes. 18, 21. 1. Cor. 4, 19, Matth. 6, 10. Matt. 26, 39. 42.; Lord, if it be for the aduancement of thy glorie, let it be done in thy Name; Lord, if thou seest it good, and profitable for me, grant that I maie vse it to thine honor, and praise: but if thou knowest it wilbe

hurtful, O Lord, remooue awaie this desire fro me Iam. 4, 3..
                  For euerie desire, which seemeth right and good in the iudgement of man, is not of the holie spirit: and it is an hard matter to discerne rightlie whether a good or an euil spirit doth prouoke thee to couet this or that; or whether thine owne spirit moue thee therevnto 1. Cor. 2, verse. 11.. Manie in the end haue bin deceaued, who seemed to be stirred vp by a good spirit.
                  And therefore alwaies thou must wish for yt which thou wouldest haue in the feare of God, and with humblenes of minde Psal. 19, 7. Psal. 111, 5. Prou. 1, 28. 29.: and commit the whole matter to the Lord, with a meere check to thy selfe, saieng on this wise:
                  Lord, what is better for me thou knowest; doo thou whether of both thou wilt thy selfe Matt. 8, 2. Mark. 14, 36. Giue me what thou wilt, as much as thou wilt, and when thou wilt thy selfe. Deale with me as thou thinkest good, and as it shal please thee, and be most for thy glorie. Place me there, where thou wilt thy selfe, and in al things vse me at thy pleasure. I am in thine hand Psal. 31, 5., turne me, lose me euerie waie. Behold, I thy seruant Ps. 116, 16. Luke. 1, 38. am prepared to

al things: because my desire is to (and would to God I could rightlie, and perfectlie) serue thee, not my selfe Rom. 14 8 Phil. 1, 20..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 18. A praier for grace to do the wil of God.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O Most bountiful Sauior, extend thy fauor towards me Psa. 80, 3., let it be with me, & labor with me, and continue with me vntil the end Phil. 2, 12..
                  Giue me grace to wish, and couet those things Phil. 2, 13., as maie be grateful to thee, and acceptable in thy sight.
                  Let thy wil be my wil, and let mine alwaies folow thine, and agree therwith Mat. 6, 10 Mat. 26, 39. 42. Mat. 14, 36.
                  Grant that I maie like and mislike that which thou doest Ioh. 4, 34. Iohn. 5, 30. Iohn. 6, 38., and neuer like or mislike anie thing, but that which thou doest either like or mislike.
                  Assist me to crucifie my selfe to al worldlie things Gal. 6, 14. Roman. 6, verse. 3, &c. Philip. 3, 8.; and for thy sake to couet in this world to be contemned and vnknowen.
                  And aboue al things grant that I

maie rest, and haue peace in thee: thou art the true peace, thou alone art the quietnes of minde Phil. 4, 7.. Without thee al things are harde, and troblesome Iohn. 14, verse. 27. Iohn. 16, 33.. In this peace, that is, in thee alone which art the cheefest, & euerlasting felicitie, I wil sleepe, and take my rest Psalm. 3, 5. Psalm. 4, 8.,
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 19. That the true comfort is to be sought for, in God alone.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     WHatsoeuer pleasure I can wish, or imagine, I looke not for it in this life, but in the world to come Rom. 8, 18 32. 1. Cor. 2, 9. Heb. 13, 14..
                  If I alone had al the pleasures that mought be, and enioied al the delights in the world, certaine it is they would not long endure Ioh. 16, 20 22. 1. Cor. 7, 31. 1. Ioh. 2, 17..
                  And therefore thou canst not fullie be delighted, and refreshed thoroughlie (O my soule) but in the Lord 1. Cor, 1, 31 2. Cor. 1, 3. 4., who comforteth the abiect 2. Cor 7. 6, and assisteth the meeke Iames. 4, 6.
                  Hope a litle while Psal. 27, 14., O my soule, hope for the promise of GOD, and thou shalt attaine to plentie of al

good things in heauen. But if thou vnmeasurablie desire tēporal things, make an account of it, thou shalt forgo eternal Luke. 16, verse. 25. 1. Ioh. 2, 15. 16. 17..
                  Vse this world 1. Cor. 7, verse. 31., but desire heauen Colos. 3, 1. 2..
                  No temporal thing can satisfie thee Eccle. 1, 8. Eccles. 4, 8.; for thou art not created to enioie the same.
                  Haddest thou al creatures in thine owne possession: yet wert thou not blessed. But thy felicitie consisteth in God the creator of al Psal. 36, 7. 8. 9. Psalm. 42, verse. 1, &c.. Which is such, not as is seene and commended of the foolish fauorers of this present world, but as the good, and faithful disciples of Christ hope for, and they somtime foretast who are spiritual & pure in hart Matt. 5, 8. Psalm. 24, 4., whose conuersation is in heauen Phil. 3, 20.. Vaine, and short is al worldlie consolation: but true and blessed is the spiritual Psa. 31, 19. which the truth doth minister.
                  The godlie man carrieth alwaies about his comforter, euen Iesus 2. Cor. 1, 2. 5. Coloss. 1, 2., whome on this wise he speaketh vnto:
                  O Lord Iesu, be with me in al places, and at al times. Let this be my comfort, to lack al worldlie comfort willinglie Iob. 6, 7.: Or if at anie time I lack thy consolation, let thy wil, and due

trial of me 1. Pet. 1, 7. be in steede of cheefest comfort Psal. 23, 4.. For thou wilt not alwaies chide, neither keepe thine anger for euer Psa. 103, 9..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 20. That al our cares must be cast vpon God.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, let mee deale as I wil wt thee Iam. 4, 7.. I do know what is for thy profit. Thou conceauest as a man Ps. 94, 11. Matt. 16, 23. 1. Cor. 3, 1., and in manie things doest so thinke, as thy fleshlie minde doth counsel thee.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  Truth Lord: Thou hast more care of me, than I can haue of my selfe Psa. 55, 22. Esai. 49, 14. 15.. For he standeth totteringlie, who trusteth not wholie in thee 1. Pet. 5, 7..
                  O Lord, so that my wil maie be right and grounded on thee, deale with me euen as thou wilt Luk. 1, 38.. For it cannot be but good whatsoeuer thou shalt determine of me.
                  Wherfore whether thou wilt that I be in darknes, I praise it Rom. 12, 12 2. Corint. 6, verse. 4, &c.; or in the light, I praise it; whether in prosperitie, I praise it; or in aduersitie, I praise

that also Psal. 34, 1..
               
               
                  LORD.
                  Sonne thou must be so minded if thou wilt deale with me: and be as willing to suffer Iames. 1, 2. Iohn. 15, 19. Iohn. 16, 2., as to reioice; and to be poore, and needie Matth. 19, verse. 27. Luke. 9, 23., as rich and wealthie.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  Lord, I wil gladlie suffer for thy sake whatsoeuer thou shalt send: yea I wil take in good part at thine hands euil as wel as good, sower as sweete, sorow as ioie Phil. 4, 4. 5. Coloss. 1, 11. 12., and for al things yeeld thanks 1. Thess. 5, verse. 18..
                  Defend me, O Lord, from sinne, & I wil feare neither death, nor ye Diuel: & so thou forsake me not vtterlie, neither blot me out of the booke of life, no miserie shal dismaie me Psalm. 91, verse. 5, &c..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 21. That the troubles of this life are patientlie to be suffered after the example of our Sauior Christ.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, for thy saltion I came downe frō heauen Iohn. 3, 13: Iohn. 6, 33. 38, &c. Philip. 2, 7. 8., and tooke thy miseries vpon me not of necessitie Esai. 53, 5., but voluntarilie; to teach thee to be patient,

& to beare the miseries of this world gladlie, not grudginglie 1. Pet. 2. vers. 21, &c..
                  For from the houre of my birth euen til my death on the crosse, there neuer wanted sorowes which I was to suffer Esaie. 53, verse. 2, &c. Luke. 9, 22. I bare the want of necessarie things Luke. 2, 7. Matth 4, 2. Luke. 9, 58.; I harde much muttering against me Ioh. 7, 12.; I put vp manie tauntes and reproches Matth. 12, verse. 24. Iohn. 8, 48.; for my benefits, I receaued vnkindnes Esaie. 5, verse. 1, &c. Matth. 21, vers. 33, &c.; for my miracles, il words Luk. 11, 14. 15.; for my ghostlie counsaile, reprehension Iohn. 7, 28. 30..
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  O my Lord, seeing thou in this life hast shewed thy selfe patient (wherein especialie thou fulfilledst the commandement of thine heauenlie father Ioh. 17, 4. Philip. 2, 8.:) good reason is it, that I a miserable, and sinful wretch do showe my selfe patient according to thy wil, and, while thou thinkest meete, beare the burden of mortal life after thine ensample 1. Pet. 2, vers. 21, &c..
                  For although this present life seeme burdensome: yet through thy fauor it is made the lighter, and maie the more easilie be borne of weakelings both by thine example Matth. 11, verse. 29. 30., and of thy saincts Phil. 4, 13. Hebr. 6, 11. verse. 12. Hebr. 11, 32. 33, &c..
                  Yea much more comfortable is it now, than it was in the old law, when both the waie was harder to finde 2 Cor. 3, vers. 13, &c.,

and fewe had a desire to seeke the celestial kingdome Ro. 9, 29. 1. Cor. 10, 6,.
                  Then how much am I bound to thee, which hast vouchsafed to showe both to me, & to al beleeuers a right and readie waie vnto thine euerlasting kingdome Ioh. 14, 6.! For thy waie, is our waie: and by holie patience we striue to come vnto thee, our crowne: whome, vnles thou haddest gone afore Iohn. 14, 2. 19. Iohn. 15, 18., and schooled vs Ioh. 16, 32 33., who would care to folow? How manie would abide not onelie behind, but a great waie of also, if they had not these thy noble examples before their eies?
                  And, hearing such commandements and signes, and yet are lukewarme, what would we do, if we had not such a light giuen vs to folowe thee?
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 22. Of long-suffering; and who is patient in deede.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     WHat is that thou saiest, my sonne? cesse to complaine. Behold how both I Heb. 12, 2., and other saincts Hebr. 11, vers. 32, &c. Hebr. 6, 11. 12. haue suffered;

thou hast not as yet resisted vnto bloud Heb. 12, 4.. Litle is it which thou sufferest being compared with them, who haue suffered so much, so mightilie bin tempted, so grieuouslie afflicted, so manie waies tried, and exercised Heb. 11, 34 35. 36. 37..
                  And therefore cal such into minde as haue endured moe troubles: so shalt thou more easilie beare thine owne. And if thine seeme not light, looke whether impatiencie doo not cause thee to thinke so. But, be they smal, be they great, endeuor thou to beare them patientlie 2. Cor. 6, 4 Iames. 1, 2. 3..
                  For the more patience thou showest; the more wiselie thou doest; the more fauor thou shalt get; the more easilie thou shalt beare aduersitie, being both in mind, and custome not slothfullie prepared herevnto Rom. 5, 3. 4..
                  And saie not, I neither can, nor maie suffer this at his handes; for he hath iniuried me greatlie, and accused me of those things, which I neuer thought of; if another had dealt so with me, I could yet haue put vp such things, as I see might reasonablie be put vp. I saie, vse not these speeches, for they are foolish cogitations, such as neither waigh the woorthines of patience, nor the reward due for the

same Iam. 1, 12., but respect persons rather, and iniuries receiued Mat. 5, 43. 44, &c..
                  He is not truelie patient that wil beare but with whome he list, and what he list. But he is patient in deede, that waieth not who molesteth him, whether his better, or his equal, or his inferior; whether he be good and godlie, or wicked and vngratious: and howsoeuer he be iniuried, and when so euer, he taketh it in good part, as sent from God, and puts it in his winnings. For the smalest thing that is, being suffered for Gods sake, shal haue a great reward Matt. 5, 11. 12. Rom. 8, 18. Phil. 1, 12. 13, &c..
                  Wherefore be thou girded Eph. 6, 14 vnto the battel, if thou wilt haue the victorie. Vnles thou striue thou shalt neuer obteine the crowne of patience 2. Tim. 2, 5.. So that, if thou wilt not suffer, thou refusest to be crowned: but if thou desire to be crowned, striue manfullie, and suffer patientlie the brunt of the battel Ps. 27, 14. Psal. 31, 24.. For neither quietnes without labor, nor victorie without fighting is obteined 2. Tim. 2, 5.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  O my Lord, grant that through thine assistance I maie do that, which of my selfe me thinks I cannot do 2. Cor. 3, 5. Thou knowest that otherwise I can but suffer litle, & euen

by a smal puffe of aduersitie, am easilie ouerthrowen.
                  Grant that al trobles for thy name sake maie be welcome to mee, and wished for: for to suffer, and to be afflicted for thee, is verie good for my soules health Psal. 119, verse. 67▪ 71. Roman. 5, verse. 3, &c. Iames. 1, 2. 3.,
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 23. A confession of mans weakenes, and miserie.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     I Wil confesse my sinnes, and wickednes vnto thee, O Lord, Psal 32, 5..
                  Oftentimes a smal thing brings me down, and trobles me. Sometime I determine to plaie the stoute champion; and by and by with a light tentation I am ouerthrowen. Now and then of a smal thing ariseth a greeuous tentation; and when I thinke I am safe, vnawares manie-times I receaue the foile.
                  Wherefore, Lord, behold mine humilitie, and frailtie which is wel knowen to thee. Haue mercie on me, and deliuer me out of this myre Psal 69, 1. 2.
                  This doth vexe me at the verie

hart, and confoundes me in thy presence, when I see how fraile I am, and weake to resist affections: which albe they drawe me not altogether to assent Rom. 7, 15 16. 17. 24., yet they disquiet me greatlie by their sore assaults, and make me wearie of my life, they fight so within me.
                  And hereby more euidentlie I perceaue mine owne infirmitie, in that I see wicked cogitations do more easilie inuade, than forsake me.
                  Oh that thou most mightie God of Israel, & louer of godlie soules Heb. 4, 15, oh that thou wouldest behold my paine and griefe Psal. 25, 16, and prosper mine endeuors!
                  Strengthen me with courage from thine holie heauens, that the old man, euen the miserable flesh, not plainelie as yet made subiect to the spirit Rom. 8, 5., get not the vpper hande Rom. 6, 12, whome, as long as we liue in this wretched world, we must resist Gal. 5, 16. 17.. I cal it wretched, because therein al things are ful of snares, and enimies Iob. 14, 1. 22. 1. Pet. 5, 8.. For tentations come vpon tentations: yea, while one conflict is a making, others come on the necke of them vnlooked for Iob. 7, 13. 14..
                  So then can this life be loued, which

hath so much gal therein, and is open to so manie trobles, and miseries Iob. 5, 7.? Or can it be called a life, which causeth so manie deaths, and plagues Iob. 10, 17? And yet, notwithstanding al this, it is loued, and manie seeke for pleasure in the same Mat. 7, 13. Luke. 13, 23 24..
                  The world is manie-times dispraised, because it is deceitful, & vaine 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 17.: and yet it is hardlie forsaken, the desires of the flesh beare such a swaie 1. Iohn. 5, verse. 19.. For in verie deede some things prouoke to loue, other to abhorre the same. To loue it, the lust of the flesh, & of the eies, with the pride of life 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 16. wil allure to abhorre it, the paines, and euerlasting miseries to come Ioh. 16, 20 Luk 16, 25., maie cause.
                  But, alas, vile pleasure subdueth the minde addicted to the world: so that to feede the senses it thinketh it a pastime, hauing neither seene, nor tasted the sweetenes of the Lord Psal. 34, 8., nor the inner comfort of virtue 1. Cor. 2, 9. 10. 14..
                  But they, which vtterlie contemne the worlde, and studie vnder holie discipline to liue vnto GOD, they both know the heauenlie comfort, promised to such as forsake themselues Luk. 9, 23. Iohn. 16, 33., and also perceaue how lamentablie the worlde doth er, and

lies in wickednes 1. Iohn 5, verse. 19..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 24. That we must repose no confidence in anie creature, but in God alone.
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O My soule Psa. 116, 7., trust in the Lord in al things, and aboue al things: for he is the euerlasting rest of ye godlie Ps. 132, 14.
                  Giue me grace, O sweete Iesu, O my GOD, to rest in thee aboue al things in the world; aboue al helth, and beautie; aboue al honor, and glorie; aboue al power and dignitie; aboue al knowledge and dexteritie of wit; aboue al cunning and riches; aboue al mirth and ioiefulnes; aboue al praise, al fame, al sweetenes, al pleasure; aboue al hope, al promise, and al merite; aboue al desire, al gifts, al rewards which thou canst giue, & powre out; aboue al ioie, & iolitie which the mind can feele, and conceaue; finalie, aboue al Angels, and Archangels, aboue al the host of heauen, aboue al things visible and inuisible, aboue al things, which

thou art not Matth. 10, verse. 37. 38. 39. Mat. 19, 27. 28. 29. Rom. 8, 35. 38. 39. 1. Ioh. 2, 15., O my God.
                  For thou, my God, thou art best of al; thou alone art almightie; thou alone art plentiful; thou art most sweete, and thou art most comfortable; thou art most faire, most louelie, most noble, and most glorious Psalm. 36, verse. 5, &c. Psalm. 42, 
                           •
                        ..
                  In thee are, haue bin, and wil be euermore al good, and perfect things: and therefore both little is it, and lesse than thy selfe whatsoeuer thou giuest me besides thy selfe, or openest and promisest of thy selfe not seene, neither perfectlie attained.
                  For my minde wil neuer be at quiet, nor content with that is present, vntil, hauing passed ouer al gifts and worldlie things, it rest in thee Psa. 116, 7..
                  O Christ, my sweete spouse and sauiour, O most faithful louer, Lord of the whole world 1. Tim. 6, verse. 15. Reuel. 1, 5., O that I had ye wings of true libertie: that I might flie vnto thee, and rest in thee Psal. 55, 6!
                  O when shal I be mine owne man, and behold howe sweete thou art, my Lord, my God Psal. 34, 8.! When shal I winde my selfe wholie into thee in such sort, that for the entire good wil I beare thee, I maie not knowe

my selfe, but thee alone after an incredible manner, knowne but vnto fewe Psa. 17, 15.!
                  Nowe oftentimes I sigh Ro. 7, 24., and beare my wretchednes with griefe, because much euils rush vpon me in this vaile of miseries, the which manie-times trouble me, & grieue me, and ouershadowe me, and hinder me, yea they distract, and withdraw, and so intangle me, that I can haue no free accesse vnto thee, nor enioie thy louing embracements in the presence of thy blessed Saints 1. Cor 13, verse. 12..
                  O my God, let my so manifolde sighes, and sorowes of mind, which I feele in this world, mooue thee.
                  O Iesus the brightnes of eternal glorie, and comfort of the wandring soule, my mouth is with thee that cannot speake, and in silence Esa. 30, 15 do I speake to thee.
                  How long wil my Lord defer his comming? Oh that he would come to me poore wretch, make me glad, and with stretched out arme deliuer me from al troble Psal. 40, 7.!
                  Come, Lord Iesus, come Reuel. 22, verse. 20. 17. Psal. 130, 5. 6. 7.. For lacking thee I am no daie, no houre in quiet: because thou art my ioie, without whom my table is emptie.
                  
                     I am a caytiue, and I knowe not how, kept in prison, and kept downe with fetters Ro. 7, 23. 24., and so shal be til thou comfort me with the light of thy presence, set me at libertie, & shewe me a friendlie countenance Rom. 8, 2..
                  Let others seeke in steede of thee what they wil: nothing neither doth, nor shal please me, but thou, my God, my hope, and eternal saluation Psal. 3, 3. Psal. 16, 2. 2. Sam. 22, 2.
                  I wil neuer be silent, I wil neuer cesse to praie Luk. 11, 9. 10. Luke 18, 1. 7., vntil y• put awaie al displeasure, & speake to me againe.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  Lo, because thou callest for me, I am come: thy teares, thy groning, thine humilitie, and hartie sorow haue mooued me so to do.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  O my Lord, through the desire I haue to enioie thee, I, who am redie to renounce al things for thy sake Phil. 3, 7. 8., haue called thee. But thou first didest stir me vp to seeke thee Luke. 10, verse. 22.. For which thing, O Lord, I yeeld thee humble thankes, who of thy great goodnes hast bestowed so singular a benefit vpon me.
                  Now what remaineth, but that I humblie submit my selfe to thee Psal. 78, 8. Psal 119, 5., being alwaies mindful of my sinnes, and vilenes Ps. 119, 19?
                  
                     For among al things either in heauen or earth none is like to thee Ps. 35, 10. Psal. 71, 19. Psal. 89, 18. Psal. 86, 8..
                  Thy works are exceedingly good Gen. 1, 31., O Lord, thy iugdements are true, and al things are guided by thy prouidence Psal. 19, 1. 2. Matth. 6, vers. 26, &c..
                  Wherefore praised, and magnified be thou, O wisedome of the Father 1. Cor. 1, verse. 24. Coloss. 2, 3.; and thou my soule Ps. 146, 1. 2., and mouth, with al creatures of the worlde Ps. 150, 6. Psalm. 148, verse. 1, &c., extol and glorifie him for euer.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 25. Of the continual calling into minde the infinit blessings, and benefits of God.
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O Lord, open thou the eies of my vnderstanding Ps. 119, 18. 17., and teach me to liue according to the rules of thy Lawe.
                  Grant that I may knowe thy wil, and with great reuerence, and painfulnes, cal thy manifolde benefites conferred both vpon me, and al men into minde, that so I maie render

due praise vnto thee for the same Psal. 26, 7..
                  Albeit, to saie the truth, I cannot sufficientlie commend thee for the least of all thy benefites Eccl. 18, 4.; yea so vnable am I to extol thee dulie for them Psal. 40, 5., that when I consider thy liberalitie, I am vtterlie dismaied at the greatnes thereof.
                  For whatsoeuer we haue, belonging either to the bodie, or to the soule, outwardlie or inwardlie, naturallie or otherwise, they are thy benefits, and cōmend thy bounteousnes, and liberalitie Psalm. 33, verse. 6, &c. 1. Corin. 12, verse. 8, &c., of whom we haue receiued al good things Iam. 1, 17..
                  And although some haue moe than others, yet al is thine Matth. 25, vers. 14, &c., and without thee euen the least thing cannot be attained Ioh. 3, 27..
                  Now if anie haue receiued greater gifts, he cannot brag of his owne merit, nor extol himselfe aboue others, nor despise his inferior 1. Cor. 4, 6. 7.. For by so much is a man greater, and better, by howe much he ascribeth lesse to himselfe Mat. 11, 29, and is the modester in yeelding thanks. And ye more vile and vnwoorthie a man iudgeth himselfe, the more capable is he of greater things Mat. 23, 11 12. Luk. 18, 13. 14..
                  
                     Againe he that hath fewer gifts, ought not to take it heauilie, nor to enuie his better Iam. 4, 2.; but rather to cast his eies vpon heauen, and highlie to commend thy goodnes, who giuest thy gifts so abundantly, & so franklie without respect of persons Matt. 5, 45 Luke. 6, 35..
                  From thee we haue al 1. Cor. 4, 6, &c. Iames. 1, 17., and therfore in al things thou art to be glorified. What is meete for euerie man thou knowest; & why this man hath litle, and he much, it is not for vs, but for thee to iudge, who knowest what is necessarie for euerie man.
                  Therefore, my Lorde and God, I count it for a great benefite, to haue but fewe things which seeme glorious, and praise-woorthie in the opinion of man. And thus I thinke, that basenes, & pouertie should be so far from disquieting the minde, & bringing downe a man, that they ought to be occasions of great comfort, and reioicing, inasmuch as thou, God, doest choose the poore, humble, and despised in this world into the number of thy saincts, and seruants Psa. 113, 7. 8. Matth. 5, 3. 1. Cor. 1, 26. 27. 28..
                  As witnes thine Apostles, whome thou madest princes through al the earth Ps. 45, 16.: who behaued themselues so modestlie, and showed foorth so litle

malice, and deceipt, that not onelie they absteined from complaining, but also reioiced to suffer rebuke for thy Name Acts. 5, 41.: yea those things which we naturalie abhor, they did greedilie embrace 1. Thess. 2, verse. 15. 2. Co. 11, 23 24, &c..
                  So that nothing should so comfort, & reioice the hart of him which loueth thee, and confesseth thy goodnes, as the knowledge of thine heauenlie wil Iere. 9, 23, 24. 1. Cor. 1, 31., wherewith he ought so to content himselfe, that he desire as greatlie to be of smal, as another doth to be of great accompt; and take as wel in woorth the lowest place, as the hiest roome, and to be despised and contemned; as to be honored, and extolled aboue al Matth. 20, verse. 25. 26. 27. Luk. 22, 25. 26. 27.. For more should he desire to haue thy wil done Mat. 6, 10. Mat. 26, 39. 42. 44., and thine honor aduanced, than anie thing besides 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 15. 16. 17.; yea more pleasure should he take therein thā in any thing els, which either he hath alreadie, or maie haue Rom. 8, 35 36, &c..
               
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 26. Of the thing
                     •
                  , in number foure, which procure quietnes.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     I Wil now teach thee my sonne, the readie waie vnto peace, and freedome.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  Doo, Lord, as thou saiest: for that is it which I desire.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  My sonne, doo the wil of another, rather than thine own wil Ioh. 4, 34. Iohn. 5, 30. Iohn. 6, 38.: alwaies desire litle before a great deale Actes. 20, verse. 33. 34. 35.: alwaies couet the lowest place Luk. 14, 8. 9. 10. Prou. 25, 7., and submit thy selfe to al Eph. 5, 21.: alwaies praie & wish that thou maist thoroughlie do the wil of God Mat. 6, 10.; and doubtles thou shalt enter into the boundes of peace, and quietnes.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  This thy short speech, Lord, conteineth much perfection: and though it be briefe for wordes, yet is it pithie for sense, and most effectual. And, did I faithfulie obeie the same, sure I am, affections would not beare such a swaie within me, as they do Roman 7, vers. 15, &c. Galat. 5, 17.: and, I neuer am greeued, and out of quiet, but when I swarue

from this thy doctrine.
                  But thou, Lord, which art almightie, and alwaies doest desire the welfare, of man Ezech. 18, verse. 32., extend thy fauor towardes me, that both I maie do thy wil, and attaine saluation,
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 27. A praier against euil thoughtes, or cogitations.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O Lord, my God forsake me not Psal. 22, 1.; O my God, assist me. For euil cogitations, and feares be in my minde, which disquiet me; insomuch that I see not how to auoide, and breake them off without great hurt to my selfe.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  I wil go before thee, and suppresse the power of man: and, hauing opened the prison doore Acts. 5, 19. Acts. 12, 10., reueale my secretes, and mysteries to thee.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  Doo so, Lord, and with thy countenance Psal. 67, 1. banish al wicked cogitations fro my minde. For this is my onlie hope, and comfort in troble, euen to flie vnto thee Psal. 18, 3. 6., to depende

vpon thee, to cal vpon thee zelouslie, and patientlie to expect thine heauenlie comfort Psa. 27, 14..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 28. A praier vnto almightie God to haue the eies of our vnderstanding opened.
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O Sweete Iesu, lighten mee with ye brightnes of thine eternal light, & driue al darkenes, as it were, from the mansion house of my soule Iohn. 1, 9. Iohn. 12, 8..
                  Suppresse those wandring thoughts; and breake in peeces those violent tentations.
                  Fight thou couragiouslie for my defence, and vanquish euil beasts, to wit, the inticing desires of the flesh, that by thy power I maie get peace, and sing out thy praises in the holie court of my soule.
                  Rebuke the windes Matt. 8, 26 Luke. 8, 24., and tempests, command the sea to be quiet, bid the North winde not to rage, and there wilbe a great calmnes. Sende thy light, & truth Psal. 43, 3., which may lighten the earth: for I am rude earth,

good for naught, vntil thou inlighten mee.
                  Powre out thy fauor from aboue, replenish my soule with thine heauenlie grace; & minister the water of godlines, which ye vppermost part of the earth being watered, maie bring forth good, or the best fruite rather.
                  O Lord, lift vp my minde which is pressed downe through the waight of sinnes, and stir vp the same who lie to the desire of celestial things, that hauing tasted the sweetenes of supernal happines, it maie greatlie grieue me euen to thinke of this world Philip. 3, 8 Coloss. 3, 1. 2.. Take me, or plucke me rather from al momentanie pleasure of earthly things: for no creature can either quiet, or comfort my minde Ioh. 16, 33 2. Thes. 2, 16 17..
                  Ioine me to thee by an vndissoluble band of goodwil. For thou alone dost suffice thy freend, & without thee al other things are vaine Coloss. 3, 2,
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 29. That we ought not curiouslie to enquire how other men do liue.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, be not curious, neither haue thou vaine cogitations in thy minde. What

is this or that vnto thee? Folow thou me Ioh. 21, 22. For thou needest not care what manner of folkes others are, either what they do, or speake Matt. 7, 1. 2, &c..
                  Thou art not appointed to pleade for other men: but thou must answere for thy selfe Matth. 25, verse. 20. 21, &c. 1. Pet. 4, 4. 5. Galat 6, 5. Reu. 22, 12.. Why then medlest thou with that which nothing toucheth thee?
                  It is I which know al, and see al whatsoeuer is done vnder the coape of heauen Mach. 15, verse. 2.: yea I know how it goeth with euerie man, what he thinketh, what he would, & whether his counsel tendes Psal. 7, 9. Hebr. 4, 13. Reue. 2, 23..
                  And therefore commit al things to me: be thou quiet, and let troblesome people alone in their dooings. For they shal one daie yeeld an account of al their deedes, & saiengs Rom. 14, verse. 12., neither can they mocke mee Gala. 6, 7..
                  Waie thou neither the shadowe of a great name, nor the familiaritie of manie, nor the priuate good-wil of men. For these things do but distract the minde sundrie-waies, and replenish it with black cloudes of darkenes.
                  Wouldest thou diligentlie attend my comming, and open the doore Sal. sōg. 5, verse. 2. Reue. 3, 20. of thy minde to let me in, then would

I gladlie speake, and reueale my secrets vnto thee.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 30. Wherein the true peace, and profiting of the minde doth consist.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, thus haue I saide Ioh. 14, 27, Peace I leaue with you; my peace I giue vnto you, not as the world giueth, giue I vnto you.
                  Al men desire peace: but al men care not for those thinges which belong vnto the right peace Luke. 19, verse. 42..
                  My peace dealeth with such as are modest, and meeke in hart Psal. 119, verse. 130. Mat. 11, 29.. Thy peace doth consist in long suffring Luke. 21, verse. 19. Rom. 2, 7. 10.; which thou maiest enioie plentifullie, if thou wilt harken to me, and folowe my saiengs Psa. 119, 1. 2. Wherefore in al things consider what thou doest, and what thou speakest; and let this be thy cheefest care, how thou maist please me Colos. 1. 10 Ephes. 5, 10, and besides me take pleasure in nothing Ier. 9, 23. 24..
                  Of other mens saiengs and doings iudge not thou rashlie Matth. 7, verse. 1, &c.; neither intrude thy selfe into another mans

charge 2. Thess, 3, verse. 11.: so shalt thou either litle, or verie seldome be trobled.
                  For thou canst not be voide of al troble liuing in this world Ioh. 16, 33; to feele no vexation either in minde or bodie is peculiar to the saincts in heauen which enioie euerlasting rest Ioh. 16, 22 Reue. 12, 4..
                  So then thinke not that thou hast found true peace, if thou feele no aduersitie 1. Cor. 4, verse. 8, &c.; or that al is wel, if thou haue none enimie; or that thou art in good state, if thou enioie prosperitie 1. Thess. 5, verse. 2. 3.: neither deeme that thou art somewhat, or highlie in my fauor, though thou remainest where great exercise of religion is, yea or tastest the sweetenes of the same Mar. 14, 17 18. 19. 20.. For by these things a true louer of godlines is not knowen, neither doth the profiting, and perfection of a man consist in these things.
                  Wherein then? Namelie in submitting thy selfe wholie to the wil of God; and in seeking thy selfe in nothing Rom. 12, verse. 16., be it litle or much, neither now, nor hereafter, but alwaies both in wealth & woe keeping one manner countenance with thankesgiuing Phil. 4, 11. 12. waieng euerie thing in equal balance.
                  Finalie, if thou showe thy selfe so

valiant, and constant in faith, that when inwarde consolation is withdrawen, thou canst addresse thy selfe to suffer greater things Rom. 5, 3. 4. 5 Iames. 1, 3., and yet for al that refraine from praising thy self vainelie for thine holines, & zeale Luk. 18, 11 12 Rom. 11, 18 20., doubtles thou shalt finde the right, and readie waie vnto peace, yea and one daie behold my countenance againe Psal. 42, 2. with mirth, and ioie Psa. 91, 14. 15. 16..
                  And if thou once come vnto such a passe, that thou canst fullie, & perfectlie contemne thy selfe Phil. 4, 11. 12. 13. Coloss. 3, 5., know of a truth, that thou shalt enioie as much peace, and quietnes, as possiblie maie come vnto a mortal man.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 31. In praise of a quiet, and free minde; with an humble petition for the attaining of the same.
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     DOubtles it is the part of a perfect man, Lorde, neuer to loase the minde from the studie of heauenlie things, but to passe ouer the manifold cares of this world euen without care, not like a sluggard, but through

the excellencie of a free minde, cleauing to no worldlie thing with an immoderate desire Philip. 3, 8 Coloss. 3, 1. 2. 1. Ioh. 2, 15..
                  O most gratious, & merciful God, keepe me, I beseech thee, from the cares of this world Mat. 6, 25. 26, &c. 1. Cor. 7: 31., that I be neuer too much entangled by reason of the manifold things which this bodie needeth; nor taken with the vaine delight of that which hurts the soule; nor finalie broken, and ouerthrowen with sorowes.
                  I saie not from those things, which the vaine world doth greedilie hunt after 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 16.: but from those miseries, which suppresse the minde of thy seruant by a common, and penal curse of mortalitie, and so withdrawe me, that I cannot enter, when I would, into the freedome of the spirit Rom. 7, 16 17..
                  O my God, which art sweetnes vnspeakeable, make al fleshlie ioie, which withdraweth me from ye loue of eternal things, and enticeth with ye beholding of, I cannot tel what present, and pleasant goodnes, make this ioie to be grieuous, and odious vnto mee Gal. 6, 14. Philip. 3, 7..
                  Let not flesh & bloud, O my God, let not flesh and bloud ouer
                        •
                     ome me 1. Ioh 2, 15 16.; let not the world, and the vaine

glorie thereof deceaue me Ioh. 12, 43; let not Satan by his subtletie supplant me 1. Pet. 5, 8.
                  Giue me strength to resist 1. Pet. 5, 9., patience to endure Eph 3, 16. 17. Rom. 12, 12, constancie to perseuere vnto the end Matth. 24, verse. 13. Reuel. 2, 7,.
                  Grant me for the comforts of this worlde the most comfortable ointment 2. Cor. 1, verse. 21. of thine holie spirite; and for the lust of the flesh, poure on me the loue of thy name Iam. 4, 4.. The verie meat, and drinke, and apparel with other things necessarie for the nurishment of the bodie are euen burdensome to a feruent spirit 1. Co. 7, 32 33. 34.. Giue grace that I maie vse these things moderatelie, and neuer be snarled with an ouer great desire of them Matt. 6, 25.
                  Al things are not to be reiected, for then nature would decaie: againe to couet superfluous, and euerie plesant thing, thy sacred commandements doo forbid, for so the flesh would insult ouer the spirit Rom. 8, 8. Galat. 5, 16. 17.. Wherfore betweene these things let thine hande direct me, and teach me to do nothing out of measure,
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 32. That selfe loue is the cause of pe
                        •
                     dition.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, thou must buie the whole with the whole, and keepe backe nothing of thy selfe Mat. 19, 21 27. 29. Luke. 9, 23. 24.. For know this, selfe-loue doth more hurt thee Matt. 7, 3. 4. 5. Math. 19, 22, than anie thing besides: and according to thy loue euerie thing doth more or lesse cleaue vnto thee. So that, if thy loue be pure Matth. 5, 8 1. Iohn. 2, 17, simple, and godlie, thou shalt be quite from the bondage of things.
                  Couet not that, which thou maist not haue Exod. 20, verse. 17. Rom. 7, 7.: and haue not that which maie hinder thee, and depriue thee of the libertie of minde Gal. 5, 16. 17..
                  It is maruelous, that thou doest, not wholie commit thy selfe to me with al that thou hast, or canst desire. Why doest thou vainelie consume thy selfe with sorow? Why doest thou wearie thy selfe with superfluous cares Psal. 42, 5. 11. Psal. 43, 5.? Shewe thy selfe obedient to my wil, and I wil see that none hurt come to thee Matth. 6, verse. 33.. But if, to attaine

profit, and to enioie thy desire, thou applie thy selfe to seeke things, and minde to change thy soile, looke neuer to be at quiet, or free from care. For in euerie thing thou shalt wish some thing, and in no place looke for perfect peace.
                  Therefore euerie thing doth good, but not euerie thing which we haue gotten, and mightilie heaped together, but contemned, and cut fro the minde by the rootes Phil. 3, 7. 8.: which I would not should be vnderstood of monie, and riches onlie, but also of the desire of honor, and vaine-glorie, al which do perish with the world 1. Iohn. 2, verse. 17. 1. Cor. 7, 31..
                  The place also doth smalie defend, if zeale of the spirit be lacking Gal. 5, 22.: neither can that outwarde peace long continue Iohn. 14, verse. 27., if it be not grounded vpon a staied minde, that is, vnles thou depende vpon mee, though thou change thy soile thou shalt not better thy selfe. For when occasion doth arise, and is receaued, thou shalt finde not onelie those things which thou didst shun, but a great deale moe.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 33. A praier to obteine the puritie of minde, of heauenlie wisedome.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     STrengthen me, O God, by the grace of thy holie spirit Eph. 3, 16.: confirme the inner man, that my minde maie vtterlie be voide of al vaine cares 1. Cor. 7, verse. 32. and griefe, and I neuer drawen awaie with the desire of anie thing, be it vile, or pretious, but maie count both my selfe Luk. 9, 23., and al other things euen corruptible Phil. 3, 8.. Forasmuch as nothing vnder the Sunne continueth euer Eccl. 1, 3. 4. 1. Ioh. 2, 17., but they are al vaine, and vexations of the spirit Eccles. 2, vers. 11, &c.. He who thus thinketh, is most singularlie wise.
                  O Lord, giue me heauenlie wisedome Eccl. 2, 26 Wisd. 9, 4. Iames. 1, 5., which maie teach mee to seeke Mat. 6, 33., and finde thee aboue al, to sauor of thee Psal. 34, 8., and to loue thee Mat. 22, 37 Mark. 12, 29 30. Luk. 10, 27. aboue al: and to take other things as they are in themselues, according to the order of wisedome 1. Co. 7, 29 30. 31.. Giue me grace both wiselie to auoide flatterers Prou. 2, 16 Prou. 5, 3. 4. Prou. 29, 5.; and patientlie to beare my foes 1. Pe. 2, 21 23. 1. Pet. 3, 8. 9. Prou. 16, 32.. For, neither to be moued with

euerie blast of wordes Prou. 14, verse. 29., nor to listen to the flattering Marmaid Eccl. 7, 28 Prouerb. 6, vers. 20, &c. 24., is doubtles a great part of wisedome, and the readie waie to go forwarde salfelie in our iournie begun.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 34. Against il tongues.
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, take it not greuouslie, though some conceaue, and speake amisse of thee Mat. 5, 11.; but thinke woorse of thy selfe than they do, and beleeue that none is more weake than thy selfe Luke. 18, verse. 13..
                  If thou treade the secrete path of virtue, thou wilt not greatlie waie flieng wordes Psa. 56, 11.
                  It is no smal wisedome in aduersitie to be silent Ps. 112, 7. Esai. 30, 15. Luk. 21, 19., to turne vnto me, and not to be disturbed whatsoeuer men do thinke. Thy peace must not depend vpon the speech of men: for thou art one manner of man stil, speake they il, or speake they wel of thee: but in me, in me, I saie, true glorie, and true peace doth consist Ioh. 16, 33, the which he shal mightilie enioie, who neither desireth to please men, nor feareth their displeasure Matth. 10, verse. 28..
                  
                     Of vntemperate loue, and vaine feare, al vnquietnes of mind, and distracting of the senses do arise Matth. 9, verse. 21. 22..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 35. How we ought to cal vpon God, and to praise him in aduersitie.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     PRaised be thy Name, O Lord, for euermore, whose wil it is, that I should bee tried with this affliction Iam. 1, 2.: which of my selfe I cannot escape, but am to flie vnto thee, requiring thine assistance Psal. 71, 2. 3., and to turne it to the best.
                  O Lord, now am I in troble, and my minde is greuouslie vexed thorough my present miserie.
                  And therefore, O most deare father, what shal I saie? I am entrapped on euerie side: deliuer me from this houre, wherinto I doubtles came, that thou therby mightest purchase great praise both for bringing me so down, and deliuering me againe Ps. 22, 23. 24..
                  O Lord, I beseech thee deliuer me from this euil, me poore and needie soule Ps. 40 17., knowing not whether to turne my selfe without thee.
                  
                     In like sort, O Lord, giue me patience now Heb. 12, 1. Heb. 10, 36., help me, O my God, so wil I not feare, be I neuer so greeuouslie afflicted Psa. 56, 11. Actes. 5, 41..
                  And now in these my trobles, what shal I saie? Euen thy wil be done, Lord Matt. 6, 10: I haue deserued this affliction, and punishment Psal. 69, 5., and therefore must of necessitie beare it (God grant that patientlie I maie do so) til after these stormes faire weather comes againe.
                  I know right wel, thou cāst by thine almightines either altogether remooue awaie this tentation, or mitigate the rage thereof, that I faint not vtterly, as often heretofore thou hast done Psal. 77, 1. 2. 5. 6, &c. of thy great mercie towardes me, O my God. And the more trobles suppresse me, the more sweetelie shal I be refreshed with the help of thine almightie right hand.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 36. Of calling for Gods assistance, and hope to recouer his fauor againe.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, I am that Lord euen the strengthener of men in the daie of troble Nahum 1, verse. 7., vnto whom thou must make recourse

as often as it goes not wel with thee.
                  But thou feelest not my heauenlie comfort, because thou turnest not thy selfe with speede vnto praier Ps. 50, 15. Psalm. 86, 1. 2, &c..
                  For, before thou makest anie earnest praier vnto mee, thou seekest much comfort else where, and takest pleasure in outwarde things; which do thee smal good, vntil thou perswade thy selfe in deede, that I it is who deliuer such out of troble as put their confidence in me Psa. 33, 18. Psal. 27, 14. Psal. 31, 24., and that without me no helpe is auaileable Psal. 33, 16 17. 18., no counsel profitable Iob. 5, 13. Psal. 2, 2, 4., no physick durable Luk. 8, 43..
                  But now hauing taken courage vnto thee after stormes, waxe thou strong againe in the light of my mercie. For I am readie saith the Lord Reu. 22, 7., not onelie to restore al things to their integritie, but also mightilie to renew them Reu. 21, 1. 2 Pet. 3, 13..
                  Is there anie thing too harde for me Iob. 9, 4. 5. 6, &c.? Or am I like to them which keepe not promise 1. Kings. 8, verse. 23. Titus. 1, 1. 2.? Where is thy faith? Stand constantlie, and perseuere Mat. 24, 13: showe thy selfe a patient and valiant man, & doubt thou not but in due time thou shalt finde comfort Ps. 27, 14. 1. Cor. 16, verse. 13..
                  Waite Psa. 37, 3. 7. 34., waite I saie for me, and I wil come and heale thee. It is tentation

that trobles thee; & vaine feare which terrifies. What good doth care of future chances, but euen bring sorowe vpon sorowe Mat. 6, 25 26, &c. Prouer. 10, verse. 22.? The daie hath enough with his owne griefe Matt. 6, 34. A vaine thing it is, and to no purpose, either to be sad, or to reioice for things to come, which perhaps wil neuer come to passe.
                  But man with such imaginations maie be deceaued; albeit so easilie to be carried awaie with the tentation of the enimie, is an argument of a faint hart, and litle faith Matth. 14, verse. 31. Matth. 16, 8.. He waieth not whether he illude, and deceaue a man with true things, or with false, whether with the loue of present Matth. 4, 8. 9. Luke 4, 5. 6. 7., or feare of things to come.
                  Wherefore neither be thou trobled in minde, nor feare; trust onelie in me, and repose confidence in my mercie Psal. 27, 1. Psal. 28, 7. Psal. 34, 22. Psa. 115, 11..
                  Manie-times thou thinkest I am far off, when in deede I am at hand Ps. 119, 151 155. 1. Co. 10, 13: and when thou supposest that al is gone, manie-times thy gaine comes rouling in Iam. 1, 12. So that al is not lost, though thou susteine aduersitie.
                  According to the sense of present miseries thou must not iudge; neither when anie mischance happeneth,

be so mooued and dismaied as though no hope of escape were left at al 1. Cor, 10, verse. 13..
                  Thinke not thou art vtterlie cast off, though for a time either I sende affliction, or denie thy desired comfort; for thereby thou must enter into the kingdome of heauen Actes. 14, verse. 22.. And assuredlie it is better both for thee, and al the rest of my seruants, to be stirred vp with aduersitie Psal. 119, verse. 67. 71. Luke. 9, 23. 1. Pet. 1, 6. 7., than to enioie al things at your harts desire.
                  For I am so priuie to the secret cogitations of the hart, that I know it is greatlie for thine euerlasting welfare, to be sometime left to thy selfe in trobles, lest perchance being puffed vp with prosperitie, thou thinke thy selfe to be that which thou art not Deu. 32, 15..
                  I can take awaie that I gaue Mat 25, 14 15, &c. 28., and giue it againe, when I thinke it good. If I gaine, it is mine 1. Cor. 4, 7: If I tooke awaie, I tooke not thine, forasmuch as euerie good giuing, and euerie perfect gift is fro me Iam. 1, 17..
                  Wherefore, when I sende thee miserie, and aduersitie, neither do thou fret 1. Pet. 4, 12., nor faint Heb. 12, 3. Heb. 10, 35. 36.: for I, euen I the same can speedilie succor thee, and turne thy sorowe into ioie againe Deut. 32, verse. 39. 1. Sam. 2, 6..
                  
                     But, in that I deale so with thee I am righteous Psal. 119, verse. 75. Dan. 9, 14., and much to be commended. And if thou beest wise, and waiest this my doing vprightlie, thou wilt neuer so heauilie mourne for thine aduersitie, but rather be glad 1. Thess. 1▪ 6 Iames. 1, 2., and thanke me therefore Eph. 5, 20.? yea, thou wilt confesse thy selfe, that herein especialie thou shouldest reioice, in y• in punishing I do not spare thee Iob. 6, 7. 10..
                  As the Father hath loued me, so haue I loued you, saide I to my disciples Ioh 15, 9., whome I sent not vnto transitorie pleasures Ioh. 16, 20, but vnto great combates Mat. 10, 16▪ 17. 18.; not vnto honor Luke. 22, verse. 25., but vnto infamie Mat. 5, 11. 1. Pet. 3, 13. 14.; not vnto idlenes Matt. 10, 7. 8, &c., but vnto painfulnes Matt. 9, 37. 38.; not vnto rest Luk. 10, 2.; but to bring foorth much frute with patience. My sonne, forget not these my wordes.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 37. That to finde God, our creator, we should forsake al things.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O My Lord, as yet I stand greatlie in neede of thy fauor, that I maie come to that passe, that neither man, nor anie

other creature Rom. 8, 35▪ 36, &c. maie let me. For as long as anie thing deteines me back, I cannot freelie take my flight to thee Luk. 9, 23. 24. 25..
                  He that saide Psal. 55, 6., Oh that I had winges like a dooue, that I might flie awaie and rest, would freelie haue flied.
                  What is more quiet than the simple eie Matt. 6, 22? or what more at libertie, than he who desireth nothing in the world Luk. 9, 23.?
                  So that man must ouerpasse al creatures, and bring himselfe vnto that forwardnes, that rauished beside himselfe, he confesse that thou the Creator of al things art nothing like vnto thy creatures Esai. 44, 6. 7. 8. Esaie. 55, 8. 9. Reuel. 5, 2. 3. 5..
                  Vnles man be free from the loue of euerie creature Luk. 5, 11. Luk. 14, 26. 27., he cannot quietlie applie himselfe to heauenlie things.
                  For therefore fewe there be which addict themselues to the studie of celestial things, because fewe can withdrawe themselues, wholie from the loue of this world Matth. 22, verse. 5. Luk. 14, 18..
                  But to do so we haue neede of the special fauor of God Ioh. 6, 44. 65., which maie lift vp the minde, and rauish it aboue it selfe.
                  
                     And vnles man be so lifted vp in spirit, and, being deliuered from al worldlie things, conioined to God, whatsoeuer he either knoweth, o
                        •
                      possesseth is to verie smal purpose 1. Cor. 13, 1▪ 2. 3.
                     ▪
                  
                  A long while shal he be a nouice, and grouel on the ground, which maketh account of anie thing, besides that one eternal, and infinite good thing Matth. 13, verse. 44. 45.. Whatsoeuer is not God is nothing, and to be esteemed for nothing Ro. 8, 33▪ 34, &c. Philip. 3, 8..
                  Doubtles great difference is there betweene the wisedome of a man inspired from aboue Gal. 1, 11. 12., and the knowledge of worldlie wise men 1 Cor. 1, verse. 18. 19, &c.: and much more excelent is that doctrine which floweth from heauen 2. Tim. 3, verse. 16. 17., & the celestial fountaine, than that is painfullie fetcht frō the braines of man Matt. 15, 9. 1. Cor. 1, 20.
                  Manie there be which studie heauenlie things; but which doo those things that belong therevnto Matt. 7, 22▪ Rom. 2, 21. 22, &c. Iames. 1, 22▪ 23, &c., not manie.
                  Another great let is, for that men stand vpon signes, & sensible things Galat. 4, 9. 10. Galat. 5, 1. Coloss. 2, 20, and bestowe smal diligence in the mortifieng of themselues Coloss. 3, 5 Galat. 6, 14..
                  I maruel what the matter is, or with what spirit we are led, or what commeth into our mindes, which are

called spiritual, that with such care and studie we seeke after vile and vanishing things Matt. 6, 19. Ezech. 34, 2. 1. Pet. 5, 2., and so seldome cal our wits together to thinke vpon the matters of saluation Coloss. 3, 2! Yea after a litle consideration we by & by burst out againe, and waie not our deedes anie more in the balance Reu. 3, 17. 18..
                  Where our affections be Matt. 6, 21, wee marke not: & that al which we haue is vnpure Esai. 64, 6., we lament not.
                  For euerie man hath corrupted his waies Rom. 3, 10▪ 11. 12. Psalm. 14, 1. 3., which was the cause of so great a floud in the old world Matth. 24, verse. 37. 38. 39. Luk. 17, 26. 27..
                  So that the affection within being vnpure, needs must the actions proceeding from the affections, which showe the want of strength, be vnpure Matt. 6, 22▪ 23. Matt. 12, 33▪ 35.. For of a pure minde the frute of a good life doth proceede Luk. 6, 45..
                  Inquirie is made, how much a man doth▪ but how zelouslie it was done, no consideration is had.
                  Whether he be rich, or strong, or faire, or stoute; whether he can write wel, or sing wel, or plough wel, we enquire: but how poore in spirit he is Matt. 5, 3., how patient and meeke Matth. 11, verse. 29., how religious and spiritual, manie wil not tel.
                  Nature beholdeth the outwarde

partes of man Ioh 7, 24. Iohn. 8, 15.; Grace respecteth the inward Iames. 2, 5. Iohn 8, 16.: that commonlie is deceaued Iam. 2, 6., this hath hir trust in God Psa. 116, 7. 8. 9., that she maie not er.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 38. That we must denie our selues, and renounce vtterlie al carnal desires.
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, thou canst not come vnto perfect freedome, vnles thou vtterly denie thy self Luk. 9, 23..
                  As manie as are couetous 1. Cor. 6, 9 10. 1. Tim. 6, 8. 9. 10.; as manie as loue themselues Esai. 5, 21.; as manie as lust Iam. 1, 13. 14. 15. 1. Pet▪ 2, 11.; as are curious 1. Tim. 1, 4.; busie-bodies 1. Pet. 4, 15.; desirous alwaies of pleasure Luke. 16, verse. 25 not of Iesus Christ; attempting that which shal not abide Ps. 2, 1. &c 4, (for whatsoeuer is not of God wil come to naught Acts. 5, 38. 39.), are captiues and in bondage vnto Satan Rom. 6, 1
                           •
                         13. 14..
                  Take this for al. Forsake al Luk▪ 9, 23., and finde al Mat. 19, 27 28. 29. Forsake thy desire Mat. 8, 34., and finde rest Mat. 10, 39. Meditate hereof continualie, and when thou hast fulfilled al, thou shalt vnderstand.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  O my Lord, this cannot

be done in a daie, neither is it a plaie for children: but therein brieflie the whole perfection of a godlie man, is comprehended.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  Sonne, change not thy mind for al that, neither be thou dismaied at the naming of perfection: but so much the more stir vp thy selfe vnto higher things Phil. 3, 13. 14. 15., and at the least in desire sigh after them.
                  Oh that thou wert come vnto that passe that thou couldest not loue thy selfe, nor disobeie me Rom. 12, 1 2.; then would I like thee wel, then shouldest thou leade thy life in ioie, and quietnes Leu. 26, 3▪ 4, &c. Deut. 28, 1. 2, &c.!
                  Thou hast as yet manie things to be forsaken, the which vnles thou altogether yeeld vp to me, looke not to attaine the end of thy desire.
                  I counsel thee to buie of me gold tried by the fire Reu. 3, 18., that thou maist be made rich, I meane celestial wisedome which treadeth al abiect, and vile things vnder feete.
                  Cast awaie the wisedome of this world 1. Cor. 1, 26, that is, cesse to please, and flatter thy selfe after the facion of the world 1. Ioh 2, 15 16..
                  I tel you, the most vile things, must be bought with pretious things Matth. 13, verse. 44. 45. 4
                           •
                        ., and such as are of greatest accompt

among men. For the true wisedome of GOD, which doth not arrogate much to itselfe 1. Cor. 13, verse. 14., nor desireth to be greatly accounted of in this world Mat. 11, 29, which manie commend in wordes Mat. 7, 22. 23., but dissent there from in deedes Mat. 23, 3., seemeth but a vile 1. Co. 1, 20 21., and base thing, and therefore is not thought vpon wel nigh: and yet for al that it is the pretious treasure Matth. 13, verse. 44. 45. 46., and the pearle hidden fro manie.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 39. The mutabilitie of mans hart; and of thinking vpon God in, and afore al things.
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, beleeue not the affection which mooues thee at this time, for speedilie it wil change.
                  For so long as thou liuest, thou shalt be subiect to mutabilitie euen per-force Ps. 144, 4.; and be now merie, now sad; now quiet, now trobled; now zelous, now cold; now earnest, now rechles; now graue, and by and by light of behauior.
                  Notwithstanding the wise man

rightlie instructed in the spirit, standeth fast vpon these mutable things, not regarding what he feeleth in himselfe, or on what side the winde of instabilitie doth blowe, but how he maie bring his purpose to a right, and blessed end Psal. 16, 8..
                  For so it falleth out, that one, and the same man, maie abide vnmooued Ps, 112, 6. 7. 8. among so manifold euents, if the single eie of his minde be directed continualie vpon me.
                  And the more pure the eie of his minde is Mat. 6, 22. 23., the more constantlie doth he abide in the middes of stormes Acts. 5, 41.. But manie haue this sight of theirs trobled, so that easilie they looke vpon euerie pleasure obiected; and hardlie can one be found without al blemish of selfe-loue 1. Co. 13, 4. 2. Cor. 12, 14 15..
                  So came the Iewes vnto Martha, and Marie being at Bethania, not for Iesus sake onlie, but that they might see Lazarus Iohn. 12, 9.
                  Therefore the eie of the minde must be purged Matt 6, 22 23., that it maie be simple, and right, and cast vpon me altogether, notwithstanding the manifold diuersitie of things which come betweene.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 40. That it is a pleasure aboue al pleasures, to loue God aboue al, and in al things.
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     BEhold, my God, & al things 1. Cor. 15, verse. 28.. What will more? what more happie thing can I wish for?
                  O sauorie, and sweete worde; but to him which loueth the worde, not the worlde, nor the things in the world 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16. 17.!
                  My God, and al things. To him that vnderstandeth I haue saide sufficient; and to repeate the same oftentimes is a delight to him that loueth Rom. 8, 31. 32, &c..
                  For, if thou be present Ps. 104, 29 30., al things bring ioie; if thou be absent, what can make merie?
                  Thou makest the minde quiet; and thou bringest much peace, and the ioie of hart Psal. 4, 7. Psalm. 16, 8. 9..
                  Through thee we thinke wel of al things Rom. 8, 35 36, &c. Philip. 1, 21. Phi. 4, 11. &c; and through thee Phil. 2, 13 in al things Eph. 5, 20 we praise thee. With out thee nothing can like vs long; and

that euerie thing maie be grateful & good, thou must blesse it with thy fauor, and season it with the sauce of thy wisedome.
                  What is not sauorie to him, to whome thou art sauorie Psal. 34, 8.? Againe what can please him, to whome thou art not pleasant?
                  But the wise of this world Rom. 1, 22 1. Cor. 1, 19. 20, &c., and such as sauor of the flesh Rom. 8, 5. lack thine heauenlie wisedome: for in the flesh 
                        •
                     s death Rom. 8, 6., and much vanitie in the world 1. Cor. 1, verse. 20..
                  But they are wise in deede, who folowe thee in contemning the world, and in mortifieng the flesh: because they are translated from vanitie vnto veritie, and from the flesh to the spirit Rom 8, 5.. These relish God: and these refer al thinges created vnto the laude and praise of the Creator Psa. 69, 34 Psal. 149, 1. 2, &c..
                  But ods there is, and great ods too betweene the sauor of the Creator Rom. 8, 5. 6., and of the creature 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16. 17.; of eternitie, and of time; of light vncreate, and of 
                        •
                     ight inlightened.
                  O light euerlasting Iohn. 1, 4. 9., which passest al lightes that are made, shine 
                        •
                     hou vpon me; and pierce, purge, comfort, & lighten with thy brightnes euen al the inward partes of my

soule: reuiue my spirit with al the powers thereof, that I maie cleaue vnto thee with a song of exceeding ioie.
                  Oh, when wil that blessed houre come, alwaies to be wished, wherein thou wilt so fil me with thy presence, that thou wilt be al in al to me 1. Cor. 15, verse. 28.! vntil when, my ioie doubtles wil not be perfect Ioh. 16, 22.
                  As yet the old man Rom. 6, 6. to my great griefe Phil. 1, 23., not yet wholie crucified Gal 6, 14., nor yet dead Coloss. 3, 5, is within me. As yet the flesh lusteth against the spirit Gal. 5, 17., it fighteth within me Iames. 4, 1., and disquiets the kingdome of the soule.
                  But thou, who rulest the raging of the sea Psal. 89, 9. Matth. 8, 26 Luke. 8, 24., and stillest the waues therof when they doo arise, scatter the people that delight in warre Psa. 68, 30, bring them downe by thy mightie power. Extend thy mightines, and make thy right hand to be knowen.
                  For in thee, O Lord, is mine whole trust Psal. 31, 1., mine onlie refuge is in thee Ps 56, 11..
               
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 41. That this life is neuer free from tentations.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     LOoke not in this worlde to be without trobles my sonne Iob. 7, 1., but while thou liuest, thou shalt stand in neede of spiritual armor 2. Cor. 10, verse. 4. 5. Ephes. 6, 10. 11, &c.. Thou liuest among enimies, on the right hard, and on the left thou art assaulted 2. Cor. 6, 7. Matt. 10, 16. And therefore vnles thou take the shield of faith Eph 6, 16., and the sworde of the spirit Eph. 6, 17., which is the word of God, thou canst not long be without some grieuous wounde.
                  Furthermore, vnles thou fasten thy minde vpon me with a pure affection to suffer al things for my sake 2. Cor. 6, 4. 5, &c. Ephes 6, 10. Iames. 1, 2. 3., thou canst neither susteine the heate of persecution, nor obteine ye crowne of eternal life 2. Tim. 4, 7 8. Reuel. 2, 7. Reuel. 7, 13. 14. 15, &c.. Wherefore thou must ouerpas al things like a man Psa. 31, 24. 1. Cor. 16, 13, and showe a courage howsoeuer things fal out. For to him which ouer commeth is Manna giuen Reu. 2, 17.: but for him who sleepeth, is miserie prepared Matth. 25, verse. 10. 11. 12. 30..
                  Now if thou seeke rest in this life Ioh. 16, 33.,

how wilt thou enter into eternal rest Heb. 4, 11?
                  Then prepare thy selfe, not to peace, but vnto patience Heb. 10, 36; and seeke for quietnes not on earth, but in heauen Ioh. 14, 27 Ioh. 16, 33., not among men, or in the world, but in God alone 1. Thess. 5, verse. 23. 2. Thes. 3, 16 Philip 4, 7..
                  Thou oughtest to endure al things for Gods sake Rom. 8, 35 36, &c. 1. Cor. 13, 7., euen labors, griefe, tentations, afflictions, trobles, need, sicknes, iniuries, euil reports, reprehensions, oppression, infamie, correction, contempt 2. Cor. 6, 4 5, &c. Phil. 4, 11. 12, &c..
                  For these things inuite, as it were, vnto virtue; these trie the yong soldier of Iesus Christ 2. Tim. 2, 3. 5.; these bring to the crowne of blisse 2. Tim. 4, 7 8. 1. Pet. 5, 4.. To such a man I wil giue for his smal paines an eternal rewarde; and for temporal shame, glorie without end Matt. 5, 10 11..
                  Thinkest thou alwaies to haue prosperitie at thine owne desire? Looke not for it. Mine old saintes & seruants could neuer haue it: but they were faine to suffer much troble Acts. 5, 41 Heb. 11, 8. 17., manifold tentations 2. Cor. 6, 4 5. Heb. 11, 32. 33, &c., miserable endes Matth. 14, verse. 10. Actes. 7, 59. 60. Heb. 11, 37., which they endured patientlie Reu. 7, 13. 14., trusting rather vpon God, than vpon man Ps. 56, 11., and counting the afflictions of this present time, not worthie ye glory which was to come Rom. 8, 18.
                  
                     Now wouldest thou haue that out of hand, which so manie with teares, and long trobles could hardlie attaine? Hope therfore in the Lord Psa. 27, 14 Psal. 31, 24. 1. Cor. 16, 13, be strong, & giue not ouer disloialie, but valiantlie imploie both thy bodie and life for the glorie of God Rom. 8, 35 36, &c.. I wil in the end most bountifullie reward thee Reuel. 2. 7 Matth. 5, 12., and in thy trobles assist thee Ps. 50, 15. Psalm. 91, 1. 2, &c..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 42. Against the vaine iudgement of men.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     CAst thy burden cō
                     stantlie vpon the Lord Psa. 55, 22., my sonne, and feare not the iudgement of man 1. Cor. 4, 3 4. 5., so long as thy conscience doth not cōdemne thee 2. Co. 1, 12.
                  It is expedient, and a blessed thing to suffer on such wise Matt. 5, 10; neither is it hard for an humble minde Mat. 11, 29 30., & man that trusteth in the Lord, so to do 2. Cor. 6, 4 5, &c. Philip. 2, 13..
                  Manie men saie manie things, and therefore litle regard should be giuen to them: and to please al, it is impossible Matth. 6, verse. 24..
                  And although Paule endeuored

to please al men 1. Cor. 4, verse 12. 13, &c., and made himself al things to al men 1. Cor. 9, verse. 22.: yet passed he litle to be iudged of man 1. Cor. 4, 3.
                  He did as much as laie in him to profit, and salue others 1. Cor. 9, verse. 22.: but for al that, he could not staie the slanderous tongues of the wicked 1. Co. 4, 12 verse. 13. & therfore committed he his whole cause vnto the Lord 1. Cor. 4, 5., who knew al, and against the slanderous and backbiting speeches of the vngodlie he defended himselfe with patience, & longsuffering Coloss. 1, verse. 24. 1. Cor. 4, 12. 1. Pet. 2, 20. 21, &c..
                  Notwithstanding sometime he answered againe Actes. 25, verse. 10. 11. Actes. 26, 2. 3. 4, &c. 1. Cor. 9, 1. 2, &c. Philip. 1, 12. 13. 14., least the weakelings through his silence should be offended.
                  Why then fearest thou the sentence of a mortal man, who being aliue to daie, maie be dead to morowe Sirach. 10, verse. 11.?
                  Feare God, and thou wilt not feare man Psal. 27, 1. Psal. 56, 4..
                  What hurt do anie mans wordes, and iniuries to thee? Naie, himselfe he hurteth rather; and shal not escape the iudgement of God, whosoeuer he be Rom 14, verse. 10. 2. Cor. 5, 10..
                  Haue thou GOD alwaie before thine eies, & contend not with quareling words. And though now thou

be without cause defamed 1. Pet. 2, 19 20., take it not grieuouslie, neither by impatiencie diminish thy reward Matt. 5, 12, but rather cast the eies of thy minde vpon me in heauen, who both can deliuer thee from al infamie, and iniurie of men Psal. 50, 15, and wil reward euerie one according to his workes Rom. 2, 6. Reu. 22, 12..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 43. That we must wholie resigne ouer our selues vnto God, if we minde to attaine vnto the freedome of mind.
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, if thou forsake thy selfe Luk. 9, 23, thou shalt finde mee.
                  See thou chalenge nothing to thy selfe, nor haue nothing proper, and alwaies thou wilt gaine Matth. 19, verse. 29.. For as soone as thou yeeldest vp thy selfe wholie without reuocation, thou shalt be endued with moste excellent rewardes Luke. 18, verse. 29. 30. Mar. 10, 28. 29. 30..
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  Lord, how oft shal I yeeld vp, and wherein shal I forsake my selfe?
               
               
                  LORD.
                  Alwaies, & euerie houre; both in smal, and great matters. I except

nothing: my desire is to haue thee renounce al things Matth. 13, verse. 4
                           •
                        . 45. 46.. For how canst thou be mine, and I thine, vnles both inwardlie, and outwardlie thou haue left, and lost thine owne wil Matth. 26, verse. 39. 42 Luk. 22, 42 Iohn. 4, 34. Matth. 6, 10?
                  And this the sooner thou doest, the better thou shalt speede: and the more throughlie and syncerelie, the more thou shalt please me, and profit thy selfe Matth. 24, verse. 45. 46. 47. Mat. 25 21. 22, &c..
                  Some there be which giue ouer themselues, but it is with some exception Luk. 9, 
                           •
                        9 60. 61.. They do not fullie depende on God, and therefore they studie how to prouide for themselues.
                  Others at the first renounce themselues wholie: but afterward when tribulation or persecution cōmeth Matth. 13, verse. 20. 21. they fal awaie, & so do no good at al.
                  These men shal neuer aspire either vnto the true libertie of y• mind, or to the most comfortable benefit of my familiaritie 2. Cor. 13, verse. 13., vnles they wholie renounce Luk. 9, 23, and dailie sacrifice themselues Rom. 12, 1, without which none either can, or shal enioie the fauor of God.
                  I haue saide oftentimes, and now I saie againe, Forsake, yeelde vp thy selfe Matth. 16, verse. 24. Mark. 8, 34. Luke. 9, 23., and thou shalt enioie the sounde quietnes of minde Matth. 11, verse. 29. Matth. 16, vers. 24, &c.. Giue

the whole for the whole, cal backe nothing, keepe back nothing Luke 18, verse. 22. 23, &c.. Abide vnfainedlie, and faithfullie in me, & thou shalt haue me, the freedome of minde, & deliuerance frō darknes Matth. 25, vers. 35, &c..
                  Wherefore let this be thy studie, let this be thy praier, wish continualie, that thou maist euen nakedlie folowe naked Iesus Luk. 9, 23., and die to thy selfe Rom. 6, 6., to liue eternalie with me 2. Tim. 2, verse. 11. 12.. Then shal both vaine imaginations Psalm. 1, 1., and vile affections Mat. 6, 22. 23., and superfluous cogitations 1. Co. 7, 31 32. depart awaie: then both immoderate feare shal vade 1. Ioh. 4, 18, and intemperate loue consume awaie 1. Ioh. 2, 17.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 44. Of the right vse of outward things; and that we should flie vnto God when we are afflicted.
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, thou must haue a special care, that thy minde be single and pure Mat. 6, 22. 23. in euerie place, in euerie action, in al thy busines: also, that al things serue thee, and not thou them Matt. 6, 24; also that thou be not a slaue, and bondman to thine owne actions Galat. 5, 1.; but a master, a ruler, a free-man, an Hebrue translated

into the lot, and libertie of the sonnes of God Gal. 4, 3. 7. 9., whose eies are turned from worldlie Gal. 5, 13., and cast vpon heauenlie things Colos. 3, 1. 2.; who looke vpon temporal things with the left, but with the right eie vpon eternal; who wil not be brought vnder the power of anie thing 1. Cor. 6, verse. 12. 1. Ioh. 2, 15. 1. Co. 10, 23; but make al things to serue to good purpose, according to the order of almightie God the Creator Psal. 8, 6 7. 8., who hath done nothing of al that he did in vaine Gen. 1, 31..
                  Furthermore if in thy troble thou wilt not stick vnto outward things, nor with a carnal eie behold the things that are seene and heard: but with Moses in al thine affaires enter by and by into the tabernacle of the Lord Exo. 33, 9. Nomb. 7, 89, doubtles thou shalt receaue answere sometime, and returne instructed in things both present, and to come.
                  For it was Moses woont in matters of controuersie, and difficult things to go into the Tabernacle, and to be rid from the wickednes of men he vsed praier Exod. 33, verse. 13., and the calling for Gods assistan
                        •
                     e. So oughtest thou to enter into the priuie closet of thine hart Matt 6, 6., and there most earnestly to cal vpon God.
                  
                     For we reade Iosh. 9, 14 that Ioshua, and the rest of the Israëlites were therefore deceaued of the Gibeonites, because they counseled not with the mouth of the Lord, but gaue light credit to their faire tale.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 45. That man should not be too i
                        •
                     
                     portunate in his matters.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     SOnne, cast thy burden vpon mee Ps. 55, 22., and in due time I wil grant thy request.
                  Looke vpon my commandements, and thou shalt finde great profit thereby Deut. 6, 3. 4, &c. Deut. 12, 28 Psal. 85, 8..
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  O my Lord, I willinglie refer mine whole cause to thee Matt. 6, 25 26, &c. 1. Pet. 5, 7.: for I find that al my cares do naught preuaile.
                  Oh that I were not so careful of worldlie things, but could euen out of hand vnfeinedlie obeie thee Luk. 5, 11. 28.!
               
               
                  LORD.
                  My sonne, manie-times a man desires a thing, which afterwardes he mislikes when he hath it once. Because the desires of one thing do not long endure but force

you to couet after sondrie & diuers.
                  Wherefore it is no smal thing for a man euen in smalest things to forsake himselfe: and, he that wil go forwarde in deede must vtterlie denie himselfe Luk. 9, 23 Luk. 14, 26. 33., for he who so doth is most at libertie, and safe.
                  But the old serpent Reu. 12, 9. 10, &c., an vtter enimie to good men Matth. 13, verse. 24. 25, &c., cesseth at no time from tempting Luke. 4, 3. 4, &c. 1. Tim. 6, 9. 10. 1. Pet 5, 8. 9.; but night and daie laieth snares to entrap, and ouerthrow the simple.
                  Wherefore watch and praie Matth. 26, verse. 41., that ye enter not into tentation.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 46. That man hath nothing which good is of himselfe; neither that he should glorie of anie thing.
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     LOrd, what is man that thou art mindeful of him Psal. 8, 4.? and the sonne of man, that thou visitest him? What hath he deserued Rom. 11, 6 Ephes. 2, 8., that thou shouldest regard him Psa. 144, 3.?
                  O Lord, I maie not complaine, if thou do reiect me Rom 9, 20: neither reason with thee, if thou denie my requests.
                  
                     But thus maie I trulie both thinke with my selfe, and saie, Lord, I am nothing, I haue no goodnes of my self 2. Cor. 3, 
                           •
                         1. Cor, 4, 7.: but naked came I out of my mothers wombe Iob. 1, 21. Eccl. 5, 14. 1. Tim. 6, 7., and naked shal I returne thether.
                  If thou assist me not, and inwardlie instruct me, I faint vtterlie, and become dissolute Ps. 51, 10. 11, &c..
                  But thou, Lord, alwaies art one, and abidest the same for euermore Ps. 102, 12. Esaie. 44, 6.; thou art alwaies good Psalm. 5, 4., righteous Deu. 32, 4., and holie 1. Pet. 1, 15.; for thou doest al things wel, righteouslie, purelie, and with wisedome Ps. 104, 1. 2, &c..
                  But I, alas, am more proane to come rather backward than forward; I continue not euermore at one staie Iob. 14, 1. 2., because I am subiect to alteration, like the time.
                  Notwithstanding, if thou reach foorth thine helping hande, I shal speedilie be comforted Psa. 16, 8., for thou without mans aide canst assist, and so strengthen me, that my countenance no more shal alter and change diuerslie, and my minde shal be fixed, and waite vpon thee alone Ps. 104, 27.
                  Therefore, did I know, while either I couet the zeale of the spirit, or am driuen by some occasion to seeke

thee (for there is none that can comfort me), how to contemne the comfort of this world 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16., doubtles I should both hope wel of thy fauor, & looke with ioiefulnes sometime for the gift of thy consolation Ioh. 16, 22.. Finalie, if it fal out wel with me at anie time, it is of thy goodnes Iam. 1, 17.: I am but vanitie in thy sight Psa 39, 11., of none account Ps. 144, 3. 4., mortal Ps. 89, 48. Psal 49, 10. 11. 12., and fraile Iob. 14, 22.
                  Whereof then do I boast? Or why couet I to be had in admiration? Euen of nothing Ier. 9, 23.: but that is vanitie.
                  Doubtles a most pestilent, and vaine thing ambition is; it both draweth man awaie from the true glorie, and spoiles him vtterlie of Gods eternal fauor Iames. 3, 1. Iames 4, 6. Eccl. 10, 7..
                  For while man pleaseth himselfe, he displeaseth thee Luk. 18, 9. 14.; while he seeketh the praise of men Ioh. 5, 44. Ioh. 12, 43., he leeseth the true virtues of the minde.
                  But the true glorie and true reioicing is for a man to glorie not of himselfe, but of thee Iere. 9, 23. 24 2. Co. 10, 17. 18.: and to reioice of thy name, not of his virtue, or anie thing besides, but onlie for thy sake.
                  Wherefore praised be thy Name, not mine; extolled be thy workes, not mine; let thy holie name be magnified Psal. 96, 1. 2. 3, &c. Psal. 145, 3, let me haue no praise at al.
                  
                     I wil euermore glorie in thy praise Ps. 106, 47.; of my selfe I wil not, except it be of mine infirmities 2. Cor. 11, verse. 30. 2. Cor. 12, 5..
                  Let the Iewes receaue honor one of another Ioh 5, 44. Iohn. 12, 43, I wil seeke that which commeth of God alone.
                  Al the glorie, the credit, the estimation of this world, if it be compared with that euerlasting glorie of thine Reu. 21, 23 24. 25. 26., what it is but mere vanitie, & foolishnes Eccl. 10, 7. 9. 12, &c.?
                  Wherefore, O my truth, my mercie, my God Psal. 25, 2., O blessed Trinitie, to thee be praise Reu. 5, 13. Reuel 7, 12. 1. Tim. 1, 17. 2. Tim. 4, ▪ 8., and honor, and glorie, and power for euermore,
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 47. That the praise of this world is to be contemned.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     BE not thou trobled, my sonne, though thou see others extolled, and esteemed, and thy selfe despised, and contemned Iam. 2, 3..
                  Cast the eies of thy minde vpon me, and, I warrant thee, thou wilt brooke thy contempt wel enough Matt. 9, 
                           •
                        9..
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  O Lord, we are blind,

and, alas, easilie seduced with vanitie Gen. 6, 5.. If I looke wel into my selfe, I am not hurt of anie thing; so that I haue no cause to complaine of thee at al Dan. 9, 14. But for that I haue both manietimes and grieuouslie offended thee, al thy creatures doo rightlie arme themselues against me Gen. 3, 17. 18..
                  Therefore praise, and honor, and glorie belongeth to thee, but to me shame, and contempt Dan. 9, 7. 8..
                  And except I frame my selfe patientlie to beare the contempt and despight of al men Ps. 123, 2. 1. Pet. 2, 21., I shal neuer attaine either a quiet mind Mat. 11, 29, the light of thy spirit, thine euerlasting societie 2. Tim. 2, 11 12..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 48. That we must not rest, or depend vpon man.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne if thou for amitie and freendship sake, repose anie cōfidence on man, neuer looke to be quiet, and at rest Ioh. 14, 27 Iohn 16, 33. Psal. 118, 8. 9 Psal 146, 3. 4. But if thou betake thy selfe vnto the immortal, and euerlasting truth Psa. 117, 2., at the departure of thy freend, thine hart wil not be trobled.
                  
                     On me should thy loue be grounded, and for my sake ought euerie good man to be loued 1. Pet. 3, 8. 9. 1. Pet. 4, 8. 1. Thess. 3, 12 1. Ioh. 3, 17. 18, &c., and the more deerelie.
                  Without me freendship cannot last: neither is it true, and pure loue, which I cople not together.
                  So mortified shouldest thou be from these affections, that, as touching thy selfe, thou shouldest seeme to be without al comfort Matth. 10, verse. 37. 1. Cor. 7, 31..
                  So much the nigher is man to God, as he is farder from the comfort of this world: and so much the more highlie doth he ascend vp to God, as the more deepelie he descendeth into, and despiseth himself Phili. 2, 5. 6. 7, &c. Iames. 4, 6. 7, &c. 1. Pet. 5, 6..
                  But he, who arrogates anie good thing to himselfe, letteth the fauor of God from dwelling within him. For the holie spirit doth alwaies seeke a meeke, and humble minde Psa. 5
                           •
                        , 17. Esai. 66, 2..
                  Couldest thou once bring thy selfe vnto nothing, & renounce the loue of this world 1. Ioh. 2, 
                           •
                        5 Ioh. 12, 25., surelie I would come, and powre vpon thee most singular benefits. But while thou lookest vpon creatures, thou loasest the sight of the Creator Iam. 4, 4..
                  Learne in al things to maister thy selfe for thy Makers sake: so shalt

thou attaine vnto the knowledge 
                        •
                      God.
                  Euen the vilest thing loued, an
                        •
                      looked vpon vndiscreetlie Matth. 10, verse. 37. Matth. 22, 1. 2, &c, doth defile a man, and hinder him from happines.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 49. Against vaine, and worldlie knowledge.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, be not tho
                        •
                      carried awaie with the fair
                        •
                      and subtile speech of ma
                        •
                      For the kingdome of God is not i
                        •
                      worde, but in power 1. Cor. 4, 20.
                  Listen to my wordes, for they in flame the minde Ps. 119, 97., lighten the vnderstanding Psal. 119, verse. 130. 105. Psalm. 19, 7. 8.; set men on fire Ier. 23, 29.; an
                        •
                      bring the true comfort Psal. 19, 8. Psa. 119, 50. 111..
                  Reade nothing with a minde t
                        •
                      seeme the more learned onlie, o
                        •
                      wise: but to mortifie thy sinnes. Fo
                        •
                      this wil more profit thee, than th
                        •
                      knowledge of manie obscure an
                        •
                      hard questions 1. Cor. 13. 3 8..
                  Though thou haue read much; ye
                        •
                      at the last thou must be faine t
                        •
                      come vnto one principle Luke. 10, verse. 42..
                  I onelie teach men wisedome, an
                        •
                     
                     
I (not men) giue vnderstanding to the simple Prou. 1, 4. Prou. 2, 6. Matt. 11, 25: so that they, whome I speake vnto, do easilie prooue wise, & profit much in the spirit.
                  Woe to them who seeke manie things of man, and neglect the waie to serue me Mat. 23, 23 24, &c..
                  The time wil come, when the master of masters, the Lord of angels, euen I shal appeare, to take an accoūt of al men, and to examine the conscience of euerie one Mat. 25. 19 20, &c. 31. 32, &c.: then wil I search Ierusalem with lights Zeph. 1, 12, and discouer those things which laie hid 
                        •
                     n darkenes 1. Cor. 4, 5, at what time tongues Thal ceasse, and knowledge doo no good 1. Cor. 13, verse. 8..
                  I, euen I do so lift vp the humbled minde, that in a moment it shal con
                     
                        •
                     eaue more knowledge of the eternal truth Mat. 10, 19 20. Mark. 13, 11 Luke. 21, 14. 15., than anie man by tenne yeeres studie can attaine vnto.
                  I teach neither ianglinglie to disquiet; nor diuersitie of opinions to distract; nor ambitiouslie to get fame; 
                        •
                     or contentiouslie to obtaine victo
                     
                        •
                     ie by force of argument.
                  I teach, how to despise the world Matth. 5, 3 4, &c.; 
                        •
                     o loath things present Luk. 9, 23.; to seeke & 
                        •
                     auor eternal Matt. 6, 33.; to flie vaine glorie Ioh. 8, 50. 54.; 
                        •
                     o suffer iniuries Mat. 5, 44. 45.; to trust in me Ioh. 14, 12.;

without me to couet nothing Ioh. 14, 14; and to loue me highlie and zealouslie aboue al Mat. 10, 37.
                  For by louing me some haue so profited in heauenlie things, that to the admiration of men they haue spoken Mark. 13, verse. 11.; and haue gotten more by forsaking al Matth. 19, verse. 27., than by anie studie.
                  But to some I speake common, to other special things; to some I comfortablie appeare in outward signes and figures, to others my secrets appeare as cleerelie as the light Mat. 13, 10 11. Mark 4, 11..
                  The Scriptures in deede speake one, and the same thing Iohn. 5, 39, yet teach they not al men alike 2. Co. 3, 14 15.: but I teach truth in the inward partes Ioh. 6, 68. Iohn 14, 6.; I search the hart Iohn. 8, 6. 7. 8. Reuel. 2, 23., and I know the thoughts Matth. 26, verse. 34. 35., I pricke forward to wel doing Phil. 2, 13, and giue to euerie man that which is needeful 1. Cor. 12, verse. 4. 5, &c..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 50. That we should not couet after earthlie, and outward things.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, remember that thou be ignorant of manie things 1. Cor. 2, 1. 2; & that thou esteeme thy selfe but for a dead man in this

world; euen for him to whome the whole world is crucified Gal. 6, 14.. Thou must ouerpasse much as though thou heardest not: and thinke alwaies on that which belongs to thy peace Luke. 19, verse. 42..
                  Better is it, to turne from those things which mislike thee, and to let euerie man haue his owne saieng, than to contend with brauling wordes Ro. 13, 13..
                  If thou be at a good point with God, and haue his iudgement alwaies in thy minde Eccl. 18, 23, thou shalt the more easilie beare it is thou be ouercome.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  O Lord, to what passe are we come! Behold if we loose a temporal thing we lament; for a litle profit we run, and labor, yea though it be al the night long; but the losse of our soule we vtterlie forget Matth. 16, verse. 26. Luke. 9, 25.. That which litle, if anie thing at al, profits, we seeke after; but that which is most necessarie Luke. 10, verse. 41. 42., we vtterlie neglect, so gladlie doth man addict him wholie vnto outward things, & without speedie repentance welter in the same 1. Ioh. 2, 15.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 51. That euerie man is not to be credited; and that by wordes we easilie offend.
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O Lord, help me now in this troble: for vaine is the help of man Ps. 60, 11..
                  How often haue I bin deceaued where I lookt for faith? Againe there haue I found it, where I lookt for none. So vaine is the trust in men Ps. 108, 12.: but in thee, O God alone the saluation of the righteous doth consist Ps. 37, 39..
                  We thanke thee 1. Thess. 1, verse. 2. 1. Thes. 5, 18 O Lord our God, for al whatsoeuer betideth vs miserable and weake ones, which are easilie deceaued, and changed with a litle.
                  What man is he that so wiselie, and circumspectlie behaues himselfe in al things, that he is neuer deceaued, nor commeth into daunger Iam. 3, 2.?
                  Yea, he who trusteth in the Lord Psa. 125, 1., and serueth him with a simple mind, doth not so easilie and soone offend: and though he fal sometime into trobles, and perils, yet either speedilie

he escapeth, or is strengthened so that he can endure them. For thou, Lord, continuest with them vnto the ende, who put their trust in thee Psal. 31, 1. 24. Psal. 94, 14. Psal. 71, 1..
                  Hard is it, yea doubtles it is verie hard to find such faithful freendes as wil stick by vs in al extremities: but thou, Lord, thou onelie art faithful Deu. 32, 4 in al things, neither is anie like vnto thee Deu. 32, 39.
                  Oh how wise was that good soule, that saide: My minde is rooted, and built in Christ Coloss. 2, 6 7.! were I at that staie, my mind so easilie would not be trobled with worldlie feare Psal. 56, 4. 11., neither should the dartes of bitter wordes Psa. 64, 3. disquiet me.
                  But who can foresee al thinges? Who can auoide miseries to come? Now, if things though fore-seene, hurt manie-times; how much more greeuouslie wil things nothing foreseene, annoie?
                  But, alas, wretch that I am, why haue I not better looked to my selfe? Either, why so lightlie haue I put confidence in others? Hereby we declare our selues to be men, and that fraile men too Iam. 3, 2., albeit manie vnrightlie account, and flatteringlie do cal vs Angels.
                  
                     Whom shal I credit, Lord, whom? but onelie thee, who art the verie truth Ioh. 14, 6. Rom. 3, 4., and canst neither deceaue, nor be deceaued.
                  For al men doubtles be liers Ps. 116, 11. Rom. 3, 4., and weake, and vnconstant, and fraile especialie in wordes Iam. 3, 2. Eccl. 14, 1. Eccl. 19, 16. Eccl. 25, 8., that rashlie hande ouer head euerie thing maie not be credited, whatsoeuer color of truth it beare.
                  Therfore not without great cause, & wisedome thou didest fore-warne to beware of men Mat. 10, 17; and fore-tel, that a mans enimies should be those of his house-hold Micah. 7, 6. Mat. 10, 36.; and saie that such are not to be beleeued, who saie Matth. 24, verse. 23. Mark. 13, 21, Lo here he is, or there he is.
                  This haue I learned to my losse, God grant I maie prooue the more wise, not foolish thereby.
                  Plaie the wise man, saide one, plaie the wise man, & that I tel you, keepe to your self. Which thing I did, thinking none should haue vnderstood the same: but afterward he that willed me to be silent, could not keepe it secret himselfe, but forth-with bewraied himselfe, and betraied me.
                  From such tatlers, and vndiscreete men, O Lord, deliuer me Ps. 120, 2. 3., that I maie neither fal into their handes,

nor folow their kinde of dealing. Let my mouth vtter continualie the truth Prou. 8, 7.; and remooue awaie far fro me a dissembling tongue Ps. 34, 13.. For my part is not to doo that to another, which I would not haue done to my selfe Mat. 7, 12. Luke. 6, 31. Tob. 4, 15..
                  Oh how good is it, and what quietnes doth it bring to saie nothing of others; not to beleeue euerie thing; to speake litle; to open our selues but to fewe; to seeke after thee, which knowest our mindes Rom. 8, 27 Iohn. 2, 25.; not to be carried about with euerie blast of words: but to couet that al both inward, and outward things maie be finished, and brought about according to thy wil and commandement Iam. 1, 18. 19, &c.!
                  Oh, how necessarie to the keeping stil of Gods fauor is it to shun the pompe of this world; not to couet those things which are wonderful in sight Luke. 16, 25.; but to folowe, and with al diligence to pursue that which maie bring vs both vnto amendement of life, and to zeale of godlines 1. Tim. 6, verse. 11. 2. Tim. 2, 22 Tit. 2, 12.!
                  How manie hath virtue knowen, and ouer-hastelie commended, endamaged! Againe, to howe manie hath the same done good, being vsed in silence Esa. 30, 15 in this miserable life,

which is altogether counted a tentation and miserie Iob. 7, verse. 1, &c..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 52. That we ought to repose our confidence in the Lord, when we are pierced with the dartes of slandering tongues.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, showe thy selfe constant, and trust in mee. For what be wordes Ps. 112, 7. 8., but wordes? which flie about the aire, yet hurt not so much as a stone.
                  If thou art faultie, amend thy selfe: if not guiltie of anie crime, studie to suffer the slander patientlie for Gods sake Mat. 5, 11.. At the least beare with i
                        •
                      words sometime, though as yet thou canst beare no great blowes.
                  Why doo such trifling things disquiet thee, but onelie because thou art carnal as yet, and hast more regard of men Matth. 10, verse. 26. Luke. 12, 4., than is meete?
                  For, because thou fearest to be contemned, thou wilt not be reprehended for thy faults, but seekest the shadowes of excuses. But looke thou more earnestlie into thy selfe, and

thou shalt see that both the world, and a vaine care to please men Gal. 1, 10. doth liue within thee.
                  For by shunning to be corrected, and blamed for thine offences, thou giuest most euident arguments, that thou art not trulie modest, and that neither thou art rightlie dead to the world, nor the world to thee Gal 6, 14. Rom. 6, 2. 3..
                  But listen thou vnto my wordes, and thou wilt not passe vpon the wordes yea of ten thousand men Psalm. 3, 6..
                  What if al the worst wordes that maie be inuented were spoken against thee; they could not hurt thee one iote, if thou wouldest beare Mat. 5, 11., and esteeme them but as motes? For they cannot plucke so much as an haire from thine head 2. Sam. 14, verse. 11. Mat. 10, 30. Acts. 27, 34..
                  But he who is either weake of courage, or wicked of conuersation, is easilie mooued with euil wordes. But he that trusteth in me, & dependeth not vpon his owne iudgement, is voide of this worldlie and fleshlie feare Psal. 56, 3. 4. 11..
                  For I both iudge and know al secrets 1. Cor. 4, 5 Reue. 2, 23.; I know what and how euerie thing is done Heb. 4, 12. 13.; I know both who offereth, and who suffereth iniurie. This proceedeth frome, & through

my permission Amos. 3, 6 Mat. 10, 16. 18, &c., that the thoughtes of manie hearts maie be opened Luk. 2, 35.
                  I wil iudge both the guiltie, and the guiltles 2. Cor. 5, verse. 10. Iohn. 5, 29,; but first it is my minde to trie them both by a secret iudgement.
                  The witnes of men deceaueth Ps. 116, 11 manie-times; but my iudgement is true Rom. 2, 2. Rom. 3, 4.; & shal neuer be ouerthrowen. But that commonlie is hidden, and knowen but of a fewe Psal. 36, 6.: yet for al that it neuer doth, or can erre Psal. 19, 9. Psal. 67, 4., albeit in the iudgement of fooles it seeme scarse indifferent.
                  Therfore it is good to appeale vnto me in euerie iudgement, and not to folowe priuate affection Matt. 7, 1. 2. Rom. 2, 1. 2. 3. 1. Cor. 4, 3. 4..
                  The righteous man is neuer mooued Psal. 91, 4. 5, &c. by anie crosse that God doth send; neither doth he either greatlie waie slanderous reportes, or vainelie reioice when he is excused by other men. For he considereth that I am he who search the hartes, and the reines Psal. 7, 9. Reu. 2, 23., and iudge not according to the outward person, or appearance Rom. 2, 11. 1. Pet. 1, 17.. For that commonlie I condemne Luk. 16, 15, which in the iudgement of man is commended.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  O Lord God, who art a righteous iudge, strong, and patient,

knowing the frailtie and wickednes of men, be thou my strength, and confidence Psal. 7, 1. Psalm. 86, 2.. For mine owne conscience wil not serue mee 1. Cor. 4, 3 4.: thou knowest that which I know not. Therfore my part was to humble my selfe when I was reproued, & to take it patientlie Prou. 13, verse. 18. Prou. 15, 5.: which, if I haue not showen, forgiue me Mat. 6, 12., O Lord, of thy mercie; and so blesse me, that hereafter I maie showe my selfe more patient. For thy singular mercie Rom. 3, 24 doth more serue to the attainement of pardon, than the opinion of mine owne righteousnes to the defence of my secret conscience. And albeit I thinke my selfe cleere from sinne, yet am I not thereby iustified 1. Cor. 4, verse. 4.. For without thy mercie no man can be saued Ps. 143, 2..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 53. That for the attainement of euerlasting life, al maner trobles must be endured.
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, let neither trobles breake thee, nor aduersitie, sustained for my sake, throw thee downe: but comfort

and confirme thy selfe in al extremities with my promise 1. Cor. 10, verse. 13., who am able inough to giue thee most ample, and infinite rewardes Iam. 1, 17. Reuel. 2, 10. 23. 26. Reuel. 3, 5..
                  Long thou shalt not labor here in this world Hebr. 10, verse. 37., neither be afflicted alwaies. Hope a while longer Reu. 3, 11., and thou shal see a speedie dispatch of al euils, and the time wil shortlie come, when there shal be neither trobles, nor tumultes anie more Reu. 7, 16 17. Reuel. 21, 4.. Litle is it, & short, whatsoeuer by time commeth to an end.
                  Wherefore go to, as thou doest, labor faithfullie in my vine-yard, I wil be thy reward Matth. 20, verse. 8 Reu. 22, 12..
                  Write thou, meditate, sing, sigh, keepe silence, praie, suffer aduersitie with a couragious hart. For doubtles euerlasting felicitie deserueth al these, yea and greater conflictes Rom. 8, 18.
                  One daie, God knowes how soone, quietnes wil come, & then shal there be neither daie, neither night, as now there is, but light perpetual without end, brightnes infinite without comprehension, peace which neuer shal decaie, & quietnes which euermore shal last Esai. 60, 19 20. Reu. 21, 23 Reuel. 22, 5.. Then thou wilt not saie, O that I were deliuered from the bodie of this death Rom. 7, 24! neither crie out on

this wise Ps. 120, 5. 6., Woe is me that I dwel so long in this world! For then both death shalbe destroied Hos. 13, 14 1. Cor. 15, 55, and saluation shal appeare which neuer shal haue end Reu. 20, 6. 14.; there no anguish Reu. 21, 4., but blessed ioie, and sweete and virtuous companie shalbe.
                  Oh, didest thou behold the euerlasting crownes Iam. 1, 12. Reue. 2, 10., or the glorie, wherewith they, who in this worlde were contemned 1. Cor 4, verse. 10. Heb. 11, 33. 34. 35., and thought not worthie to liue, do triumph withal: doubtles thou wouldest foorthwith debase thy selfe euen to the ground, and desire rather to be in subiection to al men, than to rule but one: thou wouldest not couet manie merie daies in this world Phil. 1, 23., but reioice in suffering trobles for the Name of God Acts. 5, 41.; and thinke it great gaine to be contemned among men!
                  Now if thou couldest brooke these things, and let them sinke into thy minde, thou wouldest not once complaine Rom. 12, 12 2. Cor. 6, 4. 5. Iames. 1, 2. 3.. For be not al trobles to be sustained for eternal life sake Rom. 8, 18 35. 36.? or is it so smal a thing either to get, or to forgo the kingdome of heauen Mat. 6, 26,?
                  Lift vp thine eies, man, vpon heauen: behold with me how al my saincts, who haue past the sharp conflictes

of this world, reioice now Mat. 25, 21 23. 24. Luk. 16, 25. Luk. 23, 43, how they now feele comfort, how they be where they would be, how they rest, and shal euer rest with me in the kingdome of my Father Reu. 7, 14. 15. 16. 17. Reu. 21, 4. 23. 24. 25.!
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 54. Of the happines of the life to come; and of the miseries of this present world.
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O Most blessed mansion of the eternal citie Reu. 21, 10 11. 12, &c.! O most bright daie of euerlastingnes, the which is neuer obscured by anie night Esa. 49, 10. Esai. 60, 19 20. Reu 7, 15. Reu. 21, 25., but alwaies inlightened with the most glorious truth! A daie of continual ioie, of continual quietnes, and happie state of perpetuitie.
                  Oh that that daie had once appeared Psal. 42, 2. Phil. 3, 7. 8.; and that this world had once an end!
                  That daie, doubtles, shineth to the sainctes in perpetual cleerenes, but yet a far of Hebr. 11, verse. 13., & as it were darkelie 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12., because they be pilgrims in this world 1. Pet. 2, 11. Heb. 11, 13. as yet.
                  The citizens of heauen they see

the ioiefulnes of this daie: but the banished children of Eue do sigh, because the daie of this life both short, and euil Gen. 47, 9. Psal. 39, 5. is ful of trobles and disquietnes Gen. 3, 16. 17. Ephes. 6, 11. 12. 2. Tim. 3, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5., ful of griefe & anguish where man defileth himselfe with so manie sinnes, entangleth himselfe with so manie euils, is trobled with so manie feares, busied with so manie cares, with much curiositie distracted, enwrapped with much vanitie, enclosed about with such errors, consumed with such labors, oppressed with tentations, weakened with pleasures, and vexed with pouertie 2. Cor. 11, verse. 23. 24. 25, &c..
                  Oh when shal these manifold trobles haue an end! When shal I be deliuered from this miserable seruitude of sinne! Oh Lord, when shal I thinke, but onelie vpon thee! when shal I reioice my fil in thee Psa. 16, 11.! when shal I without al manner let, without al griefe either of minde, or bodie Rom. 7, 23 24. Philip. 1, 23. enioie true libertie! When shal there be sound peace, peace I meane continual, and trustie, peace within, and peace without, and peace on al sides without perturbance Reu. 21. 4. 23. 24. 25. Reuel. 22, 3. 4. 5.!
                  O good Iesu, when shal I behold thee face to face! when shal I contemplate the glory of thy kingdome!

when wilt thou be al in al 1. Cor. 15, verse. 28. to me! or when shal I be with thee in thy kingdome, which thou hast prepared for thy beloued from the fundations of the world Matt. 25, verse. 34. 1. Cor. 2, 9.!
                  I am left here euen succurles as a banished man in the lande of mine enimies, where continual war is Eph. 6, 10. 11. 12. 1. Pet. 5, 8. 9., and much miserie Gen. 47, 9.: O giue me comfort in my banishment, and ioie in my trobles, inasmuch as with al the desire of minde I sigh, & long for thee Ps. 27, 13. Psal. 42, 1. 2.. For al the comfort which this world doth minister, is euen burdensome to me Gal. 6, 14..
                  To enioie thee is al my desire Phil. 1, 23., yet can I not apprehend thee. I wish to abide in heauenlie things, yet earthlie, and vnmortified affections Wisd. 9, 14 15. keepe me downe. In minde I would subdue al things, yet against my wil I am compelled to serue the flesh Rom. 7, 19 23.. Thus, vnhappie man that I am, I fight with my selfe, and am greuous to my selfe, whilest my spirit soareth vpward, and my flesh bendeth downeward Rom. 8, 5. Rom. 7, 23.. Oh what a combat feele I inwardlie Gal. 5, 17., when meditating of heauēlie things, I am assaulted sodenlie euen with a swarme of carnal cogitations!
                  Wherefore, O my God, forsake me

not, neither cast me awaie in thy displeasure Psal. 27, 9.. Oh scatter with ye brightnes of thy lightning al the imaginations which the enimie doth cast in, shoote forth thine arrowes and disperse them Ps. 144, 6.. Cal home my senses vnto thee; make mee to forget al worldlie things, and to throwe awaie and contemne the cogitations of wickednes.
                  O succor me, eternal veritie Psa. 43, 3. Iohn. 14, 6., that no worldlie vanitie maie carie me awaie! O come celestial sweetenes, that al vncleannes maie auoide at thy comming Psal. 68, 1. 2.!
                  This also I am to craue at thy hands, that it would please thee mercifullie to pardon, and forgiue me, though I haue other thinges in my minde when I praie besides thee. For, to saie the truth, I am woont greatlie to be distracted; and manie-times there am I not, where bodilie I sit, or stande, but whether my cogitations carrie me. Verelie there I am, where my cogitatiō is. Where my thoughts are commonlie, there is that I loue. And that which either I loue naturalie, or customablie do like, comes easilie into minde.
                  This made thee, O truth Ioh. 14, 6., to saie,

Where your treasure is, there wil your harts be Mat. 6, 21.. If I loue heauen, I wil gladlie thinke on heauenlie thinges; if the world, in prosperitie I am iocund, and pensiue in aduersitie; if the flesh, mine imaginations are fleshlie Rom. 8, 5.; if the spirit, to thinke on spiritual things wil be my delight. For what soeuer I loue, I gladlie both speake of & heare of, and thinke thereof earnestlie when I am at home.
                  Wherefore vndoubtedlie he is an happy man, who for thy sake, O Lord, doth forsake al things Matth. 19, verse. 27. 28. 29 Luke. 5, 11. Luke. 9, 23.; offer violēce to nature Matth. 11, verse. 12.; & crucifie his carnal affections Coloss. 
                           •
                        , 5 Galat. 6, 14. through the zeale of the spirit, yt his cōscience being at quiet Heb. 9, 14., he maie offer vnto thee the sacrifice of deuout praier, and be meete to be admitted into the companie of Angels Heb. 10, 34, al earthlie things being excluded Rom. 8, verse. 35. 36. 1. Cor. 9, 24. 25. both inwardlie and without.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 55. Of the desire of eternal life; and of the good things promised to such as fight.
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, seing thou perceauest thy selfe to be endued from aboue with a desire

of eternal happines, and couetest to go from the tabernacle of thy bodie 2. Cor. 5, 1 2. 2. Pet. 1, 13. 14., therebie to behold the brightnes of my glorie without shadowe of turning Iam. 1, 17., open thy minde, and receiue with greedines this holie inspiration.
                  Giue hie thankes Eph. 5, 20. 1. Thess. 1, 2. 1. Thess. 5, verse. 18. vnto almightie GOD, for dealing so gratiouslie with thee; for visiting thee so mercifullie; for stirring thee vp so zelouslie; for helping thee so mightilie, that of thine owne waight thou fal not downe vnto earthlie things Wisd. 9, 14 15..
                  Neither shalt thou attaine therevnto by thine owne endeuors, & cogitations, but by the meere grace and fauor of God Rom. 5, 20 21. Phil. 4, 13., that as in al other virtues thou shouldest go forward, so especialie encrease in modestie, prepare thy selfe vnto battels to come Luk. 9, 23. 1. Tim. 6, 11. 12. 2. Tim. 2, 2., and endeuor to cleaue to me with al thy strength Deut. 6, 5. Mat. 22, 37. Mat. 12, 29. 30. Luk. 10, 27., and to serue me alwaies with a burning affection.
                  My sonne, the fire burneth manietimes, yet neuer doth the flame ascend without smoake Eccles. 22, verse. 24.: so diuers burne with desire of heauēlie things, and yet are they not free from the tentation of carnal affections Mat. 13, 20 21., and therefore for the onlie glorie of God

they craue not those things Ioh. 6, 26. 27. Iohn. 12, 5. 6. the patient bearing whereof they desire so earnestlie at his hands.
                  Such also manie-times is your desire, which for al that you pretend to be most syncere. But that is not pure and perfect, which anie waie seeketh after priuate commoditie Matt. 6, 24. 25. 1. Cor. 13, 5.
                  Craue not that which maie bring either profit or pleasure to thy selfe, but what is acceptable in my sight Matt. 6, 9. 10 Mat. 26, 39. 42. Luk. 22, 42., and for the aduancement of my glorie. For, if thou haue a right iudgement, thou wilt prefer and folow my decree before thy desire, yea or what soeuer maie be desired.
                  I know thy desire, and I haue heard thy often groanings. Thou wouldest presentlie enioie the glorious freedome of the sonnes of God Phil. 1, 23.. Presentlie thou art delighted with the euerlasting house, and celestial countrie replenished with al ioie Reu. 21, 4.. But that houre is not yet come, and the time is yet otherwise, euen a time of war Eph. 6, 10. 11. 1. Pet. 5, 8. 9., of labor Gen 3, 17. 18. 19. Iob. 7, 1. 2., and of trial Acts. 14, 22. Thou wishest that once thou haddest attained the chiefe felicitie Phil. 1, 23.: but yet thou canst not haue the same.
                  I am he, saith the Lord, whom thou must looke for, vntil the kingdome of

God do come. Yet longer thou must be tried in the world, and exercised in manie things Eccles. 2, 1. 2. 5.. Sometime I know thou shalt be comforted, but not fullie, and continualie. Wherfore showe thy selfe constant, and valiant both in doing, and also in suffering things contrarie vnto nature Dan. 10, 2. 3. Ephes. 3, 13..
                  Thou must put on the new man Eph. 4, 24. Rom. 6, 4. Coloss. 3, 9. 10., and change thy condiitons. And manie-times thou must both do those things, which thou wouldest not Matth. 11, verse. 12.; and omit that which thou wouldest do Rom. 7, 15 19..
                  Others in their dealings shal prosper, but thou shalt not Psa. 73, 1. 2, &c.; the saiengs of other men shalbe heard, thine shal be contemned Matth. 10, verse. 16. 17, &c.. Other men shal obteine their sutes quietlie, but thou shalt suffer the repulse Psal 22, 2.; others with mightie commendations shalbe extolled, but no worde shalbe made of thee Ioh. 15, 18. 19.; other men shalbe preferred vnto hie offices, but they shal iudge thee to be good for nothing 1. Cor. 1, verse. 28.. For these causes thy nature wil be trobled sometime, and suffer great conflicts: but much good shalt thou get therebie, bearing it in silence Esa. 30, 15. Luk. 21, 19..
                  By these, and such like, the faithful seruant of the Lord is tried oftentimes,

whether he can denie, and breake himselfe of his owne wil in al things Luk. 9, 23 24..
                  And surelie thou hast most neede to be mortified therein, namelie to see and to suffer those things which naturalie thou canst not brooke, especialie when things, in thy iudgement, absurde, and hurtful are enioined thee Matth. 26, verse. 39. 42. Luk. 22, 42. Iohn. 4, 34. Iohn. 5, 30. Iohn. 6, 38. Ephes. 6, 6. Wherein, forasmuch as thou darest not resist the higher power, wherevnto thou art subiect Rom. 14, 11 Phil. 2, 10. Rom. 13, 1. 1. Pet. 2, 13. 14., it seemeth harde in thine opinion to obeie the cōmandement of another and not to folow thine owne minde.
                  But consider thou, my sonne, what commoditie, and what an ample reward wil shortlie folow these labors of thine, and doubtles thou wilt be so far from sustaining them greuouslie, that most sweete, and great comfort thou wilt take of thy patience 1. Co. 13, 7 Actes. 5, 40. 41..
                  For in steede of thy momentanie wil, which gladlie thou hast renounced, thou shalt haue an euerlasting wil in the heauens Ioh. 17, 24. 1. Ioh. 2, 17.. There whatsoeuer thou wouldest haue, or canst wish for, thou shalt finde 1. Co. 2, 9.. There aboundance of al good things thou shalt haue, without feare of loasing them Matt. 6, 19 20.. There thy wil together with

me Ioh. 17, 24 shal neuer couet after anie outward or priuate thing. No man there shal resist thee, no man complaine of thee, no man troble thee anie manner waie, but what thou canst desire shalbe present, and satisfie the desire of thy minde abundantlie Reu. 7, 14. 15. 16. 17. Reuel. 21, 4. 23. 24. 25. 26. Reuel. 22, 5..
                  There I wil render glorie for reproch sustained Wisd. 5, 1. 2, &c.; the garment of gladnes Esai. 61, 3. for heauines; for the lowest roome a kinglie throne for euermore Matth. 25, verse. 34.. There the frute of obedience shal appeere Reuel. 22, verse. 14.; the labor of repentance shal reioice Iohn. 3, 5. Ezec. 18, 21, 22.; & humble obedience shal gloriouslie be crowned 2. Tim. 2, verse. 11. 12. Coloss. 3, 4..
                  Wherefore do thou modestlie obeie al men 1. Pet. 2, 13.; and neuer care who speakes or cōmandeth, but giue thine earnest endeuor to take it in good worth, whatsoeuer is spoke, and faithfullie to fulfil that whatsoeuer is required at thine handes, howsoeuer it be either by worde or signe, yea whosoeuer, be he thy better, or thine equal, or thine inferior that would haue it done.
                  Let other men seeke other things; let others glorie in what they wil, & be commended of the world euen to the skies, but do thou reioice when thou art reproched Mat. 5, 11. 12. Actes. 5, 41. Galat. 6, 14.; when thou dost

execute my wil 1. Cor. 1, 31, and promote my glorie: and let this be thine onelie desire that GOD maie be magnified alwaies in thee, whether it be by life, or by death Phil. 1, 20..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 56. How a man oppressed with trobles, ought to yeeld him selfe to the Lordes wil.
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O Eternal God, and heauenlie Father, I yeelde thee immortal thankes, for that thou doest what thou wilt Psa. 115, 4. Matt 19, 26., and wilt nothing but that is good Deut. 32, 4 Matt. 19, 17..
                  Let me thy seruant reioice in thee 1. Cor. 1, verse. 31.
                     ▪ not either in my selfe, or in anie other thing Iere. 9, 23. For thou alone art the true comfort; thou art my hope and my crowne; thou Lord art my ioie and mine honor 2. Sam. 22, verse. 2. 3. Psalm. 18, 2. Psal. 142, 5.. Of thee I haue whatsoeuer I haue, and that not of anie merites at al of mine. Thine are al things Psa. 50, 10. 11. 12. which thou hast either giuen Iam. 1, 17., or made Psa. 136, 5. 6, &c.. I poore soule, worne out with labors euen from my youth, and greeued in minde Psal. 88, 3., and that in such wise, that sometime I

burst forth into teares Esa. 38, 14 15., and am greatlie out of quiet for the euils which hang ouer mine head.
                  O Lord, I long after the comfort of peace, it is the peace of thy children, who are fed with the light of thy consolation Psal. 119, verse. 130. that I require.
                  If thou giue peace, if thou fil me with ioie Luke. 15, verse. 22. 23., my hart shal reioice exceedinglie, and deuoutlie sound out thy praises Ps. 149, 1. 2, &c.: But if (as manie-times thou doest) thou hide thy face Ps. 104, 29, I shal not be able to runne the waie of thy commandements Psal. 119, verse. 32., but rather falling on my knees I shal smite my breast Luke. 18, verse. 13., because it goeth not with me as earst it did, when, thy lanterne lightening me from aboue I was, vnder the shadowe of thy wings Psal. 17, 8., protected against euils that rushed vpon me Psal. 18, 3. 4, &c. Psalm. 57, 2. 3..
                  O righteous Father alwaies to be praised, the houre is now come Ioh. 12, 23. Iohn. 17, 1. wherein I thy seruant must be tried. O most louing Father, meete is it that I suffer somewhat for thy sake Mat. 5, 10., at this time. O Father euermore to be worshipped, the houre is now come, which from euerlasting thou didest know would come, wherein I for a litle time must outwardlie so

die, that inwardlie I maie liue with thee for euermore; for a litle while be contemned, perish as it were in mans opinion, and be afflicted with griefe and aduersitie, that hereafter in the morning of the newe light Esa 65, 17 Reue. 22, 1. I maie rise againe with thee, & be glorified in the heauens Ioh 17, 24. O most holie Father, such was thy decree, such is thy pleasure, and that which thou commandedst Ioh. 16, 2. 20., is come to passe.
                  For this benefit thou bestowest vpon thy freend, that albeit for thy sake he must suffer affliction 1. Pet. 4, 14 1. Pet. 2, 21. in this world, yet is it but when, & of whom, and as thou wilt giue leaue. For in the world nothing commeth to passe either without thy counsel Mat. 6, 26. 27. Matt 10, 28 29. 30. 1. Cor. 12, 6., without thy prouidence, or without cause why.
                  And assuredlie it is good for me, O Lord, that I haue bin afflicted, that I maie learne thy statutes Ps 119, 71. 67., and cast off al pride, and arrogancie of mind.
                  It is good for me that I am put to shame, that I maie seeke comfort frō thee rather than of men Ps. 44, 23. 24 Psal. 69, 29. Thereby also do I learne to stand in feare of thine vnsearchable iudgements Ro. 11, 33., who punishest the righteous as wel as the wicked Psal 73, 2. 3, &c. 1. Pet. 4, 17. and yet none of them

without equitie, and iustice Psal 99, 4. Ps. 119, 75..
                  I thanke thee, O Lord, for not sparing to afflict me with euils, with bitter paines, griefe, and anguish both within and without. None is there of al vnder heauen that can comfort mee in this miserie, none I saie is there, but thou alone, my God, and my Lord who art the celestial curer of soules Ps. 147, 3. Matth. 9, 2. 22. 25. 29. 33. 35. which both woundest and makest whole againe Deu. 32, 39, bringest downe to the graue, and raisest vp 1. Sam. 2, 6 Tob 13, 2..
                  Thy correction is vpon me, thy rod teacheth me wisedome Prou. 29, verse. 15.. Lo, most louing father, I submit my selfe to the rod of thy discipline Matth. 26, verse. 39. 42.. Strike both my back, and my neck too, that I maie turne mine vntowardlines after thy wil. Make me, O Lord, thine humble and godlie disciple, as thou hast right wel accustomed to do, that I maie euen wholie obeie euerie commandement of thine Ps. 119, 71.. To thee, and to thy correction I commend both my selfe, and al mine: for better is it to be punished here than hereafter Esa 55, 6. Galat. 6, 9. 10..
                  Thou knowest al, & euerie thing; yea the most secret cogitation in the hart of man, thou knowest Heb. 4, 13.. Thou knowest what shalbe afore it come to passe Rom. 11, 2: neither hast thou neede to

be informed, or admonished of those things which are done in the world. Thou knowest wherebie I maie profit best, and what good aduersitie wil doo to the scouring off, as it were the rust of wickednes Wisd 3, 6▪ 1. Pet. 1, 7.. And therefore vse me euen as thou wilt Luke. 22, verse. 42.; and reiect me not for my wicked life Luk. 18, 
                           •
                        3, which none knoweth so wel as thou, yea, to saie the truth, none knoweth it but thou alone Ioh 2, 24. 25..
                  O Lord, grant me to know those things that I should know Ioh. 17, 3.; to loue that are to be loued Deut. 6, 5. Matt. 22, 37; to praise that which pleaseth thee; to make accoūt of such as thou hast in price; and finalie to mislike that which thou dost loath.
                  Suffer me not either to iudge after the sight of the outward eies Deut. 1, 17 1. Sam. 16, 7. Sirach 42, 1 Iob. 10, 4., or to giue sentence according to the hearing of mine vnskilful eares: but with right iudgement to discerne betwene things both visible, and spiritual 1. Co. 2, 10 11, &c., & afore al things euermore to seeke after the pleasure of thine heauenlie wil. For commonlie the senses of men in iudging 1. Cor. 2, 7 8 Iames. 2, 2. 3, &c. are deceaued; and the freendes of this world by louing onelie visible things 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16. 17. are deceaued also.
                  
                     Is a man so much the better, as he is greater in the opinion of man Luke. 16; verse. 19. 20.? The deceitful in praising the deceitful; the vaine man in extolling the vaine; the blinde in commending the blinde; the weake in magnifieng the weake, deceaueth him; and by praising vainelie, he doth verilie shame him Ioh. 5, 44. Iohn. 12. 43.. For in truth such is a man, and no more, as thou esteemest him to be, as one Francis the Minorite. saide right wel.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 57. That we are to exercise our selues with baser works, when we cannot doo the best.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, thou canst not alwaies abide in the most earnest, and ardent studie of virtue, nor continue in the highest degree of heauenlie contemplation, but offorce through original corruption Gen. 3, 16. 17, &c. Rom. 
                           •
                        , 14. 15. &c. thou art made sometime to come downe vnto inserior things, & to beare the burden of this mortal life Wisd 9, 5. 13. though vnwillinglie and with griefe. For as long as thou carriest about a mortal bodie,

thou shalt feele the waight and heauines of the same Wisd. 9, 15.
                  Therefore in the flesh thou must often groane vnder the burden of flesh Rom. 7, 24 25.; because thou canst not alwaies without intermission continue in the studie of spiritual things, and heauenlie contemplations.
                  Here then it is behooueful to make recourse vnto base and outwarde workes; to refresh thy selfe in good deedes; and with a strong faith to waite Matth. 24, verse. 46. 47. til I come from on hie to visit thee; and to suffer with patience thine exile Heb. 11, 13 14. 15. Gen 47, 9. Psa. 119, 54. and hunger of minde vntil I see thee againe 1. Cor. 15, verse. 51. 52., and deliuer thee from al trobles Reuel 21,.
                  For I wil make thee to forget thy paines, and to enioie fullie the inner quietnes Ioh. 16, 22.. Yea, I wil open vnto thee the field of the holie Scriptures, that with a ioieful minde thou maist begin to trauers the waie of my commandements Ps. 119, 32., and breake into these wordes Rom. 8, 18.: The afflictions of this present time are not woorthie the glorie which shalbe showed vnto vs.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 58. That man should thinke himselfe to deserue not comfort at Gods hand, but condemnation.
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O Lorde, I am not woorthie thy comfort, or anie spiritual consolation 1. Cor. 15, verse. 9. 10.. And therefore thou doest right wel Ps. 115. 75 when thou forsakest me poore wretch, and leauest me without comfort.
                  For though I should powre out euen a sea of teares, yet could I not deserue anie comfort at thine hand. That which I deserue be stripes, and punishment, because I haue so often so greuouslie offended thee, and in so manie things so greatlie sinned Luk. 15, 18 21.. So that, were the matter dulie considered Psal. 69. 5. 13. 16. I am not woorthie the least of al thy comforts.
                  And yet, O gratious and merciful God, who wilt not that thy workes should perish Ezech. 33, verse. 11., to declare the riches of thy goodnes vpon the vessels of thy mercie Ephes 
                           •
                        , 7. 8. Ephes. 2, 4. 5., thou doest vouchsafe to comfort me hauing no merite, far

beyond the manner of men Psal. 71, 15 Luk. 15, 22. 23. 24.. Neither be thine heauenlie comforts, like worldlie communications 2. Co. 1, 12 2. Cor. 7, 4. 5. 6..
                  But what haue I done, Lord, that thou shouldest impart vpon me anie spiritual comfort at al Rom. 11, 5. 6, &c.?. Trulie that I remember, I haue done no good at al, but alwaies haue bin both proane vnto sinne Gen. 6, 5. Gen. 8, 21. Matt. 15, 19. Rom. 3, 9. 10., and slowe to repent. And this is so true, as if I should denie it, both thou wilt find me a liar, and no man dare stand to excuse me Iob. 9, vers. 2, &c. 32..
                  By my sinnes what haue I merited but hel, and euerlasting fire Matt. 25, verse. 41.?
                  And therefore I plainelie, and in deede confesse, I am woorthie al reproch and contempt; and most vnwoorthie to liue among thy sonnes, and seruants Luk. 15, 21 Luke. 18, 13.
                  And albeit I can hardly be brought to do it; yet because it is true, I wil confesse against my selfe my wickednes Psal. 32, 5., that so the sooner I maie obteine mercie at thine hand.
                  But what shal I, sinner that I am, ful of al manner shame and infamie, what shal I saie? Surelie I haue nothing to saie, but euen this: I haue sinned, Lord, I haue sinned, take mercie on me Ps. 25, 11. Psal. 40, 11. 12. Psalm. 51▪ 1. 2. 3., forgiue me; suffer me yet

a while to be waile my wretchednes, before I passe ouer into the land of darkenes, couered with the shadowe of death Iob. 10, 21 22..
                  For what els doest thou of a giltie and miserable man require, but that he afflict, and humble himselfe for his sinnes Eze. 18, 21. 22. Ezec. 32, 14 15.?
                  For of true repentance, and humbling of the minde, ariseth hope of pardon Psal. 32, 5. Psal. 51, 17.; the trobled conscience is reconciled vnto God Heb. 9, 14.; the fauor of God which was lost is recouered Zach. 1, 3.; man is preserued from yc vengeance to come Matt. 3, 7. 8.; and with an holie kisse both God, and the sorowful soule do meete together Luke. 15, verse. 20..
                  I saie, the vnfained repentance of sinnes committed is the accepted sacrifice vnto thee, O Lord, sauoring more sweetelie in thine eares than doth the perfume of frankincense Ps. 51, 16. 17. 19.. This is the sweete ointment which thou, who neuer despisest the trobled and humbled minde of man Psa. 147, 3., wouldest should be powred vpon thine holie feete Luk. 7, 37 38.. This is the place of refuge against the rage of the enimie Ps. 138, 6. 7.; here it is amended and washt awaie whatsoeuer els where was polluted, and defiled Psal. 51, 2. 7. 1. Cor. 6, 11..
               
            
            
               
               
                  Chap. 59. Men carnalie minded finde no fauor before God.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     SOnne, my fauor is more pretious, than that it wil medle with outwarde things, and earthlie pleasures Ioh. 14, 27 Iohn. 16, 
                           •
                        3. Phil. 4, 10. 11. 12..
                  Wherfore thou must cast off what soeuer is a let therevnto Luk. 9, 23 Iohn. 8, 54., if thou wouldest be replenished with the same.
                  Leaue companie Matt. 6, 6. Matt. 14, 23.; loue to dwel by thy selfe alone; auoide communication; but powre out godlie praiers before the Lorde Luk. 18, 1. 2, &c. 1. Thes. 5, 17 18., that thy minde maie be stirred vp vnto godlines, and kept from sinne.
                  Despise euen the whole world, and prefer the calling of God before al outward things Luk. 9, 59. 1. Iohn. 2, 15. 16.. For doubtles thou canst not both serue me, and delight in transitorie things too Mat. 6, 24..
                  Thou must leaue thine acquaintance, and deare freends Luk. 9, 23. 24. Luke. 14, 26. 27. Ioh. 12, 25 26.; and cal awaie thy minde from al worldlie pleasure 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16.. So doth Peter admonish the disciples of Christ, that they behaue

themselues in this world as pilgrims, and strangers 1. Pet. 2, 11.
                  O with what a faith & confidence shal he die, who is not kept back with the desire of anie earthlie thing Gal. 6. 14. Rom. 8, 35. 36. Phil. 3, 20.!
                  But no sicke man can haue such a minde; neither doth the carnal man perceaue the libertie of him who is spiritual Rom. 8, 5. 1. Cor. 2, 14. 15. 16..
                  But if he wil become spiritual, he must renounce both strangers, and nigh freends also Matth. 10, verse. 37., and take heede of none more than of himselfe Rom. 7, 23 1. Cor. 2, 14..
                  If thou hast perfectlie subdued thy selfe Marke. 8, verse. 34., thou shalt with more ease vanquish other things. For that is true victorie, to triumph ouer a mans selfe.
                  For he, who hath his minde so in subiection, that both his desire obeieth reason, and his reason fulfilleth my commandements in al things, is doubtles both a conqueror of himselfe Matth▪ 5, verse. 38. 39., & also a Lord of the world Rom 8, 37: to which top of perfection if thou wouldest clime, thou must manfulie begin, and laie the axe to the roote Mat. 3, 10., so to cut off euen by the roote al hidden and immoderate loue, both of thy selfe, and also of euerie priuate and carnal good thing.
                  
                     For of this immoderate selfe-loue onlie depēdeth almost al that a man must vtterlie roote vp Matth. 7, 3. 4.: which vice being once subdued, great peace, and perpetual quietnes wil ensue Mat. 11, 29.
                  But, for that fewe do endeuor perfectlie to mortifie Rom. 6, 3. Coloss. 3, 5. and altogether to forsake themselues Eph. 4, 22. 23. 24., it commeth to passe that manie do remaine snarled within Iames 4, 1. 2▪ 3., and cannot in spirit rise aboue themselues.
                  But he that freelie would liue with me, must mortifie and slaie al wicked and intemperate affections of his minde Gal. 5, 19. 20. 11.; and stick to nothing created ouer greedilie 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16. Philip. 3, 7. 8. 1. Cor. 7, 29. 30. 31..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 60. The diuers working of Nature, and of Grace.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     MY sonne, consider diligentlie the diuers motions betwene Nature and Grace. For after so subtile, and contrarie a manner their motions be, that hardlie they can be discerned but of the spiritual, and illuminated man 1. Cor. 2, verse. 14..
                  
                     Al men couet in deede that which is good, yea and pretend a color of goodnes in their deedes, and saiengs: therefore vnder the showe of that which good is manie are deceaued.
                  Nature is craftie, and carrieth awaie, intrappeth, and deceaueth manie a man; yea and it would alwaies be the end of actions Rom. 1, 20 21. Rom. 10, 3. 4.: But Grace dealeth simplie, and declineth from al kinde of euil; vseth no deceit; doth al things plainlie for Gods sake, and resteth in him vnto the end 1. Cor. 13, verse. 1. 2. 1. Cor. 15, 30 31. 32..
                  Nature refuseth to die Matth. 26, verse. 69. 70. Luk. 22, 55. 56. 57. Iohn. 21, 18. Rom. 7, 15. 16, &c., to be kept downe, to be ouercome, to be in subiection, and to be kept vnder: Grace studieth to be mortified Gal. 6, 14.; striueth against appetite Rom. 7, 22 23.; coueteth to be brought in subiection, & to be ouercome Ephes. 5, 9. 1. Pet. 2, 11. 12.; wil not vse hir libertie 1. Co. 6, 12 13.; loueth to be kept in awe; wil not lord ouer anie; but is readie euermore to liue, to abide to be vnder God, yea and for Gods cause humblie to obeie euerie man 1. Co 13, 3. 4, &c..
                  Nature seeketh after profit Matth. 19▪ verse. 21. 22., and considereth what lucre maie be gotten by another: but Grace doth note rather what maie benefit others 1. Cor. 9, 12 15. 1. Cor. 10, 33 Coloss. 3, 1. 2., than profit hir selfe.
                  Nature is glad when she is had in

honor, & commended among men Ioh. 5, 44. Iohn 12, 43 Acts. 12, 21. 22. 23.: but Grace ascribeth al glorie and praise vnto God 1. Co. 10, 31 Coloss. 3, 17 Acts. 14, 13. 14 15..
                  Nature feareth reproch and contempt Luk. 18, 18: but Grace is glad to be rebuked for the Name of Christ Acts. 5, 41. Matth 5, 10..
                  Nature loueth ease and quietnes of bodie Mat. 25, 8. 18: Grace cannot be idle, but willinglie setteth hir selfe to labor 1. Cor. 15, verse. 30. 32. 2. Co. 11, 23 24..
                  Nature seeketh after curious, and goodlie, and abhorreth from base & grosse things Luk. 16, 19: Grace is delighted with simple and base things, despiseth not rough, neither refuseth to put on old rags Phil. 4, 11. 12. 2. Co. 11, 27 1. Tim. 6, 7. 8..
                  Nature respecteth transitorie things Luk. 12, 16 17, &c., reioiceth at worldlie gaine, fretteth at losse, and at euery despiteful worde is out of quiet: but Grace hath respect vnto heauenlie things, cleaueth not to the world Lu. 12, 22. 23., at losse is not trobled 1. Co. 13, 7, nor disquieted at sharpe wordes Mat. 5, 11.. Because hir treasure is reposed in heauen, where nothing perisheth Mat. 6, 20..
                  Nature is couetous, & more gladlie taketh than giueth 1 Cor. 6, 9. 10., louing priuate gaine: but Grace is bountiful 1. Cor. 13, 4, and liberal, shunneth priuate commoditie, is content with litle Act. 20, 33 34., iudging it better to giue than to receaue.
                  
                     Nature is bent vnto the world Gen. 6, 5., vnto the flesh, vnto vanitie, and to vagaries: but Grace allureth vnto God and vnto wel doing; biddeth al creatures fare-wel, flieth the world, abhorreth the desires of the flesh 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16. 1. Cor. 7, 31. Galat. 5, 19. 20., abstaineth from idle gaddings, and blusheth to be seene abroad.
                  Nature seeketh outward sola
                        •
                     e, by whose allurements it may be delighted Luk. 15, 13: but Grace seeketh comfort at God alone, and delighteth hir selfe in the chiefe good 1. Cor. 1, 31 aboue al visible things.
                  Nature doth al for gaine, nothing franklie; and stil looketh either for as good a reward or greater, and hopeth either for praise or for fauor in respect of benefits conferred; finalie it coueteth to haue hir deedes, and gifts to be greatlie accounted of Matth. 6, 1. 2.: but Grace hunteth after no worldlie thing, neither looketh for anie recompense besides God alone; nor yet coueteth moe temporal things than are necessarie for the attainement of euerlasting life 1. Tim. 6, 7 8..
                  Nature glorieth in the multitude of freends, and kinsfolke, & boasteth in the nobilitie of stock, & ancestors; fauoreth the mightie, flattereth the

wealthie; and loueth hir equals: but Grace loueth euen hir enimies Mat. 5, 44. 45., braggeth not of manie freends, neither yet respecteth the place, or stock whence she was borne Ioh. 8, 33., vnles the greater virtue and godlines florished there. This Grace fauoreth the poore more than the rich; lamenteth the case of the innocent more than of the mightie; delighteth in the true not in the deceitful; and alwaies exhorteth good men to folowe chieflie the most excellent giftes 1. Cor. 12, verse. 31., and to expresse the Sonne of God in their manners Ephes. 5, 1..
                  Nature quicklie complaineth of wante and pouertie Mat. 6, 32.: Grace constantlie endureth neede Rom. 8, 35 2. Cor. 11. 27.
                  Nature referreth al to hir selfe, & striueth and contendeth for hir selfe: but Grace referreth al things vnto the glorie of GOD 1. Cor. 10, verse. 31. Colos. 3, 17, whence she sprang Iam. 1, 18. 1. Iohn 3, 9. Iohn. 1, 12. 13.; ascribeth no goodnes to hir selfe, is not arrogant 1. Cor. 13, verse. 4. 5. 6., nor contentious, neither yet preferreth hir owne opinion before others, but in al studie and searching of the truth submitteth hir selfe to the wisdome, and iudgement of God.
                  Nature coueteth greedilie to knowe, and to heare newes, and secrets,

loueth outwardlie to appeare, and to trie much by the senses; and finalie desireth to be knowen, and to do such things, as maie bring hir fame and glorie of the world Ioh. 5, 44. Iohn. 12, 43 Matth. 6, 1. 5. 16..
                  But Grace seeketh not after newes, and curious knowledge Eccl. 3, 22 23. 24. Rom. 12, 3.. Both because it proceedeth altogether from the old corruption of man Gen. 6, 5., and also for that in deede there is no newe or durable thing vpon earth 1. Cor. 7, 31 1. Iohn. 2, 15 16. 17.. And therfore it teacheth men to absteine from foolish pleasure Ier. 9, 23.; to shun vaine glorie Gal. 5, 26.: modestlie to conceale such things as seeme praise-worthie, and to be had in admiration for their excellencie 1. Cor. 13, verse. 4.; and of euerie thing, and knowledge to get profit, and to seeke the glorie of God Coloss. 3, verse. 17.. Finalie she desireth to haue neither hir selfe, nor hirs to be praised 1. Cor. 4, 6 7., but God, who of meere goodwil imparteth al things vpon vs Iam. 1, 17., to be thanked for his benefits 1. Thess. 5, verse. 18..
                  This Grace is a light set aboue Nature, and a certaine singular gift of God, a note proper to the elect, and pledge of euerlasting life, which lifteth a man from earthlie to the loue of heauenlie things Colos 3, 1. 2., and of a carnal makes a spiritual man Rom. 8, 1. 2. 1. Cor. 2, 10. 11, &c. Galat. 4, 6..
                  
                     And therfore the more Nature is pressed downe, and tied vp, the more Grace is inspired 2. Co. 4, 16 17. 18., & the innerman with newe gifts after the image of God is renewed euerie daie Eph. 4, 22. 23. 24. Coloss. 3, 9. 10..
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 61. Of the corruption of Nature; and power of Gods heauenlie Grace.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O Lord, my GOD, who hast created mee after thy owne image Gen. 1, 26. 27. Gen. 5, 1. Wisd. 2, 23. Eccl. 17, 1. 2. 3. 1. Cor. 11, 7. Coloss. 3, 10, giue me such Grace (which is most excellent, and necessarie vnto saluation as thou hast showen Luk. 9, 23), that I maie subdue my wicked Nature, drawing me alwaies vnto sinne and destruction Gen. 6, 5..
                  For I see in my flesh the lawe of sinne, rebelling against the lawe of my minde Rom. 7, 23, and leading me captiue to the satisfieng of my desire in many things, so that without the assistance of thy most heauenlie Grace, powred zelouslie into my minde, I am vnable to resist the assaults thereof.
                  Yea, Lord, I lacke thy Grace, and that much Grace of thine, whereby

my Nature proane vnto al impietie euen from my youth Gen. 8, 21. Matt. 15, 19., maie be subdued, and ouercome. For Nature being fallen through the offence of the first man, and defiled through sinne, the punishment therof hath redounded vnto al mankind. So that nature, which at the first thou didest make good and righteous, is now counted for the sinne, and infirmitie of the corrupt Nature, inasmuch as the motion left vnto it tendeth alwaies vnto euil, and inferior things Wisd. 9, 15 Rom. 7, 14. 15. 18.. For, as touching that litle power which abideth in ye same Iohn. 1, 5. 2. Pet. 1▪ 19., that is like a certaine sparkle raked vp in the ashes.
                  This is that natural reason, enclosed about with blacke darknes, yet so that somewhat stil it can discerne, & iudge betweene good and euil, betweene truth and falsehood Rom. 7, 
                           •
                        4 15, &c., although it haue no power to fulfil that which it alloweth Phil. 2, 13. 2. Cor. 3, 5., neither enioieth a perfect light of the truth Mat. 6, 22. 23., with soundnes of hir affections.
                  Hence, O my God, is it, that, as touching the inward man, I am delighted with thy law Rom. 7, 22, knowing that thy statutes are good, righteous, holie 1. Tim. 1, 8 Rom 7, 12. 13. 18., and that they reprooue euil & wickednes, and teach what is to be

auoided. But in my flesh I serue theRom. 7, 23. lawe of sinne whilest I obeie the appetite more than reason.
                  Hence it is, that to wil is present18. with me, but alas I finde no meanes to performe. Hereof it is that oftentimes I purpose to doo manie things wel; but because thine heauenlie fauor is wanting Ps. 104, 29 which maie helpe mine infirmitie, by a litle resistance I slide back, and tire. Yea hereof it is, that I knowe in deede the waie of righteousnes, and see as in a glasse what my dutie is Rom. 7, 15, but through the waight of my sinne Wisd. 9, 15 I haue no power to arise vnto perfection.
                  O Lord, how greatlie doo I lacke thy Grace both to begin what good is, & also to proceede thorouglie in goodnes Phil. 2, 13.. For without it can I doo nothing Iohn. 15, 4. 5.; through the help thereof I can doo al things in thee Phil. 4, 13..
                  O heauenlie grace in deede Rom. 5, 20 21., without which neither the merites of man Rom. 3, 20 Galat. 2, 16 Rom. 11, 5. 6., nor the gifts of Nature are of price Ro. 11, 17. 18.. O Lord, without thy Grace neither learning 1. Cor. 1, 19 20., neither riches Luk. 12, 16 17, &c. Luk. 16, 22. 23., neither beautie 2. Sam. 14, verse. 25 2. Sam. 18, 9. 10., nor strength 1. Sam. 17, verse. 4. 5. 7. 50., nor wit, neither eloquence Acts, 12, 21 22. 23. is of anie waight before thee.
                  For the gifts of Nature are cōmon

to the wicked as wel as to the good Iere. 9, 23. Psal. 73, 2. 3.: but Grace is a gift peculiar onlie to the elect Rom. 11, 5 6., which who so hath, are counted meete and woorthie eternal life. Finalie it is so excellent, that without it neither the gift of prophesie, nor the working of miracles Mat. 7, 22., neither the profound knowledge of secret things, is anie thing worth: yea neither faith, nor hope, nor anie other virtues are accepted in thy sight without loue and Grace 1. Co. 13, 1 2, &c..
                  O blessed Grace, which makest him rich with virtues, who is poore in spirit Matt. 5, 3.; and him humble of minde, who is rich for goodes Ro. 11, 20.: Come, come downe to me, fil me earlie with thy comfort, that my minde for wearines and hunger doo not faint.
                  O Lord, I beseech thee, impart thy Grace vpon me Luk. 1, 30. 48.: that is sufficient for me 2. Cor. 12. verse. 9., though I haue nought els that Nature would require. Yea, I protest, if that be with me, I wil dread no tentation, nor troble whatsoeuer Psal. 23, 4. Rom. 8, 35., that is my strength Psal. 18, 2., that bringeth counsel and helpe Ps. 19, 14.: yea it is both mightier than al enimies Rom 8, 31, and wiser than the prudent 1. Cor. 1, verse. 19. 20..
                  It is the mistres of truth, ye teacher of discipline, the light of the minde Mat. 11, 25. 26. Luk. 10, 21.,

the comfort in affliction, the expeller of sadnes, the remoouer awaie of care Psal. 80, 3. 4. 7 19, the nourisher of religion; the mother of teares: at a worde, without it what am I but withered wood, & a roote most vnprofitable, and to be cast awaie Iohn. 15, 4 5. 6.?
                  Wherefore, O Lord, let this thy Grace both go afore, and also folow me, whereby I maie continualie applie my self▪ vnto wel-doing through Iesus Christ thy Sonne,
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 62. That we ought to denie our selues, and to imitate Christ by the crosse.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     THe more thou leauest thy selfe Luk. 9, 23, my sonne, the nigher thou commest vnto me 2 Co. 4, 16.
                  As outwardlie to coute nothing, causeth inward peace: so inwardlie to forsake ones selfe, ioineth man to God Luk 9, 24..
                  My minde is that thou learne a perfect denial of thy selfe in my wil, and that without al contradiction or muttering Matt 9, 9. Matt. 19, 27.. Folowe thou me Ioh. 21, 19. 22.: I am the waie, the truth, and the life Ioh. 14, 6.

Without a waie men walk not; without a truth they know not; without a life they liue not. I am ye waie wherein thou must walke; the truth wherevnto thou must sticke; the life for which thou must hope. I am the waie inuiolable; the truth, vnfallible; the life euerlasting. I am the right waie; the chiefest truth; the true life, the blessed life, the life vncreate.
                  If thou go forwarde in my waie, thou shalt know the truth; and the truth shal so make thee free Ioh. 8, 32. 36., that thou shalt attaine vnto euerlasting life.
                  If thou wouldest enter into life, keepe the commandements Mat. 19, 17; If thou wouldest know the truth, beleeue me Iohn. 8, 31. 32.; If thou wouldest be perfect, sel al Mat. 19, 21; Wouldest thou be my disciple? then denie thy selfe Luk. 9, 23.: Wouldest thou attaine vnto a blessed life; then despise the life present Ioh. 12, 25. Wouldest thou be extolled in heauen? then debase thy selfe on earth Luk. 18, 13.. Wouldest thou raigne with me? then suffer with me 2. Tim. 2, verse. 12. Rom 8, 35.. For onelie the seruants of the crosse do finde the waie of happines, and of true life Actes 14, verse. 22..
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  O Lorde Iesu Christ, forasmuch as thy waie is narow Mat. 7, 13. 14. &

odious to the world Ioh. 15, 18. 19. 20., giue me grace with thee to despise the world 1. Ioh. 2, 15 16. 17.. For neither is the seruant greater than the Lord, nor the disciple aboue the maister Matth. 10, verse. 24. Luke. 6, 40. Iohn. 13, 16. Iohn. 16, 20..
                  Let thy seruant be exercised in thy waie, because therein my saluation, & true holines doth consist Psa. 119, 9. Psal. 25, 12. 14.. Whatsoeuer I reade, or heare without the same, can neuer fullie recreat or delight me Ps. 119, 14. 103 111. 127..
               
               
                  LORD.
                  Sonne, seeing thou haste read, and knowest al these things, blessed shalt thou be, if thou fulfil them Matt. 7. 24 25. Iames. 1, 25. He that vnderstandeth and fulfilleth al my commandements, loueth me, and I wil loue him againe Ioh. 14, 21, and reueale my selfe vnto him, and bring it so to passe that he shal sit with me in the kingdome of my Father Matth. 25, verse. 34..
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  Grant therefore, Lord, that what thou hast saide and promised, maie come to me Psa. 89, 28. 33..
                  From thine hands I haue receaued the crosse, I wil beare the same euen to the death, as thou hast enioined me Luk. 21, 19.
                  Doubtles the life of a true Christian, is the crosse; but that is the waie into heauen Actes. 14, verse. 22.: neither backward, nor

from our course we maie not go Luk. 9, 62..
                  Eigh brethren let vs proceede together: Iesus wilbe with vs Matth. 28, verse. 20. Ioh. 16, 22.; for Iesus sake, we haue taken this crosse vpō vs, let vs perseuere in ye crosse for Iesus sake Mat. 5, 11. Iohn. 15, 19. 20. 1. Pet. 2, 21. 22. 23.. He wil help vs, who is our capitaine, and goeth afore vs Phil. 2, 5. 6. 7. 8..
                  Lo, our King goeth in before vs fighting on our behalfe Heb. 12, 1. 2. 3. 4. Reu. 17, 14.. Let vs folowe manfulie Ps. 27, 14., let no man be dismaied; let vs euen valiantlie appoint to die in battel 1. Tim. 1, verse. 18. 1 Tim. 6, 12 2. Tim. 2, 3.; neuer let vs staine our honor by flieng frō the crosse Luk. 9, 26.
               
            
            
               
                  Chap. 63. That we should take heede of despaire, though we fal sometime.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  
                     SOnne, patience, and repentance in aduersitie Esai. 30, 15 Luk. 21, 19., doth more please mee than much ioie, and deuotion in prosperitie.
                  Why art thou vexed at so smal a thing spoken against thee? the which were it greater should not mooue thee Matt. 5, 11..
                  Care not for this, it is no newe thing, nor the first Heb. 12, 3. 1. Pet. 2, 21. 22., and shal not be the last, if thou liue longer.
                  
                     Thou art man good inough, while prosperitie doth last Matth. 26, verse. 33. 35. Luk. 22, 33.; yea thou canst giue counsel also to others, and encourage them with words: but when sudden aduersitie is at hand, thou art straight waie without both counsel and courage Matth. 26, verse. 69. 70. Luk. 22, 56. 57..
                  Waigh what thy frailtie is, of which thou hast proofe oftentimes in litle chances. Notwithstanding these and such like, are good for thee Pf. 119, 67 71. Prou. 3, 11. 12. Hebr. 12, 7. 8. 9..
                  Cast these things out of thy mind, as thou knowest thou shouldest doo; and if they touch thee, endeuor that they neuer ouerthrowe thee, nor ouer troble thee: at the lest wise beare them patientlie Rom. 12, verse. 12. Iames. 1, 1. 2., if thou canst not ioiefulie.
                  Now if thou heare such things against thy wil, and conceauest indignation thereat, bridle thy selfe, and take heede that nothing slip out of thy mouth, wherebie the litle ones maie be offended Mat. 18, 6. 7. Mark. 9, 42. Luke. 17, 1. 2.. So wil both this perturbation of thine quicklie be setled, and the griefe of minde, through the returne of Gods grace, be turned into ioie.
                  I yet liue, saith the Lord, readie to helpe, and extraordinarilie to comfort thee, if thou cal vpon me Psa. 50, 15. Psal. 91, 15. Esaie. 49, 8. religiouslie

in faith Mat. 21, 22 Iames. 1, 6..
                  Be thou patient, and prepare thy selfe to greater trobles Ps. 27, 14. Psal. 31, 24. 1. Co. 16, 13. Thou must not therefore be out of hart, though thou see thy selfe greatlie to be afflicted, & tempted grieuouslie 1. Cor. 10, verse. 13. Iames. 1, 1. 2.. Thou art a man, no God; neither Angel, but flesh.
                  Thinkest thou alwaies to abide in one and the same state of godlines? when neither the Angel in heauen Iob. 4, 18 2. Pet. 2, 4. Iude. 6., nor Adam the first man in paradise Gen. 3, 17. could, for both fel quicklie?
                  I am he who wil both strengthen the mourners with health Ps. 113, 7., and exalt vnto my dignitie such as acknowledge their owne weakenes Ps. 145, 19 Luke. 1, 52..
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  O Lord, for thy wordes, more sweete to me than honie, & ye honie-combe Psal. 119, verse. 103., I thank thee.
                  Alas, in such calamitie and trobles what should I doo, didest not thou strengthen mee with this ghostlie speech Psal. 119, verse. 92.!
                  So that at length I maie come vnto the port of saluation, what skilleth it what and how great things I endure Rom. 8, 18. 35. 36.?
                  O Lord, grant me a good end; and a blessed departure out of this life: O my God, remember me Luke. 23, verse. 42., & guide

me the right way into thy kingdome,
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 64. That high matters, and secret iudgements of God should not be searcht after.
               
                  OF hard matters, my sonne, and of the secret iudgementes of God take heed thou dispute not Prou. 25, 2 Ecclus. 3, 22 23. 24.. I saie reason not either why this man is so reiected, or that man in such fauor Rom. 11, verse. 18. 19.; why this man is so miserablie afflicted, that man so highlie aduanced.
               These things are beyond the reach of man; neither is anie reason, or disputation meete inough to search out the counsel of the Almightie Esa. 40, 28.
               Therefore, when either the enimie doth bring these thinges into thy minde, or 
                     •
                  ls some curious felowes enquire of thee, answere with the Prophet Psal. 119, verse. 137.: Righteous art thou, O Lord, and iust are thy iudgements. Againe, saie, Psal. 19, 9. The iudgements of the Lord are truth, they are righteous altogether.
               For my iudgements are to be feared,

not to be discussed, in asmuch as they are aboue the capacitie of mā 
                  Ro. 11, 33..
               Do thou neither enquire, nor dispute touching the merits of sainctes, who either was more holie in the world, or is more glorious in heauen. For these things oftentimes breede strife, and vaine contentions 1. Tim. 1, 4, yea and moreouer they nourish pride, & ambition, whereof spring enuie, and discordes 1. Tim. 6, 4 5., whiles one doth proudlie contende one to be more holie, and religious than another.
               The desire to learne, and to finde out these things gets no profit at al; but displeasure of the saincts. For I am not the God of dissention, but the God of peace 1. Cor. 14, verse. 33.; which peace consisteth in true modestie Mat. 11, 29, notin arrogancie of minde Esai 57, 21.
               Some through good wil are more enclined toward these than toward those: but that doo they rather of humane affection, than of heauenlie 1. Cor. 3, 3 4. 5..
               I am he who made al the saincts Gen. 2, 9,, who haue endowed them with gifts Iam. 1, 17., and exalted them to glorie Ioh. 17, 22; I know what euerie one hath deserued, I preuented them with most liberal blessings Psal. 21, 3. Matth. 5, 45.; I before the world began fore-knew who were to be loued Rom. 8, 28 29. 30. 2. Tim. 1, 9.; I

choase them out of the world Ioh. 15, 16., not they me; I, of my great fauor, called them Rom. 8, 30, and drew them Iere. 31, 3. Iohn. 6, 44. 65. mercifulie vnto me; I lead them through manifold tentations Heb. 11, 32 33. 34., and powred most singular comforts vpon them Ps. 94, 19. 2. Cor. 1, 7. 2. Cor. 7, 4. 5. 6. 7.; I gaue them power to perseuere Phil. 1, 12. 13. 14. Phili. 2, 30., and crowned their patience 2. Tim. 2, verse. 12. Reu. 2, 26.; I knowe both the first and the last Mat. 19, 30; I loue al men most wonderfulie Mat. 5, 45. 1. Tim 2, 4.; I am to be praised in al my saintes Psa. 148, 1. 2, &c. Psal. 150, 1. 2, &c. and in each of them honored and glorified, who haue so gloriouslie exalted such as I did predestinate Rom. 8, 30 Ephes. 1, 4. 5., and that without anie merites at al which they had done 2. Tim. 1, 9.
               Therefore who so despiseth euen the least of my seruants, doth not honor the great Mat. 10, 40 Mat. 18, 10. Matt. 25, 45. Luk. 10, 16.. Because I haue made the smal as wel as the great; so that he who derogates from anie of the saincts, derogates from me, and from al the partakers of the celestial kingdome.
               For al are one through the band of loue, they al thinke one thing, they minde one thing, and they loue al as one Ro. 12, 4..
               Yea, which is far more strange, they loue me more than themselues, or anie merites of their owne Exo. 32, 32. For

being rauished aboue themselues, & carried awaie frō al selfe-loue, they proceede wholie into the loue of me, so that nothing can either turne them awaie, or keepe them downe Rom. 5, 3. 4. 5. Rom. 8, 35. 36.. For being ful of eternal truth, they burne with y• fire of loue vnquenchable.
               Let therefore carnal, and fleshlie men, who know nothing but how to loue their priuate ioies 1. Co. 13, 5., surcesse from prating about the state of the godlie 1. Cor. 2, verse. 14.. For they ad vnto, and diminish from their praises according as in affection they are inclined, not as pleaseth the eternal truth.
               Manie are ignorant; but they especialie, who being smalie inlightened, can seldome loue anie man with a perfect spiritual affection of loue 1. Ioh. 2, 9. 10, &c..
               Some through natural and humane affection are inclined toward these men and toward those: and as they thinke of earthlie, so they iudge of heauenlie things Wisd. 9, 13 14. 15. Iohn. 8, 15. Iohn. 3, 3. 4. 5..
               But vnspeakeable is the difference betweene those things which vnperfect men do dreame of, and betwene that which men spiritualie inlightened from aboue 2. Tim. 3, verse. 16. 2. Pet. 1, 21. do behold Mat. 13, 11. Iohn. 8, 23. 2. Cor. 2, 14. 15. 16..
               Therefore my sonne, wade not curiouslie

in those matters, which passe the reach of thy wit Eccl. 3, 22. 23. 24.: but bend thy whole studie, that thou maist be found the least in the kingdome of God Matth. 5, 3..
               Now in case a man knew who were either more holie for zeale, or in place more honorable than the rest in the kingdome of heauen, what good would that knowledge bring him, but onlie to make him the more humble in my sight thereby Eccles. 1, verse. 13., and to breake the oftener into the praise of my Name!
               He pleaseth God better that thinketh how great his sinnes, and how litle his virtues are Mat. 18, 1. 2., and how far he is from the perfection of godlie men, than he doth which disputeth about the highnes & basenes of the saincts of God.
               They glorie not of their owne merites, in asmuch as they ascribe no goodnes to themselues, but confesse that whatsoeuer they haue commeth fro me 1. Cor. 4, 6 7. who haue giuen them al things Iam. 1, 17. of mine infinite mercie and loue.
               And they for their partes are filled with such fulnes of the Godhed, and ioie Psa. 16, 11. Ioh. 16, 22. 33., that they lack no glorie, nor

felicitie at al.
               The saincts the more brighter in glorie, the more humble are they 2. Cor. 12, verse. 4. 5. 10., and the nigher and deerer to me. Therefore shal you finde it written, that they cast their crownes before the throne of God Reu. 4, 10. 11., and, with faces toward ye ground before the lambe Reuel. 5, 8. 12. 13., worshipped him who liueth for euer and euer.
               Manie reason who is greatest in the kingdome of God Mat. 18, 1. Mark. 9, 34. Luke. 9, 46., which neuer recken whether they be themselues to be counted in the nomber of ye least.
               In heauen to be euen the least is a great thing, where al be great: For al both shalbe called Matt. 5, 9. Matth 6, 9. and are Mat. 13, 38 Matt. 25, 34. the children of God.
               He that is least shal become as a thousand Esa. 60, 22; and he that is an hundred yeeres old being a sinner shal die as a yong man Esa. 65, 20.
               For when the disciples demanded who in ye kingdome of heauen should be greatest, they had this answere made them Matt. 18, 3.: Except ye be conuerted, and become as litle children, ye shal not enter into the kingdome of heauen. Whosoeuer therefore shal4. humble himselfe as this litle childe, the same is the greatest in the kingdome

of heauen.
               Wo then to them who disdaine to humble themselues with litle ones. For the gate of the kingdome of heauen is too lowe for them to enter in thereat Mat. 7, 13.. Wo also to the rich Luk. 6, 24., who haue their comforts in this worlde. For they shal stand howling without Matt. 25, verse. 41. Luk. 16, 23. 24., when the poore are entered into the kingdome of God.
               But ye meeke ones Matth. 11, verse. 29. reioice; and be glad yee poore. For yours is the kingdome of God Matth. 5, 3, obeieng or walking in the truth.
            
            
               
                  Chap. 65. That al our trust, and confidence must be fixed on God alone.
               
               
                  SERVANT.
                  
                     O My Lord, wherein is mine hope fixed in this life? or what is my greatest comfort of al things which are anie where vnder the coape of heauen? Is it thou, my Lord and God, whose mercie is infinite Psa. 100, 5. Psa. 103, 11. Lam. 3, 22. 23. Ecclus. 18, 3 4. 5.?
                  When was it with me either wel if thou wert absent; or il, if thou wert present Ps. 104, 27 28. 29.?
                  Doubtles I would choose to be rather

poore for thee Matt. 5, 3., than rich without thee Luk. 6, 24. Luk. 16, 24.: and rather with thee to be a pilgrime on earth Luk. 9, 58., than without thee to possesse heauen Esai. 14, 12.
                  Where thou art, there is heauen Psal. 11, 4.; where thou art not, there is hel, and destruction Ps. 104, 29..
                  Thou alone art the thing which I desire Ps. 119, 174 Psalm. 42, 1.; therefore neede haue I to sigh, to crie, to praie vnto thee Ps. 50, 15. Psal. 120, 1..
                  Finalie I can trust none, that can dulie assist me in my trobles, but thee alone my God: thou art mine hope Psal. 18, 1. 2., thou art my confidence, thou art my comforter, in al things most faithful.
                  Al men seeke their owne Phil. 2, 4.: but thou desirest naught but my welfare and profit Eze. 18, 31 32.; and turnest al things for me to good.
                  In that thou laiest me open to tentations and trobles, it is altogether for my profit Ps. 119, 67 71.. For thy woont is a thousand waies to trie such as thou louest Wisd. 3, 5. 6. Iob. 7, 18. Exo. 20, 18. 19. 20. Deut. 13, 1. 2. 3. Heb. 12, 3. 4. 5. Acts, 14, 22. In which trial thou oughtest no lesse to be loued, and praised, than if thou did est replenish me with al celestial comforts Rom. 8, 35 36, &c..
                  Wherefore in thee, my Lord and GOD, I place al mine hope, and confidence Psal. 31, 1. Psalm. 71, 1.; on thee doo I laie al

my calamities and trobles Psal. 61, 2. Psal. 62, 7.. For without thee whatsoeuer I behold is al fraile and transitorie Ps. 102, 24. 25. 26. 27. Malach. 3, 6. Heb. 1, 10. 11. 12..
                  For neither can freends profit Psa. 118, 8. 9.; nor strong men, helpe 2. Mac. 15, verse. 25. 26. 27. Ps. 33. 16, 17; nor wise men, counsel wel Psal. 2, 1. 2. 3. 4.; nor learned bookes, comfort 1. Co. 1, 20; nor riches, saue Luk. 16, 24; nor secret place, hide Ps. 127, 1.; vnles thou be present, and helpe, strengthen, comfort, instruct and keepe.
                  For whatsoeuer seemes to belong to the attainement of peace and felicitie, without thee is nothing, and brings in deede no felicitie at al Ps. 104, 29. Hos. 13, 10. 11..
                  So that thou art the cheefest end 1. Cor. 15, verse. 28., the perfection of life, and the profoundnes of speech; in thee to trust aboue al things is the chiefest comfort of thy seruants.
                  On thee doo I looke Psal. 25, 1.; in thee doo I trust Psal. 31, 1. Psal. 71, 1., O my God, and Father of mercie 2. Cor. 1, 3.
                  Blesse, make my soule holie with celestial happines, that it may be thy sacred habitation, and seate of eternal glorie, a temple pure from al filthines 1. Co. 3, 16. 17. 1. Cor. 6, 19 20., which maie offend the eies of thy Maiestie.
                  O Lord, according to the greatnes of thy mercie, and according to the multitude of thy compassions Psal. 51, 1. looke

vpon me; and heare the supplication of thy poore seruant Psal. 34, 6., liuing far off a banished man in a sauadge contrie Gen. 47, 9. Heb. 11, 13. 14. 15. 16..
                  Protect, and keepe the soule of thy poore seruant Psal. 71, 3. among so manie dangers of this mortal life; and bring me by the conduction of thy fauor into the contrie of eternal glorie Reu. 21, 23 through the waie of peace Luk. 1, 79.,
               
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  1. Tim. 1, 17. Now vnto the King euerlasting, immortal, inuisible, vnto God onlie wise, be honor, and glorie for euer and euer, Amen.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            Faultes escaped in the Printing.
            
            
               
                  
                     Pag.
                     Line.
                     Fault.
                     Correction.
                  
                  
                     59
                     23
                     laie
                     laied
                  
                  
                     189
                     23
                     gaine, it is
                     gaue, it was
                  
                  
                     262
                     24
                     coute
                     couet
                  
                  
                     264
                      
                     Chap. 92.
                     Chap. 62.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            Certaine special praiers contained in this Booke.
            
            
               Vse, if thou wilt
               1. Praise God for his benefits, in the third booke.

                     chap. 6, page. 121.
                     chap. 10, page. 133.
                     chap. 12, page. 137.
                     chap. 40, page. 198.
                     chap. 47, page. 213.
                  
               
               2. Confesse thine owne wickednes & Gods righteousnes, in ye third booke.

                     ch. 16. p. 147.
                     ch. 23, p. 160.
                  
               
               3. Praie vnto God,
For
                     a quiet conscience, p. 178.
                     grace to cal the benefits of God into mind, in the third booke, chap. 25, pag. 167.
                     grace to contemne the world, pag. 209.
                     grace to doe the wil of God, in ye 1. booke, cha. 19, p. 37. booke 3. chap. 18, pag. 151, 154.
                     grace to hope in God, & to loue him aboue al things. booke 3, ch. 24, pag. 163.
                     Gods heauenlie comfort▪ page. 153, 247.
                     deliuerance out of troble, in the third booke,

cha. 35, pag. 185. ch. 51, pag. 220.
                     happines euerlasting. ch. 54, pag. 230.
                     instruction spirituall, pa. 111.
                     true knowledge, & zeale. pag. 116.
                     the mercie of God, cha. 65. page. 276.
                     patience in trobles, pag. 159, 226, 240, 263.
                     a pure mind, pag. 183.
                     a quiet conscience, p. 178.
                     spiritual instruction, pag. 111.
                     to haue thine vnderstanding opened, pa. 173.
                     zeale, pag. 116.
                  
               
               to auoid

                     euil thoughts, pag. 172.
                     sinne, pag. 155.
                     vaine glorie, pag. 210.
                     tentation, pag. 258.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
               This discourse is diuided into three parts or Bookes, the first whereof hath 25. Chapters, whose contents be these.
               
               
                  Chap. 1 THat al worldly things are vain, and to be contemned. Page. 1.
               
                  Chap. 2 Against vaine glorie in spiritual things. Page. 3.
               
                  Chap. 3 Of true knowledge, or knowledge of the truth. Page. 6.
               
                  Chap. 4 Wisedome must be vsed in al our dealings. Page. 10.
               
                  Chap. 5 How to read and studie the holie Scriptures with profit. Page. 11.
               
                  Chap. 6 That inordinate, and carnal affections must be mortified. Page. 12.
               
                  Chap. 7 Against vaine hope, and vaine glorie. Page. 13.
               
                  Chap. 8 What companie is to be refrained, or folowed. Page. 15.
               
                  Chap. 9 For obedience & subiection. Page. 16.
               
                  Chap. 10 Against idle meetings, and vaine talke. Page. 18
               
                  Chap. 11 How to come vnto quietnes in mind, and to a godlie life. Page. 19.
               
                  Chap. 12 Of the profit gotten by aduersitie. Page. 22.
               
                  Chap. 13 That no man either is, or hath bin without tentation; and how to suffer, and resist the same. Page. 23.
               
                  Chap. 14 Against rash iudgment. Page. 27.
               
                  
                  Chap. 15 Of the workes of charitie; & how to doo good workes. Page. 29.
               
                  Chap. 16 That men which offend must be borne withal sometime. Page. 30.
               
                  Chap. 17 The waie vnto quietnes both tē
                  poral and eternal. Page. 32.
               
                  Chap. 18 The virtuous life of the holie Fathers. Page. 33.
               
                  Chap. 19 The exercise of a true Christiā. Page. 36
               
                  Chap. 20 Of solitarines, and silence. Page. 40.
               
                  Chap. 21 Preparatiues vnto godlines. Page. 45.
               
                  Chap. 22 A viewe of the miserie of mankind. Page. 49.
               
                  Chap. 23 That man ought to thinke vpon his end. Page. 52.
               
                  Chap. 24 Of the last iudgement; and of the punishment of sinne. Page. 58.
               
                  Chap. 25 That we must earnestlie endeuor to amend our liues. Page. 63.
            
            
               The Chapters of the second Booke haue these contents.
               
                  Chap. 1 OF the inward life of man. Page. 70.
               
                  Chap. 2 Of patience and humilitie, two virtues necessarie to be in a Christian. Page. 75.
               
                  Chap. 3 That wee ought to be at peace both with our selues, and with al men. Page. 76.
               
                  
                  Chap. 4 Of purenes in mind, and plaines in meaning. Page. 79.
               
                  Chap. 5 Of the consideration of a mans selfe. Page. 80.
               
                  Chap. 6 The ioie of a good conscience. Page. 82.
               
                  Chap. 7 That our sauior Christ is to be loued aboue al things. Page. 85.
               
                  Chap. 8 Of the familiaritie with Iesus. Page. 87.
               
                  Chap. 9 Of the want of comfort. Page. 90.
               
                  Chap. 10 Of thankfulnes vnto God for his benefits. Page. 95.
               
                  Chap. 11 The smal nōber that loue Christ vnfeinedlie. Page. 98.
               
                  Chap. 12 Of patient bearing the crosse of Christ. Page. 101.
            
            
               The Chapters of the last booke, haue these contents.
               
                  Chap. 1 OF the spiritual communication betweene Christ & the faithful soule. Page. 110.
               
                  Chap. 2 That the truth speaketh inwardlie without noise of words. Page. 111.
               
                  Chap. 3 That the wordes of God with al reuerence should be heard; and that they are not vnderstood of most men. Page. 113.
               
                  Chap. 4 A praier for the attaining of the true knowledge of Gods heauenlie

wil; & for zeale in religion. Page. 116.
               
                  Chap. 5 That we must walke syncerelie, and humblie before God. Page. 118.
               
                  Chap. 6 A praier and thankes-giuing vnto God for his benefits. Page. 121.
               
                  Chap. 7 The praise and force of godlie loue. Page. 122.
               
                  Chap. 8 How to trie a friend; also how to resist the enimie. Page. 125.
               
                  Chap. 9 Of modest concealing the benefits of God. Page. 129.
               
                  Chap. 10 That man must debase himselfe in the sight of God. Page. 133.
               
                  Chap. 11 That al things are to be directed vnto God, as to the principal end. Page. 135.
               
                  Chap. 12 That it is a sweete thing to serue God, & to despise the world. Page. 137.
               
                  Chap. 13 That the desire of the mind must be examined, and bridled. Page. 140.
               
                  Chap. 14 The waie vnto patience, and to fight against fleshlie desires. Page. 142.
               
                  Chap. 15 Of obedience to our betters, after the example of Christ. Page. 145.
               
                  Chap. 16 That we are to consider the secret iudgements of God, least we waxe proud in his gifts. Page. 147.
               
                  Chap. 17 What wordes and manner wee should vse in desiring anie thing at the hands of God. Page. 149.
               
                  Chap. 18 A praier for grace to do the wil of

God. Page. 151.
               
                  Chap. 19 That the true comfort is to be sought for in God alone. Page. 152.
               
                  Chap. 20 That al our cares must be cast vpon God. Page. 154.
               
                  Chap. 21 That the trobles of this life are patientlie to be suffered after the example of our sauiour Christ. Page. 155.
               
                  Chap. 22 Of long suffering, and who is patient in deed. Page. 157.
               
                  Chap. 23 A confession of mans weakenes and miserie. Page. 160.
               
                  Chap. 24 That we must repose no confidence in anie creature, but in God alone. Page. 163.
               
                  Chap. 25 Of the continual calling into mind the infinite blessings, & benefits of God. Page. 167.
               
                  Chap. 26 Of the things in nomber foure which procure quietnes. Page. 171.
               
                  Chap. 27 A praier against euil thoughts or cogitations. Page. 172.
               
                  Chap. 28 A praier vnto almightie God to haue the eies of our vnderstanding opened. Page. 173
               
                  Chap. 29 That we ought not curiouslie to enquire how other men doe liue. page. Page. 174.
               
                  Chap. 30 Wherin the true peace, and profiting of the mind doth consist. Page. 176.
               
                  Chap. 31 In praise of a quiet, & free minde;

with an humble petition for the attaining of the same. Page. 178.
               
                  Chap. 32 That selfe-loue is the cause of perdition. Page. 181.
               
                  Chap. 33 A praier to obteine the puritie of mind, with heauenlie wisedome. page. Page. 183.
               
                  Chap. 34 Against il tongues. Page. 184.
               
                  Chap. 35 How we ought to cal vpon God, & to praise him in aduersitie. Page. 185.
               
                  Chap. 36 Of calling for Gods assistance, & of hope to recouer his fauor againe. Page. 186.
               
                  Chap. 37 That to find God, our Creator, we should forsake al things. Page. 190.
               
                  Chap. 38 That we must denie our selues, & renounce vtterlie al carnal desires. Page. 194.
               
                  Chap. 39 The mutabilitie of mans hart; & of thinking vpon God, afore al things. Page. 196.
               
                  Chap. 40 That it is a pleasure aboue al pleasures to loue God aboue al, and in al things. Page. 198.
               
                  Chap. 41 That this life is neuer sure from tentations. Page. 201.
               
                  Chap. 42 Against the vaine iudgement of men. Page. 203.
               
                  Chap. 43 That we must wholie resigne ouer our selues vnto GOD, if we mind to attaine vnto the freedom

of mind. Page. 205.
               
                  Chap. 44 Of y• right vse of outward things; and that we should flie vnto God when we are afflicted. Page. 207.
               
                  Chap. 45 That man should not be too importunate in his matters. Page. 209.
               
                  Chap. 46 That man hath nothing which good is of himselfe; neither that he should glorie of anie worldlie thing. Page. 210.
               
                  Chap. 47 That the praise of this world is to be contemned. Page. 213.
               
                  Chap. 48 That we must not rest, or depend vpon man. Page. 214.
               
                  Chap. 49 Against vaine, & worldlie knowledge. Page. 216.
               
                  Chap. 50 That we should not couet after earthlie, and outward things. Page. 218.
               
                  Chap. 51 That euerie man is not to be credited; and that by wordes we easilie offend. Page. 220.
               
                  Chap. 52 That wee ought to repose our confidence in the Lord, when we are pierced with the darts of slandering tongues. Page. 224.
               
                  Chap. 53 That for the attaining of euerlasting life, al maner trobles must be endured. Page. 227.
               
                  Chap. 54 Of the happines of the life to come; and of the miseries of this present world. Page. 230.
               
                  
                  Chap. 55 Of the desire of eternal life; and of the good things promised to such as fight. Page. 234.
               
                  Chap. 56 How a man oppressed with trobles, should yeeld himselfe to the Lords wil. Page. 240.
               
                  Chap. 57 That we are to exercise our selues with base workes, when we cannot doo the best. Page. 245.
               
                  Chap. 58 That man should think himselfe to deserue not comfort at Gods hand, but condemnation. Page. 247.
               
                  Chap. 59 Men carnalie minded find not fauor before God. Page. 250.
               
                  Chap. 60 The diuers working of Nature, and of Grace. Page. 252.
               
                  Chap. 61 Of the corruption of Nature; and power of Gods heauenlie Grace. page. Page. 258.
               
                  Chap. 62 That wee ought to denie our selues, and to imitate Christ by the c
                     •
                  osse. Page. 262.
               
                  Chap. 63 That we should take heede of despaire, though wee fal sometime. Page. 265.
               
                  Chap. 64 That high matters, and secret iudgements of God should not be searcht after. Page. 268.
               
                  Chap. 65 That al our trust, and confidence must be fixed on God alone. Page. 274.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            1580.
            
               Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the signe of the Starre, being the assigne of William 
                  •
               eres.
            
         
      
   