
      
         
            
            
            THE FOLOVVING OF
CHRIST, TRANSLATED OVT
of Latin into Engliſhe, newlie corrected
and amended.
            VVherevnto alſo is added the golden Epiſtle
of Sainct Bernarde.
            And nowe laſtelie the rules of a Chriſtian lyfe,
made by Iohn Picus the elder earle of mirādula.
            
            Anno. 1585.
Cum Priuilegio.
         
         
            
            The introduction.
            
               HEreafter foloweth a booke called in
Latin Imitatio Chriſti, that is in Engliſhe,
the folowing of Chriſte, wherein
be cōteyned foure litle bookes.
VVhich booke, as ſome men affirme,
was firſte made and compyled in Latin by the famous
Clerke maſter Iohn Gerſon, Chauncellour
of Paris. And the ſayed foure bookes be nowe of
late newly tranſlated into Engliſh in ſuch maner
as hereafter appeareth. And though three of the
firſt bookes of the ſayd foure bookes haue bene
before this time right well and deuoutlie trāſlated
into Engliſhe by a famous Clerke called
maſter VVilliam Atkinſon which was a doctour
of diuinitie, Yet for as muche as the ſayde tranſlatour
for ſome cauſe him mouinge) in diuers
places left out muche parte of ſome of the Chapters,
and ſometime varied from the letter, as
in the thirde chapter, and in the. 18 and. 19. chapters
of the firſt booke, and alſo in diuers other
chapiters of the ſayde three bookes will appeare
to them that will examine the Latin and the ſayd
firſt tranſlation together: Therefore the ſayed. 3.
bookes be eftſones trāſlated into Engliſh, in ſuch
maner as hereafter foloweth, to the intent that
they that liſt maye at their pleaſure be occupied
with the one or the other, after as their deuotion
ſhall ſtirre them when they haue ſeene thē both.
And after the ſayde three bookes foloweth the
fourth booke, which was firſt tranſlated out of
Frenche into Engliſhe, by the right noble and excellent
Princes Margaret late Counteſſe of Richmondo
and Darbye, mother vnto the noble
Prince of bleſſed memorie Kynge Henry the. 7.

father vnto our late Ioueraine Lord Kinge Henry
the. 8. And for as muche as it was tranſlated by
the ſayed noble Princes out of Frenche, it coulde
not folowe the Latin ſo nigh nor ſo directlie as
if it had bene tranſlated out of Latin. And therefore
it is nowe tranſlated out of Latin, and yet
neuertheleſſe it keepeth the ſubſtaunce and the
effect of the firſt tranſlation out of Frenche,
though ſometime it varie in wordes, as to the
Reader will appeare. And in the latter ende, after
the fourth booke, is a ſhort morall doctrine,
which is called The ſpirituall glaſſe of the ſoule.
And it is right good and profitable to euery perſon
ofte tymes to looke vpon it.
         
         
            A preface to the booke folovvinge.
            
               AMonge manye Treatiſes, which haue
bene put out both in Latin and Engliſhe,
in this perillous worlde, to
ſeduce the ſimple people, & to bring
them from the vnitie of the Catholike
Churche into peruers and abhominable errours,
there hath bene alſo in tyme paſt before
made by diuers learned and vertuous men many
good Treatiſes, which yf men woulde be ſo diligent
to looke vpon, as they are curious to looke
on the other they ſhoulde not ſo ſoone fall from
the true knowledge of Chriſtes doctrine, and the
right ſenſe of holie Scripture, whiche euer hath
bene taught by continuall ſucceſsion in his holie
Churche, of the holie ghoſt, the ſpirite of truth,
who ſhall euer remayne with it. And amonge many
of theſe good Treatiſes, there is one called,
the Imitation or folowinge of Chriſte, whiche in
my iudgement is excellent: and the more it is ſeriouſlie

and aduiſedlie reade and looked vpon,
the more it ſhall like euery Chriſtian Reader,
who will ſet his minde earneſtlie to folow Chriſt
his ſteppes. Let them proue by reading euery day
a chapter whē they haue beſt leaſure; and I doubt
not, but they ſhall finde my ſayinges true. I haue
reade it ouer very many times, and the more I
reade, the more I like it and finde profite to my
ſoule health. It teacheth the true mortification of
the fleſhe to the ſpirite, accordinge to the right
ſenſe of holie Scripture, and the doctrine of 5.
Paul. VVhich I conſideringe deſired the Queenes
highnes printer to take the paynes e
                  ••
               ſones
to imprint it, ſeeinge the other is worne awaye,
whiche was verie faultie in many places. And in
this he hath done his diligence in correction
thereof, as you ſhall well perceyue in conferring
them together. Thus fare you well in Chriſt, and
praye for them that haue taken paynes in this
behalfe.
         
         
            Hereafter folovveth the chapters.
of this preſent booke.
            
               
                  OF the Imitation or folowinge of
Chriſte, and of the deſpiſinge of
all vanities of the world.
Cap. 1. Fol. 1.
               Againſt vayne ſeculor cunning,
and of a meeke knowinge of our
ſelfe. Cap. 2. fol. 2.
               Of the teachinge of truth. cap. 3. fol. 3.
               That light credence is not to be geuen to
wordes. cap. 4. fol. 5.
               Of the reading of holy Scripture. cap. 5. fol. 6.
               Of inordinate affections. cap. 6, fo. 6.
               
                  
That vayne hope and elation of minde are
to be fled and auoyded. cap. 7. fo. 7.
               That much familiaritie is to be fled.
cap. 8. fo. 7.
               Of meeke ſubiection and obedience, and
that we ſhall gladlye folowe the counſayle of
other. cap. 9. fo. 8.
               That we ſhoulde auoyde ſuperfluite of wordes,
and the companye of worldlye lyuinge
people. cap. 10. fo. 9.
               The meanes to get peace, and of deſire to
profite in vertues. cap. 11. fo. 9.
               Of the profite of aduerſitie. cap. 12. fo. 11.
               Of temptations to be reſiſted. cap. 13. fo. 11.
               That we ſhall not iudge lightlye other
mens deedes, nor cleaue muche to our owne
will. cap. 14. fo. 14.
               Of workes done in charitie. cap. 15. fo. 14.
               Of the ſufferinge of other mens defaultes.
cap. 16. fo. 15.
               VVhat ſhoulde be the life of a true religious
perſon. cap. 17. fo. 16.
               Of the examples of holy fathers. cap. 18. fo. 17.
               Of the exerciſes of good religious perſons.
cap. 19. fo. 18.
               Of he loue of onelines & ſilēce. cap. 20. fo. 20.
               Of compunction of the hart. cap. 21. fo. 22.
               Of the conſideringe of the miſerie of mankinde
and wherein the felicitie of man ſtandeth.
cap. 22. fol. 24.
               Of the remēbraunce of death. cap. 23. fo. 26.
               Of the iudgement, and of the payne that is
ordeyned for ſinne. cap. 24. fol. 28.
               Of the feruent amending of all our lyfe, and
that we ſhall ſpeciallye take heede of our owne
ſoule health before all other. cap. 25. fo. 31.
            
            
               
               The Chapters of the ſeconde booke.
               
                  OF inward conuerſation. cap. 1. fo. 34.
               Of a meeke knowinge of our
owne defaultes. cap. 2. fo. 37.
               Howe good it is for a man to be
peacefull. cap. 3. fo. 38.
               Of a pure minde and a ſimple intent.
cap. 4. fo. 39.
               Of the knowing of our ſelues. cap. 5. fo. 39.
               Of the gladnes of a cleane conſcience.
cap. 6. fo. 40.
               Of the loue of Ieſu aboue all thinges.
cap. 7. fo. 42.
               Of the familier freendſhip of Ieſu.
cap. 8. fo. 42.
               Of the wanting of all ſolace and comforte.
cap. 9. fo. 44.
               Of yelding of thankes to God for his manyfolde
graces. cap. 10. fo. 47.
               Of the ſmall number of louers of the croſſe.
cap. 11. fo. 48.
               Of the way of the croſſe, and how profitable
pacience is in aduerſitie. cap. 12. fo. 50.
            
            
               The chapters of the thirde booke.
               
                  OF the inwarde ſpeaking of Chriſte to
a faythfull ſoule. cap. 1. fo. 54.
               Howe almightie God ſpeaketh
inwardlye to mans ſoule without
ſounde of wordes. cap. 2. fo. 55.
               That the wordes of God are to be heard
with great meekenes, and that there be but fewe
that ponder them as they ought to doe.
cap. 3. fo. 56.
               
                  
A prayer to obteyne the grace of deuotion
cap. 4. fo. 57.
               Howe we ought to be conuerſant in truth
and meekenes before God. cap. 5. fo. 58.
               Of the merucious effect of the loue of gods
cap. 6. fo. 60.
               Of the proofe of a true louer of God.
cap. 7. fo. 62.
               Howe grace is to be kept cloſe through the
vertue of mookenos. cap. 8. fo. 63.
               Howe we ſhall thinke through mekenes our
ſelfe vile and abiect in the ſight of God.
cap. 9. fo. 65.
               Howe all thinges are to be referred to God
at ende of euery worke. cap. 10. fo. 66.
               That it is ſweete and delectable to ſerue
God, and to forſake the worlde. cap. 11. fo. 67.
               That the deſires of the hart ought to be well
examined & well to be moderated. cap. 12. fo. 69.
               Howe we ſhoulde keepe patience, and continuallie
ſtriue agaynſt all concupiſcence.
cap. 13. fo. 69.
               Of the obedience of a meeke ſubiect after
the example of our Lorde Ieſu Chriſte.
cap. 14. fo. 71.
               Of the feeret and hid iudgementes of God
to be conſidered, that we be not proude of our
good deedes. cap. 15. fo. 72.
               Howe a man ſhall order him ſelfe in his deſires.
cap. 16. fo. 73.
               A prayer that the will of God be alwaye
fulfilled. cap. 17. fo. 74.
               That the verie true ſolace and comfort is in
God. cap. 18. fo. 74.
               That all our ſtudye and buſines of minde
ought to be put in God. cap. 19. fo. 75.
               
                  
That all temporall miſeries are gladlie to be
borne through the example of Chriſte.
cap. 20. fo. 76.
               Of pacient ſuffering of iniuries and wronges
and who is truelie pacient. cap. 21. fo. 77.
               Of the knowledge of our owne infirmities,
and of the miſeries of this life. cap. 22. fo. 78.
               Howe a man ſhoulde reſt in God aboue all
thinge. cap. 23. fo. 79.
               Of the remembringe of the great and manifolde
benefites of God. cap. 24. fo. 81.
               Of foure thinges that bringe peace into the
ſoule. cap. 25. fo. 83.
               A prayer agaynſt euill thoughtes.
cap. 26. fo. 83.
               A prayer for the clearinge of mans minde.
cap. 27. fo. 84.
               That it is not good to ſearche curiouſlye
an other mans life. cap. 28. fo. 85.
               In what thinge peace of hart and greateſt
profite of man ſtandeth. cap. 29. fo. 85.
               Of the libertie, excellencie, and worthines
of a free minde. cap. 30. fo. 86.
               That priuate loue moſt letteth a man from
God. cap. 31. fo. 87.
               A prayer for the purginge of mans ſoule.
and for heauenlie wiſdome, and the grace of god
to be obteyned and had. cap. 32. fo. 88.
               Agaynſt the euill ſayinge of detractours.
cap. 33. fo. 89.
               Howe almightie God is to be inwardly called
vnto in time of tribulation. cap. 34. fo. 89.
               Of the helpe of God to be aſked, and of a
full truſt to recouer through deuout prayer our
former grace. cap. 35. fo. 90.
               Howe we ſhoulde forget all creatures that

we mighte finde out creatour. cap. 36. fo. 92.
               How we ſhoulde forſake our ſelfe and thruſt
downe: all couetouſhes out of our hartes.
cap. 37. fo. 93.
               Of the vnſtablenes of mans hart, and that
our finall intent in all thinges ſhoulde be to God.
cap. 38. fo. 94.
               Howe our Lord God ſauoureth to his louer
ſwete aboue all thinges. cap. 39. fo. 95.
               That there is no full ſuretie fro temptation
in this life. cap. 40. fo. 96.
               Againſt the vaine iudgementes of man.
cap. 41. fo. 97.
               Of a pure and whole forſaking of our ſelfe
and of our owne will, that we might get the freedome
of ſpirite, and folowe the will of God.
cap. 42. fo. 98.
               Howe a man ſhall rule him ſelfe in outward
thinges, and howe he ought to call to God for
helpe in all perils and daungers. cap. 43. fo. 99.
               That a man ſhoulde not be importune in his
buſines. cap. 44. fo. 100.
               That a man hath no goodnes of him ſelfe,
and that he may not rightfully glorifie him ſelfe
in any thing. cap. 45. fo. 101.
               Howe all temporall honour is to be deſpiſed,
cap. 46. fo. 102.
               That our traſt is not to be put in worldlye
people. cap. 47. fo. 103.
               That we ſhoulde eſchewe vaine ſeculer cunning.
cap. 48. fo. 104.
               That we ſhoulde not regarde muche outwards
thinges, ne ponder but litle the iudgement of
man. cap. 49. fo. 105.
               That man he not alwaye to be beloued, for
that they ſo lightlye offende in wordes.

cap. 50. fo. 106.
               That we ſhall put all our confidence in God,
when euil wordes be ſpoken to vs. cap. 51. fo. 107
               Howe all greeuous thinges in this lyfe are
gladly to be ſuffered, for winning of the lyfe that
is to come. cap. 52. fo. 109.
               Of the day of eternitie, and of the miſeries
of this lyfe. cap. 53. fo. 110.
               Of the deſire of euerlaſtinge life, and of the
great rewarde that is promiſed to thē that ſtrongly
fight againſt ſinne. cap. 54. fo. 112.
               Howe a man that is deſolate ought to offer
him ſelfe wholly to God. cap. 55. fo 114.
               That it is good that a man geue bim ſelfe
to meeke bodelie laboures, when he feeleth not
him ſelfe diſpoſed to high workes of deuotion.
cap. 56. fo. 117.
               That a man ſhall not thinke him ſelfe worthye
to haue comfort, but rather to haue ſorowe
and payne, and of the profite of contrition.
cap. 57. fo. 117.
               That grace will not be mixte with loue of
worldlie thinges. cap. 58. fo. 119.
               Of the diuerſities and diuers motions betweene
Nature and grace. cap. 59. fo. 120.
               Of the corruption of nature, and of the worthines
of grace. cap. 60 fo. 123.
               That we ought to forſake our ſelfe, & to folowe
Chriſt by bearinge of his croſſe. cap. 61. fo. 125.
               That a man ſhall not be ouermuch caſt into
heauynes, though he happen to fall into ſome
defaultes. cap. 62. fo. 126.
               That a man ſhal not ſearche the iudgementes
of God. cap. 63. fo. 127.
               That all our hope and truſt is to be put in God
onelye. cap. 64. fo. 130.
            
            
               
               The chapters of the fourth booke.
               
                  VVith howe great reuerence Chriſte
is to be receyued. cap. 1. fo. 132.
               That the great goodnes and charitie
of God is geuen to man in this
bleſſed Sacrement. cap. 2. fo. 136.
               That it is very profitable ofte to be houſled.
cap. 3. fo. 137.
               That many commodities be geuen to them
that deuoutlye receyue this holy Sacrament.
cap. 4. fo. 139.
               Of the worthines of the Sacrament of the
Aultar, and of the ſtate of Prieſthood.
cap. 5. fo. 141.
               Of the inwarde remembraunce and exerciſe
that a man ought to haue afore the receuinge of
the bodie of Chriſte. cap. 6. fo. 142.
               Of the diſcuſsing of our owne conſcience, &
of the purpoſe of amendement. cap. 7. fo. 142.
               Of the oblation of Chriſt on the Croſſe, and
of a full forſaking of our ſelfe. cap. 8. fo. 144.
               That we ought to offer our ſelfe & all ours to
God, and to praye for all people. cap. 9. fo. 144.
               That the holye communion is not lightly to
be forborne. cap. 10. fo. 146.
               That the body of Chriſt and holy Scripture
are moſte neceſſarie for the health of mans ſoule.
cap. 11. fo. 148.
               That he that ſhall be houſled ought to prepare
him ſelfe thereto with great diligence.
cap. 12. fo. 150.
               That a deuoute ſoule ſhoulde greatlie deſire
with all his hart to be vnited to Chriſt in this
b
                     •
                  eſſed Sacrament. cap. 13. fo. 151.
               Of the burning deſire that ſome deuout perſons

haue had to the body of Chriſt. cap. 14. fo. 153.
               That the grace of deuotion is gotten through
mekenes & forſaking of our ſelfe. cap. 15. fo. 154
               That we ſhoulde open all our neceſſities to
Chriſt, and aſke his grace. cap. 16. fo. 155.
               Of the burning loue and great affection that
we ſhould haue to receyue Chriſt. cap. 19. fo. 161
               That a man ſhall not be a curious ſearcher
of this holye Sacrament, but a meeke folower of
Chriſt, ſubduing alwaye his reaſon to the fayth.
cap. 18. fo. 157.
            
            Here endeth the Table.

            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               Of the Imitation or folovving of Chriſte,
and of the deſpiſing of all vanities
of the vvorlde.
The firſte Chapter.
               
                  HE that foloweth me (ſayeth
Chriſte our Sauiour)
walketh not in darknes,
but he ſhall haue the light
of life Theſe be the words
of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt,
whereby we be admoniſhed and warned,
that we ſhall folowe his teachinges, and
his maner of lyuing, if wee will truely be
illumined, & be deliuered from all blindnes
of hearte. Let all the ſtudy of our
heart be therfore from hēceforth, to haue
our meditation wholly fixed in the lyfe,
& in the holy teachinges of Ieſus Chriſte:
for his teach inges are of more vertue, &
of more ghoſtlye ſtrength, then are the
teachinges of all Angels and Saintes.
And he that thorough grace might haue
the inner eye of his ſoule opened into the
ſoothfaſt beholdinge of the Goſpels of
Chriſte, ſhould finde in thē Manna, that
is to ſay, ſpirituall foode of the ſoule: but

it is often times ſeene, that ſome perſons
which ofte heare the Goſpelles of Chriſt,
haue litle ſweetenes therein, and that is,
for that they haue not the ſpirite of
Chriſte. VVherefore, if we will haue the
true vnderſtanding of Chriſtes Goſpels,
we muſt ſtudy to conforme our life to his
life as nigh as we can. VVhat auaileth it
a man to reaſon high ſecrete miſteries of
the Trinitie, if he lack meekenes, wherby
he diſpleaſeth the Trinitie? Truely nothinge.
For high curious reaſons make
not a man holie nor rightwiſe, but a good
lyfe maketh hym beloued with God. I
had rather feele compunction of hearte
for my ſinnes, then onely to knowe the
diffinitiō of compunctiō. If thou couldeſt
all the Bible without the booke, and alſo
the ſayinges of all Philoſophers by hart,
what ſhould it profite thee without grace
and charitie? All that is in this worlde
is vanitie, but to loue God, and onely to
ſerue him. This is the moſt noble and the
moſte excellent wiſdome that may be in
any creature, by deſpiſinge of this world
to drawe daylie neerer and neerer to the
kingedome of heauen. It is therefore a
great vanitie to labour inordinatlie for
worldly riches, which ſhortlye ſhall periſhe,
and to couet honor, or any other
inordinate pleaſures or fleſhlie delightes
in this lyfe; wherby a man after this lyfe

ſhall be ſore and greeuouſlye puniſhed.
Howe great a vanitie is it alſo to deſire
a longe life, and litle to care for a good
life: to heede thinges preſent, and not to
prouide for thinges that are to come:
to loue thinges that ſhortlie ſhall paſſe
away, and not to haſte thither where is
ioy euerlaſtinge. Alſo haue this common
prouerbe ofte in thy minde, That the eye
is not ſatiſfied nor fullye pleaſed with
the ſight of any bodilye thinge, ne the
eare with hearing: and therfore ſtudye to
withdrawe the loue of thy ſoule from all
thinges that be viſible, and turne it to
thinges that be inuiſible. For they that
folowe their ſenſualitie, hurt their owne
conſcience, and leeſe the grace of God.
            
            
               Againſt vayne ſeculer cunning, and of a
meeke knovvinge of our ſelfe.
The 2. Chapter.
               
                  EVery man naturallye deſireth
to knowe: but what
auaileth knowledge without
the dreade of God? A meeke
huſbād man that ſerueth god;
is muche more acceptable to
him, thē is a curious Philoſopher, which
conſideringe the courſe of heauen, wilfully
forgetteth him ſelfe: He that wel

knoweth him ſelfe, is vile and abiect in
his owne ſight, and hath no delight in
the vaine praiſinges of man. If I knewe
all thinges that be in this world without
charitie, what ſhould it auaile me before
God, that iudgeth euery man after his
deedes? Let vs therfore ceaſe from the
deſire of ſuche vaine knowledge: for oftē
times is founde therin great diſtruction
and deceipt of the enemy, wherby the
ſoule is muche hindred and let from the
perfect and true loue of God. They that
haue great cunninge, deſire commonly to
be ſeene, and to be holden wyſe in the
worlde, and there be many thinges, that
the knowledge of them bringe but litle
profite and fruit to the ſoule, and he is
verye vnwyſe that taketh heede to any
other thinge, then to that which ſhall
profite hym to the health of his ſoule.
VVordes feede not the ſoule, but a good
life refreſheth the minde, and a cleane
conſcience bringeth a man to a firme and
ſtable truſt in God. The more cunninge
thou haſte, if thou liue not thereafter, the
more greeuouſlie ſhalte thou therefore be
iudged, for the miſuſinge thereof. Therefore
raiſe not thy ſelfe into pride, for any
crafte or cunninge that is geuen vnto
thee, but haue therefore the more feare
and dreade in thy heart: for certayne it
is, that thou muſt hereafter yeelde therefore

the ſtrayter accompt. If thou thinke
that thou knoweſt many thinges, and
haſt great cunninge, yet knowe it for certaine,
that there be many mo things that
thou knoweſt not: and ſo thou mayeſt
not rightwiſely thinke thy ſelfe cunning,
but oughteſt rather to cōfeſſe thine ignoraunce
and vncunninge. VVhy wilt thou
preferre thy felfe in cūning before other,
ſith there be many other more excellent
and more cunning then thou, and better
learned in the law? If thou wilt any
thinge learne and knowe, profitably to
the health of thy ſoule, learne to be vnknowen,
and be glad to be holden vile &
nought, & vncunninge as thou art. The
moſt high and the moſte profitable cunninge
is this, a man to haue a ſoothfaſt
knowledge, and a full deſpiſinge of him
ſelfe. Alſo a man not to preſume of himſelfe,
but alwaye to iudge and thinke wel
and bleſſedly of other, is a ſigne & a token
of great wiſdome, and of great perfectiō
and ſinguler grace. If thou ſee any perſō
ſinne, or commit any great crime openly
before thee, yet iudge not thy ſelfe to be
better then he, for thou knoweſt not how
longe thou ſhalt perſeuer in goodnes.
VVe be all frayle: but thou ſhalt iudge no
man more frayle then thy ſelfe.
            
            
               
               Of the teaching of truth.
The .3. Chapter.
               
                  HAppye and bleſſed is that perſon
whom truth teacheth and
enformeth, not by figures, or
by deceitful voyces, but as
the truth is: our opinion and
our wit many times deceiueth vs, for
we ſee not the truth. What auayleth vs
the knowledge of ſuche thinges as ſhal
neyther helpe vs at the daye of iudgement
if we knowe them, nor hurt vs if
we know them not. It is therfore great
folly to be negligent in ſuche things as
be profitable and neceſſary to vs, and to
labour for ſuch thinges that be but curious
and damnable. Truely if we doo
ſo, we haue eyes but we ſee not. And
what auayleth vs the knowledge of the
kinde and working of creatures? truely
nothing. He to whom the euerlaſting
worde (that is Ieſus) ſpeaketh 
                     •
                  is diſcharged
of many vayne opinions, and
of that worde al thinges proceede, and
all thinges openlye ſhewe and crye, that
he is God. No man without him vnderſtādeth
the truth, ne rightfully iudgeth,
but he to whom al thinges is one,
and he that all thinges draweth into
one, aud all thinges ſetteth in one,

and deſireth nothinge but one, may
quickly be eſtabliſhed in heart, and be
fully pacifyed in God. O truth that
God art, make me one with thee in perfect
charitie, for all that I reade, heare,
or ſee without thee, is greeuous to me,
for in thee is all that I wil or maye deſire.
Let all Doctours be ſtil in thy preſence,
and let all creatures keepe them
in ſilence, and thou only Lord ſpeake to
my ſoule. The more that man is ioyned
to thee, and the more that he is gathered
together in thee, the more he vnderſtandeth
without labour high ſecrete miſteries:
for he hath receyued from aboue
the light of vnderſtanding. A cleane,
pure, and a ſtable hart is not broken ne
lightly ouercome with ghoſtely labours,
for he doeth al thing to the honour of
God: and for that he is cleerely mortifyed
to him ſelf, therfore he coueteth
to be free from folowing his owne wil.
VVhat hindereth thee more then thy
affections not fully mortifyed to the wl
of the ſpirite? truelye nothing more. A
good deuout man ſo ordereth his outwarde
buſines, that it draweth not him
to the loue of it, but that he compell it
to be obedient to the wil of the ſpirite,
& to the right iudgemēt of reaſon. VVho
hath a ſtronger battayle then he that
laboureth for to ouercome him ſelfe? and

that ſhoulde be our dayly labour & our
dayly deſire to ouercome our ſelfe, that
we may be made ſtronger in ſpirite, and
increaſe daily frō better to better. Euery
perfectiō in this life hath ſome imperfection
annexed vnto it, and there is no
knowledge in this worlde but that it is
mixt with ſome blindens of ignorance.
And therfore a meeke knowing of our
ſelfe is a more ſurer way to God; then is
the ſearching for highnes of cunning.
Cunning wel ordred is not to be blamed,
for it is good and cōmeth of God:
but a clean conſcience and a vertuous
life is muche better, & more to be deſired.
Becauſe ſome men ſtudye to haue cunning
rather then to liue well, therfore
they erre many times, and bring forth
litle good fruite or none. O if they
woulde be as buſye to auoyde ſinne, and
to plante vertues in their ſoules as they
be to moue queſtions, there ſhoulde not
be ſo many euill thinges ſeene in the
worlde, ne ſo much euil example geuen
to the people, ne yet ſo much diſſolute
liuing in religiō. At the daye of iudgement
it ſhall not be aſked of vs, what
we haue read, but what we haue done,
nor howe well we haue ſayde, but howe
religiouſly we haue liued. Tell me nowe,
where be all the great clerkes and famous
doctors, whom thou haſte wel-knowen?

when they liued, they flouriſhed
greatly in their learning, and now
other men occupy their prebendes & promotiōs,
and I can not tell whether they
think any thing on thē: in their life they
were holden great in the world, & nowe
is litle ſpeaking of thē. O howe ſhortly
paſſeth away the glorye of this world,
with al the falſe deceauable pleſures of
it? would to God their life had accorded
well with their learning, for then had
they well ſtudied and read. How many
periſhe dayly in this worlde by vayne
cunning, that care litle for a good life,
ne for the ſeruice of God. And becauſe
they deſire rather to be great in the
worlde then to be meeke, therfore they
vaniſhe awaye in their learninges as
ſmoke in the ayre. Truely he is great
that hath great charitie: and he is great
that is litle in his owne ſight, and that
ſetteth at nought all worldly honour.
And he is very wiſe, that accompteth all
worldly pleaſures as vile dounge, ſo
that he maye winne Chriſte. And that perſon
is very wel taught, that forſaketh
his owne will, and foloweth the will of
God.
            
            
               
               That light credence is not to be geuen
to vvordes.
The .4. Chapter.
               
                  IT is not good lightly to beleeue
euery worde or inſtinct
that commeth, but the thing
is aduiſedly and leaſurely to
be cōſidered & pondered, that
almightie God be not offended through
our lightnes. But alas for ſorowe,
we be ſo fraile, that we anone beleeue
of other euil, ſoner then good. But neuertheles,
perfect men be not ſo light of
credence, for they know well, that the
frayllie of man is more prone to euil thē
to good, and that it is in wordes very
vnſtable. It is therefore great wiſdome,
not to be haſtie in our deeds, ne to truſt
much in our own wits, nor lightly to
beleeue euery tale, nor to ſhewe anone
to other al that we heare or beleeue. Take
alway counſel of a wiſe man, and couet
rather to be inſtructed and ordred by
other, then to folowe thine owne inuention.
A good life maketh a man wiſe
to God, and inſtructeth him in many
things, that a ſinful man ſhal neuer
feele ne knowe. The more meeke that a
man is in him ſelfe, & the more obedient
that he is to God, the more wiſe & the
more peaceful ſhall he be in euery thing
that he ſhal haue to do.
            
            
               
               Of the readinge of holy Scripture.
The .5. Chapter.
               
                  CHaritie is to be ſought in holye
Scripture, and not eloquence,
and it ſhould be read with the
ſame ſpirite that it was firſte
made. VVe ought alſo to ſeeke
in holy Scriture, ghoſtlye profite rather
then curioſitie of ſtile, and as gladly ſhall
we reade ſimple and deuoute bookes, as
bookes of high learninge and cunninge.
Let not the authoritie of thine authour
miſlike thee, whether he were of greate
cunning or litle: but that the loue of the
verye pure truth ſtyrr thee to reade. Aſke
not who ſayde this, but take heede what
is ſayde. Men paſſe lightlye awaye, but
the truth of God euer abideth. Almightie
God ſpeaketh to vs in his Scripture
in diuers maners, without acceptinge of
perſons: but our curioſitie ofte letteth vs
in reading of Scripture, when we will
reaſon and argue thinges that we ſhould
meekely and ſimply paſſe ouer. If thou
wilt profite by readinge of Scripture,
reade meekely, ſimply, and faithfullye, &
neuer deſire to haue thereby the name of
cunning. Aſke gladlye, and heare meekely
the ſayinges of Saintes, & miſlike not
the parables of ancient fathers, for they
were not ſpoken without great cauſe.
            
            
               
               Of inordinate affections.
The 6. Chapter.
               
                  VVhen a man deſireth any
thinge inordinatelye, forthwith
he is vnquiet in him
ſelfe. The proude man, & the
couetous man neuer haue
reſt: but thee meeke man, and the poore
in ſpirite liueth in greate aboundance of
reſt & peace. A man that is not yet mortified
to himſelfe, is lightly tempted and
ouercome in lietl and ſmall temptations.
And he that is weake in ſpirite, and is
yet ſome what carnall, and inclined to
ſenſible thinges, maye hardly withdrawe
himſelfe from worldly deſires: And therfore
he hath oft greate griefe & heauines
in heart, when he withdraweth him from
them, and he diſdayneth anone, if any
man reſiſt him, and if he obteyne that he
deſireth, yet is he vnquieted with grudge
of conſcience, for he hath folowed his
paſſion which nothinge helpeth to the
getting of that peace be deſired. Then by
reſiſting of paſſions is gotten the very
true peace of heart, and not by folowing
of them. There is therfore no peace in the
heart of a earnall man, nor in the hearte
of a man that geueth him ſelfe all to outward
thinges: but in the heart of a ghoſtli

man or woman which haue their delite in
God, is founde great peace and inwarde
quietnes.
            
            
               That vayne hope and elation of mynde are
to be fled and auoyded.
The .7. Chapter.
               
                  HE is vayne that putteth his
truſt in man, or in any creature.
Be not aſhamed to ſerue
other for the loue of Ieſu
Chriſte, and to be poore in this
worlde for his ſake: truſt not thy ſelfe, but
all thy truſt ſet in God: doo that in the is
to pleaſe him, & he ſhall well helpe forth
thy good will. Truſt not in thine owne
cunning, neither in the cunning or pollicie
of any creature liuinge, but rather in
the grace of God, which helpeth meeke
perſons, and thoſe that preſume of them
ſelues, he ſuffereth to fall till they be
meeke. Glorify not thy ſelfe in thy riches,
nor in thy worldlie freends, for that they
be mightie, but let all thy glorie be in god
onelie that geueth all thinges, and that
deſireth to geue himſelfe aboue all thinges.
Exalt not thy ſelfe for the largenes
or fayrenes of bodie, for with a litle ſickenes
it may be ſoone defouled. Ioy not in
thy ſelfe for thy habilitie or readines of

wit, leaſt thou diſpleaſe God, of whoſe
gifte it is all that thou haſte. Holde not
thy ſelfe better then other, leaſt happlye
thou be thereby impaired in the ſight of
God, who knoweth all that is in man.
Be not proude of thy good deedes, for
the iudgementes of God be other then
the iudgementes of man, to whom it diſpleaſeth
ofte times, that pleaſeth man.
If thou haue any goodnes or vertue in
thee, beleeue yet that there is much more
goodnes & vertue in other, ſo that thou
maieſt alwaye keepe thee in meeknes. It
hurteth not though thou holde thy ſelfe
worſe then any other, though it be not ſo
in deede, but it hurteth much if thou preferre
thy ſelfe aboue any other, be he neuer
ſo great a ſinner. Great peace is with
the meeke mā, but in the heart of a proud
man is alwaye enuye and indignation.
            
            
               That muche familiaritie is to be auoyded.
The .8. Chapter.
               
                  OPen not thy heart to euery
perſon, but to him that is
wiſe, ſecrete, and dreadinge
God. Be ſeldome with yonge
folkes and ſtraūgers: Harter
not riche men, and afore great men do
not lightly appeare. Accompanie thy ſelfe

with meeke perſons and ſimple in heart,
who be deuoute & of good gouernaunce,
and treate with them of things that may
edify and ſtrength the ſoule. Be not familier
to any woman, but all good women
commend to God. Couete to be familier
onelie with God and with his Angels:
but the familiaritie of man, as much as
thou mayeſt, looke thou eſchewe. Charitie
is to be had to all: but familiaritie is not
expedient. Sometime it happeneth, that
a perſon vnknowen thorough his good
fame is much commendable, whoſe preſence
after liketh vs not ſo muche. VVe
weene ſometyme with our preſence to
pleaſe other, when we rather diſpleaſe
them, through the euill maners and euil
conditions that they ſee and will conſider
in vs.
            
            
               Of meeke ſubiection and obedience, and
that vve ſhall gladly folovve the
counſayle of others.
The 9. Chapter.
               
                  IT is a great thing to be obedient,
to lyue vnder a prelate,
and in nothing to ſeeke
our owne libertie. It is much
more ſurer waye, to ſtande in
the ſtate of obedience, then in the ſtate of

prelacie. Many be vnder obedience more
of neceſſitie then of charitie, and they
haue great paine, and lightlye murmure
and grudge: and they ſhall neuer haue libertie
and freedome of ſpirite, till they
whollye ſubmit them ſelues vnto their
ſuperiour. Go here and there where thou
wilt, and thou ſhall neuer finde perfect
reſt, but in meeke obedience vnder the
gouernance of thy prelate. The imagining
and chaunging of place hath deceaued
many a religious perſon: Truth it is,
that euery man is diſpoſed to doe after
his owne will, and beſt can agree with
them that folowe his wayes. But if we
will that God be amonge vs, we muſt
ſometime leue our owne will, though it
ſeeme good, that we may haue loue and
peace with other. VVho is ſo wiſe that he
can fully knowe all thinges? truely none.
Therefore truſt not to muche to thyne
owne witt, but heare gladlye the counſayle
of other. And if percaſe the thinge
which thou wouldeſt haue done be good
and profitable, and yet neuerthleſſe thou
leaueſt thine owne will therein, and foloweſt
other, thou ſhalt finde much profite
therby. I haue often times heare ſay,
that it is the more ſurer waye to heare
and take counſell, then it is to geue it. It
is good to heare euerie mans counſel, but
not to agree, when reaſon requireth, it is

a ſigne of a great ſingularitie of minde,
and of much inward pride.
            
            
               That vve ſhoulde auoyde ſuperfluitie of vvordes,
and the company of vvorldly
liuinge people.
The .10. Chapter.
               
                  FLee the company of wordly
liuinge people as much as
thou maieſt: for the treatinge
of wordlie matters
letteth greatlie the feruour
of ſpirite: though it be done
with a good intent, we be anone deceiued
with vanitie of the world, and in maner
are made as thral vnto it, if we take not
good heede. I would I had helde my
peace many times when I haue ſpoken,
and that I had not beene ſo much amōge
worldly company as I haue beene. But
why are we ſo glad to ſpeake and commen
together, ſith we ſo ſeldome depart
without ſome hurt of conſcience? This is
the cauſe, By our comminge together we
thinke to comforte eche other, and to refreſhe
our hearts when we be troubled
with vaine imaginations, and we ſpeake
moſte gladly of ſuch thinges as we moſte
loue, or els of thinges that be moſte contracious
vnto vs. But alas for ſorowe▪
                  
all is vaine that we doo: for this outward
comfort is no litle hinderance of
the true inward comfort that commeth
of God. Therfore it is neceſſarie, that we
watche and pray, that the time paſſe not
away from vs in ydlenes. If it be lawfull
and expedient to ſpeake, ſpeake then of
God, and of ſuche thinges as are to the
edifyinge of thy ſoule, or of thy neighbours.
An euill vſe, and a uegligence of
our ghoſtly profite, maketh vs oftē times
to take litle heede how we ſhould ſpeake.
Neuerthleſſe, ſometime it helpeth right
much to the health of the ſoule, a deuout
commoning of ſpirituall thinges, ſpecially
when men of one minde and ſpirite in
God, doo meete, and ſpeake and common
together.
            
            
               The meanes to get peace, and of deſire to
profite in vertues.
The 11. Chapter.
               
                  VVe might haue much peace,
if we would not meddle
with other mens ſayinges
and doeinges that belong
not vnto vs. How may he
longe liue in peace, that
willfully will medle with other mens buſines,
and that ſeeketh occaſions abroade

in the worlde, and ſeldome or neuer gathereth
him ſelfe together in God. Bleſſed
be the true, ſimple and meeke perſons,
for they ſhal haue great plentie of
peace. VVhy haue many ſaintes bene ſo
perfectly contemplatiue, for they alway
ſtudied to mortifie thē ſelues fro worldly
deſires, that they might freely with
al the power of their hart tend to our
lord. But we be occupied with our paſſions,
and be muche buſied with tranſitory
thinges, & it is very ſeldome that
we may fully ouercome any one vice:
And we be nothing quicke to our dueties,
wherfore we remayne colde & ſlowe
to deuotion. If we were perfectly mortifyed
to the world and to the fleſhe, and
were inwardly purifyed in ſoule, we
ſhoulde anone ſauour heauēly thinges,
and ſomewhat ſhoulde we haue experience
of heauenly contemplation. The
greateſt hinderance of the heauenly cō
                  templation
is, for we are not yet cleerly
deliuered from al paſſions and concupiſcence,
ne we enforce not our ſelf to
folowe the way that holy Saints haue
gone before vs: but when any litle aduerſitie
commeth to vs, we be anone caſt
downe therin, and turne vs ouer ſoone
to ſeeke mans cōfort. But if we woulde,
as ſtrong men, and as mightie champiōs
fight ſtrongly in this ghoſtlye battayle,

we ſhoulde vndoubtedlye ſee the helpe
of God come in our neede: for he is alway
redy to helpe al them that truſt in
him, and he procureth occaſions of ſuche
battayle, to thende we ſhould ouercome
and haue the victorye, and in the ende
to haue the greater reward therfore. If
we ſet the ende and perfection of our religion
in theſe outward obſeruaunces,
our deuotiō ſhal ſoone be ended. VVherfore
we muſt ſet our axe depe to the
roote of the tree, that we (purged frō al
paſſiōs,) may haue a quiet minde. If we
wold euery yeare ouercome one vice, we
ſhould anone come to perfection: But I
feare rather, that contrariwiſe we were
better and more pure in the beginning
of our conuerſiō, then we be many yeres
after we were cōuerted. Our feruor and
deſire to vertue ſhould dayly increaſe in
vs, as we increaſe in age: But it is now
thought a great thing, if we may holde a
litle ſparcle of the feruor that we had
fyrſt: but if we would at the beginning
break the euil inclination that we haue
to our ſelfe and to our owne wil, we
ſhould after doo vertuous workes eaſily,
and with great gladnes of heart. It is
an harde thing to leaue euil cuſtomes,
but it is more hard to breake our owne
wil, but it is moſt harde, euermore to lye
in payne, and endieſſye to loſe the ioyes

of heauen If thou ouercome not ſmall
thinges and light, howe ſhalt thou then
ouercome the greater? Refiſt therefore
quickelie in the beginninge thy euill inclinations,
and leaue of whollie all thine
euill cuſtomes, leaſt happlie by litle and
litle they bringe the after to greater difficultie.
O if thou wouldeſt conſider how
great inwarde peace thou ſhouldeſt haue
thy ſelfe, and how great gladnes thou
ſhouldeſt cauſe in other, in behauinge of
thy ſelfe well, I ſuppoſe verilye thou
wouldeſt be much more diligent to profite
in vertue, then thou haſte bene before
this time.
            
            
               Of the profite of aduerſitie.
The .12. Chapter.
               
                  IT is good, that we haue ſometime
griefes and aduerſities:
for they driue a man to beholde
him ſelfe, and to ſee, that he is
here but as in an exile, and be
learned therby to know, that he ought
not to put his truſt in any worldly thing.
It is good alſo, that we ſuffer ſometime
contradiction, and that we be holden of
other as euill and wretched, and ſinfull,
though we doo well and intend well:
far ſuch thinges helpe vs to meekenes,

and mightilye defende vs from vayne
glorie & pride. VVe take God the better
to be our iudge and witnes, when we be
outwardlie deſpiſed in the worlde, and
that the worlde iudgeth not well of vs.
Therefore a man ought to ſettle him ſelfe
ſo fullie in God, that what aduerſitie ſo
euer befall vnto him, he ſhall not nede to
ſeke any outward cōfort. VVhen a good
mā is troubled or tēpted, or is inquieted
with euill thoughtes, then he vnderſtā
                  deth
& knoweth that God is moſt neceſſarie
to him, & that he may nothinge doo
that is good without him, Then he ſoroweth,
waileth & prayeth for the miſeries
that he rightfully ſuffereth: Thē it yrketh
him alſo the wretchednes of this life, & he
coueteth to be diſſolued frō this bodie of
death, & to be with Chriſt. And thē alſo he
ſeeth well, that there may be no ful peace
nor perfect quietnes here in this world.
            
            
               Of temptations to be reſiſted.
The 13. Chapter.
               
                  AS longe as we liue ī this world
we may not be fully without
temptation. For as Iob ſayth,
temptation is the life of man
vpon earth, therefore euery
man ſhould beware well againſt his tēptations,

and watche in prayers that
the ghoſtly enemy finde not time & place
to deceiue him, which neuer ſleepeth, but
alwaye goeth about, ſeekinge whom he
may deuoure. There is no man ſo perfect
nor ſo holye in this worlde, that he ſometime
hath not temptations. And we may
not fully be without thē: for though they
be for the time verye greeuous and painfull,
yet if they be reſiſted, they be verye
profitable: for a man by experiēce of ſuch
temptations is made more meeke, and is
alſo purged & informed in diuers maner,
which he ſhould neuer haue knowen, but
by experience of ſuche temptations. All
bleſſed Sainctes that nowe be crowned
in heauē, grewe and profited by temptations
and tribulations, and thoſe that
coulde not well beare temptations, but
were finallye ouercome, be taken perpetuall
priſoners in hell. There is no order
ſo holy, ne no place ſo ſecrete, that is fully
without temptatiō, and there is no man
that is fully free from it here in this life:
for in our corrupt body we beare the matter
whereby we be tempted, that is, our
inordinate concupiſcence, wherein we
were borne. As one temptation goeth,
another commeth, and ſo we ſhall alway
haue ſomewhat to ſuffer: and the cauſe
is, for we haue loſt our innocencie. Many
folke ſeeke to flee temptation, and they

fall the more greeuouſlie into it: For by
onely fleeing we may not haue victory,
but by meekenes & patience we be made
ſtronger then al our enemies. He that
only flieth the outward occaſiòns, and
cutteth not away the inordinate deſires
hid inwardly in the heart, ſhal litle profite,
and temptations ſhal lightly come
to him againe, and greeue him more then
they did fyrſte, by litle and litle with patience
and ſufferaunce, & with the helpe
of God, thou ſhal ſooner ouercome temptations
then with thine owne ſtrength
and importunitie. In thy temptation it
is good that thou ofte aſke counſayle, &
that thou be not rigorous to no perſon
that is tempted: but be glad to comfort
him, as thou wouldeſt be comforted. The
beginning of all euil temptatiōs is incō
                  ſtancie
of mind, & to litle a truſt in God.
For as a ſhip without guide is driuen
hither and thither with euery ſtorme, ſo
an vnſtable man that anone leaueth his
good purpoſe in God, is diuerſlye tempted.
The fyre proueth gold, and temptation
proueth the righteous man. VVe
know not many times what we can
ſuffer, but temptation ſheweth plainely
what we are, and what vertue is in vs.
It is neceſſary in the beginning of euery
temptation to be wel ware, for then
the enemy is ſoone ouercome, if he be

not ſuffered to enter into the heart, but
that he be reſiſted and ſhut out aſſoone as
he proffereth to enter: For as a bodily medicine
is verie late miniſtred, when the
ſickenes hath bene ſuffred to increaſe by
longe continuance: ſo is it of temptation.
Firſte commeth to the minde an vncleane
thought, and after foloweth a ſtronge
imagination, and then delectation and
diuers euill motions, and in the ende foloweth
a full aſſent, and ſo by litle & litle
the enemy hath ful entrie, for he was not
wiſely reſiſted in the beginninge: and the
more ſlowe that a man is in reſiſting, the
more weake he is to reſiſt, & the enemye
is daylie the more ſtronger againſt him.
Some perſons haue their greateſt temptations
in the beginninge of their conuerſion,
ſome in the ende, and ſome in
maner all their lyfe tyme be troubled
therewith, and there be many that be but
lightlie tempted, and all this commeth of
the great wiſedome and righteouſnes of
God, which knoweth the ſtate & merite
of euery perſon, & ordeineth all thinges
for the beſt, and to the euerlaſtinge health
and ſaluation of his elect & choſen people.
Therefore we ſhal not diſpayre when
we be tempted, but ſhall the more feruētlye
praye vnto God, that he of his infinite
goodnes and fatherlie pitie vouchefaſe
to helpe vs in euery ende, and that
he, (according to the ſayinge of S Pauie)

ſo preuent vs with his grace in euerye
temptation, that we may be able to ſuſtayne.
Let vs then meeken our ſoules
vnder the ſtronge hand of allmyghtie
God, for he will ſaue all them, and exalt
all them that be here meeke and lowly
in ſpirite. In temptations and tribulatiōs
a man is proued howe much he hath
profited, and his merite is thereby the
greater before God, and his vertues are
the more openlie ſhewed. It is no great
meruaile if a man be feruent and deuoute
when he feeleth no griefe: but if he can
ſuffer patientlie in time of temptation or
other aduerſitie, and therewithall can
alſo ſtirre himſelfe to feruour of ſpirite,
it is a token, that he ſhall greatly profite
hereafter in vertue and grace. Some perſons
be kept from many great temptations,
and yet daylie they be ouercome
through litle and ſmall occaſions, and
that is of the great goodnes and ſufferance
of God to keepe them in meeknes,
that they ſhall not truſt ne preſume
of them ſelues, that ſee them ſelues
ſo lightlye, and in ſo
lytle thinges daylie
ouercome.
            
            
               
               That vve ſhall not iudge lightly other
mens deedes, nor cleaue much to
our ovvne vvill.
The 14. Chapter.
               
                  HAue alwaye a good eye to thy
ſelfe, and beware thou iudge
not lightlye other men. In iudging
other men a man ofte laboureth
in vaine, ofte erreth, and lightly
offendeth God: but in iudging him ſelfe
and his owne deedes, he alwayes laboreth
fruitfully, and to his ghoſtly profite.
VVe iudge oftentimes after our owne
hart and affections, & not after the truth:
for we ofte loſe the true iudgmēt through
our priuate loue. But if God were alwaye
the whole intent of our deſire, we ſhould
not ſo lightly erre in our iudgementes,
nor ſo lightly be troubled, for that we be
reſiſted of our will. But commonly there
is in vs ſome inward inclinatiō, or ſome
outward affection, that draweth our
heart with them from the true iudgemēt.
Many perſōs through a ſecrete loue that
they haue to their ſelfe, worke vndiſcretelye
after their owne will, & not after the
will of God, and yet they weene not ſo:
and they ſeeme to ſtand in great inwarde
peace when thinges folowe after their
minde, but if it folowe otherwiſe then
they would, anone they be moued with

impatiente, and be right heauy and penſife.
By diuerſities of opinions be ſprong
many times diſſentions betwene frendes
and neighboures, and alſo betweene
religious and deuoute perſons. An olde
cuſtome is hardly broken, & no man will
lightly be remoued from his owne will:
but yf thou cleaue more to thine owne
will or to thine owne reaſon, then to the
meeke obedience of Ieſus Chriſte, it will
be long or thou be a man illumined with
grace. For almightie God will, that we be
perfectlie ſubiect and obedient to him, &
that we aſcend and riſe high aboue our
owne will, and aboue our owne reaſon,
by a greate brenning loue, and a whole
deſire to him.
            
            
               Of vvorkes done in charitie.
The 15. Chapter.
               
                  FOr nothing in the world, nor
for the loue of any creature, is
euill to be done, but ſometime
for the neede and comfort of
our neighbour a good deede
may be deferred, or be turned into another
good deede, for thereby the good
deede is not deſtroyed, but is chaunged
into better. VVithout charitie the outwarde
deede is litle to be prayſed: but
whatſoeuer is done of charitie, be it neuer

ſo litle, or neuer ſo deſpiſable in ſight
of the worlde, it is right profitable before
God, who iudgeth all thing after the intent
of the doer, & not after the greatnes
or worthines of the deede. He doth much
that much loueth God, & he doth much
that doeth his deede well, and he doeth
his deede well, that doth it rather for the
comminaltie then for his owne will. A
deede ſometime ſeemeth to be done of
charitie and of loue to God, when it is
rather done of carnalitie, and of a fleſhly
loue, then of a charitable loue: for cōmonlie
ſome carnall inclinatiō to our frēdes,
or ſome inordinate loue to our ſelfe, or
ſome hope of a temperall reward, or a deſire
of ſome other profite, moueth vs to
doe the deede, and not the pure loue of
charitie. Charitie ſeeketh not him ſelfe in
that he doth, but he deſireth to doe onlie
that, which ſhalbe honour and prayſinge
to God. He enuieth no man, for he loueth
no priuate loue, neither wil he ioy in him
ſelfe, but he couereth aboue all thinges to
be bleſſed in God. He knoweth well, that
no goodnes beginneth originallie of mā,
and therefore he referreth all goodnes to
God, of whom all thinges proceede, and
in whom all bleſſed Saintes doe reſt in
euerlaſting fruition. Oh, he that had but
a lytle ſparkle of this perfect charitie,
ſhould feele ſooth faſtlie in his ſoule, that
all earthlie thinges be full of vanitie.
            
            
               
               Of the ſuffering of other mens defaultes.
The .16. Chapter.
               
                  SVche defaultes as we can
not amende in our ſelues
nor in other, we muſt patientlye
ſuffer, til our Lord
of his goodnes wil other
wiſe diſpoſe. And we ſhall
thinke, that happlye it is ſo beſt for to
be for prouinge of our patience, without
which our merites are but litle to be pō
                  dred.
Neuertheleſſe, thou ſhalte pray
hartilye for ſuch impedimētes, that our
Lorde of his great mercye and goodnes
vouchſafe to helpe vs, that we may patientlye
beare them. If thou admoniſhe
any perſon once or twiſe, and he will not
take it, ſtriue not ouermuche with him,
but commit al to God, that his wil be
done, and his honour in al his ſeruauntes,
for he can wel by his goodnes turne
euil into good. Study alway, that thou
maieſt be patient in ſuffering of other
mens defaultes, for thou haſte many
thinges in thee, that other doe ſuffer of
thee: and if thou canſte not make thy
ſelfe to be as thou wouldeſt, how mayeſt
thou then looke to haue another to be
ordered in al thinges after thy wil? VVe
woulde gladlye haue other perfect, but
wil not amēde our owne defaultes. VVe
would that other ſhould be ſtraitly corrected

for their offences, but we will
not be corrected. It miſliketh vs, that
other haue libertie, but we will not
be denyed of that we aſke. VVe wolde
alſo, that other ſhould be reſtrained according
to the ſtatutes, but we in no wiſe
wilbe reſtrayned. Thus it appeareth euidentlye,
that we ſeldome ponder our
neighbour, as we doe our ſelfe. If al men
were perfect, what had we then to ſuffer
of our neighbours for God? Therfore
God hath ſo ordeyned, that one of vs
ſhal learne to beare anothers burden: for
in this world no man is without default,
no man without burden, no man
ſufficiente to him ſelfe, nor no man wiſe
ynough of him ſelfe. VVherefore it behoueth
eche one of vs to beare the burden
of other, to comfort other, to helpe
other, to enforme other, and to inſtruct
and admoniſh other in all charitie: who
is of moſt vertue, appeareth beſte in time
of aduerſitie. Occaſions make not a man
frayle, but they ſhewe openly what he is.
            
            
               VVhat ſholde be the life of a true religious
perſon.
The .17. Chapter.
               
                  IT be hooueth thee to breake thine
owne wil in many thinges, if
thou wilte haue peace and concorde
with other. It is no litle

thing to be in monaſteries or in congregations,
and to continue there without
complayning or miſſaying, & faithfully
to perſeuer there vnto the ende: Bleſſed
are they that there liue well, and make a
good ende. If thou wilt ſtand ſurely in
grace, and muche profite in vertue, holde
thy ſelfe as an outlaw, and as a pilgrime
here in this life, and be glad (for the
loue of God) to be holden as a foole, and
as a vile perſon in the worlde, as thou
art. The habite and tonſure helpe litle,
but the chaunging of life, and the mortifying
of paſſiōs make a perſon perfect
and true religious. He that ſeeketh any
other thing in religion, then purely god,
and the health of his ſoule, ſhal finde
nothing there but trouble and ſorowe,
and he may not lōg ſtand there in peace
and quietnes that laboreth not to be
leaſt and ſubiect to all. It is good therfore
that thou remember ofte, that thou
camſte to religion to ſerue, and not to be
ſerued, and that thou art called thither
to ſuffer and to labour, & not to be ydle,
or to tel vayn tales. In religion a man
ſhal be proued as gold in a fornace,
and no man may ſtand long
there in grace and vertue,
but he wil with al his
heart meeke him ſelfe
for the loue
of God.
            
            
               
               Of the examples of holy fathers.
The .18. Chapter.
               
                  BEholde the liuely examples
of holy fathers and bleſſed
Saintes, in whom flouriſhed
and ſhined all true perfection
of life and perfecte religion.
And thou ſhalt ſee howe litle it is, and
welnigh as nothing, that we doe nowe
in theſe dayes, in compariſon of them: O
what is our life, if it be to them cōpared?
They ſerued our Lorde in hunger and
thirſte, in heate & in colde, in nakednes,
in laboure and in werines, in vigiles and
faſtinges, in prayers, & in holy meditations,
in perſecutions, and in many reproufes.
O how manye, and howe greeuous
tribulations ſuffered the Apoſtles,
Martyrs, Confeſſours, virgins, & other
holy Saintes, that would folowe the
ſteppes of Chriſte? They refuſed honours
and all bodily pleaſures here in this life,
that they might alway haue the euerlaſting
life. O howe ſtraite and abiecte a life
led the holy fathers in wildernes? how
greeuous temptatiōs ſuffred they, howe
fierſly were they with their ghoſtly enemies
aſſailed, and how feruent prayer
offered they dailye to God? VVhat rigorous
abſtinence vſed they, howe great
zeale and feruour had they to ſpirituall

profite? how ſtrong battayle helde they
againſt all ſinne, and howe pure & whole
intent had they to God in all their deedes?
On the day they labored, & in the
night they prayed. And though they labored
on the day bodily, yet they prayed
in minde, and ſo they ſpent their time
alway fruitfullye, and thought euery
houre ſhorte for the ſeruice of God: and
for the great ſweetenes that they had in
heauenly contemplatiō, they forgot ofte
times their bodily refection. All riches,
honour, dignities, kinſemen and frendes
they renounced for the Ioue of god. They
coueted to haue nothing in the world,
& ſcarſely they would take that was neceſſary
for the bodily kinde. They were
poore in worldly goodes, but they were
riche in grace & vertue. They were needy
outwardly, but inwardly in their ſoules
they were repleniſhed with grace and
ghoſtly eōfortes. To the world they were
alienes and ſtrangers, but to God they
were right deere and familier frendes. In
the ſight of the world, and in their owne
ſight they weare vile & abiecte, but in the
ſight of God and his Saintes they were
precious, & ſingulerlye electe. In the ſhined
all perfection of vertue, true meekenes,
ſimple obedience, charitie & patiēce,
with other like vertues & gracious giftes
of God: VVherefore they profited dayly
in ſpirit, & obteyned great grace of God.

They be lefte as an exāple to al religious
perſons: and more ought their examples
to ſtirre them to deuotiō, and to profite
more and more in vertue and grace, then
the great multitude of diſſolute & ydle
perſons ſhoulde anye thing drawe them
abacke. O what feruour was in religious
perſons at the beginning of their
religion? what deuotion in prayers?
what zeale to vertue? what loue to ghoſtlye
diſcipline? and what reuerence and
meeke obedience fiouriſhed in thē vnder
the rule of their ſuperiour? Truely their
deedes yet beare witnes, that they were
holy and perfect, & ſo, mightily ſubdued
the world, and thruſte it vnder foote.
Nowe a dayes he is accōpted vertuous,
that is no offender, and that may with
patience keepe ſome litle ſparcle of that
vertue and feruor that he had firſte. But
alas for ſorowe, it is through our owne
ſlouth and negligence, and through loſing
of time, that we be ſo ſoone fallen
from our firſt feruour into ſuch a ghoſtly
weaknes and dulnes of ſpirite, that
in maner it is to tedious to vs for to
liue. But woulde to God, that the
deſire to profite in vertue ſlepte
not ſo vtterly in thee, that ſo
ofte haſte ſeene the holy
examples of bleſſed
Saintes.
            
            
               
               Of the exerciſes of a good religious perſon.
The 19. Chapter.
               
                  THe lyfe of a good religious
man ſhould ſhine in all vertue,
and be inward, as it appereth
outwarde, and that
much more inwarde: for almightie
God beholdeth the
heart. VVhom we ſhould alwaye honour
and reuerence, as if we were euer in his
bodilye preſence, and appere afore him as
Angels clene and pure, ſhining in all vertue:
we ought euery daye to renewe our
purpoſe in God, and to ſtirre our heart
do feruor and deuotiō, as though it were
the firſte daye of our conuerſion, & dayly
we ſhall pray and ſay thus: Helpe me my
Lorde Ieſu, that I may perſeuer in good
purpoſe, and in thy holy ſeruice vnto my
death, & that I may nowe this preſent
daye perfectly beginne, for it is nothinge
that I haue done in time paſt. After our
purpoſe, and after our intent ſhalbe our
reward: And though our intent be neuer
ſo good, yet it is neceſſarie, that we put
therto a good will, and a great diligence.
For if he that often times purpoſeth to
doe well and to profite in vertue, yet
fayleth in his doing, what ſhall he doe
then, who ſeldome or neuer taketh ſuch
purpoſe? Let vs intend to doe the beſt

we can, and yet our good purpoſe may
happē to be hindred and letted in diuers
maners. And our ſpeciall hinderaunce is
this, that we ſo lihgtly leaue of our good
exerciſes that we haue vſed to doe before
time: for it is ſeldome ſeene, that a good
purpoſe wilfully broken may be recouered
agayne without great ſpirituall hinderance.
The purpoſe of righteous men
dependeth in the grace of God more then
in thēſelues, or in their owne wiſedome:
for man purpoſeth, but God diſpoſeth: ne
the waye that man ſhall walke in this
worlde, is not in himſelfe, but in the grace
of God. If a good cuſtome be ſometime
left of for helpe of our neighbour, it may
ſoone be recouered: but if it be left of
through ſlouth, or through our owne
negligence, it will greatlie hinder vs, and
hardly will it be recouered agayne. Thus
it appereth, that though we incorage our
ſelues all that we can to doe well, yet it
is good that we alwaye take ſuch good
purpoſe, eſpeciallie againſt ſuch thinges
as hinder vs moſte. VVe muſt alſo make
diligent ſearche both within vs & without
vs, that we leaue nothing inordinate
vnterformed in vs, as nigh as our frailtie
may ſuffer. And if thou can not for frayltie
of thy ſelfe doe thus continual
                     •
                  ie, yet
at the leaſt, that thou doe it once on the
day, euening or morning. In the morning
thou ſhalt take a good purpoſe for that

daye folowinge, and at night thou ſhalte
diſcuſſe diligentlie, how thou haſt behaued
thee the daye before, in worde, in
deede, and in thought: for in them we
doe ofte offend God aud our neighbour.
Arme thee as Chriſtes true knyght with
meeknes and charitie, againſt all the malice
of the enemie. Refraine glotonie, and
thou ſhalt the more lightlie refrayne all
carnall deſires. Let not the ghoſtly enemy
finde thee all ylde, but that thou be readinge,
writing, prayinge deuoutlie, thinkinge,
or ſome other good labour doinge,
for the comminaltie. Bodily exerciſes are
to be done diſcretelie: for that that is profitable
to one, is ſometime hurtfull to
another: and alſo ſpirituall labours done
of denotion, are more ſure, done in priuitie,
then in open place. And thou muſt
beware, that thou be not more readie to
priuate deuotiōs, then to them, that thou
arte bounde to by duetie of thy religion.
But whē thy duetie is fulfilled, thē adde
thereto, after as thy deuotion gyueth. All
may not vſe one maner of exerciſe, but
one in one maner, another in another
maner, as they ſhall feele to be moſt profitable
to thē. Alſo, as the time requireth,
ſo diuers exerciſes are to be vſed, for one
maner of exerciſe is neceſſary on the holy
daye, another on the feriall daye: one in
time of temptation, another in time of
Peace and cōſolation: one when we haue

ſweetenes in deuotion, another, when
deuotion withdraweth. Alſo againſt principall
feaſtes we ought to be more diligēt
in good workes, and deuoutlie to call for
helpe to the bleſſed Saintes, that then be
worſhipped in the Churche of God, then
in other times, and to diſpoſe our ſelues
in like maner, as if we ſhoulde then be
taken out of this world, and be brought
into the euerlaſtinge feaſt in heauen. And
fith that bliſſe is yet differred from vs for
a time, we may well thinke, that we be
not yet readye nor worthye to come
therto. And therefore we ought to prepare
our ſelues to be more readie another
time. For as S. Luke ſaith, Bleſſed is that
ſeruaunt, whom our Lorde, when he ſhall
come at the hour of death, ſhall finde
readie: for he ſhall take him, and lifte him
vp high aboue all earthlie thinges, into
the euerlaſtinge ioye and bliſſe in the
kingdome of heauen. Amen.
            
            
               Of the loue of onelines and ſilence.
The .20. Chapter.
               
                  SEeke for a cōuenient time
to ſearche thine owne cō
                  ſcience,
and thinke ofte on
the benefites of god. Leaue
of all curious thinges, and
reade ſuch matters as ſhal
ſtirre thee to compunctiō
                  
of heart for thy ſinnes, rather then to
reade onelie for occupyinge of the time.
If thou wilt withdrawe thy ſelfe from
ſuperfluous wordes, and from vnprofitable
runninges about, and from the
hearinge of rumours and vayne tales,
thou ſhalt finde time eonuenient to be
occupied in holy meditations. The moſte
holie men and women that euer were,
fled the company of worldlie liuing men
with all their power, & choſe to ſerue god
in ſecrete of their heart: And one holye
mā ſayde: As ofte as I haue beene amōge
worldlie cōpanie, I haue departed with
leſſe feruour of ſpirite then I came: and
that we know well when we talke long,
for it is not ſo harde to keepe allwaye ſilence,
as it is, not to exceede in wordes
when we ſpeake much. It is alſo more
light to be alwaye ſolitarti at home, then
to go forth into the world, and not offēd.
Therefore he that intendeth to come to
an inwarde ſetting of his heart in God,
and to haue the grace of deuotion, muſt
with our Sauiour Chriſte. withdrawe
him from the people. No man maye ſurelie
appeace amōge the people, but he that
woulde gladlie be ſolitarie if he might:
nor no man is ſure in prelacie, but he
that would gladlie be a ſubiect: no, none
maye ſurelie commaunde, but he that
hath learned gladlie to obey: and none
ioyeth trulie, but he, whoſe heart witneſſeth,

that he hath a cleane conſcience: ne
none ſpeaketh ſurelie, but he that would
gladlie keepe ſilence, if he might. And alwaye
the ſuretie of good men and bleſſed
men hath beene in meekenes & dreade
of God. And though ſuch bleſſed men ſhined
in all vertue, yet they were not therfore
lifte vp into pride, but were therfore
the more diligent in the ſeruice of God,
and the more meeke in all their doeings.
And on the contrarywiſe, the ſuretie of
euill men riſeth of pride, and of preſumption,
and in the ende it deceaueth them.
Therefore thinke thy ſelfe neuer ſure in
this life, whether thou be religions or
ſeculer: for ofte times they that haue
beene holden in the ſight of the people
moſte perfecte, haue beene ſuffered to
fall more greeuouſlye for their preſumption.
Alſo it is muche more profitable
to many perſons that they haue ſometimes
temptations (leaſt happlye they
thinke them ſelues ouermuch ſafe, and be
thereby lift vp into pride, or run to ſeeking
of outward conſolation) then that
they be alwayes without temptations.
O how pure a conſcience ſhould he haue,
that would deſpiſe all tranſitorie ioye, &
neuer would meddle with worldlie buſines.
And what peace & inward quietnes
ſhould he haue, that would cut away frō
him all buſines of minde, and onelye to
thinke on heauenlye thinges. No man is

worthy to haue ghoſtlye cōfortes, vnleſſe
he haue fie
                     •
                   beene well exerciſed in holy
cōpunctiō. And if thou wilt haue cōpunctiō,
goe into a ſecret place, & put frō thee
all the clamorous noyſe of the worlde: for
the prophete Dauid ſaith, Let the ſorowe
for thy ſinnes be done in thy ſecrete chā
                  ber:
ī thy 
                     •
                  elle thou ſhalt finde great grace
which thou maieſt lightlye loſe without.
Thy Celle wel cōtinued, ſhal waxe ſweete
& pleaſaunt to thee, & ſhall be to thee hereafter
a right deere frende: & if it be but
euill kept, it ſhall growe verie tedious &
yrkeſome to thee. But if in the beginning
thou be ofte therein, and keepe it well in
good prayers & holy meditations, it ſhall
be after to thee a ſpeciall frende, and one
of thy moſte ſpeciall comfortes, in ſilence
and quietnes of hearte. A deuout ſoule
profiteth much, and learneth the hidde
ſentēces of Scripture, and findeth there
alſo manye ſweete teares in deuotion,
wherewith euery night ſhe waſheth her
mightilie from all filth of ſinne, that ſhe
may be ſo much the more familiar with
God, as ſhe is diſſeuered from the clamorous
noyſe of wordly buſines. Therefore,
they that for the loue of vertue
withdrawe them from their acquaintāce,
and frō their worldlie frendes, our Lord
with his aungels ſhall drawe nigh to
them, and ſhall abide with them. It is
better, that a man be ſolitarie, and well

take heede of him ſelfe, then that he doe
miracles in the world forgettinge himſelfe.
It is alſo a laudable thinge in a religious
perſon, ſeldome to goe forth, ſeldome
to ſee other, & ſeldome to be ſeene
of other. VVhy wilt thou ſee that, the
which it is not lawefull for thee to haue:
The worlde paſſeth awaye with all his
concupiſcence and deceuable pleaſures.
Thy ſenſuall appetite moueth thee to go
abrode, but when the time is paſt, what
beareſt thou home againe, but remorſe of
conſcience, and vnquietnes of hart? It is
ofte ſeene, that after a mery goinge forth
foloweth a heauy returninge, and that a
glad euentide cauſeth a heauie morning:
and ſo all fleſhly ioy entreth pleaſantlie,
but in the ende it biteth & ſlayeth. VVhat
maieſt thou ſee without thy Celle, that
thou maieſt not ſee within? Lo, heauen &
earth, and all the elementes, whereof all
earthly thinges be made: and what maieſt
thou elſewhere ſee vnder the ſunne that
may long endure? And if thou might ſee
all earthly thinges, and alſo haue all bodilie
pleaſures preſēt at once before thee,
what were it but a vaine ſight? Lyfte vp
thine eyes therfore to God in heauē, and
praye hartily, that thou maieſt haue forgeuenes
of thine offences. Leaue vayne
thinges to them that wilde vaine, & take
thou heede onelye to thoſe thinges that
our Lorde commaundeth thee. Shet faſt

the doore of thy ſoule, that is to ſaye, thy
ymagination, and keepe it warilye from
beholding of any bodilie thing as muche
as thou maieſt: and then lift vp thy mind
to thy Lorde Ieſu, and open thy heart
faithfullie to him, and abide with him in
thy Celle, for thou ſhalt not finde ſo much
peace without. If thou haddeſt not gone
forth ſo muche as thou haſte done, nor
haddeſt geuen hearinge to vaine tales,
thou ſhouldeſt haue beene in muche more
inward peace thē thou art: but foraſmuch
as it delighteth thee to heare newe thinges,
it behoueth thee therefore to ſuffer
ſometime both trouble of heart, and vnquietnes
of minde.
            
            
               Of compunction of the heart.
The .21. Chapter.
               
                  IF thou wilt any thinge profite
to the health of thy ſoule
keepe thee alwaye in the
dreade of God, and neuer
deſire to be fullie at libertie,
but keepe thee alwaye vnder
ſome wholſome diſcipline. Neuer geue
thy ſelfe to vndiſcrete mirth for no maner
of thinge, as nigh as thou mayeſt. Haue
perfect compunction, and ſorowe for thy
ſinnes, and thou ſhalt finde therby great
inwarde deuotiō. Compunction openeth
to the ſyght of the ſoule manye good

thinges, which lightnes of heart, & vaine
mirth ſoone driueth awaye. It is meruaile,
that any man can be merye in this
life, if he conſider well, howe farre he is
exiled out of his coūtrey, and how great
perill his ſoule daylie ſtandeth in: but
through lightnes of heart, and negligēce
of our defaultes, we feele not, nor we
will not feele the ſorowe of our owne
ſoule: but often times we laugh, when
we ought rather to weepe and mourne:
for there is no perfect libertie, nor true
ioye, but in the dreade of God, and in a
good conſcience. That perſon is right
happie, that hath grace to auoyde from
him all thinges that letteth him from
beholdinge of his owne ſinnes, and that
can turne him ſelfe to God by inward
compunction: and he is happie alſo that
auoideth from him all thinges that may
offend or greeue his conſcience. Fight
ſtronglie therefore againſt all ſinnes, and
dreade not ouermuch, although thou he
incumbred by an euill cuſtome, for that
euill cuſtome may be ouercome, with a
good cuſtome. And excuſe thee not, that
thou art let by other men, for if thou wilt
leaue the familiaritie with other, they
will ſuffer thee to doe thy deedes without
impediment. Meddle thee not with
other mens goodes, neither buſie thee in
great mens cauſes: haue alwaye an eye to
thy ſelfe, and diligentlie informe and admoniſhe

thy ſelfe before all other. If thou
haue not the fauour of worldlie liuinge
people, ſorowe not therfore: but let this
be thy daylie ſorowe, that thou behaueſt
not thy ſelfe in thy conuerſation, as it
beſeemeth a good religious perſon for to
doe. It is more expedient, and more profitable,
that a man ſometime lacke conſolations
in this life, the that he haue them
alwayes after his owne will, namelye,
fleſhlie conſolations. Neuerthleſſe, that
we haue not ſometime heauenly conſolations,
or that we ſo ſeldome feele them as
we doe, it is through our owne defaulte:
for we ſeeke not to haue the true compunction
of harte, nor we caſte not fullie
awaye from vs the falſe outwarde conſolatiōs.
Holde thy ſelfe therfore vnworthy
to haue any conſolation, and worthye
to haue much tribulation. VVhen a man
ſoroweth perfectlye for his ſinnes, then
all wordly cōfortes be painefull to him A
good man findeth alway matter ynough,
why he ought iuſtlie ſo ſorowe & weepe:
for if he beholde him ſelfe, or if he thinke
on his neighbour, he ſeeeth well, that
none liueth here without great miſerie,
& the more throughlie that he may conſider
him ſelfe, the more ſorow he hath. And
alwaye the matter of true ſorowe, and of
true inwarde copunction, is the remembraunce
of our ſinnes, wherein we be ſo
wrapped on euery ſide, that ſeldome we

may beholde any ghoſtly thinges. But if
we would more ofte thinke on our death,
then we doe on long lyfe, no doubt but
we ſhould more feruentlie apply our ſelfe
to amendment: and I beeleue alſo, that
if we woulde hartily remember the paines
of hell, and of purgatorie, that we
ſhoulde more gladlye ſuſtayne all labors
and ſorowes, and that we ſhoulde not
dreade anye paine in this world, wherby
we myght auoyde the paynes that are to
come. But foraſmuch as theſe things goe
not to the heart, and we yet loue the flattering
and falſe pleaſures of this worlde,
therefore we remaine colde, and voide of
deuotiō, and ofte it is through the weakenes
of the ſpirite, that the wretched
bodie ſo lightlie complaineth. Pray therfore
meekelie to our Lorde, that he of his
great goodnes geue thee the ſpirite of
compunction, and ſaye with the
prophete thus: Feede me (Lord)
with the breade of compunction,
and geue me to
drinke water of teares
in great
abundance.
            
            
               
               Of the conſideringe of the miſerie of mankinde,
and vvherein the felicitie of
man ſtandeth.
The .22. Chapter.
               
                  AVVretch thou act, whoſoeuer
thou be, witherſoeuer thou
turne thee, but if thou turne
thee to God. VVhy arte thou
ſo lightlie troubled, for that it
falleth not to thee as thou wouldeſt and
deſireſt. VVhat is he that hath all thinge
after his wil? neither thou nor I, nor any
man liuinge: for none liue here without
ſome trouble or anguiſhe, be he kyng. Or
who thinkeſt thou, is in moſte fauour
with God? truelie he that ſuffreth gladlie
moſte for God. But many perſons weake
and feeble in ſpirite, ſaye thus in their
heartes: Lo, howe good a life that man
leadeth, howe riche he is, howe mightie
he is, how high in authoritie, how great
in ſight of the people, and how faire and
beautifull in his bodily kinde: but if thou
take heede to the goodnes euerlaſtinge,
thou ſhalt well ſee, that theſe worldlye
goodes and worldly likinges are but litle
worth, and that they be more rather greuous
then pleaſaunt, for they may not
be had ne kept, but by great labour and
buſines of minde. The felicitie of man
ſtandeth not in abundance of worldlie

goodes, for the meane is beſt. And verilie,
to liue in this world is but miſerie: and
the more ghoſtlie that a man would be,
the more painfull it is to him for to liue,
for he feeleth more plainely the defaultes
of mans corruption. For why, to eate, to
drinke, to ſleepe, to wake, to reſt, to labour,
and to ſerue all other neceſſities of
the bodie, is great miſerie, and great affliction
to a deuout ſoule, which woulde
gladly be free from the bondage of ſinne,
that it might without let ſerue our Lord
in puritie of conſcience, and in cleannes
of heart. The inwarde man is greatlie
greeued through the bodilie neceſſities
in this world. VVherefore the prophete
Dauid deſired, that he might be deliuered
from ſuch neceſſities. But woe be to
them that knowe not their owne miſery,
& woe be to them that loue this wretched
and this corruptible life: for ſome loue it
ſo muche, that yf they might euer lyue
here, though they myght poorelye get
their liuinge with labour & begginge, yet
they would neuer care for the kingdome
of heauē. O madde and vnfaithfull creatures
are they, that ſo deepelie ſet their
loue in earthly things, that they haue no
feeling nor taſte but in fleſhlie pleaſures.
Truelie in the hour of death they ſhall
knowe, howe vile and howe naughtie it
was, that they ſo much loued. But holle
Saintes, and deuout folowers of Chriſt.

they did not what pleaſed the fleſhe, ne
what was pleaſaunt in the ſight of the
world, but all their whole intent and deſire
they helde to thinges inuiſible, and
feared, leaſt by ſight of thinges viſible
they might be drawen downe to the loue
of them. My welbeloued brother, loſe not
the deſire to profite in ſpirituall thinges,
for thou haſt yet good time and ſpace.
VVhy wilt thou any longer deferre the
time? Ariſe, and now this ſame inſtant
beginne, and ſaye thus, Nowe is time to
laboure in good workes, nowe is time to
fight in ghoſtlie battaile, and nowe is
time to make amēdes for treſpaſſe paſſed.
VVhen thou art troubled, then is beſt
time to merite and get rewardes of God.
It behoueth thee to go through fire and
water, before thou come to the place of
recreation, and but if thou can fullie haue
the maſtry ouer thy ſelfe, thou ſhalt neuer
ouercome ſinne, nor liue without great
tediouſnes and ſorow. VVe would gladlie
be deliuered frō all miſerie and ſinne:
but becauſe we haue through ſinne loſt
our innocencie, we haue loſt alſo the
verie ioye and felicitie. VVherefore, we
muſt holde vs in patience, and with good
hope abide the mercie of God, till wretchednes
and miſerie be ouerpaſſed, and
that this bodilie lyfe be chaunged into
the life euerlaſtinge. O how great is the
frailtie of man, that he is euer readie and

prone to ſinne. This daye thou art confeſſed,
and to morow thou falleſt againe.
Now thou purpoſeſt to beware, and intendeſt
to go forth ſtronglie in good workes,
and ſhortlie after thou doeſt as thou
neuer haddeſt taken ſuch purpoſe. Rightfullie
theréfore we ought to meeke our
ſelfe, and neuer to thinke in vs any vertue
or goodnes, for that we be ſo fraile
& vnſtable: Soone may it be loſt through
negligence, that with much labour, and
ſpeciall grace was hardlie gotten. But
what ſhall become of vs in the ende, whē
we ſo ſoone waxe dull and ſlow? Sothlie
ſorowe and woe ſhall be to vs, if we fail
to bodilie reſt nowe, as though we were
in ghoſtly ſikernes, whē there appeareth
not as yet, neither ſigne nor token of
vertue nor of good liuing in our conuerſation.
VVherefore it were expedient to
vs, that we were yet againe inſtructed
(as Nouices) to learne good maners, it
happly there might by that meanes
be founde hereafter any truſt of
amendment and ſpirituall
profite in our conuerſation.
            
            
               
               Of the remembraunce of death.
The .23. Chapter.
               
                  THe hour of death wil ſhortly
come, & therefore take heede
how thou ordereſt thy ſelfe:
for the common prouerbe is
true, To daye a man, to morowe
none. And when thou
arte out of ſight, thou arte anone out of
minde, and ſoone ſhalt thou be forgottē.
O the great dulnes and hardnes of mans
heart, that only thinketh on thinges preſent,
& litle prouideth for the life to come.
If thou diddeſt well, thou ſhouldeſt ſo
behaue thy ſelfe in euery deede, and in
euery thought, as thou ſhouldeſt in this
inſtant dye. If thou haddeſt a good conſcience,
thou ſhouldeſt not muche feare
death. It were better for thee to leaue
ſinne, then feare death. O my deere brother,
if thou be not readie this daye, how
ſhalt thou be readie to morow? To morow
is a daye vncertaine, and thou canſte
not tel, whether thou ſhalt liue ſo longe.
VVhat profite is it to vs to liue longe,
when we therby ſo litle amende our life?
Longe life doth not alwaye bringe vs to
amendment, but ofte times increaſeth
more ſinne. VVoulde to God that we
might be one daye well cōuerſant in this
world? Manie recken their yeares of conuerſion,
and yet there is but litle fruite

of amendment, nor of any good example
ſeene in their conuerſation. If it be fearefull
to die, peraduenture it is more perillous
to liue long. Bleſſed be thoſe perſons,
that euer haue the houre of death
before their eyes, and that euerie daye
diſpoſe themſelues to die. If thou euer
ſaweſt anye man die, remember that thou
muſt needelie goe the ſame waye. In the
morninge doubt whether thou ſhalt liue
to night, & at night thinke not thy ſelfe
ſure to liue till to morowe. Be alwaye
readie, and liue in ſuch maner, that death
finde thee not vnprouided. Remember
howe many haue died ſodenlie and vnprouided,
for our Lorde hath called them
in ſuch an houre as they leaſte thought.
And when that laſt hour ſhall come, thou
ſhalt begin to feele all otherwiſe of thy
life paſſed, then thou haſte done before:
and thou ſhalt then ſorowe greatlie, that
thou haſt beene ſo ſlowe and negligent
in the ſeruice of God as thou haſte beene.
O how happie and wiſe is he therfore,
that laboreth nowe to ſtand in ſuch ſtate
in this lyfe, as he would be founde in at
his death. Truely, a perfect deſpiſing of
the worlde, and a feruent deſire to profite
in vertue, a loue to be taught, a fruitfull
labour in workes of penaunce, a readie
will to obey, a forſaking of our ſelfe,
and a willing ſuffering of all aduerſities
for the loue of God, ſhall geue vs a great

truſte, that we ſhall die wel. Now, whileſt
thou art in health, thou mayeſt doo many
good deedes, but if thou be ſicke, I can
not tell, what thou mayeſt doe: For why,
fewe be amended through ſicknes. And
likewiſe, they that go muche on pilgrimage,
be ſeldome thereby made perfect
& holye. Put not thy truſt in thy frendes
and thy neighbours, neither deferre thy
good deedes till after thy death: for thou
ſhalt ſoonet be forgotten then thou weeneſt.
Better it is to prouide for thy ſelfe
betime, and to ſend ſome good deedes before
thee, then to truſt to other, who peraduēture
will lightly forget thee: if thou
be not nowe buſie for thy ſelfe, & for thine
owne ſoule health, who ſhall be buſie for
thee after thy death? Nowe is the time
very precious, but alas for ſorowe, that
thou ſpēdeſt the time ſo vnprofitablie, in
the which thou ſhouldeſt winne the life
euerlaſting. The time ſhal come, whē thou
ſhalt deſire one daye or one houre to
amende thee, but I wot not whether it
ſhalbe graunted vnto thee. O my deere
brother, from how great perill & dreade
mighteſt thou now deliuer thy ſelfe, yf
thou wouldeſt alwaye in this lyfe dreade
to offend God, and alwaye haue the comminge
of death ſuſpect. Therefore ſtudye
nowe to liue ſo, that at the houre of death
thou mayeſt rather ioye then dreade.
Learue nowe to dye to the worlde, that

thou mayeſt then liue with Chriſt. Learnt
alſo to deſpiſe all worldlie thinges, that
thou mayeſt then freelye go to Chriſte.
Chaſtiſe nowe thy bodye with penance,
that thou mayeſt then haue a ſure and a
ſtedfaſt hope of ſaluatiō. Thou art a fosle,
if thou thinke to liue longe, ſith thou art
not ſure to lyue one daye to the ende.
Now many haue beene deceaued through
truſt of longe life, & ſodenlie haue beene
taken out of this worlde or they had
thought. Nowe ofte haſt thou heard ſay,
that ſuche a man was ſlayne, and ſuche a
man was drowned, and ſuche a man fell
and brake his necke? This man as he eate
his meat was ſtrangled, and this man as
he played tooke his death, one with fyre,
another with yron, another with ſicknes,
and ſome by theft haue ſodenly periſhed?
And ſo the ende of all men is death, for
the life of man as a ſhadowe ſodenly ſlideth
and paſſeth away. Thinke ofte, who
ſhall remember thee after thy death, and
who ſhall praye for thee? Doe nowe forthy
ſelfe all that thou canſt, for thou
wotteſt not when thou ſhalt dye, nor
what ſhall folowe after thy death VVhileſt
thou haſt time, gather thee riches
immortall, thinke nothing abidingly, but
on thy ghoſtly health. Set thy ſtudy onely
on thinges that be of God, and that belonge
to his honor. Make thee frendes
againſt that time, worſhip his Saintes,

and folowe their ſteppes, that when thou
ſhalt go out of this worlde, they may receaue
thee into the euerlaſting tabernacles.
Keepe thee as a pilgrime, & as a ſtrā
                  ger
here in this world, to whom nothing
belongeth of worldlye buſines. Keepe
thy hearte alwaye free, and lifted vp to
God, for thou haſt no cittie here long abiding.
Sende thy deſires, and thy daylie
prayers alwaye vpwarde to God, and
praye perſeuerantly, that thy ſoule at the
houre of death, may bleſſedly depart out
of this world, and goe to Chriſte.
            
            
               Of the laſt iudgement, and of the payne
that is ordeyned for ſinne.
The 24. Chapter.
               
                  IN all thinges beholde the ende
and ofte remember, howe thou
ſhalt ſtande before the high
Iudge, to whom nothing is
hidde: who will not be pleaſed
with rew ardes, nor receaue any maner
excuſes, but in all thinges wil iudge that
is righteous and true O moſte vnwiſe &
moſte wretched ſinner, what ſhalt thou
then anſwere to God, who knoweth all
thy ſinnes and wretchednes, ſith thou
dreadeſt here ſometime the face of a mortal
man? VVhy doeſt thou not nowe prouide
for thy ſelfe againſt that daye, ſith
thou mayeſt not then be excuſed nor defended

by none other? But euery man
ſhall then haue ynough to doe, to anſwere
for him ſelfe. Nowe thy labor is
fruitfull, and weeping is acceptable, thy
mourning is worthye to be hearde, and
thy ſorowe alſo is ſatiſfactory & purging
of ſinnes. The pariēt man, who ſuffereth
iniuryes and wronges of other, and yet
neuertheleſſe ſoroweth more for their
malice, then for the wrong done to him
ſelfe, hath a wholſome and bleſſed purgatory
in this worlde, and ſo haue they
that gladly can praye for their enemies,
and for them that be contrarious vnto
them, and that in their heart can forgeue
thoſe that offend them, and tary not Idge
to aſke forgeuenes. And ſo haue they
alſo, that more lightly be ſtirred to mercye
then to vengeance, and that can, as
it were, by a violēce breake downe their
owne will, and ſtrongly reſiſt ſinne, and
labour alway to ſubdue their body to the
ſpirite. It is better nowe to purge ſinne,
and to put away vſce, then to reſerue it
to be purged hereafter. But verilye, we
deceaue our ſelues by inordinate loue
that we haue to our bodily kinde. VVhat
ſhall the fyre of purgatorye deuoure, but
thy ſinne? truelye nothing. Therefore,
the more thou ſpareſt thy ſelfe nowe, and
the more thou foloweſt thy fleſhly liking
the more greeuouſlye ſhalt thou wayle
hereafter, and the more matter thou reſch.

ſerueſt for the fire of purgatory. In ſuche
thinges as a man moſte hath offended,
ſhall he moſte be puniſhed. The ſlouthful
perſons ſhall be there pricked with burning
prickes of yron, and gluttons ſhall
be tormented with great hunger & thirſte.
The lecherous perſons, and louers of voluptuous
pleaſures ſhal be filled ful with
brenning pitche and brimſtone: and enuious
perſons ſhall wayle and howle, as
doe madde dogges. There ſhal no ſinne be
without his proper torment. The proude
man ſhal be filled full with all ſhame and
confuſion, and the couetous man ſhall be
pined with penurie & neede. One houre
there in paine ſhall be more greuous then
here a hundred yece in moſte ſharpeſt penaunce.
There ſhall be no reſt nor conſolation
to the damned ſoules: but here
ſometime we feele reliefe of our paynes,
and haue ſometime conſolation of our
frendes. Be now ſorowful for thy ſinnes,
that at the day of iudgemēt thou mayeſt
be ſaued with bleſſed Saintes. Then ſhall
righteous men ſtande in great conſtancie
againſt them that haue wronged them,
and oppreſſed them here. Then ſhall he
ſtande as a Iudge that here ſubmitted
himſelfe meekelye to the iudgement of
man. Then ſhall the meeke poore man
haue great confidence and truſt in God,
& the obſtinate proude man ſhal quake &
breade. Thē ſhall it appeere, that he was

wiſe in this worlde, that for the loue of
God was content to be taken as a foole,
and to be deſpiſed, and ſet at nought.
Then ſhall it alſo pleaſe him muche the
tribulation that he ſuffereth patiently in
this world, and all wickednes ſhall ſtop
his mouth. Then euery deuout perſon
ſhall be ioyful and glad, and the vnreligious
perſons ſhall wayle and dreade.
Then ſhall the fleſhe, that hath beene
with diſcretion chaſtiſed ioy more, then
if it had beene nouriſhed with all delectation
and pleaſure. Then ſhall the vile
habite ſhine cleere in the ſight of God,
and the precious garmentes ſhall xare
foule and lothſome to beholde. Then the
poore cottage ſhall be more allowed, thē
the pallace ouer gilted with golde. Then
ſhall more helpe a conſtant patience, thē
all worldly power and riches. Then ſhall
meeke obedience be exalted more high,
then all worldly wiſedome and pollicie
and then ſhall a good cleane conſcience
make vs more gladſome and mery, then
the cunning of all philſophye. Then the
deſpiſing of worldly goodes ſhalbe more
of valure then all worldly riches & treaſure.
Then ſhalt thou haue more comfort
for thy deuout prayinge, then for all thy
delicate feedinge. Then ſhalt thou alſo
ioye more for thy ſilence keepinge, then
for thy long talkinge and iangling. Then
good deedes ſhall plenteouſlie be rewarded,

and faire wordes ſhall litle be regarded.
Then ſhall it pleaſe more a ſtraite life
and hard penance here, then all worldlie
delectation and pleaſure. Learne nowe
therefore to ſuffer the ſmall tribulations
in this worlde, that thou mayeſt then be
deliuered from the greater there ordeyned
for ſinne. Firſte proue here, what
thou mayeſt ſuffer hereafter. And yf thou
mayeſt not nowe ſuffer ſo lytle a payne,
howe ſhalt thou then ſuffer the euerlaſtinge
tormentes? And yf nowe ſo litle a
paſſion make thee impatient, what ſhall
then doe the intolerable fire of purgatorie
or of hell? Thou mayeſt not haue two
heauens, that is to ſaye, to ioye here, and
to haue delectation here, and after to
ioye alſo with Chriſte in heauen. Moreouer,
if thou haddeſt lyued alwaye
vnto this daye in honours, and fleſhlye
delectations, what ſhould it profite thee
nowe, if thou ſhouldeſt this preſent inſtant
departe the worlde. Therefore all
thing is vanitie, but to loue God, and to
ſerue him. He that loueth God with all
his heart, dreadeth neither death, torment,
iudgement nor hell, for a perfect
loue maketh a ſure paſſage to God: but if
a mā yet delite in ſinne, it is no meruaile
though he dreade both death and hell.
And though ſuche a dreade be but a thral
dread, yet neuertheleſſe it is good, that if
the loue of God withdrawe vs not from

ſinne, that the drede of hell conſtraine vs
therto. He that ſetteth apart the drede of
God, may not longe ſtand in the ſtate of
grace, but ſoone ſhall he run into the
ſnare of the deuill, and lightlye ſhall he
therewith be deceaued.
            
            
               Of the feruent amendinge of all our life, and
that vve ſhall ſpeciallie take heede of
our ovvne ſoule health, before
all other.
The .25. Chapter.
               
                  MY ſonne, be wakinge and
diligent in the ſeruice of
God, and thinke ofte wherfore
thou art come, and why
thou haſte forſakē the world:
was it not that thou ſhouldeſt
liue to God, and be made a ſpirituall
man? yes truelie. Therefore ſtirre thy ſelfe
to perfection, for in ſhort time thou ſhalt
receaue the full rewarde of all thy laboures,
and from thenceforth ſhall neuer
come to thee neither ſorowe nor dreade.
Thy labour ſhalbe litle and ſhort, and
thou ſhalt receaue therefore againe euerlaſtinge
reſt and comfort. If thou abide
faythfull and feruent in good deedes,
without doubt our Lorde will be faythfull
and liberall to thee in his rewardes.
Thou ſhalt alwaye haue a good truſt,
that thou ſhalt come to the palme of victorie,

but thou ſhalt not ſet thee in a full
ſuretie thereof, leaſt happlie thou waxe
dul and proude in heart. A certaine perſon,
which often times doubted whether
he where in the ſtate of grace or not, on
a time fell proſtrate in the Churche, and
ſayde thus: O that I might knowe, whether
I ſhoulde perſeuer in vertue to the
ende of my life. And anone he hearde inwardlie
in his ſoule the anſwere of our
Lord, ſayinge: VVhat wouldeſt thou doe
yf thou kneweſt thou ſhouldeſt perſeuer?
doe nowe, as thou wouldeſt doe then,
and thou ſhalt be ſafe, and ſo anone he
was comforted, and committed himſelfe
whollie to the will of God, and all his
doubtfulnes ceaſſed, and neuer after
would he curiouſie ſearch to know what
ſhould become of him, but rather he ſtudied
to knowe, what was the will of god
againſt him, and how he might begin and
ende all his deedes that he ſhould doe to
the pleaſure of God, and to his honour.
Truſt in God, and do good deedes, ſayth
the prophete. Dauid, inhabite the earth,
and thou ſhalt be fedde with the riches
of thy good deedes. But one thing withdraweth
manie from profitinge in vertue,
and from amendment of life, that is
an horrour, and a falſe worldlie dreade,
that they may not abide the paine and
labour that is needefull for the gettinge
thereof. Therefore they ſhall moſt profite

in vertue before all other, that enforce
them ſelues mightilie to ouercome thoſe
thinges that be moſte greeuous and contrarious
to them. For a man profiteth
there moſte, & there winneth moſt grace,
where he moſte ouercommeth him ſelfe,
and wherin he moſt mortifieth his bodye
to the ſoule. But all men haue not in lyke
much to mortifie and ouercome, for ſome
haue mo paſſions then ſome haue. Neuertheleſſe,
a feruent louer of god, though
he haue more greater paſſions thē other,
yet ſhall he be more ſtronger to profite in
vertue, then another that is better manered,
and that hath fewer paſſions, but
is leſſe feruent to vertue. Two thinges
helpe a man much to amendment of lyfe,
that is, a mightie withdrawinge of himſelfe
from thoſe thinges that the bodye
moſt inclineth him to, and a feruent labour
for ſuche vertues as he hath moſte
neede of. Studie alſo to ouercome in thy
ſelfe thoſe thinges that moſt miſlike thee
in other men, and take alwaye ſome ſpeciall
profite in euerie place whereſoeuer
thou become, as, yf thou ſee any good
example, enforce thee to folowe it: and yf
thou ſee any euill example, looke thou
eſchewe it. As thy eye conſidereth the
workes of other, right ſo, and in the ſame
wiſe thy workes be conſidered of other.
O howe ioyous and howe delectable is
it, to ſee religious men deuoute and feruent

in the loue of God, well manered,
and well taught in ghoſtlie learning: and
on the contrarye part, howe heauye and
ſorowfull is it to ſee them liue inordinatlie,
not vſinge thoſe thinges that they
haue choſen and taken them to. Alſo, how
inconuenient a thinge is it, a man to be
negligent in the purpoſe of his firſte callinge,
and to ſet his mynde to thinges
that be not committed to hym. Thinke
ofte therefore on the purpoſe that thou
haſte taken, and ſet before the eye of thy
ſoule the memorie of Chriſtes paſſion:
and if thou beholde well, and diligentlie
his bleſſed life, thou mayeſt well be aſhamed,
that thou haſte no more conformed
thee to him then thou haſte done. He that
will inwardly and deuoutlie exerciſe him
ſelfe in the moſte bleſſed lyfe and paſſion
of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, ſhall finde
therein plenteouſlye all that is neceſſarie
for him, ſo that he ſhall not neede to
ſeeke any thinge without him. O yf Ieſu
crucified were ofte in our hearts, and in
our remembrance, we ſhould ſoone be
learned in all thinges that be neceſſarie
for vs. A good religious man that is feruent
in his religion, taketh all thing wel,
and doth gladly all that he is commaunded
to doe, but a religious perſon that is
negligent and ſlouthfull, hath trouble
vpon trouble, & ſuffereth great anguiſhe
and paine on euerie ſide, for he lackeeh

the true inwarde comfort: and to ſeeke
the outward comfort he is prohibited.
Therefore a religious perſon that liueth
without diſcipline, is like to fall in great
ruine. Alſo he that in religion ſeeketh to
haue libertie and releaſinge of his dutie,
ſhall alwaye be in anguiſhe and ſorowe,
for one thinge or other ſhall euer diſpleaſe
him. Therefore take heede howe other
religious perſōs doe, that be right ſtraitlie
kept vnder the rule of theire religion.
They goe ſeldome forth, they liue hardly,
they eate poorelie, and be cloathed groſſelie:
they labour much, ſpeake litle, watche
longe, riſe earlie, make longe prayers,
reade ofte, and keepe them ſelues alwaye
in ſome wholſome doctrine. Beholde the
Carthuſiens, the Ciſterſiens, and manie
other monkes and Nunnes of diuers religions,
howe they riſe euerie night to
ſerue our Lorde. And therefore it were
great ſhame to thee, that thou ſhouldeſt
waxe ſlowe and dull in ſo holie a worke,
where ſo manie laude & prayſe our Lorde.
O howe ioyous a life were it, if we ſhould
nothinge elſe doe, but with heart and
mouth continuallye prayſe our Lorde.
Nowe truelie, yf we ſhould neuer neede
to eate, drinke, nor ſleepe, but that we
might alwaye laude him: and onelie take
heede to ſpirituall ſtudies, then were we
much more happie and bleſſed then we
are nowe, when we are bounde of neceſſitie

to ſerue the bodie. O would to God,
that theſe bodilie meates were turned into
ſpirituall refections, which (alas for
ſorowe) we taſte but ſeldome. VVhen a
man is come to that perfection, that he
ſeeketh not his conſolation in any creature,
then beginneth God firſt to ſauour
ſweet vnto him, and then he ſhall be contented
with euery thinge that commeth,
be it in likinge or miſlikinge. Then ſhall
he be glad for no worldlie profite, be it
neuer ſo great, nor ſorie for the wantinge
of it, for he hath ſet and eſtabliſhed hym
ſelfe whollie in God, the which is vnto
him all in all: to whom nothing periſheth
nor dyeth, but all thinge liueth to hym,
and ſerueth him without ceaſſinge, after
his biddinge. In euerie thinge remember
the ende, and that time loſt can not be
called againe. VVithout labour and diligence
thou ſhalte neuer get vertue. If
thou beginne to be negligent, thou beginneſt
to be feeble and weake: but yf
thou applie thee to feruour, thou ſhalt
finde great helpe of God, & for the loue
of vertue thou ſhalt finde leſſe payne in
all thy laboures then thou diddeſt firſt.
He that is ſeruent and louinge, is alway
quicke and readie to all thinges that be
of God, and to his honour. It is more labour
to reſiſt vices and paſſions, then it
is to toyle and ſweate in bodily labours.
He that will not flee ſmall ſinnes, ſhalt

be litle and litle fall into greater. Thou
ſhalt alway be glad at night, when thou
haſte ſpent the daye before fruitfullye.
Take heede to thy ſelfe, & ſtirre thy ſelfe
alwaye to deuotion. Admoniſhe thy ſelfe,
and howeſouer thou remember other,
forget not thy ſelfe: and ſo much
ſhalt thou profite in vertue, as
thou canſt breake thine
owne will, and folowe
the will
of God.
            
         
         
            
            Here beginneth the ſeconde Booke.
            
               
            
            
               Of invvarde conuerſation.
The firſte Chapter.
               
                  THe kyngdome of God is
within you (ſaith Chriſt our
Sauiour) Turne thee therefore
with all thy heart to
God, and forſake this wretched
worlde, and thy ſoule
ſhall finde great inwarde reſt. Learne to
deſpiſe outwarde thinges, and geue thy

ſelfe to inward thinges, and thou ſhalt
ſee the kyngdome of God come into thy
ſoule. The kingdome of God is peace &
ioy in the holy ghoſte, that is not graunted
to wicked people. Our Lord Ieſus
Chriſt wil come to thee, and will ſhew to
thee his conſolations. If thou wilt make
ready for him in thy heart a dwelling
place, that is all that he deſireth to haue
in thee, and there is his pleaſure to be.
There is betwixt almightie God and a
deuout ſoule manye ghoſtly viſitinges,
ſweete inwarde ſpeaking, great giftes of
grace, many conſolations, muche heauenly
peace, & wonderous familiaritie
of the bleſſed preſence of God. Therefore
thou faythfull ſoule, prepare thy
heart to Chriſte thy ſpouſe, that he maye
come to thee, and dwell in thee: for he
ſayth him ſelfe, VVho ſo loueth me, will
keepe my commaundement. And my father
and I & the holy Ghoſte ſhall come
to him, and we ſhall make in him our
dwelling place. Geue therfore to Chriſt
free entrie into thy heart, and keepe out
all thinges that may let his entrye: and
when thou haſte him, thou arte riche
ynough, and he only ſhall ſuffiſe to thee,
and then he ſhalbe thy prouider and defender,
and thy faythful helper in euery
neceſſitie, ſo that thou ſhalt not neede to
put thy truſt in any other without him.
Man is ſoone changed, & lightly falleth

away, but Chriſte abideth for euer, and
ſtādeth ſtrongly with his louer vnto the
ende. There is no great truſt to be put in
man that is but mortall & frayle, though
he be right muche profitable, and alſo
much beloued vnto thee, nor any great
heauines to be taken, though he ſometime
turne and be againſt thee: for they
that this day be with thee, to morowe
may happen to be againſt thee, and may
ofte turne, as doth the winde. Put thy
full truſt therfore in God, and let him be
thy loue and dreade aboue all thinges,
and he will anſwere for thee, and will
doe for thee in all thinges as ſhall be
moſte needeful and expedient for thee.
Thou haſte here no place of long abiding,
for whereſoeuer thou become, thou
arte but a ſtraunger, and a pilgrime, and
neuer ſhalt thou finde perfect reſt, til
thou be fullye vnited to God. VVhy
doeſt thou looke to haue reſt here, ſith
this is not thy reſiſting place? Thy ful
reſt muſt be in heauenly thinges, and all
earthly thinges, thou mnſt beholde as
thinges tranſitorye, and ſhortly paſſing
awaye: and be well ware thou cleaue
not ouermuche to them, leaſt thou be
taken with loue of them, and in the ende
periſhe thereby. Let thy thought be alway
vpward to god, & direct thy prayers
to Chriſte continually: and if thou maye
not for frayltie of thy ſelfe alwaye occupye

thy minde in contemplation of the
godhead, be then occupied with minde
of his paſſion, & in his bleſſed woundes
make thee a dwelling place. And if thou
flie deuoutly to the wound of Chriſtes
ſide, and to the markes of his paſſion,
thou ſhalt feele great comforte in euery
trouble, and ſhalt litle force, though thou
be openly deſpiſed in the world, & what
euil wordes ſoeuer be ſpoken of thee,
they ſhall litle greeue thee. Our maiſter
Chriſte was deſpiſed in the worlde of all
men, and in his moſt neede was forſaken
of his acquaintaunce and frendes, and
lefte among ſhames and rebukes. He
would ſuffer wrongs, and be nought ſet
by in the world, & we will not, that any
perſon doe vs wrong, nor diſprayſe our
deedes. Chriſt had many aduerſaryes and
backbiters, and we would haue all to be
our freendes and louers. How ſhould thy
patience be crowned in heuen, if no aduerſitie
ſhoulde be fall to thee in earth. If
thou wilt ſuffer none aduerſitie, howe
mayeſt thou be the frende of Chriſte? It
behoueth thee to ſuffer with Chriſte, &
for Chriſt, if thou wilt reigne with Chriſt.
Truely, if thou haddeſt once entred into
the bloudy woundes of Ieſu, and haddeſt
there taſted a litle of his loue, thou
ſhouldeſt litle care for lykinges or miſlikinges
of the worlde, but thou ſhouldeſt
rather haue greate ioye, when wronges

and reproufes were done vnto thee: for
perfecte loue of God maketh a man perfectlye
to deſpiſe him ſelfe. The true inwarde
loue of God that is free from all
inordinate affections, maye anone turne
him ſelfe freelye to God, and lyfte him
ſelfe vp in ſpirite, in contemplation, and
fruitfullye reſt him in Chriſte. Alſo he, to
whom all thinges be eſteemed as they be,
and not as they be taken and thought to
be of wordly people, is very wiſe, and is
rather taught of God then of man. And
he that can inwardly lifte his minde vpwarde
to God, and litle regard outward
thinges, needeth not for to ſeeke for time
or place to goe to prayers, or to doe other
good deedes or vertuous occupations.
For the ghoſtlye man may ſoone gather
him ſelfe together, and fixe his minde in
God, for he neuer ſuffereth it to be fullye
occupied in outward thinges. And therefore
his outward laboures, & his worlddlye
occupations neceſſary for the time,
hinder him not but litle, for as they come
ſo he applieth him ſelfe to them, and referreth
them alwaye to the will of God.
Moreouer, a man that is well ordred in
his ſoule, forceth litle the vnkind demeanour
of worldlye people, ne yet their
proude behauiour. As muche as a man
loueth anye worldly thinge more then it
ſhould be beloued, ſo muche his minde is
hindred & letted from the true ordinate

loue that he ſhould haue to God. If thou
wexe well purged from all inordinate
affections, then whatſoeuer ſhould befall
to thee, ſhould goe to thy ghoſtlie profite,
and to the great increaſing of grace and
vertue in thy ſoule. But the cauſe why ſo
many thinges diſpleaſe thee, and trouble
thee, is, for that thou art not yet perfectlie
dead to the worlde, nor thou art not
yet fullie ſeuered from the loue of earthly
thinges: and nothinge ſo much defileth
the ſoule, as an vncleane loue to creatures,
if thou forſake to be comforted by
worldly thinges outwardlie, thou mayeſt
beholde more perfectly heauenlie things,
and thou ſhalt then ſinge continuallie
laudes and prayſinges to him with great
ioye and inwarde gladnes of heart, The
whiche graunt thee and me the bleſſed
Trinitie. Amen.
            
            
               Of a meeke knovving of our ovvne defaultes.
The ſecond Chapter.
               
                  REgarde not muche who is
with thee, nor who is againſt
thee, but be this thy greateſt
ſtudye, that God may be with
thee. In euery thing that thou
doeſt, haue a good conſcience, and he ſhall
well defende thee, and whomſoeuer he
will helpe and defende, there may no malice
hinder ne greeue. If thou can be ſtill,

and ſuffer a while, thou ſhalt without
doubt ſee the helpe of God come in thy
neede. He knoweth the time and place
howe to deliuer thee, and therefore thou
muſt reſigne thy ſelfe wholye to him. It
pertayneth to him to helpe and deliuer
from all confuſion. Neuertheleſſe, it is
often times muche profitable to vs, for
the more ſurer keeping of meekenes, that
other men knowe our defaultes, and reproue
vs of them. VVhen a man meeketh
him ſelfe for his offences, he lightly pleaſeth
other, and reconcileth himſelfe to
them whom he hath offended. The meeke
man almightie God defendeth and comforteth,
to him he inclineth him ſelfe, and
ſendeth him great plentye of his grace.
To him alſo he ſheweth his ſecrettes, and
louingly draweth him to him, and after
his oppreſſions he lifteth him vp to glorie.
The meeke man, when he hath ſuffred
confuſion and reproufe, is in good peace,
for he truſteth in God, and not in the
worlde. Moreouer, if thou wilt come to
the highnes of perfection, thinke not
thy ſelfe to haue profited any thinge in
vertue, til thou canſt feele meekely in
thine heart, that thou haſte leſſe
meekenes, and leſſe vertue
then any other hath.
            
            
               
               Hovve good it is for a man to be peacefull.
The 3. Chapter.
               
                  FIrſte put thy ſelfe in peace,
and then mayeſt thou the
better pacifie other. A peacefull
man and a patient
profiteth more to him ſelfe,
and other alſo, then a man
learned, who is vnpeacefull. A man that
is paſſionate turneth often times good
into euill, & lightlie beleeueth the worſe
part: but a good peacefull man turneth
all thinge to the beſt, and hath ſuſpition
to no man. But he that is not content, is
ofte troubled with manye ſuſpitions, and
neither is he quiet him ſelfe, nor yet ſuffreth
he other to be quiet. He ſpeketh oftē
times that he ſhoulde not ſpeake, and he
omitteth to ſpeake, that were more expedient
to be ſpoken. He conſidereth greatlye
what other be bounde to doe, but to
that, where vnto he him ſelfe is bounden,
he is full negligent. Haue therefore firſte
a zeale and a reſpect to thy ſelfe, and to
thine owne ſoule, and then mayeſt thou
the more righteouſly, and with the more
due order of charitie haue zeale vpon thy
neighboures. Thou arte anone ready to
excuſe thine owne defaultes, but thou
wilt not heare the excuſes of thy brethrē.
Truely it were more charitable and more
profitable to thee, that thou ſhouldeſt accuſe

thy ſelfe, and excuſe thy brother: for
if thou wilt be borne, beare other. Behold
how farre thou art yet from perfect meekenes
and charitie, which can not be angry
with none, but with them ſelues. It
is no great thinge to be well conuerſant
with good and tractable men, for that
naturallie pleaſeth all people, and euery
man gladlie hath peace with them, and
moſte loueth them that folowe their appetite,
but to liue peaceablie with euill
men, and with frowarde men that lacke
good maners, and be vntaught, and that
be alſo contrarious vnto vs, is a great
grace and a manlie deede, and muche to
be prayſed: for it can not be done, but
through great ghoſtlie ſtrength. Some
perſons can be quiet them ſelues, and can
alſo liue quietlie with other: and ſome
can neither be quiet them ſelues, nor yet
ſuffer other to be quiet. They be greeuous
to other, but they be more greeuous to
them ſelues. Some can keepe them ſelues
in good peace, and can alſo bringe other
to liue in peace, and neuertheleſſe all our
peace while we be in this mortall lyfe,
ſtandeth more in meeke ſufferinge of
troubles, and of thinges that be contrarious
vnto vs, then in the not feelinge of
them, for no man may liue here without
ſome trouble. And therefore he that can
beſt ſuffer, ſhall haue moſte peace, and is
verie true ouercome of him ſelfe, is a Lord

of the world, a frende to Chriſte, and the
true inheritour of the kingdome of heauen.
            
            
               Of a pure mind, and a ſimple intent.
The .4. Chapter.
               
                  MAn is borne vp from earthlye
thinges with two winges, that
is to ſaye, with plainnes and
cleannes: plainnes is in the intent,
& cleannes is in the loue.
The good, true, and playne intēt looketh
toward God, but the cleane loue taketh
a ſaye, and taſteth his ſweetnes. If thou
be free from all inordinate loue, there
ſhall no good deede hinder thee, but that
thou ſhalt therewith increaſe in the way
of perfection. If thou intende well, and
ſeeke nothinge but God, and the profite
of thine owne ſoule, & of thy neighbours,
thou ſhalt haue great inward libertie of
minde. And if thy heart be ſtrayte with
God, then euery creature ſhall be to thee
a mirrour of life, & a booke of holie doctrine,
for there is no creature ſo litle nor
ſo vile, but that it ſheweth and repreſenteth
the goodnes of God. And if thou
were inwardlie in thy ſoule pure and
cleaue, thou ſhouldeſt then without lettinge
take all thinges to the beſt. A cleane
heart pearceth both heauē and hell. Such
as a man in his conſcience inwardlye,

ſuche he ſheweth to be by his outward
conuerſation. If there be any true ioye in
this worlde, that hath a man of a cleane
cōſcience. And if there be anye where tribulation
or anguiſhe, an euill conſcience
knoweth it beſt. Alſo, as yron put into the
fire is clenſed fro ruſte, and is made all
cleane and pure, right ſo, a man turninge
him ſelfe whollie to God, is purged from
all ſlouthfulnes, & ſodenlie is chaunged
into a new man. VVhen a man beginneth
to waxe dull & ſlowe to ghoſtlie buſines,
then a litle labour feareth him greatlie,
and then taketh he gladly outward comfortes
of the worlde, and of the fleſhe:
but when he beginneth perfectlye to
ouercome him ſelfe, and to walke ſtrōglye
in the way of God, then he regardeth the
laboures but litle, that he thought before
to be right greeuous, and as importable
to hym.
            
            
               Of the knovvinge of our ſelfe.
The .5. Chapter.
               
                  VVe may not truſt muche in
our ſelues, nor in our owne
wit, for ofte times through
our preſumption we lacke
grace, and right litle light
of true vnderſtanding is in vs: and that
we haue, many times we loſe through
our owne negligēce, and yet doe we not

ſee, neither will we ſee howe blinde we
are. Ofte times we doe euill, and in defence
thereof we doe muche worſe, and
ſometime we be moued with paſſion, and
we weene it to be of a zeale to god. VVe
can anone reproue ſmall defaults in our
neighbours, but our owne defaults that
be muche greater we will not ſee. VVe
feele anone, and ponder greatly what
we ſuffer of other, out what other ſuffer
of vs, we will not conſider. But he that
woulde well and righteouſly iudge his
owne defaults, ſhuld not ſo rigorouſly
iudge the defaults of his neighbours. A
man that is inwardlye turned to God,
taketh heede of him ſelfe before all other:
and he that can well take heede of him
ſelfe, can lightly be ſtill of other mens
deedes. Thou ſhalt neuer be an inward
man, and a deuout folower of Chriſte,
onleſſe thou canſte keepe thy ſelfe from
medling on other mens deedes, & canſte
ſpecially take heede of thine owne. If
thou take heede wholy to God and to
thy ſelfe, the defaultes which thou ſeeſt
in other ſhall litle moue thee. VVhere art
thou, when thou art not preſent to thy
ſelfe? And when thou haſte all runne
about, and much haſte conſidered other
mens workes, what haſte thou profited
thereby, if thou haue forgotten thy ſelfe?
If thou wilt therfore haue peace in thy
ſoule, and be perfectly vnited to God in

bleſſed loue, ſet apart all other mens
deedes, and onely ſet thy ſelfe and thine
owne deedes before the eye of thy ſoule,
& that thou ſeeſt amiſſe in thee, ſhortly
reforme it. Thou ſhalt much profit in
grace if thou keepe thee free from all tē
                  porall
cares, & it ſhall hinder thee greatly,
if thou ſet price by any temporall
thinges. Therefore let nothing be in thy
ſight high, nothing great, nothing liking
ne acceptable to thee, but it be purely
God, or of God. Thinke all comfortes
vayne that come to thee by any creature.
He that loueth God and his owne ſoule
for God, deſpiſeth all other loue: for he
ſeeth well that God alone which is eternall,
incomprehenſible, and that fullfilleth
all thinges with his goodnes, is the
whole ſolace & comfort of the ſoule, and
that he is the verie true gladnes of harte,
and none other but onlye he.
            
            
               Of the gladnes of a cleane conſcience.
The 6. Chapter.
               
                  THe glorie of a good man, is
the witneſſe of God, that he
hath a good cōſcience. Haue
therefore a good conſcience,
and thou ſhalt alwaye haue
gladnes. A good conſcience
may heare many wronges, and is euer
mery and glad in aduerſities, but an euill

conſcience is alwaye fearefull and vnquiet.
Thou ſhalt reſte thee ſweetelie and
bleſſedlie, if thine owne hart reproue thee.
not. Be neuer glad, but when thou haſt
done well. Euill men haue neuer perfect
gladnes, nor feele no inwarde peace, for
our Lorde ſayth, there is no peace to wicked
people. And though they ſay, VVe be
in good peace, there ſhall no euill come to
vs, loe who may greeue vs, or hurt vs? beleeue
thē not, for ſodēly the wrath of god
ſhall fal vpon them, vnleſſe they amende,
and all that they haue done ſhall turne to
nought, and that they would haue done
ſhall be vndone. It is no greeuous thinge
to a feruent louer of God to ioye in tribulation,
for all his ioye and glarie is to
ioy in the croſſe of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
It is a ſhort glorie that is geuen to man,
and commonlie ſome heauines foloweth
after. The ioye and gladnes of good men
is in their owne conſcience, and the ioye
of righteous men is in God, and of God,
and their ioye is in vertue and in good
life. He that deſireth the verie perfect ioy
that is euerlaſtinge, ſetteth litle price by
temporall ioye: and he that ſeeketh any
worldlie ioye, or doeth not in his harte
fullie deſpiſe it, ſheweth him ſelfe openlie
to loue but litle the ioy of heuen. He hath
great tranquilitie and peace of hart, that
neither regardeth prayſes nor diſpraiſes,
and he ſhall ſoone be pacified and cōtent

that hath a good cōſcience. Thou art not
the better becauſe thou art prayſed, nor
worſe if thou be diſprayſed, for as thou
art, thou art. And whatſoeuer be ſayd of
thee, thou art no better then almightie
God (which is the ſearcher of mans hart)
will witnes thee to be. If thou behoulde
what thou art inwardlie, thou ſhalt not
care muche what the world ſpeaketh of
thee outwardlie. Man ſeeth the face, but
God beholdeth the hart, Man beholdeth
the deede, but God beholdeth the intent
of the deede. It is a great tokē of a meeke
hart, a man euer to doe well, and yet to
thinke himſelfe to haue done but litle.
And it is a great ſigne of cleannes of life,
and of inward truſt in God, when a man
taketh not his comfort of any creature.
VVhen a man ſeeketh no outward witnes
for him ſelfe, it appeareth that he
hath wholly committed him ſelfe to God.
Alſo after the wordes of S. Paule, he that
commendeth him ſelfe, is not iuſtified,
but he whom God commendeth, and he
that hath his minde alwaye lyfte vp to
God, and is not bounde with any inordinate
affection outwardlie, is
in the degree, and in the ſtate
of a holye and a
bleſſed man.
            
            
               
               Of the loue of Ieſu aboue all thinges.
The .7. Chapter.
               
                  BLeſſed is he that knoweth
how good it is to loue Ieſu,
and for his ſake to deſpiſe
him ſelfe. It behoueth the
louer of Ieſu to forſake all
other loue beſide him, for he
will be loued onelye aboue all other. The
loue of creatures is deceyuable and fayling,
but the loue of Ieſu is faithfull and
alwayes abydinge. He that cleaueth to
any creature, muſt of neceſſitie fayle, as
doth the creature: but he that cleaueth
abydingly to Ieſu, ſhall be made ſtable in
him for euer. Loue him therefore, & holde
him thy freende, for whē all other forſake
thee, he will not forſake thee, nor ſuffer
thee finally to periſhe. Thou muſt of neceſſitie
be departed from thy freendes,
and from all mans companye, whether
thou wilt or not, and therfore keepe thee
with thy Lorde Ieſu lyuing and dying,
and commit thee to his fidelitie, and he
wil be with thee and helpe thee, when all
other forſake thee. Thy beloued is of ſuch
nature, that he will not admit any other
laue, for he will haue alonely the loue of
thy hart, and will ſit therin, as a king in
his proper throne. If thou couldeſt well
auoyde from thee the loue of creatures,
he would alway abyde with thee, and neuer

woulde forſake thee. Thou ſhalte in
maner finde it all as loſt, whatſoeuer
truſt thou haſt put in any maner of thing
beſide Ieſu. Put not thy truſt therfore to
any ſuche thing as is not but a quilfull of
winde, or as a holowe ſticke, which is not
able to ſuſtayne thee, ne to helpe thee, but
in thy moſt neede will deceyue thee, for
man is but as hay, and all his glorie is as
a flowre in the feelde, which ſodenlye vaniſheth
and ſlideth awaye: if thou take
heede only to the outward appearaunce,
thou ſhalt ſoone be deceyued: and if thou
ſeeke thy comfort in any thing but in
Ieſu, thou ſhalt feele thereby great ſpirituall
loſſe: but if thou ſeeke in all thinges
thy Lord Ieſu, thou ſhalt truly finde thy
Lorde Ieſu, and if thou ſeeke thy ſelfe,
thou ſhalt finde thy ſelfe, but that ſhall be
to thine owne great loſſe: for truly a man
is more greuous and more hurtfull to
him ſelfe, if he ſeeke not his Lorde Ieſu,
then is all the worlde, and more then all
his aduerſaries may be.
            
            
               Of the familier freendſhip of Ieſu.
The .8. Chapter.
               
                  VVhen our Lorde Ieſu is
preſent, all thing is liking,
& nothing ſeemeth harde
to doe for his loue, but
when he is abſent all thing
that is done for his loue is

paynefull and harde. VVhen Ieſu ſpeaketh
not to the ſoule, there is no faythfull
conſolation: but if he ſpeake but one
worde onely, the ſoule feeleth great inwarde
comfort. Did not Mary Magdalene
riſe ſoone from weeping, when
Martha ſhewed her that her maiſter
Chriſte was nigh, & called her? yes truly.
O that is an happie houre, when Ieſus
calleth vs from weeping to ioy of ſpirite.
Remember howe drye & how vndeuout
thou art without Ieſu, and how vnwiſe,
how vayne, and how vncunning thou
art when thou deſireſt any thing beſide
Ieſu: truely that deſire is more hurtfull
to thee, than if thou haddeſt loſt all the
worlde. VVhat may this worlde gene
thee, but through the helpe of Ieſu? To
be without Ieſu is a payne of hel: and to
be with Ieſu is a pleaſaunte Paradiſe.
If Ieſu be with thee, there maye no enimie
greue thee: & he that findeth Ieſu,
findeth a great treaſure that is beſt aboue
all other treaſures: and he that Ioſeth
Ieſu, loſeth verie muche, and more than
all the world. He is moſt poore that liueth
without Ieſu, and he his moſte riche that
is with Ieſu. It is great cunning to be
well cōuerſaunt with Ieſu, and to keepe
him is right great wiſedome. Be meke &
peacefull, and Ieſu ſhall be with thee: be
deuout and quiet, and Ieſu will abyde
with thee. Thou mayeſt anone dryue

awaye thy Lorde Ieſu, and looſe his grace,
if thou applye thy ſelfe to outwarde
thinges: and if through negligence of thy
ſelfe thou looſe him, what freende ſhalte
thou thē haue? VVithout a freende thou
mayeſt not long endure, and if Ieſu be
not thy freende moſte before all other,
thou ſhalt be verie heauye and deſolate,
and be lefte without all perfect frendſhip.
And therefore thou doeſt not wiſely
if thou truſt or ioye in any other thinge
beſide him. VVe ſhoulde rather chooſe to
haue all the worlde againſt vs, then to
offende God, and therefore of all that be
to thee lefe and dere, let thy Lorde Ieſu
be to thee moſte lefe and dere, and moſte
ſpecially beloued to thee aboue all other,
and let all other be beloued for him, and
he onelie for him ſelfe. Ieſu is onelie to be
beloued for him ſelfe, for he onelie is proued
good and faythfull before all other
freendes. In him and for him both enimies
and freendes are to be beloued, and
before all things we ought meekely with
all diligence to praye to him, that he may
be beloued and honoured of all his creatures.
Neuer couer to be ſingulerly loued
or commended, for that belongeth onelye
to God, which hath none lyke vnto him,
and deſire not that any thinge be occupied
with thee in thy harte, ne that thou
be occupied with loue of any creature,
but that thy Lorde Ieſu may be in thee,

and in euery good man and woman. Be
pure & cleane inwardly without letting
of any creature, as nigh as thou canſte:
for it behoueth thee to haue a right cleane,
and a pure hart to Ieſu, if thou wilt
knowe and feele howe ſwete he is. And
verily thou mayſt not come to that puritie,
vnleſſe thou be preuēted and drawen
through his grace, & that all other things
ſet apart, thou be inwardlye knyt and
vnited to him. VVhen the grace of God
cōmeth to a man, then is he made mightie
and ſtronge to doe euery thinge that belongeth
to vertue, and when grace withdraweth,
then is he made weake & feeble
to doe any good deede, and is in maner
as he were lefte onely to payne and puniſhmentes.
And yf it happen ſo with
thee, yet diſpaire not ouermuch therfore,
nor leaue not thy good deedes vndone,
but ſtande alwaye ſtrōglye after the will
of God, and turne all thinges that ſhall
come to thee to the laude and prayſinges
of his name. For after winter commeth
ſomer, and after the night commeth
the daye, and after a great
tempeſt ſheweth agayne
right cleare and pleaſaunt
weather.
            
            
               
               Of the vvanting of all ſolace and comfort.
The 9. Chapter.
               
                  IT is no great thinge to deſpiſe
mans comfort, when
the cōfort of God is preſent:
but it is a great thinge, and
that a right great thinge, a
man to be ſo ſtronge in ſpirit
that he may beare the wantinge of them
both, and for the loue of God, and to his
honour, to haue a readie will, to beare as
it were a deſolation of ſpirite, and yet in
nothinge to ſeeke him ſelfe nor his owne
merites. VVhat proofe of vertue is it, if
a man be mery and deuout in God when
grace commeth and viſiteth the ſoule?
for that houre is deſired of euery creature.
He rideth right ſafely, whom the grace
of God beareth & ſupporteth: and what
maruell is it if he feele no burden, that is
borne vp by him that is almightie, and
that is led by the ſoueraigne guide that
is God him ſelfe? VVe be alwaye glad to
haue ſolace & conſolation, but we would
hane no tribulation, nor we will not
lightly caſt from vs the falſe loue of our
ſelfe. The bleſſed Martyr Saint Laurence
through the loue of God mightily ouercame
the loue of the worlde, and of him
ſelfe, for he deſpiſed all that was likinge
and delectable in the worlde. And Sixtus
the Pope, whom he moſt loued for the

loue of God, he ſuffred meekelie to be taken
frō him, & ſo through the loue of God
he ouercame the loue of man, & for mans
comfort he choſe rather to folow the will
of God. Doe thou in like wiſe, and learne
to forſake ſome neceſſary and welbeloued
freende for the loue of God, and take it
not greeuouſlie, when thou art left or
forſaken of thy freende: for of neceſſitie
it behoueth worldlie frendes to be diſſeuered.
It behoueth a man to fight long,
and mightilye to ſtriue with him ſelfe,
before he ſhall learne fully to ouercome
him ſelfe, or be able freely and readlly to
ſet all his deſires in God. VVhen a man
loueth him ſelfe, and much truſteth to
him ſelf, he falleth anone to mans comfortes:
but the verie true louer of Chriſte,
and the diligēt folower of vertue, falleth
not ſo lightlye to them, neither ſeeketh
much ſuch ſenſible ſweetenes, ne ſuch bodely
delites, but rather is glad to ſuffer
great harde labours & paine for the loue
of Chriſt. Neuertheleſſe, when ghoſtlye
comfort is ſent to thee of God, take to
meeklye, and geue humble thankes for it:
but knowe it for certain, that it is of the
great goodnes of God that ſendeth it to
thee, and not of thy deſeruing: and looke
thou be not therefore lift vp into pride,
nor that thou ioye much thereof, neither
preſume vainely therein, but rather that
thou be the more meeke for ſo noble a

gifte, and the more warie and fearefull in
all thy workes: for that time will paſſe
awaye, and the time of temptation will
ſhortlye folowe after. VVhen comfort is
withdrawen, diſpayre not therefore, but
meekelye and patiently abide the viſitation
of God, for he is able, and of power
to geue thee more grace, and more ghoſtly
comfort, then thou haddeſt firſt. Suche
alteratiō of grace is no new nor ſtraunge
thinge to them that haue had experience
in the waye of God, for in great Saintes,
and holye prophetes was many times
founde like alteration. VVherefore the
prophete Dauid ſayth: Ego dixi in abundantia
mea, non mouebor in aeternum. That is
to ſaye, VVhen Dauid had aboundance
of ghoſtly comfort, he ſaide to our Lorde,
that he truſted he ſhould neuer be remoued
from ſuch comfort. But after, when
grace withdrewe, he ſaide: Auertiſti faciem
tuam a me, & factus ſum conturbatus. That is,
O Lord, thou haſt withdrawen thy ghoſtlye
comfortes from me, and I am lefte in
great trouble and heauines: and yet neuertheles,
he diſpaired not therfore, but
prayed hartily vnto our Lorde, and ſayd:
Ad to domine clamabo, & ad deum meum deprecabor.
That is to ſaye, I ſhall buſilye crye
to thee, O Lorde, and I ſhall meekelye
praye to thee for grace and comfort. And
anone he had the effecte of his prayer,
as he witneſſeth him ſelfe, ſaying thus:

                  Audiuit dominus, & miſertus eſt mei, dominus
factus eſt adiutor meus, That is to ſay, Our
Lorde hath heard my prayer, and hath
had mercy on me, and hath nowe agayne
ſent me his helpe and ghoſtlye comforte.
And therefore he ſayth afterward: Lord,
thou haſt turned my ſorow into ioye, and
thou haſte belapped me with heauenlye
gladnes. And if almightie God hath thus
done with holy Saintes, it is not for vs
weake and feeble perſons to diſpayre,
though we ſometime haue feruour of ſpirite,
and be ſometime left colde and voyd
of deuotion. The holy ghoſte goeth and
commeth after his pleaſure, and therefore
the holy man Iob ſayth: Lorde, thou graciouſly
viſiteſt thy louer in the morning
tyde, that is to ſaye, in the time of comfort,
and ſodenlye thou proueſt him: that
is to ſay, in withdrawing ſuch comfortes
from him. VVherein then may I truſt, or
in whom may I haue any confidēce, but
onelye in the great endleſſe grace and
mercy of God? for why? the company of
good men, nor the felowſhip of deuout
brethrē and faithfull frendes, neither the
hauing of holy bookes, or deuout treatiſes,
ne yet the hearing of ſweete ſonges,
or of deuout hymnes may litle auayle,
and bring forth but litle comfort to the
ſoule, when we are left to our owne frailtie
and pouertie. And when we be ſo left,
there is no better remedie but patience,

with a whole reſigning of our owne will
to the will of God. I neuer yet founde
any religious perſon ſo perfect, but that
he had ſometime abſentinge of grace, or
ſome miniſhinge of feruour: and there
was neuer yet anye Saint ſo highlie rauiſhed,
but that he firſte or laſt had ſome
temptation. He is not worthy to haue the
high gift of contemplation, that hath not
ſuffred for God ſome tribulation. The
temptations goinge before, were wont
to be a ſoothfaſt token of heauenlie comfort
ſhortly comminge after. And to them
that be founde ſtable in their temptatiōs,
is promiſed by our Lorde great conſolation.
And therfore he ſayth thus: He that
ouercommeth, I ſhall geue him to eate of
the tree of life. Heauenlie comfort is ſomtime
geuen to a man, that he may after
be more ſtronge to ſuffer aduerſities: but
after followeth temptation, that he be
not lifte vp into pride, and thinke hym
ſelfe worthie of ſuch conſolation. The
ghoſtlie enemie ſleepeth not, neither is
the fleſhe yet fullie mortified: and therefore
thou ſhalte neuer ceaſſe to prepare
thy ſelfe to ghoſtlye battayle, for thou
haſte enemyes on euerie ſide, that
euer will be readie to aſſaile thee,
and hinder thy good purpoſe
all that
they can.
            
            
               
               Of yeeldinge thankes to God for his manifolde
graces.
The .10. Chapter.
               
                  VVhy ſeekeſt thou reſt heere,
ſyth thou arte borne to laboure?
diſpoſe thy ſelfe to
patience, rather then to cō
                  fortes,
to beare the Croſſe of
penaunce, rather then to
haue gladnes. VVhat temporall man
would not gladly haue ſpirituall comfortes,
if he might alwaye keepe them? for
ſpirituall comfortes excede far all worldlie
delites, and all bodelie pleaſures, for
all worldlye delites be eyther foule or
vayne, but ghoſtlie delites are onelie iocunde
and honeſt, brought forth by vertues,
and ſent of God into a cleane ſoule.
But ſuch comfortes no man may haue
when he woulde, for the time of temptation
tarieth not longe. The falſe libertie
of will, and the ouermuch truſt that we
haue in our ſelfe, be much contrary to the
heauenlie viſitations. Our Lorde doeth
well in ſendinge ſuch comfortes, but we
doe not well, when we yeelde no thankes
therefore to him againe. The greateſt
cauſe why the giftes of grace maye not
lightlie come to vs, is, for that we be vnkind
to the gyuer, and yelde not thankes
to him, from whom all goodnes commeth.
Grace is alway geuen to thē that

be ready to yelde thākes therfore againe.
And therefore it ſhalbe taken from the
proud man, that is wont to be geuen to
the meke man. I wold none of that conſolation
that ſhould take from me compunction,
nor any of that contemplatiō
that ſhould lift my ſoule into preſūption.
Euery high thing in ſight of man, is not
holy, nor euery deſire cleane and pure:
euery ſweet thinge is not good, nor euery
deere thinge to man, is alwaye pleaſant
to God. VVe ſhall therefore gladlie take
ſuch giftes, whereby we ſhall be the more
readie to forſake our ſelfe, and our owne
will. He that knoweth the comforts that
come through the gifts of grace, and
knoweth alſo how ſharpe and painefull
the abſentinge of grace is, ſhall not dare
to thinke, that any goodnes commeth of
him ſelfe, but he ſhall openlye confeſſe,
that of him ſelfe he is right poore, and
naked of all vertue: yeelde therefore to
God, that is his, and to thy ſelfe that is
thine: that is to ſay, thanke God for his
manifolde graces and blame thy ſelfe for
thine offences. Holde in thee alwaye â
ſure grounde, and a ſure fouudation of
meekenes, and then the highnes of vertue
ſhall ſhortlie be geuen vnto thee: for
the high tower of vertue may not longe
ſtand, but if it be borne vp with the lowe
foundation of meekes. They that be moſt
great in heauen, be leaſt in their owne

ſight: and the more glorious they be, the
meeker they are in them ſelues, full of
truth and heauenlie ioy, not deſirous of
any vaine glory or praiſinge of man. Alſo
they that be fullie ſtabled and confirmed
iu God, maye in no wiſe be lifte vp into
pride: and they that aſcribe all goodnes
to God, ſeeke no vaine glorie nor vayne
prayſinges in the world, but they deſire
onlie to ioye, and to be glorified in God,
and deſire in heart, that he maye be honoured,
lauded and prayſed aboue all
thinges, both in him ſelfe, and in all his
Saintes: and that is alwaye the thinge
that perfect men moſte couet, and moſte
deſire to bringe about. Be thou louinge
and thankfull to God for the leaſt benefite
that he geueth thee, and then ſhalt
thou be the more apte and worthie to receaue
of hym more greater benefites.
Thinke the leaſt gift that he geueth, is
great, & the moſt deſpiſable thinges accepte
as ſpeciall giftes, and as great tokens
of loue: for if the dignitie of the geuer be
well conſidered, no gifte that he geueth
ſhall ſeeme litle. It is no litle thinge that
is geuen of God: for though he ſende
paine and ſorowe, we ſhoulde take them
gladlie and thankefullie, for it is for our
ghoſtlie health, all that he ſuffereth to
come vnto vs. If a man deſire to holde
the grace of God, let him be kinde and
thankefull for ſuch grace as he hath receaued,

patient when it is withdrawen,
and praye deuoutlie, that it may ſhortlie
come againe. Let him be meeke and lowa
in ſpirite, that he loſe it not agayne
through his preſumption and pride of
hart.
            
            
               Of the ſmall number of the louers
of the Croſſe.
The .11. Chapter.
               
                  IEſus hath many louers of
his kingdome of heauen, but
he hath fewe bearers of his
croſſe. Manie deſire his conſolation,
but fewe deſire his
tribulation. He findeth many felowes at
eatinge and drinkinge, but he findeth
fewe that will be with him in his abſtinē
                  ce
and faſtinge. All men would ioye with
Chriſt, but fewe would any thinge ſuffer
for Chriſte. Many folowe him to the breakinge
of his breade, for their bodilye refection,
but few will folowe him to drinke
a draught of the Chalice of his paſſion.
Manie maruayle and honour his miracles,
but fewe will folowe the ſhame of
his croſſe, & of his other vilanies. Manie
loue Ieſu ſo longe as no aduerſitie foloweth
to them, and can prayſe him, and
bleſſe him, when they receyue any benefit
of him: but if Ieſu a litle withdraw? him
ſelfe from them, and a litle forſake them,

anone they fall to ſome great grudginge,
or to ouergreat defection, or into open
deſperation: But they that loue Ieſu purelie
for him ſelfe, and not for their owne
profite and commoditie, they bleſſe him
as hartilie in temptation and tribulatiō,
and in all other aduerſities, as they doe
in tyme of conſolation. And yf he neuer
ſent them conſolation, yet woulde they
alway laude him, and prayſe him. O how
may the loue of Ieſu doe to the helpe of
a ſoule, if it be pure and cleane, not mixt
with any inordinate lone to him ſelfe?
truelie nothing more. May not they then
that euer looke for worldlie comfortes,
and for worldlie conſolations, be called
worldly inarchants, and worldly louers,
rather then louers of God? do they not
openlye ſhewe by their dedes that they
rather loue them ſelfe than God? yes
truelye. O where maye be founde anye
that will ſerue God freely and purelye,
without looking for ſome rewarde for it
agayne? And where may be founde any
ſo ſpirituall, that he is cleerelye deliuered
and bereft from loue of him ſelfe,
and that is truely poore in ſpirite, and
is whollye auoyded from loue of creatures?
I trowe noue ſuche can be found
but it be far hence, and in far countryes
If a man geue all his ſubſtaunce for God
yet he is naught: and if he doe great penaunce
for his ſinnes, yet he is but litle▪
                  
and if he haue great cunning and knowledge,
yet he is far from vertue: and if he
haue greate vertue and brenninge deuotion,
yet much wanteth in him, And that
is ſpecially one thing, which is moſte neceſſarye
to him: what is that? that all
thinges forſaken, and him ſelfe alſo forſaken,
he go cleerely from him ſelfe, and
keepe nothinge to him ſelfe of anye priuate
loue, and whē he hath done all that
he ought to doe, that he feele in him ſelfe,
as he had nothinge done, nor that he
thinke it great, that ſome other might
thinke great, but that he thinke him ſelfe
truely, as he is, an vnprofitable feruant:
for the authour of truth, our Sauiour
Chriſte ſaith, when ye haue done all that
is commaunded you to doe, yet ſaye that
ye be but vnprofitable ſeruauntes. Then
he that can thus doe, may well be called
poore in ſpirite, and naked of priuate
loue: and he may well ſay with the prophete
Dauid, I am vnited in God, and
am poore and meeke in heart. There is
none more riche, none more free, nor any
of more power, then he that can forſake
him ſelfe, and all paſſinge thinges,
and that truelye can holde him
ſelfe to be loweſt and
vileſt of all
other.
            
            
               
               Of the vvay of the Croſſe, and bovve profitable
patience is in aduerſitie.
The 12. Chapter.
               
                  THe wordes of our Sauiour

                     •
                  e thought very harde and
greeuous, whē he ſaith thus:
Forſake your leife, take the
Croſſe, and folowe me. But
much more greeuous ſhall it
be, to heare theſe wordes at the laſt daye
of iudgement: Go ye from me ye curſed
people into the fire that euer ſhall laſt.
But thoſe that nowe gladlie heare and
folowe the wordes of Chriſt, whereby he
counſaileth them to folowe him, ſhall not
then neede to dreade for hearinge thoſe
wordes of euerlaſtinge damnation. The
ſigne of the Croſſe ſhall appere in heauē,
when our Lorde ſhall come to iudge the
worlde, and the ſeruantes of the Croſſe,
who conformed them ſelues here in this
life to Chriſte crucified on the Croſſe, ſhal
go to Chriſte their Iudge with greate
fayth and truſt in him. VVhy doeſt thou
then dreade to take this Croſſe, ſith it is
the verye waye to the kingdome of heauen,
and none but that? In the Croſſe is
health, in the Croſſe is life, in the Croſſe
is defenſe from our enemies, in the croſſe
is infuſion of heauenlie ſweetnes, in the
Croſſe is the ſtrength of minde, the ioye
of ſpirite, the highnes of vertue, and the

full perfection of all holines, and there
is no health of ſoule, nor hope of euerlaſting
life, but through vertue of the croſſe
Take therefore the Croſſe, and folowe
Ieſus, and thou ſhalt goe into the lyfe
euerlaſtinge. He hath gone before thee
bearinge his Croſſe, and died for thee
vpon the Croſſe, that thou ſhouldeſt in
like wiſe beare with him the Croſſe of penance
and tribulation, and that thou
ſhouldeſt be readie likewiſe for his loue
to ſuffer death, if neede require, as he
hath done for thee. If thou die with him,
thou ſhalt liue with him: and if thou be
felowe with him in paine, thou ſhalt be
with him in glorie. Beholde then how in
the Croſſe ſtandeth all, & howe in dyinge
to the worlde lieth all our health, & that
there is no other waye to true and inward
peace, but the waye of the Croſſe,
and of deadlie mortifyinge of the bodie
to the ſpirite. So whether thou wilt, and
ſeeke what thou liſt, and thou ſhalt neuer
finde aboue thee, nor beneath thee,
within thee, nor without thee, more
high, more excellent, nor more ſure waye
to Chriſt, then the waye of the holy croſſe.
Diſpoſe euery thinge after thy will and
thou ſhalt neuer finde, but that thou
muſt of neceſſitie ſomewhat ſuffer eyther
with thy will, or againſt thy will, and ſo
ſhalt thou alwaye finde the Croſſe: for
either thou ſhalt feele paine in thy bodie,

or in thy ſoule thou ſhalt haue trouble of
ſpirit. Thou ſhalt be ſometime as thou
were forſaken of God. Sometime thou
ſhalt be vexed with thy neighbour, and,
that is yet more painefull, thou ſhalt
ſometime be greeuous to thy ſelfe, and
thou ſhalt find no meane to be deliuered,
but that it behoueth thee to ſuffer til it
ſhall pleaſe almightie god of his goodnes
otherwiſe to diſpoſe for thee: for he will,
that thou ſhalt learne to ſuffer tribulation
without cōſolatiō, that thou mayeſt
therby learne, whollie to ſubmit thy ſelfe
to him, and by tribulation to be made
more meeke, then thou were at the firſt.
No man feeleth the paſſion of Chriſte ſo
effectuouſlie, as he that feeleth like paine
as Chriſte did. This Croſſe is alway readie,
and euery where it abideth thee, and
thou mayeſt not flee, nor fullie eſcape it,
wherſoeuer thou become, for in what
place ſoeuer thou art, thou ſhalt beare
thy ſelfe about with thee, and ſo alwaye
ſhalt thou finde thy ſelfe. Turne thee
where thou wilt, aboue thee, beneath
thee, within thee, and without thee, and
thou ſhalt finde this croſſe on euery ſide,
ſo that it ſhall be neceſſarie for thee, that
thou alwaye keepe thee in patience: and
that it behoueth thee to doe, if thou wilt
haue inwarde peace, and deſerue the perpetuall
crowne in heauen. If thou wilt
gladlie beare this Croſſe, it ſhall beare

thee, and bringe thee to the ende that
thou deſireſt, where thou ſhalt neuer
after haue any thinge to ſuffer. And if
thou beare this Croſſe againſt thy will,
thou makeſt a great burden to thy ſelfe,
and it will be the more greeuous to thee,
and yet it behoueth thee to beare it. And
if it happen thee to put away one croſſe,
that is to ſaye, one tribulatiō, yet ſurely
another will come, and happlie more
greeuous then the firſt was. Troweſt
thou to eſcape, that neuer yet any mortal
man might eſcaped VVhat Saint in this
world hath beene without this Croſſe, &
without ſome trouble? Trulie, our Lorde
Ieſu was not one houre without ſome
ſorowe and payne, as longe as he liued
here, for it behoued him to ſuffer death,
and to riſe againe, and ſo to enter into
his glorie: and how is it then, that thou
ſeekeſt any other waye to heauen then
this plaine high waye of the Croſſe? All
the life of Chriſt was Croſſe and martyrdome,
and thou ſeekeſt pleaſure and ioy.
Thou erreſt greatlie, if thou ſeeke anye
other thinge then to ſuffer: For all this
mortall life is full of miſeries, and is all
beſet about and marked with Croſſes, &
the more highlie that a man profiteth in
ſoi
                     •
                  ite, the more painfull Croſſes ſhall he
finde, For by the ſooth faſtnes of Chriſtes
loue, wherein he daylie increaſeth, daylie
appeareth vnto him more and more the

paine of this exile. But neuertheleſſe, a
man thus vexed with paine, is not left
whollie without all comfort, for he ſeeth
well, that great fruite and high rewarde
ſhall growe vnto him by the bearinge of
his Croſſe. And when a man freelie ſubmitteth
him ſelfe to ſuch tribulatiō, then
all the burden of tribulation is ſodenlie
turned into a great truſt of heauenlye
conſolation. And the more the fleſhe is
puniſhed with tribulation, the more is
the ſoule ſtrengthned daylie by inwarde
conſolation: And ſometime the ſoule ſhall
feele ſuch comfort in aduerſities, that
for the loue and deſire that it hath to be
conformed to Chriſte crucified, it woulde
not be without ſorowe and trouble: for it
conſidereth well, that the more that it
may ſuffer for his loue here, the more acceptable
ſhall he be to him in the life to
come. But this workinge is not in the
power of man, but through the grace of
God, that is to ſaye, that a frayle man
ſhould take and loue that, which his bodilie
kinde ſo much abhorreth and flieth:
for it is not in the power of man, gladlie
to beare the Croſſe, to loue the Croſſe, to
chaſtiſe the bodie, and to make it obediēt
to the will of the ſpirite, to flee honours,
gladlie to ſuſtayne reproufes, to deſpiſe
him ſelfe, and to couet to be deſpiſed: patientlie
to ſuffer aduerſities, with al
diſpleaſures thereof, and not to deſire

any maner of profite in this worlde. If
thou truſt in thy ſelfe, thou ſhaltneuer
bringe this matter about: but yf thou
truſt in God, he ſhall ſend thee ſtrength
from heauen, and the worlde, and the
fleſhe ſhalbe made ſubiect to thee: yea,
and if thou be ſtrongly armed with faith,
and be marked with the Croſſe of Chriſt,
as his houſholde ſeruant, thou ſhalt not
neede to feare thy ghoſtlie enemie, for he
ſhall alſo be made ſubiect to thee, ſo that
he ſhall haue no power againſt thee.
Purpoſe thy ſelfe therefore as a true
faythfull ſeruant of God, manfullye to
beare the Croſſe of thy Lorde Ieſu, that
for thy loue was crucified on the Croſſe:
prepare thy ſelfe to ſuffer all maner of
aduerſities and diſcommodities in this
wretched life: for ſo ſhall it be with thee,
wherſoeuer thou hide thee, and there is
no remedie to eſcape, but that thou muſt
keepe thy ſelfe alwaye in patience. If
thou deſire to be a deare and well beloued
frende of Chriſt, drinke effectuouſlie
with him a draught of the chalice of his
tribulation. As for conſolations, commit
them to his will, that he order them as
he knoweth moſt expediēt for thee: but as
for thy ſelfe, & for as much as in thee is,
diſpoſe thee to ſuffer, & when tribulatiōs
come, take them as ſpeciall conſolations,
ſayinge with the Apoſtle thus: The paſſiōs
of this world be not worthy of them

ſelues, to bringe vs to the glorye that is
ordeined for vs in the life to come, yea,
though thou thy ſelfe mighteſt ſuffer aſmuch
as all men do. VVhē thou cōmeſt to
that degree of patience, that tribulatiō is
ſweete to thee, & for the loue of God is ſauoury
& pleaſaūt in thy ſight, then maieſt
thou truſt, that it is wel with thee, & that
thou art in good eſtate, for thou haſte
founde paradiſe in earth. But as long as
it is greeuous to thee to ſuffer, and thou
ſeekeſt to flee, ſo long it is not well with
thee, neither art thou in the perfect way
of patiēce: but if thou couldeſt bringe thy
ſelfe to that eſtate, that thou ſhouldeſt be
at, that is, to ſuffer gladly for God, and to
dye fully to the worlde, then ſhoulde it
ſhortlye be better with thee, and thou
ſhouldeſt finde great peace: but yet, although
thou were rapt with Paule into
the third heauē, thou ſhouldeſt not therefore
be ſure without all aduerſitie: for
our Sauiour ſpeaking of S. Paul, after
he had bene rapt into heauen, ſayd thus
of him: I ſhall ſhewe him howe many
thinges he ſhall ſuffer for me. To ſuffer
therefore to thee remayneth, if thou wilt
loue thy Lorde Ieſu, and ſerue him perpetually.
VVould to god, that thou wexe
worthy, to ſuffer ſomewhat for his loue.
O howe great ioye ſhoulde it be to thee,
to ſuffer for him? what gladnes to all the
Saintes of heauen? and howe great edifying

to thy neighbour? All men cōmend
patience, and yet fewe men will ſuffer.
Righteouſly thou oughteſt to ſuffer ſome
litle thing for God, that ſuffereſt much
more for the worlde. And knowe this for
certaine, that after this bodily death
thou ſhalte yet lyue, & the more that thou
canſt dye to thy ſelfe here, the more thou
beginneſt to liue to God. No man is apt
to receyue the heauenlie rewarde, but he
haue firſt learned to beare aduerſities for
the loue of Chriſte, for nothinge is more
acceptable to God, nor more profitable
to man in this worlde then to be glad to
ſuffer for Chriſt, in ſomuch that if it were
put in thy election, thou ſhouldeſt rather
choſe aduerſitie then proſperitie, for then
by the pacient ſufferinge thereof thou
ſhouldeſt be more like to Chriſte, and the
more confirmed to all his ſaintes. Our
merite, and our perfectiō of life ſtandeth
not in conſolations and ſweetnes, but
rather in ſufferinge of great greeuous
aduerſities and tribulations. For if there
had bene any nearer or better waye for
the health of mans ſoule then to ſuffer,
our Lorde Ieſu would haue ſhewed it by
wordes, or by examples: But for there
was not, therefore he openlie exhorted
his diſciples that folowed him, and all
other that deſired to folowe him, to forſake
their owne will, and to take the
Croſſe of penance and folowe him, ſaying

thus, VVho ſo will come after me, forſake
he his owne will, take he the Croue,
and folowe he me. Therefore all thinges
ſearched and redde, be this the finall concluſion,
that by many tribulations it
behoueth vs to enter into the
kingdome of heauen. To
the which bring vs
our Lorde Ieſus.
Amen.
            
         
         
            
            Here beginneth the third Booke.
            
               
            
            
               Of the invvarde ſpeakinge of Chriſt
to a faythfull ſoule.
The firſte Chapter.
               
                  I Shall take heede, ſaith a deuout
ſoule, and I ſhall heare
what my Lorde Ieſu ſhall
ſpeake in me. Bleſſed is that
man whiche heareth Ieſu
ſpeaking in his ſoule, and that taketh of

his mouth ſome worde of comforte, and
bleſſed be the eares that heare the ſecret
rowninges of Ieſu, and heede not the
deceytfull rowninges of this world. And
bleſſed be the good playne eares that
heede not the outwarde ſpeache, but rather
take heede what God ſpeaketh and
teacheth inwardlye in the ſoule. Bleſſed
be the eyes alſo, that be ſhutte from ſight
of outwarde vanities, & that take hede to
the inwarde mouinges of God. Bleſſed
be they alſo that get them vertues, and
prepare them by good bodily and ghoſtly
workes, to receyue dayly more and more
the ſecrete inſpirations and inward teachinges
of God. Alſo, bleſſed be they that
ſet them ſelues wholly to ſerue God, and
for his ſeruice ſet apart all lettinges of
the world. O thou my ſoule, take heede to
that is ſayde before, and ſhet the dores of
thy ſenſualities, that are thy fyue wittes,
that thou mayeſt heare inwardlye, what
our Lord Ieſu ſpeketh in thy ſoule. Thus
ſaith thy beloued, I am thy health, I am
thy peace, I am thy lyfe, keepe thee with
me, and thou ſhalt finde peace in me. Forſake
the loue of tranſitorie thinges, and
ſeeke thinges that be euerlaſting VVhat
be all temporall thinges but deceauable?
and what may any creature helpe thee, if
thy Lord Ieſu forſake thee. Therefore all
creatures, and all worldlye thinges forſaken
& lefte 
                     〈◊〉
                   that in thee is, to make

thee pleaſaunt in his ſyght, that after
this lyfe thou mayſt come to the life euerlaſting,
in the kingdome of heauen. Amē.
            
            
               Hovve allmightie God ſpeaketh invvardlye to
mans ſoule vvithout ſounde of vvordes.
The .2. Chapter.
               
                  SPeke Lord, for I thy ſeruāt
am readie to heare thee, I
am thy ſeruant: geue me
wiſedome & vnderſtanding
to knowe thy commaundements.
Bowe my heart to
folowe the wordes of thy holy teachings
that they may diſtil into my ſoule, as
dewe into the graſſe. The children of Iſrael
ſayde to Moyſes: Speake thou to
vs, and we ſhall heare thee: but let not
our Lorde ſpeake to vs, leaſt haply we
dye for dreade. Not ſo Lord, not ſo I beſeeche
thee, but rather I aſke meekelye
with Samuel the prophete, that thou
vouchſafe to ſpeake to me thy ſelfe, and
I ſhall gladlye heare thee. Let not Moyſes,
nor any other of the prophets ſpeake
to me, but rather thou Lorde, who art
the inward inſpirour and geuen of light
to all prophets: for thou alone without
them mayeſt fully informe and inſtruct
me. They without thee maye litle profite
me. They ſpeake thy wordes, but they
geue not the ſpirite to vnderſtand the

wordes. They ſpeake fayre, but if thou be
ſtill, they kindle not the heart. They
ſhewe faire letters, but thou declareſt the
ſentence. They bring forth great high
miſteries, but thou openeſt therof the
true vnderſtanding: they declare thy
commaundements, but thou helpeſt to
performe them. They ſhew the way, but
thou geueſt comfort to walke therein.
They doe all outwardly, but thou illumineſt
and infourmeſt the heart within.
They water onely outwardly, but it is
thou, that geueſt the inwarde growing.
They crye all in wordes, but thou geueſt
to the hearers vnderſtanding of the
wordes that be hard. Let not Moyſes
therfore ſpeake to me, but thou my Lorde
Ieſu, who art the euerlaſting truth, leaſt
happely I dye, and be made as a man
without fruit, warmed outwardly, and
not inflamed inwardly, and ſo to haue
the harder iudgement, for that I haue
hearde thy word, & not done it: knowen
it, and not loued it: beleeued it, and not
fulfilled it. Speake therefore to me thy
ſelfe, for I thy ſeruaunt am readye to
heare thee. Thou haſt the wordes of eternall
life, ſpeake them to me, to the full
comfort of my ſoule, and geue me
amendement of all my life
paſt, to thy ioy, honor and
glory euerlaſtingly.
Amen.
            
            
               
               That the vvordes of God are to be hearde
vvith great meekenes, and that there be
but fevve that ponder them, as
they ought to doe.
The .3. Chapter.
               
                  MY ſonne ſayth our Lord, heare
my wordes, and folow them,
for they be moſte ſweet, farre
paſſing the wiſedome & cunning
of all philoſophets, and
wiſe men of the worlde. My words be
ſpirituall and ghoſtly, and can not be
fully comprehended by mans wit, neither
are they to be turned or applyed to
the vayne pleaſure of the hearer, but are
to be heard in ſilēce with great meeknes
and reuerence, and with great inward
affection of the heart, and alſo in great
reſt and quietnes of body and ſoule. O
bleſſed is he, lord, whom thou infourmeſt
& teacheſt, ſo that thou mayeſt be meelie
and mercifull. Lorde vnto him in the euil
day, that is to ſay, in the day of the moſt
dreadful iudgement, that he be not then
left deſolate & comfortleſſe in the land of
dānation. Then ſayth our Lord againe:
I haue taught prophetes from the beginning,
and yet cealſe I not to ſpeake
to euery creature, but many be deafe, &
will not heare, & many heare the worlde
more gladly then me, and more lightly

folowe the appetite of the fleſhe, thē the
pleaſure of God. The worlde promiſeth
temporall thinges of ſmall value, & yet
is he ſerued with great affectiō: but God
promiſeth high thinges, and thinges
eternall, and the hearts of the people be
ſlowe & dul. Oh, who ſerueth & obeyeth
God in all thinges with ſo great deſire,
as he doth the worlde, and as worldly
princes be ſerued & obeyed? I trow none:
for why? for a litle prebend great iourneyes
be taken, but for the life euerlaſ
                     •
                  ing,
the people wyll ſcarſely lift their
feete once from the grounde. A thing
that is of ſmall price, many times is buſily
ſought, and for a penie is ſometime
great ſtrife, and for the promiſe of a litle
worldlye profite, men eſchewe not to
ſwinke and ſweate both day and night:
But alas for ſorowe, for the goods euerlaſting,
and for the rewarde that may
not be eſteemed by mans ha
                     ••
                  e, and for
the high honour & glory that neuer ſhall
haue ende, men be ſlowe to take any
maner of payne and labour. Be thou therefore
aſhamed thou ſlowe ſeruaunt of
God, that they be founde more ready to
workes of death, then thou art to works
of life, and that they ioy more in vanitie,
then thou in truth: and yet they be ofte
deceyued of that that they haue moſt
truſt in, but my promiſe deceueth no
man, nor leaueth no man that truſteth in

me without ſome comfort. That I haue
promiſed I will performe, & that I haue
ſayd I will fulfill to euery perſon, ſo that
they abide faythfully in my loue & dread
vnto the ende, for I am the rewarder of
all good men, and a ſtrong prouer of all
deuout ſoules. VVrite my wordes therefore
in thy hart diligētly, and ofte thinke
thou vpō them, and they ſhall be in time
of temptatiō much neceſſarie vnto thee.
That thou vnderſtandeſt not when thou
readeſt it, thou ſhalt vnderſtande in the
time of my viſitation. I am wont to viſite
my ſeruauntes two maner of wayes,
that is to ſay, with temptation, and with
conſolation: and two leſſons dayly I
reade vnto them, one wherby I rebuke
their vices, another whereby I ſtirre thē
to encreaſe in vertues: and he that knoweth
my wordes and deſpiſeth thē, hath
that that ſhall iudge him in the laſt day.
            
            
               A prayer to obteyne the grace of
deuotion.
The .4. Chapter.
               
                  Lord Ieſu, thou art all my riches,
and all that I haue, I
haue it of thee. But what am
I (Lorde) that I dare thus
ſpeake to thee, I am thy pooreſt
ſeruaunt, & a worme moſt abiect, more
poore, and more diſpiſable than I can or

bare ſay. Beholde (Lorde) that I am
nought, that I haue nought, and of my
ſelfe I am nought worth: thou art only
good, righteous and holy, thou ordereſt
all things, thou giueſt all things, & thou
fulfilleſt all things with thy goodnes,
leauing only the wretched ſinner barrain
and voyde of heauēly comfort. Remember
thy mercies, and fill my harte with
thy manifolde graces, for thou wilte not
that thy works in me be made in vaine.
How may I beare the miſeries of this
lyfe, vnleſſe thy grace and mercy doe cō
                  fort
me therin? Turne not thy face from
me, defer not thy viſiting of me, ne with
drawe not thy comforts from me, leſt
happily my ſoule be made as dry earth
without the water of grace, and as it
were a thing vnprofitable to thee. Teache
me, Lorde, to fulfill thy will, and to
liue meekly and worthily before thee, for
thou art all my wiſedome and running,
and thou art he that knoweſt me as
I am, and that kneweſt me before
the world was made, and
before that I was borne
or brought into
this lyfe.
            
            
               
               Hovve vve ought to be conuerſant before
God in truth and meekenes.
The 5. Chapter.
               
                  MY ſonne, ſayth our lord Ieſu,
walke before me in truth
and meekenes, and ſeeke me
alwayes in ſimplenes and
playnnes of hart. He that
walketh in truth, ſhall be
defended from all perils and daungers,
and truth ſhall deliuer him frō all deceyuers,
and from all euil ſayings of wicked
people. If truth deliuer thee, thou art very
free, and thou ſhalt litle care for the
vayne ſayinges of the people. Lord it is
true all that thou ſayeſt, be it done to
me after thy ſaying. I beſeeche thee that
thy truth may teache me and kepe me,
and finally leade me to a bleſſed ending,
and that it may deliuer me from all euil
affections, and from all inordinate loue,
that I may walke with thee in freedome
of ſpirite, and libertie of harte. Then
truth ſayth agayne, I ſhall teache thee
what is acceptable and liking to me:
Thinke on thy ſinnes paſte, with great
diſpleaſure and ſorowe of harte, & neuer
thinke thy ſelfe worthy to be called holy
or vertuous for any good deedes that
thou haſt done, but thinke howe great a
ſinner thou art, be
                     •
                  apped and bounde
with great and manifolde ſinnes and

paſſions, and that of thy ſelfe thou draweſt
to nought, ſoone falleſt, ſoone art
ouercome, ſoone troubled, and ſoone art
thou broken with labour and payne: and
thou haſt nothing whereof thou mayſt
righteouſly glorifie thy ſelfe, but many
things thou haſt wherfore thou oughteſt
to deſpiſe thy ſelfe, for thou art more vnſtable
and more weake to ghoſtly works,
then thou knoweſt or mayſt thinke. Let
nothing therfore ſeeme great to thee, nothing
precious, nothing worthy any reputation,
nor woorthy to be prayſed in
thy ſight, but that is euerlaſting. Let the
euerlaſtinge truth be moſt liking & moſte
pleaſaunt to thee aboue all other thinges,
and that thine owne ſinne and vilenes
be moſte miſliking and moſte diſpleaſaunt
to thee. Dreade nothing ſo
much, nor reproue nothing ſo much, neyther
let any thing be to thee ſo much hated,
nor flee nothing ſo muche as thy
ſinnes and wickednes: for they ſhould
more diſpleaſe thee, then ſhould the loſſe
of all worldly thinges. Some there be
that walke not purelye before me, for
they through pride and curioſitie of thē
ſelues deſire to ſearche and know high
thinges of my godhead, forgetting them
ſelues, & the health of their owne ſoules:
ſuch perſons fall oft times into great lē
                  ptations
and greeuous ſinnes by their
pride and curioſitie, for the which I am

turned againſt them, & leaue them to thē
ſelues, without helpe or counſaile of me.
Dreade therfore the iudgemetes of God,
& the wrath of him that is almightie, and
diſcuſſe not, nor ſearche his ſecretes, but
ſearche well thine owne iniquities, How
ofte, & how greeuouſlie thou haſte offended
him, & howe many good deedes thou
haſte negligētlie omitted & lefte vndone,
whiche thou mighteſt well haue doone.
Some perſons beare their deuotion in
bookes, ſome in images, ſome in outward
tokens and figures: ſome haue me in
their mouth, but litle in their heart: but
ſome there be, that haue their reaſon cleerely
illumined with the light of true vnderſtandinge,
whereby their affectiō is ſo
purged and purified from loue of earthly
thinges, that they maye alwaye couete &
deſire heauenlie thinges: in ſo much as it
is greeuous to thē for to heare of earthly
likinges, and it is to them alſo a right
great payne to ſerue the neceſſities of the
body, and they thinke all the time as loſt,
wherein they go about it. Suche perſons
feele and knowe well, what the ſpirite of
truth ſpeaketh in their ſoules, for it teacheth
them to deſpiſe earthlie thinges,
and to loue heauenlie thinges: to forſake
the worlde that is tranſitorie, and to deſire
both daye and night, to come thither
where is ioy euerlaſtinge, to the which
bringe vs our Lorde Ieſus. Amen.
            
            
               
               Of the meruaillous effect of the loue of God.
The .6. Chapter.
               
                  BLeſſed be thou heauenlie father,
the father of my Lorde
Ieſus Chriſte, for thou haſte
voucheſafed to remember me
thy pooreſt ſeruant, and ſomtime
doeſt comfort me with thy gracious
preſence, that am vnwoorthy al comfort:
I bleſſe thee, and glorifye thee alwaye,
with thy onelye begotten ſonne, and
the holy Ghoſte without endinge. Amen.
               O my Lord God moſte faythfull louer,
when thou commeſt into my heart, all
mine inwarde partes doe ioye. Thou art
my glorie, and the ioye of my heart, my
hope and wholle refuge in all my troubles.
But foraſmuche as I am yet feeble
in loue, & vnperfect in vertue, therefore
I haue neede of more comforte and helpe
of thee. Vouchſafe therefore ofte times
to viſite and inſtruct me with thy holye
teachinges. Deliuer me from all euill paſſions,
and heale my ſicke hart from all
inordinate affections, that I may be inwardlie
healed and purged from all inordinate
affections and vices, and be made
apte and able to loue thee, ſtronge to ſuffer
for thee, and ſtable to perſeuer in thee.
Loue is a great thinge and a good, and
onelie maketh heauye burdens light, and
beareth in like balaunce things pleaſaūt

and diſpleaſant: it beareth a heauie burden,
and feeleth it not, and maketh bitter
thinges to be ſauerie and ſweete. Alſo the
noble loue of Ieſu perfectlie printed in
mans ſoule, maketh a man to doe great
thinges, and ſtirreth him alwaye to deſire
perfection, and to growe more and
more in grace and goodnes. Loue will
alwaye haue his minde vpwarde to god,
and will not be occupied with loue of the
worlde. Loue will alſo be free from all
worldlie affections, that the inwarde
ſight of the ſoule be not darked or let,
nor that his affectiō to heauenly thinges
be put from his free libertie by inordinat
winninge or loſinge of worldly thinges.
Nothinge therefore is more ſweete then
loue, nothinge higher, nothinge ſtronger,
nothinge larger, nothinge ioyfuller, nothinge
fuller, nor any thinge better in
heauen or in earth: for loue deſcendeth
from God, and may not reſt finallie in
anye thinge lower then God. Suche a
louer flieth high, he runneth ſwiftlie, he
is merie in God, he is free in ſoule, he
geneth all for all, and hath all in all: for
he reſteth in one high goodnes aboue all
thinges, of whom all goodnes floweth
and proceedeth the beholdeth not onelee
the gifte, but the geuer aboue all giftes.
Loue knoweth no meaſure, but is feruent
without meaſure. It feeleth no burden, it
regardeth no labour, it deſireth more thē
                  
it may attaine, it complaineth of none
impoſſibilitie, for it thinketh all thinge
that maye be done for his beloued, poſſible
and lawfull vnto him. Loue therefore
doth many great thinges, and bringeth
them to effect, wherein he that is no
louer fainteth and faileth. Loue waketh
muche, and ſleepeth litle, and ſleepinge
ſleepeth not: it fainteth, and is not werie:
is reſtrained of libertie, and is in great
freedome. He ſeeth cauſes of feare, and
feareth not, but as a quicke bronde or
ſparkle of fire, flameth alwaye vpwarde
by feruoure of loue into God, & through
the eſpeciall helpe of grace is deliuered
from all perils and daungers. He that is
thus a ghoſtlie louer, knoweth well what
his voyce meanes, which ſayeth thus:
Thou Lorde God art my wholle loue and
my deſire, thou art all mine, and I all
thine. Spreade thou my heart into thy
loue, that I may taſte and feele howe
ſweete it is to ſerue thee, and how ioyful
it is to laude thee, aud to be as I were all
molten into thy loue. O I am bounden in
loue, and go farre aboue my ſelfe: for the
wonderfull great feruour that I feele of
thy vnſpeakeable goodnes, I ſhall ſinge
to thee the ſonge of loue, and I ſhall folowe
thee my beloued by highnes of
thought, whereſoeuer thou go, and my
ſoule ſhall neuer be werie to prayſe thee
with the ioyfull ſonge of ghoſtlie loue,

that I ſhall ſing to thee. I ſhall loue thee
more then my ſelfe, and not my ſelfe but
for thee, and all other in thee and for
thee, as the lawe of loue commaundeth,
which is geuen by thee. Loue is ſwifte,
pure, meeke, ioyous and glad, ſtronge, patient,
faythfull, wiſe, forbearing, manlye,
& neuer ſeeking him ſelfe, nor his owne
will, for whenſoeuer a man ſeeketh him
ſelfe, he falleth fro loue. Alſo loue is circumſpect,
meeke, righteous, not tender,
not light, nor heedinge vayne thinges:
ſober, chaſte, ſtable, quiet, and well ſtabled
in his outwarde wittes. Alſo, loue is ſubiect
and obedient to his prelate, vile and
deſpiſable in his owne ſight, deuout and
thankfull to God, truſting, and alwaye
hoping in him, and that whē he hath but
litle deuotion, or litle ſauor in him: for
without ſome ſorowe or payne no man
may lyue in loue. He that is not alwaye
redy to ſuffer, and to ſtand fullye at the
will of his beloued, is not woorthy to be
called a louer, for it behoueth a louer to
ſuffer gladlye all harde and bitter
thinges for his beloued, and not
to decline from his loue for
no contrariou thing
that may befall
vnto him.
            
            
               
               Of the proufe of a true louer of God.
The 7. Chapter.
               
                  MY ſonne, ſaith our Sauiour
Chriſte, thou art not yet a
ſtronge and a wyſe louer:
for whye? for a litle aduerſitie
thou leaueſt anone
that thou haſte begon in
my ſeruice, and with great
deſire thou ſeekeſt outward conſolatiōs.
But a ſtrong and a faithful louer of God
ſtandeth ſtable in all aduerſities, and geueth
litle heede to the deceitfull perſuaſions
of the enemy, and as he pleſeth him
in proſperitie, ſo he diſpleaſeth him not
in aduerſitie. A wiſe louer cōſidereth not
ſo much the gifte of his louer as he doth
the loue of the geuer. He regardeth more
the loue then the gifte, and accompteth
all giftes litle in compariſon of his beloued,
who geueth them to him. A noble
louer reſteth not in the gifte, but in me
aboue all giftes. Furthermore, it is not all
loſt, though thou ſometime feele leſſe deuotion
to me, and to my Saintes then
thou wouldeſt doe, & on that other ſyde,
the ſweete ghoſtly deſire that thou feeleſt
ſometime to thy Lord Ieſu, is the feleable
gift of grace geuen to thy comfort in this
life, & a taſte of the heauenly glory in the
lyfe to come: but it is not good, that thou
leane ouermuch to ſuch cōfortes, for they

ligthly come and go after the will of the
geuer: but to ſtriue alwaye without ceaſſing
againſt all euill motiōs of ſinne, and
to deſpiſe all the ſuggeſtions of the enemy,
is a token of perfect loue, & of great
merite & ſinguler grace. Let no vanities,
nor no ſtrange fantaſies trouble thee, of
what matter ſoeuer they be. Keepe thine
intent and thy purpoſe alway whole and
ſtrong to me, and thinke not that it is an
illuſion, that thou art ſodenlie rauiſhed
into exceſſe of minde, and that thou art
ſoone after turned agayne to thy fyrſt
lightneſſe of hart, for thou ſuffreſt ſuche
lightneſſe rather againſt thy will, than
with thy will. And therefore if thou be diſpleaſed
therewith, it ſhal be to thee great
merite and no perdition. I knowe (ſayth
our Lorde) that the olde auncient enimie
the feende, will aſſay to let thy good wil,
and to extinct the good deſire that thou
haſt to me, and to all goodnes, all that he
can, and he will alſo hinder thee from all
good workes, and deuout excerciſes if he
may: that is to ſaye, from the honour and
worſhip that thou art bounde to geue to
me and to my ſaintes, and from minde of
my paſſion, and from the remembraunce
of thine owne ſinnes, from a diligent
keeping of thy harte in good meditatiōs,
and from a ſtedfaſt purpoſe to profite in
vertue. He will alſo put into thy mynde
many ydle thoughts, to make thee yrke,

and to be ſoone werye with prayer, and
with readinge, and with all other good
vertuous workes. A meke confeſſion diſpleaſeth
him much, and if he can he will
let a man that he ſhall not be houſeled.
But beleue him not, nor care not for him
though he aſſayle thee neuer ſo muche.
Make all his malice returne to him ſelfe
agayne, and ſaye to him thus, Go from
me thou wicked ſpirit, and be thou aſhamed,
for thou art foule and vglye, that
wouldeſt bringe ſuche thinges into my
mynde. Go from me thou falſe deceyuer
of mankinde, thou ſhalt haue no part in
me, for my Sauiour Ieſu ſtandeth by me
as a mightie warriour and a ſtronge
champion, and thou ſhalt flye awaye to
thy confuſion. I had leuer ſuffer the moſt
cruell death, then to conſent to thy malicious
ſtiringes. Be ſtill therefore thou
curſed feende, and ceaſe thy malice, for I
ſhall neuer aſſent to thee, though thou
vexe me neuer ſo muche. Our Lorde is my
light and my health, whom ſhal I dreade?
and he is the defender of my life, what
ſhall I feare? Truely though an hoſte of
men ariſe againſt me, my hart ſhall not
dread them: For why? God is my helper
and my redeemer. Then ſayth our Lorde
agayne to ſuch a ſoule, ſtriue alwaye as a
true knight againſt all the ſtyringes of
the enymie. And if thou be ſometyme
through thy frailtie ouercome, riſe ſo one

againe, and take more ſtrength then thou
haddeſt firſt, & truſt vertlie to haue more
grace, and more comfort of God, than
thou haddeſt before. But beware alwaye
of vainglorie and pride, for therby many
perſons haue fallen into greate errours,
and into great blindnes of ſoule, ſo farre,
that it hath bene right nigh incurable.
Be it therefore to thee a great exemple,
and a matter of perpetuall meekenes, the
fall & ruine of ſuche proude folkes, that
fooliſhlie haue preſumed of them ſelfe, &
haue in the end finallie periſhed by their
preſumption.
            
            
               Hovve grace is to be kept cloſe through
the vertue of meekenes.
The .8. Chapter.
               
                  MY ſonne, it is muche more expedient,
and muche more ſurer
way for thee, that thou hide
the grace of deuotion, and not
to ſpeake much of it nor much
to regard it, but rather to diſpiſe thy ſelfe
the more for it, and to thinke thy ſelfe
vnworthy any ſuch gracious gift of god
than to ſpeke of it. And it is not good to
cleaue muche to ſuche affections as may
be ſoone turned into the cōtrary. VVhen
thou haſt the grace of deuotion, conſider
how wretched & needy thou wert wont
to be, when thou haddeſt no ſuch grace

The profite and increaſe of life ſpirituall
is not onely when thou haſt deuotion,
but rather when thou canſt meekly
and patienly beare the withdrawing &
abſenting thereof, and yet not to leaue
thy prayers, nor thy other good deedes
that thou art accuſtomed to doe, vndone,
but to thy power, and as far as in
thee is, doeſt thy beſt therin, and forgetteſt
not thy duetie therefore, nor art not
negligent for any dulnes or vnquietnes
of minde that thou feeleſt. Neuertheleſſe
there be many perſons, that when any
aduerſity falleth to them, they be anone
vnpatient, and be made thereby very
ſlowe and dull to doe any good deede,
and they hinder them ſelues greatly. For
it is not in the power of man the waye
that he ſhall take, but it is onelye in the
grace of God to diſpoſe that after his
will, and to ſende comforte when he
will, and as muche as he will, and to
whom he will, as it ſhall pleaſe him, and
none otherwiſe. Some vnware perſons
through an vndiſcrete deſire that they
haue had to haue the grace of deuotion,
haue deſtroyed them ſelues, for they
woulde doe more then their power was
to doe, and would not knowe the meaſure
of their gift, nor the litlenes of their
owne ſtrength, but rather woulde folowe
the pride of their heart, then the
iudgement of reaſon. And becauſe they

preſumed to doe greater thinges then
was pleaſant to God, therefore they loſt
anone the grace that they had before, &
were lefte needy and without comfort,
which thought to haue builded their neſtes
in heauen: and ſo they were taught
not to preſume of them ſelues, but meekely
to truſt in God, and in his goodnes,
Alſo, ſuch perſons, as be beginners, and
yet lacke experience in ghoſtly trauayle,
maye lightly erre, and be deceiued, vnleſſe
they will be ruled by counſayle of
other. And if they will needlye folowe
their owne counſaile, and will in no wiſe
be remoued from their owne will, it will
be very perillous to them in the ende.
And it is not lightly ſeene, that they
that be wiſe and cunning in their owne
ſight, will be meekely ruled or ordered
by other. It is better to haue litle cunning
with meekenes, then great cunninge
with vayne liking therein: and it
is better to haue litle cunninge with
grace, then muche cunninge, whereof
thou ſhouldeſt be proude. Alſo, he doth
not diſcretely, that in time of deuotion
ſetteth him ſelfe alſo to ſpirituall mirth,
and as it were, to a heauenly gladnes, &
forgetteth his former deſolation, and the
meeke drede of God. Neither doeth he
well or vertuouſly, that in time of trouble,
or any maner aduerſitie or greefe
beareth him ſelfe ouer much deſperatlye,

and doth not feele or thinke ſo faithfully
of me as he ought to doe. He that in time
of peace and ghoſtly comfort will thinke
him ſelfe ouermuche ſure, commonly in
time of battaile and of temptation, ſhall
be founde ouermuche deiect & fearfull:
but if thou couldeſt alwaye abide meeke
and litle in thine owne ſight, and couldeſt
order well the motiōs of thine owne
ſoule, thou ſhouldeſt not ſo ſoone fall into
preſumption or diſpaire, nor ſo lightly
offend almightie God. VVherfore this is
good and wholſome counſell, that when
thou haſte the ſpirite of feruour, thou
thinke, howe thou ſhalt doe, when that
feruor is paſſed, and then whē it happeneth
ſo with thee, that thou thinke that
it may ſoone come againe, which to my
honoure, & to thy prouing I haue withdrawen
for a time. And it is more profitable
to thee, that thou ſhouldeſt be ſo
proued, then that thou ſhouldeſt alway
haue proſperous thinges after thy will:
for why? merites are not to be thought
great in any perſon, becauſe he hath
manye viſions, or many ghoſtlye comfortes,
or for that he hath cleere vnderſtāding
of Scripture, or that he is ſet in
high degree: but if he be ſtablye grounded
in meekenes, and fulfilled with charitie,
and ſeeke wholly the worſhip of God, &
in nothing regardeth him ſelfe, but fullie
in his heart can deſpiſe him ſelfe, & alſo

coueteth to be deſpiſed of other, then
maye he haue good truſt, that he hath
ſomewhat profited in grace, and that he
ſhall in the ende haue great rewarde of
God for his good trauaile. Amen.
            
            
               Hovv vve ſhall thinke through meekenes our
ſelfe to be vile and abiect in the
ſight of God.
The 9. Chapter.
               
                  SHall I, Lorde Ieſu, dare
ſpeake to thee, that am but
duſte and aſhes? verilie, yf
I thinke my ſelfe any better
then aſhes & duſte, thou
ſtandeſt againſt me, & alſo
myne owne ſinnes beare
witnes againſt me, that I may not withſaye
it: but if I deſpiſe my ſelfe, and ſet
my ſelfe at naught, and thinke my ſelfe
but aſhes and duſt, as I am, then thy
geace ſhall be nigh vnto me, and the light
of true vnderſtandinge ſhall enter into
my heart, ſo that all preſumption & pride
in me ſhall be drowned in the vale of
meekenes, through perfect knowinge of
my wretchednes, Thorough meekenes
thou ſhalt ſhewe vnto me what I am,
what I haue bene, and from whence I
came, for I am nought, and knewe it not.
If I be left to my ſelfe, thē am I nought,
and all is feeblenes and imperfection.

But if thou voucheſafe a litle to beholde
me, anone I am made ſtronge, and am 
                     •
                  illed
with a newe ioye, and meruaile it is,
that I wretch am ſo ſoone lift vp from
my vnſtablenes, into the beholdinge of
heauenlie thinges, and that I am ſo louinglie
lifted vp of thee, that of my ſelfe
fall downe alwaye to earthlie likinges.
But thy loue, Lorde, cauſeth all this,
which preuenteth me, and helpeth me in
all my neceſſities, and keepeth me warily
from all perils & daungers, that I daylye
am like to fall into. I haue loſt thee, and
alſo my ſelfe by inordinate loue that I
haue had to my ſelfe, and in ſeekinge of
thee againe, I haue founde both thee
and me, and therefore I will more deeply
from henceforth ſet my ſelfe at naught,
and more diligentlye ſeeke thee, then in
time paſte I haue done: for thou Lorde
Ieſu, thou doeſt to me aboue all my merites,
& aboue all that I can aſke or deſire.
But bleſſed be thou in all thy workes, for
though I be vnworthy any good things,
yet thy goodnes neuer ceaſſeth to doe
well to me, & alſo to manye other, which
be vnkind to thee, and that are turned
right farre from thee. Turne vs Lorde
therefore to thee agayne, that we maye
hēceforward be louing, thankfull, meeke
& deuout to thee, for thou act our health,
thou art our vertue and all our ſtrength
in body and ſoule, and none but thou: to

thee therfore be ioy and glory euerlaſtingly
in the bliſſe of heauen. Amen.
            
            
               Hovve all thinges are to be referred to God,
as ende of euery vvorke.
The .10. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſayth our Sauiour
Chriſt, I muſt be the ende of all
thy workes, if thou deſire to be
happy and bleſſed. And if thou
referre all goodnes to me, from
whom all goodnes commeth, then ſhall
be purged and made cleane in thee thine
inwarde affections, which els would be
euill inclined to thy ſelfe and to other
creatures. If thou ſeeke thy ſelfe in any
thing as ende of thy worke, anone thou
fayleſt in thy doinge, and waxeſt drie and
barrein frō all moyſture of grace. VVherfore
thou muſt referre all thinges to me,
for I geue all. Behold therfore all things
as they be, flowinge and ſpringinge out
of my ſoueraine goodnes, and reduce all
thinges to me as to their originall beginninge,
for of me both ſmall and great,
poore and riche, as of a quicke ſpringinge
wall, drawe, water of life. He that ſerueth
me freelie and with good will, ſhall receaue
grace for grace: But he that will
glorifie him ſelfe in him ſelfe, or willfully
ioye in any thinge beſide me, ſhall not be
ſtabliſhed in perfect ioye, nor be delated

in ſoule, but he ſhalbe letted & anguiſhed
many wayes from the true freedome of
ſpirite. Thou ſhalt therefore aſcribe no
goodnes to thy ſelfe, nor thou ſhalt not
thinke, that any perſon hath anye goodnes
of him ſelfe, but that thou yeelde alwaye
the goodnes to me, without whom
man hath nothing. I haue geuen all, and
all will I haue againe, and with great
ſtraitnes will I looke to haue thankings
therefore. This is the truth, whereby is
driuen awaye all maner of vaine glorye
and pride of heart. If heauenly grace and
perfect charitie enter into thy hart, then
ſhall there no enuie nor vnquietnes of
mind, neither any priuate loue haue rule
in thee: For the charity of God ſhal ouercome
all thinges, and ſhall dilate and inflame
all the powers of thy ſoule. VVherfore,
if thou vnderſtandeſt a right, thou
ſhalt neuer ioye but in me, and in me
onelie thou ſhalt haue truſt, for
no man is good but God alone,
who is aboue all thinges to
be honoured, and in all
thinges to be
bleſſed.
            
            
               
               That it is ſvveete and delectable to ſerue God,
and to forſake the vvorlde.
The 11. Chapter.
               
                  NOw ſhall I ſpeake againe to
thee my Lorde Ieſu, and not
ceaſſe. And I ſhall ſay in the
eares of my Lord, my God
and king that is in heauen.
O howe great is the aboundance
of thy ſweetenes, which thou haſte
hidde and kept for thē that dreade thee?
But what is it then to them that loue
thee, & that with all their hart do ſerue
thee? verily, it is the vnſpeakeable ſwetenes
of contemplation, that thou geueſt
to them that loue thee. In this Lord,
thou haſt moſte ſhewed the ſwetenes of
thy charitie to me, that whē I was not,
thou madeſt me, and when I erred farre
from thee, thou broughteſt me againe to
ſerue thee, and thou cōmaundeſt me alſo,
that I ſhall loue thee. O fountaine of
loue euerlaſting, what ſhal I ſay of thee?
howe maye I forget thee, that haſt vouchedſafe
to louinglye to remember me?
VVhē I was like to haue periſhed, thou
ſhewedſt thy mercy to me aboue all that
I coulde thinke and deſyre, and haſt ſent
me of thy grace and loue aboue my merites.
But what ſhall I geue thee againe
for all this goodnes? It is not geuen to
all men to forſake the worlde, & to take

a ſolitarye life, and only to ſerue thee, &
yet it is no great thing to ſerue thee,
whom euery creature is bounde to ſerue.
It ought not therefore to ſeeme any
great thing to me to ſerue thee, but rather
it ſhould ſeeme maruel and wonder
to me, that thou wilt vouchſafe to receaue
ſo poore, and ſo vnworthy a creature
as I am into thy ſeruice, and that
thou wilt ioyne me to thy welbeloued
ſeruantes. Lo Lorde, all thinges that I
haue, & all that I doe thee ſeruice with,
is thine: and yet thy goodnes is ſuche,
that thou rather ſerueſt me, then I thee:
for lo, heauen & earth, planets and ſtarres
with their contents, which thou haſt
created to ſerue man, be readye at thy
biddinge, and doe daylye that thou haſte
commaunded. And thou haſte alſo ordeyned
aungels to the minyſterie of man.
But aboue all this, thou haſte vouchedſafe
to ſerue man thy ſelfe, and haſte promiſed
to geue thy ſelfe vnto hym. VVhat
ſhall I then geue to thee agayne for this
thouſand folde goodnes? woulde to God
that I might ſerue thee all the dayes of
my lyfe, or at the leaſt, that I might one
daye be able to doe thee faythfull ſeruice,
for thou art woorthye all honour, ſeruice,
and prayſinge for euer. Thou art my
Lorde and my God, and I thy pooreſt
ſeruant, moſt bounde before all other to
loue thee, and prayſe thee, and I neuer

ought to ware werye of the prayſinge of
thee. And that is it that I aſke, and that
I deſire, that is to ſay, that I may alway
laude and prayſe thee. Vouchſafe therfore,
moſte mercifull Lord, to ſupply, that
wanteth in me, for it is great honour to
ſerue thee, & all earthly thinges to deſpiſe
for the loue of thee. They ſhal haue great
grace that freely ſubmit thē ſelues to thy
holye ſeruice. And they ſhall finde alſo the
moſte ſweete conſolation of the holye
ghoſte, and ſhall haue great freedome of
ſpirit, that here forſake all worldlye buſines,
and chooſe a harde and ſtraite lyfe
in this worlde for thy name. O free and
ioyfull ſeruice of God, by the which a man
is made free, holy, and alſo bleſſed in the
ſight of God. O holye ſtate of religion,
which maketh a man lyke to aungels,
pleaſant to God, dreadefull to wicked
ſpirites, and to all faythfull people right
highlye commendable. O ſeruice much
to be embraced, and alwaye to be deſired,
by whom the high goodnes
is wonne, and the euerlaſting
ioye and gladnes is
gotten without
ende.
            
            
               
               That the deſires of the heart ought to be
vvell examined and moderated.
The 12. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſayth our Lorde, it
behoueth thee to learne many
thinges that thou haſte
not yet well lerned. VVhat be
they Lorde? that thou order
thy deſires and affections
wholly after my pleaſure, and that thou
be not a louer of thy ſelfe, but a deſirous
folower of my wil in all things. I knowe
well that deſires ofte moue to this thing
or to that: but cōſider well, whether thou
be moued principally for mine honour, or
for thine owne, If I be in the cauſe, thou
ſhalt be wel contented, whatſoeuer I doe
with thee: but if any thinge remayne in
thy harte of thine owne will, that is it
that letteth and hindreth thee. Beware
therefore that thou leane not muche to
thine owne deſire without my councell,
leaſt happly it repent thee, and diſpleaſe
thee in the ende, that firſte pleaſed thee,
Euerye affection and deſyre of mans
hart that ſeemeth good and holye, is not
forthwith to be folowed, nor euery contrarious
affection or deſire is not haſtily
to be refuſed. It is ſometime right expedient,
that a man refraine his affections
and deſires, though they be good, leaſt
happlye by his importunitie he fall into

vnquietnes of minde, or that he be a let
to other, or be letted by other, and ſo faile
in his doinge: and ſometime it behoueth
vs to vſe as it were, a violence to our
ſelfe, and ſtronglye to reſiſt and breake
downe our ſenſuall appetite, and not to
regard what the fleſhe will or will not,
but alwaye to take hede that it be made
ſubiect to the will of the ſpirite, and that
it be ſo long chaſtiſed, and compelled to
ſerue, till it be ready to all thing that the
ſoule commaundeth, & that it can learne
to be cōtent with a litle, and can delight
in ſimple thinges, and not to murmure
nor to grudge for any cōtrarious thinges
that may befall vnto it.
            
            
               Hovv vve ſhould keepe patience, and continually
ſtryue agaynſt all concupiſcence.
The .13. Chapter.
               
                  O My Lord God (as I heare ſay)
patience is muche neceſſarie vnto
me, becauſe of many contrarious
thinges, which in this life
daylie chaunce. I ſee well, that howeſoeuer
I doe order my ſelfe for peace yet
can not my life be without ſome battaile
and ſorowe. My ſonne, it is true that
thou ſayeſt: wherfore, I will not, that
thou ſeeke to haue ſuche peace as wanteth
temptations, or as feeleth not ſome
cōtradictiō: But that thou trow & beleue

that thou haſt found peace whē that thou
haſt many troubles, and art proued with
many cōtrarious thinges in this worlde.
And if thou ſaye, thou mayeſt not ſuffer
ſuche thinges, how ſhalt thou then ſuffer
the fire of Purgatory? Of two euils, the
leſſe euill is to be taken. Suffer therefore
patientlie the litle paines of this world,
that thou mayeſt hereafter eſcape the
greater in the worlde to come. Troweſt
thou, that worldlye men ſuffer litle or
nothing? yes truely, thou ſhalt find none
without ſome trouble, though thou ſeeke
the moſt delicat perſons that be. But percaſe
thou ſayeſt to me againe, they haue
many delectations, & folowe their owne
pleaſures ſo much, that they ponder but
litle all their aduerſities. VVell, I will it
be as thou ſayeſt, that they haue all that
they can deſire, but howe longe troweſt
thou that it ſhall endure? Soothly, it ſhal
ſodenlye vaniſh awaye as ſmoke in the
ayre, ſo that there ſhall not be lefte anye
remembraunce of their ioyes paſſed, & yet
when they liued they were not without
great bitternes and griefe, for ofte times
of the ſame thing wherein they had their
greateſt pleaſure, receaued they after
great trouble and payne, & righteouſlie
came that vnto them, that foraſmuche as
they ſought delectations and pleaſures
inordinatelye, that they ſhoulde not fulfill
their deſire therein, but with greate

bitternes and ſorowe. O howe ſhorte,
howe falſe, and howe inordinate be all
the pleaſures of this worlde? Soothlye,
for dronkenſhip and blindnes of hearte
the worldlye people perceaue it not, nor
wil not perceaue it, but as dombe beaſtes,
for a lytle pleſure of this corruptible life,
they runne headlonge into euerlaſtinge
death. Therefore my ſonne, go not after
thy concupiſcence, but turne thee lightly
from thine owne wil. Delite thee in god,
and fixe thy loue ſtronglye in him, and he
ſhall geue thee the aſking of thine heart.
And if thou wilt haue cōſolation aboundantlye,
and wilt receaue the ſoothfaſt
comfort that commeth of God, diſpoſe
thy ſelfe fullye to deſpiſe this world, and
put from thee whollye all inordinate delectations,
and thou ſhalt haue plēteouſly
the comfort of God. And the more that
thou with draweſt thee from the conſolation
of all creatures, the more ſweete &
bleſſed conſolations ſhalte thou receaue
of thy creatoure. But ſoothlye thou canſt
not at the firſt come to ſuch cōſolations,
but with heauines and laboure goinge
before, thy olde cuſtome will ſomewhat
withſtande thee, but with a better cuſtome
it may be ouercome. The fleſh will
murmure againſt thee, but with feruour
of ſpirite it ſhall be reſtrained. The olde
auncient enemy thee freende wil 
                     •
                  et thee
if he can, but with deuout prayer. He ſhall

be driuen awaye, and with good bodilye
and ghoſtlye laboures his waye ſhalbe
ſtopped, ſo that he ſhall not dare come
nigh vnto thee.
            
            
               Of the obedience of a meeke ſubiect, after the
example of our Lorde Ieſu Chriſte.
The 14. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſaith our Sauiour
Chriſte, he that laboureth
to withdrawe him from
obedience, withdraweth
hym from grace: And he
that ſeeketh to haue priuate
thinges, loſeth the
thinges that be in common. If a man can
not gladlie ſubmit him ſelfe to his ſuperiour,
it is a token that his fleſhe is not
yet fullie obedient to the ſpirite, but that
it ofte rebelleth and murmureth. Therefore
yf thou deſire to ouercome thy ſelfe,
and to make thy fleſhe obeye meekelye
to the will of the ſpirit, learne firſt to
obeye gladlye to thy ſuperiour. The outward
enemye is the ſooner ouercome, yf
the inner man, that is the ſoule, be not
feebled nor waſted. There is none worſe,
nor any more greeuous enemye to the
ſoule, then thy ſelfe, if thy fleſhe be not
well agreeinge to the will of the ſpirite.
It behoueth the therfore, that thou haue
a true deſpiſinge and contempt of thy

ſelfe, yf thou wilt preuayle againſt thy
fleſhe and bloud. But foraſmuch as thou
yet loueſt thy ſelfe inordinatlie, therefore
thou feareſt to reſigne thy will whollie
to another mans will. But what greate
thinge is it to thee that art but doſte and
nought, if thou ſubdue thy ſelfe to man
for my ſake, when I, that am almightie,
& moſte highe God, maker of all thinges
ſubdued my ſelfe mekelye to man for thy
ſake? I made my ſelfe moſte meeke and
moſt lowe of all men, that thou ſhoudeſt
learne to ouercome thy pride through
my meekenes. Learne therefore, thou
aſhes, to be tractable, learne thou earth
and duſt, to be meeke, and to bowe thy
ſelfe vnder euerye mans foote for my
ſake: learne to breake thine owne will,
& to be ſubiect to all men in thine heart.
Riſe in great wrath againſt thy ſelfe, and
ſuffer not pryde to reygne in thee, but
ſhewe thy ſelfe ſo litle and obedient, and
ſo noughtie in thine owne ſight, that as
thee thinkes, all men maye righteouſlye
go ouer thee, and tread vpō the, as vpon
earth or claye. O vaine man, what haſte
thou to complaine. O thou fowle ſinner
what mayeſt thou righteouſly ſay againſt
them that reproue thee, ſith thou haſte
ſo ofte offended God, and haſte alſo ſo
ofte deſerued the paynes of hell? But neuertheleſſe,
my eye of mercie hath ſpared
thee, for thy ſoule is precious in my ſight,

that thou ſhouldeſt thereby knowe the
greate loue▪ that I haue to thee, and be
therfore the more thankful to me againe,
and geue thy ſelfe to perfect & true ſubiection
and meekenes, and to be ready in
hart, patiently to ſuffer for my ſake thine
owne contemptes and deſpiſings, whenſoeuer
they ſhal happen to fal vnto thee.
Amen.
            
            
               Of the ſecrete and hid iudgementes of God
to be conſidered, that vve be not proude
of our good deedes.
The .15. Chapter.
               
                  LOrd, thou ſoundeſt thy iudgementes
terribly vpon me,
and filleſt my body & bones
with great feare and dreade:
my ſoule alſo trembleth very
ſore, for I am greatly aſtonied, for that
I ſee that heauens be not clene in thy
ſight, for ſith thou foundeſt default in
angels, and ſparedſt thē not, what ſhall
become of me, that am but vile and ſtinking
carreyne? Stars fel from heauen,
and I duſt and aſhes, what ſhould I
preſume? Alſo ſome people that ſeemed to
haue great workes of vertue, haue fallen
full lowe. And ſuche as were fed with
meate of aungels, I haue ſeene after delyte
in ſwynes meate, that is to ſaye, in
fleſhlye pleaſures. VVherefore it may be

well ſayde and verifyed, that there is no
holynes nor goodnes in vs, if thou with:
drawe thy hand of mercy from vs, nor
that no wiſedome maye auayle vs, if
thou Lorde gouerne it not: nor any
ſtrength helpe, if thou ceaſſe to preſerue
vs: no ſure chaſtitie can be, if thou Lorde
defende it not, nor any ſure keeping may
profite vs, if thy holy watchfulnes be
not preſent: for if we be forſaken of thee,
anone we be drowned and periſhe: but
if thou a litle viſite vs with thy grace,
we anone liue, and be lifte, vp agayne.
VVe be vnſtable, vnleſſe thou confirme
vs, we be colde and dul, but if by thee we
be ſtirred to feruoure of ſpirite. O howe
meekely and abiectly ought I therfore
to iudge of my ſelfe, & how much ought
I in my heart to deſpiſe my ſelfe, though
I be holden neuer ſo good and holy in
ſight of the world: and howe profoundly
ought I to ſubmit me to thy deepe and
profound iudgementes, ſith I finde in
my ſelfe nothinge els but naught and
naught? O ſubſtaunce that may not be
pondered. O Sea, that may not be ſailed:
in thee, and by thee I finde that my ſubſtaunce
is nothing, and ouer all naught
where is nowe the ſhadowe of this
worldlye glorie, and where is the truſt
that I had in it? Truelie it is vaniſhed
awaye through the deepenes of thy ſecrete
and hidde Iudgementes vpon me.

VVhat is fleſhe in thy ſight? how may
clay glorifye him ſelfe againſt his maker?
how may he be deceaued with vain prayſes
whoſe heart in truth is ſubiect to god?
All the worlde may not lift him vp into
pride, whō truth, that God is, hath perfectly
made ſubiect vnto him, nor he may
not be deceaued with any flattering, that
putteth his whole truſt in God. For he
ſeeth well, that they that ſpeake be vaine
and nought, and that they ſhall ſhortly
faile with the ſounde of wordes, but the
truth of God alway abideth.
            
            
               Hovv a man ſhall order him ſelfe in his
deſires.
The .16. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſayth our Sauiour
Chriſt, thus ſhalt thou ſay in
euerye thing that thou deſireſt.
Lorde, if it be thy will, be
it done as I aſke, and if it be
to thy prayſing, be it fulfilled in thy
name. And if thou ſee it good and profitable
to me, geue me grace to vſe it to thy
honoure. But if thou knowe it hurtfull
to me, and not profitable to the health
of my ſoule, then take from me ſuche deſire.
Euery deſire cōmeth not of the holy
ghoſte, though it ſeeme rigteous & good,
for it is ſometime full harde to iudge,
whether a good ſpirit or an euil moueth

thee to this thing or to that, or whether
thou be moued of thyne owne ſpirite.
Many be deceued in the ende, which firſt
ſeemed to haue beene moued of the holy
ghoſte. Therfore with dreade of God, and
with meekenes of heart it is to deſire and
aſke whatſoeuer commeth to our minde
to be deſired and aſked, and with a whole
forſakinge of our ſelfe to committe all
thinges to God, and to ſaye thus: Lorde,
thou knoweſt what thing is to me moſte
profitable, doe this or that after thy will,
geue me what thou wilt, aſmuch as thou
wilt, and when thou wilt. Doe with me
as thou knoweſt beſt to be done, and as it
ſhall pleaſe thee, and as ſhall be moſte to
thy honoure. Put me where thou wilt,
and freelye doe with me in all thinges
after thy will. Thy creature I am, and in
thine handes, leade me and turne me
where thou wilte, loe, I am thy ſeruaunt
ready to all thinges that thou commaundeſt,
for I deſire not to lyue to my
ſelfe, but to thee. VVoulde to
God it might be worthilye
and profitablye, and
to thy honoure.
Amen.
            
            
               
               A prayer, that the vvill of God be
alvvaye fulfilled.
The 17. Chapter.
               
                  MOſt benigne Lorde Ieſu,
graunt me thy grace, that
it maye be alway with me,
and worke with me, and
perſeuer with me vnto the
end. And that I may euer
deſire and wil that is moſt
pleaſaunt and acceptable to thee. Thy
will be my will, and my will alwaye to
folowe thy will, & beſt accord therewith.
Be there alwaye in me one will, and one
deſire with thee, and that I may haue no
power to will or to not will, but as thou
wilt or wilt not. And graunt me that I
maye dye to all thinges that be in the
world, and for thee, to loue to be deſpiſed,
and to be as a man vnknowen in this
world. Graunt me alſo aboue all thinges
that can be deſired, that I may reſt me in
thee, and fullye in thee pacifye my heart,
for thou Lord art the very true peace of
heart, and the perfect reſt of bodye and
ſoule, and without thee all thinges be
greeuous and vnquiet. VVherefore, in
that peace that is in thee, one high, one
bleſſed, and one endleſſe goodnes
ſhall I alwaye reſt me,
ſo may it be.
Amen.
            
            
               
               That the verye true ſolace & comfort is
in god.
The .18. Chapter.
               
                  VVhat at ſoeuer I may deſire or
thinke to my cōfort, I abide
it not here, but I truſt to
haue it hereafter: for if I
alone might haue all the ſolace
and comfort of this worlde, & might
vſe the delites thereof after mine owne
deſire without ſinne, it is certaine, that
they might not long endure: wherefore
my ſoule may not fully be comforted, nor
perfectly refreſhed, but in God onely,
who is the comfort of the poore in ſpirite,
and the embracer of the meeke and
lowly in heart. Abide, my ſoule, abide the
promiſe of god, & thou ſhalt haue aboundance
of all goodnes in heauen. If thou
inordinatelye couete theſe goodnes preſent,
thou ſhalt loſe the goodnes eternal.
Haue therfore goods preſent in vſe, and
eternall in deſire. Thou mayeſt in no
maner be ſatiate with temporal goodes,
for thou art not created ſo to vſe thē, as
to reſt thee in them: for if thou alone
haddeſt all the goodes that euer were
created & made, thou mighteſt not theefore
be happy and bleſſed, but thy bleſſedfulnes
and full felicitie ſtandeth only in
God, that hath made all thinges of
nought. And that is not ſuch felicitie as

is commended of the fooliſhe louers of
the worlde, but ſuch as good chriſten
men & women hope to haue in the bliſſe
of heauen, and as ſome ghoſtlye perſons
cleane and pure in heart ſometime doe
taſte here in this preſent life, whoſe conuerſation
is in heauen. All worldly ſolace,
and all mans comfort is vaine and
ſhort, but that comfort is bleſſed and
ſoothfaſt, that is perceaued by truth inwardly
in the hart. A deuout folower of
God beareth alway about with him his
comforter, that is Ieſu, and ſayeth thus
vnto him: My Lord Ieſu, I beſeech thee
that thou be with me in euery place, and
euerye time, and that it be to me a ſpecial
ſolace, gladly for thy loue to want all
mans ſolace. And if thy ſolace want alſo,
that thy will, and thy righteous prouing
and aſſaying of me, may be to me a
ſinguler comfort, and a high
ſolace. Thou ſhalt not alwaye
be angrie with me,
neither ſhalt thou alwaye
threate me.
So may it be.
Amen.
            
            
               
               That all our ſtudy and buſines of minde
ought to be put in God.
The .19. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſaith our Lorde to his
ſeruant, ſuffer me to doe with
thee what I will, for I knowe
what is beſt and moſt expedient
for thee. Thou workeſt in many
thinges after thy kindlie reaſon, and
after as thy affection, and thy worldlie
pollicie ſtirreth thee: and ſo thou mayeſt
lightlie erre and be deceued. O Lorde, it
is true all that thou ſayeſt, thy prouidēce
is much more better for me, then all that
I can doe or ſay of my ſelfe. VVherfore it
may well be ſayde and verified, that he
ſtandeth very caſuallye, that ſetteth not
his wholle truſt in thee. Therefore Lorde,
while my witte abideth ſtedfaſt & ſtable,
doe with me in all thinges as it pleaſeth
thee, for it may not be but well all that
thou doeſt. If thou wilt, that I be in
light, be thou bleſſed, and if thou wilt,
that I be in darkenes, be thou alſo bleſſed.
If thou vouchſafe to comfort me, be
thou highly bleſſed. And if thou wilt, that
I ſhall liue in trouble, and without all
cōfort, be thou in likewiſe muche bleſſed.
My ſonne, ſo it behoueth to be with thee,
if thou wilt walke with me: as readye
muſt thou be to ſuffer, as to ioye, and as
gladlie be needye and poore, as wealthy

and riche. Lorde, I will gladlie ſuffer for
thee whatſoeuer thou wilt ſhall fal vpon
me. Indifferētly will I take of thy hande
good and bad, bitter and ſweete, gladnes
and ſorowe, and for all thinges that ſhall
befal vnto me, hartily wil I thanke thee.
Keepe me, Lorde, from ſinne, and I ſhall
neither dreade death nor hel. Put not my
name out of the booke of life, and it ſhall
not greeue me, what trouble ſoeuer befal
vpon me.
            
            
               That all temporall miſeries are gladly to be
borne through the example of Chriſte
The 20. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſayth our Lorde, I
deſcended from heauen, and
for thy health haue I takē thy
miſeries, not compelled therto
of neceſſitie, but of my charitie,
that thou ſhouldeſt learne to haue patiēce
with me, & not to diſdayne to beare
the miſeries & wretchednes of this life,
as I haue done for thee: for from the firſt
houre of my birth vnto my death vpō the
croſſe, I was neuer without ſome ſorowe
or paine. I had great lacke of temporall
thinges, I heard great cōplaintes made
on me, I ſuffered beningely many ſhames
& rebukes, for my benefites I receaued
vnkindnes, for my miracles, blaſphemies,
& for my true doctrine many reproufes.

O Lorde, foraſmuche as thou wert founde
patient in thy life, fulfilling in
that moſte ſpecially the will of thy father,
it is ſeeming, that I moſte wretched
ſinner beare me patiently after thy
will in all thinges, and as long as thou
wilt, that I for mine owne health, beare
the burden of this corruptible life: for
though this life be tedious, and as an
heauy burden to the ſoule, yet neuertheleſſe,
it is nowe through thy grace
made very meritorious, and by exāple of
thee, & of thy holie ſaints, it is now made
to weak perſons more ſufferable & cleere,
and alſo muche more comfortable then it
was in the olde lawe, when the gates of
heauen were ſhet, and the waye thitherwarde
was darke, and ſo fewe did couet
to ſeeke it. And yet they that were then
righteous, and were ordeined to be ſaued,
before thy bleſſed paſſion and death
might neuer haue come thither. O what
thankes am I bounde therfore to yeelde
to thee, that ſo louingly haſte vouchedſafe
to ſhew to me, and to all faythful
people that will folow thee, the very
true and ſtraite way to thy kingdome.
Thy holy life is our way, and by thy patiēce
we walke to thee, who art our head
and gouernour. And if thou Lorde haddeſt
not gone before, and ſhewed vs the
way, who woulde haue endeuoured him
to haue folowed? howe many ſhoulde

haue taried behind, if they had not ſeene
thy bleſſed examples goinge before? VVe
be yet ſlowe & dull, nowe we haue ſeene
and hearde thy ſignes and doctrines:
what ſhoulde we then haue beene, if we
had ſeene no ſuch light goinge before vs:
Truelie, we ſhould haue fixed our minde
and loue whollye in worldlye thinges,
from the which keepe vs Lorde of thy
great goodnes. Amen.
            
            
               Of patient ſuffering of iniuries and vvronges,
and vvho is truely patient.
The .21. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, what is it that thou
ſpeakeſt, why complaineſt
thou thus? ceaſſe, ceaſſe, cō
                  plaine
no more, conſider my
paſſion, and the paſſions of
my ſaintes, and thou ſhalt
well ſee, that it is right litle that thou
ſuffreſt for me. Thou haſt not yet ſuffred
to the ſhedinge of thy bloud, and truelie,
thou haſte litle ſuffred in compariſon of
them that haue ſuffred ſo many thinges
for me in time paſt, and that haue bene
ſo ſtrongly tempted, ſo greeuouſlye troubled,
and ſo manye wayes proued. It behoueth
thee therefore to remember the
great greeuous thinges that other haue
ſuffred for me, that thou mayeſt the more
lightly beare thy litle griefes: and if they

ſeeme not litle to thee, loke thy impatiē
                  ce
cauſe not that: but neuertheles, whether
they be litle or great, ſtudie alwaye
to beare them patientlie without grudginge
or complayninge, if thou may, and
the better that thou canſt diſpoſe thee to
ſuffer them, the more wiſelier thou doeſt,
and the more merit ſhalt thou haue, and
thy burdē by reaſon of thy good cuſtome
and of thy good will ſhall be the lighter.
Thou ſhalt neuer ſaye, I can not ſuffer
this thinge of ſuch a perſon, nor it is not
for me to ſuffer it: he hath done me great
wronge, and layeth vnto my charge that
I neuer thought, but of another man I
will ſuffer as I ſhall thinke. Suche maner
ſayinges be not good, for they conſider
not the vertue of patience, nor of
whom it ſhalbe crowned, but they rather
conſider the perſons and the offences
done vnto them. Therefore he is not
truelie pacient that will not ſuffer but as
much as he will, and of whom he will: for
a true pacient man forceth not of whom
he ſuffereth, whether of his Prelate, or
of his felowe that is egall vnto him, or
of any other that is vnder him nor whether
he be a good man and a holye, or an
euill man and an vnworthy, but whenſoeuer
any aduerſitie or wronge falleth
vnto him whatſoeuer it be, and of whom
ſoeuer if be, and howe ofte ſoeuer, he taketh
all thankfullie as of the hande of

God, and accompteth it as a riche gifte,
and a great benefite, O God, for he knowweth
well that there is nothinge that a
man may ſuffer for God that may paſſe
without great merite. Be thou therefore
readie to battall, if thou wilt haue victorie:
without battaile thou mayeſt not
come to the crowne of patience, and yf
thou wilt not ſuffer, thou refuſeſt to be
crowned. VVherefore, if thou wilt needlie
be crowned, reſiſt ſtronglie, and ſuffer
patientlie, for without laboure no man
may come to reſt, nor without battaile
no man may come to victorie. O Lorde
Ieſu, make it poſſible to me by grace,
that is impoſſible to me by nature: Thou
knoweſt well that I may litle ſuffer, and
that I am caſt downe anone with a litle
aduerſitie, wherfore I beſeeche thee, that
trouble and aduerſitie may hereafter for
thy name be beloued and deſired of me,
for truelie, to ſuffer, and to be vexed for
thee, is verie good and profitable to the
health of my ſoule.
            
            
               Of the knovvinge of our ovvne infirmities,
and of the miſeries of this life.
The .22. Chapter.
               
                  I Shall knowledge againſt me
all my vnrighteouſnes, and I
ſhall confeſſe to thee Lorde all
the vnſtablenes of my hearte.
Ofte times it is but a litle

thinge that caſteth me downe, & maketh
me dull and ſlowe, to all good workes,
and ſometime I purpoſe to ſtande ſtronglie:
but when a litle temptation cōmeth,
it is to me greate anguiſhe & griefe, and
ſomtime of a right litle thing, a greeuous
temptation riſeth, and when I thinke
my ſelfe to be ſomewhat ſurer, and that,
as it ſeemeth, I haue the higher hande,
ſodenly I feele my ſelfe nere hand ouercome
by a light temptatiō. Beholde therfore,
good Lord, beholde my weaknes and
my frailnes, beſt knowen to thee before
all other: haue mercy on me, O Lord, and
deliuer me from the filthy dregs of ſinne,
that my feete be neuer fixed in them. But
this is it that ofte grudgeth me ſore, and
in maner cōfoundeth me before thee, that
I am ſo vnſtable and weake, and ſo feayle
to reſiſt my paſſions. And though they
drawe me not alwaye to conſent, yet neuerthleſſe,
their cruell aſſaultes be very
greeuous vnto me, ſo that it is in maner
tedious to me, to liue in ſuch battaile: but
yet ſuch battaile is not all vnprofitable
to me, for thereby I knowe the better
myne owne infirmities, for I ſee well,
that ſuch wicked fantaſies doe riſe in me
muche ſonner then they go awaye▪ But
would to God, that thou moſte ſtrongeſt
God of Iſraell, the louer of all faythfull
ſoules, wouldeſt vouchſafe to beholde the
labour and ſorowe of me thy pooreſt ſeruant,

and that thou wouldeſt aſſiſt me
in all things that I haue to do. Strength
me Lord with heuenlye ſtrength, ſo that
the olde enimie the fiende, nor my wretched
fleſh, which is not yet fullye ſubiect
to the ſpirite, haue not power nor lordſhip
ouer me, againſt whom I muſt fight
continuallye, while I ſhall lyue in this
miſerable life. But alas, what life is this,
where no trouble nor miſerie wanteth,
where alſo euery place is full of ſnares &
of mortall enimies? for one trouble or
temptation goinge awaye, another commeth,
and the firſt conflict yet duringe,
many other ſodenlye ryſe more then can
be thought. Howe may this life therefore
be loued that hath ſuche bitternes, and
that is ſubiect to ſo many miſeries? And
howe may it be called a life, that bringeth
forth ſo many deathes, & ſo many ghoſtly
infections? and yet it is beloued & muche
delighted of in many perſons. The world
is ofte reproued, that it is deceiptful and
vaine, and yet it is not lightly forſaken,
eſpeciallye when the concupiſcences of
the fleſhe be ſuffered to haue rule. Some
thinges ſtirre a man to loue the worlde,
and ſome thinges to deſpiſe it: the concupiſcence
of the fleſh, the concupiſcence
of the eye, and the pride of the hart, ſtirre
man to loue the worlde. But the paines
and miſeries that folowe of it, cauſeth
hatred and tediouſnes of it agayne. But

alas for ſorowe, a litle delectation ouercommeth
the minde of thē that be much
ſet to loue the world, and dryueth out of
their hartes all heauenlie deſires, inſomuch
that many accompt it as a ioye of
Paradiſe to liue vnder ſuch ſēſible pleaſures,
and that is, becauſe they neither
haue ſeene nor taſted the ſweetnes in
God, nor the inwarde gladnes that cō
                  meth
of vertues. But they that perfectly
deſpiſe the worlde, and that ſtudie to liue
vnder holie diſcipline, be not ignoraunt
of the heauenlie ſweetnes that is promiſed
vnto ghoſtlie liuers: and they ſee alſo
howe greeuouſlie the world erreth, and
howe greeuouſlie it is deceyued in diuers
maners.
            
            
               Hovve a man ſhoulde reſt in God
aboue all thinges.
The 23. Chapter.
               
                  ABoue all thinges, and in all
thinges reſt thou my ſoule in
thy Lorde God, for he is the
eternall reſt of all Angels and
ſaintes. Geue me Lord Ieſus,
this ſpeciall grace for to reſte me in thee
aboue all creatures: aboue all helth and
fayrenes, aboue all glorye and honour,
aboue all dignitie and power, aboue all
cunninge and pollicie, aboue all riches &
craftes, aboue all gladnes of bodye and

ſoule, aboue all fame and prayſing, aboue
all ſweetnes and conſolation, aboue all
hope and repromiſſion, aboue all merite
and deſire, aboue all giftes & rewardes,
that thou mayeſt geue or ſende beſide thy
ſelfe, and aboue all ioy and mirth that
mans heart or minde may take or feele:
And alſo aboue all Angels and Archangels,
and aboue the company of heauenlie
ſpirites, aboue all thinges viſible and
inuiſible, and aboue all thing that is not
thy ſelfe. For thou, O Lord God, art moſt
beſt, moſt higheſt, moſt mighteſt, moſt ſufficient,
and moſt full of goodnes: moſte
ſweete, moſte comfortable, moſte fayre,
moſte louinge, moſte noble, and moſte
glorious aboue all thinge, in whom all
goodnes is together perfectlie and fully,
hath beene and ſhall be. And therefore,
whatſoeuer thou geueſt me beſide thy
ſelfe, it is lytle and inſufficient to me
for my heart may not reſt, nor fullye be
pacifyed but in thee, ſo that it aſcendeth
aboue all giftes, and alſo aboue
all maner of thinges that be created. O
my Lorde Ieſu Chriſt moſte louing ſpouſe,
moſte pureſt louer and gouernoure
of euerye creature, who ſhall geue me
winges of perfect libertie, that I may fite
high, and reſt me in thee. O when ſhall I
fullie tende to thee, and ſee, and feele
how ſweete thou art: whē ſhall I wholly
gather my ſelfe together in thee, ſo perfectlye

that I ſhall not for thy loue feele
my ſelfe, but thee onelie aboue my ſelfe,
and aobue all bodilie thinges, and that
thou viſite me in ſuch wiſe as thou doeſt
viſite thy faythfull louers? Nowe I ofte
mourne and complaine the miſeries of
this life, and with ſorowe and woe beare
thē with right great heauines: for many
euill thinges happen daylie in this lyfe,
which ofte times trouble me, and make
me verie heauie, & greatlie darken mine
vnderſtanding. They hinder me greatly,
and put my minde from thee, and ſo encomber
me many wayes, that I can not
haue free minde & cleane deſire to thee,
nor haue thy ſweete imbracinges that to
thy bleſſed Saintes be alwaye preſent.
VVherefore I beſeeche thee Lorde Chriſt
Ieſu, that the ſighinges and the inwarde
deſires of my hart, with my manifolde
deſolutions, may ſomewhat moue thee,
and incline thee to heare me. O Ieſu the
light and brightnes of euerlaſting glory,
the ioy and comfort of all chriſtien people
that are walking & labouring as pilgrimes
in the wyldernes of this world,
my harte cryeth to thee by ſtill deſires
without voyce, and my ſilence ſpeaketh
vnto thee, and ſayth thus: How longe
carieth my Lorde God to come to me,
verilie I truſt that he will ſhortlie come
to me his pooreſt ſeruant, and comfort
me, and make me ioyous & glad in him,

And that he will deliuer me from all anguiſhe
and ſorowe. Come Lord come, for
without thee I haue no glad daye, nor
houre, for thou art all my ioye & gladnes,
and without thee my ſoule is barren and
voyde. I am a wretche, and in maner in
priſon, and bounde with fetters, till thou
through the light of thy gracious preſēce
vouchſafe to viſit me, and to refreſh me,
and to bring me againe to libertie of ſpirite,
and that thou vouchſafe to ſhewe
thy fauourable and louinge countenance
vnto me. Let other ſeeke what they will,
but trulye there is nothinge that I will
ſeeke, nor that ſhall pleaſe me, but thou
my Lorde God, my hope and euerlaſtinge
helth. I ſhall not ceaſe of prayer till thy
grace returne to me againe, & that thou
ſpeake inwardly to my ſoule, & ſaye thus,
Lo I am here, I am come to thee, for thou
haſte called me, thy teares & the deſyre of
thy hart, thy meeknes and thy contrition
haue bowed me downe, and brought me
to thee. And I ſhall ſaye agayne, Lorde I
haue called thee, and I haue deſyred to
haue thee, ready to forſake all things for
thee, thou firſt haſte ſtirred me to ſeeke
thee. VVherefore be thou alwaye bleſſed
that haſte ſhewed ſuche goodnes to me,
after the multitude of thy mercy: VVhat
hath thy ſeruant (Lorde) more to doe or
ſaye, but that he meeken him ſelfe before
thy maieſtie, and euer haue in minde his

owne iniquitie? There is none like to
thee Lorde, in heauen nor in earth, thy
workes be good, thy iudgementes be
righteous, & by thy prouidence all things
be gouerned. VVherefore to thee which
art the wiſedome of the father, be euerlaſting
ioy & glory, and I humbly beſeech
thee, that my body and ſoule, my harte
and tounge, and all thy creatures, maye
alwaye laude thee, and bleſſe thee. Amen.
            
            
               Of remembringe of the great and manyfolde
benefites of God.
The 24. Chapter.
               
                  OPen mine hart, Lorde, into
the beholding of thy lawes,
and in thy cōmaundements
teach me to walke, geue me
grace to knowe and to vnderſtand
thy will, and with
great reuerence and diligent conſideratiō
to remember thy manyfold benefites,
that I may from henceforth yeld to thee
due thankes for thē againe. But I knowe
and confeſſe it for truth, that I am not
able to yeld to thee condigne thankinges
for the leaſt benefite that thou haſt geuen
me, for I am leſſe then the leaſt benefite
that thou haſt geuen. And whē I beholde
thy noblenes and woorthines, my ſpirite
dreadeth and trembleth very ſore for the
greatnes therof. O Lord, all that we haue

in body & in ſoule, inwardly & outwardlye,
naturally or ſupernaturallye, they be
thy benefites, and ſhew thee openly to be
a bleſſed and good benefactour, of whom
we haue receiued ſuch giftes. And though
one hath receaued more, and another
leſſe, yet they all be thy giftes, & without
thee the leaſt can not be had: and he that
hath more receaued, may not rightfully
glorify him ſelfe therein, as though he
had gotten it by his owne merite, nor
exalt him ſelfe aboue other, nor diſdayne
other, nor deſpiſe his inferiours therfore:
for he is greateſt and moſte acceptable to
thee, that leaſt aſcribeth to him ſelfe, and
that is for ſuche giftes the more meeke
and deuout, in yeldinge thankes to thee
for them agayne. And he that through
meekenes can holde him ſelfe moſte vile,
and moſte vnwoorthy of all other, is the
more apt to receaue of thy hande more
larger giftes. And he that hath receaued
the fewer giftes, ought not therefore to
be heauy, or to diſdaine at it, nor to be
enuious againſt them that haue receaued
the greater, but rather he ought to lifte
his minde vpwarde to thee, and highlye
to laude and prayſe thy name, that thou
ſo liberallye, ſo louinglye, and ſo freelye,
withou acceptinge of perſons, departeſt
thy giftes among thy people: all thinges
come of thee, and therefore thou art in
all thinges to be bleſſed. Thou knoweſt

what is expedient to be geuen to euery
perſon, and why one hath leſſe, and another
more, it is not for vs to reaſon or
diſcuſſe, but to thee onelye, by whom the
merites of euery man ſhall be diſcuſſed.
VVherefore Lorde, I accompt it for a
great benefite not to haue many giftes,
whereby outwardlie, & after mās iudgement,
laude and prayſinge ſhould folow.
And ouer that, as me ſeemeth, although
a man conſider and beholde his owne
pouertie, and the vilenes of his owne
perſon, he ought not therefore to take
griefe, heauines, or de
                     •
                  ection, but rather
to conceaue thereby greate gladnes of
ſoule: for thou haſte choſen, and daylie
doeſt choſe poore meeke perſons, & ſuche
as be deſpiſed in the worlde, to be thy
familier and houſholde ſeruauntes, witnes
thy Apoſtles, whom thou madeſt
princes of al the worlde, which neuertheleſſe
were conuerſaunt amonge the people
without complayninge or miſſaying,
ſo meeke and ſimple without all malice
and diſceipte, that they ioyed to ſuffer reproufes
for thy name, ſo farreforth, that
ſuch thinges as the world abhorreth and
flieth, they coueted with great deſire.
Thus it appeareth, that there ought nothinge
ſo much to comfort and glad thy
louer and him that hath receaued thy
benefites, as that thy will and pleaſure
in him be fullfilled after the eternall diſpoſition

of him from the beginninge,
wherewith he ought to be ſo well contented
and pleaſed, that he woulde as
gladly be holden leaſt, as other woulde be
holden moſt, and as peacefull woulde he
be, & as well pleaſed in the loweſt place,
as in the higheſt: and as glad to be deſpiſed
and abiect, and of no name nor reputation
in the world, as other to be nobler
or greater: for thy will, Lorde, and the
honour of thy name ought to excell all
thinges, and more ought it to pleaſe and
comfort thy louer, then all other benefits
geuen, or that might be geuen vnto him.
            
            
               Of foure things that bring peace into the ſoule.
The 25. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, nowe ſhal I teach
thee the very true waye of
peace and of perfect libertie.
O Lorde Ieſu, doe as
thou ſayeſt, for that is
ryght ioyous for me to
heare. Studye my ſonne
rather to fulfill another mans will, then
thine owne. Thoſe alwaye to haue litle
worldly riches, rather then much: ſeeke
alſo the loweſt place, and deſire to be vnder
other, rather then aboue, and couete
alwaye and praye, that the will of God
be whollye done in thee. Lo, ſuch a perſon
entreth ſoothfaſtlie into the verye true

waye of peace and inward quietnes. O
Lorde, this ſhort leſſon that thou haſte
taught me, conteyneth in it ſelfe much
high perfection. It is ſhorte in wordes,
but it is full of ſentence, and fruitfull in
vertue: for if it were well and faithfullie
kepte of me, vnreſtfulnes ſhoulde not ſo
lightly ſpring in me as it hath done. For
as ofte as I feele my ſelfe vnreſtfull, and
not contented, I finde that I haue gone
from this leſſon, and from this good doctrine.
But thou Lorde Ieſu, who haſt all
thinges vnder thy gouuernaunce, and
alwaye loueſt the health of mans ſoule,
increaſe more grace in me, that I maye
from henceforth fulfill theſe teachinges,
and that I may doe alway, that ſhalbe to
thy honoure, and to the health of my
ſoule. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer againſt euill thoughtes.
The .26. Chapter.
               
                  My Lorde Ieſu, I beſeeche thee
be not farre from me, but come
ſhortlye, & helpe me, for vaine
thoughtes haue riſen in mine
hart, and worldly dredes haue
troubled me verie ſore, howe ſhall I
breake them downe? howe ſhall I paſſe
vnhurt without thy helpe? I ſhall go
before thee, ſayth our Lorde, and I ſhall
driue awaye the pride of thy hart, then

ſhal I ſet open to thee the gates of ghoſtlie
knowledge, and ſhall ſhew to thee the
priuities of my ſecretes. O Lorde, doe as
thou ſayeſt, and then ſhall flee from me
all wicked fantaſies, and truelie this is
my hope, and my onelie comfort, to flee
to thee in euery trouble, ſtedfaſtlie to
truſt in thee, inwardlie to call to thee,
and patientlie to abyde thy comminge,
and thy heauenlie conſolations, which
I truſt ſhall ſhortlie come to me. Amen.
            
            
               A prayer for clarifying of mans
minde.
The .27. Chapter.
               
                  CLarifie me, Lorde Ieſu, with
the cleerenes of the euerlaſtinge
light, and driue out of
my heart all maner of darknes,
and all vaine imaginations,
fight ſtronglie for me, and driue
awaye the euill beaſtes, that is to ſaye, all
my euill and wicked cōcupiſcences, that
peace of conſcience may enter and haue
full rule in me, and that aboundaunce of
lawde and prayſinge of thy name, maye
ſound continuallie in the chamber of my
ſoule: that is to ſaye, in a pure & cleane
cōſcience in me. Commaunde the windes
and tempeſtes of pride to ceaſſe, bid the
ſea of worldlie couetiſe to be in reſt, and
charge the north winde, that is to ſaye,

the fiendes temptatiō, that it blowe not
and then ſhalbe great tranquillitie and
peace in me. Send out thy light & truth
of ghoſtlye knowledge, that it maye ſhine
vpon the earth barreyne and dry, and
ſende downe thy grace from aboue,
and therewith annoynt my dry heart,
and geue me the water of inward deuotion,
to moiſte therwith the drines of my
ſoule, that It may bring forth ſome good
fruite, that ſhall be liking and pleaſaunt
to thee. Rayſe vp my minde, that is ſore
oppreſſed with the heauy burdē of ſinne
and lifte vp my deſire to the loue of heauenly
thinges, that by a taſte of the heauenlie
felicitie, it may lothe to thinke on
any earthly thinges. Take me Lorde, and
deliuer me from the vile conſolation of
creatures, which muſt of neceſſitie ſhort:
lie periſhe and fayle. For there is nothing
created, that may fullye ſatiſfye mine
appetite. Ioyne me therefore to thee
with a ſure bonde of heauenly
loue, for thou onely ſuffiſeſt
to thy louer. And without
thee all thinges
be vaine, and of
no ſubſtaunce.
            
            
               
               That it is not good to ſearche curiouſlye
another mans lyfe.
The 28. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſaith our Lorde,
looke thou be not curious
in ſearchinge of any other
mans lyfe, neyther doe
thou buſie thy ſelfe with
thoſe thinges, which doe
not belonge vnto thee.
VVhat is this or that to thee? folow thou
me: VVhat is it to thee, whether this mā
be good or bad? or whether he ſaye or doe
this or that? Thou needeſt not to anſwere
for another mans deedes, but for thine
owne deedes thou muſt needly aunſwere.
VVhy then doeſt thou medle where it
needeth not? I ſee and know euery man,
and euery thinge vnder the ſunne, I ſee
and beholde, and howe it is with euery
perſon, what he thinketh, what he willeth,
and to what ende his worke draweth,
is open to me. And therefore all
thinges are to be referred to me. Keepe
thy ſelfe alwaye in good peace, and ſuffer
him that will alwayes ſearche another
mans life, be as buſye as he will, and in
the ende ſhall fall vpon him as he hath
done and ſayde, for he can not deceaue
me whatſoeuer he be. If thou admoniſhe
anye perſon for his ſoule health, looke
thou do it not, to get the thereby anye

name or fame in the worlde, nor to haue
the familiaritie or pryuate loue of any
perſon, for ſuche thinges cauſe much vnquietnes
of minde, and will make thee
alſo to loſe the rewarde that thou ſhouldeſt
haue of God, and will bring greate
darkenes into thy ſoule. I woulde gladly
ſpeake to thee my wordes, & open to thee
the ſecrete miſteries of fraternall correction:
yf thou wouldeſt prepare thy ſoule
ready againſt my cōminge, and that thou
wouldeſt open the mouth of thy hearte
faithfullye to me: Be thou prouident,
wake diligentlye in prayer, humble thy
ſelfe in euery thing, and thou ſhalt finde
great comfort in God, and litle reſiſtence
in thy euen chriſten.
            
            
               In vvhat thing the peace of heart, and greateſt
profite of man ſtandeth.
The 29. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſaith our Lord Ieſu, I
ſayd to my diſciples thus: My
peace I leaue with you, my
peace I geue you, not as the
worlde geueth, but much more
then it maye geue. All men deſire peace,
but all men will not do that belongeth to
peace. My peace is with the meeke and
milde in hart, and thy peace ſhall be in
much paciēce: if thou wilt heare me, and
folowe my wordes, thou ſhalt haue great

plentie of peace. O Lorde what ſhall I
doe to come to that peace? Thou ſhalt in
all thy workes take good heede what
thou doeſt and ſayeſt, and thou ſhalte ſet
all thy whole intent to pleaſe me, and
nothing ſhalt thou couet or ſeeke without
me, and of other mens deedes thou
ſhalt not iudge preſumptuouſly, nor thou
ſhalt not medle with thinges that perteine
not to thee, if thou do thus it maye
be that thou ſhalt litle or ſeldome be troubled:
but neuertheleſſe, to fele at no time
any maner of trouble, nor to ſuffer any
heauines in body nor in ſoule, is not the
ſtate of this lyfe, but of the lyfe to come.
Thinke not therefore that thou haſte
found the true peace when thou feeleſt
no greefe, nor that all is well with thee
when thou haſt none aduerſitie, nor that
all is perfect for that euery thing cōmeth
after thy minde. Nor yet that thou arte
great in godds ſight, or ſpecially beloued
of him, becauſe thou haſt great feruour in
deuotion, and great ſweetnes in contemplation,
for a true louer of vertue is not
knowen by all theſe thinges, nor the true
perfection of man ſtandeth not in them.
(VVherein then Lorde?) In offering of
a man with all his hart wholly to God,
not ſeking him ſelfe, nor his owne will,
neyther in greate thinges nor in ſmall,
in tyme nor in eternitie, but that he
abide alwaye one, and yeelde alwaye like

thankes to God for things pleaſant and
diſpleaſant, waying them all in one like
balance as in his loue. Alſo if he be ſtrong
in God, that when inwarde conſolation
is withdrawen he can yet ſtirre his harte
to ſuffer more if God ſo will, and yet iuſtifieth
not him ſelfe, nor prayſeth him
ſelfe therefore, as holye and righteous:
then he walketh in the very true waye of
peace, and then he may well haue a ſure
and a perfect hope and truſt that he ſhall
ſee me face to face, in euerlaſting ioy and
fruition in the kingdome of heauen. And
if he can come to a perfect and a full contempt
and deſpiſinge of him ſelfe, then
ſhall he haue full habundance of reſt and
peace in the ioye euerlaſtinge, after the
meaſure of his gifte. Amen.
            
            
               Of the libertie, excellencie, and vvorthineſſe
of a free mynde.
The .30. Chapter.
               
                  LOrde it is the worke of a perfect
man, not to ſequeſter his
minde from the beholding of
heauenly thinges, and among
many cares, to go as he were
without care: not in the maner of an ydle
or of a deſolate perſon, but by the ſpeciall
prerogatiue of a free minde, alwaye buſy
in goddes ſeruice, not cleuinge by inordinate
affection to any creature. I beſeeche

thee therefore my Lord Ieſu, moſt meeke
and mercifull, that thou keepe me from
the buſines and cares of the worlde, and
that I be not ouermuch inquieted with
the neceſſities of the bodilie kinde, nor
that I be not taken with the voluptuous
pleaſures of the worlde, and the fleſhe,
and that in likewiſe thou preſerue me
from all hinderance of the ſoule, that I
be not broken with ouermuch heauines,
ſorow, nor worldlye dreade. And by theſe
petitions I aſke not onelie to be deliuered
from ſuch vanities as the world deſireth,
but alſo from ſuche miſeries as
greeue the ſoule of me thy ſeruant, with
the common malediction of mankinde,
that is, with corruption of the bodilie
feelinge, where with I am ſo greeued
and letted, that I maye not haue libertie
of ſpirite to beholde thee when I would.
O Lorde God, that art ſweetnes vnſpeakeable,
turne into bitternes to me all
fleſhlie delites, which would drawe me
from the loue of eternall thinges to the
loue of a ſhort and a vile delectable pleaſure:
Let not the fleſhe and bloude ouercome
me, nor the worlde with his ſhort
glory deceyue me, nor the fiend with his
thouſand folde craftes ſupplant me, but
geue me ghoſtlie ſtrength in reſiſtinge,
patience in ſufferinge, and conſtancie in
perſeueringe. Geue me alſo for all worldlie
conſolatiōs, the moſt ſweete conſolations

of the holy ghoſt, and for al fleſhly
loue, ſende into my ſoule the loue of thy
holy name. Lo meat, drinke, cloathinge,
and all other neceſſaries for the body be
painefull and troubleſome to a feruent
ſpirite, which if it might, woulde alwaye
reſt in God, & in ghoſtly thinges. Graunt
me therefore grace to vſe ſuch bodilye neceſſaries
temperatlye, and that I be not
deceaued with ouermuch deſire to them.
To forſake all thinges it is not lawfull,
for the bodilye kinde muſt be preſerued,
but to ſeeke ſuperfluous thinges, more
for pleaſure, then for neceſſitie, thy holye
lawe prohibiteth: for ſo the fleſhe woulde
rebel againſt the ſpirite. VVherfore Lord,
I beſeech thee, that thy hande of grace
maye ſo gouerne and teache me, that I
exceede not by any maner of ſuperfluitie.
Amen.
            
            
               That priuate loue moſt letteth a man
from God.
The .31. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſaith our Lorde it behoueth
thee to geue all for all,
and nothing to keepe to thee
of thine owne loue, for the
loue of thy ſelfe more hurteth
thee, then any other thing in this world.
After thy loue, and after thine affection
euery thinge cleaneth to thee more or

leſſe. If thy loue be pure, ſimple, and well
ordered, thou ſhalte be without inordinate
affection to any creature. Couete
therefore nothing that is not lawfull for
thee to haue, and haue nothing that may
let thee from ghoſtlye trauayle, or that
maye take from thee inwarde libertie of
ſoule. It is meruail, that thou committeſt
not thy ſelfe fullye to me with all thy
heart, with all thinges that thou mayeſt
haue or deſire. VVhye art thou thus conſumed
with vaine ſorowe? why art thou
weried with ſuperfluous cares? Stande
at my will, and thou ſhalt finde nothing
that ſhall hurt or hinder thee: but if thou
ſeeke this thing or that, or wouldeſt be in
this place or in that for thine owne profite,
and for thine owne pleaſure, thou
ſhalt neuer be in reſt, nor euer free from
ſome trouble of minde: for in euery place
ſhal be found ſomething that will miſlike
thee. Tranſitorie thinges when they be
had and greatly multiplied in the world,
do not alway helpe mans ſoule to peace,
but rather when they be deſpyſed and
fullie cut out of the loue and deſire of the
hart, and that not to be vnderſtand onely
of golde and ſiluer, and other worldlye
riches, but alſo of deſire of honours and
prayſinges of the worlde, which ſhortlye
vaniſheth and paſſeth awaye, as doth
the ſmoke with the winde: the place
helpeth little yf the ſpirite of feruour

be awaye. Alſo the peace that a man getteth
outwardelye, ſhall not long ſtande
who
                     •
                  e, if it be voyde from the true inward
peace of hart, that is to ſay, though
thou chaunge thy place, yet it ſhall litle
amende thee, vnleſſe thou ſtande ſtedfaſt
in me: for by newe occaſions that ſhall
daylie riſe, thou ſhalte finde that thou
haſt fled, & percaſe muche more perillous,
and muche more greuous thinges than
the firſt were.
            
            
               A prayer for the purginge of mans ſoule, and
for heauenlye vviſdome and the grace of
God to be obteyned and had.
The 32. Chapter.
               
                  COnfirme me Lorde, by the
grace of the holye ghoſt, and
geue me grace to be ſtronge inwardlye
in ſoule, and auoyde
out thereof all vnprofitable
buſines of the worlde, and of the fleſhe
that it may not be led by vnſtable deſires
of earthlie thinges. And that I maye beholde
all thinges, as they be, tranſitorie,
and of ſhort abidinge, and me alſo to go
with them: for nothinge vnder the Sun
may longe abide, but all is vanitie, and
affliction of ſpirite. O howe wiſe is he
that feeleth and vnderſtandeth this to
be true that I haue ſayde. Geue me (Lord)

therefore heauenlye wiſedome, that I
maye learne to ſeeke thee, and to finde
thee, and aboue all thinges to loue thee,
and all other thinges to vnderſtande and
knowe, as they be, after thorder of my
wiſedome, and none otherwiſe, and geue
me grace alſo, wiſelie to withdrawe me
from them that flatter me, and patiently
to ſuffer thē that greue me: for it is great
wiſedome not to be moued with euery
blaſt of wordes, nor to geue eare to him
that flattereth, as doth the mairmayde.
The waye that is thus begon, ſhall bring
him that walketh in it, to a good and a
bleſſed ending.
            
            
               Agaynſt the euill ſayinges of detractours.
The 33. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſaith our Sauiour
Chriſt, thou ſhalt not take it
to griefe, becauſe ſome perſons
thinke euill, or ſay euill
of thee, that thou wouldeſt
not gladlye heare, for thou
ſhalt yet thinke worſe of thy ſelfe, and
that no man is ſo euill as thou arte. If
thou be well ordred inwardlye in thy
ſoule, thou ſhalt not muche care for ſuche
flyinge wordes. And it is no litle wiſedome,
a man to keepe him ſelfe in ſilence,
and in good peace, when euill wordes be
ſpoken to him, and to turne his heart to

God, and not to be troubled with mans
iudgement. Let not thy peace be in the
heartes of men, for whatſoeuer they ſay
of thee, good or bad, thou art not therefore
a nother man: but as thou art, thou
art. VVhere is the true peace and glorie,
is it not in me? yes truely: Therefore he
that neither deſireth to pleaſe man, nor
dreadeth not to diſpleaſe him, ſhall haue
great plentie of peace: for of inordinate
loue, and vaine dread, commeth all vnquietnes
of heart, and vnreſtfulnes of
minde.
            
            
               Hovve almightie God is to be invvarldlye
called vnto, in time of tribulation.
The 34. Chapter.
               
                  LOrde, thy name be bleſſed
for euer: that thou wouldeſt
this temptation and
tribulation ſhould fal vpon
me, I maye not eſcape it,
but of neceſſitie I am driuen
to flee to thee, that
thou vouchſafe to helde me, and to turne
all into gohſtlye profite. O Lorde, I am
nowe in trouble, & it is not well with me,
for I am greatly vexed with this preſent
paſſion. And nowe moſte beſt beloued father,
what ſhall I ſay, I am nowe taken
with anguiſhes and troubles on euerye
ſide, ſaue me in this houre, but I truſt

that I am come into this houre, that
thou ſhalt be lauded and prayſed when
I am perfectlye made meeke before thee,
and that I am clerely deliuered by thee,
be it therfore pleaſaunt to thee to deliuer
me. For what may I moſt ſinneful wretch
doe, or whither may I goe without thee?
Giue me patiēce nowe at this time in all
my troubles: helpe me my Lord God, and
I ſhall not feare ne dread what troubles
ſoeuer fall vpon me. And nowe what ſhal
I ſay, but that thy will be done in me? I
haue deſerued to be troubled & greeued,
and therefore it behoueth that I ſuffer as
long as it ſhall pleaſe thee, but woulde to
God that I might ſuffer gladlye till the
furious tempeſtes were ouerpaſſed, and
that quietnes of hart might come againe.
Thy mightie hande (Lorde) is ſtronge
ynough to take this trouble from me, and
to aſwage the cruel aſſaults thereof, that
I doe not vtterly fayle, as thou haſt ofte
times done to me before this time, & the
more harde that it is to me, the more
light it is to thee. And when I am clerely
deliuered by thee, then ſhall I ſaye, This
is the changing of the right hande of him
that is higheſt, that is, the bleſſed
Trinitie, to whom be ioye,
honour, and glorye
euerlaſtingly.
Amen.
            
            
               
               Of the helpe of God to be aſked, and of a full
truſt to recouer through deuout prayer
our former grace.
The .35. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, I am the Lorde that
ſendeth comfort in tyme of
tribulation, come therefore to
me, when it is not well with
thee. This is it that letteth
thee moſt, that thou turneſt thee ouer
ſlowlie to me, for before thou pray hartilie
to me, thou ſeekeſt many other comforts,
and refreſheſt thy ſpirites in outwarde
thinges. And therefore all that
thou doeſt litle auayleth thee, til thou
canſt beholde and ſee, that I am he that
ſendeth comfort to all that faithfully doe
call to me, and that there is not without
me any profitable counſayle nor perfect
remedie. But nowe take a good ſpirite to
thee, and after thy troubles be thou comforted
in me, & in the light of my mercie
haue thou full truſt, for I am nere to thee
to helpe thee, and to reſtore thee againe,
not onelie to like grace as thou haddeſt
firſt, but alſo to muche more, in great
aboundance. Is there anye thinge hard
or impoſſible to me? or am I like to him,
that ſayeth a thinge, and doeth it not?
where is thy fayth? Stand ſtronglie and
perſeuerantlie in me, be ſtedfaſt, abiding

my promiſe, and thou ſhall haue comfort
in ſuch time as it ſhall be moſt expedient
for thee: abide, abide, and tary for me, and
I ſhall come ſoone, and helpe thee. It is
temptation that vexeth thee, and a vaine
dread that feareth thee much. But what
auayleth ſuch feare of dreade for thinges
that perchaunce ſhall neuer come, but
that the ghoſtlye enemye woulde thou
ſhouldeſt haue ſorowe vpon ſorow. Beare
therefore patienlye thy troubles that be
preſent, and drede not ouermuche thoſe
that be to come: for it ſuffiſeth to euery
daye his owne malice. It is a vaine thing
and vnprofitable, to be heauy or glad for
thinges, that perchaunce ſhal neuer happen
nor come, but it is the vnſtablenes of
man, that he will be deceaued, & ſo lightly
to folowe the ſuggeſtion of the enemie,
for he careth not whether he maye deceiue
by true ſuggeſtion or by falſe, nor
whether it be by loue of thinges preſent,
or by dreade of thinges to come. Therfore
be thou not troubled, neither drede, but
truſt ſtronglie in me, & in my mercy haue
perfect hope, for when thou weeneſt, that
thou art right farre from me, ofte times
I am right neere vnto thee: and when
thou weeneſt that all is loſt, then ofte
times foloweth the greater reward. It is
not therefore all loſt, though ſome thinge
happen againſt thy will, and thou ſhalt
not iudge therein after thy outwarde

feelinge, neyther ſhalt thou take anye
griefe ſo ſore to hart, but that thou ſhalt
haue good truſt to eſcape it: nor thou
ſhalt not thinke thy ſelfe all whollie forſaken
of me, though I ſende thee for a
time ſome heauines and trouble, for that
is the ſurer way to the kingdome of heauen:
and doubtles, it is more expedient
to thee, and to other of my ſeruauntes,
that ye ſometime be proued with aduerſities,
then that ye haue alway all things
after your wils. I know the hid thought
of man, and that it is much expedient to
the health of the ſoule, that he be lefte
ſometime to him ſelfe without ghoſtlie
ſauour or cōfort, leaſt haply he be rayſed
vp into pride, and thinke him ſelfe better
then he is. That I haue geuen, I maye
take awaye, and maye reſtore it againe,
when me ſhall liſt. VVhen I geue a thing
to anye perſon, it is mine owne that I
haue geuen, and when I take it awaye
againe, I take none of his: for euerye
good gifte, and euery perfect rewarde
commeth of me. If I ſende to thee trouble
or heauines, in what wiſe ſoeuer it
be, take it gladly, & diſdain it not, neither
let thy heart fayle thee therin, for I may
anone lifte thee vp againe, and turne thy
heauines into great ioye and ghoſtlye
gladnes. And verilie, I am righteous,
and much to be lauded and prayſed, whē
I doe ſo with thee. If thou vnderſtande

a right, and beholde thy ſelfe truelie as
thou art, thou ſhalt neuer be ſo directlie
heauie for anye aduerſitie, but rather
thou ſhalt ioye therein, and thinke it as
the greateſt gifte, that I ſpare not to
ſcourge thee with ſuch trouble and aduerſitie:
for I ſayde to my diſciples thus:
As my father loueth me I loue you: and
yet I ſent them not forth into the world,
to haue temporall ioyes, but to haue
great battailes, not to haue honours, but
deſpites, not to be ydle, but to labor, not
to reſt, but to bringe forth much good
fruite in patience and good workes. My
ſonne, remember well theſe wordes that
I haue ſpoken to thee, for they be true,
and can not be denyed.
            
            
               Hovv vve ſhould forget all creatures, that
vve might finde our Creator.
The .36. Chapter.
               
                  LOrde, I haue great neede of
thy grace, & that of thy great
ſinguler grace, or that I may
come thither, where no creature
ſhall let nor hinder me
from perfect beholdinge of thee: for as
longe as anye tranſitorye thinge holdeth
me, or hath rule in me, I maye
not flye freelye to thee. He coueted to
flye without let, that ſayde thus: VVho
ſhall geue me winges like to a doue, that

I may flie into the boſome of my ſauiour,
& into the holes of his bleſſed woundes
and reſt me there? I ſee well, that no
man is more reſtfull, nor more likinge in
this world, then is that man, who alway
hath his minde, and whole intent vpwarde
to God, and nothinge deſireth of
the world. It behoueth him therfore that
would perfectlie forſake him ſelfe, & beholde
thee, to ſurmount al creatures, and
him ſelfe alſo, & through exceſſe of minde
to ſee and behold, that thou maker of all
things haſt nothing amōge all creatures
like vnto thee: & but a man be cleerely deliuered
frō the loue of creatures, he may
not fullie tend to his Creator? And this
is the greateſt cauſe, why there be ſo fewe
cōtēplatiues, that is to ſay, becauſe there
be ſo fewe, that willinglye will ſequeſter
them ſelues from the loue of creatures.
To cōtemplation is great grace required,
for it lifteth vp the ſoule, and rauiſheth
it vp in ſpirit aboue it ſelfe. And except a
man be lift vp in ſpirite aboue him ſelfe,
and be clearelie deliuered from all creatures,
as in his loue, and be perfectly and
fullie vnited to God, whatſoeuer he can,
or whatſoeuer he hath, either in vertue or
cunning, it is but litle worth afore God.
Therefore he ſhal haue but litle vertue, &
long ſhall he lye ſtill in earthlie likinges,
that accounteth any thing great or worthy
to be prayſed, but onelie God, for all

other thinges beſides God are nought, &
for nought are to be accoūted. It is great
difference betwene the wiſdome of a deuout
man lightened by grace, and the
cunninge of a ſubtill and ſtudious clerke,
and that learninge is muche more noble
and muche more worthy, that commeth
by the influence and gracious gifte of
God, than that that is gotten by the labour
& ſtudy of man. Many deſire to haue
the gifte of contemplation, but they will
not vſe ſuche thinges as be required to
contemplation. And one great let of contemplation
is, that we ſtande ſo longe in
outward ſignes, and in ſenſible things, &
take no heede of perfect mortifying our
body to the ſpirit. I wote not howe it is,
nor with what ſpirit we be led, nor what
we pretend, we that be called ſpirituall
perſons, that we take greater labour and
ſtudy for tranſitory thinges, than we doe
to knowe the inwarde ſtate of our owne
ſoule. But alas for ſorowe, anone as we
haue made a litle recollection to God, we
ten forth to outwarde thinges, and doe
not ſearch our owne conſcience with due
examination, as we ſhoulde do, nor we
heede not where our affection reſteth, newe
ſorowe not that our deedes be ſo euill
& ſo vnclene as they be. The people corrupted
them ſelfe with fleſhly vnclēnes,
and therefore folowed the greate floode:
and veryly when our inward affection is

corrupted, it is neceſſarie that our dedes
folowinge thervpon be alſo corrupted,
for of a cleane heart ſpringeth the fruite
of good life. It is ofte times aſked what
deedes ſuch a mā hath done, but of what
zeale, of what intent he did them, is litle
regarded: whether a man be riche, ſtrong,
fayre, able, a good writer, a good ſinger,
or a good labourer, is ofte enquired, but
howe poore he is in ſpirite, howe pacient
and meeke, howe deuout, and howe inwardlie
turned to God, is litle regarded.
Nature holdeth the outwarde deede, but
grace turneth her to the inwarde intent
of the deede. The firſt is ofte deceyued,
but the ſeconde putteth her truſt wholly
in God, and is not deceyued.
            
            
               Hovve vve ſhould forſake our ſelfe, and thruſte
dovvne all couetiſe out of our heartes.
The .37. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſayth our Lorde, thou
ſhalt not haue perfect libertie of
minde, vnleſſe thou wholly forſake
thy ſelfe. All proprietaries,
and al louers of them ſelues, al couetous
perſons, curious, vaine glorious, and all
runners about, and alſo ſuch as ſeeke
thinges ſofte & delectable in this worlde,
and not of Ieſus Chriſte, ofte fayninge,
and greedilye ſeekinge thinges that ſhal
not longe endure, be as men fettred and

bounde with chaines, and haue no perfect
libertie nor freedome of ſpirit, for all
thinges ſhall periſh that be not wrought
of God. Holde well in thy minde this
ſhort word: Forſake all thinges, and thou
ſhalt finde all thinges, forſake couetiſe,
and thou ſhalt finde great reſt. Print wel
in thy minde that I haue ſayde, for whē
thou haſte fulfilled it, thou ſhalte well
knowe, that it is true. Lorde, this leſſon
is not one dayes worke, nor a playe for
children, for in it is conteyned the full
perfectiō of all religion. Alſo, my ſonne,
thou oughteſt not to be turned from god,
nor to be anye thinge diſcouraged from
his ſeruice, when thou heareſt the ſtraite
lyfe of perfect men, but rather thou
oughteſt to be prouoked thereby to higher
perfection, and at leaſt to deſire
in harte, that thou mighteſt come therto.
But woulde to God thou were firſte
come to this point, that thou were
not a louer of thy ſelfe, but that thou
wouldeſt keepe my commaundementes,
and the commaundementes of him that
I haue appoynted to be thy father ſpirituall:
for then thou ſhouldeſt pleaſe
me greatlye, and then all thy lyfe
ſhoulde paſſe forth in ioye and peace.
Thou haſte yet manye thinges to forſake,
whiche vnleſſe thou can whollye
forſake, thou ſhalt not get that thou
deſireſt. And therefore I counſayle thee,

to buye of me bright ſhininge gold, that
is to ſaye, heauenlye wiſedome, that deſpiſeth
all earthlye thinges, and caſt fro
thee all worldlye wiſdome, and all mans
comfort, and all thine owne affections,
and that thou choſe to haue vile thinges
and abiect, rather thē precious and high
in the ſight of the worlde. But thee true
heauenly wiſedome ſeemeth to manye, to
be vile and litle, and well nigh forgotten.
Many can ſaye with their mouth that it
is good, not to deſire to be magnifyed in
the worlde, but their lyfe foloweth not
their ſaying. And therefore they deſire it
priuily in their heart, but yet that is the
precious margaret, and the high vertue
that is hid fro much people for their preſumption,
get it who ſo may.
            
            
               Of the vnſtablenes of mans harte; and
that our finall intent in all thinges
ſhoulde be to God.
The .38. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, looke thou beleeue not
thine owne affection, for it
chaungeth ofte from one to an
other. As longe as thou liueſt
thou ſhalt be glad to chaunge
habilitie whether thou wilt or not, as
nowe glad, nowe ſorowfull, nowe pleaſed,
nowe diſpleaſed, nowe deuout, nowe

vndeuout, nowe luſtie, nowe ſlouthfull,
nowe heauie, nowe lightſome. But a wiſe
man that is well taught in ghoſtlie trauayle,
ſtandeth ſtable in all ſuch thinges,
and forceth litle what he feeleth, nor on
what ſide the winde of vnſtablenes bloweth,
but all the intent and ſtudie of his
minde is, howe he may moſte profite in
vertue, & finallie come to the moſt fruitfull
& moſt bleſſed ende. By ſuch a wholle
intent fullie directed to God, may a man
abide ſtedfaſt & ſtable in him ſelfe among
many aduerſities, and the more pure and
the more cleane that his intent is, the
more ſtable ſhall he be in euery ſtorme.
But alas for ſorowe, the eye of mans
ſoule is anone darkened, for it beholdeth
lightlie delectable thinges that come of
the worlde, and of the fleſhe, in ſo muche
that there is ſeldome founde any perſon
that is free & cleare from the venemous
deſire of hearinge of ſome tales, or of
ſome other fantaſies, and that by their
owne ſeekinge. In ſuche maner 
                     •
                  ame the
Iewes into Bethany, to Martha and to
Marie Magdalen, not for the loue of our
Lord Ieſus, but for to ſee Lazarus, whom
he had rayſed from death to life. VVherefore
the eye of the ſoule is to be kept full
bright, that it be alwaye pure and cleane,
and that it be aboue all paſſing thinges,
wholly directed to god: the which graunt
vs to. &c. Amen.
            
            
               
               Hovve our Lorde God ſauoureth to his louer
ſvveetly aboue all things, and in all things.
The 39. Chapter.
               
                  OVr Lorde God is to me all
in all, and ſith he is ſo, what
would I more haue, or what
can I more deſire? O this is
a ſauoury worde & a ſweete,
to ſaye, that our Lorde is to
me all in all. But that is to him that loueth
the worde, and not the worlde. To
him that vnderſtandeth this worde, is
ſayd inough, but yet to repeate it ofte is
likinge to him that loueth. I maye therfore
more plainely ſpeake of this matter,
and ſaye, Lorde when thou art preſent to
me, all thinge is pleaſaunt and likinge,
but when thou art abſent, all thinges are
greeuous and greatly miſlikinge. VVhen
thou commeſt thou makeſt myne harte
reſtfull, and bringeſt into it a newe ioye,
thou makeſt thy louer to feele and vnderſtande
the truth, and to haue a true
iudgement in all thinges, & in all thinges
to laude and prayſe thee. O Lorde, without
thee nothinge may belonge likinge
nor pleaſaunt, for if any thinge ſhoulde
be lykinge and ſauourye, it muſte be
through helpe of thy grace, and be tempered
with the ſpicerie of thy wiſedome.
To him to whom thou ſauoureſt well,
what ſhall not ſauour well? And to him

that thou ſauoureſt not well vnto, what
may be ioyfull or likinge? But worldlie
wiſe men, and they that ſauour fleſhlye
delightes, fayle of this wiſedome. For in
worldlie wiſedome is founde great vanitie,
and in fleſhlie pleaſures is euerlaſtinge
death: and therefore they that folow
thee Lord by deſpiſing of the world,
and by perfect mortifieng of their fleſhly
luſtes, be knowen to be verie wiſe, for
they be led from vanitie to trueth, and
from fleſhelie likinge to ſpirituall cleannes.
To ſuche perſons God ſauoureth
wonderous ſweete: and whatſoeuer they
finde in creatures, they referre it all to
the laude and prayſing of the Creatoure:
for they ſee well, that there is great difference
betwixt the Creator and creature,
eternitie and time, and betwixte the
light made & the light vnmade. O euerlaſtinge
light farre paſſinge all thinges
that are made, ſende downe the beames
of thy lightninges from aboue, and purifye,
glad, and clarifie in me al the inward
parties of my heart. Quicken my ſpirite
with all the powers thereof, that it may
cleaue faſt, and be ioyned to thee in ioyfull
gladnes of ghoſtlye rauiſhinges. O
when ſhall that bleſſed hour come, that
thou ſhalt viſite me, & glad me with thy
bleſſed preſence, ſo that thou be to me all
in all? As longe as that gifte is not geuen
to me, that thou be to me all in all, there

ſhall be no full ioye in me. But alas for
ſorowe, mine olde man, that is my fleſhly
liking, yet liueth in me, and is not yet
fully crucified, nor perfectly deade in me,
for yet ſtriueth the fleſhe ſtrongly againſt
the ſpirit, aud moueth great inward battayle
againſt me, and ſuffereth not the
kyngdome of my ſoule to lyue in peace.
But thou, good Lorde, that haſt the lordſhip
ouer al the power of the Sea, & doeſt
aſwage the ſtreames of his flowinges.
Aryſe and helpe me, breake downe the
power of myne enemies, which alwaye
moue this battayle in me. Shewe the
greatnes of thy goodnes, & let the power
of thy right hande be glorified in me, for
there is to me none other hope nor refuge,
but in thee onely my Lorde, my God:
to whom be ioy, honour and glorye euerlaſtingly.
Amen.
            
            
               That there is no full ſuretie from temptation
in this lyfe.
The 40. Chapter.
               
                  OVr Lorde ſayeth to his ſeruaunt
thus: Thou ſhalte neuer
be ſure from temptation
and tribulation in this lyfe.
And therefore, armoure ſpiritual
ſhal alway, as long as thou liueſt, be
neceſſarie for thee. Thou art amōg thine
enemies, and ſhalt be troubled and vexed

with them on euery ſide, and but if thou
vſe in euery place the ſhielde of patience,
thou ſhalt not long keepe thee vnwounded.
And ouer that, if thou ſet not thy
hart ſtronglie in me, with a readie will
to ſuffer all thinges patientlie for me,
thou mayeſt not longe bear this ardoure,
nor come to the reward of bleſſed ſaints.
It behoueth thee therfore manly to paſſe
ouer many thinges, and to vſe a ſtronge
hande againſt all the obiections of the
enemie. To the ouercommer it promiſeth
Angels foode, and to him that is ouercome,
is left much miſerie. If thou ſeeke
reſt in this lyfe, howe then ſhalt thou
come to the reſt euerlaſtinge? Set not thy
ſelfe to haue reſt here, but to haue patience,
and ſeeke the true ſoothfaſt reſt, not in
earth, but in heauen, not in man, or anye
creature, but in God onelie, where it is.
For the loue of God thou oughteſt to ſuffer
gladlie all thinges, that is to ſaye, all
laboures, ſorowes, temptations, vexations,
anguiſhes, needines, ſickeneſſe, iniuries,
euill ſayinges, reprouinges, oppreſſions,
confuſions, corrections, and
deſpiſinges. Theſe helpe a man greatlie
to vertues, theſe proue the true knight
of Chriſte, and make redye for hym the
heauenlie crowne, and our Lorde ſhall
yeelde him againe euerlaſtinge rewarde
for this ſhort laboure, and infinite glorie
for this tranſitorie confuſion. I 
                     •
                  oweſt

thou, that thou ſhalt haue alwaye ſpirituall
cōfortes after thy will? Naye, naye,
my Saintes had them not, out manye
great griefes, and diuers temptations,
and great deſolations, but they bare all
with great patience, and more truſted in
me then in them ſelues: for they knewe
well, that the paſſions of this worlde be
not able of them ſelues to get the glorye
that is ordeined for thē in the kingdome
of heauē. VVilt thou looke to haue anone
that, whiche others coulde not get but
with great weepinges & labours? Abide
paciently the comming of our Lorde, doe
manfully his bidding, be cōforted in him,
miſtruſt him not, nor go not backe from
his ſeruice for paine nor for dread, but
lay forth thy body and ſoule conſtantlye
to his honour in all good bodylye and
ghoſtly laboures, And he ſhal reward thee
againe moſte plenteouſlye for thy good
trauayle, and ſhal be with thee, and helpe
thee in euery trouble that ſhal befall vnto
thee, So may it be. Amen.
            
            
               Againſt the vaine iudgementes of men.
The 41. Ch
                     •
                  pter.
               
                  My ſonne, fixe thy hart ſtedfaſtly
in God, and dreade not the
iudgmētes of man, where thine
owne conſcience withneſſeth
thee to be innocent and cleare. It is right

good and bleſſed, ſometime to ſuffer ſuch
ſayinges, and it ſhall not be greeuous to
a meeke harte whiche truſteth more in
God than in him ſelfe. Many folke can
ſaye many thinges, and yet litle fayth is
to be geuen to their ſayinges, & to ple
                     ••
                  e
all men it is not poſſible. For though S.
Paule laboured all that he might to haue
pleaſed al people in God, & did to all men
all that he coulde for their ſaluation, yet
neuertheleſſe he coulde not let, but that
he was ſometime iudged of other. He did
for the edifyinge and health of other as
much as in him was, but that he ſhoulde
not ſometime be iudged of other, or not
be deſpiſed of other, he coulde not lette,
wherefore he committed all to God that
knoweth all thinge, and armed him ſelfe
with patience and meeknes, againſt all
thinges that might be vntruelye ſpoken
againſt him. And neuertheleſſe ſometime
he anſwered againe, leſt that by his ſilēce
hurte or hinderance might haue growen
to other VVhat art thou then that dreadeſt
ſo ſore a mortall man? this daye he
is, and to morowe he appeareth not,
dread God, and thou ſhalt not nede to
dread man. VVhat maye man do with
thee in wordes or iniuries? he hurteth
him ſelfe more than thee, and in the ende
he ſhall not flee the iudgement of God,
whatſoeuer he be. Haue alwaye God
before the eye of thy ſoule, and ſtriue

not agayne by multiplyinge of wordes.
And if thou ſeeme for a time to ſuffer cō
                  fuſion
that thou haſt not deſerued, diſdayne
thou not therefore, nor through
impatience miniſhe nor thy rewarde, but
rather lifte vp thy harte to God in heauen,
for he is able to deliuer thee from all
confuſion and wronges, and to rewarde
euery man after his deſert, and muche
more then he can deſerue.
            
            
               Of a pure and a vvholle forſakinge of our ſelfe
and our ovvne vvill, that vve might get the
freedome of ſpirite, and folovve
the vvill of God.
The .42. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſayth our Lorde,
forſake thy ſelfe, and thou
ſhalt finde me. Stād without
election, and without
folowinge of thine owne
wil, & alſo without al proprietie,
& thou ſhalt much
profite in grace: and if thou whollie reſigne
thy ſelfe into my handes, and take
nothinge to thee againe, thou ſhalt haue
the more grace of me. O Lorde, howe ofte
ſhall I reſigne me vnto thee, & in what
thinges ſhall I forſake my ſelfe? Alwaye,
and in euery houre, in great thinges and
in ſmall: I except none, for in all thinges

I will finde thee naked and verie poore,
and voyde of thine owne will: els howe
maieſt thou be mine, and I thine, but if
thou be cleerely berefte within and without
of thine owne will. And the ſooner
that thou canſt bringe it about, ſo muche
the ſooner ſhall it be better with thee, &
the more perfectlye and the more cleerely
that thou canſt doe it, the more fully ſhalt
thou pleaſe me, and the more ſhalt thou
winne. Some perſons reſigne thē ſelues
vnto me, but it is with ſome exception,
for they truſt not fullye to me, and therefore
they ſtudye to prouide for thē ſelues.
And ſome at the beginning offer thous to
me, but after, when any temptation commeth,
they ſoone turne agayne to their
owne will, and to that, which they promiſed
to forſake, and therefore they profite
litle in vertue. And truely ſuch perſons
ſhall neuer come to perfect clennes,
and to freedome of heart, nor to the grace
of familiaritie with me, but through a
perfect forſakinge of them ſelues, and
through a dayly offering of them, and all
that they haue wholly to me, for without
that maye no man haue perfect fruition
and vnitinge with me. I haue ſayde to
thee many times before, and yet I ſay to
thee againe, forſake thy ſelfe, and reſigne
thy ſelfe whollye to me, and thou ſhalt
haue great inward peace in me. Geue all
for all, and nothinge keepe to thy ſelfe of

thine owne will, but ſtand purelye and
ſtably in me, and thou ſhalt haue me, and
thou ſhalt be ſo free in heart and in ſoule,
that darkenes of conſcience, nor thraldome
of ſinne ſhall euer haue power in
thee. Endeuour thy ſelfe therefore to get
this freedome of ſpirite that I ſpeake of,
pray for it, ſtudie for it, and alwaye deſire
in thy harte, that is to ſaye, that thou
mayeſt clerely be ſpoyled and bereft of all
propertie and of thine owne will, & that
thou beeing naked of all wordly thinges,
mayeſt folowe me that honge naked for
thee vpon the Croſſe, & that thou mayeſt
dye to thy ſelfe & to all worldlye thinges
alſo (as in thy loue) and bleſſedly to liue
to me. Then if thou doe thus, al vanities,
& all vaine fantaſies, and all ſuperfluous
cares of the world, and of the fleſhe, ſhall
faile, and fade, and go awaye. Then alſo
immoderate dread and inordinate loue
ſhall dye in thee, and thou ſhalt bleſſedly
lyue in me, and I in thee. Amen.
            
            
               Hovve a man ſhall rule him ſelfe in outvvarde
things, and hovve he ought to call to God for
helpe in all perils aud daungers.
The .43. Chapter.
               
                  OVr Lorde Ieſu ſayeth to his ſeruant
thus, Thou oughteſt to take
heede diligentlye, that in euery
place, in euery deede, and in euery

outwarde occupation that thou doeſt,
thou be inwardlye free in thy ſoule, and
haue the rule ouer thy ſelfe, and that all
thinges be vnder thee as in thy loue, and
thou not vnder them: but that thou be
the Lorde & gouernoure ouer thy deedes,
not as a ſeruāt, or a bond man, but rather
exempted as a true Hebrewe, that is to
ſaye, as a true chriſtien man, goinge into
the number and into the freedome of the
children of God, which ſtand vpō things
preſent, and looke towardes thinges
euerlaſting, and beholde thinges tranſitorye
with their lefte eye, and thinges
euerlaſtinge with their right eye: whome
worldlie goodes can not drawe downe to
the loue of them, but they rather drawe
worldlie goodes to ſerue, in ſuche wiſe,
as they be ordeyned to of God, and as
they be inſtituted to doe by the high maker
of all thinges, which leaueth nothing
inordinate in his creatures. Alſo, if thou
ſtande in euery aduenture, and doubt
that ſhal happen to thee, not to the iudgment
of thy outwarde apperance, but
anone in euery ſuche doubt thou entreſt
into thine owne ſoule by deuout prayer,
as Moyſes did into the tabernacle, to
aſke counſell of God, thou ſhalte heare
anone the aunſwere of our Lorde, which
ſhall inſtruct thee ſufficientlye in many
thinges, both preſent, & that are to come.
It is reade, that Moyſes had alwaye recourſe

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
to the tabernacle of God, for doubtes
and queſtions to be aſſolied, and that
he there aſked the helpe of God through
deuout prayer for the perils and daungers,
aſwell of him ſelfe, as of the people.
So ſhouldeſt thou enter into the ſecrete
tabernacle of thine owne heart, & there
aſke inwardlie with good deuotion the
helpe of God in all ſuch doubtes & perils.
VVe reade that Ioſue, and the children
of Iſrael were deceaued of the Gabaonites,
becauſe they gaue light credence to
their ſayinges, & did not firſte aſke counſaile
of God, as they ſhould haue done,
and ſo by the fayre wordes of the Gabaonites,
and thorough a falſe pitie, Ioſue
and the children of Iſrael were illuded
and greatlie deceaued.
            
            
               That a man ſhoulde not be importune in
his buſines.
The .44. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſaith our Lorde, cō
                  mit
alwaye thy cauſe to me,
and I ſhall well diſpoſe it
for thee whē time ſhal come.
Abide mine ordinaunce and
direction, and thou ſhalte
finde thereby great profite and helpe. O
Lorde, gladlie will I commit all thinges
to thee, for it is litie that I can doe for
my ſelfe. VVould to God that I did not

cleaue to deſires of worldlie thinges, but
that I might alwaye offer my ſelfe whollye
to thy will and pleaſure. My ſonne,
ſo it is good for thee to doe, for often
times a man that truſteth muche in him
ſelfe, and in his owne will, ſetteth his
minde muche to bringe about this thinge
or that, as he deſireth: but when he hath
attayned that he deſireth, thē beginneth
he to feele all otherwiſe of it then he did
before: for the affections and deſires of
man be not alwaye one, but ofte driue a
man from one thinge to another. Therefore
it is no ſmall thinge, a man fullie to
forſake him ſelfe, though it be in right
litle and ſmall thinges. For truelie, the
verie perfection of man is a perfect denyinge,
and a full forſakinge of himſelfe,
And ſuche a man is verie free, & beloued
for God. But the olde auncient enemye
the fiende, which reſiſteth goodnes all
that he maye, ceaſſeth not longe from
temptation, but daye and night he maketh
greeuous aſſaultes, to ſee if he
maye catche any vnware perſon
into his ſnare of deceit. Therefore
wake ye, and praye,
that ye be not deceaued
by temptation.
            
            
               
               That man hath no goodnes of him ſelfe, and
that he may not rightfully glorifye
him ſelfe in any thing.
The 45. Chapter.
               
                  O Lorde, what is man, that
thou doeſt vouchſafe to haue
minde on him? Or what
hath he done for thee, that
thou wilt viſit him with
grace? And what may he cō
                  playne,
although thou ſometime forſake
him? Or what maye I righteouſlye ſaye,
though thou graunt me not that I aſke?
Truely, I may well thinke and ſay thus:
I am nought, nor I haue no goodnes of
my ſelfe, but in all thinges I am of my
ſelfe al inſufficiēt, and go to nought, and
but if I be holpen of thee, and be inwardlie
informed and taught by thee, I ſhall
be altogether ſ
                     •
                  outhfull, and to all thinge
vnprofitable. O Lorde, thou arte alwaye
one, euer ſhalt be one, alway good alway
righteous and holy, well, righteouſly and
bleſſedly diſpoſing all thinges after thy
wiſedome: but I wretche, that alway am
more redy & prone to euill then to good,
am not alwaye abidinge in one, for ſeuen
times be chaunged vpon me. Neuertheleſſe,
it ſhall be better with me, when it
ſhall pleaſe thee to put to thy helpinge
hand, for thou onely act he, that without

man mayeſt helpe me, and ſo cōfirme and
ſtable me in thee, that mine heart ſhall
not ſo lightlie be changed from thee, but
that it maye be wholly fired in thee, and
finallye to reſt in thee. And verilye, if I
coulde caſt awaye from me all mans comfort,
either for getting of deuotion, or for
that I am compelled therto of neceſſitie,
for that I finde no comfort in man, then
might I well truſt in thy grace to haue of
thee newe viſitations, & newe heauenlie
conſolation: But I confeſſe it for truth,
that I am vnworthy to haue anye ſuche
conſolations, and I thanke thee, as ofte
as anye good thinge commeth to me: for
all that is good cōmeth of thee. I am but
vanitie, and nought before thee, an vnconſtant
man, and a feeble, and therefore,
whereof maye I righteouſly glorifie my
ſelfe, or why ſhould I looke to be magnified?
Truelye vaine glorie is a perillous
ſickenes, a greeuous peſtilence, & a right
great vanitie: for it draweth a man from
the true ioy that he ſhould haue in God,
and robbeth him cleerelye of all heauenly
grace. For when a man pleaſeth him ſelfe,
he diſpleaſeth thee, & when he delighteth
in mans prayſinges, he is depriued from
the true vertues: for the true ſtedfaſt ioye
& gladnes is, to ioye in thee, & not in him
ſelfe, in thy name, and not in his owne
vertue, nor in anye creature. Therefore
thy name be prayſed, and not mine, thy

workes be magnified, and not mine, and
thy goodnes be alwaye bleſſed, ſo that
nothing be geuen to me of the laude and
prayſing of man. Thou art my glory and
the ioy of my hart, in thee ſhall I be glorified,
and alway ſhall I ioy in thee, and
in my ſelfe nothinge, but in my infirmities.
Let the Iewes ſeke glorye amonge
them ſelues, but I will ſeeke none but
that is onely of thee, for all mans glory,
all temporall honour, and all worldlye
highnes to thy eternall glorye compared,
is but as fooliſhnes, and a great vanitie.
O truth, O mercy, O bleſſed trinitie, to
thee be laude, honour, and glory euerlaſtingly.
Amen.
            
            
               Hovve all temporall honour is to be deſpiſed.
The 46. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, take it not to greefe,
though thou ſee other men honoured
and exalted, and thy
ſelfe deſpiſed & ſet at nought.
If thou raiſe vp thine hart to
me in heauē, the deſpites of man in earth
ſhall litle greeue thee. O Lord we be here
in great darknes, and are ſoone deceyued
with vanities, but verilie if I beheld my
ſelfe well, I ſhould openlie ſee, that there
was neuer any wrong done to me by any
creature, nor that I haue nothing wherof
I maye righteouſſie complayne. But

for as muche as I haue ofte ſinned, and
greeuouſlie offended againſt thee, therefore
all creatures be armed againſt me.
To me therefore is due, confuſion and
deſpite, to thee lande, honour, and glorye.
And vnleſſe I can bring my ſelfe to this
point, that I woulde gladlye be deſpiſed
and forſaken of all creatures, & vtterlye
to ſeeme as nought in the worlde, I may
not be inwardlye pacified nor ſtabliſhed
in thee, nor ſpirituallie be illumined, nor
yet fully vnited to thee.
            
            
               That our truſt is not to be put in
vvorldlye people.
The 47. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, if thou ſet thy peace
with anye perſon for thyne
owne pleaſure, or worldlye
frendſhippe, thou ſhalt alway
be vnſtable, and neuer ſhalte
thou be cōtented: but if thou haue alway
recourſe to the truth euerlaſting, that is
God himſelfe, then the death or goinge
awaye of thy deareſt freende, whatſoeuer
he be, ſhall litle greue thee. The loue of
thy frend ought alwaye to be referted to
me, and for me he is to be beloued, howe
good and howe profitable ſoeuer he ſeme
vnto thee in this life. VVithout me frēdſhip
is nought worth, nor maye not long
endure, nor that loue is not true and

cleane that is not knit by me. Thou
oughteſt therefore to be ſo mortified in
all ſuch affections of worldlie men, that
in as much as in thee is, thou wouldeſt
couete to be without all mans comfort.
So muche a man draweth nerer to God,
as he can withdrawe hym ſelfe from
the worlde, and from all worldlie comfort,
and ſo muche the more he aſcendeth
higher to God, as he can deſcend lower
in him ſelfe, and as he can waxe vile and
abiect in his owne ſight. He that aſcribeth
any goodnes to him ſelfe, withſtandeth
the grace of God, and letteth it to
liue in him, for the grace of the holye
ghoſte ſeeketh alwaye a meeke and an
humble heart. If thou couldeſt perfectly
annihilate thy ſelfe, and whollie put out
of thy heart all humane and create loue,
then ſhoulde I (ſayth our Lorde) dwell
in thee with great aboundaunce of my
grace But when thou lookeſt to creatures,
then is righteouſlie drawen from
thee the ſight of thy Creator. Learne
therefore to ouercome thy ſelfe for the
loue of him that made thee like to hym
ſelfe. and thou ſhalt anone come to great
ghoſtlie knowledge. Howe lytle ſoeuer
the thinge be that a man loueth, yf he
loue it inordinatlie, it hindreth and letteth
him greatlie from the true and perfect
loue that he ſhoulde haue to God.
            
            
               
               That vve ſhould eſchevv vayne ſeculer
cunninge.
The .48. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſayth our Lorde, let
not fayre and ſubtil wordes
moue thee, for the kingdome
of heauen ſtandeth not in
wordes, but in good vertuous
workes. Take hede to
my wordes, for they enflame the harte,
and lighten the vnderſtandinge, and
bringe in alſo compunction of harte for
ſinnes paſt, and cauſe alſo ofte times
great heauenlie comfort, ſodenly to come
into the ſoule. Reade neuer in any ſciēce,
to the intēt thou wouldeſt be called wiſe,
but ſtudie rather to mortifie in thee all
ſtirringes of ſinnes, as much as in thee
is, & that ſhall be more profitable to thee,
than the knowledge of many harde and
ſubtill queſtions. VVhen thou haſt reade
and vnderſtoode many doubtes, yet neuertheleſſe,
it behoueth thee to come to
one that is beginninge of all thinges,
that is, God him ſelfe, and els thy knowledge
ſhall litle auayle thee. I am he that
teacheth a mā cūning, & do giue more vnderſtāding
to meeke perſons, than can be
taught by mās teaching. And he to whom
I ſpeake, ſ
                     •
                  al ſoone be made wiſe, & much
ſhall he profit in ſpirite, when payne and
wo ſhall be to them that onelie ſeeke for

curious learninge, takinge litle heede to
the waye to ſerue God. The time ſhall
come when Chriſt Lorde of Angels, and
maſter of all maſters ſhall appere to heare
the leſſon of euery creature, and to examine
the conſcience of euery perſon, and
then ſhall Ieruſalem, that is, mans ſoule,
be ſearched with lanternes and lights of
Goddes high knowledge, and rightfull
iudgmentes, and then alſo ſhall be made
open the deedes and thoughtes of euery
man, & all excuſes and vaine argumentes
ſhall ceaſſe, and vtterlie be ſet apart. I am
he alſo that ſodenlie at a point illumine
and lifte vp a meeke ſoule, that it ſhalbe
made able to take and to receiue in ſhort
time more perfectlie the true reaſon of
the wiſdome of God, then an other that
ſtudieth ten yeres in ſcholes, and lacketh
meekenes. I teache without ſounde of
wordes, without diuerſitie of opinions,
without deſire of honour, and without
ſtrife and argumentes. And I am he that
teach all the people to deſpiſe earthlye
thinges, to lothe thinges that be preſent,
to ſeeke and to ſauour eternall thinges,
to flee honoures, to beare pacientlie all
euill wordes and ſpeakinges, to put their
truſt whollie in me, nothinge to couet
without me, and aboue all thinges brenninglie
to loue me And ſome folkes thorowe
an inwarde loue that they haue had
to me, haue learned many great thinges,

and haue ſpoken high miſteries of my
God head. They profit more in forſaking
all thinges, then in ſtudyinge for highe &
ſubtill learning. But to ſome mē I ſpeake
common thinges, to ſome ſpeciall things,
to ſome I appeare ſweetlie in ſignes and
figures, and to ſome I geue great vnderſtandinge
of Scripture, and open to thē
high ſecret miſteries. There is in bookes
one voice, and one letter that is reade,
but it enfourmeth not all perſons alike,
for I am within ſecretlie hidden in the
letter, the teacher of trueth, the ſearcher
of mans hart, the knower of thoughtes,
the promoter of good workes, and the
rewarder of al men, after as my wiſdome
and goodnes iudgeth them to haue deſerued,
and none otherwiſe.
            
            
               That vve ſhoulde not regarde muche outvvarde
thinges, nor po
                     •
                  der but litle the
iudgement of man.
The 49. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, it is profitable to thee
to be ignoraūt in many things,
and to thinke thy ſelfe as deade
to the worlde, and to whom all
the worlde is crucified. And thou muſte
alſo with a deafe eare let many thinges
paſſe, as thou neither heard them, nor
ſawe them, and to thinke on ſuch things

as ſhall cauſe in thee an inwarde peace
in ſoule. It is alſo more profitable to
thee, that thou turne the eye of thy ſoule
from thinges that diſpleaſe thee, and to
let euery man holde his opinion therein
as him ſeemeth 
                     •
                  eſt, rather than to ſtriue
againe with frowarde wordes. And truelie,
if thou were well ſtabled in God, and
beheldeſt well his iudgementes, thou
ſhouldeſt lightlie be content to be iudged
of other, and to be ouercome of other, as
our Lorde Ieſus was for the
                     •
                   in time of
his paſſion. O Lorde, ſith it is true that
thou ſayeſt, what ſhall become of vs that
heede ſo muche worldlie thinges, and beweepe
ſo greatlie a litle temporall loſſe,
and we labour and tunne for worldlie
profite with all our might, but our ſpirituall
profite and the health of our owne
ſoules, we litle regarde? Suche thinges
as litle or nothinge profiteth vs, is much
ſet by, but that that is moſt neceſſarie to
vs is nighe forgorten. For why? all
men runne gladlye into outwarde
thinges. And truelie but they
ſhortlye turne backe agayne,
they ſhall gladlie reſt ſtill in
them, whiche in the ende
ſhall be to them great
perill and
daunger.
            
            
               
               That men be not alvvaye to be beleeued, for that
they ſo lightlye offende in vvordes.
The .50. Chapter.
               
                  LOrde ſende me helpe in my
troubles, for mans helpe is
litle worth. Howe ofte haue I
not founde frendſhip where I
thought I ſhould haue found
it? And how ofte haue I founde it, where
I leaſt preſumed to haue founde it? wherfore
it is a vayne thinge to truſt in man,
for the true and ſoothfaſt truſt and health
of righteous men is onelie in thee. Bleſſed
be thou Lorde therefore in all thinges
that happen vnto vs, for we be weake
and vnſtable, ſoone deceiued, and ſoone
changed from one thinge to an other.
VVho may ſo warelie and ſo alſuredlie
keepe him ſelfe in euery thinge, but ſhall
ſometime fall into ſome deceipt, or into
ſome perplexitie? truelie verie ſewe: but
he that truſteth in thee, and that ſeeketh
thee with a cleane hart, ſ
                     ••
                  deth not ſo
lightlie from thee. And if it happen him
to fall into any trouble or perplexitie,
whatſoeuer it be, & how greeuous ſoeuer
it be, he ſhall anone eyther be deliuered
by thee, or be comforted by thee, for thou
neuer forſakeſt him that truſteth in thee.
It is right harde to finde ſo true and ſo
faithfull a frende that wil perſeuer with
his freende in all his troubles, but thou

Lord art moſt faithfull in all thinges, and
like to thee none can be founde. O howe
well ſauoured that holy ſoule in ghoſtly
thinges, that ſayde thus: My minde is
ſtabliſhed in God, and is fully grounded
in Chriſt. Truely if it were ſo with me, the
dread of man ſhould not ſo lightly enter
into me, nor other mens wordes ſhoulde
not ſo ſoone moue me. VVho may forſee
all thinges? or who may preuent all euils
that are to come? and if thinges foreſeene
do yet ofte times great hurt, VVhat ſhall
then thoſe thinges doe that be not foreſeene?
But why haue not I, wretche, better
ſeene to my ſelfe? and why haue I ſo
lightlye beleeued other mens ſayinges?
truelye for that we be but men, and that
but frayle men, though we be eſteemed &
thought of many to be as Angels in our
conuerſation VVhom may I beleeue but
onelye thee? Thou art the trueth that
deceyueſt no man, nor mayeſt not be deceyued.
And on the other, ſide, euery man
is a lyer, weake, and vnſtable, and ſ
                     •
                  ding
(moſt eſpecially) in wordes, ſo that ſcarſelie
it may be beleeued that ſeemeth openlie
to be true. Howe prudentlie therefore
haſte thou warned vs to beware of the
lightnes of man, and that our familier
ſeruantes maye be our enimies, ſo that it
is not to be beleued, though one will ſay,
Lo here is thy frend, or there is thy frend,
for I am taught with mine owne hurt:

but would to God it might be as a warninge
to me, and not to my more follye.
Some ſaye to me, Beware, beware, kepe
rioſe to thy ſelfe that I ſhall the we thee.
And when I kepe it cloſe, and beleeue it
to be ſecret, he can not be ſecret in that
him ſelfe deſired, but anone he betrayeth
both him ſelfe & me, and goeth his waye.
From ſuche tales, and from ſuch vnſtable
men Lorde defende me, that I fall not
into their handes, nor that I neuer commit
any ſuche thinges. A true worde and
a ſtable Lorde geue into my mouth, and a
deceitfull toung driue farre awaye from
me, for that I woulde not haue done to
my ſelfe, I ought to be ware that I doe it
not to other. O howe good and how peacefull
is it to kepe ſilence of other mens
wordes and deedes, and not to geue full
credence till the trueth be tryed, and not
to report lightlye to other all that we
heare or ſee, nor to open our hart fullye
but to very fewe, and to ſeeke thee alway
that art the beholder of mans hart, & not
ſo be moued with euery flake of wordes,
but to deſire in harte that all thinges in
vs inwardly and outwardlye may be fulfilled
after thy will: howe ſure a thinge
is it alſo for the keepinge of heauenlye
grace, to flee the conuerſation of worldly
people all that we may, and not to deſire
thinges that ſeeme outwardly to be pleaſaunt
and liking: but with all the ſtudye

of our hart to ſeeke ſuch thinges as bring
in feruour of ſpirit, and amendement of
life. It hath bene truelie a great hurte to
many perſons, a vertue knowen, & ouer
timelie prayſed: and contrariwiſe, it hath
beene right profitable to ſome, a grace
kept in ſilence, and not lightlie reported
to other in this frayle life, that is full of
temptation and priule enuie.
            
            
               That vve ſhall put all our confidence in God,
vvhen euill vvordes be ſpoken to vs.
The .51. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſayth our Lord, ſtande
ſtronglie, and truſte faythfully
in me. VVhat be wordes but
winde? they flye in the ayre,
out they hurte neuer a ſtone
on the grounde. And if thou knowe thy
ſelfe not giltie, thinke that thou wilt
ſuffer gladlie ſuche wordes for God. It is
but a litle thinge for thee to ſuffer ſometime
a haſtie worde, ſith thou art not yet
able to ſuffer harde ſtrokes. But why is it
that ſo litle a thinge goeth ſo nigh thy
heart, but that thou art yet fleſhelie and
carnall, and heedeſt to pleaſe men more
then thou ſhouldeſt. And becauſe thou
dreadeſt to be deſpiſed, thou wilt not
gladlie be reproued of thine offences, and
thou ſearcheſt therefore buſilie, and with
great ſtudie how thou mayeſt be excu
                     •
                  ed

But behoulde thy ſelfe well, and thou
ſhalt ſee, that the worlde yet liueth in
thee, and a vaine loue alſo to pleaſe man.
VVhen thou refuſeſt to be rebuked and
puniſhed for thy defaultes, it appereth
euidentlie, that thou art not yet ſoothfaſtlie
meeke, nor that thou art not yet
deade to the worlde, nor the worlde to
thee yet truelye crucified. But heare my
wordes, and thou ſhalt not neede to eare
for the wordes of ten thouſand men. Loe,
yf all thinges were ſayde againſt thee,
that might be moſt maliciouſlie and vntruelie
fayned againſt thee, what ſhoulde
they huit, if thou ſuffered them to ouerpaſſe
& goe awaye? truelie no more then
a ſtrawe vnder thy foote, & one heare of
thy head they might not take from thee.
But he that hath not a man
                     •
                   heart inwardly,
nor ſetteth not God before the
eye of his ſoule, is ſoone moued with a
ſharpe word, whē he that truſteth in me,
& will not ſtand to his owne iudgement,
ſhall be free frō all mans dreade, for I am
the Iudge that knoweth all ſecrettes: I
knowe howe euery thinge is done, and I
know alſo both him that doth the wrōg,
and him that it is done to. Of me this
thinge is wrought, and by my ſufferāce
it is come about, that the thoughtes
of mennes heartes maye be knowen,
and when the time commeth I ſhall
iudge both the innocent, and hym that

is giltie. But firſte through my righteous
examination I will proue them bothe.
The witnes of man ofte times deceaueth,
but my iudgement alwaye is true,
and ſhall not be ſubuerted. And howbeit
it is ſometime hid, and not knowen, but
to fewe, yet it is euer true, and erreth
not, neither may erre, though in the ſig
                     ••
                  
of ſome perſons it ſeemeth not ſo. Therefore
in euery doubt it behoueth to runne
to me, and not to leane muche to thine
owne reaſon, but with euery thinge that
I ſhall ſende thee to be content, for a
righteous man is neuer troubled with
any thinge that I ſhall ſuffer to fall vnto
him, inſomuch, that though a thing were
vntruelie ſpoken againſt him, he ſhoulde
not muche care for it, neither ſhoulde he
muche ioye, though he were ſometyme
reaſonablye excuſed, for he thinketh alwaye
                     •
                  
that I am he that ſearcheth mans
hart, and that I iudge not after the outwarde
apperance: for ofte times it ſhall
be founde in my ſight woorthy to be blamed,
that in mans ſight ſeemeth muche
woorthy to be prayſed. O Lord God moſt
righteous Iudge, ſtronge and patient,
which knoweſt the frayltie and malice of
man, be thou my ſtrength and wholle cō
                  fort
in all my neceſſities, for mine owne
conſcience (Lorde) ſuffiſeth me not, for
thou knoweſt in me that I knowe not.
And therefore in euery reproufe I ought

alway to meeken my ſelfe, and patiently
to ſuffer all thinges in charitie, after thy
pleaſure. Forgeue me (Lorde) as ofte as I
haue not ſo done, and geue me grace of
greater ſufferaunce in time to come. Thy
mercy is more profitable, and more ſure
maye for me to the gettinge of pardon
and forgeuenes of my ſinnes, then a truſt
in mine owne workes, through defence
of my darke conſcience. And though I
dreede not my conſcience, yet I may not
therefore iuſtifie my ſelfe, for thy mercie
remoued and taken awaye, no man maye
be iuſtified, nor appere righteous in thy
ſyght.
            
            
               Hovve all greeuous thinges in this lyfe are
gladlie to be ſuffered, for vvinning
of the lyfe that is to come.
The .52. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, ſayth our Lord, be
not broken by impatiēce,
with the labour that thou
haſt taken for my ſake, nor
ſuffer thou not tribulatiō,
to caſt thee in diſpaire, nor
into vnreaſonable heauines
or anguiſhe in any wiſe, but be thou
comforted & ſtrengthed in euery chaunce
by my promiſes & beheſts, for I am able,
and of power to rewarde thee and other
my ſeruauntes aboundantlie more then

ye can thinke or deſire. Thou ſhalt not
laboure long here, nor alwaye be greeued
with heauines: tary a while my promiſes,
and thou ſhalt ſhortlye ſee an ende of all
thy troubles. One hour ſhall come, when
all thy labours and troubles ſhall ceaſſe:
and truely, that hour will ſhortlye come,
for all is ſhort that paſſeth with time.
Doe therefore as thou doeſt, labour buſily
and faithfullye in my vineyarde, and I
ſhal ſhortly be thy reward. VVrite, reade,
ſinge, mourne, be ſtill and pray, and ſuffer
gladlye aduerſitye, for the kingdome of
heauen is more woorth then all theſe
thinges, and much more greater thinges
then they are. Peace ſhall come one daye,
which is to me knowen, and that ſhall
not be the day of this lyfe, but a day euerlaſtinge,
with infinite cleerenes, ſtedfaſt
peace, and ſure reſt without ending. And
then thou ſhalt not ſaye, VVho ſhall deliuer
me from the bodye of this death,
neither ſhalt thou neede to crie, woe is
me, that my comming to the kingdome of
heauen is thus prolonged. For death ſhal
then de deſtroyed, and health ſhall be
without ende of bodye & ſoule, inſomuch
that no maner of vnreſtfulnes ſhall be,
but bleſſed ioye, and moſte ſweeteſt and
fayreſt companye. O if thou ſaweſt the
euerlaſtinge crownes of my Saintes in
heauen, in howe great ioye and glorye
they are, that ſometime ſeemed to be vile

perſons, and as men deſpiſable in the
worlde, thou ſhouldeſt anone meken thy
ſelfe lowe to the grounde, and ſhouldeſt
rather couete to be ſubiect to all men,
then to haue ſoueraintie ouer anye one
perſon, and thou ſhouldeſt not deſire to
haue mirth and ſolace in this worlde, but
rather tribulation and paine, and thou
ſhouldeſt thē accompt it as a great winning,
to be deſpiſed and taken as naught
amonge the people. O if theſe thinges
ſauoured well to thee, and deepely pearced
into thy hearte, thou ſhouldeſt not
once dare complaine for anye maner of
trouble that ſhoulde befall vnto thee. Are
not all painefull thinges, and moſte greeuous
laboures gladlye to be ſuffered for
the ioyes euerlaſting? yes verilye, for it is
no litle thinge to win or loſe the kingdome
of heauen. Lifte vp thy face therefore
into heauen, and beholde howe I
and all my Saintes that be with me in
heauē, hadde in this worlde great battall
and conflict, and nowe they ioye with
me, and be comforted in me, and be
ſure to abide with me, and to dwel
with me in the kingdome of my
father without ending.
Amen.
            
            
               
               Of the daye of eternitie, and of the
miſeries of this lyfe.
The 53. Chapter.
               
                  O Bleſſed manſion of the heauenlie
Citie, O moſte cleereſt
daye of eternitie, whom the
night maye not darken, but
the high truth, that God is,
illumineth and cleereth the daye, alwaye
merie, alwaye ſure, and neuer chaunging
his ſtate into the contrarie. VVoulde to
God that this daye might once appere
and ſhine vpon vs, and that theſe temporall
thinges were at an end. This bleſſed
daye ſhineth to Saintes in heauen
with euerlaſtinge brightnes and claritie,
but to vs pilgrimes in earth it ſhineth
not but a farre of, as through a mirroure
or glaſſe. The heauenlye Citizens knowe
well, howe ioyous this daye is: But we
outlawes, the childrē of Eue, doe weepe
and wayle the bitternes and tediouſnes
of this daye, that is, of this preſent lyfe,
ſhort and euill, full of ſorowes and anguiſhes,
where man is often times defiled
with ſinne, encōbred with paſſions,
inquieted with dreades, bounden with
charges, buſied with vanities, blinded
with errours, ouercharged with labours,
vexed with temptations, ouercome with
delightes & vaine pleaſures of the world,
and greeuouſlie tormented, ſometyme

with penurie and neede. O Lorde, when
ſhall the ende come of all theſe miſeries,
and when ſhall I be cleerelie deliuered
from the bondage of ſinne? when ſhall I
onely Lord haue minde on thee, and fully
be made glad and mery in thee? whē ſhall
I be free without letting, and in perfect
libertie, without griefe of bodie & ſoule?
VVhen ſhal I haue ſadde peace without
trouble, peace within and without, and
on euery ſide ſtedfaſt and ſure? O Lorde
Ieſu, when ſhall I ſtande and behoulde
thee, and haue full ſight and contemplation
of thy glorie? And when ſhalt thou
be to me all in all? and when ſhall I be
with thee in thy kingdome, that thou
haſte ordeyned to thy elect people from
the beginning. I am lefte here poore, and
as an outlawe in the lande of mine enemies,
where daylie be battailes & great
miſfortunes. Comfort my exile, aſſwage
my ſorow, for all my deſire crieth to thee.
It is to me a greeuous burden, whatſoeuer
the worlde offereth me here to my
ſo lace. I deſire to haue inwarde fruition
in thee, but I can not attayne therto. I
couet to cleue faſt to heauenlie thinges,
but temporall thinges, and paſſions vnmortified
pull me awaye downward. In
minde I woulde be aboue all temporall
thinges, but whether I will or not, I am
compelled through myne owne default
to be ſubiect to my fleſhe. Thus I moſte

wretched man fight in my ſelfe, and am
made greeuous to my ſelfe, whiles my
ſpirits deſireth to be vpwarde, and my
fleſhe downewarde. O what ſuffer I inwardlie,
when in my minde I beholde
heauenly things, and anone a great multitude
of carnall thoughtes enter into
my ſoule? Therefore Lorde, be not longe
frō me, neither depart in thy wrath from
me thy ſeruant. Send to me the lightnes
of thy grace, and breake downe in me all
carnall thoughts. Sende forth the dartes
of thy loue, & breake therewith all phantaſies
of the enemy. Gather the wits and
powers of my ſoule together in thee. Make
me forget all worldlie thinges, & graūt
me to caſt awaye, and whollie to deſpiſe
all phantaſies of ſinne. Helpe me thou
euerlaſtinge truth, that no worldlie vanitie
hereafter haue power in me. Come
alſo thou heauenlie ſweetnes, and let all
bitternes of ſinne flie farre frō me. Pardon
me, and mercifully forgeue me, when
I thinke in my prayer of any thinge, but
of thee: for I confeſſe for truth, that in
time paſt I haue vſed my ſelfe verie vnſtable
therein, for many times I am not
there, where I ſtande or ſit, but rather I
am there, where my thoughtes leade me,
for there am I where my thought is, and
there as my thought is accuſtomed to be,
there is that that I loue, and that ofte
times commeth into my minde, that by

cuſtome pleaſeth me beſt, and that moſt
deſireth me to thinke vpon. VVherefore,
thou that art euerlaſtinge truth, ſayeſt:
VVhere as thy treaſure is, there is thy
heart. VVherefore, if I loue heauen, I
ſpeake gladlie of heauenlie thinges, and
of ſuch thinges as be of God, and that
pertaine moſt to his honoure, and to the
glorifyinge and worſhippinge of his holy
name. And if I loue the worlde, I ioye
anone at worldlie felicitie, and ſorowe
anone at his aduerſitie. If I loue the
fleſhe, I ymagine ofte times that pleaſeth
the fleſhe, and if I loue my ſoule, I
delight muche to ſpeake and to heare of
thinges that be to my ſoule health. And
ſo whatſoeuer I loue of them, I gladlye
heare and ſpeake, and beare the images
of them ofte in my minde. Bleſſed is that
man that for thee (Lorde) forgetteth all
creatures, & learneth truelie to ouercome
him ſelfe, and with the feruour of ſpirite
crucifieth his fleſhe, ſo that in a cleane
and a pure conſcience he maye offer
his prayers to thee, and be worthy
to haue companye of bleſſed
Angels, all earthlie thinges
excluded from him, and
fullye ſet apart.
Amen.
            
            
               
               Of the deſire of euerlaſtinge life, and of the great
revvarde that is promiſed to them that
ſtronglye fight agaynſt ſinne.
The 54. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, when thou feeleſt
that a deſire of euerlaſtinge
bliſſe is giuen vnto thee, &
thou coueteſt to go out of
the tabernacle of thy mortal
bodie, that thou might clearelie
without ſhadowe beholde my clearenes,
Open thine harte, and with al the
deſires of thy ſoule, take that holie inſpiration,
and yeelding moſt large thankes
to the high goodnes of God that ſo worthilie
doth to thee, ſo beninglie viſiteth
thee, ſo brenninglie ſtirreth thee, and ſo
mightelie beareth thee vp, that through
thine owne burden thou fall not downe
to earthilie likings, and thinke not, that
that deſire commeth of thy ſelfe, or of
thine owne workinge, but rather that it
commeth of the gifte of grace, and of a
louelie beholdinge of God vpon thee,
that thou ſhouldeſt profite thereby in
meekenes and vertue, and that thou
ſhouldeſt alſo prepare thee to be readye
againſt another time for battels that are
to come, and the more ſurely to cleaue to
God with all the deſire and affection of
thy hart, and to ſtudie with all thy power
how thou mayeſt moſt purelie and moſte

deuoutlie ſerue him: and take heede of
this common prouerbe, The fire doth oft
burne, but the flame doth not aſcende
without ſome ſmoke: So likewiſe the
deſire of ſome men draweth to heauenlie
thinges, and yet they be not all free from
the ſmoke of carnall affections, and therfore
they doe it not alwaye purelie for
the honour and loue of God, that they
aſke ſo deſirouſlie of him. Suche ofte tymes
is thy deſire that thou ſheweſt to be
ſo importune, for that deſire is not cleane
and perfect that is mixte with thine
owne commoditie. Aſke therefore not
that is delectable and profitable to thee,
but that is acceptable and honour to me:
for if thou do well, and iudge aright, thou
ſhalt preferre my ordinaunce, & my will,
before all thy deſires, & before all thinges
that may be deſired beſide me. I knowe
well thy deſire: Thou wouldeſt nowe be
in libertie of the glorie of the ſonnes of
God: nowe the euerlaſtinge houſe, & the
heauenlie countrey full of ioye and glory
delighteth thee muche, but that time cō
                  meth
not yet, for there is yet another
time to come, that is to ſaye, a time of
labour and of proufe. Thou deſireſt to be
fulfilled with the high goodnes in heauē,
but thou mayſt not yet come therto I am
the full rewarde of man, abide me till I
ſhall come, and thou ſhalt haue me to thy
rewarde. Thou art yet to be proued here

vpon earth, and more throughlye to be
aſſayed in many thinges, ſome comfort
ſhall be geuen to thee, but the fulnes
thereof ſhal not yet be graunted. Be thou
therefore comforted in me, and be thou
ſtrong, as well in doeing as in ſufferinge
thinges contrary to thy wil. It behoueth
thee to be clothed in thy blood, and to be
chaunged into a newe man, and thou
muſt ofte times doe that thou wouldeſt
not doe, and that thou wouldeſt doe thou
muſt forſake & leaue vndone. That ſhall
pleaſe other ſhall goe well forwarde, and
that ſhall pleaſe thee ſhal haue no ſpeede:
that other men ſaye ſhall be well heard,
and that thou ſhalt ſaye, ſhall be ſet at
nought Other ſhall aſke, and haue their
aſkinge, thou ſhalte aſke and be denied.
Other ſhal be great and haue great lande
and prayſe of the people, and of thee no
worde ſhall be ſpoken. To other this office
or that ſhall be committed, and thou
ſhalte be iudged vnprofitable in euery
thinge: for theſe thinges and other lyke,
nature will murmure and grudge, & thou
ſhalt haue a great battaile in thy ſelfe, if
thou beare them ſecrete in thy hart without
complayning & miſſaying. Neuertheleſſe,
in ſuche thinges and other like my
faithfull ſeruauntes are wont to be proued,
howe they can denie them ſelues,
and howe they can in all thinges breake
their owne wylles, and there is nothinge

that thou ſhalt neede ſo muche to ouercome
thy ſelfe in, as to learne to be contented
not to be ſet anye price by in the
worlde, and to ſuffer ſuche thinges as be
moſte contrarye to thy will, eſpeciallye
when ſuche thinges as in thy ſight ſeeme
vnprofitable, be commaunded to be done.
But (my ſonne) conſider well the profite
and fruite of all theſe laboures, the
ſhorte ende, and the great rewarde, and
then thou ſhalt feele not greefe nor paine
in all thy laboures, but the moſt ſweeteſt
comfort of the holye ghoſt through thy
good will, and for that litle wil that thou
forſakeſt here, thou ſhalt alwaye haue thy
will in heauen, where thou ſhalt haue all
that thou canſt or mayeſt deſire. There
ſhalte thou haue full poſſeſſion of all
goodnes, without dread to loſe it. There
thy will ſhall be euer one with my will,
and it ſhall couete no ſtraunge nor priuate
thinges. There no man ſhall reſiſte
thee, no man ſhall complayne on
thee, no man ſhall let thee, nor no man
ſhall wythſtande thee, but all thinges
that thou canſt deſyre ſhall be there
preſent, and ſhall fulfill all the powers
of thy ſoule vnto the full. There ſhall I
yeelde glorye for reprofes, and a palle of
laude for thy heauines, and for the
loweſt place here, a ſeate in heauen
for euer. There ſhall appeare the fruite
of obedience, the labour of penaunce

ſhall ioy, and the humble ſubiection ſhall
be crowned gloriouſly Bowe thee therefore
meekelye nowe vnder euery mans
hande, and force litle who ſaith this, or
who commaundeth this to be done. But
with all thy ſtudie take heede, that whether
thy prelate, or thy felowe, or anye
other lower than thou, aſke any thing of
thee, or will any thing to be done by thee,
that thou take it alwaye to the beſt, and
with a glad will ſtudie to fulfill it. Let
this man ſeeke this thing, and another
that, and let this man ioy in this thing, &
another in that, whatſoeuer it be, and
let them be lauded and prayſed a thouſande
times, but ioye thou neither in this
thinge nor in that, but onelye in thine
owne contempt and deſpiſing, and in my
will to be fulfilled, and whether it be by
life or death, that I may alway be lauded
and honoured in thee and by thee. Amen.
            
            
               Hovve a man that is deſolate, ought to
offer hym ſelfe vvhollye to God.
The .55. Chapter.
               
                  LOrde holy father, be thou bleſſed
now and euer, for as thou
wilt ſo it is done, and that
thou doeſt is alwaye well: let
me thy pooreſt ſeruaunt and
moſt vnworthy, ioye in thee, and not in
my ſelfe, nor in nothinge els beſide the
                     •
                  ,

for thou Lorde art my gladnes, thou art
my hope, my crowne, my ioye, and all my
honor. VVhat hath thy ſeruant but that
he hath of thee, and that without his deſert?
All things be thine, and I am poore,
and haue bene in trouble & in paine euer
from my youth, and my ſoule hath beene
in great heauines with weeping and teares,
and ſometime it hath bene troubled
in it ſelfe through manifolde paſſions,
that come of the world, and of the fleſhe.
VVherefore Lorde, I deſire that I maye
haue of thee the ioye of inwarde peace,
and I aſke the reſt of thy choſen children,
that be fedde and nouriſhed of thee in
the light of heauenly comforts, but without
thy helpe I can not come therto. If
thou Lorde geue peace, or if thou geue inward
ioye, my ſoule ſhall be anone full of
heauenlye melodie, and be deuoute and
feruent in thy laudes and prayſings: but
if thou withdrawe thy ſelfe from me, as
thou haſte ſometime done, then may not
thy ſeruant runne the waye of thy commaundementes,
as he did firſt, but then
he is compelled to bowe his knees, and
knocke his breſt, for it is not with him, as
it was before, when the lanterne of thy
ghoſtlie preſence ſhone vpon his heade,
and that he was defended vnder the ſhadowe
of thy mercie from all perils and
daungers, O righteous father euer to be
prayſed, the time is come that thou wilte

thy ſeruaunt be proued. And righteouſlie
is it done, that I now ſhall ſuffer ſomewhat
for thee: now is the hour come that
thou haſt knowen from the beginninge,
that thy ſeruant for a time ſhould outwardlie
be ſet at naught, and inwardlie
to liue to thee, and that he ſhoulde a litle
be deſpiſed in the ſight of the world, and
be broken with paſſions and ſickenes,
that he might after riſe with thee into a
newe light, and be clarified, and made
glorious in the kingdome of heauen. O
holie father, thou haſte ordeyned it ſo to
be, and it is done as thou haſt commaunded:
this is thy grace to thy freende, to
ſuffer, and to be troubled in this worlde
for thy loue, howe ofte ſo euer it be, of
what perſon ſoeuer it be, & in what maner
ſoeuer thou ſuffer it to fall vnto him:
without thy counſayle & prouidence, nor
without cauſe nothinge is done vpon
earth. Oh, it is good to me, Lorde, that
thou haſt meekened me, that I may therby
learne to knowe thy righteous iudgementes,
and put from me all maner of
preſumption and highnes of minde. And
it is verie profitable to me, that cōfuſion
hath couered my face, that I maye learne
thereby to ſeeke for helpe and ſuccour to
thee rather thē to man. And I haue therby
learned to dreade thy ſecrete & terrible
iudgementes, which ſcourgeſt the righteous
mā with the ſinner, but not without

equitie and iuſtice. I yeelde thankes to
thee, that thou haſte not ſpared my ſins,
but haſte puniſhed me with ſcourges of
loue, and haſt ſent me ſorowes and anguiſhes
within, and without, ſo that
there is no creature vnder heauen that
may comfort me, but thou Lorde God the
heauenlie leach of mans ſoule, which
ſtrikeſt and healeſt, and bringeſt a man
nigh vnto bodilie death, and after reſtoreſt
him to health againe, that he maye
thereby learne to knowe the littlenes of
his owne power, & the more fullie to truſt
in thee. Thy diſcipline is fallen vpon me,
and thy rod of correctiō hath taught me,
& vnder that rodde I whollie ſubmit me,
ſtrike my backe and bones as it ſhall
pleaſe thee, & make me to bowe my croked
will vnto thy will, make me a meeke
& an humble diſciple, as thou haſt ſometime
done with me, that I may walke all
after thy wil. To thee I commit my ſelfe,
and all mine to be corrected, for better it
is to be corrected by thee here, then in
time to come▪ Thou knoweſt all thinges,
& nothinge is hidde from thee that is in
mans cōſciēce. Thou knoweſt thinges to
come before they fall, & it is not nedefull
that any man teache thee or warne thee
of any thinge that is done vpō the earth.
Thou knoweſt what is ſpeedefull for
me, and howe much tribulation helpeth
to purge the reſt of ſinne in me: do with

me after thy pleaſure, and diſdayne not
my ſinfull life, to none ſo well knowen
as it is to thee. Graunt me Lorde that to
knowe, that is neceſſarie to be knowen:
that to loue, that is to be loued: that to
prayſe, that highlie pleaſeth thee: that to
regarde, that appeareth precious in thy
ſight, and that to refuſe that is vile before
thee. Suffer me not to iudge after my
outwarde wits, nor to geue ſentēce after
the hearinge of vncunninge men, but in
a true iudgement to diſcerne thinges viſible
and inuiſible, and aboue all thinges
alway to ſearche and folowe thy will and
pleaſure. The outwarde witnes of men
be ofte deceyued in their iudgementes,
And in likewiſe, the louers of the worlde
be deceyued through louinge onelie of
viſible thinges. VVhat is a man the better,
for that he is taken better? truelie nothinge.
For a deceitfull man deceyueth
an other, a vayne mā deceyueth an other,
and a blinde & feeble creature deceyueth
an other when he exalteth him, and rather
confoundeth him then prayſeth
him. For why? howe muche ſoeuer a
man be in light of God, ſo much he
is, and no more, ſayth the meeke
Saint Fraunces, howe holye
and howe vertuous ſoeuer
he be taken in ſight
of the people.
            
            
               
               That it is good, that a man geue hym ſelfe to
meeke bodilye laboures, vvhen he feeleth
not hym ſelfe diſpoſed to high
vvorkes of deuotion.
The 56. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, thou mayeſt not alwaye
ſtande in the high feruēt
deſire of vertue, ne in the higheſt
degree of contemplatiō,
but thou muſte of neceſſitie
through the corruption of the firſt ſinne
ſometime deſcende to lower thinges, and
againſt thy will, and with great tediouſnes,
to beare the burden of this corruptible
body: for as longe as thou beareſt this
bodie of death, thou muſt neede feele
ſome tediouſnes and griefe of heart, and
thou ſhalt ofte times beweepe & mourne
the burden of thy fleſhlie feelinges, and
the contradictiō of thy body to thy ſoule,
for thou mayeſt not for the corruption
thereof perſeuer in ſpirituall ſtudies, and
in heauenlye contemplation as thou
wouldeſt doe, and then it is good to thee
to flie to meeke bodilie laboures, and to
exerciſe thy ſelfe in good outwarde workes,
and in a ſtedfaſt hope and truſt to
abide my comminge, and my newe heauenlie
viſitations, and to beare thy exile,
and the drines of thy hart patientlie, till
thou ſhalt be viſited by me agayne, and

be deliuered from all tediouſnes and vnquietnes
of minde. VVhen I ſhall come,
I ſhall make thee forget all thy former
laboures, and to haue inwarde reſt and
quietnes of ſoule. I ſhall alſo laye before
thee the floriſhing medowe of holy ſcripture,
and thou ſhalte with great gladnes
of heart in a newe bleſſed feeling, fele the
very true vnderſtāding thereof, and then
quickly ſhalt thou runne the waye of my
commaundementes, and then ſhalt thou
ſaye in great ſpirituall gladnes. The paſſions
of this world be not woorthy of thē
ſelues to bring vs to the ioy that ſhall be
ſhewed vs in the bliſſe of heauen, To the
which bring vs our Lorde Ieſus. Amen.
            
            
               That a man ſhall not thinke him ſelfe, vvorthy
to haue comfort, but rather to haue
ſorovve and payne: and of the
profite of contrition.
The 57. Chapter.
               
                  LOrde, I am not woorthy to
haue thy conſolation, nor any
ſpirituall viſitatiō, and therefore
thou doeſt righteouſly to
me, when thou leaueſt me
needy and deſolate: for though I might
weepe water of teares like to the Sea,
yet were I not woorthy to haue thy con
                  
                     •
                  olatiō,
for I am worthy to haue nothing

but ſorowe and paine, for I haue ſo greeuouſlye
and ſo ofte offended thee, and in
ſo many things greatly treſpaſſed againſt
thee. Therefore I may well ſaye and confeſſe
for truth, that I am not woorthy to
haue thy leſte cōſolation. But thou Lord
benigne and mercifull, that wilt not thy
workes doe periſh, to ſhewe the greatnes
of thy goodnes in the veſſels of thy mercy,
aboue all my merites or deſert, doeſt
vouchſafe ſometime to comforte me thy
ſeruaunt more then I can thinke or deuiſe.
Thy cōſolations be not like to mens
fables, for they be in them ſelues ſoothfaſt
& true. But what haue I done Lorde,
that thou wilt vouchſafe to geue me any
heauenly conſolation? I knowe not that
I haue done anye thing well as I ſhould
haue done, but that I haue bene prone
and readie to ſinne, and ſlowe to amendment.
This is true, and I can not deny
it: for if I would deny it, thou ſhouldeſt
ſtand againſt me, and no man might defend
me. VVhat haue I then deſerued,
but hell and euerlaſtinge fire? I confeſſe
for truth, that I am woorthy in this
worlde of ſhame and deſpite, and that it
becommeth not me to be conuerſant with
deuout people. And though it be greeuous
to me to ſay thus, yet (ſith the truth
is ſo) I wil confeſſe the truth as it is, and
openlye will reproue my ſelfe of my defaultes,
that I may the rather obteine of

thee mercy & forgeuenes. But what maye
I then ſay Lorde, that thus am giltie and
full of cōfuſion? truely I haue no mouth
nor tonge to ſpeake, but onely this word:
I haue ſinned Lorde, I haue ſinned, haue
mercy on me, forgeue me, and forget my
treſpaſſe, ſuffer me a litle, that I maye
weepe & waile my ſinnes, or that I paſſe
hence to the lande of darknes couered
with the ſhadowe of death. And what
doeſt thou Lord aſke moſt of ſuch a wretched
ſinner, but that he be contrite, and
meeken him ſelfe for his ſinne, for in true
contrition & meekenes of heart, is found
the very hope of forgeuenes of ſinne, and
the troubled conſcience is therby cleered,
and the grace before loſt is recouered
agayne. Man alſo is thereby defended
fro the wrath to come, & almightie God,
and the penitente ſoule mete louinglie
together in holie kiſſinges of heauenlye
loue. A meeke contrition of heart is to
thee Lorde a right acceptable Sacrifice,
more ſweetlie ſauouringe in thy ſight,
then burnynge incence. It is alſo the
precious oyntment, that thou wouldeſt
ſhould be ſhed vpon thy bleſſed feete, for
a meeke and contrite heart thou neuer
deſpiſeſt. This contrition is the place of
refuge, from the dreade and wrath of the
enemie, and therby is waſhed & clenſed,
whatſoeuer is before miſdone, or that
is defiled through ſinne in any maner.
            
            
               
               That grace vvill not be mixt vvith loue
of vvorldlye thinges.
The .58. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, grace is a precious
thing, and will not be mixte
with anye priuate loue, nor
with worldlye comfortes. It
behoueth thee therefore to
caſte awaye all lettinges of
grace, if thou wilt haue the gratious gift
thereof. Thoſe therefore a ſecrete place,
and loue to be alone, and keepe thee from
hearinge of vayne tales and fables, and
offer to God deuout prayers, and praye
hartily, that thou mayeſt haue a contrite
hart, and a pure conſcience. Thinke al the
world as naught, and preferre my ſeruice
before all other thinges, for thou mayeſt
not haue minde on me, and therwithall
delite thee in tranſitorie pleaſures. It behoueth
thee therefore to withdrawe thee
from thy deereſt freendes, and from all
thine acquaintaunce, and to ſequeſter thy
minde whollie fro the inordinate deſire
of all worldlye comfort as muche as thou
mayeſt. Thus prayed Saint Peter, that
all Chriſtien people might holde them
ſelues as ſtrangers, and as pilgrimes vpō
earth, for then they ſhoulde not ſet but
litle price by the comfort thereof. O howe
ſuce a truſt ſhall it be to a man at his departinge
out of this world, to feele inwardlie

in his ſoule, that no worldlie
loue, nor yet the affection of no paſſinge
or trāſitorie thinge hath any rule in him.
But a weake feeble perſon newlie turned
to God, may not ſo lightlie haue his hart
ſeuered from earthlie likinge, nor the
beaſtlie man knoweth not the freedome
of a man that is inwardly turned to god.
And therefore if a man will perfectlie be
ſpirituall and ghoſtlie, he muſt aſwell renounce
ſtrangers as kinſfolke, and ſpeciallie
before all other, that he be moſte
ware of him ſelfe, for if he ouercome him
ſelfe perfectlie, he ſhall the ſooner ouercome
all other enimies. The moſte noble
and moſt perfecte victorie, is, a man to
haue the victorie of him ſelfe. He therefore
that holdeth him ſelfe ſo muche ſubiect,
that the ſenſualitie obeyeth to reaſon,
and reaſon in all thinges obeyeth to
me, he is the true ouercommer of hym
ſelfe, and the Lorde of the worlde. But if
thou couet to come to that point, thou
muſt beginne manfullie, and ſet thy axe
to the roote of the tree, and fullie to cut
awaye, and to deſtroye in thee all the inordinate
inclination that thou haſte to
thy ſelfe, or to any priuate or materiall
thinge, for of that vice that a man loueth
him ſelfe inordinatlie, well nigh dependeth
all that ought groundlie to be deſtroyed
in man. And if that be truely ouercome,
anone ſhall folowe great tranquilitie

and peace of conſcience. But foraſmuch
as there be but fewe that labour to
die to them ſelues, nor to ouercome them
ſelues perfectlie, therefore they lye ſtill in
their fleſhlie feelinges and worldlie comfortes,
and may in no wiſe riſe vp in ſpirite
aboue them ſelues: for it behoueth
him that will be free in heart, & haue cō
                  tēplatiō
of me, to mortifie all his euill inclinations
that he hath to him ſelfe, & to
the world, & not to be bounde to any creature
by any inordinate or priuate loue.
            
            
               Of the diuerſities and diuers mouinges betvvene
nature and grace.
The 59. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, take good heede of the
motions of nature and grace,
for they be verie ſubtil, and
much contrary the one to the
other, and hardlie may they be
knowen aſonder, but it be by a ghoſtly
man, that through ſpirituall grace is inwardlye
lightned in ſoule. Euerye man
deſireth ſome goodnes, and pretendeth
ſomewhat of goodnes in all his wordes
and deedes, and therfore vnder pretence
of goodnes many be deceaued. Nature is
wylie, and full of deceit, and draweth
many to her, whom ſhe often times ſnareth
and deceyueth, & euer beholdeth her
owne wealth, as the ende of her worke.

But grace walketh ſimplye, without dereyte,
ſhe declineth from all euill, ſhe pretendeth
no gyle, but all thinges ſhe doth
purelye for God, in whom finallye ſhe
reſteth. Nature will not gladlye dye, nor
gladlye be oppreſſed or ouercome, neither
will ſhe gladlye be vnder other, ne be
kept in ſubiection: but grace ſtudieth
howe ſhe may be mortified to the world,
and to the fleſh. She reſiſteth ſenſualitie,
ſhe ſeeketh to be ſubiecte, ſhe deſireth to
be ouercome, ſhe will not vſe her owne libertie:
ſhe loueth to be holden vnder holy
diſcipline, and coueteth not to haue lordſhip
ouer anye one creature, but to lyue
and to ſtande alway vnder the dreade of
God, and for his loue is alwaye readie to
bowe her ſelfe meekely to euery creature.
Nature laboureth for her owne profite
and aduantage, & muche beholdeth what
winning commeth to her by other. But
grace beholdeth not what is profitable
to her ſelfe, but what is profytable to
manye. Nature receaueth gladlye honour
and reuerence, but grace referreth
all honour and reuerence to God. Nature
dreadeth reprouinges and deſpiſing, but
grace ioyeth for the name of god to ſuffer
thē both, and take them when they come
as ſpeciall giftes of God. Nature loueth
idlenes and fleſhlie reſt, but grace can
not be ydle without doeinge ſome good
deede, and therefore ſhe ſeeketh gladlye

ſome profitable labours. Nature deſireth
faire thinges and curious, and abhorreth
vile thinges and groſſe: but grace delighteth
in meke and ſimple thinges, ſhe deſpiſeth
not harde thinges, nor refuſeth
not to be clad in poore olde clothing and
ſimple garmentes. Nature beholdeth
gladlie thinges temporall, ſhe ioyeth at
worldlie winninges, is heauie for worldlie
leeſinges, and anone is moued with a
ſharpe word, but grace beholdeth things
euerlaſtinge, and truſteth not in thinges
temporall, nor is not troubled with the
loſſe of thē, nor ſhe is not grreeued with
a frowarde worde, for ſhe hath layde her
treaſure in God, and in ghoſtlie thinges
whiche may not periſhe. Nature is couetous,
& more gladlie taketh than geueth,
and loueth muche to haue propertie and
priuate thinges: but grace is pitifull and
liberall to the poore, ſhe flieth ſinguler
profite, ſhe is content with litle, and
iudgeth it more bleſſed to geue then to
take. Nature inclineth to the loue of
creatures, to the loue of the fleſhe, and to
vanities and runnings about, and to ſee
newe thinges in the worlde: but grace
draweth a man to the loue of God, and
to the loue of vertues, ſhe renounceth all
creatures, ſhe flieth the world, ſhe hateth
deſires of the fleſhe, reſtrayneth libertie
and wandringes about, and eſcheweth
aſmuch as ſhe may to be ſeene among recourſe

of people. Nature hath gladlye
ſome outwarde ſolace, wherein ſhe maye
faylably delight in her outwarde wittes:
but grace ſeeketh onelie to be comforted
in God, and to delight her in his goodnes
aboue all thinges. Nature doth all
thinges for her owne winninge and ſinguler
profite, ſhe may doe nothinge free,
but hopeth alwaye to haue like profite or
better, or laude or fauour of the people,
and coueteth much that her deedes and
workes be greatlie pondred and prayſed:
but grace ſeeketh no temporall thing, nor
none other reward for her hire, but onely
God, ſhe will no more of tēporall goodes
then ſhall neede for the gettinge of the
goodes euerlaſtinge, and careth not for
the vayne prayſe of the worlde. Nature
ioyeth greatlie in many freendes & kinſfolkes,
and is glorified much of a noble
place of birth, and of her noble bloud and
kinred ſhe ioyeth with mightie men: ſhe
flattereth riche men, and is merie with
them that ſhe thinketh like to her in noblenes
of the worlde: but grace maketh a
man to loue his enemies, ſhe hath no pride
in worldlie freendes, ſhe regardeth
not the noblenes of kynne, ne the houſe
of her father? but if the more vertue be
there, ſhe fauoureth more the poore then
the riche, ſhe hath more compaſſion of an
innocēt then of a mightie man: ſhe ioyeth
euer in truth, and not is falſehoode, and

alwaye comforteth good men more and
more to profite and growe in vertue and
goodnes, and to ſeeke daylie more higher
giftes of grace, that they may through
good vertuous workes be made like to
the ſonne of God. Nature complayneth
anone for wantinge of a right litle thing
that ſhe woulde haue, or for a litle worldlie
heauines, but grace beareth gladlie all
needines and wantinges of the worlde.
Nature inclynethe all thinges to her
ſelfe, and to her owne profite as much as
ſhe maye: ſhe argueth for her ſelfe, and
ſtriueth and fighteth for her ſelfe: but
grace rendreth all thinges to God, of
whom all thinges doe flowe and ſpringe
originallie. She aſcribeth no goodnes to
her ſelfe, nor preſumeth of her ſelfe: ſhe
ſtriueth not, nor prefer
                     •
                  eth her opinion
before other mens, but in euery ſentence
ſhe ſubmitteth her meeklie 
                     •
                  o the eternall
wiſedome and iudgement of God▪ Nature
coueteth to knowe and to here newe
ſecret thinges, ſhe will that her workes
be ſhewed outwarldlie, and will haue experience
of manye thinges in the worlde
by her outwarde wittes, ſhe deſyreth
alſo to be knowen, and to doe great
thinges in the worlde, whereof laude
and prayſinge maye folowe, but grace
careth not for anye newe thinges,
nor for anye curyous thinges whatſoeuer
they be: for ſhe knoweth well,

that all ſuche vanities commeth of the
corruption of ſinne, and that no newe
thinge maye longe endure vpon earth.
She teacheth alſo to reſtraine the outwarde
wittes, and to eſchewe all vayne
pleaſure and outwarde ſhewinge, and
meekelie keepeth ſecrete thinges, that in
the worlde were greatlie to be meruayled
and prayſed. And in euerie thinge, and in
euerie ſcience ſhe ſeeketh ſome ſpirituall
profite to her ſelfe, and laude and honour
to almightie God. She will not, that her
good deedes, nor her inwarde deuotion
be outwardly knowen, but moſt deſireth,
that our Lorde be bleſſed in all his workes,
which geueth all thinges freelie of
his high excellent charitie. This grace is
a light ſupernaturall, and a ſpirituall
gifte of God, and it is the proper marke
and token of elect people, and an earneſt
penie of the euerlaſtinge life, for it rauiſheth
a man fro loue of earthlie thinges,
to the loue of heauenlie thinges, and of
a fleſhlie liuer maketh an heauenlie perſon:
and the more that nature is oppreſſed
and ouercome, the more
grace is geuen, and the ſoule
thorough newe gratious viſitations
is daylye reformed
more and more
to the image
of God.
            
            
               
               Of the corruption of nature, and the vvorthynes
of grace.
The .60. Chapter.
               
                  O Lorde, which haſte made me
to thine image and likenes,
graunt me this grace that
thou haſte ſhewed to me to
be ſo great and ſo neceſſarye
to the health of my ſoule,
that I may ouercome this wretched nature
which draweth me alwaye to ſinne,
and to the loſinge of mine owne ſoule. I
feele in my fleſhe the lawe of ſinne fighting
ſtrongly againſt the lawe of my ſpirite,
which leadeth me as a thral or bondman
to obey to ſenſualitye in manye
thinges, and I may not reſiſt the paſſiōs
therof, but if thy grace doe aſſiſt me therin.
I haue therefore great neede of thy
grace, and that of the great aboundaunce
of thy grace, If I ſhould ouercome this
wretched nature, which alwaye fro my
youth hath bene readie & prone to ſinne.
For after that nature was vitiate & befiled
by the ſinne of the firſt man Adam,
the payne thereof deſcended into all his
poſteritie, ſo that, that nature which in
the firſt creatiō was good & righteous, is
nowe taken for ſinne and corruption, ſo
farre forth, that the motiōs that are now
lefte vnto nature, drawe man alwaye
vnto euill. And that is for this reaſon, for

that the litle ſtrength and mouinge to
goodnes, that yet remayneth in it, is as
a litle ſparcle of fire, that is hid and ouerhilled
with aſhes, that is to ſaye, the naturall
reaſon of man, which is all about
belapped and ouerhilled with darkenes
of ignoraunce, whiche neuertheleſſe hath
power yet to iudge betwixt good and
bad, and to ſhewe the diſtance and diuerſitie
betwixt true and falſe. Howbeit that
through weakenes of it ſelfe, it is not
able to fulfill all that it approueth, nor
hath not ſith the firſte ſinne of Adam the
full light of truth, nor the ſweetnes of affections
to God as it had firſte. Of this
it commeth, moſt mercifull Lorde, that in
my inwarde man that is in the reaſon of
my ſoule, I delite me in thy lawes and in
thy teachinges, knowinge that they are
good, and righteous, and holie, and that
all ſinne is euill, and to be fled and eſchewed:
and yet in my outwarde man, that
is to ſaye, in my fleſhelie felinge, I ſerue
the lawe of ſinne, when I obeye rather to
ſenſualitie then to reaſon. And of this it
foloweth alſo, that I will good, but to
perfourme it without thy grace I maye
not for weakenes of my ſelfe. And ſometime
I purpoſe to doe many good deedes,
but for that grace wanteth, that
ſhoulde helpe me, I goe backeward, and
fayle in my doinge. I knowe the waye to
perfection, and howe I ſhoulde do, I ſee

it euidentlye, but for that I am ſo oppreſſed
with the heauye burden of this
corrupt bodye of ſynne, I lye ſtill, and
ryſe not to perfection: O Lorde, howe
neceſſarye therefore is thy grace to me,
to beginne well, to continue well, and to
ende well, for without thee I maye nothinge
doe that good is. O heauenlye
grace (without whom our merites are
nought woorth, nor the giftes of nature
nothinge to be pondred, neither craftes
or riches any thinge to be regarded,
nor beautie, ſtrength, wit nor eloquence
nothinge maye auayle) come thou
ſhortlye and helpe me. The gyftes of
nature be common to good men and
bad, but grace and loue are the giftes
of electe and choſen people, whereby
they be marked and made able and worthy
to haue the kingedome of heauen.
This grace is of ſuche worthynes, that

                     •
                  eyther the gyfte of prophecie, nor
the workinge of miracles, nor yet the
gyfte of cunninge and knowledge maye
nothinge auayle wihout it, ne yet
fayth, hope or other vertues be not
acceptable to thee without grace and
charitie. O bleſſed grace, that maketh
the poore in ſpirite to be ryche in vertue,
and hym that is ryche in worldlye
goodes, maketh meeke and lowe in heart,
come and deſcende into my ſoule, and
fulfill me with thy ghoſtlie comfortes,

that it fayle not, nor faynt for werines
& drynes of it ſelfe. I beſeeche thee Lord,
that I may finde grace in thy ſight, for
thy grace ſhal ſuffice to me, though I doe
wante that nature deſireth. For although
I be tempted and vexed with troubles on
euery ſide, yet ſhall I not neede to drede,
whiles thy grace is with me: for ſhe is my
ſtrength, ſhe is my comfort, and ſhe is my
counſayle and helpe, ſhe is ſtronger then
all mine enemies, and wiſer then all the
wiſeſt of this worlde. She is the mayſtres
of truth, the teacher in diſcpline, the
light of the hart, the comfort of trouble,
the driuer awaye of heauines, the auoyder
of dreade, the nouriſher of deuotion,
and the bringer of ſweete teares and deuoute
weepinges. VVhat am I thē without
grace, but a drie ſtocke to caſte
awaye? Graunt me therefore, that
thy grace maye preuent me and folowe
me, and that It may make
me euer buſie and diligent
in good workes vnto
my death. So
may it be.
Amen.
            
            
               
               That vve ought to forſake our ſelfe, and to folovv
Chriſte by bearinge of hys Croſſe.
The 61. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, as much as thou canſt
go out fro thy ſelfe, and frothine
owne will, ſo much as
thou mayeſt enter into me: and
as to deſire nothing outwardlie
bringeth peace inwardlie into mans
ſoule, ſo a man by an inwarde forſakinge
of him ſelfe ioyneth him to God. I will
therefore, that thou learne to haue a perfect
forſaking, and a full reſigning of thy
ſelfe into my hands, without withſaying
and complayninge, and that thou folowe
me: for I am the waye, I am the truth,
and I am the life. VVithout a waye no
man maye go, and without truth no man
maye knowe, and without life no man
maye lyue. I am the waye which thou
oughteſt to goe, the truth which thou
oughteſt to beleue, & the life which thou
ſhalt hope to haue. I am the waye that
can not be defyled, the truth which can
not be deceyued, and the life that neuer
ſhall haue ende. I am the waye moſte
ſtraite, the truth moſt perfect, and the life
moſt ſoothfaſt. A bleſſed life, and a life vnmade
that made all things. If thou dwell
and abide in my waye, thou ſhalt knowe
the truth, and truth ſhal deliuer thee, and
thou ſhalt come to euerlaſtinge life. If

thou wilte come to that lyfe, kepe my cō
                  maundementes,
If thou wilt knowe the
truth, beleeue my teachinges, If thou
wilt be perfect, ſell all that thou haſte, If
thou wilt be my Diſciple, forſake thy
ſelfe, If thou wilt haue the bleſſed lyfe,
deſpiſe this preſent life, If thou wilt be
exalted in heauen, meeke thee here in
earth, And if thou wilt reigne with me,
beare the Croſſe with me: for truely, only
the ſeruauntes of the Croſſe ſhall finde
the life of bleſſednes, and of euerlaſtinge
light. O Lorde Ieſu, foraſmuche as thy
waye is narowe and ſtraite, and is alſo
muche deſpiſed in the worlde, geue me
grace to beare gladlye the deſpiſinges of
the worlde. There is no ſeruaunt greater
then his Lorde, nor any Diſciple aboue
his maſter. Let thy ſeruaunt therefore be
exerciſed in thy wayes, for therein is the
health and the very perfection of lyfe:
whatſoeuer I reade or heare beſide that
way, it refreſheth me not, nor delighteth
me not fullye. My ſonne, foraſmnche as
thou knoweſt theſe thinges, & haſt reade
them all, thou ſhalt be bleſſed if thou fulfil
them. He that hath my commaundementes,
and keepeth them, he it is that
loueth me, and I ſhall loue him, & I ſhall
ſhewe my ſelfe vnto him, and ſhall make
him ſitte with me in the kingdome of my
father. Lorde as thou haſt ſayde and promiſed,
ſo be it done to me, I haue taken

the Croſſe of penaunce at thy hand, and
I ſhall beare it vnto my death, as thou
haſte put it to me to doe. For the lyfe of
euery good man is the Croſſe, and it is
alſo the way and leader to Paradiſe, and
nowe it is begonne, it is not lawfull for
me to go backe fro it, ne it is not behouefull
for me to leaue it. Haue done therefore
my welbeloued brethren, go we forth
together, Ieſu ſhall be with vs, for Ieſu
we haue taken this Croſſe, for Ieſu let
vs perſeuer, and he ſhal be our helpe, that
is our guyde and leader. 
                     ••
                   our kinge
goeth before vs, that ſhall fyght for
vs, folowe we hym ſtronglye, dreade
we no perils, but be we readye to dye
ſtronglye with hym in battayle, that
we put no blot into our glorye, nor miniſhe
not our rewarde, by flyinge cowardlye
awaye from the Croſſe.
            
            
               That a man ſhall not be ouermuche caſt into
heauynes, though he happen to fall into
ſome defaul
                     •
                  es.
The .62. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, patience and mekenes
in aduerſitie, pleaſe me
more, then much conſolation
and deuotion in proſperitie.
VVhy art thou ſo heauy for
a litle worde ſayde or done
againſt thee? yf it had bene more, thou

ſhouldeſt not haue bene moued therwith,
but let it nowe ouerpaſſe, it is not the
firſt, and it ſhall not be the laſt if thou
lyue longe. Thou art manfull inough as
long as no aduerſitie falleth to thee, and
thou canſt well giue counſaile, and well
canſt thou comfort and ſtrengthen other
with thy wordes: But when aduerſitie
knocketh at thy doore, thou faileſt anone
both of counſayle and ſtrength. Beholde
well therefore thy great frayltie, which
thou haſt daylie experience of in litle obiectes▪
Neuertheleſſe, it is for thy ghoſtly
health that ſuche thinges and other like
be ſuffered to come vnto the Purpoſe thy
ſelfe in thy harte to doe the beſt that
lieth in thee, and then when ſuche tribulations
ſhall happen to fall vnto thee,
although it greeue thee, yet let it not
whollie ouerthrow thee, nor let it not
longe tarie with thee. And at the leaſt ſuffer
it pacientlie, although thou maye not
ſuffer it gladlie. Moreouer, though thou
be loth to heare ſuche thinges, and that
thou feele great indignation therat in
thy hart, yet thruſt thy ſelfe downe lowe
in thine owne ſight, and ſuffer no inordinate
worde paſſe out of thy mouth,
whereby any other might be hurt, and
then all ſuch indignation ſhall be anone
aſſuaged & ſoone appeaſed in thee. And
then alſo that which before was taken
to ſo great heauines to thee, ſhall anone

be made ſweete & pleaſaunt in thy ſight.
For yet lyue I (ſayth our Lorde) redie to
helpe thee, and to cōfort thee, more then
euer I did before, if thou wilt whollye
truſt in me, and deuoutly call for helpe to
me. Be quiet in hart, prepare thy ſelfe yet
to more ſufferance. For it is not all loſt
though thou feele thy ſelfe ofte troubled
or greeuouſlye tempted. Thinke thou art
a man, and not God, a fleſhlye man, and
no Angell. Howe mayeſt thou alwayes be
in one ſtate of vertue, when that wanted
to Angels in heauen and to the firſt man
in Para diſe, the which ſtoode not longe?
I am he that rayſe vp them that be ſorowfull
to health and comfort, and thoſe
that knowe their owne vnſtablenes, I
lifte them vp to be ſtabled in the ſight of
my Godhead for euer. Lorde, bleſſed be
thy hol
                     •
                  e word. It is more ſweeter to my
mouth then honye combe. VVhat ſhould
I doe in all my troubles and heauines, if
thou diddeſt not ſometime comfort me
with thy wholſome and ſweete wordes?
Therefore it ſhall not force what trouble
or aduerſitie I ſuffer here for thee, ſo that
I maye in the ende come to the porte of
euerlaſting health. Geue me a good ende
and a bleſſed paſſage out of this worlde:
haue minde on me, my Lorde my God,
and direct me by a ſtraite and redy
waye into thy kingdome, I
beſeech thee. Amen.
            
            
               
               That a man ſhall not ſearche the iudgementes
of God.
The .63. Chapter.
               
                  My ſonne, beware to diſpute
of highe-matters, & of the
ſecret iudgemēts of God,
why this man is ſo left &
forſaken of God, and why
this man is taken to ſo
great grace, why alſo one
man is ſo much troubled, and another ſo
greatly aduaunced. Theſe thinges ouerpaſſe
all mans knowledge, for to ſerch
gods iudgement no mans reaſon maye
ſuffiſe, nor yet this diſputation. Therfore,
when the ghoſtly enemy ſtirreth thee to
ſuch thinges, or if any curious men aſke
of thee ſuche queſtions, anſwer with the
prophete Dauid, and ſay thus, Lord thou
art righteous, & thy iudgemēts are true,
and be iuſtified in them ſelfe, thy indgements
are to be dread, & not to be diſcuſſed
by mans wit, for they be to mans wit
incomprehenſible. Beware alſo that thou
ſearch not, nor reaſon not of the merites
of Saintes, which of them was holyer
then other, or which of them is higher in
heauen: Suche queſtions ofte times nouriſhe
great ſtrifes and vnprofitable reaſoninges,
and proceede of pride & vaineglory,
wherby enuy ſpringeth and diſcē
                  tion:
that is to ſaye, when one laboureth

to prefer this Saint, and another that.
And truely a deſire to knowe ſuch things
rather diſpleaſeth Saints then pleaſeth
them For I (ſaith our Lord) am not God
of diſcention and ſtrife, but of vnitie and
peace, the which peace ſtandeth rather in
true meekenes, than in exalting of them
ſelues. Some men be more ſtirred to loue
this Saint or that, and that with muche
greater affection, but truly that affection
is oft time more rather a manly affectiō,
than a godlye. Am not I he that haue
made all Saints? yes truelye: and ouer
that I haue giuen thē grace, and I haue
geuen them glorye: I knowe all their
merites, I preuented them with the
ſweetnes of my bleſſinges, I knewe my
elect and choſen people before the worlde
was made, I haue choſen them from the
worlde, they haue not choſen me, I called
them by my grace, I drewe them by my
mercy, I led them through temptations,
I ſent them inwarde comfortes, I gaue
them perſeueraunce, I crowned their
patience, I knowe the firſt man and the
laſte, I loue them all with an ineſtimable
loue. Thus I am to be prayſed in all my
Saintes, and aboue all thinges to be bleſſed
and honoured in all, and in euery of
them whom I haue ſo gloriouſſye magnifyed
and predeſtinate without anye
merites in them goeinge before. Therefore
he that deſpyſeth the leaſte of my

Saintes, doth no honour to the greateſt,
for I haue made both the leſſe and the
more, and he that diſprayſeth any of my
Saintes, he diſprayſeth me and other of
my Saintes in the kingdome of heauen,
for they be all one, faſte vnited and knit
together in one ſure bonde of perfect
charitie. They feele all one thinge, and
they will all one thinge, and they loue
altogether all into one thinge, and they
loue me muche more then them ſelues, or
their own merites, for they be rapt about
themſelues, and be drawen from their
owne loue, and whollie be turned into
my loue, in the which they reſt by eternal
fruition. There is nothinge that maye
turne them from my loue, nor that may
thruſt them downe out of their glorie, for
they be full of eternall trueth, and burne
inwarldlie in ſoule with fyre of euerlaſtinge
charitie, that neuer ſhall be quenched.
Let all them ceaſe therefore that be
carnall and beaſtly, and that can not loue
but priuate ioye, to ſearche the ſtate of
my bleſſed Saintes in heauen, for they
put awaye, and adde to their merites as
they fauour, and not after the pleaſure of
the eternall truth of God. In many folkes
is great ignoraunce, but moſte ſpeciallie
in them that haue ſo litle light of
ghoſtlie vnderſtanding, that they can not
loue any perſon with a cleane loue. Many
alſo be moued by a naturall affection, or

by a worldly frendſhip to loue this ſaint
or that, and as they imagine in earthly
thinges, ſo they imagine of heauenlye
thinges, but there is a diſtaunce incomparable
betwixt thinges which imperfect
men imagine by naturall reaſon, and
which men truelye illumined with grace
beholde by heauenlye contemplation.
Beware therefore, my ſonne, to treate
curiouſly of ſuche thinges, for they paſſe
thy knowledge, and endeuour thy ſelfe,
that thou mayeſt be worthy ſo be nūbred
with the leaſt Saint that ſhall come to
heauē. And if percaſe a man might knowe
who were holyer, or who ſhould be taken
greater in the kingdome of heauen, what
ſhoulde that knowledge auayle him, but
if he would therby the more meeke him
ſelfe, and the more ryſe thereby, into the
laude and prayſinge of my name? truelie
nothinge. Therefore he is much more acceptable
to God that thinketh on the
greatnes of his ſinnes, and of the littlenes
of his vertues, and howe farre he is
from the perfectiō of the leaſt Saint that
is in heauē, then he that argueth of their
greatnes, or of their litlenes, or bleſſednes
of life, forgettinge them ſelfe. It is
better alſo with deuout prayers, & with
weepinges and teares meekelie to praye
to Saintes, and to call to them for helpe,
then vaynelie to ſearche for their perfection.
They be verie well contented with

the ioye that they haue, if men woulde
refrayne themſelues from ſuche vayne
arguments. They glorifie not them ſelues
of their merites, ne they aſcribe no
goodnes to themſelues, but they referre
all goodnes to me, for they knowe well
that I of my infinite goodnes and charitie
haue geuen all vnto them. And they
be ſo muche fulfilled with loue of the
godhead, and with ouerpaſſing ioye, that
no glorie maye want in them, nor anye
felicitie. And the higher that they be in
heauen, the meeker be they in them ſelues,
and the more nighe and the more
louing to me. Therefore it is written in
the Apocalips, that Saintes in heauen
layde their crownes before God, and fell
proſtrate on their faces before the meeke
lambe, that is Ieſu, and they woorſhipped
him as their Lorde God, that is and
ſhalbe lyuing euermore without ending.
Amen. Manye ſearche who is higheſt in
heauen, that knowe not whether they
ſhall be worthy to be numbred with the
leaſt that ſhall come thither: for it is a
great thinge to be the leaſt in heauen,
where all be great, for all that ſhall come
thither ſhall be called the ſonnes of God,
and ſo ſhall they be in deede: the leſt there
ſhall be counted for a thouſande, and a
ſinner of a hundred yere ſhall be ſet at
naught VVhen the Apoſtles aſked amōg
them ſelues, who ſhoulde be greateſt in

the kingdome of heauen, they heard this
anſwer of Chriſt: but ye (ſayde he) be conuerted
from your ſinne, and be made
meeke as litle children, ye maye not enter
into the kyngdome of heauen. He
therefore that meeketh him ſelfe as this
litle childe, he ſhalbe greateſt in the kingdome
of heauen. VVoe then be to them
that diſdayne to meeke them ſelues with
litle children, for the meeke part of heauen
will not ſuffer them to enter into it:
wo alſo be vnto the proude riche men
that haue their cōſolation here, for when
the good poore men ſhall enter into the
kingdome of God, they ſhall ſtande weepinge
and waylinge without. Ioye ye
then, ye that be meeke and poore
in ſpirite, for yours is the
kingdome of God, ſo that
ye walke and houlde
your iorney aſſuredlye
in the
waye of
truth.
            
            
               
               That all our hope and truſt is to be put in
God onelye.
The 64. Chapter.
               
                  O Lorde, what is the truſt that
I haue in this life? or what is
my moſte ſolace of all thinges
vnder heauen? Is it not thou,
my Lorde God, whoſe mercy
is without meaſure? where hath it beene
well with me without thee? or when
hath it not beene well with me, thou
being preſent? I had leuer be poore with
thee. then rich without thee, I had leuer
be with thee as a pilgrime in this world,
then without thee to be in heauen, for
where thou art, ther is heauē, and where
thou art not, there is both death and hell.
Thou arte to me all that I deſire, and
therefore it behoueth me to ſigh to thee,
to crie to thee, & hartily to praye to thee,
I haue nothinge to truſt in that maye
helpe me in my neceſſities, but onelye
thee, for thou art my hope, thou art my
truſt, thou art my comforte, and thou
arte my moſte faithfull helper in euerye
neede. Man ſeeketh that is his, but thou
ſeekeſt my health and profite, and turneſt
all thinges into the beſt for me, for if
thou ſende temptations and other aduerſities,
thou ordeineſt all to my profite,
for thou art wont by a thouſande wayes
to proue thy choſen people. In whiche

proufe thou art no leſſe to be lauded and
prayſed, than if thou haddeſt fulfilled thē
with heauenlie comfortes. In thee Lorde
therefore I put my truſt, and in thee I
beare patientlye all my aduerſities, for I
finde nothinge without thee but vnſtablenes
and follie, for I ſee well, that the
multitude of worldlye freendes profiteth
not, nor that ſtronge helpers nothinge
maye auayle, ne wiſe counſayler geue
profitable counſayle, ne cunninge of doctours
gyue conſolation, ne ryches delyuer
in tyme of neede, ne ſecrete place any
thinge defende, yf thou Lorde doe not
aſſiſt, helpe, comforte, counſail, informe,
and defend. For all thinges that ſeeme to
be ordeined to mans ſolace in this world,
if thou be abſent, be right nought worth,
nor maye not bring to man anye true felicitie,
for thou art the ende, Lorde, of all
good thinges, the highnes of lyfe, and the
profounde wiſedome of all things that is
in heauen and in earth. VVherfore to
truſt in thee aboue all thinges, is the
greateſt comfort to al thy ſeruauntes. To
thee therefore I lifte mine eyes, and in
thee onely I put my truſt, my Lorde my
God, the father of mercy, bleſſe thou, and
halowe thou my ſoule with thy heauenlie
bleſſinges, that it may be thy dwelling
place, and the ſeate of thy eternall glorie,
ſo that nothinge be founde in me at any
tyme, that maye offende the eye of thy

maieſtie. Beholde me (Lorde) after the
greatnes of thy goodnes, and of thy manyfolde
mercies, and graciouſlye heare
the prayer of me thy pooreſt ſeruaunt,
outlawed, and farre exiled into the countrey
of the ſhadowe of death, defend and
keepe me amonge the manyfolde perils
and daungers of this corruptible lyfe,
and direct me through thy grace
by the waye of peace, into the
countrey of euerlaſtinge
clearnes without
ending.
Amen.
               Finis.
            
         
         
            
            Hereafter foloweth the fourth Booke of
the folowinge of Chriſte, which treateth
moſte ſpeciallye of the
Sacrament of the aultare.
            
               
            
            
               Prologue.
               
                  COme to me (ſaith our Lorde)
all ye that labour and be charged,
and I ſhall geue vnto you
refection. And the breade that
I ſhall geue vnto you, ſhall be
my fleſh for the lyfe of the worlde. Take

it and eate it, for it is my bodye, that for
you ſhall be geuen in ſacrifice, doe ye this
in remembrance of me, for who ſo eateth
my fleſhe, and drinketh my bloud, he ſhal
dwell in me, and I in him. Theſe wordes
that I haue ſayde to you be ſpirite and
lyfe.
            
            
               VVith hovve great reuerence Chriſte
is to be receaued.
The firſte Chapter.
               
                  O My Lorde Ieſu Chriſte, eternall
truth, theſe wordes
aforeſayde be thy wordes, albeit
they were not ſayde in
one ſelfe time, nor written in
one ſelfe place. And for that they be thy
wordes, I will thankefully and faithfullie
accept them. They be thy wordes, and
thou haſte ſpoken them, and they be now
myne alſo: for thou haſte ſayde them for
my health. I will gladlye receyue them
of thy mouth, to the end they maye be the
better ſowen and planted in mine heart.
Thy wordes of ſo great pietie, full of
ſweetnes and loue, greatly excite me. But
Lorde, my ſinnes feare me greatlie, and
my cōſcience not pure to receaue ſo great
a miſterie, draweth me ſore abacke. The
ſweetnes of thy wordes prouoketh me,
but the multitude of mine offēces charge
me verie ſore. Thou commaundeſt that I

ſhall come vnto thee faythfullie, if I will
haue part with thee, & receaue the nouriſhinge
of immortalitie, and couete to
obteyne the glorie and life eternall. Thou
ſayeſt Lorde, come ye to me that laboure
and be charged, and I ſhall refreſhe you.
O howe ſweete, and howe amyable a
worde is it in the eare of a ſinner, that
thou Lorde God wilt bidde me, that am
ſo poore and needie to the Communion
of thy moſte holie bodie? But what am I
Lorde, that I dare preſume to come to
thee? Loe heauē and earth may not comprehende
thee, and thou ſayeſt, come ye al
to me. VVhat meaneth this moſte meeke
worthynes, and this louelie and frendly
biddinge? howe ſhall I dare come vnto
thee, which knowe not that I haue done
any thinge wel? Howe ſhall I bringe thee
into mine houſe, which ſo ofte haue offē
                  ded
before thy face? Angels and Archangels
honor thee, & righteous men dreade
thee, And thou ſayeſt yet, Come ye all vnto
me: but that thou Lorde haddeſt ſayde
it, who woulde beleue it to be true? And
but thou haſte commaunded it, who durſt
attempt to go vnto it? Noe that iuſt man
laboured an hundred yere to make the
ſhippe, to the end he might be ſaued with
a fewe of his people. Howe maye I prepare
me then in an houre to receaue thee
with due reuerence, that art maker and
Creatour of all the worlde? Moyſes thy

ſeruant? and great familier and ſpeciall
freende made the arke of timber not corruptible,
whiche he couered with right
pure golde, and put in it the tables of the
lawe. And I a corrupt creature, how ſhall
I ſo lightlie date receaue thee, that art
maker of the lawe, & geuer of grace and
lyfe vnto all creatures? The wiſe Salomon,
kinge of Iſrael, edified a meruelous
temple to the prayſinge of thy name in
the ſpace of ſeuen yeres, and by eight
dayes halowed the feaſt of the dedication
of the ſame: he offred a thouſande peacible
hoſtes, and put the arke of God in the
place made readie for it with great melodie
of clarions and trumpetres. Howe
dare I then that am moſte poore amonge
other creatures receaue thee into mine
houſe, who ſcarcelie haue well ſpent one
houre of time, or one halfe hower of my
life? O my good Lorde howe muche ſtudied
they to pleaſe thee, and howe litle is
it that I doe? Howe litle time take I,
when I diſpoſe me to be houſeled? ſeldome
am I gathered together in thee, and
more ſeldome and I purged fro hauinge
my mind ouermuch on worldlie thinges.
And certainly, no vnprofitable thoughts
ought to come into the holie preſence of
thy Godhead, nor no creatures ought
there to haue place, for I ſhall not receaue
an Angel, but the Lorde of Angels into
my heart. Neuertheleſſe, there is great

difference betwene the arke of God with
his reliques, and thy moſt pure & precious
bodie, with his vertues, which are mo
then can be ſpoken: and betwene the Sacrifice
of the olde lawe, that was but a
figure of the newe lawe, & the true hoſte
of thy precious bodie, whiche is the accompliſhement
of all the olde ſacrifice.
VVhy then am I not more inflamed
to come to thee, why do I not prepare my
ſelfe with greater diligēce to receaue this
holie and bleſſed Sacramēt, ſith the holy
auncient fathers, the patriarches & prophetes,
Kinges and Princes, with all the
people, haue ſhewed ſo great affectiō towardes
thy ſeruice in time paſſed. The
moſte deuout & bleſſed Kinge the Kynge
Dauid, went before the arke of God, and
honoured it with all his ſtrength, alwaye
remembringe the great benefites before
geuē vnto the fathers: he made Organes
of diuers maners, & alſo Pſalmes, which
he ordeyned to be ſonge, and he him ſelfe
ſang them with great gladnes, and ofte
times with his harpe, he beinge fulfilled
with the grace of the holie ghoſt, taught
the people of Iſrael to laude and prayſe
God with all their heart, and dayly with
their mouth to bleſſe him, & preache his
goodnes. And yf there were ſhewed then
ſo great deuotion and remembraunce of
laude and prayſinge to God, before the
arke of the olde teſtament: howe muche

reuerence and deuotion ought we then
nowe to haue in the preſence of this holy
Sacrament, and in the receauinge of the
moſte excellent bodye of our Lorde Ieſu
Chriſte? Many runue to diuers places to
viſite reliques of Saintes, and meruayle
greatlye when they heare of their bleſſed
deedes, they ſee great buyldinges of temples,
and beholde howe their bones and
holie reliques be couered with ſilke, and
lapped in golde: and loe thou my Lorde
God, thou arte preſent here with me
vpon the Aultar, the moſt holie Saint of
Saintes, maker of all thinges, and Lorde
of Angels. Ofte times there is great curioſitie
and vanitie in the ſight of ſuche
thinges, and litle fruite and amendemēt
is had thereby, and that ſpeciallie, where
there is ſo light recourſe and waueringe,
without anye contrition goinge before.
But thou my Lorde God, my Lorde Ieſus
Chriſt, god and man, art here wholle preſent
in the Sacrament of the Aultare,
where the fruit of euerlaſtinge health is
had plenteouſtie, as ofte as thou art worthilie
and deuoutlie receaued. But if that
ſhall be done fruitfullie, there maye be no
lightnes, curioſitie, nor ſenſualitie: but
ſtedfaſt fayth, deuoute hope, and pure
charitie. O God inuiſible, maker of all
the worlde: howe maruaylouſ
                     •
                  ye doeſt
thou with vs, howe ſweetelie, and howe
graciouſlie diſpoſeſt thou all thinges to

thy choſen people, to whom thou offereſt
thy ſelfe to be taken in this glorious Sacrameut?
Certainlie it ſurmounteth all
vnderſtandinge, and it draweth the hartes,
and kindleth the affection of all deuout
men. The true faythfull people that
diſpoſe all their life to amendement, receaue
ofte times through this glorious
Sacrament great grace and deuotion,
and great loue of vertue. O meruaylous
and ſecretlie hid is the grace of this Sacrament,
the which faythfull people of
Chriſt doe onelie knowe: for infidels, and
they that liue in ſinne, maye haue thereof
no maner of experience. In this Sacrament
ſpirituall grace is geuen, and the
vertue that was loſt in their ſoule is repayred,
and the beautie that was deformed
through ſinne, returneth agayne:
and the grace of this Sacrament ſometime
is ſo much, that of the fulnes of deuotion
that commeth thereby, not onelie
the minde, but alſo the fee
                     •
                  le bodye recouer
their former ſtrength. But verilye,
it is greatlie to be ſorowed, that we be
ſo ſlowe and negligent, and that we be
ſtirred with no more affection to receyue
Chriſt then we be, for in him ſtandeth
all merite and hope of them that ſhall be
ſaued. He is our health and our redemption,
he is the comfortour of all that
liue in this worlde, and the eternall reſt
of all Saintes in heauen. And it is alſo

greatly to be ſorowed, that ſo many take
ſo litle heede of this high miſterie, which
gladdeth the heauen, and preſerueth all
the world. Alas the blindnes and hardnes
of mans hart, that taketh no greater
heede to ſo noble a gifte, but by the dayly
vſing thereof is negligent, and taketh
litle heede thereto. If this bleſſed Sacrament
were miniſtred onelie in one place,
& cōſecrate but by one prieſt in the world,
with how great deſire, thinkeſt thou, the
people would runne to that place, and to
that Prieſt, that they myght ſee there
theſe heauenlie miſteries? Nowe there be
manye prieſtes, and Chriſte is offred in
many places, that the grace and loue of
God to man maye appeare ſo muche the
more, as the holie communion is ſpreade
the more abrode throughout the worlde,
thankinges be to thee therefore, my Lord
Ieſu, that thou vouchſafe to refreſh vs
poore outlawes with thy precious blood
and to ſtir vs with the wordes of thine
owne mouth to receiue this holie
miſterie, ſayinge, come ye all
to me that labour and
be charged, and I
ſhall refreſh you.
            
            
               
               That the great goodnes and charitie of
God is geuen to man in this bleſſed
Sacrament.
The ſecond Chapter.
               
                  O My Lorde Ieſu, truſtinge in
thy great goodnes & mercye
I come to the, as a ſicke man
to him that ſhall heale him,
and as he that is hungrye &
thirſtie to the fountayne of life, that is
needie, to the Kinge of heauen, as a ſeruaunt
to his Lord, a creature to his creator,
and as a deſolate perſō to his meeke
and bleſſed comfortour. But howe is it
that thou commeſt to me? who am I that
thou wilt geue thy ſelfe vnto me? howe
dare I a ſinner appeare before thee? and
howe is it that thou wilt vouchſafe to
come to ſo ſimple a creature? Thou knoweſt
thy ſeruant, and ſeeſt well that he
hath no goodnes of him ſe
                     ••
                  e, whereby
thou ſhouldeſt geue this grace vnto him.
I confeſſe therefore mine owne vnworthines,
and I knowledge thy goodnes, I
prayſe thy pietie, and yeelde thee thankings
for thy great charitie. Verily thou
doeſt all this for thine owne goodnes, &
not for my merites, that thy goodnes
may therby the more appeare, & thy charitie
the more largelie be ſhewed, and thy
meekenes the more highlie be commēded.
Therefore becauſe this pleaſeth thee,

and thou haſt cōmaunded that it ſhoulde
thus be done, thy goodnes alſo therein
pleaſeth me: and woulde to God that
mine iniquities reſiſted me not. O my
Lorde Ieſu, howe great reuerence and
thankinges, with perpetuall prayſinges
of thy name, ought to be geuen thee for
the receyuinge of thy holie bodie, whoſe
dignitie no man is able to expreſſe? But
what ſhall I thinke in this communion,
and in goeinge to my Lorde God, whom
I can not worſhip as I ought to doe, and
yet I deſire to receyue him deuoutly. But
what may I think better or more healthfull
to me, then whollie to meeke my ſelfe
before thee, exaltinge thy infinite goodnes
farre aboue me. I laude thee my Lord
God, and ſhall exalt thee euerlaſtinglie,
I deſpiſe my ſelfe, and ſubmit me to thee,
and ſorowe greatlie the deepenes of mine
iniquitie. Thou arte the Saint of all
Saints, and I am the filth of all ſinners,
and yet thou enclineſt thy ſelfe to me,
that am not worthye to looke towarde
thee. Thou commeſt to me, thou wilt be
with me, thou biddeſt me to thy feaſt,
thou wilt geue me this heauenly meate,
and this Angelles foode to eate, which
is playnlye none other but thy ſelfe that
art the liuely bread which deſcēdeſt from
heauen, and geueſt lyfe to the worlde.
Beholde Lorde from whence all this loue
proceedeth, and howe great goodnes ſhineth

vpon vs, and howe great thankes &
prayſes are due to thee therfore. O howe
helthful and howe profitable a counſayle
was it whē thou ordeinedſt this glorious
Sacrament? and how ſweete and ioyous
a feaſt was it when thou gaueſt thy ſelfe
as meat to be eaten? O Lorde howe meruailous
is thy worke, howe mightie is
thy vertue, and howe farre vnſpeakable
is thy trueth? By thy worde all thinges
were made, and all thinges were done as
thou haſt commaunded. It is a meruaylous
thinge & worthy to be beleeued, and
farre aboue the vnderſtandinge of man,
that thou Lorde that art God and very
man, art wholly conteyned vnder a litle
likenes of bread and wine, and art eaten
without conſuminge, of him that taketh
thee: and that thou that art Lorde of all
thinges, and that needeſt nothing in this
world, wouldeſt by this glorious Sacrament
dwell in vs, kepe thou mine heart &
my body immaculate, that in a glad and
a pure conſcience I may ofte times celebrate
thy miſteries, and receiue them to
my euerlaſtinge health, which thou haſte
ordeined moſt ſpeciallye to thy honour &
perpetuall memory. O my ſoule be thou
mery and glad for ſo noble a gift, and ſo
ſinguler a cōfort left to thee in this vale
of miſery, for as ofte as thou remembreſt
this miſtery, & takeſt the body of Chriſte,
ſo ofte thou workeſt the worke of thy redemption,

and art made partaker of all
the merites of Chriſt. Truely the charitie
of Chriſt is neuer miniſhed, & the greatnes
of his mercy is neuer conſumed, and
therefore thou oughteſt alwaye with a
newe renewing of minde to diſpoſe thee
to it, and with a well aduiſed and a deepe
conſideration to thinke on this great
myſterie of health. It ſhoulde ſeeme to
thee as newe, and as pleaſaunt a ioy and
comfort, when thou ſingeſt maſſe, or heareſt
it, as if Chriſte the ſame daye firſt entred
into the wombe of the virgin, and
were made man, or if he the ſame daye
ſuffered and dyed vppon the Croſſe, for
the health of mankinde.
            
            
               That it is very profitable ofte to be houſeled.
The .3. Chapter.
               
                  LOrde I come to the to thēde
that it maye be well with me
through thy gifte, and that
I maye ioye at the holy feaſt
that thou of thy great goodnes
haſte made redy for me. In thee is all
that I may or ſhoulde deſire, for thou art
my health & my redemption, my hope, my
ſtrength, my honour and glorie. Make me
thy ſeruant this daye mery and glad in
thee, for I haue lifte my ſoule vnto thee,
nowe I deſire deuoutlie and reuerentlie
to receiue thee into mine houſe, that I

may deſerue with zeale to be bleſſed of
thee, and to be accompanied amonge the
children of Abraham. My ſoule coueteth
to receiue thy body, my hart deſireth to
be vnited with thee, betake thy ſelfe to
me Lord and it ſuffiſeth, for without thee
there is no comfort, nor without thee
I may not be, nor without thy viſitation
I may not liue, and therefore it behoueth
me ofte times to goe to thee, and for my
health to receiue thee, leſte happilye if I
ſhould be defrauded from that heauenlie
meat I ſhould faile in the waye. So thou
ſayedſt thy ſelfe, moſte mercifull Ieſu, as
thou were preaching to the people, & healedſt
them of their ſickneſſes: I will not
let thē returne into their houſes faſting,
leſt they fayle by the waye. Doe with me
therefore in like maner, that haſt left thy
ſelfe in this glorious Sacrament for the
comfort of all faithfull people. Thou art
onely the true refection of the ſoule, and
he that worthily eateth thee ſhall be partaker
and heire of eternal glorie: it is neceſſarie
to me that ſo oft do offende, ſo
ſoone ware dull and ſlowe, that by ofte
prayers and cōfeſſions I may renewe my
ſelfe, purifie my ſelfe, and kindle my ſelfe
to quicknes & feruour of ſpicite, leſt happily
by long abſtaining I might fall from
that holy purpoſe: for the wittes of man
and woman be from their youth proude
and readie to euil, and but this heauenly

lie medicine do helpe, man maye anone
fall to worſe and worſe, therefore this
holy communion draweth a man from
euill, and comforteth him in goodnes. If
I nowe be ofte times ſo negligent and
ſlouthfull when I am cōmaunded, what
ſhould I be if I receiued not that bieſſed
medicine nor ſought not for that great
helpe? And though I be not euery daye
apte nor diſpoſed to receyue my Creator:
neuertheleſſe I ſhall take heede to receyue
him in times conuenient, ſo that I
maye be partaker of ſo great a grace, for
it is one of the moſte principall conſolations
to a faithfull ſoule, that is to ſaye,
that as long as he is as a pilgrime in
this mortall bodye, that he ofte remember
his Lorde God, and receyue him that
is his onely beloued aboue all thinges. It
is a marueilous goodnes of the great pitie
that thou Lorde haſte againſt vs, that
thou Creatour and geuer of Iyfe to all
ſpirites, voucheſtſafe to come to a poore
creature, and with thy godhead & manhood
to refreſh his hunger and neede O
happie is that man, and bleſſed is that
ſoule that deſerueth deuoutlie to receiue
his Lorde God, and in that receiuinge to
be fulfilled with a ſpirituall ioy. O howe
great a Lorde doth he receiue? howe welbeloued
a geſt doth he bringe into his
houſe? howe ioyous a felowe doth he receiue?
howe faithfull a freeude doth he

accept? howe noble a ſpouſe doth he imbrace
that receiueth thee? For thou art
onelie to be beloued before all other, and
aboue all thinges. Let heauen and earth,
and all the ornamentes of them be ſtill in
thy preſence, for whatſoeuer they haue
worthy laude or praiſe, they haue that of
the larges of thy gift: and yet they maye
not be lyke to the honour and glorie of
thy name, of whoſe wiſedome there is no
number nor meaſure.
            
            
               That many commodities be geuen to them,
that deuoutly receaue this holye
Sacrament.
The 4. Chapter.
               
                  O My Lorde God, preuent thy
ſeruant with the bleſſinges
of thy ſweetenes, that he
may deſerue to go reuerently
and deuoutly to this high
Sacrament. Stirrs vp my
hart into a full beholdinge of thee, and
deliuer me from the great ſlouth and
ydlenes that I haue bene in in time paſſed:
viſite me in thy goodnes, and geue
me grace to taſte inwardlie in my ſoule,
the ſweetnes that is hid ſecretlie in this
bleſſed Sacramēt, as in a moſt plenteous
fountaine. Illumine alſo mine eyes to ſee
and beholde ſo great a miſterrie, & ſtrengthen

me, that I maye alwaye faythfullie
and vndoubtedly beleeue it: for it is thy
operation, and not the power of man, thy
holie inſtitutiō, and not mans inuention.
And therefore to take and to vnderſtand
theſe thinges, no man is ſufficient of him
ſelfe, and they alſo ouerpaſſe the ſubtility
of all Angels and heauenlye ſpirites.
VVhat may I then moſte vnworthy ſinner,
earth and aſhes ſearche and talke of
ſo high a ſecret, but onelye that in ſimplenes
of hart, in a good ſtable fayth, and
by thy commaundement I come to thee
with meeke hope and reuerence, and beleue
verily, that thou art here preſent in
this Sacrament God and man? Thou
wilt therefore, that I ſhall receaue thee,
and knit my ſelfe to thee in perfecte charitie.
VVherefore I aſke thee mercy, and
deſire, that thou geue me thy ſpecial grace,
that I maye from henceforth be fully
molten, and relented into thee, flowe in
thy loue, and neuer after to intermit my
ſelfe with any other comfort. This moſte
high and moſte worthy Sacrament is the
life of the ſoule and body, the medicine of
all ſpirituall ſicknes, wherby all vices be
cured, paſſions refrayned, temptations
ouercome and diminiſhed: the greater
grace is ſent, vertue increaſed, and faith
ſtabliſhed, hope ſtrengthed, and charitie
kindled and ſpread abroade. Thou haſte
geuen, and ofte times geueſt manye great

giftes by this Sacrament to thy beloued
ſeruantes that deuoutly receaue thee, for
thou thereby art the ſtronge vpholder of
my ſoule, the repairer of all the infirmities
of man, and the geuer of all inward
conſolation, and of cōfort in tribulation:
and from thee deepnes of their owne deſection
thou rayſeſt them againe into a
ſtrong hope of thy preſeruation, and reneweſt
them, and lighteſt them inwardlie
with a newe grace, ſo that they that
felte them ſelues before receauing of that
bleſſed Sacrament, heauy and without
affection, after when they haue receaued
it, haue founde them ſelues changed
into a great ghoſtly feruour. And all
this thou doeſt to thy elect people of thy
great goodnes, that they may ſee and
knowe openlye by experience, that they
haue nothing of them ſelues, but that all
grace and goodnes that they haue, they
haue receaued of thee, for of them ſelues
they be colde, dull and vndeuoute, and
by thee they be made feruent, quicke in
ſpirite, and deuout folowers of thy will:
who maye go meekly to the fountaine of
ſweetnes, but that he ſhall bringe awaye
with him great plentie of ſweetnes? or
who may ſtande by a great fyre, but he
ſhall feele great heate thereof? and thou
Lorde arte the fountaine of all ſweetnes,
and the fyre alwayes brenning, and
neuer faylinge, and therefore, though. I

maye not drawe the fulnes of that fountaine,
nor drinke thereof to the full, I
ſhall neuertheleſſe put my mouth to the
hole of the heauenlie pipe, that I maye
take ſome litle droppe thereof to refreſhe
my thirſt, ſo that I be not all dried away.
And though I be not all heauenlye and
brenninge in charitie, as the Seraphins
and Cherubins be, neuertheleſſe I ſhall
endeuour me to ſet my ſelfe to deuotion,
and to prepare mine heart, that I maye
get ſome litle ſparcle of the brenninge of
heauenlie life, through the meeke receuing
of this liuely Sacramēt: and whatſoeuer
wanteth in me, I beſeeche thee my
Lorde Ieſu, moſt holie & bleſſed, that thou
beninglye and gratiouſlie ſupplie in me:
for thou haſte vouched ſafe to call all to
thee, ſaying: Come ye all to me that labour
and be charged, and I ſhall refreſhe
you. I labour in the ſweate of my bodie,
and am tormented with the ſorowe of
mine heart, and charged with ſinnes,
trauayled with temptations, intriked
and oppreſſed with many euill paſſions,
and there is none that may helpe, or that
maye deliuer me, ne that maye make me
ſafe, but thou Lorde God my onely Sauiour,
to whome I commit me and all
mine, that thou kepe me, and lead me
into life euerlaſtinge: accept me and take
me into the laude & glorye of thy name,
that haſte ordeyned to me thy bodie and

bloud to be my meate and drinke: and
graunt me Lorde, I beſeech thee, that by
the ofte receauinge of thy high miſterie,
the feruour of deuotion maye daylie increaſe
in me.
            
            
               Of the vvorthines of the Sacrament of the
Aultar, and of the ſtate of prieſthood.
The .5. Chapter.
               
                  IF thou haddeſt the puritie of
Angels, and the holines of S.
Iohn Baptiſt, thou ſhouldeſt
not for that be worthie to receaue
nor touche this holy Sacrament:
for it is not graunted for the
merites of man, that a man ſhoulde conſecrate
and touche the Sacrament of
Chriſte, and take to his meate the breade
of Angels. It is a great miſterie, and it is
a great dignitie of prieſts, to whome it is
graunted, that is not graunted to Angels,
for prieſts onely that be duely ordeined
in the Church, haue power to ſinge
Maſſe, and to conſecrate the bodye of
Chriſt: for a prieſt is the miniſter of God,
vſinge the worde of conſecration, by the
commaundement and ordinance of God:
and God is there the principall doer, and
the inuiſible worker, to whom is ſubiect
all that he willeth, and all obeyeth to
that he commaundeth. Thou oughteſt
therefore more to beleeue almightie God

in this moſte excellent Sacrament, then
thine owne wit, or any other viſible tokē
or ſigne. And therefore with dreade and
reuerēce it is to go to this bleſſed worke.
Take heede then diligentlie, and ſee from
whēce this miſtery and ſeruice commeth
that is geuen vnto thee by the touchinge
of the handes of the bilhop. Thou aſte
nowe made a prieſt, and art conſecrate to
ſing Maſſe. Take heede therefore, that
thou faithfullye and deuoutlye offer thy
ſacrifice to God in due time, and that
thou keepe thy ſelfe without reproufe,
thou haſte not made thy burden more
light, but hou arte nowe bounde in a
ſtraiter bonde of diſcipline, and of muche
more high perfection then thou were before.
A prieſt ought to be adorned with
all vertues, and to geue other example of
good life: his conuerſation ſhoulde not
be with the common people, nor in the
common waye of the worlde, but with
Angels in heauen, or with perfect men in
earth, that be beſt diſpoſed to ſerue God.
A prieſt alſo clothed in holye veſtimentes
beareth the place of Chriſt, that he ſhould
humblie and meekly praye to our Lorde
for him ſelfe, & for all the people: he hath
before him and behinde him the ſigne of
the Croſſe of Chriſt, that he ſhoulde diligently
remember his paſſion: he beareth
before him the Croſſe, that he maye diligently
behould & ſee the ſteppes of Chriſt,

and ſtudy feruentlye to folow them, and
behinde him alſo he is ſigned with the
Croſſe, that he ſhould gladly and meekly
ſuffer all aduerſities for the loue of God:
he beareth the Croſſe before him, that he
ſhoulde bewayle his owne ſinnes, and he
beareth it behinde hym, that he maye
through compaſſion beweepe the ſinnes
of other, and knowe him ſelfe to be ſet as
a meane betwene God and al the people,
and not to ceaſſe of prayer and holye
oblation, til he maye deſerue of almighty
God mercy & grace. VVhen a prieſt ſaith
Maſſe, he honoreth God, he maketh Angels
glad, he edifieth the Chruche, he helpeth
the people that be a liue, and geueth
reſt to them that be deade, and maketh
him ſelfe partaker of all good dedes.
            
            
               Of the invvarde remembraunce and exerciſe
that a man ought to haue afore the receauinge
of the bodye of Chriſte.
The 6. Chapter.
               
                  LOrde, when I thinke of thy
worthines, and of my great
filthines, I tremble ſtronglie,
and am cōfounded in my ſelfe:
for if I receaue thee not, I flie
the eternall life: and if I vnworthylie receaue
thee, I runne into thy wrath.
VVhat ſhall I then do my good Lorde,
my helper, my protectour, comforter, and
right ſure Counſailer in all my neceſſities?

Teache me (good Lorde) the right
waye, and purpoſe vnto me ſome readie
ererciſe conuenable to the receauinge of
this holye miſterie, for it is neceſſarye
vnto me, & greatlie profitable to knowe,
howe deuoutlie and reuerentlie I ought
to prepare mine heart to receaue it, or to
conſecrate ſo great and ſo goodlie a Sacrifice
as it is.
            
            
               Of the diſcuſſing of our ovvne conſcience, and
of the purpoſe of amendment.
The 7. Chapter.
               
                  IT behoueth thee aboue all
thinges with ſoueraigne reuerence
and profounde meeknes
of hart, and with full
fayth, and humble intent (to
the houour of God) to celebrate,
take and receaue this holie Sacrament,
examine diligentlie thy couſcience
by true contrition and meeke confeſſion,
and make it cleane after thy power, ſo
that thou know nothing that greueth or
biteth thy cōſcience, or that may let thee
to go frelie vnto it: haue diſpleaſure of
all thy ſinnes in generall, & for thy daylie
exceſſes and offences haue ſighinges and
ſorowinges more ſpeciall. And if the time
will ſuffer it, confeſſe vnto God in ſecrete
of thine heart the miſeries of all thy
paſſions, weepe and ſorowe, that thou

art yet ſo carnall and worldly, ſo vnmortified
from thy paſſions, ſo full of motiōs
of concupiſcences, ſo vnware, and ſo euill
ordred in thy outward wits, ſo oft wrapped
in vayne phantaſies, ſo muche inclined
to outwarde and worldlie thinges,
ſo negligent to inwarde thinges, ſo redie
to laughinge and diſſolution, ſo harde to
weepinge and compunction, ſo readie to
eaſie thinges, and to that that is likinge
to the fleſhe: ſo ſlowe to penance & feruor
of ſpirite, ſo curious to heare newe thinges,
and to ſee fayre thinges, ſo lothe to
meeke and abiect thinges, ſo couetous to
haue muche, ſo ſcarſe to geue, ſo glad to
holde, ſo vnaduiſed in ſpeakinge, ſo incontinent
to be ſtill, ſo euill ordred in maners,
ſo importune in deedes, ſo greedie
vpon meate, ſo deafe to the word of God,
ſo quicke to reſt, ſo ſlowe to laboure, ſo
attentiue to fables, ſo ſleepye to holye
vigils, ſo haſtie to thende, ſo vnſtable to
take heede to the waye to the ende, ſo
negligent in the ſeruice of God, ſo dull
and ſo vndeuout to go to Maſſe, ſo drye
in thy houſell, ſo ſoone fallen at large to
outwarde thinges, ſo ſeldome gathered
together to inwarde thinges, ſo ſoone
moued to anger and wrath, ſo lightlye
ſtirred to the diſpleaſure of other, ſo readie
to iudge, ſo rigorous to reproue, ſo
glad in proſperitie, ſo feeble in aduerſitie,
ſo ofte purpoſinge many good thinges,

and ſo ſeldome bringinge them to effecte.
And when thou haſte thus confeſſed and
be wept all theſe defaults and ſuch other
like in thee, with great ſorowe and diſpleaſure
of thine owne fraylenes, ſet thee
then in a full purpoſe to amende thy life,
and to profite alwaye from better to better,
and then with a full reſigninge and a
wholle will offer thy ſelfe into the honour
of my name in the Aulter of thy
hart, as ſacrifice to me, that is to ſaye,
faythfullie committinge to me both thy
bodie and ſoule, ſo that thou mayeſt be
worthye to offer to me this high ſacrifice,
and to receyue healthfullie the Sacrament
of my holie bodie, for there is no
oblation more worthie, nor ſatiſfaction
greater to put awaye ſinne, then a man
to offer him ſelfe purelie and whollie to
God, with the offeringe of the bodie of
Chriſt in maſſe and in holie communion.
If a man doe that in him is, and is truelie
penitent as ofte as he commeth to me
for grace and forgiuenes, I am the
Lorde that ſayth, I will not the
death of a ſinner, but rather that
he be conuerted to liue, and I
ſhall no more remember his
ſinnes, but they all ſhall
be forgeuen and pardoned
vnto hym.
            
            
               
               Of the oblation of Chriſte on the Croſſe, and
of a full forſakinge of our ſelfe.
The 8. Chapter.
               
                  OVr Lorde Ieſus ſayth to his
ſeruant thus: As I hanginge
all naked with mine armes
ſpread abroad vpon the croſſe,
offered my ſelfe to God the
father for thy ſinnes, ſo that nothinge
remayned in me, but that all went in ſacrifice
to pleaſe my Father, and to appeaſe
his wrath agaynſt mankinde: ſo thou
oughteſt to offer thy ſelfe freelie to God
as muche as thou mayeſt, in a pure and
holie oblation daylie in the Maſſe with
all thy power and affection. VVhat require
I more of thee, then that thou
ſhouldeſt ſtudie whollie to reſigne thy
ſelfe vnto me? for whatſoeuer thou geueſt
beſide thy ſelfe I regarde it not, for I
looke not for thy giftes, but for thee. For
as it ſhoulde not ſuffiſe to thee to haue
all thinges beſide me, ſo it maye not pleaſe
me whatſoeuer thou geue beſide thy
ſelfe. Offer thy ſelfe to me, and geue thy
ſelfe all to God, and thy oblation ſhall
be acceptable. Lo I offered my ſelfe whollye
to my father for thee, and I gaue my
bodye and bloude to thy meate, that
I ſhoulde be all whollie thine, and
thou mine. But if thou haue a truſt in thy
ſelfe, and doeſt not freelye offer thee to

my will, thy oblation is not pleaſaunt,
and there ſhall be betwene vs no perfect
vnitie. Therefore a free offeringe of thy
ſelfe into the handes of God, muſt go before
all thy workes, if thou wilte obteine
grace and the true libertie. Therefore it
is that ſo fewe be inwardlie illuminate
and free, becauſe they can not whollye
forſake them ſelfe (for my words be true)
but a man renounce him ſelfe he may not
be my diſciple. Offer thy ſelfe fullie to me
with all thine affection and loue. Amen.
            
            
               That vve ought to offer our ſelfe and all ours
to God, and to praye for all people.
The 9. Chapter.
               
                  LOrde all thinges be thine
that be in heauen & earth.
I deſire to offer my ſelfe to
thee in a free and perpetual
oblation, ſo that I may perpetuallie
be with thee. Lord
in ſimplenes of hart I offer me this daye
to thee to be thy ſeruant in the ſeruice &
ſacrifice of laude perpetuall, accept me
with this oblation of thy precious bodye
which I this daye offer to thee in the
preſence of thy holie Angels that be here
preſent inuiſible, that it maye be to my
health, and to the health of all the people.
And Lorde I offer to thee all my ſinnes
and offences that I haue committed before

thee and thy holie Angels fro the
daye that I might firſt offende vnto this
daye, that thou voucheſafe through thy
great charitie to put away all my ſinnes,
& to clenſe my cōſcience of all mine offences,
and reſtore to me agayne the grace
that I through ſinne haue loſt, and that
thou forgeue me all thinges paſt, and receyue
me mercifullie into a bleſſed kiſſing
of peace and forgeuenes. VVhat may I
do then but meekelie cōfeſſe and bewaile
my ſinnes, and continuallie aſke mercye
of thee? forgeue me mercifull Lorde I beſeeche
thee, for all my ſinnes diſpleaſe me
muche, and I will neuer commit them
againe, but ſorow for them, readie to doe
penance and ſatiſfactiō after my power.
Forgeue me Lorde, forgeue me my ſinnes
for thy holie name, ſaue my ſoule that
thou haſt redeemed with thy precious
bloode. I commit my ſelfe whollie vnto
thy mercie, I reſigne me whollie into
thy handes, doe with me after thy goodnes,
and not after my malice and wretchednes.
I offer alſo to thee all my good
deedes, though they be verie fewe and
imperfect, that thou amende them, and
ſanctifie them, and make them likinge
and acceptable to thee, and alwaye make
them better and better, and that thou
bringe me, though I be a ſlowe and an
vuprofitable perſon, to a bleſſed and a
laudable ende. I offer alſo to thee all the

deſires of deuout perſons, the neceſſitie
of mine aunceſters, freendes, brother, ſiſter,
and of all my louers, and of all them
that for thy loue haue done good to me or
to any other, & that haue deſired & aſked
me to praye, or to doe ſacrifice for them
or for their freendes, whether they be aliue
or deade, that they maye the rather
feele the helpe of thy grace, and the gifte
of thy heauenlie conſolation, thy protection
from all perils, and the deliuerance
from all payne, and that they ſo beinge
deliuered from all euils, may in ſpirituall
gladnes yeelde to thee high laude and
prayſinges. I offer to thee alſo my prayer
and my peaceable offeringe, for all them
that haue in any thinge hindred me, or
made me heauy, or that haue done me
any hurt or greeue: and for all them alſo
whom I haue at anye time made heauy,
troubled, greued, or ſlaundered, in worde
or deede, wittinglye or ignorantlye,
that thou forgeue vs altogether our
ſinnes and offences againſt thee, and of
eche of vs againſt other, and that thou
Lorde take fro our heartes all ſuſpition
and indignation, wrath, variance, and
whatſoeuer may let charitie, or diminiſh
fraternall loue, that eche of vs ſhoulde
haue to other: haue mercie Lorde, haue
mercie on all them that aſke thee mercie,
and geue grace to them that haue neede,
and make vs to ſtande in ſuche caſe, that

we be worthye to haue thy grace, and
finallye to come to the lyfe euerlaſtinge.
Amen.
            
            
               That the holye Communion is not lightlye
to be forborne.
The .10. Chapter.
               
                  IT behoueth thee to runne 
ofte to the fountayne of grace
and mercye, and to the
fountaine of all goodnes and
puritie, that thou mayeſt be
healed from thy paſſiōs and
vices, and be made more ſtronge againſt
all the temptations and deceytfull crafte
of our enemie. The fiende knowinge the
greateſt fruit, and higheſt remedie to be
in receauinge of this bieſſed Sacrament,
inforceth him by all the wayes that he
can, to let and withdrawe all faythfull
and deuout people from it as muche as
he can: and therefore ſome men, whē they
diſpoſe them ſelues to it, haue more greater
temptations then they had before: for
as it is written in Iob, the wicked ſpirit
commeth amonge the children of God,
that he maye by his olde malice and wickednes
trouble them, or make them ouermuch
fearefull and perplexed, ſo that he
maye diminiſhe their affection, or take
awaye their fayth, if happilie he maye
thereby make them eyther vtterlye to

ceaſſe from beinge houſeled, or els that
they goe to it with litle deuotion. But it
is not any thing to care for al his craftes
and phantaſies, howe vyle and vgglye
ſoeuer they be, but all phantaſies are to
be throwen agayne at is owne head, and
he ſo far to be deſpiſed, that for all his
aſſaults and cōmotions that he can ſtirre
vp, the holy communion be not omitted.
Sometime ouer much curiouſnes to haue
deuotion, or ouer great doubt of making
confeſſion, letteth muche this holye purpoſe.
Doe therefore after the counſayle of
wiſe men, and put awaye all doubtfulnes
and ſcrupulouſnes, for they let the grace
of God, and deſtroy whollie the deuotion
of the minde. Alſo it is not good that for
any litle trouble or griefe, that thou leaue
this holie worke, but go lightlie and be
confeſſed and forgeue gladlye all that
haue offended thee. And if thou haue offē
                  ded
any other, meekelie aſke of them forgeueues,
and God ſhall right mercifully
forgeue thee. VVhat profiteth it longe to
tarie from confeſſion, or to deferre this
holie Communion? Purge thee firſt, and
quickelie caſt out thy venim, and haſte
thee after to take the medicine, and thou
ſhalt feele more profite thereby, then yf
thou tariedſt lōger for it. If thou deferre
it to daye for this thinge or that, to morowe
we may happen to come a greater, and
ſo thou mayeſt be let longe from thy good

purpoſe, and be made afterwarde more
vnapt vnto it. Therfore as ſoone as thou
canſt, diſcharge thy ſelfe from ſuche heauines
and dulnes of minde, and fro all
ſlouth, for it nothing profiteth long to
be anguiſhed, long to go with trouble, &
to ſequeſter him ſelfe for ſuche dayly obſtacles,
fro the diuine miſteries: but it
doeth great hurt, and cōmonly bringeth
in greath ſlouth, and lacke of deuotion.
But alas for ſorowe, ſome ſlouthfull and
diſſolute perſons gladlye ſeeke cauſes to
tarye from confeſſion, and ſo defer the
longer this holye Communion: and that
they doe, to the intent that they ſhoulde
not be bounde to geue them ſelues to any
more ſure kepinge of them ſelues in time
to come, then they haue done before. But
alas, howe litle charitie, and ſlender deuotion
haue they that ſo lightly leaue of
ſo holie a thing, & howe happie is he, and
howe acceptable to God that ſo liueth,
and that ſo keepeth his cōſcience in ſuch
cleannes, that he is euerie daye readie, &
hath good affection to be houſled, if it
were lawfull vnto him, & that he might
doe it without note or ſlaunder? He that
ſometime abſtaineth of meekenes, or for
any other lawfull impediment, is to be
prayſed for his reuerence, but yf it be
through ſlouthfulnes, he ought to quicken
him ſelfe, and to doe that in him is,
and our Lorde ſhall ſtrengthen his deſire

for his good will, for to a good will our
Lorde hath alwaye a ſpeciall reſpect, and
when he is lawfullie let, he ſhall haue a
good will and a meeke intent to it, and
ſo he ſhall not want the fruite of the Sacrament.
And verilie euerie deuout man
maye euerye daye, and euerye houre go
healthfullie, and without prohibition
vnto the ſpirituall Cōmunion of Chriſte,
that is to ſaye, in remembringe of his
paſſion, and neuertheleſſe, in certaine
dayes and times he is bounde to receaue
Sacramentally the bodie of his Redemer
with a great reuerēce: and rather to pretende
therein the laude and honour of
God, then his owne conſolation. For ſo
ofte a man is houſled miſticallye and
inuiſibly, as he remembreth deuoutly the
miſterie of the incarnation of Chriſt, and
his paſſion, and is thereby kindled into
his loue. He that doeth prepare him ſelfe
for none other cauſe, but becauſe the feaſt
is comminge, or the cuſtome compelleth
him therto, he ſhall cōmonlie be vnready
to it. Bleſſed is he therefore, that as ofte
as he ſayth Maſſe, or is houſled, offereth
him ſelfe vnto our Lorde in holie Sacrifice.
Be not in ſayinge Maſſe ouer longe,
nor ouer ſhort, but keepe the good common
waye, as they doe with whom thou
liueſt: for thou oughteſt not do that
ſhoulde greeue other, or make them tedious,
but to keepe the common waye,

after the ordinance of the holie fathers,
and rather to confirme thy ſelfe to that
that ſhall be profitable to other, then to
folowe thine owne deuotion, or priuate
pleaſure.
            
            
               That the bodye of Chriſte and holye Scripture,
are moſte neceſſarye for the
health of mans ſoule.
The .11. Chapter.
               
                  O Moſte ſweeteſt Ieſu, howe
great ſweetenes is it to a
deuout ſoule, when he is
fedde with thee at thy heauenlie
feaſt, where there is
none other meate brought
forth to eate, but thou his onely beloued,
and that art moſt deſirable to him, aboue
all the deſires of his heart. And verilie it
ſhoulde be ſweete and pleaſaunt to me,
by an inwarde and meeke affection, to
weepe before thee, and with the bleſſed
woman Marie Magdalene, to waſhe thy
feete with the teares of mine eyes. But
where is that deuotion? where is that
plenteous ſheddinge out of holie teares?
Certainlie all my heart ought to breune,
and to weepe for ioye in the ſight of thee,
and of thy holye Angels: for I haue thee
verilye preſent with me, though thou be
hid vnderr another likeneſſe, for to behold

thee in thy proper and diuine cleerenes,
mine eyes might not beare it, neither all
the worlde might ſuſteyne to ſee thee in
the cleerenes and glorye of thy maieſtie.
Therefore thou greatly helpeſt my weaknes,
in that thou hideſt thy ſelfe vnder
this bleſſed Sacrament. I haue him verily,
& worſhip him, whom Angels worſhip
in heauen, but I onely in faith, and they
in open ſight, and in thine owne likenes
without any couerture. It behoueth me
to be content in the light of true faith,
and therein to walke till the day of euerlaſting
eleerenes ſhall appeare, and that
the ſhadowe of figures ſhall go awaye.
VVhen that that is perfect ſhall come, all
vſe of Sacramentes ſhall ceaſſe, for they
that be bleſſed in the heauēly glorie, haue
no neede of this Sacramental medicine:
for they ioye without end in the preſence
of God, beholding his glory face to face, &
ſo tranſformed fro clerenes to clerenes of
the godhead, they taſt the glorye of the
ſonne of God made man, as he was in his
godhead fro the beginninge, and ſhall be
euerlaſting. VVhen I remember all theſe
maruailous comfortes, whatſoeuer ſolace
I haue in this world, though it be ſpiritual,
it is greeuous and tedious vnto me,
for as longe as I ſee not my Lorde openlie
in his glorie, I ſet it at naught al that
I ſee and heare in this world. Lord, thou
art my witnes, that nothing may cōfort

me, nor any creature maye quiet me, but
thou my Lorde God, whom I deſire to
ſee and beholde eternally: but that is not
poſſible for me to doe, as longe as I ſhall
be in this mortall life. VVherefore it behoueth
me to keepe my ſelfe in great patience,
and to ſubmit my ſelfe to thee in
euery thinge that I deſire, for thy holye
Saintes that nowe ioy with thee, abode
in good fayth & patience all whiles they
liued here the comming of thy glory. That
they beleeued, I beleeue, that they hoped
to haue, I hope to haue, and thither as
they by thy grace be come, I truſt to come,
and till then I ſhall walke in faith, &
take comfort of the examples of the ſayde
holy Saints. I haue alſo holie bookes for
my ſolace, as a ſpirituall glaſſe to looke
vpon, & aboue all theſe I haue for a ſinguler
remedie thy holye bodye. I perceue
wel, that two thinges be much neceſſarie
vnto me in this worlde, without which
this miſerable lyfe ſhould be to me as importable:
for as long as I ſhall be in this
body, I cōfeſſe my ſelfe to haue neede of
two things, that is to ſay, of meat & light.
Theſe two haſt thou geuen vnto me, that
is to ſaye, thy holy body to the refreſhing
of my bodye and ſoule, and thou haſte ſet
thy word as a lanterne before my feete,
to ſhewe me the waye that I ſhall go.
VVithout theſe two I may not wel liue,
for the worde of God is the light of my

ſoule, and this Sacrament is the breade
of my lyfe. Theſe two may alſo be called
the two tables, ſet here & there in the ſpiritual
treaſure of holy Church: The one is
the table of the holy Aultar, hauinge this
holie bread, that is the precious bodie of
Chriſt: The other is the table of the lawes
of God, conteining the holie doctrine of
the lawe of God, and inſtructing man in
the right fayth, and in the true beliefe,
leadinge him into the inwarde ſecrettes
that be called Sancta Sanctorum, where
the inwarde ſecrettes of Scripture be
hid and conteyned. I yeelde thankinges
to thee my Lorde Ieſu, the brightnes of
the eternal light, for this table of holie
doctrine the which thou haſt miniſtred to
vs by thy ſeruauntes, Prophetes, & Apoſtles,
and other doctours: and thankings
alſo be to thee the creator & redeemer of
mankinde, that thou to ſhewe to all the
worlde the greatnes of thy charitie, preparedſt
a great ſupper, in the which thou
ſetteſt not forth the Lambe figured in the
olde lawe, but thy holy body and bloude
to be eaten, gladding thereby in that holy
feaſt all faithful people, and geuing them
to drinke of thy chalice of health, in the
which be conteyned all the delightes of
Paradiſe, where Angels eate with vs
with much more plenteous ſweetenes. O
howe great and howe honourable is the
office of Prieſtes, to whom is geuē power

to conſecrate with the holye wordes of
conſecration, the Lorde of all maieſtie, to
bleſſe him with their lippes, to holde him
in their handes, to receiue him into their
mouthes; and to miniſter him to other. O
howe cleane ſhoulde the handes be, howe
pure a mouth, howe holye a bodye, and
howe vndefiled ſhoulde be the heart of a
Prieſt, to whom ſo ofte entreth the authour
of al cleannes? Truely there ought
to procede from the mouth of a prieſt
that ſo ofte receaueth the Sacrament of
Chriſtes bodie, no worde but that is holy,
honeſt, and profitable, his eyes ſhould be
full ſimple and chaſte, that vſe to behold
the bodie of Chriſte, & his handes ſhoulde
be full pure, & lifte vp into heauen, which
vſe to touche the Creatour of heauen and
earth: and therefore it is ſpeciallye ſayde
in the lawe to Prieſtes, be ye holye, for I
your Lord God am holy. O God almightie,
thy grace be with vs, and helpe vs
that haue receiued the office of prieſthood
that we may ſerue thee worthely and deuoutly
in all puritie, and in a good conſcience.
And though we maye not liue in
ſo great innocēcie as we ought to do, yet
geue vs grace at the leaſt, that we maye
weepe and ſorowe the euils that we haue
done, ſo that in ſpirituall meeknes,
and in full purpoſe of a good will
we may ſerue thee hereafter.
Amen.
            
            
               
               That he that ſhall be houſeled ought to prepare
hym ſelfe therto before vvith
great diligence.
The .12. Chapter.
               
                  I Am the louer of al puritie, and
the liberall geuer of all holines.
I ſeeke a cleane heart, & there
is my reſtinge place, make ready
for me a great chamber ſtrawed,
that is thyne hart, and I with my
Diſciples ſhall keepe mine Eaſter with
thee. If thou wilte that I ſhall come to
thee, and dwell with thee, clenſe thee of
all the olde filth of ſinne, and clenſe alſo
the habitacle of thine heart, and make it
pleaſaunt and fayre. Exclude the worlde,
and all the clamorous noyſe of ſinne, and
ſit ſolitarie, as a ſparowe in an houſe eaſinge,
and thinke vpon all thy offences
with great bitternes of hart, for a true
louer will prepare to his beloued freende
the beſt and the fayreſt place that he can,
for in that is knowen the loue and affection
of him that receyueth his freende.
But neuertheleſſe, I knowe that thou
mayeſt not of thy ſelfe ſuffiſe to make
this preparinge fullie, as it ought to be
in euerie point, though thou went about
it a wholle yere together, and haddeſt
none other thing in thy minde to thinke
vpon, but of my mercie and grace onely:

Thou art ſuffred to go vnto my table, as
if a poore man were called to the dinner
of a riche man, and he had none other
thinge to geue him againe, but onelie to
humble him felfe, and thanke him for it:
doe that in thee is, with thy beſt diligēce,
and doe it not onelie of cuſtome, nor of
neceſſitie onely, for that thou art bounde
to it, but with dreade and reuerence and
great affection take the bodie of thy beloued
Lorde God, that ſo louinglie vouchethſafe
to come vnto thee. I am he that
hath called thee, I haue commaunded
that this thinge ſhoulde be done, I ſhall
ſupplie that wanteth in thee. Come therfore
and receaue me, & when I geue thee
the grace of deuotion, yeelde thankes to
me therefore, not for that thou art worthy
to haue it, but for that I haue ſhewed
my mercy louinglye to thee. And if thou
haue not the grace of deuotion through
receauinge of this Sacrament, but that
thou feeleſt thy ſelfe more drye, and more
vndeuout then thou were before, yet cō
                  tinue
ſtill in thy prayer, wayle, weepe, &
and call for grace, and ceaſſe not, til thou
mayeſt receaue ſome litle drop of this
helthfull grace of deuotion. Thou haſte
neede of me, and not I of thee, ne thou
commeſt not to ſanctifie me, but I come
to ſanctifie thee, and to make thee better
then thou were before. Thou commeſt to
be ſanctified, and be vnited vnto me, and

that thou mayeſt receaue a newe grace,
and be kindled a newe to amendement.
Do not forget this grace, but alway with
all thy diligence prepare thine heart, and
bringe thy beloued vnto thee: and it behoueth
thee not onelye to prepare thy
ſelfe vnto deuotion before thou ſhalt be
houſled, but alſo, to keepe thy ſelfe therein
diligentlye after the receauinge of the
Sacrament. And there is no leſſe keeping
requiſite after, then a deuout preparatiō
is needefull before: for a good keepinge
after is the beſt preparation to receaue
newe grace hereafter, and a man ſhall be
the more vndiſpoſed thereto, if he anone,
after he hath receaued the Sacrament,
geue him ſelfe to outward ſolace. Beware
of much ſpeakinge, abide in ſome ſecrete
place, and kepe thee with thy Lorde God,
for thou haſt him that all the worlde may
not take from thee. I am he, to whom
thou muſt geue all, ſo that fro henceforth
thou liue not in thy ſelfe, but onely in me.
            
            
               That a deuout ſoule ſhoulde greatlye deſire
vvith all his heart to be vnited to Chriſte
in this bleſſed Sacrament.
The .13. Chapter.
               
                  VVho ſhal graüt vnto me (Lord
that I maye finde thee onelie,
and opē all mine heart to thee,
and haue thee, as mine heart

deſireth, ſo that no man maye deceaue
me, nor any creature moue me nor drawe
me backe, but that thou onelie ſpeake to
me, and I to thee as a louer is wont to
ſpeake to his beloued, and a freende with
his beloued freende? That is it that I
praye for, that is it that I deſire, that I
may be whollie vnited to thee, and that
I maye withdraw my hart fro all things
create, and through the holie cōmunion,
and ofte ſaying Maſſe, to ſauor and taſte
eternall thinges. Ah Lorde God, when
ſhall I be all vnited to thee, and whollie
be molten into thy loue, ſo that I wholly
forget my ſelfe? Be thou in me, and I in
thee: and graunt, that we maye ſo abide
alwaye together in one. Verilie, thou art
my beloued, elect and choſen before all
other, in whom my ſoule coueteth to
abide all dayes of his life. Thou art the
Lorde of peace, in whom is the ſoueraine
peace and true reſt, without whom is labour
and ſorowe, and infinite miſerye.
Verilie thou art the head God, and thy
counſayle is not with wicked people, but
with meeke men, and ſimple in heart. O
howe ſecrete and howe benigne is thy
holy ſpirite, which to the intēt. thou woldeſt
ſhewe to thy choſen people thy ſwetnes,
haſte vouchedſafe to refreſhe them
with the moſt ſwete bread that deſcēdeth
from heauen Verilie there is none other
nation ſo great, that hath their goddes

ſo nigh vnto them, as thou Lorde God
art to all thy faithfull people, to whom
for their daylie ſolace, and to rayſe their
heartes into the loue of heauenly things,
thou geueſt thy ſelfe as meat and drinke.
O what people be there, that be ſo noble
as the chriſtien men are? or what creature
vnder heauen is ſo muche beloued as the
deuout chriſtien ſoule, into whom God
entreth, and feedeth her with his owne
glorious fleſh and bloude? O ineſtimable
grace, O meruaillous worthines, O loue
without meaſure, ſingulerly ſhewed vnto
man: but what ſhall I yeelde againe to
God for all this grace and high charitie?
Truelie there is nothing more acceptable
to him, then that I whollye geue mine
heart, and inwardly ioyne my ſelfe vnto
him, & then ſhall all mine inward partes
ioye in him, when my ſoule is perfectlie
vnited vnto him. Then ſhall he ſay to me,
If thou wilte be with me, I will be with
thee: And I ſhall anſwere to him againe,
and ſay, Voucheſafe Lorde to abide with
me, and I will gladly abide with thee, for
that is all my deſire, that mine heart
maye be faſt knit vnto thee
without departinge.
Amen.
            
            
               
               Of the brenninge deſire that ſome deuoute
perſons haue had to the body of Chriſte.
The 14. Chapter.
               
                  O Howe great multitude of ſweetnes
is it Lorde that thou haſt hid
for them that dreade thee? But
what is it thē for them that loue
thee? Verilie, when I remember me of
manye deuout perſons that haue come to
this holie Sacrament with ſo great feruoure
of deuotiō, I am then many times
aſtonied and cōfounded in my ſelfe, that
I go vnto thy aultar, and to the table of
thy holy communion ſo coldely, and with
ſo litle feruour, and that I abide ſtill ſo
drie, and without any affection of hart,
and that I am not ſo whollie kindled before
thee my Lorde God, nor ſo ſtronglie
drawen thereby in affection to thee as
manie deuout perſons haue beene, the
which of the great deſire that they haue
had to this holte communion, and for a
feeleable loue of hart that they haue had
therto, might not refrayne them from
weping, but effectuouſly with the mouth
of their heart and bodie together, opened
their mouthes to thee Lorde that art the
liuelie fountaine, becauſe they coulde not
otherwiſe aſſwage, ne tempt their hūger,
but that they tooke thy holie body, which
they did with great ioye and ſpirituall
gredines. Truelie the great brenninge

ſ
                     •
                  ith of them is a probable argument of
thy holy preſence, and they alſo knowe
verily their Lorde in breaking of breade,
whoſe heartes ſo ſtronglye brenneth in
them by the preſence of their Lorde Ieſu,
ſacramentallye then walking with them.
But verily, ſuch affection and deuotion,
and ſo ſtronge feruour and loue be ofte
time far from me. Be thou there fore muſt
ſwete and benigne Lorde Ieſu, mercifull
and meeke vnto me, and graunt me thy
poore ſeruaunt, that I maye feele ſometime
ſome litie part of the harty affection
of thy loue in this holy Communion, that
my fayth maye the more recouer and
amende, & mine hope through thy goodnes
be the more perfect, and my charitie
being once perfectly kindled, and hauing
experience of the heauenlye Manna, doe
neuer fayle. Thy mercy (Lorde) is ſtronge
ynough to graunt to me this grace, that
I ſo muche deſire: and when the time of
thy pleaſure ſhall come, beninglye to viſite
me with the ſpirit of a brenninge feruour
to thee. And though I doe not brenne
in ſo great deſire as ſuche ſpeciall deuout
perſons haue done, yet neuertheleſſe,
I haue deſired the grace to be inflamed
with that brenninge deſire,
praying and deſiring, that I maye
be made partaker of all ſuch thy
feruent louers, and to be numbred
in their holy companye.
            
            
               
               That the grace of deuotion is gotten thorough
meekenes, and for ſakinge of our ſelfe.
The 15. Chapter.
               
                  IT behoueth thee abidinglie to
ſeeke the grace of deuotion, and
without ceaſſing to aſke it, patientlie
and faithfullie to abide
it, thankefullie to receaue it, meekelie to
keepe it, ſtudiouſlie to worke with it, and
whollie to commit to God the time and
maner of his heauenlte viſitalion, till his
pleaſure ſhall be to come vnto thee: and
principallie thou oughteſt to meeke thee,
when thou feeleſt but litle inward deuotion,
but thou ſhalt not be ouermuche
caſte downe therfore, nor inordinatlie be
heauie, for our Lorde geueth many times
in a ſhort moment, that he denied longe
time before: he geueth alſo ſometime in
the ende, that in the beginninge of the
prayer he deferred to graunt. If grace
ſhoulde alwayes anone be graunted, and
ſhould anone be preſent, after the will of
the aſket, it ſhoulde not be well able to be
borne by a weake and feeble perſon, and
therefore in a good hope and meeke patience
the grace of deuotion is to be
abiden and taried for, and thou oughteſt
to impute it to thy ſelfe and to thine
owne ſinnes, when grace is not geuen
thee, or that it is ſecretlie taken from
thee. Sometime it is but a litle thinge

that letteth grace or hideth it awaye,
if it maye be called litle, and not rather
great, that letteth and prohibiteth ſo
good a thinge, but whether it be litle or
great, if thou remoue it, and perfectlye
ouercome it, it ſhall be graunted vnto
thee that thou deſireſt, and forthwith as
thou betakeſt thy ſelfe with all thine hart
to God, and deſireſt neither this thinge
nor that for thine owne pleaſure, but
whollye putteſt thy will to his will, thou
ſhalt finde thy ſelfe vnited to him, and
ſet in a great inwarde peace, for nothing
ſhall ſauour ſo well to thee, nor ſo muche
pleaſe thee, as that the will and pleaſure
of God be fullie dene in thee. VVhoſoeuer
therefore in a pure ſimple harte
lifteth his intent vp to God, and voyde
him ſelfe from all inordinate loue and
diſpleaſure of any worldlye thinge, ſhall
be more apte to receiue grace, and ſhall be
beſt worthy to haue the gift of deuotion.
For there our Lorde geueth his bleſſinge
where he findeth the veſſels empty and
voide. And the more perfectlye a man can
renounce him ſelfe & all worldly things, &
can by deſpiſing of him ſelfe the more die
to him ſelfe, ſo much the ſooner grace ſhal
come, and ſhall the more plenteouſlie enter
into him, and the higher ſhall lifte vp
his hart into God. Then his harte ſhall
ſee and abounde, and ſhall marueile and
be delated in him ſelfe, for the hande of

our Lord is with him, and he hath wholly
put him into his hande for euer. Lo, ſo
ſhall a man be bleſſed that ſeeketh God
with all his hart, and taketh not his ſoule
in vaine. Suche a man in receiuinge this
holye Sacrament deſerueth great grace
of the vniting in God, for he looketh not
to his owne deuotion and conſolation,
but to the glorie and honour of God.
            
            
               That vveſhoulde open all our neceſsities
to Chriſte, and aſke his grace.
The 16. Chapter.
               
                  O Moſte ſweete Lorde, whom I
deſire deuoutly to receiue, thou
knoweſt the infirmitie and neceſſitie
that I am in, in howe
many ſinnes and vices I lye,
howe ofte I am greeued, tempted, troubled,
and defiled, I come to thee for remedie,
and I make my prayer to thee for
comfort, & I ſpeake to him that knoweth
all thinges, to whom all my ſecrete and
inward thoughtes be manifeſt and open,
and the which onelye mayeſt perfectlye
counſayle me & helpe me. Thou knoweſt
what I neede to haue, and howe poore I
am in vertue. Lo I ſtande before thee
poore & naked, aſkinge and deſiringe thy
grace. Refreſh me therefore thy pooreſt
ſeruaunt, begginge for ſpirituall foode,
kindle my hart with the fyre of thy loue,

and illumine my blindnes with the clerenes
of thy preſence: turne all worldlye
thinges into bitternes to me, and all
greeuous thinges & contrarious thinges
into patience, and all create thinges
into deſpiſinge, and into forgettinge of
them. Lifte vp myne harte to thee into
heauen, and ſuffer me not liue vaynlie,
nor to erre in this worlde. Thou Lorde
from henceforth ſhalt be ſweete to me for
euer, for thou art onelye my meate and
drinke, my loue, my ioye, my ſweetnes,
and all my goodnes: woulde God that
thou wouldeſt kindle me, enflame me,
and turne me wholye into thee, that I
maye be made one ſpirite with thee by
grace of inward vniting, and meltinge of
burning loue into thee: ſuffer me not to
depart from thee faſtinge and drye, but
worke with me mercifullye, as thou haſte
ofte times marueillouſlye wrought with
thy beloued ſeruauntes in tyme paſte.
VVhat maruaile were it if I were all inflamed
into thee, and fayled in my ſelfe,
ſith thou art the fyre alwaye burning,
and neuer fayling, the loue purifying
the hartes, and lightning
the vnderſtanding
of all creatures.
            
            
               
               Of the burninge loue and great affection that
vve ſhoulde haue to receyue Chriſte.
The 17. Chapter.
               
                  VVith high deuotiō and burninge
loue, and with all feruour
and affection of the
hart, I deſire to receiue thee
Lord, as many Saintes and
deuout perſōs haue deſired
thee in their communiō, & that moſt ſpeciallie
pleaſed thee in the holines of their
life, & were in moſt burninge deuotion to
thee. O my Lorde God, my loue eternall,
all my goodnes and felicitie without endinge:
I couet to receyue thee with as
great deſire, & as due reuerēce as any holie
man euer did, or might do: & though I
be vnworthie to haue ſuch feelinge in deuotiō
as they had, yet neuertheleſſe I offer
to thee the whole affection of my hart
as verilie as if I onelie had all the burninge
& flaminge deſires that they had, &
ouer that, all that a meeke minde maye
imagine & deſire, I giue and offer to thee
with high reuerēce & worſhip, & inwarde
feruour: & I deſire to reſerue nothinge to
my ſelfe, but me and all mine I offer to
thee in ſacrifice freely and moſt liberally.
And alſo my Lorde God, my creatour
and redeemer, with ſuch affection, reuerence,
laude and honour: with ſuch thankes,
dignitie and loue, and with ſuche

fayth, hope and puritie, I deſire to receaue
thee this daye, as thy moſt holie and
glorious mother the virgin Mary deſired
and receaued thee, when ſhe meekely and
deuoutlie anſwered the Angel that ſhewed
her the miſterie of thy incarnation,
and ſayde: Ecce ancilla domini, fiat ſecundum
verbum tuum, that is to ſaye, Loe, I am the
hand mayd of God, be it done to me after
thy worde: and as thy bleſſed precurſour
Saint Iohn the Baptiſt, moſte excellent
of all Saintes, was glad, and ioyed in
great ioye in the holle ghoſt through thy
preſence, when he was yet in his mothers
wombe, And after when he ſaw thee walkinge
amonge the people, verie meekelie,
and with deuout affection he ſayde: The
fceend of a ſpouſe that ſtandeth and heareth,
ioyeth with great ioye to heare the
voyce of the ſpouſe: and ſo couete I in
great and holie deſires to be inflamed,
and to preſent my ſelfe to thee with all
mine heart, and alſo I offer and yeelde to
thee all the laudes of deuont heartes, the
brenninge affectiōs, exceſſiue thoughtes,
ſpirituall illuminations, and heauenlie
viſions, with all vertues and prayſinges,
done, or to be done by any creature, in
heauē or in earth for me, and for all them
that be cōmitted to my prayer, that thou
mayeſt be worthilie lauded and glorified
for euer. Accept Lorde God my minde,
and the deſires of the manifolde laudes

and bleſſinges, that by me are to thee due
of right, after the multitude of thy greatnes,
more then can be ſpoken. And all
theſe I yelde to thee, and deſire to yelde
to thee euerye daye, and euerye moment,
and with all my deſire and affection
meekelye exhort and praye all heauenlye
ſpirites and all faythfull people, to yelde
with me thankinges and laudes to thee.
And I beſeeche thee that all people, tribes
and touges maye magnifie thy holye
and moſte ſweete name with great ioye
and brenning deuotion, and that all they
that reuerentlie and deuoutlye miniſter
this moſte high Sacrament, or with full
faith receyue it, maye thereby deſerue to
finde before thee thy grace and mercy:
and when they haue obteyned the deuotion
that they deſired, and be ſpirituallye
vnited to thee, and be thereby
well comforted and maruelouſlye
refreſhed, and be departed from
thy heauenly table, that they
will haue me poore
ſinner in their remembraunce.
Amen.
            
            
               
               That a man ſhall not be a curious ſearcher of
this holye Sacrament, but a meeke folovver
of Chriſte, ſubduinge alvvaye his
reaſon to fayth.
The 18. Chapter.
               
                  THou muſt beware of a curious,
and an vnprofitable
ſearching of this moſte profounde
Sacrament, if thou
wilt not be drowned in the
great depth of doubtfulnes,
for he that is the ſearcher of Gods maieſtie
ſhall be anone thruſt out of glorie.
God is of power to worke muche more
then man may vnderſtand, neuertheleſſe
a meeke and an humble ſearchinge of the
truth, readie alwaye to be taught, and to
walke after the teachinges of holye fathers,
is ſufferable. Bleſſed is the ſimplicitie
that leaueth the waye of harde queſtions,
and goeth in the playne and ſtedfaſt
waye of the commaundementes of
God. Manye haue loſt their deuotion, becauſe
they woulde ſearch higher thinges
then perteineth to thē. Faith and a good
life is aſked of thee, and not the highnes
of vnderſtanding, nor the depenes of the
miſteries of God. If thou maye not vnderſtād
nor take ſuch thinges as be with
in thee, howe maieſt thou then comprehend
thoſe thinges that be aboue thee?

Submit thy ſelfe therefore meekelie to
God, and ſubmit alſo thy reaſon to
faith, and the light of knowledge and
true vnderſtandinge ſhall be geuen vnto
thee, as it ſhalbe moſte profitable and neceſſary
for thee. Some be greuouſly tempted
of the fayth, and of the Sacrament,
but that is not to be reputed to them, but
rather to the enemye: therefore care not
for him, nor diſpute not with thy thouhtes,
nor aunſwere not to the doubtes
that thine enemie ſhall laye vnto thee,
but beleue the wordes of God, and beleue
his Saintes & Prophetes, and the wicked
enemye ſhall anone flee awaye fro thee.
And it is ofte times much profitable, that
the ſeruaunt of God ſhoulde feele and
ſuſteine ſuche doubtes for their more
proufe: and cōmonly the enemy tempteth
not vnfaithfull people & ſinners, whom
he hath ſure poſſeſſiō of, but he tempteth
& vexeth in diuers maners the faithfull
and veuout perſons. Go therefore with a
pure and vndoubted faith, and with an
humble reuerence procede to this Sacrament,
and whatſoeuer thou canſt not vnderſtand,
commit it faithfullye to God,
for God will not deceaue thee, but he
ſhall be deceaued that truſteth ouermuch
to him ſelfe. God walketh with the ſimple
perſons, he openeth him ſelfe, and
ſheweth him ſelfe to meeke perſons. He
geueth vnderſtanding to them which are

poore in ſpirite, he openeth the wit to
pure and cleane mindes, and hideth his
grace from curious men and proude men.
Mans reaſon is feeble and weake, and
anone maye be deceyued, but faith is ſtable
and true, and can not be deceyued,
therefore all reaſon and all naturall workinge
muſt folowe faith without further
reaſoning: for faith and loue in this moſt
holy and moſte excellent Sacrament ſurmount
and worke high in ſecrete maner
aboue all reaſon. O the eternal God, and
the Lorde of infinite power doth great
thinges in heauen & in earth, that maye
not be ſerched, for if the workes of God
were ſuche that they might be lightlye
vnderſtanded by mans reaſon, they were
not ſo marueylous and ſo ineſtimable as
they be.
               Here endeth the fourth booke of
the folowinge of Chriſte, the whiche
fourth booke treateth moſte principallye
of the bleſſed Sacrament of the
Aultar.
            
         
         
            
            HERE BEGINNETH A GODLY
Treatiſe, and it is called a notable Leſſon,
otherwiſe it is called the
golden Epiſtle.
            
               
                  Iesu fili Dauid misereremei.
                  O matter Dei memento mei
               
            
            
               The expoſition of the name of
this lytle Booke.
               
                  A Right good and wholſome
Leſſon, profitable vnto all
Chriſtians, aſcribed vnto S.
Bernard, and put among his
workes, I thinke by ſome
vertuous man, that woulde it ſhoulde
thereby haue the more authoritie, and

the rather be reade, and better be borne
awaye: for doubtleſſe, it is a good matter,
and edificatiue vnto all them that haue
zeale and care vnto ſoule health, and deſire
of ſaluation. It is called in the Title
(Notabile documentum) that is to ſaye. A
notable leſſon: And ſome do call it the
golden Epiſtle. It foloweth immediatlie
after a litle worke called Formula honeſtae
vitae, the forme and maner of an honeſt
life, or of honeſt liuing.
               
                  IF you intend to pleaſe God,
and woulde obtaine grace to
fulfill the ſame, two thinges
be vnto you very neceſſarye.
The firſt, you muſt withdrawe
your minde from all worldlie and tranſitorie
thinges, in ſuch maner, as though
you cared not whether any ſuch thinges
were in this worlde or no. The ſeconde
is, that you geue and applye your ſelfe ſo
whollie to God, and haue your ſelfe in
ſuch a wayte, that you neuer doe, ſaye, or
thinke, that you know, ſuppoſe, or beleue
ſhoulde offende or diſpleaſe God, for by
this meane you maye ſooneſt and moſte
readily obtayne and winne his fauor and
grace. In all thinges eſteeme and accōpt
your ſelfe moſte vile and moſte ſimple,
and as verie naught, in reſpect and regarde
of vertue: and thinke, ſuppoſe and
beleeue, that all perſons be good and better

then you be, for ſo ſhall you muche
pleaſe our Lorde. VVhatſoeuer you ſee,
or ſeeme to perceaue in anye perſon, or
yet heare of any chriſtian, take you none
occaſion therein, but rather aſcribe and
applie you all vnto the beſt, and thinke or
ſuppoſe all is done or ſayd for a good intent
or purpoſe, though it ſeeme contrarie:
for mans ſuſpition and light iudgementes
be ſoone and lightlie deceaued or
begiled. Deſpiſe no perſon willinglye, nor
euer ſpeake euill of any perſon, though it
were neuer ſo true that you ſaye. For it
is not lawfull to ſhew in confeſſion the
vice or default of any perſon, except you
might not otherwiſe ſhewe and declare
your owne offence. Speake litle or nothing
vnto your proper & ſelfe laude or
prayſe, though it were true, and vnto
your familier felowe or faythfull frende,
but ſtudie to keepe ſecret and priuie your
vertue, rather then your vice: yet were it
a cruell deede for any perſons to defame
them ſelfe. Be more glad to geue your
eare and hearing vnto the prayſe, rather
then vnto the diſprayſe of any perſon,
and euer beware aſwell of hearinge as
ſpeakinge of detraction: and when you
ſpeake, take good deliberation, and haue
fewe wordes, and let thoſe be true and
good, ſadlie ſet and wiſelie ordred. If any
wordes be ſpoken vnto you of vice or vanitie,
as ſoone as ye may, breake of, and

leaue that talke or communication. And
euer returne, and applie your ſelfe vnto
ſome appointed good and godlie occupation,
bodilie or ghoſtlie. If anye ſodayne
chaunce fall or happen vnto you, or vnto
any of yours, leane not to lightlie therevnto,
or care muche therefore. If it be of
proſperitie, reioyce not muche therein, or
be ouer glad thereof: If it be aduerſitie,
be not ouercaſt or ouerthrowē therwith,
or brought to ſorowe or ſadnes, thanke
God of all, and ſet litle thereby. Repute
all thinges tranſitorie as of litle price or
valure. Geue euer moſt thought and care
vnto thoſe thinges, that may profite and
promote the ſoule. Flye and auoyde the
perſons and places of muche ſpeeche, for
better it is to keepe ſilence, thē to ſpeake.
Keepe the times and places of ſilēce preciſelie,
ſo that you ſpeake not without
reaſonable & vnfained cauſe. The times
of ſilence in religion be theſe. From collation
vnto Maſſe be ended after the houre
of tierce: from the firſt grace in the fratour
vnto the end of the later grace. And
from the beginninge of euenſonge, vnto
grace be ended after ſupper, or els (Benedicite)
after the common beuer. The places
of ſilence be the church and the clauſtre,
the fratour and the dortour. If you
be ſlaundred, and do take occaſion at the
fault or offence of any perſon, then loke
well vpon your ſelfe, whether you be in

the ſame default ſometime your ſelfe, and
then haue compaſſion vpon your brother
or ſiſter. If there be none ſuche default in
you, thinke verily, and beleue there maye
be, and then do as (in like caſe) you would
be done vnto. And thus, as in a glaſſe ye
maye ſee and beholde your ſelfe. Grudge
not, ne complaine vpon any perſon for
any maner cauſe, except you ſee and perceaue
by large coniecture, that you may
profite and edify thereby. Neither denie,
nor affirme your minde or opinion ſtiflye
or extremelie, but that your affirmation,
denegation, or doubt be euer powdred
with ſalte, that is to ſaye, wiſedome diſcretion
and patience. Vſe not in any wiſe
to mocke, checke, or ſcorne, ne yet to
laugh or ſmile but right ſeldome. And
that alwaye to ſhew reuerence or louing
maner, light countenance or looſe behauiour
becōmeth not a ſadde perſon. Let
your communication be ſhort, and with
fewe perſons, alway of vertue, learning,
or good and Chriſtian edification, and
euer with ſuch warines, that no perſon
in thinges doubtfull may take any authoritie
of your wordes or ſentence. Let
all your paſtime be ſpent in bodilie labours,
good and profitable, or els godlie
in ſtudie, or that paſſeth all, in holie and
deuout prayer, ſo that the hart and mind
be occupied with the ſame you ſpeake.
And when you praye for any certain perſons

remember their degree, eſtate and
condition. For a forme and order of your
prayer, this maye be a good and readye
waye, to folowe the order of the ſixe gramaticall
caſes: The nominatiue, the genitiue,
the datiue, the accuſatiue, the vocatiue,
and the ablatiue. The nominatiue,
that is, firſte to praye for your ſelfe,
that you maye haue ghoſtly ſtrength and
conſtancie, that you fall not into any
deadlye offence by frayltie, and that you
maye haue right knowledge of God by
faith, and of your ſelfe by due conſideration
of your eſtate and condition, and of
the lawes of God for your conduct and
countenance: and thirdly, that you maye
haue grace and good will, accordinge to
the ſame ſtrength and knowledge, and
that hauinge vnto God a reuerēt dreade,
you neuer offende in thought, worde or
deede, but that you may euer loue him for
him ſelfe, & all his creatures in due order
for him, and in him. The ſecōde is the genitiue
caſe. Then muſt you praye for your
genitors, your progenitours and parēts,
that is to ſaye, your fathers and mothers
ſpirituall and carnall, as your ghoſtlye
fathers or ſpirituall ſouuerains, your
godfathers, your godmothers, your natural
father and mother, your graundfathers
and graundmothers, your brothers
and ſiſters, and all your kin. In the third
place is the datiue caſe. There muſt you

praye for benefactours, good doers, of
whom you haue receaued any maner of
giftes ſpirituall or temporall, vnto the
welth of your ſoule or bodie. In the
fourth place is the accuſatiue caſe, where
you ſhoulde praye for your enemyes, ſuch
perſons as by any meanes haue anoyed,
hurt, or greeued you, either ghoſtly or bodilie,
that is to ſaye, in your ſoule or maners
by anye ſuggeſtion, intiſinge, euill
counſaile, or euill example. In your fame
or good name by detraction, backbiting,
or ſlaundering, or yet by familier companie.
For a perſon commonlie is reputed
and ſuppoſed to be of ſuch condition, as
they be, with whom he hath conuerſatiō
and companie. And for them that hurt
your bodie, either by ſtrokes, or by anye
other occaſion haue hindred the ſtate and
health thereof. And lykewiſe of your
worldlie goodes or poſſeſſions. For all
theſe maner of enemies muſt you praye,
that our Lord God would forgeue them
as you doe, and as you forgeuen woulde
be, and that they may come to right charitie
and peace. The fifth caſe is called
vocatiue, that is to ſaye, the calling caſe,
where you conuenientlie maye call, crie,
and pray vnto our Lorde for all maner of
perſons that be out of the ſtate of grace,
either by infidelitie, as Turkes, Sarazens,
and ſuche other: or els by errour, as
all maner of heretikes: or els by anye

deadly ſinne or offence to God. Praye for
all theſe maner of perſons, that they may
come vnto the right waye of their ſaluation.
In the ſixte and laſt place is the
ablatiue caſe, where thou muſt praye for
al them that be taken out of this life, and
that died or paſſed the ſame life in charitie,
and that nowe haue neede of prayer.
In the which you maye keepe a forme of
the ſame order that is before, that is to
ſay: In ſteede of the nominatiue, where
you prayed for your ſelfe, you may nowe
praye for all thoſe that doe bide in paine
for anye default or offence done by
your example or occaſion: and for the genitiue
in the ſecond place, for your parentes,
and all your kinne departed this
life. And in the thirde place for the datiue,
praye for your benefactours paſſed.
And for the accuſatiue in the fourth place,
you maye praye for them that liue in
payne, for any occaſion or enſample that
they gaue vnto you. And in the fifte place
for the vocatiue, praye for all them that
haue greateſt paines in purgatorie, and
leaſt helpe here by the ſuffrage of prayers.
And for the ablatiue in the ſixte and laſte
place, pray for all ſoules in generall. And
that you may be the more apte to praye,
call three thinges ofte times to remembrance,
that is to ſaye, what you haue
bene, what you be, and what you ſhall be.
Firſt, by reaſon of your bodie, you were

conceaued of the moſte filthie abhominable
matter of man, ſhameful to be ſpoken,
farre more vile then the ſlutche or ſlime
of the earth, and after borne in a ſinfull
ſoule, & purged onely by grace. And nowe
(as vnto the bodie) you be a muckheape
or dunghill of filth, more vyle then any
vpon earth, if you remember what doth
iſſue daylie, and come forth out of the
meates of your bodie. And your ſoule is
daylie in ſome ſinne, or (at the leaſt) full
like to be. VVhat you ſhall be as vnto
your bodie, you maye ſee in experience,
wormes meate, and earth againe. And
what ſhall become of your ſoule, no man
in this world can aſſure you. To remember
then the ioyes of heauen, and paines
of hell, and that both be infinite, endles,
and without rebate, but both euer encreſinge
and neuer ceaſing, neuer haue eaſe
nor teſt, but euer continue & euerlaſtinge.
To remember then, I ſaye, theſe thinges
may greatly moue you to haue your ſelfe
in a good awayte, and to ſtudie howe you
may auoyd the one, & obteyne the other.
Remember ſpecially howe great a loſſe it
is to looſe heauen, and howe vncomfortable
gaines to winne helle, and howe
ſoone and howe lightlie either of them
may be gotten or loſt. VVhen any thinge
then of aduerſitie, hurt, or diſpleaſure
happen vnto you, thinke thē or imagine,
that if you were in hell, you ſhould haue

the ſame diſpleaſure and manye worſe.
And ſo to auoyde thoſe, you ſhall here the
better ſuffer, and for our Lorde the more
patientlie beare all theſe that nowe be
preſent, or any that may come hereafter.
And in like maner, if any good proſperitie
or pleaſure happen vnto you, thinke
then that if you were in heauen, you
ſhould haue that pleaſure and many m
                     •
                  
excellent ioyes. And ſo for the feruent deſire
of thoſe ioyes, you ſhall ſet litle by
any worldlie comfort or pleaſure. A good
contemplation therefore may it be vnto
you in feaſtes of holie Saintes, to thinke
and record howe great paines they ſuffered
here for the loue of our Lorde, and
howe ſhort theſe were, and howe ſoone
paſſed: and then againe how marueylous
reward they had therefore in ioye and
bliſſe euerlaſtinge. So the troubles and
tormentes of good perſons be ſoone and
ſhortlie gone and ended, and the ioyes
and pleaſures of ſinful perſons doe ſoone
fade and f
                     ••
                  e for euer. The good perſons
for their troubles ſuffered here vppon
earth, doe get and win eternall and euerlaſting
glorie, which the euill perſons doe
loſe. And contrarie, theſe euill and ſinfull
perſons for their ioy and pleaſures here,
do receiue by exchaunge eternall and
euerlaſtinge ſhame & rebuke, with paine
and wo vnſpeakeable. VVhen ſoeuer thē
you be diſpoſed to ſluggiſhneſſe, or to be

drowſie, remiſſe in prayers, or dull in
deuotion, then take this litle worke, or
els ſome other good Treatiſe, and read
therin, and euer note well the contentes
thereof, and what is meant thereby. And
if you be not thereby deliuered or eaſed
thereof, then ſhift vnto ſome other worke
or occupation, ſo that euer you auoyde
ydlenes, and all vaine paſtimes, which in
dede is loſſe of time. And then remember,
that thoſe that nowe bide in paine, either
in hell, or yet in purgatorie, for ſuche times
ſo paſſed or loſt, had rather then all
the world haue ſuch time to redeme their
paines by, as you maye haue if you will.
Time then vnto al perſons wel occupied,
is verie precious and deare. Beware well
therefore, howe you ſpend it or paſſe it,
for you can neuer reuoke it nor call it
backe. If the time paſſe you by trouble &
vexation, thinke they be happie and gracious,
that be paſt this wretched life, and
nowe in bliſſe, for they ſhall neuer haue
any ſuche miſerie. And when you feele a
comfort or conſolation ſpirituall, thanke.
God thereof, & thinke the damned ſoules
ſhall neuer haue any ſuche pleaſure. And
thus let this be for your exerciſe in the
datiue. At night when you go to reſt, firſt
make accompt with your ſelfe, and remember
howe you haue ſpent or paſſed
the daye and time that was geuen you tobe
vſed in vertue, and howe you haue beſtowed

your thoughtes, your wordes, &
your workes. And if you finde no great
thing amiſſe, geue the whole laude and
praiſe vnto our Lorde God. And if you
perceaue cōtrarie, that you haue miſpent
any part thereof, be ſorie therefore, and
beſeech our Lorde of mercy & forgeuenes,
and promiſe, and verilie purpoſe to make
amendes the next daye. And if you haue
oportunitie thervpon, it ſhall be full conuenient
for you to be cōfeſſed on the next
morow, and ſpecially, if the matter done,
ſaide or thought by deliberate conſent, do
greuouſlie weigh & worke with a grudge
in your conſcience, then woulde I aduiſe
you neuer to eate nor drinke, till ye be
diſcharged thereof, if you maye conuenientlie
get a goſtlie father. Nowe for a
concluſion of this worke, put before you,
as by caſe or ymagination two large
Cities, one full of trouble, turmoyle and
miſerie, & let that be hel. The other Citie
ful of ioy, gladnes, comfort and pleaſure,
and let that be heauen. Loke wel on them
both, for in both be many dwellers and
great companye. Then caſt and thinke
within your ſelfe, what thing here might
ſo pleaſe you, that you ſhoulde choſe the
worſe citie, or what thing ſhould diſpleaſe
you on the other part, whereby you
ſhoulde withdrawe your ſelfe from that
vertue that might conuey and bring you
vnto the other citie. And when you haue

ſatudied well here vpon, and can nothinge
finde, I dare well aſſure you, if you keepe
well the precepts and counſailes of this
litle leſſon, you ſhall find the right way,
for the holie ghoſte will inſtruct & teache
you, where you be not ſufficient of your
ſelues, ſo you indeuor and geue diligence
to beare awaye and folowe that here is
taught. Reade it euerie weake once or
twiſe, or oftener if you will. And where
you profite, geue the thankes, laude, and
prayſe vnto our Lorde God, and moſte
ſweete Sauiour Ieſu Chriſte, who ſende
you his mercie and grace, that alwaye
liueth God worlde without ende. Amen.
            
            
               This leſſon was brought vnto me in
Engliſhe of an olde tranſlation, rough and
rude, with requeſt to amende it. I thought
leſſe labour to write new the whole, which
I haue done accordinge to the meaning of
the authour, though not worde for worde:
and in diuers places added ſome thinges
folowinge vpon the ſame, to make the
matter more ſentētious and full. I beſeeche
you take all vnto the beſt, and praye for
the olde wretched brother of Sion, Richard
VVhitforde.
            
         
         
            
            A ſpirituall glaſſe.
            
               REade diſtinctlie, praye deuoutlie,
ſigh deepelie, ſuffer
paciētly, meeke you lowlye,
geue no ſentence haſtelie,
ſpeake but rathe, and that
truelie, preuēt your ſpeache
diſcretly, do your deedes in charitie, tēptations
reſiſte ſtronglie, breake his heade
ſhortlie, weepe bitterlie, haue compaſſion
tenderlie, doe good workes buſilie, loue
perſeuerantlie, loue hartelie, loue faythfullie,
loue God alonelie, and all other
for hym charitablie, loue in aduerſitie,
loue in proſperitie, thinke alway of loue,
for loue is none other but God him ſelfe.
Thus to loue bringeth the louer to loue
without ende. Amen.
         
         
            
            THE RVLES OF A CHRISTIAN
lyfe, made by Iohn Picus the elder
Erle of Mirandula.
            
               FIrſt, if to man or woman the
waye of vertue doth ſeeme
harde or painefull, bycauſe
we muſt nedes fight againſt
the fleſhe, diue
                  •
               l, and the
worlde, let him or hir call to
remembraunce, that whatſoeuer life they
will choſe accordinge to the world, many
aduerſities, incommodities, muche heauines
and labour are to be ſuffred.
            Moreouer let them haue in remembraunce,
that in wealth and worldlye
poſſeſſions is muche and longe contencion,
laborious alſo, and therwith vnfruitfull,
wherein trauaile is the concluſion
or ende of labour, and finallye
paine euerlaſting, if thoſe thinges be not
well ordered and charitablie diſpoſed.
            Remembre alſo, that it is very foliſhenes,
to thinke to come vnto heauen by
any other meane than by the ſayed battaile,
conſideringe that our heade and
maiſter Chriſte did not aſcende vnto heanen
but by his paſſion: And the ſeruaunt
ought not to be in better eſtate or condicion
than his mayſter or ſoueraine.
            Furthermore conſider that this battayle

ought not to be grudged at, but to
be deſired and wiſhed for, all though
thereof no price or rewarde myght enſue
or happen, but onelie that thereby we
might be comfourmed or ioyned to Chriſt
out God & maiſter. VVherefore as often
as in reſiſtinge any tȳptacion thou doeſt
withſtande any of thy ſences or wittes,
thinke vnto what part of Chriſtes paſſiō
thou mayeſt applie thy ſelfe or make thy
ſelfe like: As reſiſtinge glotonie, whiles
thou doeſt puniſhe thy taſt or appetite:
remembre that Chriſte receyued in his
drinke, ayſell mixte with the gall of a
beaſte, a drinke moſt vnſauerie and lothſome.
            VVhan thou withdraweſt thy hand
from vnlawfull takinge or keepinge of
any thinge, which liketh thine appetite,
remembre Chriſtes handes as they were
faſte nayled vnto the tree of the Croſſe.
And reſiſtinge of pride, thinke on hym,
who beinge verie God almightie, for thy
ſake receyued the fourme of a ſubiecte,
and humbled hym ſelfe vnto the moſte
vile and reprochefull death of the Croſſe.
And whan thou arte tēpted with wrath:
Remembre that he, whiche was God,
and of all men the moſt iuſt or righteous,
whan he behelde him ſelfe mocked, ſpitte
on, ſcourged, and puniſhed with all diſpites
and rebukes, and ſet on the Croſſe
amonge errant theues, as if he hym ſelfe

were a falſe harlot, he not withſtandinge
ſhewed neuer token of indignation, or
that he were greeued, but ſufferinge all
thinges with wonderfull pacience, aunſwered
all men moſte gentillie. In this
wiſe, if thou peruſe all thinges one after
an other, thou mayeſt finde, that there
is no paſſion or trouble, that ſhall not
make the in ſome parte conformable or
lyke vnto Chriſte.
            Alſo put not thy truſte in mans helpe,
but in the onelie vertue of Chriſte Ieſu,
which ſayed: Truſt well, for I haue vainquiſhed
the worlde. And in an other place
he ſayth: The prince of this worlde is
caſte out therof. VVherfore lette vs truſt
by his onelie vertue, to vainquiſhe the
worlde, and to ſubdue the diuell. And
therefore ought we to aſke his helpe by
our owne prayers and by the prayers of
his bleſſed Sainctes.
            Remembre alſo, that as ſone as thou
haſt vainquiſhed one temptacion, alwaye
an other is to be loked for: The diuell
goeth alwaye about and ſeeketh for hym
whom he would deuoure. VVherefore we
ought to ſerue diligentlie and be euer in
feare, and to ſaye with the prophete: I
will ſtande alwaye at my defence.
            Take heede moreouer, that not onely
thou be not vainquiſhed of the diuell,
that tēpteth the, but alſo that thou vainquiſhe
and ouercome him. And that is not

onelie whan thou doeſt no ſinne, but alſo
whan of that thinge wherein he tempted
thee, thou takeſt occaſiō for to doe good.
As if he offreth to the ſome good acte to
be done to the intent that thereby thou
mayeſt fall into vainglorie: forthwith
thou thinkynge it, not to be thy deede
or worke, but the benefite or rewarde of
God, humble thou thy ſelfe, and iudge
the to be vnkinde vnto God in reſpecte
of his manifolde benefites.
            As often as thou doeſt fight, fight as
in hope to vainquiſhe, and to haue at the
laſt perpetuall peace. For that paraduenture
God of his abundant grace ſhall
gyue vnto the, and the diuell beinge confuſed
of thy victorie, ſhall retourne no
more againe. But yet whan thou haſte
vainquiſhed, beare thy ſelfe ſo as if thou
ſhouldeſt fight againe ſhortelie. Thus
alwaye in bataile, thou muſte thinke on
victorie: & after victorie, thou muſt prepare
the to bataile immediatlie againe.
            Allthough thou feeleſt thy ſelfe well
armed and readie, yet flee (not withſtandinge)
all occaſions to ſinne. For as the
wiſe man ſaith: VVho loueth perille, ſhal
therein periſhe.
            In all temptacions reſiſt the beginninge,
and beate the Children of Babilon
againſt the ſtone, whiche ſtone is Chriſte,
and the children be euill thoughtes and
imaginacions. For in longe continuynce

of ſinne, ſeldome worketh any medicine
or remedie.
            Remembre, that although in the ſaied
conflict of temptacion the bataile ſemeth
to be verie daungerous: yet conſider how
muche ſweter it is to vainquiſhe temptacion,
than to folowe ſinne, whereto
ſhe inclineth the, whereof the ende is repentaunce.
And herein many be foule deceiued,
whiche compare not the ſwetenes
of victorie to the ſwetenes of ſinne, but
onelye compareth bataile to pleaſure.
Notwithſtandinge a man or woman,
whiche hath a thouſande times knowen
what it is to gyue place to temptacion,
ſhoulde ones aſſaie, what it is to vainquiſhe
temptacion.
            If thou be tempted thinke thou not
therefore that God hath forſaken the, or
that he ſetteth but littell by the, or that
thou arte not in the ſight of God, good
or perfecte: but remēbre, that after Saint
Paule had ſeene God, as he was in his
diuinitie, and ſuche ſecreate miſteries as
be not lawfull for any man to ſpeake or
reherce, he for all that ſuffred temptacion
of the fleſh, wherewith God ſuffred him
to be tempted, leaſt be ſhoulde be aſſaulted
with pride. VVherein a man ought to
conſider, that Saint Paule, whiche was
the pure veſſell of election, and rapt into
the thirde heauen, was notwithſtādinge
in perill to be proude of his vertues, as

he ſayth of him ſelfe. VVherfore aboue all
temptacions man or woman ought to
arme thē moſte ſtronglie againſt the tēptacion
of pride, ſince pride is the rote of
all miſchiefe, againſt the which the onelie
remedie is to thinke alwaye that God
humbled him ſelfe for vs vnto the Croſſe.
And moreouer that death hath ſo humbled
vs whether we will or no, that our
bodies ſhall be the meate of wormes lothſome
and venimouſe.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   