
      
         
            
            ¶ THE NEW found vvorlde, or Antarctike, wherin is contained wōderful and ſtrange things, as well of humaine creatures, as Beaſtes, Fiſhes, Foules, and Serpents, Trées, Plants, Mines of Golde and Siluer: garnished with many learned aucthorities, trauailed and written in the French tong, by that excellent learned man, maſter ANDREVVE THEVET.
            And now newly tranſlated into Engliſhe, wherein is reformed the errours of the auncient Coſmographers.
            ¶Imprinted at London, by Henrie Bynneman, for Thomas Hacket.
            And are to be ſold at his ſhop in Poules Church yard, at the ſigne of the Key.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the right honorable Sir Henrie Sidney, Knight of the moſt Noble order of the Garter, Lorde Preſident of Wales, and Marches of the ſame, Lord Deputie Generall of the Queenes Maieſties Realme of Ireland. Your humble Orator Thomas Hacket wiſheth the fauoure of God, long and happy life, encreaſe of honor, continuall health and felicitie.
            
               
                  NOne are more to be commended (right Honorable) than thoſe who wer the firſt inuenters and finders out of Artes and Sciences, wherwith mankind is beautified and adorned, without the which giftes he were but naked, barbarous and brutiſh, yea and a ſeruile creature. It was not for nothing that the elders in times paſt did ſo muche celebrate the inſtituters of thoſe things: as Herodotus writeth, that the Egiptians before all other men firſt foūd out the yere by the courſe of the Planets, and deuided it into .xij. monthes. Diodorus aſsigned it to the Thebanes, the which ſtandeth well with the opinion of Herodotus, bicauſe the Thebanes be a nation of Egipt. As Numa added to the yere Ianuary and February, Romulus ordred Marche, Aprill, and May, Auguſtus an other part, and ſo Iulius Caeſar made vp

the perfect yere, as Polidorus Vergilius witneſſeth in his boke De inuentoribus rerum. But how much praiſe is to be giuen to ſuch as haue inuented good lawes & ſtatutes for the brideling of the Barbarous and wicked, and for the maintayning and defending of the iuſt? As we reade that Iſis ariuing in Egipt, brideled that Countrey, and ordained good common wealths. How did the Scicilians honor Ceres, for that ſhe was the firſt inuenter of wheat ſowing, with other innumerable? Among all other, none in my iudgement is more worthier to be praiſed, thā the firſt finders out how to make ſhips and veſſels nauigable for the ſea. Strabo writeth that Minos king of Crete, had the firſt rule of the ſea. But Diodorus ſayth, that Neptunus had the Empire of it afore him, for he inuented the feat in rowing of boates, and made a nauie, and was made Admirall of it by his father Saturnus, and Plinie reporteth that King Erichthas deuiſed boates firſt, and rowed in them on the Red ſea. Some ſay they were ordained by the Troyans in the narow ſeas called Helleſpontus: ſome thinke they were inuented in the Engliſh ſea. Danus as ſome write, was the firſt that vſed any ſhip when he ſailed out of Egipt into Grece. But for more aſsurance, what ſo euer their opinions be, as touching the beginning hereof, (as we rede in the holy ſcripture) Noe was the firſt inuenter or maker thereof, before the floud. The ingenious induſtry of man hath brought many things to a notable and good perfection, as well in Coſmography and Nauigation, as in any other arte or ſcience: for no doubt, (as it apereth by this trauaile or worke of Coſmography & ſuch like,) the olde ancient writers, as Ptholomeus and others, were deceiued, in that they iudged this Newe found Worlde, or the Weſt part to be vnhabitable. How muche are they to be praiſed, that for their Countrey ſake refuſe no imminent perill, leauing the Pleaſaunt bedde of Delicacie, and the ſeate or cradle of Senſualitie, their landes and goodes, their Wiues

and children, which in dede, are deareſt vnto them, to abandō themſelues and their ſweteſt liues to the fauoure of the boyſtrous ſeas, to the hap of the vnconſtante windes, to the chayre of fortune, and finally to a thouſande imminent euils, onely to encreaſe the fame and good renowme of their countrey. Among the which I might rehearſe, that this most noble Seignorie and Territorie of England hath of late yeares gotte the fame and renowme, that it hath had in times past, by Nauigation lately atempted by many and ſundrie of our countreymen, (God graunte them ſtill to go forwarde and encreaſe in thoſe and ſuch like enterpriſes, to Gods glory and the benefite of this common Wealth.) But alas, the greater number of mē are giuen to idelneſse or ſenſualitie, as if I mighte ſay nowe: where are the Tiberians, the Metelli, the Emili, the Marij and the Catones? Among the number of a great many, and in the middeſt of aboundance and pleaſure, we meditate nothing elſe but onely ſecuritie, almoſte abhorring to heare the name of trauell or payne, by which it may be ſayde to vs, in a manner, as it was ſayde of Haniball, after the battell Traſimenius or Cannas, that his wintering at Capua in pleaſure and delicacie was more noyſom and hurtfull vnto him, than either of the battels before named. We reade after that Alexander had vanquiſhed almoſt the thirde parte of the world, hauing ouerthrowē the mighty King Porrus one of the ſtrongest Kings of India, with whom (as rehearſeth Plutarche in the life of Alexander) he among all other had moſte to doe, hauing alſo ſubdued vnto him the mighty King Darius, hearing the Philoſopher Anaxagoras, in a certayne lecture, holding this opinion, that there were Worldes out of number, therewith he burste out ſodaynely into weeping, his friendes moued with this ſight, demaunded whether any miſhap had fallen vnto him mete to weepe for or no, he ſayde theſe wordes: Oh, haue I not good cauſe to weepe trowe ye, that

there being worlds innumerable, I am not yet come to be full Lorde of one? of whom I gather the inceaſable ſtomake, glory and renowme, how little he estemed him ſelfe and his Kingdoms, without the name of victorious and mighty. Among and aboue all (as affirmeth Plutarchus) he estemed the Ilia
                     •
                  
                of Homer, bicauſe in the ſame was declared the excellent prowes of Achilles. Thus (right honorable) we ſee, the valiant and curagious perſonages of the world haue brought to paſse many excellent enterpriſes, ſo that their fame ſhall neuer dye, atcheued as well by ſea as by lande, as this worthy traueller Andrewe Theuit, in this his Nauigation of the New found World, which I haue dedicated vnto your honor, as a tokē of my good will, the which after your great & waighty affaires, it may pleaſe you to vſe, and to pardō this my raſh enterpriſe, wherein I am enboldned to prefer this towards you, as a thing very rare, and of ſuch exquiſite doing, as before this time the like hath not ben heard of, whoſe annotations therin be ſuch, as no Coſmographers hereto before haue done the like: deſiring your honor ſo to accepte the ſame, as the good will of him that gaue it. And thus I commit your good Lordſhip to the tuition of God, who preſerue you and all yours in health and eternall felicitie. Amen.
            
               
                  Your Lordſhips moſte humble, Thomas Hacket.
            
         
         
            
            ¶An Admonition to the Reader.
            
               I Doubt not gentle Reader, but that the deſcription of this preſent hiſtorie wil make thée to wonder, as well bicauſe of the varietie of things that herein then mayſt Reade, as alſo of many others whiche at the firſte wil ſeme vnto thée rather monſtrous than naturall. But after that thou haſt ſoberly wayed & conſidered the great effects of our mother dame nature, I doe ſurely beleue yt ſuch admiratiōs ſhal haue no more place in thée. Alſo let it not ſeme to thée ſtrāge the ſetting forth of many ſtrāge trées, as Palme trées and others, with beaſts of the fielde and foules of the Ayre, the which are cleane contrarie to the ſetting forth of our Coſmographers and Anciente writers, who for bicauſe that they haue not ſene the places, and for the ſmal experience and knowledge that they had, did greatly erre. But if thou herein ſtande in doubt, then thoſe that haue trauelled thether, and thoſe Indians that were brought frō thence, can affirme al things herein contayned to be true. Furthermore if that there be here in this booke any wordes that ſeme to thée rude or il placed, thou ſhalt therefore accuſe the feuer and death, (ye feuer) which hath ſo kept or cleaned to the Author ſince his returne home, that he had no leaſure to peruſe his boke before that it came to the Printer, being prouoked to deliuer it at the commaundement of the Cardinall of Sens: and death which happened to Ambroſe de la porte, a good ſtudent and well ſene in the Frenche tong, who had taken vpō him the whole charge of this preſent boke. Notwithſtanding gentle Readers, our good will herein hath not bene wanting, onely wiſhing for recompence, that it may be agreable to thée. Farewell.
         
         
            
            
               In prayſe of the Author.
               THe fartheſt ſcope of heauen and earth alſo,
               The ſubtile ſtremes incloſed in the grounde,
               The mighty Mines of Metals that doe gro
               In lurking vaynes, that hidden are profounde,
               The Criſtall pearle, the Diamond ſo fayre,
               The floting fiſh of diuers kindes of hew,
               Of diuers ſoiles, to which thou mayſt repayre,
               Of other landes that yet to vs be new,
               Hath Theuet here through trauell his and payne,
               Educted forth, to ſatisfie thy minde,
               Who well deſerues thy thankefull ſpeech to gayne,
               As ſingle eye of iudgement thyne ſhall finde.
               Therefore as craues this his deſerued ſtile,
               So of his worke let iudgement thyne procede,
               Who of good will this libell did compile,
               To further thee, that tooke the ſame to rede.
            
            
               IN THEVETVM NOVI ORBIS peragratorem & deſcriptorem, Io. Auratus, literarum Graecarum Regius profeſſor.
               AVre tenus, ſed non pedibus, nec nauibus vllis,
               Plurimus & terras, menſus & est maria
               Multa tamen non nota maris terrae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  ue relicta
               His loca, nec certis teſtificata notis.
               At maria & terras pariter vagus iſte Theuetus
               Et viſu, & menſus nauibus & pedibus.
               Pignora certa refert longarum haec ſcriptae viarum,
               Ignoti
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  ue orbis curſor & author adeſt.
               
                  Ʋix quae audita alijs, ſubiecta fidelibus edit
               Hic oculis, terra ſospes ab Antipodum.
               Tantum alijs hic Coſmograephis Coſmographus anteit,
               Auditu quanto certior eſt oculus.
               
                  Ʋale in Chriſto.
            
         
         
            
            ¶To my Lord the Right reuerend Cardinall of Sens, keper of the great ſeales of France: Andrew Theuet wiſheth peace and felicitie.
            
               
                  MY good Lorde, being ſufficiently enformed, (how greatly) after the moſte commendable and no leſſe great and paynfull exerciſe, to the which it pleaſed the King to employe and beſtowe your prudencie (& forcaſting witt) you take pleaſure not onely to reade, but alſo to ſee and taaſte, ſome fayre Hiſtorie, the which among ſo many cares, might recreat your ſpirite and giue it a delectable libertie of his moſte graue and carefull buſineſſe. I haue boldened my ſelfe to preſent vnto you this my diſcourſe of a longer farre voyage made into India America, otherwiſe by vs named Fraunce Antartike, being partly peopled and partly diſcouered by our Pilotes, a land which at this day may be called the fourth parte of the vvorlde, not onely by the withdrawings of our orizons, as by the diuerſitie of nature of beſts, and temperatneſſe of the ayre of the countrey. Alſo for that none heretofore hath ſought it out, ſuppoſing al Coſmographers

(yea perſuading with themſelues) that the world was lymitted in that which the elders to vs had ſhewed. And although that this worke ſemeth to me of it ſelfe to be very litle to be offered before the eyes of your Lordſhip, notwithſtanding, the greatneſſe of your name will extol the baſeneſſe of my worke: ſeing alſo that I am aſſured wel of your wonted clemēcie, vertue, and deſire to heare wonderfull things, that eaſily you will iudge howe that my intention doeth tende to no other ende but onely to make you vnderſtand, that I haue no other delyght than to offer vnto you that thing, of the which you may draw and receiue ſome contentation, and wherein ſometimes, you ſhalbe eaſed of the great and troubleſome affayres which are offered in thys degree and office, that you holde. For there is no mind or ſpirit be it neuer ſo conſtant, but that ſometymes is troubled with the quicke diſpatch, graue and weighty affaires of a common weale. Therefore it is needefull ſometimes to ordayne as the learned Phiſition doth to a pacient or ſicke body, ſome chaunge of meates to recreate the appetite of them which by their infirmitie and ſickneſſe, cannot broke nor taſte one kind of meate continually, be it neuer ſo pleaſant.
            This therefore is the cauſe why the ancient Philoſophers and others did oftentimes withdrawe themſelues from being wrapped in or charged with the publike affayres. As alſo the

great Orator Cicero witneſſeth to haue abſented him ſelfe many tymes from the Senate of Rome, (to the great diſpleaſure of the cytizens) for to remayne in his countreyhouſe to be delighted in the pleſant and Harmonicall melodie of the birdes. Seing then that among oures, as he among the Romaynes, for your ſingular erudition, prudencie, and eloquence, you are as chiefe and principall miniſter of the triumphant common weale of Fraunce: and ſuch a one as deſcribeth Plato in his common weale, that is to know, great Lorde, and a louer of vertue and ſcience, therefore it is not without reaſon to imitate and folow him in this point. Euen ſo (my good Lorde) as returning all weake and wery of ſo long a voyage, I was by you firſt of your grace receiued and welcomed home, which gaue me to vnderſtand and know, that you are the ſingular patron of vertue and of all thoſe, that folowe it alſo to my iudgement, I thinke I could not direct this my little labour to a better than to you, the which if it pleaſe you to receiue ſo beningly as with a good & affectioned will I do preſent and direct it, and alſo to reade and peruſe it, you ſhal find in my opinion wherin to recreate your ſpirites, and to holde me yours for euer. Although that already for many cauſes I feele my ſelfe greatly bound and holdē to do moſt humble and obedient ſeruice to your lordſhip: to whom I beſech the creator to giue all good lucke and proſperitie.
         
         
            
            ¶A Preface to the Reader.
            
               
                  COnſidering vvith my ſelfe hovv much the long experiēce of things, & faithfull obſeruation of many countries and nations, alſo their orders and maner of lyfe, bringeth or cauſeth perfection to man, although there were no exerciſe more cōmendable by the which a man may ſufficiently decke his ſpirite with all kinde of Heroicall vertue and ſcience: biſide my firſt & formal Nauigation into the countrey of Leuant, in Grecia, in Turkie, Egypte, and Arabia, the which in times paſte I haue put to light, I haue againe vnder the protection and ſauegard of the great gouernor of the vniuerſal worlde, ſeing it hath pleaſed him to ſhew me ſo much fauor being left to the diſcretion and mercy of one of the moſt vnconſtant Elements, & leaſt aſſured that is among the reſt, with ſmall veſſelles of wood ſo fraile that many times there was more hope of death than of life, for to ſayle toward the Pole Antartike, the which was neuer diſcouered nor found out by the elders in times paſt, as it appereth by the writings of Ptolomeus and others, alſo ours of Septentrion, to the Equinoctiall, and therefore it was thought to be vnhabited. And we ſayled ſo long that at the laſte we came to India America, aboute the Capricorne, a mayn land of good temperatneſſe and inhabited, as we will particularly & more at large hereafter declare, the which I haue taken in hande at the

inſtant requeſt of many great perſonages, of whō the geſtes more than Heroical & high enterpriſes celebrated by the Hiſtories, cauſe them to lyue for euer in perpetual honor and immortall glory. What hath prouoked the great Poet Homer ſo vertuouſly to celebrate in his writings Vlyſſes, but onely his long peregrination and far trauell that he made in diuerſe places, with the experiēce of many things aſwel by ſea as by land after the ſpoyle of Troye? What moued Virgill to write ſo worthily of the Troyan Aeneas although that he according to the writing of ſome Hiſtoriographers had moſt trayterouſly betrayed his natiue countrey in to the hands of his enimies, but onely for that he had vertuouſly reſiſted the furie of the raging waues, and other inconueniences of the ſea, he had ſene & endured many ſharpe ſhoures, and finally he came into Italie? Euen ſo as the ſoueraigne creator hath made man of twoo ſubſtāces the one differing or exceding the other, the one elementary & corruptible, the other celeſtiall; diuine and immortall. Alſo he hath put al things in his ſubiectiō, that is contained vnder the ſcope or circuite of the Firmament, to the ende that he might know aſmuch as to him was neceſſary for to attaine to the ſoueraigne gift, leauing him neuertheleſſe ſome difficultie & varietie of exerciſe. Man then although that he be a creature maruelouſly accompliſhed, yet he is neuertheleſſe an inſtrument of vertuous actes, of the which God is the original, ſo that he may electe ſuch an inſtrumēt as pleaſeth him for to execute his pleſure, be

it by ſea or by land. But it may ſo chaunce as it is cōmonly ſene come to paſſe, that ſome vnder this pretexitie make it a cuſtome to abuſe the workemaſter by an auarice and an vnſatiable appetite of ſome particular and temporall appetite, ieoparding themſelues vndiſcretely & as wickedly, (as Horace in his epiſtles doeth manyfeſtly ſhew) that he is worthy of prayſe, that for the beautifiing and eluminating of his ſpirite, & in the fauor of the common wealth doth willingly offer and put forth him ſelfe. This rule or meane Socrates the wiſe Philoſopher knew how to practiſe, and after him Plato his diſciple, (bothe the which) not onely contented to haue traueled and made voyages into ſtrange countreys for to attaine to the full perfection & knowledge of Philoſophie, but alſo to declare it openly without hope of any reward or recompenſe. Did not Cicero ſend his ſonne Marke to Athens? partely for to heare Cratippus, and of him to lerne Philoſophie, and partly alſo for to lerne the maners and lyuing of the citiſens of Athens. Lyſander being elected for his magnanimitie & worthineſſe gouernor ouer the Lacedemonians hath ſo worthily atcheued ſo many faire enterpriſes againſt Alcibiades, a man prewe and valiant, and Antiochus his Lieutenant on the ſea, that what loſſe or detrimēt ſo euer did chāce, his heart and manly courage did neuer faile him, but purſued his enimie by ſea & by lande, ſo that in the ende he brought Athens to his obedience. Themiſtocles, not leſſe experte in the feate of warre thā in Philoſophie, for to ſhew what a feruēt deſire

he had to ieoparde his lyfe for the libertie of his countrey, perſuaded the Athenians, that the ſiluer that was gathered in the mynes the which they were wonte to diſtribute to the people, was turned and beſtowed to furniſhe and make ſhips and galleys againſt Xerxes, who for that he had partly diſtreſſed him, and almoſt put to flight, falling to appointment after this happie victorie againſt the order of an enimie, made him preſent with three of the beſte Cities of his Empire. What hath cauſed Seleucus Nicanor, the Emperour Auguſtus Ceſar, and many Princes and noble men to beare in their pendens and ſtandarts the Dolphin and the anker, but onely to giue inſtruction to al their poſteritie, that Nauigation is the firſt and of al others the moſt vertuous. Here therfore without any long diſcourſe is an example of nauigatiō: as al things the more excellent they are, the more difficile or harde is the way to attaine to them, as after the experience Ariſtotle witneſſeth, ſpeaking of vertue. And that the nauigation is alwaies folowed with peril, as a body is with his ſhadowe, the which in times paſt was ſhewed by Anacharſis the Philoſopher, who after he had demaūded of what quantitie or thickneſſe were the plācks or ſide of a ſhip: it was anſwered, not aboue four fingers: ſo much (ſaid he) is the lyfe of him from death that ſayleth with ſhips on the water. Now gentle Reader in that I haue alleged ſo many excellent perſonages, it is not to compare, much leſſe to thinke my ſelfe equal to them, but I am perſuaded that the great

power of Alexander hath not letted his ſucceſſors to attempte yea the very extremitie of fortune. Alſo the deepe knowledge of Plato did nothing at all feare or abaſhe Ariſtotle, but that at his owne pleaſure he hath treated of Philoſophy. For this intent therefore not to be found ydle and ſlacke among others, no more than Diogenes was amōg the Athenians, I haue thought good to ſet out in writing many notable things that I haue diligently obſerued in my Nauigation betwene the South and the Weaſt, that is to wit, the ſituation and diſpoſition of places, in what clymat, zone or paralegie it be, aſwel of the ſea coſtes, Ilandes, and mayne land, the temperatneſſe of the ayre, the forme and maner of liuing of the inhabitants, the forme and propertie of beaſts of the earth and of the ſea, alſo of trees and roots with their frutes, mines and precious ſtones, ſhewing it liuely and truely as neare as is poſſible. As touching the reſte I wold thinke my ſelfe happie if that it would pleaſe you to accepte and receiue this my little labor with as willing a heart as I doe preſent it: as for the reſt I am aſſured that it wil be agreable if the Reader thinke well and way in his minde the long and dangerous peregrination that I haue taken in hand, for to ſee with the eye & to bring to light thoſe things moſt memoriall that I cold note and gather together, as hereafter ſhalbe ſene.
         
      
      
         
            
            The firſt Chapter. How the Author tooke ſhipping.
            
               ALthough that the firmament and all things that are contayned vnder the Moone, euen to the ſcope of the earth, ſéeme as the veritie is, to haue bene made for man,Al things haue bene made for man. yet neuertheleſſe it is ſo that dame Nature mother of all things, hath bene, and is alwayes ſuch a one, that ſhe hath preſerued and kept hid within, the things that are moſt precious and excellenteſt of hir worke, yea ſhe hath remiſed hir ſelfe, contrary to things artificiall, the moſte experteſt workeman that euer was, were it Appelles or Phidias,
               A difference of Art and of Nature. euen ſo as in the outwarde ſhew remayneth the paynting, grauing or decking of the veſſel or ſtatue, and within it remayneth altogether rude and vnpolliſhed. But in nature we ſée the contrary. Let vs firſt take example by the humayne body. Al the art and excellencie of nature is hidden within: alſo of al other naturall bodies, the exterior or outwarde parte is nothing in compariſon if that of the interior part it taketh not his perfection. The earth ſheweth outwardly a ſorowful and heauy face, being for the moſt parte couered with ſtones, thornes and thiſtles, or ſuch lyke: but if the huſbandman minde to open it with the plough, he ſhall finde this vertue ſo excellent, redy to bring him forth abundance, and to recompence him a thouſand folde. Alſo the vertue of the roote & of the plante being without a harde barcke ſometimes ſingle & ſometimes double, & that part of the frute that is moſt precious, wherein the vertue to bring forth his lyke, is hid within, as in the ſureſt place or belly of the ſayd frute. Euen as the laborer or huſbandman hauing

tylled the earth, receiueth thereby greate profit and aduantage:How Nauigation profiteth. others not contented onely to ſée the waters, would in like caſe ſounde them by the way of this noble Nauigatiō with ſhippes and veſſels, and for bicauſe that thereby they haue founde & gathered ineſtimable riches, yt which is not without reaſon, ſeing al things were made for man, the Nauigation is become by little & little ſo frequented and folowed of men, that many not continually remaining in vnconſtant Ilands, haue in the end aborded the mayne land good and fruitfull, the which before the experiēce was not thought, neither according to the opiniō of our elders.The cauſe of the Authors Nauigation. Therefore the principal cauſe of our Nauigatiō was for that Mounſieur de Villegagnon, knight of Malta a very expert gentleman as wel in Nauigation as in other honeſt & comely affaires, hauing with more deliberation receiued the Kings commaundement, & for that he was ſufficiently enformed of my voyage made into the countrey of Leuant, and the good & perfect knowledge that I had in Nauigation, did moſt inſtantly requeſt me, yea vnder the Authoritie of the King my ſoueraygne Lorde & Prince, to whom I owe all honor & obedience, charging and commaunding me to aſſiſt him in the accompliſhing of his enterpriſe, the which I frely graūted, as wel for the obediēce that I will giue to my natural Prince according to my capacitie, as alſo for the honeſtie of the thing, although it was payneful.How the Author toke ſhipping for to ſayle to India America. And therfore the ſixt day of May 1555. after that the ſayd Mounſieur de Villegagnon had giuen order for the rigging and trimming of his ſhips, for munitions & other things of warre, but with much greater difficultie than to an Armie marching on the lād, and to the qualitie of his men of al eſtats, gentlemē, ſouldiers, and diuers artificers: to be ſhort, all things being made redy and prepared in as good order as might be, the tyme

being come for vs to take ſhipping,Why it was called new Hauen. at new Hauen a porte town (the cauſe why it was ſo named I will ſhew before paſſing further) being ſo named to my iudgement of this worde that ſignifieth ſea or ſtraight, or if you ſay Hauen, ab hauriendis aquis,
                lying in Normandie, whereas forſaking the lande we hoyſed ſayle, ſayling vpon that great ſea by good right named Occean, bicauſe of his raging, of this Greke word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                as ſom iudge, being wholy vnder the power and mercy of the winde and waues. I know well that in times paſt, according to the ſuperſtitious Religion of the Gentiles, many made their Vowes, Prayers, and Sacrifices, to diuers Goddes,The ſuperſtitiō of the elders before they would go on the water. according as their neceſſitie did ſhewe, then among thoſe that would goe on the water ſome before hande would caſte ſome péece of money therein as a preſente or offering for to cauſe the Goddes of ye ſea to be fauorable and to appeaſe their Ire. Others attributing ſom deuinitie to the windes, thought to appeaſe them by ſtrange ceremonies. As we find the Calabrians to haue done to Lapix, a wind ſo named: likewiſe the Thurins and Pamphiliens to certayne others. Alſo we reade in Aeneidos in Virgill, if it be worthy of credence, that notwithſtanding the importunate prayer of Iuno to Aeolus King of windes, the miſerable Troyan remayned on the ſea, and the quarrell of the Goddes that did folowe. By this we may euidently knowe the error and abuſe, with the which the Antiquitie was blinded, being an erronious and damnable opinion, attributing to one of the leaſt creatures and vnder the power of man, that which appertayneth to the onely Creator, to whome I cannot ſufficiently giue prayſe in this place for his fauor ſhewed to vs, in deliuering vs out of ſuch blinded ignoraunce. And for my parte, for that of his onely grace he hath ſo fauoured our voyage, that

giuing vs a good full winde, we haue ſafely and peaceably paſſed the ſtreights, and from thence to the Canaries, Ilands diſtant from the equinoctial .27. degrées, and from our France fiue hūdreth leagues or there about. Now for many reaſons I thought good to begin this my diſcourſe at our embarkment, and ſhipping, as by a more certaine and ſure meane, the which being done, I thinke louing Reader, if that you take pleaſure to reade it, I doute not but to guide you from point to point, and from place to place, euen from the beginning vnto the end, as right as is poſſible, obſeruing the longitude and latitude of countries. Neuertheleſſe whereas I haue not vſed ſuch forme and meane, as the thing and your néedefull iudgement doeth deſerue, I beſéech you to hold me excuſed, conſidering that it is very harde for one man alone, without the fauor and maintenance of ſome Prince or great Lord, for to ſayle and diſcouer far countries, obſeruing the things ſingular, nor to execute greate enterpriſes, although yt of him ſelfe he might. And to my remembrance Ariſtotle agréeth well to this purpoſe, that it is vnpoſſible and very harde that he ſhould do any thing of great excellencie and worthy of prayſe, when the meane, that is to ſay riches, wanteth, knowing that the life of man is ſhorte and ſubiect to a thouſand fortunes and aduerſities.
         
         
            Of the ſtreight aunciently named Calpe, and now Gibaltary. Cap. ij.
            COaſting Spaine on the lefte hand, with a calme and fauorable winde, we came ouer againſt Gibaltar, not ſtriking our ſayle, nor caſting anker very nere, for many cauſes. In yt which place we ſtayed certaine dayes. This ſtreight is on the borders of Spaine, deuiding Europe
               
with Africa, as Conſtantinople doeth Europe and Aſia. Many thinke this to be the originall of our ſea Meditareum, as if the great ſea being to full, ſhoulde by this place poure out vpon the earth, of the which writeth Ariſtotle in his booke of the World in this maner: the Occeā that of all ſides doeth compaſſe vs toward the weſt neare to the columnes or pillers of Hercules,
               Ilandes and other ſingularities of Gibaltar. doeth poure out by the earth into oure ſea as in a porte or hauen by a narow ſtraight: neare to this ſtraight are twoo Ilands neare one to the other, inhabited with ſlaues and others, the which labor to make ſalte, and therefore there is good trade and traffike: of theſe Ilandes the one is ſouthwarde and the greateſt made in maner of a triangle, if that ye beholde it from far, named by the elders Ebuſus,
               Ebuſus. Ieniza. and by the moderneſſe Ieniza, the other is towarde the north and named Frumentaria, and for to ſaile thether it is very dangerous,Frumentaria. bicauſe of certayne rockes that are there, with other inconueniences. Furthermore there entereth diuerſe nauigable Riuers that bringeth greate riches, as one named Malue, ſeparating Mauritania frō 
               Ceſarienſia,
               Malue. Sala. another yet named Sala, taking his ſpring in Mountayne Dure, the which traueſſing the Kingdome of Fes, diuideth in forme of this Greke letter Δ and then runneth into this ſtreight: likewiſe of many others the which at this time I omit: this much I will ſay by the way, that this ſtraight paſſeth ouer the coaſt of Afrike to the troppike of Cancer, where as the ſea doeth very little ebbe and flowe, but in thoſe partes ſo ſone as one draweth néere to this greate floude Niger, 11. degrées from the lyne, the courſe of this Riuer is not perceiued. In this ſtraight of the ſea Meditareum, there be twoo Moūtaynes of a wonderful height, one on the coſte or ſide of Africa, in tymes paſte named Calpe, and now Gibaltar, the other Abyle, the which both

together are called the Colūnes,Diuers opiniōs of the erection of the pillers of Hercules. or pillers of Hercules, for that according to ſome writers he diuided them in twain that before was but one mountaine named Briarei: and there retourning into Grecia by this ſtraight finiſhed and ended his labors, eſteming and thincking that he coulde paſſe no further, bicauſe of the Amplitude and ſpreading of the ſea, which extended euen to his orizon & end of his ſight. Others do affirme that the ſaid Hercules for that he woulde leaue a memorial of his happie conqueſts, cauſed ther to be erected two columnes or pillers of a meruelous height on the coſt of Europe.
               The maner & cuſtome of noble and valiant men in tymes paſte. For the old & ancient cuſtome hath ben that the Noble & great Lords, did reare & ſet vp a piller or columne, in that place whereas they did finiſhe their voyages & high enterpriſes, or elſe at their toombes or ſepulturs, thereby to ſhew and manifeſt their might & famous actes aboue others. As we reade of Alexander which did leaue certaine markes in Aſia the great, wheras he had bene. For the like cauſe the like was erected at Rhodes. As much may be ſaid of Mauſolia numbred amōg the ſeuen wonders of the world, made & edified by Artemiſia in the honour & for the loue that ſhe bare to hir huſband: the like of the Pyramides of Memphis, vnder yt which are embalmed the Kings of Egypte. Furthermore at the entrie of the great ſea, Iulius Caeſar reared vp a hye piller of white marbell. And for bicauſe that many haue bene of this name of Hercules, we wil ſay with Arian ye Hiſtoriographer,What Hercules it was of whō are named the columns Tarteſſe and auncient Citie of Africa. this Hercules to be he, that the Tyriens haue celebrated, for bicauſe that they haue edified Tarteſſe on the borders of Spaine whereas are the pillers of the which we haue ſpoken, and there is conſecrated to him a temple according to ye maner of the Phenicians, with ſuch ſacrifices and ceremonies as was vſed in times paſte. Alſo it hath ben named the place of Hercules. This ſtraight at this day is the refuge and ſuccor of theues, pirates and rouers on

the ſea, as Turkes, Moores and Barbarians, enimies of our Chriſtian Religion,Gibaltar a place of Trafficke from Europe to Africa. who lurking and flotting there with their Galleys and barkes, rob and ſpoyle marchāts that come to trade as well of Africa and Spayne as of Fraunce, Englande and other places, and that which is more to be lamented, the captiuitie of diuers Chriſtians whom they vſe moſt cruelly, yea worſe than brute beaſtes in all their affaires, beſide the loſſe of ſoules in denying their Chriſtendome bicauſe of their horrible and dreadful torments.
         
         
            Of Africa generally. Chapter .3.
            SAyling beyond this ſtraight,Cap. de canti. for that we had coſted the countrey of Africa the ſpace of eight dayes, on the left hand euen right to the Cape of Canti being diſtant frō the Equinoctial .33. degrées, we wil write therof generally. Africa as Ptolomeus writeth,The fourth parte of the world as ſome writers affirme the opinion of this word Africa. is one of ye third parts of ye world, or elſe the fourth, according as certayne writers haue affirmed that haue writen ſine, tchat by nauigatiōs many countries, in times paſt being vnknowē, haue ben diſcouered, as India America of the which we pretende to write, named as Ioſeph witneſſeth Africa of Affer, who as we reade in the Gréeke and Latine Hiſtories, for that he ouercame it, raigned him ſelf & named it after his own name, for before it was called Libia as ſome think of this Gréeke word: 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                the which ſignifieth the South winde that there is frequented and familiar, or of Lybs that raigned, or elſe Africa hath ben named of this article A, and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                that ſignifieth colde, and before called Hisperia. As touching his lying,The ſituation of Africa. it beginneth truely at the Weaſte Atlantike and endeth in the ſtraight of Arabia or at the ſea of Egypte as Apian witneſſeth, as in like caſe in fewe woordes Ariſtotle doeth very well write. Others make it to beginne at Nyll towardes the North, at

the ſea Meditareum: furthermore Africa hath bene called as Ioſephus writeth in the Antiquities of India, al that is comprehended on the one ſide from the North ſea or Meditareum, euen to the Weſt Meridionall, neuertheleſſe ſeperated in twayne, olde and newe, the new beginneth at the hilles of the Moone, hauing his head at the Cape of good hope in the South ſea .35. degrées aboue the lyne, ſo that it contayneth of latitude .25. degrées. As touching the olde, it is diuided in foure prouinces, the firſt is Barbaria, contayning Mauritania, Cyrenia, and Ceſarienſia, there the people be very blacke. In tymes paſt this countrey was little inhabited, but nowe much more: alſo the diuerſe kindes of people remayning in this countrey with the diuerſitie of maners and of their Religion, the knowledge of which wold haue made both a long voyage and alſo a large volume. Ptolomeus hath made no mention of the exterior parte towarde the South, for bicauſe that it was not founde out nor diſcouered in his tyme. Many haue diſcribed it more at large, as Plinie, Mela, Strabo, Apian, and others, and therefore I wil not ſtand therein.
            This Religion, as Herodian writeth, is frutefull, and well peopled with people of diuerſe ſortes and maners of liuing.Pillers of ſtone where as are writings, of the Phenicians. Alſo the Phenicians in times paſt came to dwell in Africa, as it is ſene by that which is writen in the Phenician tong in certaine pyllers of ſtone that as yet are to be ſene in the towne of Tynge, called at this day Thamar, belonging to the King of Portugal. As touching their maners euen ſo as is the temperatneſſe of the ayre according to the diuerſitie of places, alſo the people themſelues doe cauſe varietie of temperance, and by folowing of maners for the Simpathie that the ſoule hath with the body, as Galian ſheweth in the booke that he hath writē. Likewiſe

we ſée in Europia, in diuers Kingdomes, the varietie of maners and cuſtomes, the Africans in general are crafty,The maners & Religiō of the Africans. as the Syrines couetous, the Sicilians willy, and the Aſians voluptuous. There is alſo difference in Religions: ſome worſhip after an other maner, ſome are Mahometiſtes, other ſome are Chriſtians after a very ſtrange maner contrary to vs. And as for brute beaſtes, there are diuers kindes. Ariſtotle ſaith that the beaſtes in Aſia are very cruell, and in Africa monſtrous. For the ſcarcetie of water many beaſtes of diuers kindes are conſtrayned to aſſemble where as there is any water to be had, & there oftentimes they couple together, and therby engendereth the diuerſitie of ſtrange and monſtrous beaſtes,The cauſe why there are in Africa ſo many ſtrange kind of beaſtes the which cauſeth this argument and prouerbe, that Africa alwayes bringeth forth ſome new thing. This prouerbe is commō among the Romaines, for that they made thether many vayages, hauing the Dominion of it of a long tyme, as Scipio Africanus ſayth, they alwaies brought from thence ſome ſtrange thing, which ſéemed to engender a rebuke or ſhame to their citie and common weale.
         
         
            The fourth Chapter treateth of Africa particularly.
            NOwe as concerning that parte of Africa the which we haue coaſted towards the Weſt, as Mauritania,
               Barharia parte of Africa and why it was ſo called. and Barbaria, ſo named bicauſe of the diuerſitie and ſtrange maner of the inhabitantes, it is inhabited with Turkes, Moores, and others borne in the countrey, true it is that in ſome places it is vnhabited, and as deſert as wel for the extreme heate that maketh them to goe naked ſauing onely their priuie partes, as alſo for the ſterilitie and barenneſſe of ſome places being full of Spiders, and

               
for the quantitie of wild beaſtes, as Lyons, Tigers, Dragons, Leopards, Panthers, and others vnknowen, the which cauſeth and conſtrayneth the people of that countrey to go in bandes and companies to their affaires and trades, garniſhed with bowes and arowes, & with other weapons, for their defenſe. But if by aduenture they be ſodainly beſet with theſe wild beaſts, being but a ſmal cō
               panie whē that they go a fiſhing or otherwiſe, they flée to the ſea, caſting thēſelues in, & ſo ſaue thēſelues by ſwimming, in the which they are wel exerciſed & accuſtomed. The others being not ſo ſwift in running, or not hauing the knowledge to ſwym, clyme vp into trées, and by this meane they euitate or eſchew the danger of thoſe beaſtes. Ye muſt alſo note that the people of ye countrey dye more by the rauiſhment of wilde beaſts than by natural death: and this is from Gibaltar to the Capuerd. They kepe the curſed and damnable lawe of Mahomet,
               The Religion & ceremonies of the barbariens. yea more ſuperſtitiouſly than the naturall Turkes. Before they make their prayer in their temples, they waſhe wholy their bodies, thinking thereby they purge their ſoule as well as the body by this outwarde waſhing and ceremonie with a corruptible element, and their prayer is made foure times a day, as I haue ſene the Turkes do at Constantinople.
               In Mecha the ſepulture of Mahomet: the voyage of the Turkes to Mecha. In times paſt when that the Pagans had firſte receiued this damnable Religion, they were conſtrayned once in their time to make a voyage to Mecha, where as their gentill Prophete is buryed, otherwiſe they had no hope of the rewards or benefits that to them wer promiſed, the which things the Turkes obſerue at this day, and they aſſemble for to accompliſhe this voyage with all kinde of munitions and attilery, as though they would goe a warfar, for feare of the inuaſions of the Arabians that kepe the mountaines in certaine places. What aſſemblies I

haue ſene being in Cairea, with the magnificence and triumphes that there is made. And yet this is more curiouſly and ſtraitly obſerued amōg the Moores of Africa and other Mahometiſts ſo blinded and obſtinate are they, the which hath giuen me occaſion to ſpeake in this place of the Turkes and of their voyage afore they take in hand the warre or any thing elſe of waight or importance. And when that principally the meane is taken from them to make this voyage, they ſacrifice ſome wild or tame beaſt, as they chaunce to méete, which they call as well in their language as in Arabike, Corban, which is as much to ſay as preſent or offering, the which abuſe is not vſed amōg the Turkes of Leuant, neither in Conſtantinople. They haue certaine Prieſts that are the greateſt deceiuers of ye world, they make the common ſort beleue & vnderſtande, that they know the ſecrets of God and of their Prophete that ſpeaketh many times to them. Furthermore they vſe a ſtrange maner of writing, and do attribute the firſt vſe of writing before all other nations. To the which the Egyptians wil neuer accord to whom the moſt part of thoſe that haue treated of Antiquities, giue the firſt inuention of writing with the repreſenting by certaine figures the cogitations and thoughtes of the minde. And to this purpoſe writeth Tacitus in this maner:The Egyptiās were the firſt that inuented writing and letters. the Egyptians wer the firſt that repreſented and manifeſted the conception of the minde by figures of beaſtes, grauing vpon ſtones for the memorial of mē, the things that happened and were done in times paſt. Likewiſe they ſay that they are the firſt inuenters of letters. And this inuention, as it is founde by writing, was brought into Grecia by the Phenicians, that then ruled on the ſea, being reputed to their great glory as the firſt, finders out of that which they had learned of the Egyptians.
            
            
               The men in this parte on the coaſte of Europe, vſe to noynte their ioyntes with Oyle, of the which they haue greate plenty, before they take in hand any greate exerciſe: for al ſofte and pliable things are not eaſy to breake, they principallie make warre with the Spanyardes on their borders, partly for religion & partly for other cauſes. It is true that the Portingals of late time haue ouercome certaine places in Barbaria,
               The holy Croſſe a town in Barbarie. and edified townes and Caſtels, and planted our Religion, ſpecially one faire towne named the holy Croſſe, for that they ariued & ſtayed there the ſame day, & it is at the foote of a faire mountayn. But within this twoo yeres the wicked people of the countrey being aſſembled together, haue throwne downe from the ſayde mountayne ſo many greate ſtones, that they had pulled out thereof, that in the ende the poore Portingals were conſtrayned to forſake the place, & there is alwayes ſuch enimitie or hatred among them, that they trade and trafficke together their Suger, Oyle, Ryce, Lether and other marchandiſe by leauing of pledges and hoſtages. They haue quātitie of good fruts, as Oranges, Lemōds, Citrons, Pomegarneds, the which they eat for wante of better meate, and Ryce in ſtede of Wheate: alſo they drinke Oyles, as we do Wine. They liue many yeares, more to my iudgement bicauſe of the ſobrietie they vſe, than otherwiſe.
         
         
            Of the fortunate Ilandes novv called the Canaries. Cap. 5.
            
               How the Fortunate Ilandes lye nowe named the Canaries.LEauing Barbaria on the left hande, hauing alwayes the winde fauorable, we knew by our compaſſe how néere we were to the fortunate Ilandes, lying on the borders of Mauritania toward the weſt, being ſo named

by our elders, bicauſe of the good tēperatneſſe of the aire,Why they wer named of our elders the Fortunate Ilandes. & frutfulneſſe of the ſame. Nowe the firſt day of September in the foreſayde yeare, about ſixe of the clocke in the morning, we had ſight of one of theſe Ilands, bicauſe of the hyght of a great Hill, of the which we wil ſpeke more largely and particularly hereafter. Theſe Ilandes as ſome do affirme are .x. in number,The number of theſe Ilands. of which there are thrée that the Authors make no mention of, for that they are vnhabited, the other ſeuen, which are named, Tenerif the Ile of yron, Gomeria, and the great Iland, properly called Canaria, are diſtant from the Equinoctial .27. degrées, the other thrée, Forteuenturia, Palma, and Lencelota, are .28. degrées, ſo that by this ye may ſée, that from the firſt to the laſt, is a degrée, the which is .17. Leagues and a halfe, reckening from the North to the South, according to the opinion of Pillotes. But without further talke, he that wold finde out by the degrées of the firmament the quantitie of leagues, and ſtades, that the earth doth contayne, and what proportion there is from league to degrée (the which ought to be obſerued of him that will write of coū
               treys as a true Coſmographer) let him reade Ptolomeus, the which treateth therof at large in his Coſmography.Ca. 3.4.5. & 6. Among theſe Ilands there is none of them, but the greateſt that is named Canaria, bicauſe of the multitude of greate Dogs that there are nouriſhed, as Plinie ſheweth, and many others after him, that ſay as yet, that Iuba bare away twayne.
            But nowe they are all named the Canaries without any diſtinction, for this onely reaſon before ſhewed.Why the fortunate Ilandes are now named the Canaries. But in my opinion I thinke they were named Canaries, for the abundance of Canes and wild Réedes that growe on the ſea brink: as for the Canes or Réedes yt beare Suger, the Spaniards haue planted a great many, ſince the tyme

that they haue there inhabited, but ther did inhabite brutiſh & Barbarous men before that there were any Dogs, the which ſtandeth by good reaſon, for I knowe well by experience, that in all the countreis and Indies yt haue ben diſcouered and founde out of late dayes, they had neuer knowledge of dog or catte, as hereafter ſhal be ſhewed. Yet I knowe well that the Portingals haue brought thether ſome, and kept them for to hunte after wild beaſtes. Plinie, therefore ſpeaketh in this maner: the firſt is called Ombrion,
               Ombrion. whereas there is no ſigne of houſe nor building. In the mountaines there is a fountaine, & trées like vnto that which is named Ferula,
               Strange trees. both blacke and white, out of the which may be wrong or writhen water. Of the blacke ones the water is very bitter, & to the contrary the white ones, the water is pleaſant to drinke. The other is called Iunonia,
               Iunonia. whereas there is but one onely houſe builded of ſtone, ther is ſene another that is next to this, but leſſe & of the ſayd name: another that is full of greate Lizardes. Right ouer againſt theſe before ſhewed, there is another named the Iland of Snowe,
               The Ile of Snowe. Canaria. for that it is alwayes couered with ſnowe. The next to that is Canaria, ſo called bicauſe of the multitud of great dogs yt it engendreth, as we haue before ſhewed, wherof Iuba King of Mauritania, had two, & in the ſaide Ile ther are ſome apperāce of old buildings. This coūtrey in times paſt hath ben inhabited with wild & Barbarous people, not knowing God, but altogether Idolaters, worſhipping ye Sūne ye Moone & certaine other planets, as ſoueraigne deities, of the which they thought they receiued al their benefits, but in leſſe thā .58. yeres, ye 
               Spaniards haue ſubdued and ouercome them, and ſlayne part of them, and the reſt they hold and kepe as ſlaues and captiues: and they inhabiting there, haue eſtabliſhed or ſet vp the Chriſtian fayth, ſo that at this preſent ther is none

of the ancient dwellers left,The inhabitāts of the Canaries conuerted to the Chriſtian faith. onely a fewe excepted that are hid in the mountaynes, as in the mountayne of Pych, of the which we will ſpeake hereafter folowing: True it is that that place is the refuge of all the baniſhed of Spaine, the which for puniſhement are ſent thither into exile, ſo that there is an infinite number alſo of ſlaues, the which ſerue as well to labor the grounde, as to do other labors. I do much maruel how the inhabitantes of theſe Ilands, and of Afrike, for that they are néere neighbors, haue ſo differed in language, in colour, Religion and in maners. Alſo that many vnder the Romaine Empire haue conquered and ſubdued the greateſt parte of Africa, and neuer touched theſe Ilands, as they haue done in the ſea Meditareum, knowing alſo that they are very fruitfull, ſeruing as a victualer to ye 
               Spaniards, euē as Cicilie ſerueth to the Romaines and Geneuois.
               The bountie of the Ilandes named Canaries. This countrey of it ſelfe is good, being ſo well tilled, it bringeth greate profit, and the moſt in Sugers. For within theſe fewe yeares they haue planted many Canes that bring forth greate quantitie of Sugers maruelous good, not only in theſe Ilands but in other places that they hold there.Suger of Canaria. Neuertheleſſe it is not ſo good in any part as in theſe Ilāds of Canaries. And the cauſe why it is there better gathered & deſired, is, for that the Ilāds in the ſea Meditareum on the coſt of gréeke lād, as Metelin, Rhodes, & other places bearing good ſuger, before the Turke had the dominiō of them, haue ben ſpoyled by negligence or otherwiſe. And in all the countrey of Leuant, I haue ſene no ſuger made but in Egypt,
               Suger of Egypt & ye canes yt beare it growe on the brinke of Nyll, the which alſo is greatly eſtemed of the people & of the marchants yt trade thether as much & rather more, than Canarie Suger. The elders before vs eſtemed greately the Suger of Arabia,
               Suger of Arabia. for that it was maruellous harty and pleaſant, ſpecially

for medicine, to the which vſe they did put it & to little other. But now adayes voluptuouſneſſe is ſo increſed, ſpecially in our Europe, that there cannot be neuer ſo little a banket made after our maner of liuing, but that euery ſauſe muſt be ſugered, and alſo our meates and drinkes. The which thing was defended to the Athenians, by their lawes, as a thing that did effeminate the people: the which the Lacedemonians haue folowed by example.
            But of a trueth the great Lordes of Turkie drinke ſugered waters, for bicauſe that wine is defended them by their lawe. As touching the wine that was inuented by the greate Phiſition Hyppocrates, it was onely permitted to ſicke folke and vnable, but at this day it is ſo common with vs, as it is ſcarce in other countreys. So much haue we ſpoken by the way, on the talke of ſuger, let vs nowe returne to our mater.The fruitfulneſſe of the Canaries. As for corne there is ſufficient in theſe Ilands, alſo of very good wine, better than the wine of Candia, where as they make Malmeſies, as we will declare intreating of the Ilands of Madera. Of fleſh alſo there is ſufficient, as wilde and tame goates, birds of all kindes greate quantitie, Oranges, Citrons, Lemonds, Pomegranads and other fruites, Palmes, and greate quantitie of good Hony.
            
               Smal trees named Paper.There is alſo about the riuers and floudes little trées named Paper, and in the ſayd riuers and floudes there are fiſhes named Silures, the which Paulus Iouius in his booke of fiſhes, thinketh to be Sturgion, of the which the poore ſlaues féede on, ſweating for trauell & almoſt breathleſſe, and oftentymes they féede thereon for wante of other meate. And thus much I will ſay by the way, that they are very hardly intreated of the Spaniards, ſpecially of the Portingals, yea worſſe than of the Turkes or Arabians. And I am conſtrayned to ſpeake thereof, for that I

haue ſene it my ſelfe. Among other things, there is found an herb againſt the hils ſides commonly called Oriſelia,
               Oriſelia an herbe. the which they gather with greate diligēce for to dye colour. Furthermore they make a kinde of blacke gumme the which they name Bre,
               Bre, blacke gumme and howe it is made. of the which there is greate abundāce in Tenerif. They take thornes of yt which there is great quantitie, and breake them, and lay them by pece one vpon another like croſſes, and vnder eche heape there is a little hole of no great depth, and then they ſet fire on this woodē almoſt at the very top, and then it rendereth his gumme that falleth into this hole. Others do make it with leſſe labor, for the hole being made, they ſet fier on ye trée: this gumme bringeth them great profit in their trade that they make to Perou, of the which they vſe to calke ſhips and other veſſels for the ſea, putting it to no other vſe. As touching the harte of this trée being ſomewhat red, the poore people that dwel on the hils and moūtaynes cut it by long ſtickes of the length of halfe a fadome, as greate as our thumbe, and lighting it at one ende it ſerueth in ſtede of a cādel. Alſo the Spaniards vſe it after this manner.
         
         
            Of the high mountaines of Pike properly called Pikehill. Cap. 6.
            IN one of theſe Ilands named Tenerif,
               The wonderfull hight and circuite of Pikehill. there is a Hil of ſo wonderful a highth that the mountaynes of Armenia, of Perſia, Tartaria, neither the Hyll Lybem in Syria, the mounte Ida, Athos, nor yet the mounte Olympus, ſo much celebrat by the Hiſtoriographers, ought not to be cōpared to this Hil, the which containeth in circuite at the leaſte twenty miles, & from the foote to the top 54. miles. This moūtaine or Hil is named Pike, at al times ſnowy,

myſty, and ful of great and cold vapors, and alſo of ſnow, although that it is not eaſily ſene, (to my iudgement) for bicauſe that it extendeth to the lower Region of the Aire the which is very colde, as Philoſophers, and Aſtronomers holde opinion, ſo that the ſnow cannot melt, bicauſe that in that place the Sunne cannot caſt hir beames, and therefore the ſuperior or vpper part remayneth alwayes colde. This mountayne or Hill is ſo high, that if the ayre be cleare, it may be ſene fiftie Leagues on the water and more, the top and the bottome of this hill though one be néere or farre of, is made in maner of this Gréeke figure Ω the which ſignifieth Omega.
               The height of the hill Etna. I haue alſo ſene the Hill called Ethna .30. Leagues, and on the ſea néere to Cypris, I haue ſene a certayne mountayne of Armenia, fiftie Leagues of, though I haue not the eye ſight ſo good, as Linxius, who from the Promontorie of Lylibie in Cicilie, did diſcerne and ſée the ſhips, in the porte of Carthage. I am ſure that ſome will thinke this ſtrange, eſteming that a mans eye coulde in no wiſe ſée nor diſcerne ſo far of: but neuertheleſſe this is moſt true in plainneſſe, but not in height. The Spaniards haue diuers tymes aſſayed to ſounde the height of this hyll, and for to doe it, they haue many tymes ſent a certayne number of people with mulles, bearing bread, wine & other munitions, but they neuer returne againe as I haue ben crediblie informed of thoſe that haue dwelled there ten yeres. And therefore they holde opinion, that in the ſayd hill, as wel on the toppe as on the circuite, there are ſome reſte or remnant of theſe wilde Canarians, that thither are retired, and kepe the ſayde hyll, liuing with Rootes, and with wilde beaſtes, the which kill and ſlaye thoſe that preſume to get vp the hill,Ptolomeus hath knowen this hill. to diſcouer the toppe thereof. Alſo of this Ptolomeus hath had knowledge, ſaying, that

beyond the Columnes or pillers of Hercules. In a certain Ile there is a hil, of a maruellous and wonderful height, and therefore towarde the toppe it is alwayes couered with Snowe: from the ſayde hille there falleth greate aboundance of water, that watereth all the Ilande, the which maketh it very fruitfull of Canes, Sugers, and other thinges. And there is no other water than that which commeth from that hill, otherwiſe the countreys that are vnder the tropike of Cancer, wold remayne barren bicauſe of the exceſſiue heate.Strange ſort
                     •
                   of ſtones. It bringeth forth abundantly great ſtones like to ſpunges, & are very light, ſo that one as great as a mans heade doth not waigh half a pounde: it bringeth forth other ſtoanes like Iron ſledges: and foure or fiue Leagues vpon the Hill, are founde other ſtones, that ſmell like ſmoke, and therefore the inhabitants think that in the hil ther is ſome ſmoky Mine.
         
         
            Of the Ile of Iron. Cap 7.
            AMong theſe Ilandes I thinke good particularly to deſcribe the Ile of Iron next to Tenerif,
               The Ile of Irō and why it is ſo called. ſo named for bicauſe that there are founde Mynes of Iron, as the Ile of Palme, ſo named bicauſe of ye multitude of Palme trées, that are there, and ſo of others. And although that it be the leaſt of the others, (for his circuite is not aboue 6. Leagues) yet neuertheleſſe it is fruitful, for the circuite that it containeth, as well in canes bearing Suger,The fruitfulneſſe of the Ile of Iron. as in beaſts, fruits, & fayre gardens, aboue al ye reſt. It is inhabited wt the Spaniards as wel as ye reſt. As touching corne, ther is not ſufficiēt for the dwellers, therfore the greateſt part as ye ſlaues, are cōſtrained to nouriſhe them ſelues wt milke and chéeſe, made of goates milke, of yt which ther is

plenty, and therefore they looke freſh, well diſpoſed, and maruellous wel nouriſhed, for bicauſe that ſuch nouriſhment by cuſtome is familiar to their nature, likewiſe for that the good temperatneſſe of the ayre fauoureth them. Some half Philoſopher or half Phiſitiō (giuing alwayes honor to thē that merit honor) may here demaunde whe- that they vſing theſe things, are not grauelly, knowing yt milke,Milke and Cheeſe grauelly. and chéeſe engender grauel, as may be ſene in many in our Europe. I anſwere that chéeſe of it ſelfe may be good and bad, grauelly and not grauelly, according to the quantitie that is taken, and the nature & diſpoſition of the perſon. True it is that to vs which being not contented with one kinde of meate, we take oftentimes euen in an houre twenty, or thirty kindes of meates and drinkes, it may be hurtfull, but not to them which vſe one kinde only, yea, and that moderatly.
            We ſée that the Indians liue ſeuen or eight moneths in the warre with meale made of certayne harde and dry rootes, in the which ſome woulde Iudge that there were no nouriſhment nor ſuſtenance. The inhabitantes of Creta & Cypris,
               Diuers nouriſhmentes of diuers people. liue almoſt with no other thing than milke the which is better than that of the Canaries for that it is Kowe milke and other Goates milke. Furthermore that milke is good nouriſhment, that prōptly is conuerted into bloud,Milke is very good ſuſtenance. for that it is but bloud whitted in ye dug or roother. Plinie in his ſeconde boke & .42. Chap. ſheweth that Zoraſtes liued xx. yeres in the wilderneſſe onely with chéeſe, yt 
               Pamphiliens in the war, had almoſt no other victuals but chéeſe made of Aſſes, & Camels milke, the which alſo I haue ſene the Arabians do, the which did not onely drinke milke in ſteade of water paſſing the Deſert of Egypt, but alſo gaue it vnto their horſes. Alſo the Ancient Spaniards for 
                  •
               he moſte parte of the yeare lyued with Ackornes,

as Strabo ſheweth & Poſsidonius, of the which they made their bread, and their drinke of certayne rootes, and not onely the Spaniards but many others, as Vergill reciteth in Georgicon: but nowe the ſeaſon ſerueth vs to liue more ſwéeter and more humaynly. The men in all theſe Ilands are more broken to labor and trauel than the Spaniards in Spaine, hauing no lerning but ruſtically. To cōclude, they of knowledge that are wel ſene in the Nauigation, aſwel Portingals as Spaniards,
               The Ile of Irō is right vnder the Diametrial line. ſay that this Iland is right vnder the Diametrial, as they haue noted in their carde Marins, limitating all that is from the North to the South as the Equinoctiall lyne of Weaſt and Eaſt, the which lines are equall in greatneſſe, for euery one cōtaineth .360. degrées,The value of euery degree. and euery degrée as before we haue ſayde, is ſeuentene leagues and a halfe. And euen as the Equinoctial lyne diuideth the Sphere in two, and the foure and twenty clymats twelue, in the Eaſt, and as much in the Weaſt, alſo this Diametriall paſſing by this former Ilande, as the Equinoctiall by the Iles of S. Omer, cutteth or breaketh the Paralizes and all the ſphere by the half of the North to the South. Other things I haue not founde in this Ilande worthy of memorie, ſauing that there are greate quantitie of Scorpions, & more dangerous thā thoſe that I haue ſéene in Turkie, as I haue knowen by experience.Scorpions of Canaries. Alſo the Turkes gather them for to make Oyle, good for medicine, as the Phiſition can very well vſe it.
         
         
            Of the Ilandes of Madera. Cap. 8.
            WE reade not in Authors how that theſe Ilandes were diſcouered,The Ilandes of Madera not knowē of our elders. but within theſe ſixtie yeares that the Spaniardes and Portingals haue hazared

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
and enterpriſed many Nauigations towarde the Weaſt, and as we haue ſayde before, Ptolomeus had vnderſtanding of the Fortunate Ilāds euen to the Caape verd. Plinie alſo maketh mention, yt 
               Iuba brought two dogs from the great Canaria, beſide many Authors that thereof haue ſpoken. Then the Portingals were the firſt that found out theſe Ilands, of the which we ſpeake, and named them in their language Madera,
               What Madera ſignifieth. the which is as muche to ſay, as Woode, for that it was altogether a Wilderneſſe full of woode, and not inhabited. Theſe Ilands lye betwene Gibaltare and the Canaries towardes the Weſt, and in our Nauigation we coaſted them on the right hand, being diſtant from the Equinoctiall, about .32. degrées, and from the Canaries .63. leagues. Now for to diſcouer and labour this Countrey, as a Portingale being a maſter Pilot ſhewed me, they were conſtrained to ſet fire in the woode, as well of the higheſt as of others. Of the greateſt and principalleſt Iland, that is made in maner of a Triangle, as Δ of the Greekes, cōtaining in circuit .14. leagues, or therabout. Wherein the fire continued the ſpace of vj. or .vij. dayes, with ſuche a vehement heate, that they were conſtrained to ſaue them ſelues in their ſhips, and the others that had not this meane nor libertie, caſt themſelues into the Sea, vntill the ſmoke of the fire was paſt. Incontinently after, they began to labor the ground, to plant and ſowe diuers graines: the which profited greatly, bicauſe of the good diſpoſition and temperateneſſe of the aire. Afterwarde, they builded and edified houſes and Caſtles, ſo that at this day there is found no place ſo faire and pleaſant.Suger of Madera, celebrated aboue others. Among other things, they haue planted great plentie of Canes, that beare very good ſuger: with the which they haue a great trade into other Countreis, and at this

day the ſuger of Madera beareth the name. The people that nowe inhabite Madera, are muche more ciuill and fuller of humanitie, than they of the Canaries, and they trade with others, as humainely as is poſſible. Their greateſt trade is Suger and Wine, of the which we will treate héereafter at large. Alſo they haue Honey, Waxe, Oranges, Citrons, Lemonds, Pomegranads and Corderians, they make great quantitie of Comfets,Comfets of Madera. the beſt that may be wiſhed for, and they make them in the likeneſſe of Men, Women, Lions, Birdes, and Fiſhes, the which is a faire thing to ſée, and muche better to taſte. Alſo they conſerue many fruits, the which by this meanes do kepe, and they are caried into ſtraunge Countreis, to the comfort and recreation of euery one.The fruitefulneſſe of the Ilands of Madera. This Countrey is very good, faire, and fruitfull, aſwell of his natural diſpoſition, bicauſe of the faire hills decked with woodes and ſtrange fruits, the which we haue not in theſe parties: as alſo of fountaines and liuely ſprings, with the which the fieldes and medowes are watered, being garniſhed with herbes and floures ſufficiently, and wilde beaſtes of all ſortes. Among the Trées that are there,Gumme. there are many that caſte gumme, the which they haue learned with the time, to put to neceſſary vſes. There is alſo ſéene a kind of Gaiac,
               A kinde of Gaiac. but for that it is not found ſo good as the Gaiac that is at the Antilles, they ſet nought thereby: it may alſo be, that they know not the manner how to vſe it. There are alſo certaine Trées, that at certaine times of the yeare, caſteth good Gumme, the which they call Dragons bloude,Dragons blud. and for to get it out, they pearſe the trée foote, opening it wide and déepe. This trée beareth a yellow fruit, as great as a Cherrie, the which is very good to refreſhe one, whether he haue the Ague or otherwiſe.
            
               This kinde of gumme is not vnlike to Cynaber of which writeth Dioſcoridus,
               Dioſcoridus Cinaber. ſaying, as for Cynaber ſayth he, is brought from Africa, and is ſolde deare, ſo that there is not ynough to ſatiſfie paynters: it is redde, and therefore ſome iudge it to be Dragons bloude, and ſo hath Plinie thought it in his booke the .33. of his naturall Hiſtorie the ſeuenth Chapter, of the which as well Cynaber as Dragons bloude is not at this day founde among vs ſo naturall, as the elders haue deſcribed, but the one & the other is artificiall: therefore knowing what the elders haue iudged it, and that which I haue knowen of this gumme, I woulde eſteme it to be altogether like to Cynaber and Dragons bloude, hauing a ſofte, and a cold vertue. I wil not here forget among theſe, ſo ſingular fruites as great Lemonds, Oranges, Citrons, and abundance of ſwete Pomegranads, winiſh, ſwéete and ſowre, little and great, the ryne or péele of which ſerue to tanne and harden the ſkins, for that they are very ſuppell. And I thinke that they haue learned this of Plinie, for the treateth therof in his 19. booke and thirtenth Chapter of his Hiſtorie. To be ſhort, theſe Ilāds ſo fruitful & wel diſpoſed, do excel in dilicatneſſe thoſe of Greece, were it Chios that Empedocleus hath ſo much extolled, and Rhodes, Apollonius and many others.
         
         
            Of the Wine of Madera. Cap. 9.
            WE haue here ſhewed howe much the lande of Madera is fruitfull and well diſpoſed, to beare many kinds of good fruite: nowe we muſt ſpeake of the Wine of Madera, the which is aboue all fruites, for the vſe and neceſſitie of our humayne life. I cannot tel

whether it meriteth the firſt degrée, at the leaſt I am aſſured it meriteth the ſeconde in excellencie and perfection. The Wine & Suger bicauſe of an affinitie in temperatneſſe that they haue together, require a like diſpoſition as doeth the ayre and the lande. And euen as our Ilandes of Madera doe bring forth greate quantitie of very good Suger,Wine and Suger of Madera. ſo doe they in lyke maner bring forth good Wine from what partes ſo euer the plantes are come. The Spaniards haue affirmed that they wer not brought from Leuant nor from Candia, and yet the Wine is as good and better. The which then ought not to be attributed to any other thing, but onely to the grounde. I know well that Cyrus King of the Medians and Aſsirians, before that he had conquered Egypte, made to be planted a great number of plāts that he cauſed to be brought from Siria, that ſince brought forth good Wine, but yet they paſſed not theſe of Madera.
               Wine of Cādia And as for the Wine of Candia, though they are very excellent, ſo that in times paſte they haue bene greatly eſtemed in the Romaine bankets, the which haue bene more celebrated than the Wines of Chios, Metheglyn, and of Promentorie of Aruaſia, which for his excellencie and pleaſantneſſe hath bene called Wine for the Gods. But at this day the Wines of Madera, and of the Ile of Palme one of the Canaries,
               Wine of the Ile of Palme. hath got the reputation, whereas there groweth white, red & claret with the which they doe trade into Spaine and from thēce into other countreys. The moſt excellenteſt is ſold at the place where it is made, for nine or ten Ducats the Pype. From the which countrie being tranſported into other places, it is very hot and burning, and rather poyſon to men, than nouriſhmēt, if it be not taken with diſcretion.
            
               Plato eſtemed Wine to be a very good nouriſher, and very familiar to our bodies, ſtirring vp or prouoking the

ſpirites to vertue and honeſtie, alwayes prouided that it be moderatly taken.The profit of Wine being moderatly taken. Alſo Plinie ſaith, that Wine is a ſouerayne medicine. The which being well knowen of the Perſians, eſtemed their greate enterpriſes after that they had dronke Wine (moderatly) to be more worthy than thoſe that were done faſting, that is to wit, being taken in ſufficient quantitie according to the complectiō of mē. We haue here ſhewed, that onely the quantitie or ſuperfluitie of meates and drinkes hurteth: therefore to my iudgement this Wine is better the ſecond and third yere than the firſte, when it hath the heate of the Sunne, the which heate within time conſumeth and vadeth, ſo that then there remayneth but the naturall heate: for being tranſported from one place to another, the burning heate extinguiſheth. Moreouer in theſe Ilandes of Madera, the trées, herbes, and fruites growe ſo rancke and thick, that they are conſtrayned to cutte and to burne a greate parte thereof. In ſtede of which they plante canes of Suger that profit very much, bringing their Suger in, in .6. monthes, and thoſe that they plante in Ianuarie, are cut in Iune, from one moneth to another, and ſo according as they are planted, the which letteth that the heat of the Sunne doth not hurte them. Here I haue briefly ſhewed that which I could obſerue, as touching the ſecretes of the Iles of Madera.
            
         
         
            Of the Promentarie Verd, and of his Ilandes. Cap. 10.
            
               A Promentary is, that which we cal a Cape.THE elders haue called or named a Promentarie, a point of a lande that lieth out long in the ſea, the which may be ſéene a farre of, and that this day it is called with vs a Caape, as a thing eminent aboue others,

as the heade is aboue the reſt of the body? alſo ſome will write Promontorium à Prominendo, the which to my iudgemēt is beſt. This Caape or Promentarie of the which we minde to ſpeake, lyeth on the coaſt of Africa, betwene Barbaria, and Guinny, in the realme of Senega, diſtāt from the Equinoctiall .15. degrées, being in times paſte named Ialout, by the inhabitants, and ſince Caape verd,
               Ialout now called Caape verd, & why it was ſo named. by thoſe that haue ſayled thither & diſcouered it, being ſo named bicauſe of the multitude of trées bothe ſmall and greate, that are gréene at all tymes of the yere, euen as the white Caape is ſo called, bicauſe it is full of white ſandes, being as white as Snowe, without any appearance of Herbes or trées, diſtant from the Canaries .70. Leagues: and there is founde a goulfe of the Sea, called by the people of the countrey Dargin, of the name of a little Ilande,Dargina gowlf. Promentarie of Ethiopiae. néere to the mayne lande. Ptolomeus hath named this Caape verd the Promentorie of Ethiopia, of the which he onely had knowledge without paſſinge further, the which I iudge for my parte, to be well termed of him, for this countrey extendeth of a greate length, and therefore many haue ſayde, that Ethiopia is diuided in Aſia, and in Africa. Among the which Gemaphriſius ſaith, that the mountains of Ethiopia, did occupie the greateſt parte of Afrike, extending to ye brinkes or borders of ye weſt Occidental, toward the South, euen to the floud or riuer Nigritis. This Caape is very fayre and greate lying farre into the ſea, edified on two fayre mountaynes. All this countrey is inhabited with rude & vnciuil people, not ſo rude or wild as they of the Indies, very black as they of Barbarie, ye muſt alſo note that frō 
               Gibaltar, to Preſtre Iohns land, Calicute, cōtaining more thā .3000. leagues, the people is al blacke. Alſo I haue ſene in Ieruſalem thrée Biſhops on the parte of Preſter Iohn, that came thither to viſite the holy Sepulcher,

that were much more blacker than thoſe of Barbary, and not without occaſion, for it is not to be thought that generally thoſe of Africa are a like blacke or like in maners and conditions, conſidering the varietie and difference of Regions, that are ſome more hotter than others. Thoſe of Arabia, and of Egypt, are betwene blacke and white, others browne coloured whom we call white Moores, others are cleane blacke: the moſte parte goe all naked, as the Indians, acknowledging a King, whō they name in their language Mahouat: yet ſome of them as well men as women, hyde their priuie parts with beaſts ſkins. Some among the others weare ſhirtes, & gownes of courſe hairy cloth, the which they receiue in trading with the Portingals. The people are familiar inough towardes ſtrangers. Before that they take their ſuſtenance they waſhe their bodies and members, but in another thing they doe greatly erre, for they ordaine their meates very vnclenly, alſo they eate ſtinking and rotten fleſh, & fiſh: the fiſh bicauſe of his moiſtneſſe putrifieth, and the fleſhe for that it is tender and moyſt, is quickly changed, bicauſe of the vehemēt heat, as we ſée here in Sommer. For moyſtneſſe is ſigne of putrifaction, and the heate is as a cauſe efficient. Their houſes & lodgings are alike, all rounde in maner of our doue houſes, couered with réedes and Ruſhes, of the which alſo they vſe to lye on, in ſteade of beds for to ſlepe and take their reſt. As touching their Religiō, they hold diuers kinds of opinions ſtrange inough, and contrarie to the true Religion. Some worſhip Idols, others Mahomet, chiefely in the realme of Camber; ſome thinke, that there is one God, the Author of all things, with other opinions not vnlike to the Turkes. There are ſome amōg them that liue more hardly than the others, hauing hanged at their necke a little

boxe cloſely ſhut and glewed with gumme) like to a little cheſt, ful of certain letters or wrytings, for to make their inuocations and prayers, the which cuſtomably they vſe certaine dayes without ceaſſing, hauing an opinion that whileſt they haue it about them, they be out of daunger. As for Matrimonie, they ioyne together one with another by certaine promiſſes and agréementes without any other Ceremonie. This Nation paſſeth the time in pleaſure, louing daunſing, the which they exerciſe at euening in the Moone ſhine: in their daunſing they turn their face as by ſome manner of reuerence and worſhip, the which a very friend of mine hathe ſhewed me of a truthe, who dwelled there a certaine time.Barbazins and Serretsa people of Affrica. Nere adiacent are the Barbazins and Serrets, with the which thoſe of whome we haue ſpoken make continuall warre, although that they be like, (only excepting) that ye 
               Barbazins are more wilde, brutiſhe, cruel, and hardy. The Serrets are vacabonds and deſpearſed, euen as the Arabians by the deſerts, pilfering all that they may come by, without law, & without King, ſauing only that they beare a certaine honoure to him among them, that hath done ſome proweſſe or valiant acte in the warre. And this they alleage for reaſon, that if they wer ſubiect vnder the obedience of a King, he might take their children, and vſe them as ſlaues, as doth the King of Senega. They fight for the moſt part on the water in little boates made of the barke of a trée, of foure fadome long, the which they name in their language Almadies.
               Almadies. Their weapons are bowes and ſharpe poynted arrowes enuenomed, ſo that he is vncurable that therewith is ſtricken. Furthermore, they vſe ſtaues of Canes, garniſhed at the end with ſome beaſtes téethe in ſteade of iron, with the which they can well helpe them ſelues. When they take their ennimies in the warre, they kéepe them to ſell to

to ſtraungers, for to get other Marchandiſe, (for there is no vſe of money) they doe not kill them and eate them, as the Canibals doe and they of Breſsill. I will not leaue out, ye ioyning to this Countrey, there is a faire riuer or floud named Nigritis,
               Nigritis nowe called Senega. and ſince named Senega, the which is of the ſame nature as is Nylle, from whence it procéedeth as many doe affirme, the which paſſeth by hie Lybia, and the kingdome of Orgunea, running through the midſt of that Countrey, watering it as Nylle doeth Egipt. And for this cauſe it was named Senega. The Spanyardes many times haue aſſayed by this riuer, to enter into the Countrey for to ſubdue them, and ſometimes they haue entred well foure ſcore leagues: but for that they could not at no time addulciate nor appeaſe the inhabitauntes, being ſtraunge and ſtoute, for auoiding of further inconueniences that might happen and fal, they departed home again. The trade of theſe brutiſhe men, is Oxen and Goates, ſpecially their ſkins, and they haue ſo great abundance, that for a hundreth waight of yron, you may haue a couple of Oxen of the beſt. The Portingals make their vaunt that they were the firſt, yt haue caried to this Caape verd, Goates, Cowes and Bulles, the which haue ſince ſo multiplied: alſo that they haue caried thither diuers Plantes and Séedes, as of Rice, Citrons & Orenges. As touching Nyll, it groweth in the Countrey plentifully. Neare to this Caape verde,
               Iland neare to Caape verde, not inhabited. next to the maine land, there are thrée litle Ilandes, others than thoſe that we call Ilandes of Caape verd, of the which we wil ſpeake héereafter, being fair inough, bicauſe of ye faire trées that they bring forth, neuertheleſſe they are not inhabited. They that dwell there neare, goe thither to fiſhe, from whence they bring ſuche a multitude of Fiſhe, that they vſe it in ſteade of bread, being once dried, and beatē to duſt. In one of theſe

Ilands is found a Trée,A ſtraunge tree. the which beareth leaues like to our Figge trées: the fruite is a two foote long or there about, and great in proportion like to Cowcombers of the Iſle of Cypres. Some eate of this fruit, as we doe Myllions or Pompous, and within this fruit, there is a graine of the greatneſſe of a Beane, wherewith ſome of them féede their Apes and Munkeys: others make collers to put about their necks, for it is very faire when it is dried and ſeaſoned.
         
         
            Of the Wine of Palme trees. Cap. 11.
            HAuing written as muche as is poſſible, that which merited writing of the Promentary verde, being héere before declared. I am nowe minded particularly to treate, ſéeing it cōmeth to purpoſe of Palme trées, and of the Wine and Beuerage, that theſe blacke brutiſhe men haue learned to make: the which in their language they cal Mignoll. We ſée how muche God the father and creator of all things, giueth meanes and wayes for the comfort of our life, in ſuche ſorte that if one way faileth, he ſheweth vs another. And although that in that Countrey the wine is not ſo good as in other places: and paraduenture for that they haue not bene planted, or ſo diligently looked too, as it is in many places of Europe, neuertheleſſe they haue by Diuine prouidence recouered by Arte and ſome diligēce, that which otherwiſe to them was denied. Now this Palme is a trée maruellous faire & wel accompliſhed, be it in heighth in perpetuall gréenneſſe or otherwiſe, (of ye which) there are diuers kinds,Diuers kindes of Palmes. & that grow in diuers places. In Europe aſwell as in Italy, theſe Palmes growe abundantly, chiefly in Sicily, but they are barren:

in ſome of the borders of Spaine, they beare fruite vnreliſhed and ſowre, not to eate. In Affrica they are ſwéete, and alſo in Egipt, in Cypris, in Creta, and alſo in Arabia. Likewiſe in Iuda: the wine that therof is made, is excellent, but it hurteth the braine. Of this trée there is male and female, the male beareth his floure at the braunche, the female buddeth without floure. And it is a maruellous thing, and worthy of memory of that which Plinie and many others doe reſite, that in the Foreſt of Palme trées that naturally grow out of the earthe, if that the males be cut, the females become baren without bearing any more fruit, as widowes that want their huſbandes. This trée requireth a hot Countrey, a ſandy ground, and brackiſhe or ſalt, otherwiſe they ſalte the roote before they plant it. As touching the fruit, it beareth meat outwards, the which groweth firſt, and within, a nut with a ſhel, the which is the graine and ſéede of the trée,Plinie. lib. 13. cap. 4. as we ſée Appels in our Countrey: and alſo there groweth little ones among theſe, without nut, growing al on a braunch. Furthermore, this trée being dead, reuiueth and ſpringeth againe of it ſelf,Phoenix a bird, and why ſhe is ſo named. of ye which it ſéemeth ye bird Phoenix hath taken his name, the which in Gréeke ſignifieth Palme, for that he reuiueth againe of him ſelf, without any other meane. And yet more this trée ſo muche celebrated, hath cauſed this Prouerbe and argument,Prouerbe. that is to cary the Palme, aſmuch to ſay, as the triumph and victory, or for that in times paſt they vſed a crowne of Palme in their victories, as a thing that is alwayes gréene. And yet euery play or game hath his trée, as the Bay trée, the Mirrhe trée, and the Oliue trée, or for that this trée, as ſome ſay, was firſt conſecrated to Phoebus before the Laurell or Bay, the which of antiquitie hath repreſented the ſigne of victorie. And the reaſon thereof reciteth Aulus Gelius
               ▪
               
when he ſaith, that this trée hath a certayne propertie,The property of the Palme. that happeneth to worthy and vertuous men, that is, that the Palme trée neuer boweth nor bendeth, but to the cō
               trarie, the more that it is laden the more as by a manner of reſiſtance it redreſſeth and beareth vpwarde, the which Ariſtotle confirmeth in his Problemes, alſo Plutarche, Plinie, and Theophraſtus,
               Lib. 7. Lib. 8. Lib. 16. Chapt. 42▪ Lib. 5. of plantes. the which ſeme to agrée with the ſaying of Virgill.
               
                  Shrinke not at all though fortune at thee frowne,
                  But valiantly reſiſt and beat hir downe.
               
Now to our purpoſe, in the which as wel for ye diſpoſitiō of the ayre which is very hot being in the zone Torida diſtant 15. degrées from the Equinoctial lyne, as for the good nature of the earth, there groweth abundance of Palme trées, from the which they draw a kind of Iuice for their ſtore and ordinary drinke:The manner how to make Wine of Palmes. the trée being opened with a certayne inſtrument a foote or twaine from the grounde, there procedeth a Licor, that they receiue in an earthen veſſell, and kepe it in other veſſels for their vſe. And for to kepe it from corruption they ſalt it a little, as we doe verioice in our countrey, ſo that the ſalt conſumeth or taketh away the taaſt of the trée. As touching the colour & ſtrength, it is like to the white Wines of Anion, the taaſte is very good.The property of the Wine of Palme trees. This likor is very good for to refreſh and quenche their thirſt, to the which they are ſubiect bicauſe of the extreme heate.
            The fruit of theſe Palmes are little Daates ſharp and ſower, ſo that they are not toothſome to eate, neuertheleſſe the Iuices of the trée is very pleſant to drinke. And among them they eſteme it as we doe good wines. The Egyptians in tymes paſt before they did embalme the dead bodyes hauing prepared thē according to their cuſtome, for to kepe them from putrefieng, did waſhe them thrée

or foure tymes with this likor, and then anoynted them with myrrh and Cynamon. This drinke is vſed in many countries of Ethiopia, for want of better Wine. In like maner certayne Moores make a kinde of drinke with the fruite of an other trée,Another kinde of drinke. but it is as ſoure as veriuyce before they be ripe: for to be ſhort, I wil leue many & diuers fruites and rootes the which the inhabitants vſe for their ſuſtenance, that they haue taken onely by experience, ſo that they knowe how to vſe them in their ſickneſſe. For, euen as they eſchewe voluptuouſneſſe, and ſuperfluitie, the which among vs are very familiar, ſo alſo they are more harder and ſtronger for to endure outward iniuries be they neuer ſo greate. And to the contrary we, for that we are ouer delicate and dayntie, are hurte with a ſmall thing.
         
         
            Of the Riuer of Senega. Cap. 12.
            ALthough that I am not minded in this my diſcourſe as a true Geographer to ſet out the Countreys, Townes, Cities, Floudes, Goulfes, Mountaynes, Diſtances, Situatiōs, and other things appertaining to Geography, yet neuertheleſſe it ſemeth not contrarie, to write and ſet forth at large the moſte notableſt places when it commeth to purpoſe: as the things that I haue ſéene for pleaſure and contentation of my mind, that the reader might thereby receiue ſome pleaſure and profit. Now this floude ſo famous among other things,The Kingdome of Senega. of the which the countrey and Kingdome that it watereth hath bene named Senega, as our ſea Meditarium, hath or requireth diuers names according to the diuerſitie of countreys

where it paſſeth, and in Libia, comming to the Caape verd, of the which we haue ſpoken here before, from the which to the ryuer, the countrey is very plaine, ſandie and barren, for the which cauſe there are not ſo many deuouring beaſtes, as in other places. This floude or Riuer is the firſte and moſte celebrated of the lande towarde the Weaſte ſide, ſeparating or deuiding the drie and barren countrie from the fruitfull, and it extendeth euen to the high Libia, and to many other countreys and Kingdomes that it watereth. It contayneth in bredth about a league, the which is very little in the reſpect of many riuers that are in America, of the which we will treate hereafter more at large. Before that it entereth into the Weaſte, it deuideth, and entereth in by two mouthes or openings being ſeparated the one from the other about half a league, the which are of an indifferent depth, ſo that ſmal ſhips may be brought in. Some in the olde time as Solon in his booke named Pollyciſtor, Iulius Caeſar and others,The opinion of ſome of our elders vpon the originall of Nill and of Senega Hills of the Moone and of there lying. The originall of Senega. haue written that the great floude of Nill, paſſing all ouer Egypt, hath the like ſpring or Original as Senega, & procedeth out of the ſame mountaines, the which ſemeth not true. For the originall of Nill, is far beyonde the Equator, for it commeth from the high hills of Bede, otherwiſe named of the Auncient Geographers, hills of the Moone, the which ſeparateth the olde and newe Africa, as the hills Pyrannes, deuide Fraunce from Spaine. And theſe hills are in Cerenaique, the which is beyond the lyne .15. degrées. The ſource or ſpring of Senega, of the which we ſpeake, procedeth from two hills or mountaynes, the one named Mandro, and the other Thala, being diſtant from the hills of Bede, more than a 1000. leagues. And by this may be ſene how greately many haue erred for yt they haue not ſought out things, as

we haue done of late dayes. As for the hills of the Moone, they lye in the lower Ethiopia, & thoſe from whence commeth Senega into Libia,
               Hills of Libia. of the which, the chiefeſt hills are Vſergate, from whence procedeth the Riuer of Darda, the mounte Mandro, being more ſpokē of than the others, for bicauſe that all the riuers that runne from Salata, to Maſsa, being diſtant the one from the other about ſeuenty leagues, take their originall out of this hill. Furthermore, the mounte Gyrgila, from whence their falleth a riuer named Sympho, and of Hagapole, commeth the floude Subo, being full of good fiſh and Cocodrils hurtful to their neighbors. True it is that Ptolomeus, hauing treated of many countreys and ſtrange Nacions, hath ſayde that which ſemed hym good, chiefely of Africa and Ethiopia. And among all the Auncient writers, I finde none that hath had ſo perfit knowledge to my minde as he, when he ſpeaketh of the Promentarie of Phraſo, hauing fiftene degrées of latitude, & that is the fartheſt lād of the which he hath had knowledge, as alſo deſcribeth Glarean, in the end of the deſcriptiō of Africa. In his time the inferior world hath bene diſcribed,None in times paſt hath had perfit knowledge of Africa in generall. neuertheleſſe he hath not wholy ſpeken thereof, for that he knewe not a greate parte of the land Meridionall, which in our time hath ben ſince diſcouered. And many things haue ben added to the writings of Ptolome, that may be ſene in the generall table that is properly of him. Therefore the ſimple reader hauing not greatly turned in the Coſmography, nor had experience of things, ſhal note that al the inferior worlde is deuided by the elders in thrée partes vnequal, that is to wit Aſia, Europa, and Africa, of the which ſome haue writen the truth, other that which ſemed them good, without making any mention of the weſt Indies, that at this day make the fourth parte of the world, diſcouered of late yeres, as alſo

hath bene the moſt greateſt part of the Eaſte Indies Calicut and others. As touching thoſe of the Weaſte, as Fraunce Antariike, Peru, Mexica, they are now commonly called the Newe Worlde,The newe worlde. yea to the .52. degrée and a halfe of the lyne, where as is the ſtraight of Magello, and many other prouinces on the North ſide, and of the South on the coaſt of Leuant, & to the lower tropicke of Capricorne in the Weaſt Meridionall, and the North lande, of the which Arian, Plinie, and others Hiſtoriographers, haue made no mention that they haue ben diſcouered in their tyme. Some haue made mention of certayne Ilandes that were founde out or diſcouered by the Carthaginians,
               The Iles Hiſperides diſcouered by the Carthaginians in times paſte. The Ile Atlantike in the time of Plato. but I iudge thē to be the Ilandes Hiſperides or fortunate. Plato alſo ſayth that in tymes paſt there was in the ſea Atlantike or Weaſt, a great mayne lande or countrey, and that there was in like caſe an Iland named Atlantike more greater than Africa or Aſia together (the which) was ſwallowed vp with an earthquake, the which I thinke rather to be a fable than otherwiſe, for if it had ben true, others beſide him would haue written thereof, knowing that the lande of which the elders haue had knowledge, deuideth in this maner. Firſt of the Eaſte parte it is next vnto the vnknowen land, the which is next to the great Aſia, and to the Eaſte Indies on the South ſide: they haue had knowledge of a few, that is to wit, Ethiopia Meridionall, named Agiſimbra or the North ſide of the Ilandes of Englande, Scotlande, Ireland, and the hills Hiperbores, which are the Further partes of lande Northwarde as ſome do ſay. Now to retourne to Senega,
               The diuiſitie of the countrey & the inhabitants maners in Senega. on the one and on the other ſide of the floude, euen as the grounde is diuers and differing, ſo are the inhabitantes therof: on the one ſide the people are very blacke, of great ſtature and ſtrong of body, neuertheleſſe the countrey

flouriſheth wc fayre trées bearing fruit, on the other ſide you ſhal ſée al contrary, the mē of the colour of Aſſhes, & of little ſtature. As touching the people of the countrey of Senega, I can ſay no other thing than of thoſe of Caape verd, but that they are rather worſe, for that the Chriſtians dare not ſo eaſily deſcende a lande for to trade or to haue refreſhing, as in other places, vnleſſe they wil be killed or taken for captiues, and ſo to be made ſtaues. All things among them are wilde and contemptible ſauing onely peace, the which they doe ſomewhat eſteme one towarde another. In like caſe reſte, with ſome excerciſe, ſometimes in laboring the grounde for to ſaue Ryce: as for corne and Wine there is none, as touching corne it cannot proſper nor come vp as in other countreys for that there falleth very little and ſeldome rayne, which is the cauſe that the ſéedes cannot bud out nor floure bicauſe of the extreme heate and drieth. So ſoone as they ſée their grounde watered or dewed, they begin to ſowe, and after they haue ſowed within thrée monethes the fruite is ripe redy to be cut. Their drinke is the Iuice of Palme trées and water.A fruitfull tree and Oyle of diuers properties. Among the trées of this countrey there are founde ſome of the greatneſſe of our Oke trées, the which beareth fruite as great as dates: with the nut they make Oyle that hath meruelous properties. The firſte is that it holdeth water in yellowe collour like ſafferne, with ye which they dye or collour their little boulles, that they drinke in, alſo there hattes that are made of the ſtrawe of rice. Furthermore this Oyle hath a ſmell like to Marche violets, and a ſauor or taaſt like Olyue Oyle, therefore many eat of it with their Fiſh, Ryce, and other meates that they eate. Thus much thought I good to ſpeake of this ryuer and countrey of Senega, the which extendeth from the coaſt of Leuant, to the land of Thuenſar,
               
and from the South parte of the Realme Cambra, from the ponent, to the Weaſte ſea, keping alwayes our courſe, certayne dayes after we began to enter into the countrey of Ethiopia, in that parte that is named the Kingdome of Noby, which is of a greate circuite, with many Kingdomes and prouinces, of the which we will hereafter ſpeake.
         
         
            Of the Ilands Hiſperides, othervviſe named Caape verd. Cap. 13.
            AFter that we had lefte our Promentary on the lefte hande,The lying of the Ilandes of Caape verd. for to kepe our courſe as right as it was poſſible, making the Southweſt a quarter of South almoſt a whole day, but about ten or eleuen of the clocke the winde came contrary, the which caſt vs on the right hande towardes certayne Ilandes the which are called by our carde Marins, Ilandes of Caape verd, the which are diſtant from the Canaries, about two hundreth leagues, and from the Promentarie ſixtie leagues by ſea, and a hundreth leagues from Budomell, in Affrica, following the coſte of Ginnie towarde the pole Antartike. Theſe Ilandes are ten in number, of the which there are two wel peopled with Portingals, that firſte diſcouered them & brought them to their obedience, one of them which they haue named S. Iames Iland, is better peopled than the reſt,The Ile of S. Iames. alſo thither is made greate trading by the Moores as well of thoſe that inhabite the mayne lande, as of the others that ſayle to the Indies in Ginnie, and of Manycongra, in the countrey of Ethiopia. This Ilande is diſtāt from the Equinoctiall lyne, fiftene degrées: an other

likewiſe named S. Nicolas Ile,The Ile of S. Nicolas, others as Flera, Plintana, Pintoria, and Foyon. inhabited as the other: the others are not ſo peopled, as Flera, Plintana, Pintoria, and Foyon, in the which there are a certayne number of people and ſlaues ſent thither by the Portingals, to labor the grounde in ſome places where they finde it beſte, and chiefly for to get goate ſkinnes of the which ther is great ſtore, & therewith make good trade & haue thereof a great vent, and therefore the Portingals paſſ twiſe or thriſe in a yere with ſhips and munitions leading with them dogs, and bringing nets, and ſnares for to chaſe and hunte wild goates, the which after they are ſkinned, they reſerue onely the ſkinnes, the which they ſeaſon with ſalt and earth, in certaine veſſels made for that purpoſe, for to kepe them for putrifieng, and ſo they carry them into their countrey, and therewith they make their Marokins,
               Marokins of Spaine. that are ſo greately eſtemed with vs. Alſo they inhabitants of theſe Ilands are bound to render or pay for tribut, for euery one to the King of Portingall, the number of ſix thouſande goates wilde and tame, being ſalted and dried, the which they deliuer to thoſe, that of the parte or for the Kings behoofe make the voyage, with his greate ſhippes to the Eaſte Indies, as to Calicut and other places paſſing by theſe Ilandes: and theſe number of goates are beſtowed for their ſuſtenance during the voyage, which is two yeres long or more, for bicauſe of the diſtaunce of places and the greate Nauigation that they muſte make. Moreouer the ayre in theſe Ilandes is Peſtilent and vnholſome, ſo that the firſte Chriſtians that beganne there to inhabit, were of a long tyme vexed with ſickeneſſe, as well to my Iudgement for the vntemperatneſſe of the ayre that in ſuch places cannot be good, as alſo the changing of dyet and of countrey.

Alſo the burning Agues are there very familier & common to the ſlaues ſpecially, and the bloudy flixe, of the which neither the one nor the other procéede not but of humors extreme hot, bicauſe of their continuall trauaile and naughty nouriſhment: alſo of the hotneſſe of the air, with the water that is next, and therfore they receiue exceſſe of theſe two Eliments.
         
         
            Of the Torterels, and of an herbe that they call Orſelie. Cap. 14.
            SEing yt in our Nauigation we are minded to write certaine ſecretes obſerued in places where we haue bene, it ſhal not be hurtful to ſpeak of Torterels, that theſe former Ilands doe noriſhe in as great quantitie as goates. There is found four kind of Torterels,Foure kinde of Torterels. of ye land & of the ſea, the third liuing in freſh water, the fourthe in mariſhes. Of the which I meane not to ſpeake particularly, but only of thoſe that are ſéene on the ſea coaſtes that compaſſe theſe Ilands. Theſe kind of Torterels wil leape from the Sea to the ſhore at his appoynted time, making with his clawes a hole in the ſande, wherein after ſhe hath laid hir egges, (being of the number of eight paire, of the which ſpeaketh Ariſtotle,) couereth them ſo well, that it is vnpoſſible to ſée them, or to finde them vntill that the floude commeth that vncouereth them, then bicauſe of the extreme heate that is there of the Sunne, they engender and open (as the Henne of hir egge) the which conſiſteth in greate number of Torterels, of the greatneſſe of Crabbes (which is a kinde of Fiſhe) the which the floud returning, beareth into the Sea. Among theſe Torterels, there are ſome of ſuche a greatneſſe, ſpecially in theſe partes whereof I ſpeake, that foure men

cannot almoſt beare one, as of a truth I haue ſéene and vnderſtanded of men worthy of credence.Lib. 9. cap. 10. 
               Plinie ſheweth that in the Indian Sea, there are ſo great Torterels, that the ſhel is bigge inough to couer a meane houſe, and that at the Ilandes of the red Sea, they might make therewith veſſels Nauigable. The ſayde author ſayeth alſo, that there are the like at the ſtraight of Carmania in the Perſian ſea. There are many wayes to take them. Sometimes this great beaſt of a deſire to ſwim more eaſily,How to take the Torterels. ſeketh the vpper parte of the water a little before noone, when the day is faire, where as hauing the backe bare and vncouered out of the water, ſodainly their ſhell is ſo well dried by the Sunne, that they cannot deſcend to the depth of the ſea, ſo that they floote aboue water, will they or not, and by this meanes they are taken. It is otherwiſe ſayd that in the night they come out of the Sea ſeking their repaſt, and after they are full and weary, they fall a ſléepe on the water neare to the ſhore, wheras they are eaſily taken, for they are heard how they ſnort in ſléeping, beſide many other wayes and meanes, which were to long to rehearſe.
                  The thickneſſe of the ſhells of theſe Torterels of the Sea, and why they ſerue.
                  Shieldes of the ſhels of Torterels.
                As touching their couer and ſhell, I leaue you to iudge of what thickneſſe it may be proportioned to his greatneſſe. Alſo in ye coaſt of the ſtraight of Magelan, and of the riuer of plate, the Indians make thē ſhieldes, which ſerue them for to receiue the blowes of arrowes of their enimies. Likewiſe the Amazones on the coaſt of the peaceable Sea, make their Bulwarkes when that they are aſſailed of the enimies. And for my parte I may boldely ſay, that I haue ſéene ſuche a ſhell of a Torterell, that a hande gun could in no wiſe pierce. We néede not to aſke how many the Inſulares, or Ilande dwellers of Caape verde doe take and eate, as we woulde doe héere Béefe or Mutton. Alſo it is like to Veale, and

almoſt of the ſame taſte. The wilde man of India America will in no wiſe eate of them, perſuading with them ſelues that it would make them heauy, as it is an heauy meat, which wold be a great let or hinderaunce to them in the warres, for that being heauy, they cannot purſue lightly their enimies in the warre, neither eſcape them ſelues. To conclude,A hiſtorie of a Portingal gentleman. I wil rehearſe a Hiſtorie of a Gentleman Portingalls, that was a Leper, who for the great paine that he receiued of his diſeaſe, ſéeking all the meanes he could to abſent himſelfe from his Countrey, as one being in extreame diſpaire, after he had knowledge of the conqueſt of theſe faire Ilands by thoſe of his countrey, was bent for recreation to goe thither, ſo that he prepared himſelfe in the beſt order he coulde, with ſhips, men, and artillery, and beaſtes aliue, ſpecially Goates, of the which they haue quantitie. And in the ende he landed in one of the Ilandes, who for the taſte that his diſeaſe cauſed him to haue, or for that he was weary of eating of fleſhe, the which they vſe cuſtomably in their Countrey, he had a deſire to eate egges of Torterels,A Portingall healed of the Leproſie. the which he did for the ſpace of two yeares, in ſuche ſorte, that in the ende he was healed of his Leproſie. Now I would gladly aſke, whether that by the temperateneſſe of the aire, he recouered his healthe, which he had chaunged, or the meate that he eate. I thinke verily, that bothe the one and the other was the cauſe. As touching the Torterell, Plinie who ſpeaking as well for ſuſtenaunce as for medicine, maketh no mention that it ſhould be good againſt the Leproſie. Neuertheleſſe, he ſayeth that it is good againſt many poyſons, ſpecially againſt the Salmander by a Antipathia, that is betwéene them two, and mortall enmitie.
            
               Whether that this beaſt hath any hid propertie againſt this euill, I leaue to the Phyloſophers and Phyſitions: and ſo ye may ſée that experience hath geuen the knowledge of many medicines. Of the which none cā giue any certaine reaſon: wherfore I wold that ſome wold proue the experience of theſe of our Countrey, the which to my iudgement ſhold be more better & more ſure than Vipers, ſo much commended in this affection, and of which is cō
               poſed and made the great Theriaque, knowing that it is not ſure to vſe Vipers, bicauſe of the poyſon yt they bear, what ſo euer they ſay, the which thing was alſo firſte known by experience. It is alſo ſayd that many vpon the example of this Portingall haue gone thither, to whom it hath alſo wel ſucceded. This much therfore ſhall ſuffice for Torterels, and as for the Goates that this gētleman bare thither, they haue there ſo well multiplied, that at this preſent there are an infinite nūber, & ſome holde opinion that their original commeth from thence, & that before there was none ſéene. Nowe there reſteth to ſpeake of an herbe that they name in their lāguage Orſelie:
               Orſelie a herbe. this herbe groweth on the tops of high and acceſſible rockes without any earthe, of the which there is great aboundaunce, and for to gather it, they faſten ropes on theſe Mountaines or rockes, then they clime vpwarde by the lower ende of this corde or rope, and ſcraping the rocke with certaine inſtruments that they haue, make it to fall as a chimney ſwéeper doeth, the which they reſerue, and let it down by a rope, in baſkets or other veſſels. The vſe of this herbe, is for to make coloures, as héere before we haue ſhewed.
         
         
            Of the Ilande of Fire. Cap. 15.
            
               The Ile of fire, and why it was ſo named.AMong other ſecretes I wil not leaue out ye ile of fire, ſo named, for that it caſteth cōtinually a flame of fire,

ſuche a one, that if the elders had had thereof any knowledge, they wold haue written it among other things, aſwel as of the Mountaine of Veſuue, and of the hill Etna, of the which for a truthe they rehearſe maruels. As touching Etna in Sicilie, it hath caſt the fire ſometimes with a meruellous noiſe, as in the time of Marcus Emilius, & T. Flaminus, as writeth Oroſa, the which many other Hiſtoriographers doe affirme, as Strabo, the which affirmeth to haue ſéene it, and diligently conſidered. The which maketh me to beleue ſomewhat alſo in the reſpecte of theſe men that haue ſpoken thereof. Alſo they are not ſo farre off, but yt we may proue whether it be true or no. I know well that ſome of our writers would ſay, that one of the Ilandes of Canaria caſteth continually fire: but let him take héede that he take not that, of which we ſpeake, for the other. Ariſtotle in his boke of maruels, ſpeaketh of an Ilande diſcouered by the Carthaginiens not inhabited, which did caſt flames of fire, beſide many other wonderfull things. Notwithſtanding, I cannot thinke that they haue knowen this, muche leſſe the hill Etna, for it was knowen before the raigne of the Carthaginiens. As for the hil of Puſsola, it lieth on the maine land,The Hill Puſola. and if any one wil ſay otherwiſe, I will notwithſtand them: as for my parte I cannot finde that euer it was found out, but ſince a M. D. and .xxx. with others as well néere as farre. There is alſo an other hill in Hirland, named Hecla, the which at certaine times caſteth ſtones, as thought they had come out of a fiery furnace, ſo that the ground within .v. or .vj. leagues about, is barren and vnprofitable, bicauſe of the aſhes that procéede out of this hill, wherwith the ground is couered. This Ilande of which we ſpeake, containeth vij. leagues compaſſe, by good right called the Ile of fire, for the Mountaine hauing of Circuite .679. paces, and

of height a thouſand and fiftie fadome or there about, caſteth continually fire at the top, the which may be ſéene thirty or forty leagues on the ſea, much more clearer in ye night than the day, for that by good Philoſophy the greateſt light ſhadoweth the leaſt: the which maketh the Nauigants afraide, that haue no knowledge thereof before. This flame hath a very euill ſmel, and therfore ye néede not to thinke ſuche manner of fire ſtraunge, knowing that they are naturall things, as the Phyloſophers witneſſe, (that is) thoſe places are ful of fire, and hot Mines, of the which procéedeth a vapor hot and dry, like to fire, the which cannot be done without aire. Alſo from thence procéede waters naturally hot: furthermore in Eſclauonie by Apolonia, there is a fountaine coming out of a rocke, whereas is ſéene procéede a flame of fire, whereby all the waters adiacent are as boyling. This place or Ile of fire is inhabited with Portingals, as many other are in thoſe quarters. And ſo, euen as the burning heate of this hill doth in no wiſe let the frutefulneſſe of the lād, the which bringeth forthe diuers kindes of good fruits, where as is a great temperatneſſe of the aire, liuely ſpringes and fair fountaines, alſo the ſea that cōpaſſeth it, doth not quench this vehement heate, as rehearſeth Plinie of Chimera, alwayes burning, Lib. 2. cap. 106. and quencheth with earth or hay, being caſt vpon it, but with water it is kindled.
         
         
            Of Ethiopia. Cap. 16.
            ALthough that many Coſmographers haue ſufficiētly deſcribed the Countrey of Ethiopia, alſo among our writers, thoſe the which haue made many faire Nauigations by this coaſt of Affrica, in many and farre Countreys, notwithſtanding this ſhall not let, but that

according to my endeuor, I wil declare ſome ſecretes obſerued in ſailing by this ſaide coaſt into the great America. Ethiopia therfore extendeth ſo far,The ſpreading of Ethiopia. that it hath parte bothe of Aſia and Affrica, and therfore they are deuided in two. That parte which is in Affrica, is named India, or Leuant of the red ſea, and to the North part of Egipt & Affrica toward the South parte of the floud Nigritis, the which as we haue ſaid, is called Senega.
               Senega floud, in times paſt named Nigritis. To the ponent it hath the whole parte of Affrica, the which extendeth to the banke ſide or brinkes of the Weſt. And ſo it hath ben named by the name of Ethiops, the ſonne of Vulcane, the which before had many other names. Toward the Weſt it is hilly, ſmall inhabited in the Eaſt,The deſcription of Ethiopia. others ſet it out after this ſorte folowing. There are two Ethiops, the one is vnder Egipt riche and large, and in the ſame is the Ile Mirva, great among thoſe of Nylle, and of the ſame parte extending to the Eaſt, raigneth Preſter Iohn.
               Miroa an Ilande. The other part is not ſo well knowen nor diſcouered, it is of ſuche a greatneſſe, ſauing only by ye borders of the ſea. Others deuide it otherwiſe, that is to wit, the one parte being in Aſia, and the other in Affrica, that now are called the Indies of Leuant, compaſſed with the red Sea in Barbarie, towardes the Northe, to the Countrey of Libia in Egipt. This countrey is very hilly, of the which ye hils are Bed, Iona, Bardita, Meſcha, Lipha. Some haue written that the firſt Ethiopians and Egiptians, among other were moſt rude & ignorant, leading a wild life euen as brute beaſts, without lodging or remaining, but reſting them wheras they wer benighted, worſe than at this day do the Maſoniſts. From the Equinoctiall toward the Antartike, ther is a great coūtrey of Ethiopians, yt noriſh great Eliphāts, Tigers, Rhinoceros, beaſts ſo named. There is another region bearing Cynamon betwene the armes of Nylle:
               
the realme of Etabecke,
               The realme of Etabecke and Ickthiophages. on bothe ſides of Nylle, is inhabited with Chriſtians. The others are named Ickthiophages liuing only with fiſhe, being in times paſt brought vnder the obedience and ſubiection of Alexander. The Anthropophages are neare to the hils of the Mone, and the reſt extending from thence to Capricorne, and returning towarde the Caape of good hoppe, and inhabited with diuers and ſundry people, hauing diuers ſimilitudes and monſtrous. Neuertheleſſe they are eſtéemed to be ye firſt borne into the world, alſo the firſt that haue inuented religion and ceremonies, and therfore they were neuer vnder the yoke of ſubiection, but haue alwayes liued at libertie.The loue of the Anthropophages towards their King. It is a wonderfull thing to ſée the honor and amitie that they beare to their King: for if it chaunce that he be grieued in his body, his ſubiects or houſhold ſeruaunts will be the like, eſtéeming it a thing vnpertinent to remaine whole, and their King grieued or offended.
            The greateſt part of theſe people are al naked, bicauſe of the extréeme heat of the Sunne, others couer their priuie partes with certaine ſkinnes, others couer halfe of their body,Meroa the chief towne of Ethiopia, aunciently named Saba. and others their whole body. Meroa is the hed Towne of Ethiopia, in the olde time it was named Saba, and ſince by Cambiſes, Meroa. There are diuers kinds of religion. Some are Idolaters, as hereafter ſhalbe declared, the others worſhip the Sunne when it riſeth, but they deſpiſe the Weſt. This Countrey aboundeth in miracles and wonders, it nouriſheth toward India very great beaſtes, as great Dogges, Eliphants, Rhinocerous of a wō
               derfull height, Dragons, Baſiliſcus and others: furthermore, trées ſo hie that no Archer can ſhoote to the toppe, with many other wonderfull things, as alſo Plinie reherſeth in the ſeconde boke, the .xvij Chapter of his naturall Hiſtorie. Their corne is cuſtomably Mill and Barley,

with the which alſo they make a certaine drink, and they haue fewe other fruites and trées, ſauing only certaine great Palme trées. They haue alſo in ſome places, good quantitie of precious ſtones more than in other. Alſo it ſhal not be out of the way, to ſay that theſe people are very blacke, according as the heat is more or leſſe vehemēt, and that that colour commeth of a ſuperficiall action, being the great heate of the Sunne,Why the Ethiopians, and other are black. the which is the cauſe alſo, yt they are very fearfull. The heat of the aire being ſo violent, draweth out the natural heat of the heart, and other interior parts, & therfore they remain colde within being deſtitute of the naturall heate, and onely burned outwarde, as we may ſée in other things. The action of heat in what thing ſo euer it be, is no other thing thā reſolution or diſſipation of the Eliments, when it perſeuereth and is violent, in ſuche ſorte that the moſt ſubtilleſt Eliments being conſumed, there remaineth but ye earthly part, keping colour and conſiſtence of the earth, as we ſée Aſhes and burned woode. Then to the ſkin of this people ſo burned, there reſteth but the earthly parte of the humor, the others being diſperſed which cauſeth the coulour. I ſaid they were fearful, bicauſe of the inward coldneſſe: for hardineſſe and manhoode commeth not, but with a vehement heate of the heart. The which cauſeth the Engliſhmen, & thoſe that are vnder the North Pole, which cōtrary are cold without, but maruelous hot within, to be hardy, couragious, & ful of great boldneſſe. Therfore theſe Neigers haue their heade curled, their téethe white, great lips, croked legges, the women vnconſtant, with many other vices which wold be to long to reherſe: therfore I wil leaue this to Philoſophers. Let vs come to our purpoſe.Indians and Ethiopians vſe Magique. Theſe Ethiopians & Indians vſe Magike bicauſe they haue many herbes & other things proper for

that exerciſe. And it is certaine & true, that there is a certain Sympathia in things, and hid Antipathia, the which cannot be knowen but by long experience. And bicauſe that we coaſted a countrey ſomwhat far in this land, named Ginney, I thinke good to write therof particularly.
         
         
            Of Ginney. Cap. 17.
            AFter that we had refreſhed vs at Caape verd, it behoued vs to paſſe further, hauing ye wind at Northeaſt, maruelous fauourable for to conducte vs right vnder the Equinoctiall line, the which we ought to paſſe: but being come to the height of Ginney, lying in Ethiopia, the winde became cleane contrary, bicauſe that in that region, the windes be very vnconſtant, with raine, tempeſt, and thunder, ſo that the Nauigation on that coaſt is very dangerous. Now the fourth day of September we arriued into this Countrey of Ginney, on the Weſt borders. But ſomewhat far within the lande, it is inhabited with a very ſtraunge people, bicauſe of their Idolatry & darke ignoraunce. Before that this Countrey was diſcouered, and the people knowen, it was thought that they had liued like the Ethiopians, hauing the like manner of religion of thoſe of the higher Ethiope, and of Senega: but it is found cleane contrary, for all they that inhabite or dwel from the ſaid Senega,
               The Inhabitants of Ginney, to the Cape of good hope, are all Idolaters. to the Caape of good hope, are al Idolaters without the knowledge of god and his law. And theſe people are ſo blinded and ignorant, that the firſt thing that they méete in the morning, be it birde, ſerpent, or other wilde or tame beaſt, they take it with them bearing it about them all the day, about what buſineſſe ſo euer they haue, as a God or protector of their worke, if they go a fiſhing in any of their litle boates of bark, they will put it in one of the endes of the boate well wrapped with ſome leaues, hauing an opinion and beleuing that

it wil bring them all the day good lucke, be it on lande or on water: neuertheleſſe they beleue in God, alleaging yt he is there aboue immortall, but vnknowne, for that he will not be knowne to them ſenſibly. The which erroure differeth nothing from the error of the Gentiles in times paſt, that worſhipped diuers Gods, vnder the coloure of Images and ſimilitudes. But yet this is a thing worthy to be noted, though it be ſuperſtitious and abhominable: that theſe pore, ignorant, and brutiſhe men, had rather worſhip corruptible things, than to be reputed without a God. Diodorus the Sicillian writeth, that the Ethiopians had the firſt knowledge of the fained gods, to whom they began to vow, and to ſacrifice. Alſo Homer ſignifieth that Iupiter with other Gods went into Ethiopia, as well for that they were there honored and ſacrificed vnto, as for the wholeſomneſſe of the Countrey. The like you haue of Caſtor and Pollux,
               Caſtor and Pollux, called the bright ſtarres, and lanternes of the ſea. the which going on the ſea at the requeſt of the Greekes againſt Troy, were vaniſhed in the aire, and were neuer after ſéene againe, the which giueth opinion to ſome to thinke yt they were rauiſhed & placed among the ſtarres of the Sea: alſo many name them the cleare ſtarres of the ſea, attributing their names Caſter & Polux, to two fair & bright ſtarres. The ſayd people haue neither temples nor churches, nor other places appoynted for ſacrifice and prayer. Beſides this, they are without compariſon much more wicked than thoſe of Barbarie or Affrica, in ſuch ſort that the ſtraungers dare not aborde them, nor ſet foote on land, but by pledges:The maners and order of liuing of thoſe of Ginney. otherwiſe they would take them, and handle them like ſlaues. Theſe Villaines or wicked impes goe all naked, ſauing ſome ſince the time that their Countrey hathe bene ſomewhat frequented, haue worne a little ſhirt of Cotten, or ſome ſuche thing, the which is brought them from other places.

They make not ſo great trade with beaſtes, as in Barbarie: there is very fewe fruits, bicauſe of the drineſſe & extreme heat, for this region is vnder ye ſigne Taurus: they liue a good many yeares, and yet ſéeme not olde, ſo that a man of a .C. yeares olde, would be iudged with vs not aboue .xl. Neuertheleſſe, they liue with the fleſhe of wilde beaſts, without ſéething, roaſting, or wel preparing of it: they haue alſo ſome fiſhe, and great aboundaunce of Oyſters, more larger ſome than halfe a foote, but they are more dangerous to eate, than any other fiſhe, they caſt a liquor like to milke, and yet the inhabitants eate thereof without any danger, and they vſe as well ſalte water as freſhe. They commonly make war with other nations: their weapons are bowes and arows, as the other Ethiopians and Affricans. The women of this Countrey frequent the warre as much as the men, and they beare for the moſt part, a large buckle of fine gold or other mettal at their eares, lips, and alſo on their armes. The waters of this countrey are very dangerous,The aire of Ginney, is vnholeſome. and alſo the aire is vnholeſome, for that to my iudgement, the South winde being very hot and moiſt, and familiar in that countrey, is ſubiect to all kinde of putrefactions, the which we féele many times in this Countrey. And therefore they that of our Countrey, and of other Countreys of Europe that trauaile to Gynney, cannot remaine there long, without receiuing ſome ſickneſſe, the which chaunced to vs, for many of our companie died, and others remained a long time ſicke, and with great paine they recouered their health. For the which cauſe we remained not there long time.Maniguetta, a fruit much eſtemed among ſpices. I will not omit that in Ginney, the fruit that is moſt rife and common, and with the which the ſtraungers of ſtraunge Countreis lade their ſhips, is named Maniguetta, being very good, and wel eſtemed aboue other ſpices,

with the which the Portingalles make a great trade. This fruit commeth vp in the fields like an Onion. The other that commeth from Molucquer and Calicut, is not ſo wel eſtéemed by a great deale. This people of Ginney trade with certaine Barbariens adiacent, golde and ſalt after a ſtraunge faſhion. There are certaine places ordained among them, where as eche one of his parte bringeth his Marchandiſe, thoſe of Ginney, ſalte, and the others gold molten in lumpes, and without any other talke togither, bicauſe of the ſmall truſt and confidence one of another, as the Turkes and Arabians, and ſome of America with their neighbors, they leaue in the place before ſpoken, the golde and the ſalte of eache part. This being done, theſe Ethiopians of Ginney if they finde there golde inough for their ſalt, they take it away, otherwiſe they leaue it, and let it lie. The which the other ſéeing that their golde wil not ſatiſfie, they adde vnto it vntill that there be ſufficient: then they beare away that, that to eche one doth appertaine. You ſhall vnderſtande furthermore, that the Neigers hitherwarde are more ciuill and better nurtered than theſe of Ginney, bicauſe of the great reſorte of Marchantes that trade thither: alſo they prouoke others to barter for their golde, for things of ſmal value, as kniues, glaſſes, and ſuche like.The trade of Iuorie. Alſo the Portingals trade and bargaine with the Mores of Ginney, beſide other things, for Iuorie, that we call Eliphants téethe. And one among others, ſhewed me that at one time they haue ladē twelue thouſand of theſe téethe: among the which there was one found among the other, that wayed a hundred pounde waight: for as we haue ſayd, the lande of Ethiopia nouriſheth Eliphantes, the which they take at the chaſe, as we doe here wilde Boares, and ſo they eate the fleſh, which many affirme to be very good: the which I had rather

beleue than taſte, or to ſtand diſputing thereof. I will not therefore in this place ſtand to reaſon or ſet out the vertues and properties of this beaſt, the moſte gentleſt, and approching to humain reaſon than any other,Eliphāt, a beaſt approching to humain reſon. ſéeing that this beaſt hathe bene ſo muche celebrated of our elders, and alſo by thoſe of our time: and knowing that Plinie, Ariſtotle, & many others haue ſufficiently treated thereof, and of his fleſhe, the which ſome ſay is medicinable, and good againſt the Leproſie. The téethe that we call Iuorie, dothe comfort the heart and the ſtomake, and it wil alſo helpe with all his ſubſtance, the parte or belly of the mother. I will not therefore wryte that which they haue written, for that it is not to our purpoſe. Neuertheleſſe I will not leaue to ſpeake that which I haue ſene: the which is, if that they can get any yong Eliphantes, they teache them many prety knackes. For this beaſt is very apt, and of a good vnderſtanding.
         
         
            Of the Equinoctiall line, and of the Ilandes of S. Omer. Cap. 18.
            LEauing therefore this parte of Gynney on our lefte hande, after we had ſtayed there but a while for the infection of the aire, as we haue before ſhewed, we kept our courſe, coaſting alwayes to the height of the Caape of Palmes, and of that which is called the thrée poyntes, where as runneth a faire Riuer, able to beare great ſhippes, by the reaſon whereof there is good trade all ouer the Countrey,A riuer or flud bearing Mines of golde and ſiluer. and the which beareth golde and ſiluer aboundantly in lumpes, and therefore the Portingalles haue landed there, and being in fauoure with the Inhabitantes, they haue builded there a faire Caſtle, the

which they haue named the Mine Caſtle: And not wtout a cauſe, for their Golde is without compariſon more finer than that of Calicute, or of India America. It is on this ſide the Equinoctiall about thrée degrées and a halfe. There is founde a riuer that commeth from the Mountaines of the Countrey named Cania,
               Cania and Rhegium riuers. and another more leſſer, named Rhegium, the which beareth or bringeth very good Fiſhe, alſo Cocodrils very daungerous, as Nylle, and Senega, and they eate them as we doe Venſon. I will not forget what was ſhewed me to haue bene ſene neare to the Mine Caſtle: a ſea monſter hauing the ſhape of a man, that the floud had left on the ſhore, the which was heard crie.Two ſea mō
                  ſters like to man and wife. In like caſe the female came with the next floud, crying aloud, and ſorowing for the abſence of hir make: the which is a wonderfull and ſtraunge thing. By this may be knowen, that the Sea doeth nouriſh and bring forthe diuers, and ſtraunge kinde of monſters, as well as the land. Being now by our iourneys come euen vnder the Equinoctiall, I minde not to paſſe any further, without noting ſomewhat. This line Equinoctiall,
               The deſcription of the Equinoctiall line. or Circle Equinoctiall, or elſe Equator, is a trace imagined, of the Sunne by the midſt of the world, the which deuideth in two equall partes, two times the yeare, that is to wit, the fourth of September, and theleuenth of March, and then the Sunne paſſeth directly by the Zenithe of the earth, and leaueth vs this imagined Circle, equall to the Tropicks & others that may be iudged betwene the two Poles, the Sunne going from the Eaſt to the Weſt: it is true that the ſunne goeth al the yeare by the Ecliptike to the Zodiake, ſauing on the dayes aboue named, & ſtandeth directly ouer them that inhabit there. Furthermore they haue right courſe, without ye one of the Poles be more erected than the other: the day & the night are to thē equall, &

therefore they were named Equinoctiall,
               From whence commeth the name Equinoctiall. and according as the Sunne doth depart from the one to ye other Pole, there is vnequalities of dayes and nights, and eleuation of the Pole. Then the Sunne declining by litle and litle from this point Equinoctial, goeth by his Zodiake almoſt to the Tropike of Capricorn, and paſſing no farther, cauſeth the Solſtice of winter: then returning, paſſeth by the ſayd Equinoctiall, till that he come to the ſigne of Cancer, whereas is the Solſtice of Sommer: therefore he maketh vj. ſignes parting from the Equinoctiall to eche one of theſe Tropikes. The elders haue eſtéemed this countrey or Zone among the Tropikes to be vnhabitable bicauſe of the extreme heate, as thoſe that are neare to the two Poles, bicauſe of the colde. Neuertheleſſe, within theſe few yeares this Zone hath bene diſcouered by Nauigations, and inhabited for that it was found frutefull, and abounding in many good things (notwithſtanding the heat) as the Ilandes of S. Omer and others, of the which we will ſpeake hereafter. Some vnder this line cōparing the coldneſſe of the night, with the heate of the day, haue taken this argument: that in that reſpect there might be good temperateneſſe,The temperateneſſe of the aire, vnder the Equinoctiall line. biſide many other reaſons yt I omit for this preſent. The heat that is there ſéemed to me no hotter than it is here at Midſomer. Furthermore there is much tempeſt, thunder, lightnings and raines, & therfore at the Ilands of S. Omer, as alſo in a nother Iland named the Ile of Rats, there is as much verdure or greneneſſe as is poſſible. Theſe Ilands vnder the Equinoctiall line are marked in our cardes Marins S. Omer,
               
               The Ile of S. Omer, or of S. Thomas. or S. Thomas, inhabited at this day by Portingals, although that they be not ſo frutefull as certain others.
            Alſo there is gathered a certain ſuger, but they trade with the Barbarians and Ethiopians, Golde molten,

Pearles, Muſke, Rhubarbe, Beaſtes, Byrdes and other things according to the countrey. Alſo in theſe Ilandes the ſeaſons and times are vnequall and differing from other countries, the people more ſubiect to ſickneſſe than they of the North part, the which difference & vnequalitie commeth of the Sunne, the which ſheweth his qualities by the ayre being betwene him and vs. It paſſeth as euery one knoweth, two times the yere cuſtomably thereby, and then ye 
               Equinoctial deſcrieth him, in the monthes of Marche, and September.Abundance of diuers fiſhes vnder the lyne. About this lyne is founde ſuch abundance of fiſhes of ſundry & diuers kindes, that it is a maruelous and a wōderful thing to ſée them aboue water, and I haue heard them make ſuch a noyſe about the ſhips ſide, that we could not hear one another ſpeke: whether this is bicauſe of ye heat of the Sunne or for any other reaſons, I leaue that to the Philoſophers. There reſteth nowe to ſhewe that euen about our Equinoctiall,
               The ſea water is ſweet vnder the Equinoctiall. I taaſted the water the which was more ſwéeter & pleaſāter to drinke thā in other places, wheras it is very ſalt, though that many affirme the contrarie, iudging that it ſhoulde be rather more ſalter, for that it draweth to the lyne whereas the heate is moſt vehement, knowing that from thence commeth the ſaltneſſe of the ſea, and therfore that ſhoulde be more ſwéeter that is towarde the Poles. I do verily thinke that from the one Pole to the other euen to the line, that as the ayre is not equally temperat, ſo in like caſe the water is not temperat. But vnder the lyne the temperatneſſe of the water doeth folowe the temperatneſſe of the ayre. Therefore there is a good reaſon, why the water in that part is more ſwéeter than in other places. Being paſſed this line, we found the ſea more and more calmer and peaceable, keping our courſe towarde the Caape of good hope.
         
         
            
            That not onely all that is vnder the lyne is inhabited, but alſo al the worlde is inhabited contrary to the opinion of our elders. Cap. 19.
            
               Man hath great deſire to knewe and ſe things.IT is euidently ſene howe greate the curioſitie of men is, either for a deſire to knowe things, or for to attayne to poſſeſſions, or elſe to auoyde Idleneſſe, that they haue hazarded them ſelues (as the wiſe man ſayth, and beſide him the Poet Horace ſayth in his Epiſtles) to all dangers and trauels, for to eſchew pouertie, to leade a more quiet life without trouble or payne. Notwithſtanding it might be ynough for them to know and vnderſtande that the ſoueraygne workmaſter, hath made with his owne handes this worlde al rounde, ſo that the water hath ben ſeparated from the lande, to the ende that more commodiouſly euery one might inhabit in his proper Eliment, or at the leaſte in that place whereas he thought moſte beſte. Neuertheleſſe not content with this, they would knowe if it be all ouer inbabited. Notwithſtanding for ſuch finding out, and diligence, I eſteme them for my parte as much and rather more worthy of prayſe, than our late writers and Nauigators, for that they haue firſt opened to vs theſe things. Otherwiſe with greate payne we could not haue knowen them nor comprehended: but Thales,
               The opinion of many Philoſophers, that ſay all the world is not inhabited. 
               Pithagoras, Ariſtotle, and many others as well Greekes as Latins haue ſayde, that it is not poſſible that all partes of the world ſhould be inhabited, the one parte for the greate and vnſuportable heate, another parte for the great and vehemēt cold. Other Authors deuiding the world into two parts called Himiſperes, (one of ye which) they ſay can in no wiſe be inhabited. But the other parte in the which we are, muſte of neceſſitie be inhabited.

And ſo of foure partes of the worlde they take away thrée, ſo that to their opinion there ſhoulde reſt but two, that be habitable. And for the better vnderſtanding thereof to eche one, excepting thoſe that haue knowledge thereof, I will declare this more playner,Fiue Zones by the which the worlde is meaſured. minding therefore to proue that al the world is inhabited. They ſuppoſe that there is fiue zones in all the worlde, by the which they will meaſure, and compaſſe all the earth, of the which two are colde, two temperate, and the other hot. And if you wil know how they gather theſe fiue Zones, extende your lefte hande towarde the Sunne ryſing, being the fingers ſpredde abroade, and by this meane Probus Grammaticus dyd teach, or inſtructe. Then when you haue beheld the Sunne, thorough the lower parts of your fingers, bowe and bende them euery one in forme or manner of a Circle. By the thumbe ye ſhall knowe the colde zone, which is the North,The cold zone. the which by the exceſſiue coldeneſſe (as they doe affirme) is vnhabited. Neuertheleſſe the experience hath ſhewed within fewe yeares, that all thoſe partes well néere to our Pole, alſo vnder the Paralezey Artike ioyning to the Hyperbores,
               The temperat Zone. as Scauia, Dacea, Swetherlande, Gotlande, Norway, Denemarcke, Thilia, Lyuonia, Pilapea, Pruſe lande, Ruſsia, Muſcouia, Ruthenie, whereas there is nothing but Iſe, and continual coldneſſe, to benotwithſtanding inhabited with frowarde and brutiſh men. The which to our Engliſhe Marchantes is well ynough knowen. Therefore the Ancient writers in this do greatly erre, & are not to be beleued, hauing onely ſpoken by geſſe and thought, and not by experience. Let vs ſpeake of the other zones: the other finger next to the thumbe, doeth ſignifie the tempeperat zone, the which is inhabited, & extendeth to the tropicke of Cancer, though yt in drawing néere it be more hot

than temperat, as that which is iuſtly in the midſt, that is to know betwene this tropicke & the Pole. The thirde finger doeth repreſent the zone placed betwene the two tropickes named Torrida,
               Zone Torida. bicauſe of the extreme heate of the Sunne, the which reſteth and burneth vp all, and therefore it was iudged vnhabitable. The fourth finger is the other zone,Another temperat zone. temperated of the Antipodes, a meane betwene the tropicke of Capricorne, and the other Pole, the which is inhabited. The fifth which is the little finger ſignifieth the other zone colde,Another colde zone. the which in like caſe they haue eſtemed vnhabited for the like reaſon as they alleged for the former Pole, of the which we may ſay as much as we haue ſayde of the North parte, for the like reaſon is of bothe. After then that this rule or example is knowen, it is eaſily knowen what partes of the Worlde are inhabited, and which are not, according to the opiniō of the Auncient writers. Plinie, diminiſhing that which is inhabited, ſayth, that of the fiue partes that are named zones, we muſte take away thrée bicauſe they are not inhabited, the which hath bene ſhewed by the thumbe, the greate finger and the little finger. Alſo he taketh away al that occupieth the Weaſt ſea. And in another place he writeth that ye earth that is vnder ye 
               Zodiack, is onely inhabited. The cauſes that he allegeth why theſe thrée zones are vnhabited, is, the vehement colde, which for the farre diſtance & abſence of the Sunne is in ye Region of the two Poles, and the greate and extreme heate that is vnder the zone Torrida, is bicauſe of the continuall preſence of the Sunne. As much doe our late Theologiās affirme and write. The contrary notwithſtanding, may be ſhewed by the writings of theſe Authors before alleged, by the authoritie of Philoſophers, ſpecially of our tyme, by the witneſſing of holy Scriptures, and then by

experience which paſſeth all, the which by me hath bene made. Strabo, Mela, & Plinie, although that they diſproue the zones, write neuertheleſſe that there are men in Ethiopia, in the Ilande named by the elders Aurea, and alſo in the Ile Tabroban, Malaca, and Zamotra,
               The zone Torida and hills Hyperbores are inhabited. vnder the zone Torrida: alſo that Scandenauia, the hills Hyperbores, and the countrey adiacent néere to the North, of the which we haue before ſhewed, are peopled and inhabited although according to the ſaying of Herodita, theſe hills are directly vnder the Pole. The firſt that founde out the lande contayned vnder the two temperat zones to be inhabited, as Plutarche writeth, was Parmenides.
            
            Many haue written that not onely the zone Torida, may be inhabited, but alſo wel peopled. The which Aueroys proueth by the witneſſing of Ariſtotle, in the fourth Chapter of his booke intituled, of the worlde and of the firmament Auicen
                in the like caſe, in his ſecond doctrine,The zone Torida, more cō
                  modious and wholeſom thā the others. and Albertus Magnus, in his ſixte Chapter of the nature of Regions, efforcing to proue by naturall reaſon, that this zone is inhabited, yea more profitable for our humaine life than thoſe vnder the tropickes. So that by this meanes we will conclude and ſay that it is better, more commodious, & more wholeſome for our humayne life, than any others. For euen as the colde is an enimie, ſo in like caſe the heate is friendly to our bodies, knowing that our life is nothing but heat and moyſture, to the contrary death is colde and drineſſe. By this therfore ye may knewe that all the earth is peopled, and is neuer without dwellers neither for colde, nor heate, but for barenneſſe, and whereas it is vnfruitfull it may be inhabited, as I haue ſene in Arabia, and in other countreys. Alſo man was created of God for that he might dwell and lyue in what parte of the worlde he woulde,

were it hote, colde or temperate: for he him ſelfe ſayde to our firſt parentes: Growe, increaſe and multiplie. The experience furthermore teacheth, (as many times we haue ſayde) howe large the worlde is, and commendable to all creatures, the which we may ſée by the continuall Nauigations on the ſea, and by the long iourneys on the lande.
         
         
            Of the multitude and diuers kindes of fiſhes being vnder this lyne Equinoctial. Cap. 20.
            BEfore the departing out of our lyne, I thinke it good to declare particularly of the fiſh that is found about ſeuen or eight leagues on this ſide and beyonde the lyne of diuers colours, and ſuch a multitude, that it is not poſſible to number them, or to heape them together, the which are as a greate heape of corne in a barne. And ye ſhall note that among theſe fiſhes many haue folowed our ſhips more than thrée hundreth leagues, ſpecially the Dorades, of the which we will ſpeake hereafter more at large. The Marſouins or ſea Hogs, after that they had perceiued our ſhip from farre, dyd ſwimme a mayne againſt vs, the which gaue to the Mariners a certayne ſigne and forſhewing of that parte from whence the winde ought to come, for theſe Sea beaſtes (ſay they) will ſwimme againſt one, and in a greate company as foure or fiue hundreth together. This fiſh is named Marſouin,
               Marſouin and why it is ſo named. of Marisſus, in Latine, which is as much to ſay as a ſea Hog, bicauſe that he is like almoſte to Hogs on the earth, for he hath the lyke grunt or noyſe, and hath the ſnoute lyke the ende of a Canne, and on

the heade a certayne cundite or opening, by the which he yaunneth or purgeth, euen as the Whale. The Mariners take many of them with certayne gynnes of Iron being ſharpe, and pointed at the ende and croked, and they doe eate but little thereof, hauing other better fiſh: but the liuer and lights is very good & delicate being bothe like, and alſo in taſte to a Hogs harſcelet. When they are taken, drawing towarde their death they caſte greate ſighes as we ſée our countrey Hogs do when they are let bloude. The female bringeth but twoo at a tyme. It was therefore a wonderfull thing to ſée this greate number of fiſh making a maruelous greate noyſe without compariſon, the which ſome peraduenture wil thinke ſtrange and vncredible: but I will affirme it to be ſo, for that I ſawe it. As I ſayd before, that there is fiſh found of al colours, red, as thoſe whō they named Bonnites, the others Azure, & like golde, ſhining brighter than fine Azure, as thoſe named Dorades, others gréene, gray, blacke. Yet I will not ſay, that out of the ſea they ſhoulde kepe thoſe colours. Plinie rehearſeth that in Spaine,
               A foūtaine that ſheweth fiſh lyke golde. in a fountayne, the fiſh are of the coloure of golde, but out of the fountayne they are lyke to others, the which may come of the colour of the water, being ſo betwene our eye and the fiſhe, euen as a glaſſe being of a gréene or blewe colour repreſenteth the things that ar within of the ſame colour. Now to retourn to our Dorade, many as wel Ancients as others haue written of the nature of fiſhes, but very homelie, for that they haue not ſene but hearde ſay, and ſpecially of the Dorade,
               Ariſtotle and Plinie of the Dorade. 
               Ariſtotle writeth that ſhe hath foure finnes, two aboue and two vnder, and that ſhe maketh her yong ones in ſommer, & ye female remayneth hyd a certaine time, but he telleth not how long. Plinie to my iudgement, hath borowed or lerned this of Ariſtotle,
               Lib. 6. cap. 16.
               
ſpeaking of this fiſhe, ſaying that ſhe hideth hir ſelf in the ſea a certayne time, but in paſſing further he hath defined this tyme to be when it is extreme hot, for that it cannot endure ſo greate a heate. There are founde great ones like Samons,The deſcriptiō of the Dorade. others that are leſſer: from the head to the tayle it hath a creſte and all that parte coloured lyke fine Azure, in ſuch ſorte that it is vnpoſſible to excogitate or thinke a more fayrer colour: the inferior or lower parte ſhineth like fire golde and for this cauſe it was named Dorade, alſo of Ariſtotle, in his lāguage 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that the interpretors call Aurata, and it is very fierce on the flying fiſh, the which ſhe foloweth, and chaſeth in the water, as the hounde chaſeth a haare in the fieldes, for ſhe liueth by pray, caſting hir ſelfe hye aboue water after this flying fiſh, and if that ſhe fayleth at one time ſhe recouereth at another tyme. This fiſh folowed our ſhippes the ſpace of ſeuen wekes without once forſaking of them, yea night and day, vntill that ſhe founde the ſea vnſauery or not for hir nature. I knowe wel that this fiſh hath ben much celebrated and eſtemed in tymes paſte among Noble men, for that ſhe is very delicate and pleaſant, to eat. For we reade of Sergius, that founde the meanes to haue one brought to Rome, the which was ſerued at a bancket to the Emperour,Dorade the fiſh hath bene greatly eſtemed in tymes paſte among the Romaines. Among theſe Dorades thoſe were moſt ſet by that were brought from Tarenta being made fat at the lake Licryn as witneſſeth Martiall in the thirde boke of his Epigrams. whereas it was meruelouſly eſtemed. And ſince that tyme hath this fiſh Dorade, bene greatly eſtemed among the Romaynes, ſo that there was no ſumptuous banket but that it was ſerued for a greate dayntie diſh. And whereas this fiſh is ſcant in ſommer, & harde to come by, Sergius the Senator, founde the meanes to kepe it with foode aliue, to the ende that this fiſh ſhoulde not fayle them in no ſeaſon: and for this curioſitie it was named Aurata, or golden fiſh. This fiſh is in much better ſauor in Winter than in Sōmer, for al things haue their

ſeaſon. Cornelius Celſus ordayned this fiſh to the ſicke, ſpecially, to thoſe that had the Feuer or Ague, for it is light fiſh and not heauie, but may be well digeſted: there are found more ſtore in the Weſt ſea, thā in the Eaſt ſea. Moreouer all kinde of fiſhes are not found in euery place of the ſea. Helops a ſingular fiſh is not found but onely about Pamphilia, Ilus and Scaurus, onely in the ſea Atlantike, and ſo of many others. Alexander the great being in Egypt bought two Dorades for two marke of golde, for to proue if that they were ſo delicate and fine meate, as it was ſhewed him, ſo that there were two a lyue brought him from the Weaſt ſea, to Nemphis, whereas he remained, as a Iewe being a Phiſitiō, ſhewed me by a Hiſtorie being at Damaſca in Siria. Thus much gentle Reader I haue learned as touching the Dorade, for that thou ſhouldeſt ſée what the elders haue written thereof, and among others, my lorde William Pellicier Biſhop of Mountpellier, who hath treated of the nature of fiſhes as faithfully and truely, as any in our tyme.
         
         
            Of an Ilande named the Aſcention. Cap. 21.
            THE twentie ſixth day of October, being eight degrées beyonde our lyne Equinoctiall, we founde an Ilande not inhabited, the which at the firſte we thought to name the Ile of Birdes, bicauſe of the greate multitude of Birdes that are in the ſayde Ilande,The Ile of the Aſcention, an why it was ſ. named. but looking in our carde Marin, we found that before tyme it was founde out by the Portingals, and named the Ile of the Aſcention, bicauſe that on that day, they ariued thither. We therefore ſeing thoſe Birdes flying on the ſea,

made vs to thinke that there was ſome Ilande néere hande, and the néerer we came, we ſawe ſuch a multitude of birdes of diuers ſortes with coloured feathers, that the lyke was neuer ſéene in our tyme,Diuers kinds of ſtrāge birds and in great number. the which came flying to our ſhips, and woulde reſte vpon vs, ſo that we might take them with our handes, and with greate payne coulde we be ridde of them. For if one had ſtretched out his Arme they woulde haue reſted vpon it, euen lyke tame birdes, and not one of them lyke to the birdes of our countrey, the which to ſome ſemeth vncredible. Being caſte of from our handes they flyed not away, but let them ſelues be taken agayne as before.
            Furthermore in this Ilande there is a certayne kinde of greate birdes that I haue heard called Aponars,Aponars birdes. they haue little wings, and therefore they cannot flye. They are great and hye, lyke hearnſhawes, the belly white and and the backe blake as cole, the byll lyke to a cormorant, when they are killed they crye lyke hogs.
            I thought good to ſpeake of this birde among others, for that there are founde a greate number of them in an Ilande lying towarde the Caape, of good Spéede, on the coſte or borders of newe founde lande,Caape of good haſt Ile of Aponards and why it is ſo named. the which was named the Ile of Aponards: Alſo there are ſuch a multitude, that on a tyme thrée greate ſhips of Fraunce, going to Canada, did lade eche of them two tymes their cockboates with theſe birdes on the brinke of the ſayde Ilande, and it is no maiſtrie to goe into the Iland and to driue them before them to their boates lyke ſhéepe. This therefore hath giuen me occaſion to ſpeake ſo much thereof. As touching the reſte of the Ile of Aſcention, it is indifferent faire and pleaſant, being of circute ſix leagues, with mountaines garniſhed with faire gréene trées, herbes, and floures. Not forgetting the

number of birdes, of the which we haue ſpoken,The Ile of thaſcention not yet inhabited as many others. I ſuppoſe that if it were labored and tilled with many others that are in the Weaſte, as well beyonde, as on this ſide the Equinoctiall, it woulde render as good profit, as Tenedos, Lemnos, Metelin, Negrepont, Rhodes, and Candia, or any others that are in the ſea Helispont, and the Cyclades: for in this greate Weaſte ſea, there are Ilandes that are more then .80. leagues compaſſe, and ſome leſſe, among the which the greateſt parte are deſert, and not inhabited. Nowe after that we had paſſed this Ilande, there dyd appeare foure ſtarrs of a wonderful greatneſſe made in manner of a croſſe, neuertheleſſe farre ynough from the Pole Antartike.
                The Mariners that ſayle that way name them charets. Some of them thinke that among theſe is the South Starre, the which is fixed and vnmoueable, as the North ſtarre that we call the leſſer beare, the which was hyd before that were vnder the Equator, and many others that are not ſene at this ſide to the Northwarde.
         
         
            Of the promentarie of good hope, and of many ſecretes obſerued in the ſame, likewiſe our Ariuall to the Indies, America, or Fraunce Antartike. Cap. 22.
            AFter that we haue paſſed the Equinoctiall lyue,India Meridionall. and the Ilande of S. Homer, folowing the coſte of Ethiopia, the which is called India Meridionall, it behoued to folow our courſe euē to the Tropike of winter, about the which time we diſcouered the great & famous

               Promentarie of good hope, the which the Pilots haue named Lyon of the ſea,Caape of good hope, why it is called Lyon of the ſea. Rhinoceros or beaſts of Ethiopia. bicauſe that it is feared and redouted, being ſo great and difficil. This Caape on bothe ſides is compaſſed with two great mountaines and hils, of the which the one beholdeth the Eaſt, & the other the Weſt. In this coūtrey are many beaſts named Rhinoceros, for that they haue a horne vnder their ſnout. Some cal them Oxen of Ethiopia. This beaſt is very monſtrous, and kepeth perpetuall warre and hatred with the Elephante. And for this cauſe the Romaines haue taken great pleſure to make theſe two beaſtes fight, for a ſpectacle of greateneſſe, chiefly at the creation of an Emperoure or ſome other high or greate magiſtrate: as they doe at this day marke Beares, Bulls, and Lyons. He is not altogether ſo high as the Elephant, nor ſuch as we paynte him or ſet him out in our countrey. And that which moueth me to ſpeake, is, that traueling from Egypt to Arabia, I ſawe a very Auncient monument, whereas was engraued certayne figures of beaſtes in ſtede of letters as it was vſed in the olde time, among the which was the Rhenoceros, being without horne and mayles, not lyke as our painters ſetteth him out. This beaſte for to prepare him ſelfe to fight, as Plinie rehearſeth, ſharpeneth his horne againſt a certayne ſtone, and alwayes draweth to the belly of this Elephant, for that it is the part of the body that is moſt ſofteſt. There is alſo great quantitie of wilde Aſſes, and another bearing a horne betwene bothe there eyes of two foote long. I ſawe one being in the citie of Alexandria, that is in Egypt, that a Lorde Turke brought from Melcha, the which horne he ſayde, had the lyke vertue agaynſt poyſon as had the horne of an Vnicorne. Ariſtotle calleth theſe

Aſſes with horne, Aſſes of India. About this Promentarie, is the departing of the way to the Eaſte and the Weaſte Indies, for they that will goe to the Eaſte Indies, as to Calicut, Tabrobane, Melinde, Cannonor and others, they take on the left hande, coſting the Ile of S. Laurence, guiding the head of the ſhip to Weaſt or Southweaſt hauing the winde at Weaſte Northweaſte. This countrey of the Eaſte Indies extendeth ſo farre, that many iudge it to be the thirde parte of the worlde. Mela, and Diodorus,
               The ſpreading of Eaſt India. writeth yt the ſea compaſſing theſe Indies, from the South to the Eaſte is of ſuch a greatneſſe, that with much payne they can paſſe though the wind be fauorable in the ſpace of fortie dayes, but I dare affirme twice fortie. This countrey therefore is on that ſide compaſſed with the ſea, which bicauſe of that, is named,Sea Indique. the Indian ſea or Indique confining towardes the North to the hill Cancaſa, and is named India, of a Riuer named Indus, as Tartaria of the Riuer Tartar, paſſing by the countrey of the greate King Chan. Yt is inhabited with people of diuers kinds as well in manners as in Religion. A great parte is vnder the ohedience of Preſter Iohn, the which holdeth the Chriſtian Fayth: the others are Mahometiſts, as we haue before ſhewed ſpeaking of Ethiopia: and others are Idolaters. The other way at the departing of this Caape that is on the right hand, leadeth to America, the which we folowed hauing the wind good and fauorable, neuertheleſſe we remayned a good long time on the water, as well for the diſtaunce of the places, as for the winde that afterwarde fell contrarie, the which made vs to lynger euen to the eightene degrée of our lyne,A ſigne to the Nauigants that they drewe neere to America. and then agayne it began to fauor vs. Before paſſing any farther I will ſhewe a thing that is worthy of memorie. Aproching or drawing néere to America, within fiftie leagues we began

to ſmell the ayre of the lande, otherwyſe than the ſmell of the ſea, with ſuch a ſwéete and pleaſant ſmell of the Trées, Herbes, Fruits, and Floures of the countrey, that neuer balme were it the balme of Egypte, that euer ſmell ſwéeter or pleaſanter. Therefore I leaue you to thinke or iudge what greate ioye the poore Nauigantes had, although that of a long time before they had eaten no breade, alſo being out of hope to recouer any for their retourne. The next day which was the laſte day of October about nine of the clocke in the morning,The hills of Croiſtmourō. we diſcried the high hills of Croiſtmouron, although that was not the place whereas we pretended to goe, wherefore coſting the lande a thrée or foure Leagues, not minding to deſcend a lande, being well enformed that the inhabitantes there are allyed with the Portingals, and therefore for nothing we woulde aborde or deſcende there, keping on our way till the ſecond of Nouember, that we aryued to a certayne place named Maqueh,
               Maqueh. for to enquire of things, ſpecially, of the King of Portingals Armye, whereas preparing our boates and barges, for to come a ſhore, and ſet foote on lande, there appeared foure olde men of the countrey, for that the yong men were gone to the warre, the which olde men at the firſte, fled away thinking we had bene Portingals, their enimies, but ſhewing them a token of aſſurance in the ende they came néere vs. Neuertheleſſe ſtaying there not aboue foure and twentie houres, we hoyſſed ſayle for to drawe towarde Caape de Frie,
               Caape de Fria. diſtant from Maqueh, twentie fiue leagues.
            This countrey is maruellous fayre, in tymes paſt inhabited by the Portingals, the which gaue it that name, which before was called Gekan,
               Gekan. and there they reared a

tort, minding there to remayne, for bicauſe of the goodneſſe of the place. But within a ſhorte tyme after,The maner of theſe Barbaroꝰ men is to eate their enimies. for what cauſe I knowe not, but the Barbarous men of the countrey made them all to dye, and eate them vp as they vſe cuſtomably their enimies. And at our ariuall they helde two Portingals, that they had taken in a little boate, and to them they though to doe the lyke, to whom our comming was a pleaſure, for by vs they were recouered out of the handes of theſe cruell inhabitantes. Pomponius Meleus, calleth this Caape, of which we ſpeake, the front of Africa, for that beyonde it bendeth lyke an Angle, and retourneth by little and little into the North and Eaſt, there whereas is the ende of the mayne land and of Africa, of the which Ptolomeus had neuer any knowlege.
            This Caape alſo is the chiefe or heade of Newe Africa, the which towarde Capricorne, extendeth to the mountaynes of Habacia and Gaiacia, the flat countrey is little inhabited, it is very brutiſh and Barbarous, yea monſtrous, not that the men are ſo diſformed as many haue written, as though that in their ſléepe they had dreamed it, being not afrayde to affirme that there are people of whome their eares hang to their héeles, others with one eye in the foreheade as Ariſmaſes, others without heade, others hauing but one foote but of ſuch a bredth, that therewith they may ſhadowe them ſelues againſt the heate of the Sunne, and they call them Monomeres, Monoſceles, and Sciapodes, certaine others being ignorant doe write yet more ſtrangeneſſe yea: late writers, writing without iudgement reaſon or experience. I will not altogether denye the monſters, which are vnnaturall approued by the Philoſophers,

and affirmed by experience. But I doe impugne things that are ſo farre out of reaſon: let vs returne to our Promentarie. There is founde diuers kindes of dangerous beaſtes, & venomous, among others the Baſiliſcus, hurtfull to the inhabitants, alſo to the ſtrangers and to thoſe that go to fiſh on the Borders. This Baſiliſcus as euery man may know, is a venomous beaſt, that killeth a man with his onely looke, the body about nine inches long, the head like fier, vpō yt which ther is a white ſpot in maner of a crowne, the mouth red, & the reſt of the face of blacke colour, the which I knowe by the ſkinne that I dyd ſée in the handes of an Arabian: he chaſeth away all other Serpentes with his hiſſing (as Lucian ſayth) for to remayne alone maſter of the fielde. To be ſhort, I may ſay with Saluſt, that there dyeth more people by wilde beaſts in Africa, than by any other inconuenience. This much thought I good to ſpeake by the way.
         
         
            Of the Iland Madagaſcar, otherwiſe of S. Laurence. Cap. 23.
            THE great deſire that I haue to let ſlip nothing that is neceſſarie and profitable to the Readers, bindeth me that I thinke it the office and duetie of a writer to treate of al things that partayne to his argument, without leauing one word out, the which thing hath ſtired me vp to ſet out in this place this Ilande ſo notable, hauing ſeuenty eight degrées of longitude, no minut, and of latitude aleuen degrées and thirtie minutes, very well peopled, and inhabited with blacke wilde men, (within a certayne time) the which kepe or holde the like maner of Religion as the Mahometiſts,
               The fruitfulneſſe of the Ile of S. Laurence. ſome being Idolaters, but after another manner. It was firſte diſcouered by the

               Portingals, and named S. Laurence, and before Madagaſcar in their language, rich and fruitfull of all things, for that it lieth well. And alſo the trées bring forthe fruit of themſelues without planting, grafting, ſetting or ſowing: neuertheleſſe their fruits are as good, ſwéete and pleſant to eate, as if the trée had bene grafted. We ſée in our countrey that the fruits of the fields, that is to wit, thoſe that the earth bringeth forthe without laboring, is rude, wilde, ſoure, ſwete, and without any good taſt, the others are contrary. Therfore in this Iland, is much better fruit than on the maine lande, although that it be vnder one Zone and temperateneſſe, among the which there is one that they name in their language Chicorin, and the Trée that beareth them, is like to a fether trée of Egipt,
               Chicorin, a fruit that we name nuts of India. or Arabia, as well in height as in leaues. The which fruit is ſéene héere, the which the ſhippes bring, and we cal them Nuts of India, the which the Marchants holde deare, for they are very faire and proper to make bottels, for the wine being a certaine time in theſe veſſels, hath a maruelous ſwete ſmell and pleaſaunt, bicauſe that the fruit hath a ſmell like Muſke. Furthermore, thoſe that cuſtomably drinke in theſe cuppes or veſſels, as I was enformed of a Iewe, are preſerued from the head ache, & from the ache in the flankes, and prouoketh vrine. The which being noted of Plinie and others, they ſay that al kinde of Palmes, are healthfull and good for many things. This fruit wherof we ſpeake, is altogether good. The Indians & Ethiopians being viſited with ſickneſſe, péele the fruit, & drink the iuice or liquor, the which is white, like to milk, and therewith they are eaſed: alſo with this fruit, they make a kinde of ſuſtenance, being mingled with certain meale of dried rootes or dried fiſhe, of the which they eate after that it is wel boiled together. This liquor is not to

be kept long, but for the time that is may be kept, it is without compariſon better for the partie that taketh it, than any kinde of conſerues that may be found. And for the longer keping of this fruit, they boile the liquor, the which when it is colde, they put into veſſels therfore appointed: others put therein Honey, to make it pleaſaunt to drinke. The trée that beareth this fruit, is ſo tender, that if it be neuer ſo little touched or pricked with any ſharpe or pointed thing, the iuice will come forthe, the which is pleaſant to drinke, and very proper to quenche thirſt. All theſe Ilands that are found on the coaſt of Ethiopia,
               The Ile of Prince. as the Iſle of Prince, hauing .35. degrées of longitude minute .0. and of latitude minute .0. Mopata, Zonzibar, Monfia. S. Apolin, and S. Thomas, vnder the line are riche and fruitfull, almoſt all full of theſe Palme trées, and other trées bearing fruit, that are maruellous good. There are found diuers other kinde of Palme trées bearing fruit, although that not all, like thoſe of Egypt, and in all the Indies of America and Perou, as well on the maine land, as in the Ilands are found of ſeuen ſortes of Palme trées, all differing in fruit the one from the other. Among the which I haue found ſome that beare Dates good to eate,Seuen ſortes of Palme trees in the Indies of America. as thoſe of Egipt, of Arabia, Felicia and of Siria. Moreouer in this ſaid Iland, are Melons of a meruellous greatneſſe, being as great as a man may compaſſe or embrace, of a ruddy coloure. Alſo there are ſome white, and others yellow, but muche more wholeſomer than oures in Europe. There are alſo diuers kindes of good herbes and health ſome, among the which there is one,Spagnin a kind of herbe. the which they name Spagnin, the which they vſe for their woundes and ſores, alſo againſt the biting of Vipers and other venemous beaſtes, for it draweth out the venime or poiſon. Furthermore there is founde great

quantitie of good Saunders in the woodes and groues. As touching beaſtes wilde and tame, fiſhes and birdes, our Iland noriſheth of all ſortes, and in as great quantitie as is poſſible. In the which Iland there is a ſtraunge birde, made like a puttocke or rauenous foule, the bill like a Hauke, hir eares hanging downe to hir throte, the féete very rough and full of fethers, being of a white ſhining coloure like to ſiluer,Pa a ſtraunge birde. onely the fethers on hir head are blackiſhe. This birde is named in their language Pa, in the Perſian tongue Pie or Lege, and this foule liueth with Serpents, of the which there are great quantitie, and of diuers kindes. Alſo there are other kinde of birdes not like to thoſe in our Countrey. As for beaſtes, there are a great number of Eliphants, and beaſts with one horne being of two kindes. Of the which the one is the Aſſe of India, hauing the foote not clouen, as thoſe that are found in the land of Perſia,
               The Aſſe of India, Orix. the other is named Orix or clouen foote. There are no wilde Aſſes, but onely on the dry land. Whether yt there be any Vnicorns I know not, but being at the Indies of America, certain of the Indians came to ſée vs aboue .lx. or .lxxx. leagues of: whome as we did queſtion with of many things, they ſhewed vs that in their countrey there was a great nūber of certain great beaſtes, like to a kinde of wilde cowes yt they haue, hauing one only horne in their forehead, about a fadome lōg, but to ſay yt they are Vnicorns I am not sure, hauing no perfect knowledge therof. I haue before ſhewed yt this countrey or Iland noriſheth great ſtore of ſerpents & Lezards of a maruelous greatneſſe, yt which are eaſily takē wtout dāgers. Alſo ye 
               Neigers eat theſe Lezards, ſo do the Indians of America. There are leſſer ones of ye bigneſſe of a lege, that are very good and delicate to eat, beſide many good fiſhe and foule, which they eate when they ſée time.

Among other ſecretes, bicauſe of the multitude of fiſhe, there are great ſtore of Whales, out of the which the inhabitaunts of the Countrey draw Amber, the which many take to be gray Amber, a thing that is here very ſkāt and precious.Gray Amber very cordiall. Also it is very hearty, and good to comfort the moſt notable partes of our humaine body: and with the ſame they make a great trade with ſtraunge Marchauntes.
         
         
            Of our arriuall to Fraunce Antartike, otherwiſe named America, to the place named Caape Defria. Cap. 24.
            AFter that by deuine prouidence, with ſo many trauailes common and ordinarie to ſo long a Nauigation, we were come to the maine land, not ſo ſoone as our heartes deſired, which was the tenth day of Nouember, and in ſtead of taking our reſt, it behoued vs to diſcouer & ſéeke out proper places, to make or reare newe ſiedges, being no leſſe aſtonied or amazed, that the Troyans were at their arriuall into Italie. Hauing therefore ſtayed but a while at the former place, where as we landed, as in the former Chapter we haue ſhewed, we ſpred againe our ſa-les,Caape Defria. ſailing towarde Caape Defria, wheras we were well receiued of the Indians or wilde men of the Countrey, ſhewing according to their manner, euident ſignes of ioy: neuertheleſſe we ſtayed ther but .iij. dayes, they welcomed vs one after an other, according to their cuſtome, with this word Carainbe, which is as muche to ſay as welcome, or ye are welcome. And for to ſhew their good wils,Cahonin, a drinke in America. one of their great Morbicha Onaſsonb, that is to ſay, King, feaſted vs with a kinde of meale made of rootes, and with their Cahonin, which is a drinke made of

               Mill is named Auaty, and it is great like a peaſe: there is bothe white and blacke. And for to make this drinke, they let this Mill boile with other rootes, the which after it is boyled, hath a coloure like to Claret wine: and theſe Indians finde it ſo good, that therewith they will be dronken, as men will be with wine in our Countrey. It is thicke like to wine lées. Héere I wil ſhew you a ſuperſtition that they vſe, to make this drink, after the ſtraungeſt maner in the world.The ſuperſtition of theſe Indians in making this drinke. After that it hath boyled in carthen veſſels made for that purpoſe, there ſhall come certaine virgins or maidens that ſhall chawe or champe in their mouthes this Mill being ſo boyled or ſodden, then they ſhall put it into a nother veſſel therunto appointed, or if that a woman be called therto, ſhe muſt firſt abſtain certaine dayes from hir huſband: otherwiſe they thinke that this Byuerige or drinke, will neuer come to good perfection. This being done, they will make it boyle againe, vntill that it be purged or cleanſed, as we ſée the wine boyling in the tunne: & then within certaine dayes after they drinke thereof. Now after that they had entertained vs after this ſorte, they brought vs afterwarde to ſée a large ſtone of fiue féete long or there about, in the which appeared certaine ſtrokes of a rod or ſmall wand, and the print of two féete, the which they affirme to be of their great Caraibe, whome they haue in as great reuerence, as the Turks haue Mahomet, for bicauſe (ſay they) that he hath giuen them the vſe and knowledge of fire, likewiſe to plant rootes, for before they liued but with leaues, as doe the brute beaſtes. Being thus guided and led about by their King, we forgate not diligently to know and viſite the place, wheras among other commodities requiſite and neceſſary, we founde that there was no freſhe water to be had but far from thence, the which

letted vs to ſtay ther any long time, for ye which we were ſorie conſidering the bounty of the countrey.A Riuer of ſalt water. In this place there is a Riuer of ſalt water paſſing betwene two hills, ſeparated the one from the other about a ſtones throwe, and entreth into the countrey about .36. leagues. This Riuer hath great quantitie of good fiſh of diuers kindes, chiefly greate moulets, ſo that whileſt we were there we ſawe the Indians catche of theſe fiſhes aboue a thouſand in a ſhorte ſpace.Birdes with diuers coloured fethers. Furthermore there are many birdes of diuers kindes with ſtrange fethers, ſome as red as fine ſcarlet, others white, aſhey, and other colours. And with theſe fethers the wilde men or Indians, make hats, and garments, either for to couer them or for beauty. When they goe a warfare or when they haue any ſkirmiſh with their enimies. Others alſo make them Gownes and Caps,A gown made of fethers brought from America. after their maner: and for a manifeſt truth it may be knowen by a gowne that I brought home, with the which gowne I made preſent to Monſieur Troiſteux, a gentleman of the houſe of my Lorde, the right reuerend Cardinall of Sens. Among theſe number of birdes al differing from thoſe of our Himisperia, there is one which they name in their language, Arat, the which is a very hearon in proportion,Arat a red bird. ſauing that his fethers are red as Dragons bloud. Furthermore there are ſene trées without number being gréene all the yeare long, of the which the moſte parte rendreth diuers kindes of gumme, as well in coiour as otherwiſe. Alſo there is growing on the ſea bankes little vines (which is a kinde of cockle of the greatneſſe of a peaſe) the which the wilde men beare or hang about their necke like pearles, ſpecially when they are ſicke, for they ſay it prouoketh the belly, and ſerueth for a purgation, ſome of them make powder thereof and eate it. Moreouer they ſay, that it is good to

ſtay a bloudy flixe, the which ſemeth to me contrary to his purging vertue. Neuertheleſſe it may haue bothe, bicauſe of the diuerſitie of his ſubſtances. And therefore the women beare it more oftener at their neckes adn armes than the men. Likewiſe there is found in that countrey, and on the ſea borders on the ſande greate plenty, and a kinde of fruite that the Spaniards name ſea beanes, being rounde lyke a Teſton, but more greater and more thicker of a ruddy colour, ſo that if you ſawe them you wold ſay they were Artificiall: the people of the countrey ſet nought by them, neuertheleſſe the Spaniards cary them into their countrey, and the Womē and Maydens, commonly hang them about their necke, being ſet in gold or ſiluer, the which they ſay hath vertue againſt the collicke, the payne in the head, and others. To be ſhort, this place is pleaſant and fruitfull, and they that enter farther into that countrey ſhall finde a flat countrey, couered with ſtrange kinde of trées, the like are not in Europe, being alſo beautified with fayre Riuers and ſprings and very cleare waters: among the which there is a fiſh very monſtrous for a freſhe water fiſh, this fiſh is of the largeneſſe and greatneſſe of a herring, armed from the head to the tayle, like a little beaſte of the earth, named Taton, the heade without compariſon greater than the body, hauing thrée bones in the chyne, and very good to eate, at the leaſt the Indians eate of them, and they name it in their language Tamonhata.
            
         
         
            Of the Riuer of Ganabara otherwiſe called Ianaria, and how that the countrey whereas we ariued, was named Fraunce Antartike. Cap. 25.
            HAuing no time to remaine any lōger at Cape de Fria, for the reaſon before ſhewed, it behoued vs to depart,

ſo the we wayed our ankers, and hoiſed vp ſailes to ſail to ſome other place, to the great diſpleaſure of the Indians of that Countrey, that thought we wold haue ſtayed a longer time, folowing the promiſe that we had made them at our firſt arriuall. Therfore we ſailed the ſpace of foure dayes vntil the tenth, that we found this great riuer of Ganabara,
               Ganabara ſo called, bicauſe of the likeneſſe to the lake. being ſo named of the inhabitaunts of the Countrey, for that it is like to the lake, or otherwiſe Ianaria, by thoſe that firſt did diſcouer it, being diſtaunt from the place from whence we departed .30. leagues: and by the way, the winde became contrary. Now therefore that we had paſſed many little Ilands on the ſea coaſt, and the ſtraight of our riuer being about a gunne ſhotte brode, we were determined to enter in at that place or ſtraight, and with our barkes to take land, whereas incontinently the inhabitants receiued vs very curteouſly, and as hauing knowledge of our comming, they had rered faire Palace according to the manner of the Countrey, ſtrewed & decked with leaues, and boughs of trees, and ſwéete ſmelling herbes, by a manner of honor, ſhewing of their part great ſignes of ioy, inuitating vs to doe the like. The moſt eldeſt which are as Kings and gouernours, receiued vs one after an other, and with an admiration they ſaluted vs in their lāguage according to their maner, and then they conducted vs to the place that they had prepared for vs, to the which place they brought vs vitailes of all ſides, as meale made of a roote, which they name Manihot,
               Manihot a rote that the wilde men vſe to eate. and other great & little rootes, very good and pleaſant to eate, and other things according to the Countrey. So that being there ariued, after that we had prayed and giuen thanks, (as the true Chriſtian ought to do, to him that had pacified the Sea and the windes) to be ſhort, to him that had ſhewed & giuen vs the mean

to accompliſh this voyage, we reſted vs vpon the gréene graſſe: as the Troyans did after ſo many ſhipwracks and tempeſts when that they met with the good Lady Dido, but Virgill ſaith that they had good olde Wine, and not faire water. After that we had reſted there the ſpace of two moneths, & viewed as wel the Ilands as the maine land: the Countrey was named Farre about, the which by vs was diſcouered Fraunce Antartike, whereas we found no place ſo proper and wel ſtanding for to reare or edifie a holde, as a litle Iland, cōtaining only one league of circuit, lying almoſt at the original beginning of this riuer which we haue before ſpoken of. The which Iland with the holde that we there edified, was named 
                  Ʋillegagnon. This Iland is very pleaſaunt,A pleaſant and comfortable Iland, in the which the Lord of Villegagnon fortified him ſelfe. for that therein groweth Ceader trées, and many ſwéete ſmelling Trées that are gréene throughout the yeare. In déede there is no freſh water to be had néere hand: neuertheleſſe the Lord of 
                  Ʋillegagnon fortified himſelfe there, for to be ſure and out of danger of the wild men that will be ſone offended. And alſo againſt ye 
               Portingals, leaſt they ſhold at any time make thither, ſo that he ſtrengthened himſelfe in the Iland, as wel as was poſſible. Now as for vittails the Indians or wilde men brought vs thither ſuche as the land or countrey bringeth forth: As fiſh or Veniſon and other wilde beaſts, for they noriſh them priuily, as we do here a dog or a cat. Alſo they brought vs meale of thoſe rootes of which we haue before ſhewed, hauing neither breade nor wine. The which victels we had for a ſmall value, as little kniues, loking glaſſes, & nets to take fiſh. Moreouer amōg other things noted in this riuer, nere to ye ſtraight, there is a lake that procedeth out of a high ſtone or rock,A rocke from whence procedeth a lake. being of a maruelous height, being to loke to, as high as the cloudes and very large, the which is a thing almoſte

vncredible. This rocke is enuironed or compaſſed with the Sea.
         
         
            Of the fiſh that is in this great Riuer before named. Cap. 26.
            BEfore that I procede any further, I meane to treate particularly of the fiſh that is founde in the fayre Riuer of Ganabara, otherwiſe named Ianaria, which are in great abundance,Oyſters hauing pearles. amōg the which there are oyſters, of which the ſhell ſhineth like fine pearles, yt which oyſters, the wild mē do commonly eate with other little fiſh that the children fiſh: and theſe oyſters are like to thoſe that beare pearles, of the which alſo there are founde in that countrey,The maner of theſe wild mē to take fiſh. but not ſo fine as thoſe of Calicut, and other places in the Eaſte. Moreouer theſe wilde men fiſh for other great fiſh, of the which there is great plenty. Their vſe and maner to take them is, that they being naked in the water, be it freſh or ſalt, ſhoote at them with their arrowes, to the which they are very expert, then they draw them out of the water, with a corde made of cotton or of the pille of ſome trée, or elſe the fiſh being dead, floateth of himſelf aboue the water. Among theſe fiſhes there is one very monſtrous,Panapana a kinde of fiſh. the which they name in their language Panapana, lyke to a Dog fiſh, the ſkin whereof, is very rough: this fiſhe hath ſixe holes or ſpurgings on eche ſide of the throte like to a Lampron, the head monſtrous, and the eyes almoſt at the ende of the heade, ſo that from the one eye to the other, ther is diſtant a foote and a half: this fiſh is geaſon,A kinde of thornebacke. notwithſtanding the fleſh is not ſo excellēt to eate, for it hath the taſte of a Dog fiſh. Moreouer, there is in this floud or riuer, a great multitude of thornebacke & ſkaate fiſh, but not like to ours in Europe, they are twiſe as large and more longer, the head flat and long, at the ende of which there is twoo hornes, being a foote long

a péece, and betwene theſe hornes are the eyes, and hir tayle is two foote long, and ſclender like a Rats tayle: the wilde men of the countrey will not eate of them for no good, neither of the Torterel. For they imagin and think that euen as this fiſh is ſlowe in ſwimming, it wolde alſo make them heauie and ſlowe, by the which meanes they might be taken of their enimies, ſo that they coulde not runne, nor folow nimbly the courſe.Ineuonea. They name this fiſh in their language Ineuonia. The fiſh of this riuer generally is good to eate, ſo is the ſea fiſh that coaſteth that countrey, but not ſo delicate as the fiſh vnder the lyne, & in other places of the ſea. I will not forget nor leaue out now that I am in purpoſe of fiſh, to ſhewe a maruellous thing, and worthy of memorie. In this lande or coūtrey about the riuer before named, are trées growing on the ſea borders or brinkes, couered with oyſters alwayes to the very top: you ſhall vnderſtande, that when the ſea ſwelleth, it caſteth the floud very high, and far on the lande twiſe in .24. houres, ſo that the water couereth oftentymes theſe trées, ſo that the oyſters being brought in by theſe ſpringtydes, take holde,Trees bering oyſters. and cloſe againſt the branches, being of an vncredible multitude, of the which when the wilde men minde to eat, they cut the branches of the trée being ſo charged and loden with oyſters, as we doe here a branch of a peare trée, being loden with peares, the which they eate more commonly than greater oyſters that are in the ſea, for bicauſe (ſay they) that they are more wholeſomer and haue a better taſte, and that they wil not engender feuers, ſo ſoone as the others.
         
         
            Of America generally. Cap. 27.
            NOwe that I haue treated particularly of the places wheras we did moſt remaine after that we had takē land & chiefly of ye wheras the Sieur of 
                  Ʋillagagnon, doeth

inhabite with other French men euen at this day. Likewiſe of this moſt notable riuer which we name Ianaria, the circumſtances of the places, for that they lie in a land diſcouered and found out in our time, there reſteth nowe to wright that, the which we haue learned & knowne for the time that we remained ther.America not known of the Coſmographers in times paſt. It is moſt true that this land was not knowne to the writers in times paſt, neither yet to the auncient Coſmographers that haue deuided the earth to be inhabited in thrée parts, Europa, Aſia, and Affrica, of the which they only had intelligence, but I am ſure that they had no knowledge therof, for if they had knowē it, they wold haue noted it for the fourth part of the world, for it is much more greater than any of the others. This lād by good right is called America, taking name of him that firſt found it out, being named Americus Ʋeſpucia,
               Americus Veſpucia did firſt finde out America. who was a very expert man in the Arte of Nauigation & in other high enterpriſes. But ſince him, diuers men haue diſcouered the greateſt parte lying towards Temiſtitan vnto the Countrey of the Giants, and the ſtraight of Magellan. Why it ſhold be named India I know not, but the Eaſt countrey that is named India, hath taken his name of that notable floud or riuer Indus, the which is very farre from America. It ſhall therfore ſuffice to call it America, or Fraunce Antartike. It lieth betwene the two Tropikes euen beyonde Capricornus, the weſt ſide extending towards Temiſtitan and Moluques,
               The lying of America. toward the South to the ſtraight of Magellan, and on bothe ſides of the Weſt ſea and peaceable: true it is that neare to Darienna and Furna, this Countrey is very ſtraight, for the ſea on bothe ſides entreth very farre into the land. Nowe will I write of that parte which we haue moſte knowne and frequented, which lieth about the Tropike Brumall, and yet beyond that it hathe

bene and is inhabited at this day, beſides the Chriſtians that haue dwelled there ſince Americus time,What the inhabitants of America are. with a maruelous ſtrange wild and brutiſh people, without Fayth, without Lawe, without Religion, and without any ciuilitie: but liuing like brute beaſts, as nature hath brought them out, eating herbes and rootes, being alwayes naked as well women as men, vntill ſuch time as being more viſited and frequented of Chriſtians, they may peraduenture leaue this brutiſh liuing, and lerne to liue after a more ciuill and humayne manner. And therefore we ought greatly to praiſe our maker that hath illuminated our hartes, not leauing vs ſo brutiſhe as theſe poore wild men. As touching the grounde or lande of America,
               America is a very fruitfull countrey. it is very fruitfull in trées bearing very excellent fruite without labor or ſéede. And it is not to be douted, yt if the land were tilled, it wold bring forth very good things, conſidering how it doth lye with fayre mountaynes and dales,What parte of America is inhabited by the Spaniards and Portingals. riuers bearing very good fiſh, fat Ilandes likewiſe firme and mayne lande. At this day the Spaniards and the Portingals do inhabite and dwell in a great part thereof, the Entilles on the Weſt ſea, Moluques on the peaceable ſea, from the mayne lande, vnto Dareiena, Parias, and Palmaria, the others more toward the South as in the land of Breſsill, ſo much thought I good to write of this Countrey in generall.
         
         
            Of the Americans Religion Cap. 28.
            WE haue before ſhewed how that theſe poore people liue without Religion, and without Lawe, the which is very true, but there is no creature liuing that is partaker of reaſon (ſo blinded) ſeing the

heauen, the earth, the Sunne, the Moone ſo ordayned, the ſea, & the things that are dayly ſéene, but that will iudge theſe things to be made by the hande of ſome greater worckemaiſter than man. And therefore there is no Nation be they neuer ſo brutish, but that by their owne naturall reaſon haue ſome religion, and ſome cogitatiō of God: they all therefore confeſſe, that there is ſome power and ſoueraygntie: but what a one it is, fewe there are that knowe it, and that hath cauſed the diuiſion of Religion.The Religion of the Americans. Some haue acknowledged the Sunne for ſoueraigne, others the Moone, ſome others the Starres, & others otherwiſe, as Hiſtories do recite. Nowe to our purpoſe, theſe wilde men of America, make mention and tel of a greate Lorde, whom they name in their language Toupan,
               Toupan. the which they ſay is aboue, and maketh it rayne and thunder, but they haue not the meane to praye nor to honor him at one tyme or other, neither yet no place appointed. If one ſhew them of God, as I haue many times done, they will giue an attentiue eare therevnto with an admiration, and they will aſke if it be not that Prophete that hath taught them to plante their great rootes,Hetich rootes. that they name Hetich. And they haue heard ſay of their fathers, that before they had the knowledge of the rootes, they lyued but with herbes and wild rootes, like brute beaſts: there was they ſay in their countrey a great Charaiba,
               Charaiba. that is to ſay a Prophete, yt which came to one of their yong maydēs, & gaue hir certaine great rootes named Hetich, ſhewing hir, that ſhe ſhoulde cut them in péeces, and then plante them in the earth, the which ſhe did, and ſince they haue alwayes continued from father to ſonne: the which roots haue ſo wel proſpered, that now they haue ſo great abundance that they eate little other foode, and it is as common with them as breade is with

vs. Of this roote I find two kindes of one greatneſſe: the firſt when it is ſodden or boiled becommeth yellow, & the other white, and theſe two kindes haue the leafe like to a mallow, it neuer beareth ſéede, and therefore theſe wild men do plant againe this roote, being cut in péeces, ſo that they being replanted multiplie excedingly. When that this countrey was firſte diſcouered and founde on,America firſt diſcouered in the yere. 1497 as before we haue ſhewed, which was in the yeare. 1497. by the commaundement of the King of Caſtilia, theſe wilde men being amaſed to ſée the Chriſtians in the order as they had neuer before ſene ye like: likewiſe their maner, geſture and doings, they eſtemed them as Prophets and honored them as Goddes, vntil they perceiued that they became ſicke to dye, and to be ſubiect to the like paſſions that they were, then they began to diſpraiſe them, and to intreate them worſe than they were accuſtomed as they that afterwardes went thither Spaniards and Portingals: ſo that if they be angred, they force no more to kil a Chriſtian and to eat him, than if it were one of theyr enimies: but this is in certayned places, and ſpecially among the Canibals, that lyue with none other thing,The Canibals are a people that liue with humaine fleſh. as we doe here with biefe and mutton. Alſo they haue left calling them Carabes or halfe Gods, and nowe they call them as in reproche Mahira, the which was the name of one of theyr anciente Prophetes, whom they did deteſt and abhor. As touching Toupan, they eſteme him greate, not reſting in one place, but going about here and there, and they ſay that he declareth his greateſt ſecretes to their Prophets. This therefore ſhal ſuffice for the Religion of theſe wild men, the which I knew and vnderſtode by a french expoſitor that had dwelled there ten yeares, who vnderſtode perfectly the language.
         
         
            
            The maner and cuſtome of the lyuing of theſe Americans as well men as women. Cap. 29.
            WE haue here before ſhewed ſpeaking of Africa, the which we coſted in our Nauigation, that ye 
               Barbarians and Ethiopians, and others in India went cuſtomably naked excepting their priuie partes, the which they couer with certayne vailes or aprons of cotton, or beaſtes ſkins, the which without compariſon is more tolerable than in our Americans,
               HoWe theſe Americās liue. that liue all naked euen as they come out of their mothers wombe, as well men as women without any ſhame. If you woulde know whether they do it of indigencie, or for the extreme heate, I anſwere that they may make themſelues clothing of cotton as well as to make them beds thereof to reſt in, either they might cloth them with beaſtes ſkins, as well as thoſe of Canada, for they haue greate plenty of wild and tame, eaſy to be taken. They haue this opiniō, that being naked and without apparell, they are more nimbler and better diſpoſed to all kynde of exerciſes.
            Moreouer if any tyme they be clad with any thyn and light ſhirte, the which they haue peraduenture gotten by greate payne: when they mete with their enimies they put it of before they ſet hande to their weapon (whoſe weapons) are a bowe and Arowes, for they thinke yt this garment or ſhyrte would take away their dexteritie in their fight, alſo that they could not eaſily flye nor remoue their iointes before their enimies: yea they ſay that they ſhoulde be taken of their enimies by ſuch garments. And therefore they had rather be naked, ſo ignorant are they and yll aduiſed. Neuertheleſſe they are very deſirous of gownes, ſhirts, hats, and other clothing, and they eſteme them ſo precious and coſtly, that they will rather let them

marre & take harme, than once to weare them, leaſt that by that meanes they ſhuld hurt them. In déede ſomtimes they will put them on when that they remaine at home, drinking and making good chéere after the death of their parents and friends, or in ſome ſolemnity after that they haue obtained victorie of their enimies. Moreouer if that they haue on any garment, they will put it of when that they ſit downe on the ground, and caſte it on their ſhoulders for feare of ſoyling of it. There are olde men & women among them, that hide their priuie partes with leaues. Some haue ſaid that in Europe when it was firſt inhabited, the men and women went al naked, only their ſecrete parts couered, as we read of our firſt parents. Neuertheleſſe in that time the men liued longer than they do in our age, being not ſubiect to ſo many diſeaſes as we are, ſo that they haue affirmed that all men ought to goe naked as Adam and Eue our firſt parents did, when they were in Paradiſe. As touching this nakedneſſe, we finde it not by Gods commaundement, I know that there are certaine heretikes called Adamians, that mainteine this nakedneſſe, the which ſect liued all naked, as theſe Americans of which we ſpeake.Adamians a kinde of heretikes, that maintained nakedneſſe. And they aſſēbled in their ſinagogs for to pray, al naked, and by this ye may know their opinion to be falſe, for before the ſinne of Adam & Eue, as it is ſhewed in the ſcripture, they were all naked, but afterward God gaue them garmēts of lether to couer their nakedneſſe, as the Canadians vſe at this day.The opiniō of the Turlupins, and the Philoſophers of Ciniques, cōcerning nakedneſſe. The which error others haue maintained, as the Turlupins and the Phyloſophers named Ciniques, yt which alleage for their reaſons, & do teach it publikely, that a man ought not to hide that, which nature hath giuen him. By this ye may ſée that theſe heritikes are more impertinēt, hauing had the knowledge of things than our Americans. The Romaines
               
though they were very ſtraūge in their liuings, yet they neuer remained naked. As touching ye ſtatues and images, they were made and reared vp in their temples all naked, as Titus Liuius ſheweth, hauing neither hat nor coife vpon their heads: as we find of Caius Caeſar, who being balde before, was wont to bring his hair that grew behinde,Iulius Ca
                     •••
                   did weare a cap againſt the order of the Romaines. forward for to couer his forhead: and therfore he had licence to weare a cap or coife on his head, for to hide that parte of his head that was balde. So muche thought I good to ſpeake, treating of the wilde men of America. Moreouer I haue ſéene thoſe of Perou vſe to weare litle garments made of Cotten after their maner. Alſo Plinie ſheweth, that in the farther parte of the Eaſt Indies, (for he neuer had no knowledge of America:) on ye borders of Gangis, there is a kinde of people cladde with broad leaues, which people are of a litle ſtature. I wil ſay moreouer as touching our wilde men, yt they haue a very feareful loke, bolde of ſpeche, their language is ſhort and obſcure, and yet more eaſier to learne than the Turkiſhs ſpeche, and others of the Eaſt parts, the which I may affirme by experience. They take great pleaſure to ſpeake diſtinctly, and to vaunt of the victories and triumphs that they haue had ouer their enimies. The elders among thē will kepe their promiſſe, and are more faithfull than the yong men, & yet they are all ſubiect to theft, not that they ſteale one from another, but if they finde a chriſtian or a ſtraunger, they will rifle him (of their golde & ſiluer they will take none) for they haue not the knowledge nor vſe therof, but their garments. They vſe great threatnings, ſpecially when yt they are angred, not only to ſmite but to kil. Though they be vnciuil, yet are they prompt & ready to do one ſeruice, yea for a little reward, euen to guide a ſtraunger .l. or .lx. leagues into the Countrey for feare of

difficulties and dāgers, with other charitable and honeſt déedes (more than among Chriſtians.) Now theſe wilde men being naked, haue a tawny colour,The ſtature and naturall coloure of the Americanes. the reaſon therof I leaue to the iudgement of naturall Phyloſophers, & why they are not ſo blacke as the Neigers of Ethiopia. To the reſt, wel formed and proportioned of their members, but their eyes are euill made, that is, blacke and louring, and their loke like to the loke of a wilde beaſt: they are of a high ſtature, wel diſpoſed, quicke & nimble, ſeldome grieued with ſickneſſe, vnleſſe they be hurt with arowes in the warre.
         
         
            The manner of their eating and drinking. Cap. 30.
            IT is eaſy to be knowne,The wilde me liue without lawes. yt theſe wilde men of America haue no more ciuilitie in their eating, than in other things, for as they haue no lawes to take the good, & to eſchue the euil, euen ſo they eat of al kinds of meats at al times and houres, without any other diſcretion. In déede they are of thēſelues ſuperſtitious, they will eat no beaſt nor fiſh, yt is heauy or ſlow in going, but of all other light meats in running & flying, as Veniſon and ſuch like, for bicauſe that they haue this opinion, that heauie meates wil hurte and anoy them when they ſhould be aſſailed of their enimies. Alſo they wil eate no ſalte meates, nor yet permit their children to eate any. And when they ſée the Chriſtian eate ſalt meats,The Americanes deteſt and abhorre ſalte meates. they reproue them therfore as a thing impertinent, ſaying that ſuch meats will ſhorten their liues: their ordinary meates are roaſted after their manner, as Rats of diuers kinde, and great ones, a certaine kinde of Toades greater than oures, Cocodrils and others that they roaſt all whole, with the ſkin and the bowels, and this they vſe without any difficultie,

yea theſe Cocodrils and great Lezards as great as a pig of a month old,The Lezard of America. the which is a fine meat (as they ſay that haue eate thereof.) Theſe Lezards of America are ſo priuie, that they will come neare vnto you, and take their repaſt, if that you wil take it without feare or difficultie. Their fleſh is like a Chickens fleſh, & they kil them with ſhooting at them with their arrowes. The meates that they boile, are Oyſters and other ſhell fiſhe of the ſea. In taking of their foode, they obſerue no houre, but all times and houres that they féele them ſelues to haue a ſtomake or appetite, be it in the night after their firſt ſléepe, they will riſe to eate, and then lay them downe to ſléepe. In their repaſt they kepe a maruellous ſilence,How theſe Americans kepe ſilence at their meat. the which is more to be commended, than amongſt vs that bable and talke at our tables, they doe ſéethe and roaſt very well their meate, and eate it meaſurably and not raſhly, mocking vs that deuoure in ſteade of eating: they will not drinke when they eate, nor eate when they drink, ſo that they will forbeare drinke a whole day. When they make their great bankets and ſolemnities, as when they haue obtained ſome great victorie on their enimies, then they wil ſit drinking a whole day without eating. They make drinkes of great Mill white and blacke, the which they call in their language Auaty.
               Auaty a drink. Neuertheleſſe after that they haue ſate drinking, being once departed the one from the other, they will eate ſuch as they can finde. The pooreſt ſorte liue more with ſea fiſhe, & other like meates than with fleſhe, they that are farre from the ſea, do fiſhe in riuers. Alſo they haue diuers kindes of fruites, as nature bringeth them forthe, & yet they liue long in health and well diſpoſed. Héere you muſt note that our elders in times paſt liued with fiſhe. The lawes of Triptolomeus, as Xenophon wryteth, did defend and forbid the Atheniens
               
the vſe of fleſh. Therefore it is no ſtrange thing for to liue with fiſh. Firſte in our Europe, and before that the grounde was tilled, men lyued more hardly without fleſh or fiſh, hauing not the meane to vſe them, and yet notwithſtanding they were ſtronger, and lyued the longer,The more delicate a man is nouriſhed the leſſe ſtrength he hath. being nothing ſo feminate as now in our age. Now theſe wilde men vſe fleſh and fiſh, as we haue before ſhewed. Some lye and eate in their beds, at the leaſt they ſit and eate in their beds, ſpecially the maiſter or chiefe of the family ſhalbe in his bed: and the others about him doing him ſeruice, as if nature had taught them to doe honor & reuerence to the aged.
            Moreouer they haue this honeſty, that the firſte that hath taken any great praie, be it on water or lād they wil diſtribute to euery one ſpecially to Chriſtians, if there be any, and they will requeſt and deſire them fréely to eate therof, eſteming it a great iniurie if you refuſe it. Alſo ſo ſoone as you enter into their lodgings, they will aſke you in their language Marabiſſer, what is thy name? and you may be well aſſured, that if they once knowe it, they will neuer forget it, their memorie is ſo good. Were it Cyrus the King of Perſia, Cyneas legate to the King Pyrrhus, Metridates, nor Ceſ
                     ••
                  , the which Plinie writeth of, to haue bene of ſo good a memorie, and after you haue anſwered them, they will aſke you, Marapipo, what wilt thou ſay? and many other things.
         
         
            Againſt the opinion of thoſe that thinke theſe wilde men to be all heary. Cap. 31.
            FOR bicauſe that many haue this fooliſh opinion, that thoſe people, whome we call wilde men, as they

liue in the woods and fields almoſt like to brute beaſts, ſo in like maner they are beary all ouer their bodyes, as a Lion, a Beare, or ſuch like. Alſo they are ſo pictured and painted in their tablets & clothes. To be ſhort, in ſetting out a wilde man, they ſet him out al hairy, euen from the head to the foote, the which is altogether falſe and vntrue. I haue knowne ſome ſo obſtinate, that they would affirme it with an othe, as thoſe that had ſéene it of a truth. As for me I knowe and affirme the contrary, for that I haue ſéene it. The wilde men as well of the Eaſt Indies, as of America, come forthe of their mothers wombe as faire and as well polliſhed as oures of Europe. And if that haire grow by ſucceſſion of time on any parte of their bodies, as it doeth to vs and others in what parte of the body ſo euer it be, they ſcratche it of with their nailes, ſauing only the haire of their heads, ſo greatly they doe deteſt and abhorre it, as wel women as men. And the hairs that growe on their browes,A kinde of herbe that cutteth like ſteele. the women doe ſhaue it of with a certaine herbe that cutteth like a raſer: this herbe is like to Sage or Iouncke, that groweth by the water ſide. As touching the hair Amatory, and their beards, they pluck it of, as wel as of the reſt of the body. Within theſe few yeares they haue found the meane to make litle pinſers, with the which they pull of their haire, for ſince that they haue bene frequented of Chriſtians, they haue learned the way how to forge Iron. And therfore beleue not hereafter the common opinion of ye painters nor their doings in this poynt, for they haue libertie to paint things to their owne diſcretion, euen as Poetes haue to forge and inuent lies. If it ſhould chaunce that a childe ſhould come forth of his mothers wombe hairy, & that the hairs ſhould grow & encreaſe all ouer his body, as the like hath bene ſéene in Fraunce, this were an accident of nature, as

if a childe ſhould be borne with two heades or ſuche like.A monſtrous forme of a childe couered with ſcales. Theſe are not things ſo wonderfull and ſtraunge, conſidering that Phyſitians can ſhew the reaſon. I haue ſéene a childe in Normandie, couered with ſcales like a Carpe. Theſe are imperfections of nature, according to ye Gloſe on the .xiij. Chapter of Eſay, ſhewing of certaine monſters hauing the ſhape of men named Satires, liuing in the woodes, hairy like wilde beaſtes. And of this the wrytings of Poets are full of Satyres, Faunes, Nymphes, Dryades, Hamadryades, Orcades, and other kinde of monſters, the which at this day are not to be founde, as they were in times paſt: by the which meanes the Deuill ſought to deceiue man, chaunging himſelfe into a thouſand ſimilitudes and likeneſſes. But now that our Lord Ieſus of his mercy hathe reuealed himſelfe to vs, theſe wicked ſpirits haue bene chaſed and driuen out, and hath giuen vs power to reſiſt thē, as witneſſeth the holy ſcripture. Moreouer in Affrica are to be ſéene at this day certaine monſters diſformed, for the reaſon that we haue before ſhewed in the beginning of this booke, with others that at this preſēt I will leaue out. Further more as touching theſe Americanes, they make their haire grow as Monkes were wont to doe, the which paſſeth not their eares, they cut their haire of before, for this occaſion as I haue bene enformed, for if they ſhould weare their haire long before, and their beard lōg, it ſhold be occaſion that they ſhold fal into the hāds of their enimies, which wold take them by their haire and by their beard. Alſo they ſay that their anceſtors haue ſhewed them, that to haue their head and beard thus cut and ſhauē, cauſeth them to haue a maruellous great audacitie and courage. It would be thought, yt if theſe wilde men haue frequented Aſia,
               Abantes a people in Aſia. they ſhold haue learned this of the Abantes, ye firſt found this

inuention of ſhauing or cutting of heare. For to be as they ſay, more valiant and hardy among their enimies. Alſo Plutarke ſheweth in the life Theſeus, that ye cuſtome of the Athenians was,The maner of the Athenians. that they that were conſtituted as tribunes in their common wealth, were bounde to offer the lockes or heare of their heades to the God in the Ilād of Delphos, ſo that Theſeus hauing ſhaued the heare of, on the forparte of his head was thereto prouoked by the Abantes, a people of Aſia. Moreouer we find, that Alexander the great, cauſed his men to take the Macedonians by the heare of their heade, and by their bearde: for at that time there was no barbars for to polle and ſhaue, and the firſte barbars that were ſéene in Italy, came out of Siſily. This much as touching the heare of theſe Americans.
            
         
         
            Of a tree named in the Americans tong Genipat, with which they make coloures. Cap. 32.
            
               Genipat a tree, and the fruite.GEnipat is a trée, the which the wild mē of America do greatly eſteme for the fruit that it beareth being of the trées name, not that it is good to eate, but profitable to other things that they applie it too. It is like of greatneſſe and of colour to our peach, of the iuice wherof, they make a certayne coloure, with the which ſometimes they coloure al their bodies. The poore brutiſh men not knowing the meane to drawe out the iuice or liquor of this fruit, are conſtrayned to chew it, as if they woulde ſwallow it downe,The maner how to make colour of this tree Genipat. then they take it out & wring iuice out with their handes, as you woulde wring water out of a ſpunge, the which liquor or iuice is as cleare as criſtal, ſo that when they are minded to make any enterpriſe or

feate, or to viſite one another, and to make ſome ſolempnitie, they wet all their bodies with this iuice or liquor,The maner of theſe wild mē to colour their bodies. and the more it drieth vpon them, the more perfecter colour it attaineth. This coloure is betwene an Azure and a blacke, and neuer in his perfect coloure, vntill it haue bene the ſpace of two dayes vpon their bodies, & ſo theſe pore people be as well content with that, as we be with Veluet or Sattin, or any other coſtly garment when we goe to a feaſt or a wedding. The women do more oftner coloure them ſelues therewith than men. Furthermore ye ſhall note in this place, that if the men are minded to go ten or twelue leagues off to drink or make good chéere with their friendes, they will pille ſome kinde of Trée, where within ſhall be red, yelowe, or ſome other coloure and they will ſtampe it very ſmall, and then they wil take gumme out of another trée, the which they name 
                  Ʋſub,
               Vſub a kinde of Gumme. with the which they wil rub al their body ouer, although it be good for wounds and ſores, as I haue ſéene by experience, & then vpon this Gumme they wil poure of theſe coloures before ſhewed. Others in ſtéede or for want of theſe trées or coloures, wil ſow many little fethers together of all colours, ſome as red as fine ſcarlet, and others of others colours, & about their heads they will haue garlands of theſe fethers maruelloues faire. This trée Genipat hath leaues like to a nut trée, and ye fruit groweth at the end of the braunches one vpon another on a ſtraunge faſhion and maner. There is alſo a nother trée named Genipat, of which the fruit is greater, and good to eat.An other tree named Genipat. There is a nother ſecrete herbe which they name in their language Petun, the which moſt commonly they beare about them, for that they eſtéeme it maruellous profitable for many things, this herbe is like to our Buglos.Petun an herb, and howe it is vſed. They gather this herbe very charely, and dry it within their litle

cabanes or houſes. Their maner to vſe it, is this, they wrappe a quantitie of this herbe being dry in a leafe of a Palme trée which is very great, & ſo they make rolles of the length of a cādle, & than they fire the one end, and receiue the ſomke therof by their noſe and by their mouthe. The ſay it is very holeſome to clenſe & conſume the ſuperfiuous humors of the brain. Moreouer being taken after this ſort, it kepeth the parties from hūger & thirſt for a time, therfore they vſe it ordinarily. Alſo whē they haue any ſecrete talke or coūſel among them ſelues, they draw this ſmoke, & then they ſpeake. The which they do cuſtomably one after another in the warre, whereas it is very néedeful. The women vſe it by no meanes. If that they take too much of this perfume, it will make them light in the head, as the ſmel or taſt of ſtrong wine. The chriſtiās that do now inhabite there, are become very deſirous of this parfume, although yt the firſt vſe thereof is not without danger, before that one is accuſtomed therto, for this ſmoke cauſeth ſweates & weakeneſſe, euen to fall into a Syncope, the which I haue tried in my ſelfe. And it is not ſo ſtraunge as it ſéemeth, for there are many other fruits that offende the braine, though that the taſt of them is pleſāt & good to eat.A fountaine at Lynceſtis, and his propertie. 
               Plinie ſheweth, that in Lynceſtis ther is a fountaine that maketh the people dronken, that take therof, likewiſe an other of Paphlagonia. Some think this not to be true, but altogither falſe, ye which we haue ſpoken as touching this herbe, as though nature coulde not giue ſuch power to things, yes truely muche more greater, alſo to beaſts, according to the Countreys and Regions. Wherfore ſhold it then leaue this countrey voide of ſuch a benifite, being temperate without cōpariſon more than others? And if there be any not content of this our witneſſing or affirmation, let him read Herodita, which

in his ſecond boke, maketh mention of a people in Affrica, liuing only with herbs. Apian reherſeth that the Parthians being baniſhed & driuen out of their Countrey by Marcus Anthonius, liued with a certaine herbe that toke away their memory: neuertheleſſe they had opinion that it did noriſh thē, though yt in a ſhort time after they died. Therfore ought not ye ſtory of our Petun be foūd ſtraūge.
         
         
            Of a tree named Paquouere. Cap. 33.
            SEing that we are now come to the reherſal of trées of our America, I think it good to ſet forth ſome, not for the amplifying of this work, but for the great vertue and ſecreteneſſe of things, and for that there is found no ſuch in our Europe, neither in Aſia nor in Affrica. Therfore this trée that the wilde men name Paquouere, is peraduenture the wonderfulleſt trée that euer was ſéene.The diſcription of a tre named Paquouere. It is not more higher frō the ground to the braunches, than a fadome or there about, and of greatneſſe as muche as a man may gripe with both his hāds, when that it is come to his ful groweth. And the trée is ſo tēder, that it may be eaſily cut with a knife. As touching the leaues, they are in bredth two foote, and of lengthe a fadome, a foote and iiij. fingers, the which I affirme and aſſure of a truthe. I haue ſéene almoſt of that kinde, in Egipt and in Damaſco returning from Ieruſalem. Notwithſtanding, the leaues are not halfe ſo great, as thoſe of America, likewiſe ther is great difference in ye fruit, for ye fruit is a good foote lōg, I meane the longeſt ſort, & great like a Cucumber much like vnto it, as touching the proportion: this fruit which they name in their language Pacoua,
               Pacoua the fruit. is very good whē it is come to his ripeneſſe, & of a good reliſh. The wilde men gather them before they be ripe, which fruit being gathered, they beare into their lodgings, as we doe our fruit.

It groweth on the trée by cluſters, xxx. or .xl. togither, and cloſe to another vpon litle branches neare to the trunck. And that which is more to be maruelled at, this trée neuer beareth fruite but once. The greateſt parte of theſe wilde men that dwel far within the countrey, do noriſhe themſelues with this fruit a good part of the yeare, and of an other fruit that commeth vp in the fieldes, which they name Hoyriri, the which to loke on, would be iudged to grow on ſome trée. Notwithſtāding it groweth in a certaine herbe that beareth leafe like to a Palme, as wel in the length as in largeneſſe, it groweth in the midſt of the leaues very round, & within it be litle Nuts, of the which the kernell is white & good to eate, ſauing that ouermuch therof, as wel as of other things, hurteth the braine. The which force & ſtrengthe is in the Coriander ſéede, if it be not trimmed and dighted. Likewiſe if the other were ſo dreſſed & trimmed, it wold take away this vice. Notwithſtanding the Americanes eat therof, chiefly ye litle childrē. The fields ar very ful within two leagues of Cap de Fria, neare to the great mariſh grounds yt we paſſed, after that we had ſet foote on land at our returne. This much wil I ſay by the way, that biſide ye fruit that we ſaw by ye way, we found a Cocodril dead of the greatneſſe of a good calfe, that was come out of the mariſhes, & had ben ther killed, for they eat the fleſh of them,A dead Cocodrill. Iacareabſon. alſo of great Lizards, of the which we haue before ſhewed: they name thē in their language Iacareabſon, & they are greater than thoſe of Nyll. The people of the Countrey ſay, that there is a mariſhe being a.v. leagues compaſſe, on the ſide of Pernomeri, diſtant frō the line .x. degrées towards the Canibals, wheras there are certaine Crocodrils as great as oxen, that caſt out a mortall ſmoke by their mouth, in ſuche ſort, that if ye come neare them, they will goe neare to kill you, as they haue heard tell of their aunceſtors.

In the place whereas groweth this fruite of which we ſpeake, are a great number of Hares like to ours, but not ſo great, nor yet like in coloure. There is alſo found another little beaſt named Agoutin, as great as a Hare, the haire like to a wilde Bore briſled, the head like the head of a great Rat, the eares and the mooſel like to a Hare or Wat, the féete clouen like to a Hogge, and the taile not aboue a finger lengthe, they liue with fruites: alſo the wilde men noriſhe them for their pleaſure, their fleſhe is very good for to eate.
         
         
            Howe theſe Americanes or wilde men doe diſforme them ſleues, eſteming it a great glory. Cap. 34.
            IT is not ſufficient for theſe wilde men to be naked, to paint their bodies, & to ſcratch and pluck of their haire: but alſo for to make them ſelues more diſformed, they pearce their mouthes being yong with a ſharp and pointed herbe, ſo that the hole encreaſeth & groweth as their body, for they put therin a certain kind of fiſh, hauing the ſkin very hard, of which fiſh the greater end is within, & the leſſer without (on the nether lippe.) When that they are great, ready to be maried, they put into theſe holes great ſtones, being much like to the coloure of an Emerauld, the which they doe ſo eſtéeme,A ſtone of the coloure of an Emerauld. that it is not eaſy to recouer any of them, without ſome great reward or preſent, for they are very rare and ſcant in their Countrey. Their neighbors & nie friendes bring theſe ſtones from an hie Mountain, that is in the countrey of the Canibals, the which they polliſh with an other ſtone for ye purpoſe, ſo runningly, that it is not poſſible for the beſt & moſt experteſt workman that is, to do it better. And I think ther might be found in this forſaid hil very Emeraulds: for I haue ſéene of theſe ſtones, that you could not diſcern from Emeraulds. Theſe Americanes as I ſay, do diſfigure thē
               ſelues

after this ſort, & do diſforme & miſhape themſelues wt theſe holes & ſtones in their faces: in which they take as great delite & pleaſure as a Lord or gentleman wil do in a rich & precious chaine of gold or ſom other Iewel: ſo that among them that beareth the moſt, is eſtéemed their King or greateſt Lord, and not only on their lippes and mouth, but alſo on both ſides the chéeke: theſe ſtones that the men cary, are as broad as an Angel or ſoueraine of gold, and as thicke as a finger bredth, which letteth their ſpeache, ſo that one can ſkant vnderſtand their ſpeach, for they ſpeake as though their mouth wer ful of meat: whē theſe ſtones are taken out, if that they ſpeake, you ſhal ſée them ſlauer at theſe holes, the which is a filthy and vgly fight to behold. Alſo when theſe brutiſh beaſts are diſpoſed to mock, they wil put their tōgues out of theſe holes, the women & maidens are not ſo diſformed. In dede they haue hanging at their eares prety litle ſtones and ſhels, that they haue in the ſea, alſo bracelets of certaine ſhels. They eſteme much litle beades of glaſſe, yt the frenchmen haue caried thither. Bicauſe of their diſformitie & chaunging of their naturall colour, theſe men & women are for the moſt part black, for that they colour themſelues with colours that they make of ye fruit of trées, as we haue before ſhewed, they colour one an other. The women they colour & deck the men, we do not read that other natiōs haue done the like. We finde that the Scythians going to the funerals of their friends, did painte their faces with black. The women of Turkey do paint their nailes with coloures red & blew, thinking by this to be more fairer, but not ye reſt of their body. I wil not here forget yt theſe women of America do not only paint their childrēs faces with black, but alſo their bodies, and that with diuers colours, ſpecially of one colour like to a verniſhing, yt which colour wil continue the ſpace of .iiij. dayes, & with ye ſame

colour the womē paint their legs, ſo yt for to loke a far of, you wold iudge them to be hoſed with fine black kerſey.
         
         
            Of viſions, dreames and illuſions, that theſe Americans haue, and of the perſecution that they receiue of wicked ſpirites. Cap. 35.
            IT is a wonderful thing, that theſe pore men although they be not reaſonable, for yt they are depriued frō the right vſe of reaſō, and from the knowledge of God,Why the Americanes are tormented of wicked ſprites are ſubiect to many fantaſtical illuſions & perſecutiōs of wicked ſpirites. We haue ſaid that before the cōming of our ſauior Ieſus Chriſt, we wer in like maner vexed: for the deuil ſtudieth onely to ſeducte that creature that hath no knowledge of God. Euen ſo theſe pore Americanes do oftentimes ſée a wicked ſpirite, ſometimes in one forme,Aguan a euill ſprite in their language. & ſometimes in an other, the which they name in their lā
               guage Agnan, the which ſpirit perſecuteth them day and night, not onely their ſoule, but alſo their body, beating them, and doing them much iniury, ſo that you ſhal hear them make a pitiful cry, ſaying in their lāguage, (if there be any chriſtian by or neare,) ſéeſt thou not Agnan ye beateth me, defend me if thou wilt that I ſhal ſerue thée, and cut thy wood: for many times they wil trauail to the Braſel wood for a ſmal reward. Therfore in ye night they wil not goe out of their cabens or houſes, without bearing fire with them, the which they ſay, is a ſoueraine defence and remedy againſt their ennimie. And I thought that it had bene a Fable when it was ſhewed me firſt, but I haue ſéene by experience this wicked ſpirite to be driuen out by a chriſtian, in inuocating & naming Ieſus Chriſt. Alſo the people of Ginney, & of Canada are likewiſe tormē
               ted, chiefly in the woods, wheras they haue many viſions, and they call this ſprite in their lāguage Grigri.
               Grigri. Furthermore theſe wilde men of America being this diſprouided

of reaſon,The opinion of the wilde men, as touching their naturall dreames. and of the knowledge of veritie, are eaſie to fal into many fooliſh errors. They note & obſerue their dreames diligently, thinking that al that they haue dreamed, ſhould ſodainly come to paſſe. If they haue dreamed that they ſhall haue victorie of their enimies, or to be vanquiſhed and ouercome, you ſhall not perſuade them the contrary, but they beleue it aſſuredly, as we doe the Goſpel. Of a truthe there be Phyloſophers which holde opinion, that ſome dremes wil naturally come to paſſe, according to the humors that raigne, or other diſpoſitions of ye body, as to dreame of fire, water, black things & ſuche like. But to beleue and affirme the other dreames, as thoſe of theſe Americans, it is a thing impertinent, & contrary to the true religion of Ieſus Chriſt: and to my iudgemēt ſo are al other, Macrobius in the dreme of Scipion, ſaith that ſome dreames come to paſſe, & happen bicauſe of the vanitie of ye dreamers. Other dreames come of things that we haue too much apprehended. Others beſide our Americanes, do giue creadit to dreames, as the Lacedemonians, the Perſians & certaine others. Theſe wilde men haue an other ſtraunge opinion which is an abuſe, they eſtéeme ſome among thē to be very Prophets, whome they name in their lāguage Pages,
               Pages. Prophets. to whome they declare their dreames, & the others do interprete them, & they hold opinion that they tel truthe. Theſe may be cōpared to Philon the firſt interpreter of dreames, & to Trogus Pompeius, that therein was very excellent. I might here bring in many things of dreames & diuinations, and what dreames are true or no. Likewiſe of their kinds & the cauſes therof, as we haue bene inſtructed of our elders. But for that it is repugnant to our religion, and for that defence is made to giue therto any credit, we wil leaue it, and leane only to the holy ſcripture, and to that which is commaunded

vs, & therfore I wil ſpeake therof no more: but ſure I am that for one yt hitteth right, there are a numbre contrary. Let vs returne to our wild men of America, they beare greate reuerence to theſe Prophetes, otherwiſe named Pages or Charaibes, which is to ſay, halfe Gods,Pages or Charaibes. and they are truely idolaters, euen as were the ancient Gentiles.
         
         
            Of falſe Prophetes and Magicians, that are in this countrey of America, the which inuocate and cal vpon wicked ſpirites, and of a tree named Ahouai. Cap. 36.
            THis people being ſo far from the truthe, beſide the perſecution that they receiue of wicked ſpirits, their errours and dreames, yet are they ſo far out of reaſon that they worſhip the deuill, by the meane of ſome of his myniſters named Pages, of the which ſorte we haue ſpoken already. Theſe Pages or Charaibes,
               What theſe pages and Charaibes are and of their deceit. are men of a wicked lyfe, the which are giuen to ſerue the diuel for to deceiue their neighbors. Such deceiuers for to coloure their wickedneſſe, and to be eſtemed honorable among others, remayne not continually in one place, but they are vacabunds, wandering here and there, through the woodes and other places, and returning with others, at certayne houres, making them beleue that they haue cō
               ferred and counſeled with the ſprits, for publike affaires, and that they muſt do ſo and ſo, or that this or that ſhall happen, and then they are receiued and intertayned honorably, being nouriſhed and intertayned for this their doing: and they eſteme them ſelues happie, that may remayne in their fauor and good grace, and giue or offer to them ſome preſente. Likewiſe if it happen, that any of them haue indignation or quarrell againſt his neighbor, they come to theſe Pages, to the ende that they mare dye

with poyſon him or them to whom they will euil. Among other things they helpe themſelues with a trée named in their language Ahouay, bearing fruite venomous and mortal, the which is of the greatneſſe of a little cheſtnut, and it is very poyſon, ſpecially the nut. The men for a light and little cauſe will giue thereof to their wiues, being angred, and the women likewiſe to the men: likewiſe theſe wicked women when they are with childe, if their huſbandes haue diſpleaſed them, they will take in ſtede of this fruite a certaine hearbe, for to make their fruit of their wombe to come before their time, this fruite being white with his nut, is made like this greke letter Δ Delta, and of this fruit the wild men when the nut or kernel is out, they make bels, and hang them on their legs, the which maketh as a great a noyſe as the Moris daunſers in our countrey. The wilde men wil in no wiſe giue of this fruite to ſtrangers being freſh gathered, likewiſe they forbid their children in no wiſe to touch thereof before that the kernell be fallen away. This trée in heigth is lyke to our peare trées, the leafe of two or thre fingers long, and two fingers broade, being gréene or ſpringing all the yeare long, the barcke is whitiſhe. When there is a braunche cut thereof, it rendreth a white iuice or lyquor almoſt like milk, the trée being cut it caſteth a maruelous ſtinking ſmell, therefore the wilde men will put it to no vſe, not to make therewith fier woode. I will forbeare here to ſet forth the properties of many trées, bearing fruites maruelous faire, neuertheleſſe as much and rather more venemous than this trée of which we ſpeke. Furthermore ye muſt note that the wild men haue theſe Pages in ſuch honor and reuerence, that they worſhip them or rather do Idolatry to them, ſpecially when they returne from any place: ye ſhall ſée this people goe before

them proſtrating them ſelues, and praying them, ſaying, Make that I be not ſicke, that I die not, neither I nor my children, and ſuch lyke thinges. And they wil anſwer, thou ſhalt not die, thou ſhalt not be ſicke and ſuch like. If it chaunce that theſe Pages ſpeake not truthe, and that things happen otherwiſe then they haue predeſtinated, they make no difficultie to kill him or thē, as vnworthy of that title and dignitie of Pages, euery Village nouriſheth of them, ſome one, ſome two or thre, according to their greatneſſe, and when it behoueth to knowe any greate thing, they vſe certayne ceremonies and deuiliſhe inuocations, the which are made after this maner. Firſt is made a newe lodging, in the which neuer man before hath dwelled, and there within they will reare or make a newe white bedde and cleane according to their maner.The ceremonies of theſe Prophetes to cal vpon the wicked ſpirit. Then they will cary into the ſayde lodging greate quantitie of vittels, as Cahouin, which is their ordinarie drink made by a virgin of ten or twelue yeres of age, lykewiſe of their foode made of rootes, the which they vſe in ſtede of bread. So al things being thus prepared the people being aſſembled doe guyde this their gentle Prophete to this new lodging, wheras he ſhal remaine alone, after yt a maide hath giuē him water to waſh withal, but ye muſt note, before this myſterie he muſt abſtain from his wife the ſpace of nyne dayes, being in the houſe alone: and the people gone a little backe, he lieth flatt downe on the bed, and beginneth to inuocate and call the wicked ſpirite for the ſpace of an houre, and furthermore making his accuſtomed ceremonyes, in ſuch ſorte that in the ende of his inuocations, the ſpirite commeth to him hiſſing, and whiſteling, as they ſay. Others haue ſhewed me, that thys wycked ſpirite commeth ſometymes in the preſence of all the people, thoughe

they ſée him not, but they heare a fearefull noyſe, then they crye all with one voyce in their language, ſaying: we praye thée to tel the truthe to our Prophete, that tarieth for thée there within:What the intorrogations are that they make to the wicked ſpirit. their intorrogatiōs is of their enimies, to knowe who ſhall haue the victorie, with the like anſweres, that ſay, who ſhalbe taken and eaten of their enimies? who ſhal be hurte or offended with any wilde beaſte or ſuch lyke. Some of them among other things, ſhewed me that their Prophet had forſhewed our comming.Houioulſira. They call this ſpirite Houioulſira: this & many other things haue Chriſtians affirmed me of, that had dwelled there a long tyme. And they neuer take any greate enterpriſe in hande, before they knowe the anſwere of their Prophete. When this myſterie is accompliſhed, the Prophete commeth out, who being compaſſed about with people, maketh a long narration vnto them, wherein he reherſeth al that he hath hearde of this ſpirite: and God knoweth the gréetings, rewardes and preſentes that are made vnto him. The Americans haue not bene the firſte that haue practiſed magike, but before them it hath bene common in many nations, vntill the comming of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte, whoſe preſence did efface and ouerthrowe the power of Sathan, by the which meanes the deuill ſought to begile and deceiue ye world: it is not therefore without a cauſe, that it is forbidden by the holy Scripture, yea by Gods own mouth. Of this Magike,
               Two kindes of Magike. we finde two chiefe & principal kinds, one is in hauing familiar and ſecrete talke with wicked ſpirites, who openeth & ſheweth the moſt ſecreteſt things of nature in dede, the one is more wickeder than the other, but they are bothe naught & full of curioſitie. Why ſhould we, ſeing that by the prouidence of God we haue all things that to vs is neceſſary and nedefull, goe about

to ſeke out the ſecrets of nature and other things, which our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſte hath obſerued to him ſelfe: ſuch curiouſneſſe in vs, ſheweth an vnperfect Iudgemēt, want of faith and true Religion,Againſt thoſe that beleue ſorceries and witchcraftes. and yet the ſimple people that beleueth ſuch things is moſt abuſed: Surely I cannot but maruell, ſpecially in a countrey (where good and politike lawes are vſed) why ſuch filthy and wicked abuſes be lefte vnpuniſhed, with a companie of olde witches, which put hearbes to armes, writings about neckes, with other myſteries and ceremonies, as to heale Feauers and other things, which are very Idolatrie, and worthy of greuous puniſhment. But at this day ſuch wickedneſſe may be founde among thoſe that are in Authoritie, of which ſorte we ſhould haue good counſell and iudgemente, but they themſelues are firſte blinde.
            Therefore it is no maruel, if that the ſimple and ignorant be ſoone ſeduced, ſéeing that men of wiſdome and grauitie, are ſo blinded. O blinded ignorance, wherefore ſerueth the holy Scripture? wherefore ſerueth Lawes & other good ſciences, the which our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt hath opened and ſhewed vnto vs, if we lyue in errour & ignorance as doe theſe wilde men, and more brutiſh than the very brute beaſts? Neuertheleſſe, we wil be eſtemed, to know much, & make a large profeſſion of vertue. And therefore it is not to be marueled at, if our elders not knowing the truthe are fallen into errours, ſeking it by all meanes much leſſe of theſe wilde men, of which we ſpeake: but the vanitie of this worlde, ſhall ceaſe when it pleaſeth God. Now to our matter, we began to ſhew, that there is a kinde of Magike moſt damnable, that is called Thurgia, or Goetia, ful of enchantementes, wordes,Thurgia a dānable Magike. ceremonies, and inuocations, hauing yet vnder hir certaine other kindes, of the which as it is ſayde, was inuenter

               Zabulus.
               Zabulus, Which is the right Magike. As touching the true and perfit Magike, the which is to ſeke and know heauenly things, to celebrate and honor God, it hath bene commended of many noble & graue perſonages, ſuch had the thrée Kings that went to ſeke out Chriſte, and ſuch Magike, is taken to be perfit and pure wiſdome.What Magus in the Perſian tōg ſignifieth The Perſians woulde not receiue any into the dignitie of their Empire vnleſſe he had lerned this Magike, that is, if he were not wiſe. For Magus in their language is wiſe in oures, and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                in Gréeke is Sapiens in Latine.Zalmoxis Zoraſtria. Of the which was the inuentor as it is ſayde Zalmoxis and Zoraſtria, not he that is ſo common, but he that was ſonne to Oromaſia. Alſo Plato in his Alcibiades ſaith, that he verily thinketh that the Magike of Zoraſtria, is no other thing, but to know and celebrate God, the which to know, and vnderſtande he him ſelf with Pithagoras, Empedocles, and Democrites, hazarded themſelues bothe by ſea and by lande, going into ſtrange countries, for to learne and know this Magike. I knowe well that Plinie and many others haue enforced themſelues to attaine thereto. As for me I thought good to ſpeake thus much by the way, ſéeing it commeth now in purpoſe as touching our wilde men.
         
         
            How theſe Americans beleue the ſoule to be immortall. Cap. 37.
            THis poore people although they be ignorant & erre, yet their errour and ignorance is more to be borne with all, than the Arians of our tyme which being not content to haue bene created to the image and lykeneſſe of the eternal God, perfit aboue al creaturs, againſt all ſcripture and miracles, they wil ſhew themſelues like brute beaſtes without lawe or reaſon, and therefore bicauſe of their obſtinate errour, they ſhoulde be handled lyke beaſtes, for there is no beaſte be he neuer ſo wilde

and brutiſh, but will obey and ſerue man, as the very image of God, the which we dayly ſée. But it will one day come to paſſe, that theſe wicked Imps ſhall well knowe that there reſteth ſomewhat after the death of this worlde that at the later day ſhall appeare before the maieſtie of God, there to giue account of their wicked and damnable errour. Nowe therefore theſe poore people do think ye ſoule to be immortal, the which they name in theyr language Cherepicouare,
               Cherepicouare The opinion of the wilde men on the immortalitie of the ſoule. the which I knewe in aſking of them what became of their ſoule when they were deade. The ſoules ſayde they of them that haue valiantly faught with their enimies, goeth with many other ſoules to places of pleaſure, goodly woods, gardens, and orchardes, but to the contrarie thoſe that haue not well defended their countrey nor reſiſted their enimies ſhall goe with Agnan, that is, to the wicked ſpirite that tormented them. On a tyme I boldened my ſelf to aſke or inquire of a greate King of that countrey as touching the immortalitie of the ſoule, who was come aboue thirtie leagues of, to ſée vs, but he anſwered me fiercely in his language theſe words. Knoweſt thou not ſayd he that after we be dead, our ſoules go into a far countrey wheras they be founde altogether in fayre & goodly places, as our Prophets doe ſay that viſit them oftentimes & ſpeke vnto them, the which opinion they beleue and holde of a truthe. Another tyme we went to viſit another greate King of that countrey named Pindahouſon,
               Pindahouſon a King in the wilde coūtrey. whome we founde ſicke in his bed of an Ague, who among other things demaunded of me what became of the ſoules of our friendes, and others when they dyed, and I made anſwere that they went with Toupan, the which he dyd eaſily beleue, vpon the which he anſwered me theſe wordes: come hether ſayde he, I haue hearde thée

ſpeake much of Toupan,
               This Toupan is to be vnderſtanded, the almighty God that can doe all things, ſpeake to him for me that I be healed, and if I can be made whole, I will giue thée many faire giftes, yea I wilbe clad, and arrayed as thou art, beare ſuch a greate bearde, and honor Toupan, as thou doeſt. And in dede when that he was whole, the Lorde of 
                  Ʋillegagnon was determined to haue him baptized, and therefore he kept him alwayes with him. They haue another fooliſh opinion, the which is, that being on the water, be it ſea or Riuer, for to goe againſt their enimies, if that in the meane time there ariſe a tempeſt or rage on the water,The ſuperſtition of the wilde men. as many times ther doth, they thinke that it commeth of the ſoules of their parents or friendes, but wherefore they cannot tell, and for to appeaſe the tempeſt they caſt ſome thing into the water, in tokē of a preſent or offering, thinking by this meanes to appeaſe the windes? Furthermore, when any of them die, be he King or other, before that they lay them in their graue, if that there be any that hath any thing belonging or partayning to the dead body, they will not kepe it backe, but wil bring it and deliuer it openly, & reſtore it before them all, for to be put into the earth with him: otherwiſe they doe thinke, that the ſoule after that it is ſeparated from the body, wil come and moleſt them that kepe their goodes. I woulde to God, that many amongſt vs were of the lyke opinion, (I meane without errour) then would they not kepe backe deade mens goodes, from poore orphelins and others. Now they hauing reſtored to the deade man that which is his, he is ſurely bounde with ropes of cotton, and of the pithe of trées, ſo that it is vnpoſſible as they thinke for him to reuiue and come agayne, the which they doe greatly feare, ſaying, that to the elders it hath ſo chaunced, and that hath made them ſince to looke better to it.
         
         
            
            How theſe wilde men make warre one againſt another, ſpecially againſt thoſe whome they name Margageas and Thabaiares. Alſo of a tree which they name Hayri, of the which they make their weapons for warre. Cap. 38.
            THeſe people of America are greate quarrellers againſt their neighbors, chiefly againſt thoſe whome they name in their language Margageas, & Thabaiares, & hauing no other meane to appeaſe their quarrell, they fight cruelly one with another: They gather together vpon a .6000. men, ſometymes ten or .12000. village againſt village, or otherwiſe as they do méete, the like do thoſe of Perou and the Canibals. And before that they execute any greate enterpriſe, be it in warre or otherwiſe, they aſſemble and come together, chiefly the eldeſt ſorte, without their wiues or children, with ſuch a grace and modeſty, that they wil ſpeake one after another, and be that ſpeaketh ſhal be heard with attētiue ſilence, who hauing declared his minde, giueth place to another, and ſo folowing in order, the Auditors ſit downe on the earth, vnleſſe it be ſome ancient men, that lye on their beds, the which conſidering with my ſelfe, commeth to my remembrance the moſte commendable cuſtome of the gouernors of Thebes, an ancient Citie in Grecia, the which for to cō
               ſult together of the affaires of the common welth would alwayes ſit downe vpon the ground: the which maner of doing is eſtemed an argument of prudence. Furthermore it is a ſtrange thing that theſe Americans do neuer make amongſt them any paction or concorde, though that their hatred be great, as other natiōs do be they neuer ſo cruel & barbarous, as the Turkes, Moores, and Arabians: and

I thinke that if Theſeus, the firſt inuenter of peace amōg the Greekes, were among them, he ſhoulde be more troubled, than euer he was: this people haue certaine ſleights of warre to trap one another, as well as in other places. Therefore theſe Americans haue perpetuall enimitie one againſt another at all tymes againſt their neighbors before ſhewed, ſéeking their enimies, and fighting as furiouſly together as is poſſible, the which cauſeth eache village to fortifie, & to make themſelues ſtrong with people and weapons. They will aſſemble together on the nights in greate number for to kepe watche and warde. For they are wonte to ſkirmiſh togethers, more on nightes than on dayes: if that they haue knowledge therof before hande, or otherwiſe do ſuſpecte the comming of their enimies, they wil plante in the grounde rounde about their lodgings the compaſſe of a bowe ſhot, ſharp pointed pins of wood, the which are ſo ſet in the earth, that they are ſcāt perceiued: this kind of policie they vſe to gal & pierce the féet of their enimies, which are al bare and naked, as well as the reſt of their bodies, to the ende that by this meanes they might intangle their enimies for to kill ſome, others for to take priſoners. It is a greate honor to them, the which departe out of their countrey, for to aſſayle their enimies on the borders: and when that they haue taken many of their enimies priſoners in theyr countries, he that hath taken moſt priſoners, is honored and celebrated among others, as a great King or a great Lorde: when he hath moſt killed, and when they meane ſodainly to aſſayle a towne or village, they wil hide them ſelues in the woodes lyke Foxes, lurking there for a certayne tyme, vntil they haue eſpied the tyme and vantage to come forth ſodainly to beſet their enimies. Whē they be come to a village, they know the mene to ſet fier theron,

for to make them come forth with their wiues & children, bag and baggage: being come forth, they aſſaile one another ſhoting of their arrowes: alſo with their Maces & Swords of wood, that to behold them it is a good paſſetime: they wil bite one another wt their téeth in all places wheras they cā take hold, ſhewing ſometymes the bones of thoſe whome they haue vanquiſhed and ouercome before times in the warrs, and eaten: to be ſhort, they do ye worſt they c
                  •
               n to feare & anger their enimies. Some ye ſhall ſée takē priſoners boūd & manacled like theues. And when thoſe returne from warre far in their owne countries (vanquiſhers) God knoweth the noyſe and paſſetyme that they make. The women folow their huſbands to the warres, not for to fight as the Amazoness doe, but for to miniſter to their huſbands foode and other neceſſaries, requiſite in the warres; for ſometymes they make iorneys of fiue or ſix moneths before they returne: he that is greateſt among them, hath moſte wiues to ſerue him. And when they make any greate iorney, they ſet fire on their houſes, and if they haue any good thing, they hide it vnder the ground vntill their returne. Their vittels that they haue is ſuch as the lande beareth, that is, rootes very delicate and pleaſant to eate, and fleſh of wild beaſtes, and fiſh dried in the ſmoke: their beds of cotton are caried with them: the men beare nothing but bowes and arrowes in their handes: their weapons are alſo greate Swordes and Clubs of wood very heauy: their bowes are as long as oure bowes in Englande: their arrowes are made pointed, ſome of Canes that growe on the ſea coaſt, and others are made of a kynde of a woodde named Hayri,
               Hairi a tree. bearing leafe lyke to a Palme trée, the whiche is of the coloure of blacke Marble:

therefore many ſay it is hornbeame, but it ſemeth to me otherwiſe, for the right and perfect hornebeame is more ſhining.Hornebeame a tree. Furthermore the Hornebeame trée is not lyke this, for this is very thorney al ouer. The beſt Hornbeam is to be had in Calicut, and in Ethiopia This wood is ſo heauie, that it ſincketh to the bottome of the water lyke Iron, therefore theſe wilde men make therewith their ſwordes and clubs, to fight with in the warres. It beareth a great fruit, ſomewhat pointed at one of the endes, within it a whit kernel, of ye which fruit I haue brought home with me a greate many. Beſides this the wild men make faire collers of this woode: alſo it is ſo harde and tough as I haue before ſhewed, that ye arowes that therewith are made,The buckler that they vſe. are ſo ſtrong that it wil pearce a good corſelet or Harneis: their third weapō or defence is a great buckeler, the which they vſe in the warres, it is very lōg, made of the ſkin of a beaſt, like in colour to the Neate or Oxen in our countrey, & ſo diuers in colours. The bucklers are of ſuch ſtrength as the bucklers Barcellonoys, ſo that they wil beare out the ſhot of a handgunne. And as touching handguns, many of them haue and cary with them to the warres, the which the Chriſtians haue giuē them, but they knowe not howe to vſe them, but oftentymes they ſhoote them of onely for to fear their enimies.
         
         
            Their maner of fighting as well on the lande, as on the water. Cap. 39.
            
               The cauſe why the wilde men fight one againſt anotherIF you aſke me why theſe wild men make warre one againſt an other, ſeeing that they are not greater Lords one than another, alſo for yt they do not eſteme worldly riches, & that the earth bringeth forth more than ſerueth

their neceſſitie, you ſhal vnderſtād that the cauſe of their warre is euill ynough grounded, it is onely a deſire of vengeance, that they haue without any other reaſon or cauſe, but euen like brute beaſts, that cannot agrée one wt another by no honeſt meane: & to conclude, they ſay, that they haue bene alwayes their mortall enimies. They méete together then as we haue ſayde before, in greate numbers, for to go and finde out their enimies, (if that they haue receiued any iniurie before hand) wheras they méete together, & ſhoote one at another, & after they ioine together, taking holde of their heade, eares, & biting one another by the armes, yea buffetting one another with their fiſtes. There is no ſpeaking of horſe. They are very obſtinate and couragious, in ſuch ſorte, that before they ioine to fight, being ſeparated one from another the ſpace of gunne ſhot, ſometimes for the ſpace of a whole day or two, they wil beholde, & threaten one another, ſhewing angrie, cruell and fearefull lookes, ſhouting and making ſuch a terrible noyſe, that ye could not here God thunder: alſo ſhewing their affections by ſignes with their armes and handes holding them vp,The wilde mē obſtinate and couragious. and ſhaking their ſwordes and clubs of woodde at their enimies. We are ſay they, valiant and hardy, we haue eaten your parentes, alſo we we will eate you, with many other threatenings. In this they obſerue (in my iudgement) the ancient cuſtome that the Romaynes vſed in their warres, who before they entred into battell made greate boaſtes and crakes, with greate cryes and larums, the which ſince hath bene vſed among the Galles in their warres, as Titus Liuius rehearſeth, bothe the which doings I thinke differeth much frō the doings of the Acaians, of the which Homer ſpeaketh of, for that they being redy to giue battaile to

their enimies would make no noyſe, but kept themſelues from ſpeaking. The greateſt vengeance that theſe wilde men vſe,The cuſtome of the Americans is to eate their enimies. and that ſemeth to them moſte cruell, is to eate their enimies. When that they haue taken any in the warres, if they be not ſtrong ynough to cary them away, then if that they can before any ſuccor come, they wil cut of their legs & armes, & before they wil leaue them, they will eat them, or at the leaſt euery one wil cary a piece awaye little or much: if they can get any priſoners, that they may without danger leade into their countrey, they wil in like maner eat them. The ancient Turkes, Moores, and Barbarians, vſed in times paſt almoſt the like maner, (ſo that yet remayneth this prouerbe,A prouerbe. I woulde I had eaten his harte with ſalt:) they vſe almoſt lyke weapons as our wild men do, but Chriſtians haue forged for them and haue taught them to forge Armors, with the which we our ſelues are nowe beaten, and it is in dout that they will doe the lyke to theſe Americans and others. Furthermore this poore people doe venture them ſelues vpon the water, for to finde out their enimies, as thoſe of the great riuer of Ianaria,
               The inhabitants of Morpion are enimies to thoſe of Ianaria. Almadies made of the barcke of a tree. againſt thoſe of Morpion, in which place doe inhabit the Portingals, enimies to the Frenchmen, as the wilde men of that ſame place are enimies to thoſe of Ianaria: the veſſels that they vſe on the water, are little Almadies or boates made of the barcke of trées, without nayles or woodden pins, being in length fiue or ſix fadome and thre foote brode. And you ſhall vnderſtand that they couet not to haue them greater, thinking that then they coulde not make them rowe faſte, for to eſcape or for to folowe theyr enimie. They holde a fooliſh opinion and ſuperſtitious to vnbarke theſe trées,The ſuperſtition of the men in taking of the barks of the trees. that day that they doe take of the barke, the which is done

euen from the roote to the top, they will neither drinke nor eate, fearing (as they ſay) that otherwiſe there would happen vnto them ſome myſfortune on the water. Theſe veſſels being thus made, they will ſet a floate fiue or ſixe ſcore of them, and in euery one fortie or fifty men and women, the women ſerue to caſt out of theſe little boats the water that commeth in many tymes with a little diſh made of the frute of ſome trée, the men are aſſured therin hauing their weapons, and rowe a long by the banke ſides, and if they finde a village by the way, they will ſet foote on lande and ſpoyle it, putting it to fire and ſworde, (if that they ouercome it.) A litle before our ariuall thoſe Americans that are our friendes, had taken on the ſea a little barcke of Portingals, being harde by the ſhore in ſome place, but what reſiſtence ſo euer they made aſwell with their gunnes as otherwiſe, neuertheleſſe they were taken and the men eaten, ſauing a fewe that we ranſomed, and bought at our ariuall. By this ye may knowe that the wilde men that are reſident, where the Portingals be, are enimies to the wilde men, that inhabit where the Frenchmen ariued. Well to conclude, they fight as well on the water, as on the lande, if it happen at any tyme the ſea to rage and to ſwell, they caſt therein Partrige fethers, or ſome other thing, thinking by this means to appeaſe the waues of the ſea. In lyke manner doe the Turkes and Moores, being in the lyke danger,A fooliſh opinion of the wild men and of the Turkes and Moores. waſhing their bodies with the water of the ſea. Nowe our wilde men, returning with victorie, ſhewe all ſignes of ioye, ſounding Flutes Trompettes, Drummes, and ſinging after their manner, the which is pleaſant to hearewith their Inſtrumentes a lyke made of certayne fruites hollow within, or with the bones of ſome beaſt,

or els of their enimies: their inſtrumentes for warre are richly decked with goodly coloured fethers, as we doe oures in our countrey with banners of ſilke and ſuch lyke. Their Fleutes, Drummes, and other inſtruments, ſemeth to relieue the ſpirits half gone, euen as a bellows doeth relieue a fire half dead. And to my iudgement there is no other meane to ſtir vp the ſpirites of men,Drummes Flutes & other Inſtrumentes do ſtir vp the ſpirites. but only by the noyſe of theſe inſtrumentes, & not onely men, but alſo beaſtes (neuertheleſſe not making compariſon ſeme to leape for ioy) the which hath ben obſerued at al times. It is of a truthe, that theſe Americans and Barbarous men in their aſſaultes and combates vſe great cries and fearfull noyſe as here after ſhall be ſhewed of the Amazones.
            
         
         
            Howe theſe Barbarous and wilde men put their enimies to death, that they haue taken in the warre, and eate them. Cap. 40.
            NOwe that I haue ſhewed how that the wilde men of America, leade their enimies priſoners, into their lodgings, after that they haue taken them in the warres, there reſteth now to ſhewe how they do intreate them at the laſt. Thus therefore they vſe them, the priſoners that they take and bring into their countrey,How they intreate their priſoners. ſhal be very wel intreated, a fiue dayes after ſhal be giuen hym a wife, peraduenture his daughter to whome he is priſoner, for to miniſter to him his neceſſities, as well at his bed as otherwiſe, in the meane time he is ſerued with the beſt meates that can be founde, minding to fatten hym lyke a crammed Capon againſt he ſhall dye, the which tyme he may eaſily knowe by a coller made of cotton,

on the which they hang certaine rounde fruites, or the bones of ſome beaſt of fiſhe made in maner of beads, the which they hang about their priſoners neck. And ſo many Moones as they are minded to kepe him, the like quā
               titie of theſe Beades will they hang about their neckes, and ſo take of euery Moone one, vntill that ye Moones are expired. And ſome in ſtead of theſe Beades, will hang as many litle collers about their necks, as they haue Moones to liue. Furthermore ye ſhall note, that theſe wilde men doe not recken neuer aboue fiue, and they obſerue neither dayes nor houres, neither monthes nor yeares, but they count only by Moones. This maner of counting or reckening, was in times paſt commaunded to be vſed by Solon to the Athenians, that is to obſerue the dayes by the courſe of the Moone. Nowe to our purpoſe, if that of this priſoner, and of the wife that is giuen him, there are borne any children for the time that they ſhalbe togither, they ſhall be kept and nouriſhed for a time, and than they will eate them: ſaying, that they are their enimies children. This priſonner, after that he hath bene well entertained and made fat, they will put him to death, thinking it to be a great honoure. And for to celebrate this ſlaughter, they wil ſend for their fartheſt friends and kinſfolks, for to eate their parte thereof: the day before the execution, he ſhall be laide in his bed, and chained with Iron, the which vſe they haue learned of the Chriſtians, ſinging after this ſorte: The Margageas our friendes, are good men, ſtrong and mightie in the vvarre, they haue taken and eatē a good number of our enimies, likewiſe they vvill eate me vvhen it pleaſe them. But as for me, I haue killed and eaten his parentes and friends,
               The wilde men feare not death. 
               to vvhome I am priſoner, with many ſuche like woords. By this ye may know, that they feare not death. I haue ſometimes (for

pleaſure) deuiſed with ſuche priſoners being faire and ſtrong men, demaunding of them if they did no more care to be thus ſlaine and murthered from day to day, to the which they anſweared, laughing and ſcoffing: Our friends ſayd they, will reuenge our death, ſhewing a hardie and an aſſured countenaunce. And when that I did ſhewe them, that I would redéeme them out of the handes of their enimies, they tooke it in mockage and deriſion.
            
               How the women and maiden priſoners, are intreated.As touching the women and maids that are taken in the warre, they are kept like priſoners as the men are for a certaine time, & then vſed after that maner. They are not kept ſo muche in captiuitie as the men are, but they haue libertie to goe about, and they are ſet to dreſſe Gardens, and to fiſhe and gather certaine ſhell fiſhe. Now when that they are retourned from this ſlaughter or murther,Cerimonies againſt the execution of their priſoners. Cahouin a drinke. the owner of the priſoner, as we haue already ſhewed, will requeſt all his friendes to come to him againſt that day to eate their parte of their bootye, with good quantitie of Cahouin, which is a kinde of drinke made of Mill, with certaine rootes. Vpon this day of ſolempnitie, all the aſſiſtantes will decke them ſelues with fethers of diuers coloures, or elſe they will painte their bodies. Specially he that doeth the execution, ſhall be decked after the beſt maner that is poſſible, hauing his ſweard of wood, wherewith he doeth his office, richly adorned with faire Fethers: but the priſoner, the ſhorter time that he hath to liue, the more greater ſigne of ioy doeth he ſhewe. He ſhall be brought ſurely bounde wyth cordes of Cotton into a publike place, being accompanied with ten or twelue thouſande of the wilde men his enimies, and there he ſhall be

ſmitten downe like an Oxe in the Shambles (after many Ceremonies.) This priſoner being deade, his wife that hath bene giuen him, ſhall mourne a certain time for his deathe: but the body being cut in pieces, they take the bloud, and therewith bathe their male children, for to make them the more hardye, as they ſay, ſhewing them that when they come to age, they doe the like to their enimies, as their fathers before them had done. By this ye may knowe, that the like is done to them, if they be taken in the warre. The priſoner being put to death after this ſort, and hewed in pieces, and prepared according to their maner, ſhall be diſtributed among them all, be they neuer ſo many, euery one a morſell or piece: as for the bowels or inner partes, the women eate them vp commonly, and they reſerue the head to ſet it on a poll out of their houſes in ſigne of triumph and victorie. And aboue all other, they haue a pleaſure to vſe the Portingals after this ſorte.The Canibals are mortall enimies to the Spanyardes. The Canibals, and thoſe of a riuer named Marignan, are much more cruel to the Spanyardes, making them to die a cruell death, and then they eate them.
            We finde not in no Hiſtorie of any nation, be it neuer ſo ſtraunge and barbarous, that hathe vſed the like crueltie as theſe haue done: but onely Ioſephus wryteth, that when the Romaines had beſieged Ieruſalem, vnder Titus, Veſpaſians ſonne, after that the famine or hunger had deuoured all, the mothers were conſtrained to eate their owne children. And the Anthropophages, that are a people inhabiting in Scythia, liued alſo with humain fleſh as theſe wilde men do.
            Now he that hath made ye execution ſtraightly, after that he hath done, goeth home to his houſe, and there remaineth

all the day without meate or drinke in his bed. Likewiſe he ſhall abſtaine certaine dayes, and in thrée dayes after he ſhal not ſet foote on groūd. If he be minded to goe to any place, he is borne on mennes ſhoulders, hauing among them this fonde and fooliſh opinion, that if he ſhould not ſo doe, there would happen vnto him ſome miſchiefe, or elſe the like death. This being done, with a little ſawe made of the téethe of a beaſt named Agontin, he will race his ſkin on his breſt, or on other places, ſo that it ſhall appear all rent and broken. And the cauſe why they doe theſe things, is as I haue bene enformed of ſome of them, that they doe it for pleaſure, eſtéeming the murther that by him hath bene committed againſt his enimie, a great glory and honoure to him warde. Vnto whome, minding to ſhewe the crueltie of the thing, diſdaining my woords, ſayd vnto me, that it was a great ſhame to vs for to forgiue and pardon our enimies, hauing once taken them in the warres. Moreouer he ſayd, that it is muche better to put them to death, to the ende that they moue not warre againſt vs an other time. By this ye may ſée with what diſcretion theſe poore brutiſhe men doe rule and gouerne themſelues. Alſo the maidens doe vſe ſuche Ceremonies with their bodies the ſpace of thrée dayes continually, after that they haue had the firſt purification of women, ſo that ſometimes they are very ſicke. Alſo the ſame dayes they do abſtaine from meates, not comming out of their houſes, nor ſetting foote on ground, as we haue before ſhewed of the men, ſitting only vpon a ſtone appoynted for that vſe.
         
         
            
            Hovv that theſe vvilde men couet greatly to reuenge their harmes and iniuries. Cap. 41.
            IT is not greatly to be maruelled at, if that theſe people walking in darkneſſe, and ignorant of the truthe, prepareth not only vengeaunce, but putteth it in vre: Conſidering that the Chriſtian, although it be ſtraightly forbidden him by expreſſe commaundement,Vengeance is defended to Chriſtians. cannot kepe himſelfe from it, folowing the error of one named Melicius, who helde opinion, that we ought not to pardon our enimies, the which error hath of a long time polluted the Countrey of Egipt. Therfore to prepare vengeance, is to hate our neighbor, the which is wholly repugnant to the lawe. But in theſe people it is not ſtraunge, the whiche as we haue before ſhewed, liueth without faithe & without law. For all their warre procéedeth only of a fooliſhe opinion of vengeaunce without cauſe or reaſon. And thinke not but that this fooliſh opinion hathe helde them from the beginning, and ſhall doe vntil the ende, if that God for his mercies ſake illuminat not their harts. This pore people are ſo ill taught, that onely for the flying of a flie, they will prepare miſchiefe. If that a thorne pricke them, or a ſtone hurt them, they will ſtampe it in a thouſande pieces, as if the thing were ſenſible or had vnderſtanding, the which commeth not but for fault of good iudgement. Furthermore this is of a truthe, the which I am aſhamed almoſt to ſpeake, that for to reuenge them ſelues of Fleas and Lice, they kill them with their téeth, a thing more brutiſhe than reaſonable. And when they féele them ſelues offended or gréeued, be it neuer ſo little an offenſe, they will neuer be reconciled without

vengeaunce. Such opinions are taught, and be obſerued from age to age. Ye ſhall ſée them inſtructe and teache their children being a thrée or foure yeares of age, to handle a Bowe and an Arrowe to learne to ſhoote: alſo they exhorte them to manlineſſe, to take vengeaunce of their enimies, and not to pardon any, whome ſo euer it be. Moreouer, when they are priſoners one to another, thinke not that they require to be redeemed by any compoſition what ſo euer it be, for they hope no other thing than very death, eſtéeming it an honoure and glory vnto them. And therefore they can very well mocke vs, that deliuer our enimies that we haue in our power, for money or ſuche like things, the which they ſay, is vnworthy to a man of warre. As for us ſay they, we vſe no ſuch things. Vpon a time it chaunced that a Portingall being priſoner to theſe wilde men, thought by faire words to haue ſaued his life, ſo he began to preache to them by faire woordes as gentle and as lowly as might be. Neuertheleſſe his flattering woords could not preuaile,A hiſtory of a Portingall, being priſoner to the wildemen. but he to whome he was priſoner, ſhotte him to death with his arrowes: Goe thy wayes ſaide he, thou haſte not merited to die honourably as others, neither yet among companie.
            On a time there was brought a yonge male childe of theſe wilde men of America, of the Countrey and lignage of thoſe whome they name Tabiares, which are mortall enimies to thoſe wilde men, with whome the Frenche men are in concorde and peace by certain Marchauntes of Normandie, the which was afterwarde baptiſed, noriſhed and maried at Roan, liuing like a Chriſtian man. But he was minded to returne into his countrey with vs, being of the age of two and twenty yeares.

It came to paſſe that being there, he was diſcouered of his auncient enimies, by the meanes of certaine Chriſtians, who incontinently as madde Dogs furious and woodde, ran to our ſhippes which were at that time deſtitute of men, where as by caſuall chaunce they found him, ſo they fell vpon him, and rent him in pieces, not touching any other of the company there preſent, who by the prouidence of God, enduring this pitifull death, exhorted them in the Chriſtian faith, ſo this poore man died among their handes a good Chriſtian man, whome they did not eate, as they did other of their enimies. What opinion of vengeaunce is more contrary to our lawe? Notwithſtanding, there is found among vs many, ſo obſtinate that they will reuenge as well as the wilde men. Furthermore, this is among them, if one ſmite an other, let him be aſſured to receiue as muche againe, and rather more, for they will not leaue it vnpuniſhed: it is a faire ſight to ſée them quarrell and ſight together. As for the reſt, they are faithfull one to an other,The faithfulneſſe of the wilde men, but not to Chriſtians. but to Chriſtians the moſt affectioned and ſubtelleſt théeues, although they be naked, that are poſſible, and they eſtéeme it a great vertue, that they may ſteale any thing from vs. This I ſpeake, for that I haue proued it my ſelfe, for being there about Chriſtmaſſe time, came a king of the Countrey to ſée the Sieur of 
                  Ʋillegagnon. They of his company did ſteale away my apparell being ſicke. Thus muche by the way concerning their fidelitie, after I haue ſhewed of their obſtination and deſire of vengeaunce.
         
         
            
            Hovv theſe vvilde men of America, are maried. Cap. 42.
            THis honorable eſtate of Matrimonie, ſheweth that we haue brought ſome naturall reaſon from oure mothers wombe. Otherwiſe we ſhould be counted as brute beaſts, if that God of his mercy did not illuminate our heartes. Therefore ye may be well aſſured, that theſe Americanes are no more diſcrete in their mariages, than in other things. They mary one with another, couſins with couſins, the vnkle with the néece, but not the ſiſter and the brother. A man, the more worthy and valiant he is eſtéemed,How they of America do marry. the more wiues is permitted to ſerue him, and to the other leſſe: and for to ſay the truth, the women trauail more than do the men, that is to wit, to gather rootes, make meale, drinkes, gather together the fruites, dreſſe gardens, and other things that appertaineth to houſholde. The man only goeth ſometimes a fiſhing, or to the woodes to take Veniſon for their ſuſtenaunce. Others occupy themſelues to make bowes & arrowes, leauing the reſt for their wiues to doe. They will giue you a maid to miniſter vnto you neceſſaries whileſt you be there,The deflouring of maids, before they be maried. or otherwiſe if ye will, and it ſhalbe lawfull for you to reſtore hir againe when you thinke méete, and this they vſe cuſtomably. Aſſone as you be come thither, they will ſay to you in their language: come hither, what wilte thou giue me, and I will giue thée my daughter that is faire, ſhe ſhall ſerue thée to do thy neceſſaries and other things. But for to auoide this, the Sieur of 
                  Ʋillegagnon at our arriuall defended vpon paine of death, not to acquaint our ſelues with them, as a thing not lawfull for Chriſtians.
            
               In déede when the women are maried,A defēce made by the Lord of Villegagnon, that the Frēch men ſhold not acquaint them ſelues wyth the wilde women. it is not lawfull for hir to play the harlot with any others: for if ſhe be taken in adulterie, hir huſband will not ſtick to kill hir, for they haue ſuche things in diſdaine. And to the man that is taken with hir, he will doe nothing, thinking that if he ſhould touch him, he ſhould procure the diſpleaſure of all the others friends: for ſo ther ſhould engender and ryſe perpetuall warre betwéene them: but he wil put away his wife, which is lauful for them to do for adulterie, and alſo if that they be bareyn, and can bear no children, and for other occaſions. Furthermore, they haue neuer companie with their wyues in the day time but onely the nightes, neither in publike places, as many in our countrey thinke they haue, as the Cryb, a people of Thracia, and other barbarous men in certaine Ilands of the ſea Magilanike, a thing very deteſtable and vnworthie of chriſtendome, to whome may ſerue for example theſe poore brutiſhe men. The women for the tyme that they be greate with childe, ſhall not beare or carie any heauie burthens, neyther ſhall do any great labour for feare to be hurt. The woman being brought to bed or deliuered, the wiues ſhal carie the chyld to the ſea to be waſhed, or to ſome Ryuer, and then will bring it to the mother, who ſhall remaine in hir childe bed twentie dayes, and foure houres, the father ſhall cutte the childes nauell with his téeth, as I my ſelfe haue ſéene: as for the reſt, they handle and vſe the women in child bed, as tenderly as we doe here: the noriſhment of the litle childe is the mothers milke, notwithſtāding that within certain days after his natiuitie, they wil giue it groſſer ſuſtenance. The father ſhortly after the childe is borne, ſhall giue him a bow and arrow in his hand, as a beginnyng and

proteſtation of warre and vengeaunce of their enimies. But yet there is one thing that marreth al, that is, that the fathers & mothers before they marry their daughters, wil gyue them to be abuſed, to the firſt cō
               mer for a little value, principally to Chriſtians, that trade thither, if they will couple with them, as wée haue before ſhewed. Wée fynde in ſome hiſtories of certaine people, lyuing in maner as theſe wilde men do in their mariages. Seneca in one of his Epiſtles, and Strabo in hys Coſmographie writeth,The auncient cuſtome of the Lydians Armenians, and the inhabitants of Cypris. that the Lydians and Armenians hadde a cuſtome to ſende their virgins and maidens to the ſea borders, there in offering them ſelues to all commers to get them huſbandes, or elſe their dowries. As muche ſayeth Iuſtinus, dyd the virgins of Cypris, for to get their dowries and mariages, which when they were quit and well iuſtified, offered to the Goddeſſe Venus, a preſent or offeryng. We may fynde at this day amongſt vs, that making great profeſſion of vertue and religion would doe the lyke, and rather more, without offering preſente or candle, the which I knowe of a truthe. As touching the conſanguinitie in Mariage, Saincte Hierome writeth, that the Athenians were woonte to marrie the brethren wyth the ſyſters, and not the Auntes wyth the nephewes, the whych is contrary to the order of the Americanes. Lykewiſe in oure countrey a woman of late hadde libertie to marrie hir ſelfe to fiue huſbandes, and not contraried. Beſide this we ſée the Turkes and Arabians tooke many wiues: I ſpeake it not for that it is honeſt and allowable, but for that we chriſtians ſhould auoyde ſuch things. To conclude, our wylde men vſe the maner and order that wée haue ſhewed, ſo that a mayden is ſeldome maried, hauing hir virginitie, but beyng once maryed, they dare doe no faulte: for their

huſbandes doe looke ſtraightly to them, hauing a ſuſpition of Iealouſie: ſhée may leaue hir huſbande if that ſhe be euill intreated, the whiche oftentimes commeth to paſſe, as we reade of the Aegyptians that dydde the lyke before they had any lawes. In this pluralitie of women that they vſe, as wée haue ſayde,The wyld mē haue many wiues. there is alwayes one aboue the others, moſte fauoured, whiche is not ſubiect to ſo much trauell as the others. All the children that procéede by the mariage of theſe wiues, are reputed legittimate, ſaying, that the firſt Author of generation, is the father and not the mother, which is the cauſe that many tymes they kill the male children of their enimies being priſoners, bicauſe ye ſuch children in time to come might be their enimies.
         
         
            Of the ceremonies, buriall, and funeralls, that they vſe to the deceaſſed. Capit. 43.
            SEyng that I haue ſhewed you their doing and maner of liuyng, and other theyr orders and ceremonies, there reſteth to ſpeake of their Funerals and burialls. For all that theſe kinde of people are brutiſhe and vnciuile, yet haue they this cuſtome and opinion to lay the dead bodies in the earth, after that the ſoule is ſeparated from the body, in the place wher as the deceaſed in hys life time toke moſt pleſure,The maner of the wilde men to burye the dead. thinking ſo as they ſay, that they can not put hym in place more notable than in the earth that bringeth forth the men, that beareth ſo many fruites, and other richeſſe profitable and neceſſarie for the vſe of man. There haue ben many lewde and vnaduiſed Heathen Philoſophers, that toke no care what ſhould becom of their bodies after their deceaſe, whether it were caſt out to ye beaſts in the fields or birds of ye aire, they forced not:

As Diogenes,
               The opinion of Diogenes for the buriall of the bodie. who after his death, cōmaunded that this body ſhould be caſt out to the foules of the aire, & beaſtes of the fielde for to be eaten and deuoured, ſaying that after his death, his bodie ſhould fele no more pain, and that he loued much better that his body ſhold ſerue for ſuſtenance than to putrifie and rot. Likewiſe Lycurgus, among the Lacedemonians, did giue ſtraight cō
               maundement, as Seneca writeth, that after his deathe his body ſhoulde be caſt into the ſea, others that there ſhould be burned to aſhes. Theſe poore people of America, though they be brutiſh and ignorant, ſhewe them ſelues after the death of their parentes or frends, with out compariſon more reaſonable, than aunciently dyd the Parthians, who for all that they had lawes, in ſtede of putting their dead bodies into the earthe, caſt them out to be a praie for ſoules and dogs. Alſo the Taxilians, did caſt their dead bodies to the ſoules of the ayre, and the Caspians in like maner. The Ethiopians did caſt the dead bodies into the waters: the Romans did burne them to aſhes, as many other nations haue done. By this ye may ſée, that the wilde men are not ſo voide of honeſtie, but that they haue ſome knowledge of good, conſidering that without lawe or faith they haue this knowledge and aduiſe, that is to wit, as much as Nature hath taught them,The funeralles of the deade is approued by holy ſcripture. Therfore they burye the deade bodies in the earth, as we haue alreadie ſayde, in like maner as did aunciently the Naſomones. Nowe the buriall of the dead is approued as well by the olde, as by the new teſtament: Likewiſe the ceremonies if they be duly obſerued, as well for that they haue bene veſſels and inſtrumēts of the ſoule diuine and immortal, as alſo to giue hope of the reſurrection to come. Here might I bring in many things as touching this mater,

but for that it is not my argument I omitte it, and let it paſſe. Nowe therefore among theſe wylde men yf that a houſholder happen to dye, hys wyues, and hys néere kinſefolke and friends ſhall make a maruellous mournyng, not for the ſpace of thrée or foure dayes, but foure or fiue monethes, and this greateſt ſorow is foure or fiue of the firſt dayes: ye ſhall heare them make ſuch a noyſe and harmonie as dogges and catts, ye ſhall ſee as well men as women layde on their beddes ſorowfull, others ſittyng downe with their bare buttockes on the grounde, imbracyng one an other, ſaying in their language: Our father and friend was ſo good a man, ſo valiant in the warres, that hath cauſed many of oure enimies to dye, hée was ſtrong and myghtie, he laboured ſo wel, and dreſſed our gardens, he caught beaſtes, foules, and fiſhes for our ſuſtenāce, alas he is deade, we ſhall ſée hym no more, but after we bée deade wyth oure friendes in the countreys where oure Pages ſaye they haue ſéene them, wyth many ſuche lyke wordes, the which they will repete aboue ten thouſande tymes continually day and night for the ſpace of foure or fiue howers not ceaſſyng to lament. The chyldren of the deceaſſed, a moneth after theſe mournyngs, wyll deſire their friendes to make ſome feaſt or ſolemnitie for hys honure, And there they will come together paynted with diuers colours, decked wyth fethers, and otherwiſe after their manner, makyng a thouſande ceremonies and paſſetymes, wyth daunces, playes,, tabour playing with Flutes made of the armes and legges of theyr enimies, and other inſtrumentes after the maner of their countrey. The others as the auncient ſorte, all the day long, will not ceaſſe to drinke, without eating of

any thing, and they are ſerued by the women and kinrede of the deceaſed: the which their doings is as I am aduiſed, to ſtirre vp the heartes of yong children, and to moue and prouoke them to warre, makyng them bolde againſt their enimies. The Romanes vſed almoſt the lyke maner:The vſe and cuſtome of the Romanes and others at the funeralls of a Citizen. for after the deceaſe of any Citizen that had greatly trauailed for the cōmon wealth, they made playes, pompes, and funeral ſongs to the praiſe and honour of the dead man. Likewiſe to gyue example to the yonger ſorte, for to imploy their myghte for the libertie of their countrey. Plinie ſayth, that one named Lycaon was the inuenter of ſuch thyngs. Alſo the Argiues, a people of Grecia, in memoriall of the furious Lion ouercome by Hercules, they made playes and games.Alexander the great. And Alexander the great, after that he had ſeene the ſepulchre of the worthy and valiant Hector, in memorie of his worthyneſſe, commaunded, yea hée him ſelfe dyd make many gamboldes and ſolemnities. Here myght I reherſe or bring in many hiſtories how the elders in times paſt haue diuerſly obſerued funeral rites accordyng to the diuerſitie of places, but for that I will not be tedious vnto you, I omit it: it ſhall ſuffiſe at this preſent to knowe the cuſtome of theſe wilde men, for bicauſe that as well the elders in times paſte, as alſo thoſe of oure time, haue made many exceſſe bankettes in their funerall pompes, more for a vaine and worldely glorie, than otherwiſe: but to the contrary, ye muſt vnderſtande, that thoſe that are made to the honour of the deceaſed, and for reſpecte of hys ſoule, is cōmendable, declaring hym by this meanes immortall, and foreſhewyng the Reſurrection to come.
         
         
            
            Of Mortugabes, and of the charitie that they vſe toward ſtraungers. Cap. 44.
            SEing that our argument is now of the ſauage men we will ſaye ſomewhat of their order and liuyng.Mortugabes, lodgings of the wilde men and how they be builded. In their countrey there is neither towne nor Caſtell of any greatneſſe, ſauing thoſe that the Portingals and other Chriſtians haue edified for their cōmoditie, the houſes wherein they dwell are litle lodgyngs, the which they name in theyr language Mortuga
                     •
                  es, aſſembled by hamlettes or villages, ſuche as we ſée in ſome places here. Theſe lodgyngs are of two or thre hundred paces long, and of bredthe twentie paces, or thereaboutes, buylded of woodde, and couered wyth palme leaues, layde on ſo trimmely, as poſſible may bée. Euery lodgyng hathe fayre coueryngs, but they are ſo low, that one muſte ſtoupe to goe in, as he wold do at a wicket, in euery one there is many roomes, and euery one for hym ſelfe and his familie, thrée fadome of length. This I fynd much more tollerable and leſſe grieuous than of the Arabians, and Tartarians,
               The Arabians and Tartariās haue no place to remaine in. that neuer buylde nor edifie a place for to remain and dwel in, but they ſtray about here and there like vagabundes: neuertheleſſe they gouerne them ſelues by certain lawes, but our wylde men haue none, but onely as Nature dothe gouerne them. Nowe therefore theſe wylde men in theſe little houſes, are many houſholdes together, in the middeſt of which theyr beddes ar hanged euery one in his quarter vnto pyllers mighty ſtrong and ſquare, the which beds are made of good Cotton woll: for thereof they haue greate plentye, the whiche a trée beareth,Trees that beare cotton. béeyng of the height of a man lyke vnto greate Buttons, or Akornes: but

neuertheleſſe they differ from thoſe of Cypris, Malta, and Syria: The ſayd beddes are not thicker than a linnen clothe of this countrey: and they lyde downe therin all naked, as they are accuſtomed. This bedde in theyr language is called Iny,
               Iny. Manigot. and the Cotton wherewith it is made, Manigot. On both the ſides of the bed of him that is maiſter of the houſhold, the wiues make hym fire day and nyght, for the nights are ſomewhat cold. Euery houſholde kéepeth and layeth vp in ſtore a kynde of fruite, greate as an Eſtrige egge, the which is of the colour of our Cucumbers that wée haue here in Englande, being faſhioned like a bottell pierced at bothe endes, paſſyng through the middeſt a ſtycke of Hornebeame a foote and a halfe long, one of the endes beyng planted in the earth or ground, the other ende is decked wyth faire feathers of a byrde named Arat,
               Arat a byrde. that is altogether red: the whiche thyng they haue in ſuch honor and reputation, as if it dyd merite no leſſe. And they take this to bée theyr Toupan: For when their Prophetes come towards them, they make that to ſpeake, that is within them, knowing by this meanes the ſecrets of their enimies, and as they ſay, they know & heare newes of the ſoules of their friendes deceaſed. This people aboute their houſes noriſh & bring vp no domeſtical beaſts ſauing certain hennes & cocks, which are very rare & ſcant,Hennes. and they ar but in certain places, wheras the Portingals haue firſt brought them: for before they had no intelligence of them, neuertheleſſe they ſet ſo litle ſtore by them, that for a litle knife ye ſhall haue two hennes: the women for no good will eate of them, takyng great diſpleaſure when they ſée a Chriſtian eat at one repaſt foure or fiue hennes egs, the which they name Arignane, thinking that for euery

egge they eate a henne, the whiche woulde ſuffiſe to repaſt two men: beſides this, they nouriſh and bring vp Popingays, the which they change in trading with the Chriſtians, for ſmall yron tooles.Popingayes. As for golde and ſiluer they vſe none: They hauing on a time amōg thē taken a Portingale ſhip, where there was a great number of pieces of ſiluer, that was brought from Morpion,
               No vſe of gold nor ſiluer among them. they gaue al to a Frenchmā for four hatchets and certaine litle kniues, the which they eſteme very muche, and not without a cauſe: for they are neceſſarie to cut their woodde, the which before they were conſtrained to cutte with ſtones, or to ſette a fyre the trées, for to beate them downe, and for to make their bowes and arrowes they vſe no other thing. Moreouer, they are very charitable, and as much as their lawe of Nature dothe permit them.The charitie of the wilde men one toward an other. Thoſe things that they receyue of Chriſtians, they ſette much ſtore by, but of ſuche commodities as groweth in their countrey, as ſuſtenance, beaſtes, fruites, and fiſhe, they are very liberall (for they haue little other thyng) not onely to vs, and among them ſelues, but alſo to any other nation, prouided that they be not their enimies. For ſo ſoone as they ſhal ſée any a farre off, enter into theyr countrey, they will preſent vnto them victualls, lodgyng, and a mayde for his ſeruice, as we haue before ſhewed. Alſo agaynſte thys pylgryme or ſtraunger, the women and maydens wyll come, and then they wyll ſytte downe and crie and wéepe for ioye, the which if thou wylt endure, caſting out teares, they wyl ſay in their language: Thou art welcome, thou arte of our beſt friendes, thou haſt taken great paines to come and viſite vs, and many other gréetings. Alſo the father and chiefe of the familie ſhalbe in their beds wéeping euen

as the women: If they iorney thirtie or fortie leagues be it by water or land, (they liue common together) if one haue, and others want, he ſhall diſtribute to the néedeful, the like do they to ſtrangers. And moreouer, this people are curious of new things, and wondreth according to the prouerbe, Ignorance is the mother of wonder: but yet for to get from a ſtranger that thing that he fanſieth, they can ſo wel flatter, that it is hard to ſay them nay. Firſt the men, when any doth viſite them in their lodgyngs or cabans, after they haue ſaluted them, they will drawe nere to you, with ſuch familiaritie and aſſurance, that they will ſtreight ways take your cappe or hatte, and putting it on their heads one after an other, they will beholde and wonder at them ſelues, hauyng opinion to be the faireſt: others will take youre dagger, ſworde, or other knife, if ye haue any: and therewith will with wordes and ieſtes threaten their ennimies: And to be ſhorte, they will rifle you, and ye muſt refuſe them nothing, for if ye doe, ye ſhall neither haue grace, fauour, ſeruice, loue, nor friendſhip, in déede when they haue rifled ye, they will reſtore and giue you againe youre trinkettes: as much will the women and maidens doe, being muche greater flatterers than the men, and alwayes for to get to them ſome thyng: this is of a truthe that they will be contented with a trifle, they wil come to you euen with the like grace as doe the men, with ſome fruites or other things of ſmall value, with the which they vſe to make preſentes, ſaying in their language, Agatouren, which is as muche to ſay, howe good thou arte, by a manner of flatterie, Fory aſse pia, ſhewe me ſuche thyngs as thou haſte, being very deſirous of newe things, as little glaſſes, & litle heades of glaſſe.

Alſo ye ſhal haue following of you a companie of yong children, and they will aſke in their language Hamaba pinda, Giue vs ſome fiſhe hookes, the which they vſe to take litle fiſhe with. And they are well inſtructed in this terme before ſayde, Agatouren, Thou arte good, if ye giue them that which they demaund, otherwiſe with a frowarde looke, they will ſaye to ye Hippochi, goe thou arte naught, Daganaiepa aionga, thou muſte be killed, with other threatnings and iniuries, but they wil not giue any thing, vnleſſe ye giue them. beſides this, they will marke ye and knowe ye again, for the deniall that you haue made them.
         
         
            The deſcription of a ſickneſſe named Pians, to the which are ſubiect theſe people of America as well in the Ilandes as the maine land. Ca. 45.
            KNowing wel yt there is nothing, not frō the earth vnto ye firſt heauen, what making or proportion ſo it hath, but that is ſubiect to chaunging and alteration, the aire then that compaſſeth vs, béeing not ſimplie an aire, but made and compoſed, is not alwais like in all times nor in all places, but nowe of one faſhion, incontinent of an other. And for that all diſeaſes (as oure Phiſitians ſhewe vs) come or happen either of the aire, or of the maner of mens liuing, I am determined to write and ſet out here a ſickneſſe or diſeaſe verie rife and common in theſe countreys of America, and of the Weſt, diſcouered in our time.Pians a ſickeneſſe in America, and his oirginall. Now this ſickeneſſe named pians, by the people of the countrey, cōmeth not of the corruption of the aire, for it is there verie good & tēperat, which ſheweth by expeence,

the fruites that the earth bringeth forth, with the benefite of the aire, without ye which nothing is made, bee it of Nature or artificiall. Alſo that the ſyckneſſe procéedyng of the corruption of the ayre, hurteth as aſwell the yong as the olde, the ryche as well as the poore, notwithſtandyng the internall or inwarde diſpoſition.The wildmen are very lecherous and carnall. Therefore it muſte néedes bée, that it procéedeth of ſome miſgouernement, as to much carnall and fleſhely frequentation the man with the woman, conſidering that thys people is very lecherous, carnal, and more than brutiſhe, ſpecially the women: for they do ſeeke and practiſe all the meanes to moue man to luſt. This ſickeneſſe is no other thyng than the pocks that raigneth, and hath power ouer all Europe, ſpecially among the Frenchemen: For of vs it is named the Frenche pockes, the whych diſeaſe as the Frenchmen wright,The true originall of the French pocks, as the Frenche men write. was firſt taken at a voyage into Naples, and thether it was broughte by the Spanyardes, from the Weſt Indies. For before it was diſcouered and made ſubiecte to the Spanyardes, there was no mention therof. It is not onely here in Europe, but alſo in Grecia, in Aſia, and in Affrica. Well let vs returne vnto the wylde mens euyll, and to the remedies that they doe vſe therefore. Nowe this euill taketh the parties, as well wilde men as Chriſtians that are there, by contagion or touching, euen as the pockes dothe in the realme of Fraunce. Alſo it hath the like Symptomes, and it is ſo daungerous, that if it be waxen old, it is harde and daungerous to heale: for ſometimes it dothe afflict them euen to the death. As for the Chriſtians, whiche doe inhabite in the lande of America, if they couple them ſelues with the women, they ſhall neuer bée rid of the ſame, but ſhall fall into the daunger thereof,

muche more ſooner than they of the countrey.The curing of this diſeaſe. For the curing of this diſeaſe likewiſe for a certain alteration that oftentymes commeth wyth this euill, they make a certaine decoction of the barke of a trée, named in their language Hiuourahe, of the which they drincke,Hiuourahe a tree. more eaſier to cure than with our medicine, and they are more eaſier to be healed than others, to my iudgement for their temperateneſſe and complection, which are not broken out with infections, as the Frenchmen are. Thus much thought I needefull to ſpeake in this place. And he that will make any difficultie to beleue my words, let him aſke the opinion of the moſte learnedeſt Phyſitions of the originall & cauſe of this diſeaſe, and what internall partes are ſooneſt grieued, where it is nouriſhed. For I ſée at this day many contradictions (but not among the lerned.) And to my ſéeming, I fynde very fewe that toucheth the pricke, ſpecially of thoſe that take vpon them to heale it: among the which, there are men and women ſo ignorant, that they cauſe many miſhaps vnto the poore pacientes: for in ſtéede of curyng and healyng of them, they make them worſe and worſe.The wilde mē are afflicted with ophthalmies, and from whence they proceede. There are other kinde of diſeaſes, as ophthalmies, of the whiche we haue alreadie ſhewed, that comes of ouermuch ſmoke, for that they make their fires in many corners and places of their lodgings, the which are great, for that they aſſemble a great number; for to take vp their lodgings. I knowe well that al ophthalmies come not of ſmoke: but wher of ſo euer it be, it commeth of the ylneſſe of the brain,All the paines of the eyes with ophthalmies. being by ſome meanes grieued. Alſo all the diſeaſes of the eies are not ophthalmies, as may bée ſéene among the inhabitauntes of America, of whiche we ſpeake: for many haue loſte their ſight, hauing no inflamation

in their eyes. And this fulneſſe and abundance of troubles of the braine, as I maye learne and vnderſtande, commeth of the ayre, and ſouthwindes hot and moyſt very common in America,
               The ſouthe winde and yll token. the whiche ſodainly fylleth the brayne, as Hippocrates ſheweth. Alſo we feele in our ſelues, our bodies to wax heauy, ſpecially the head when the winde is at ſouth. For to heale this paine of the eyes, they cut a braunch of a certaine trée, very ſoft rinde, like to a kind of palme trée, the which they bring home to their houſes, and they let drop the iuyce being redde, into the eye of the pacient. Moreouer, this kind of people is always ſubiect to the leproſie, paralyſey, and other exterior vices as we are in this country, but they are alwayes whole and well diſpoſed, walkyng with a great courage and boldneſſe, their heads lifting vp like a ſtagge or hart. This much by the way of this ſickneſſe, the moſt daungerous that is in Fraunce Antartike or America.
            
         
         
            Of the diſeaſes moſt rife and common in America, and the meane that they obſerue to cure them. Cap. 46.
            THere is none be they neuer of ſo rude and groſſe memorie, but that knoweth well, that theſe Americanes are made of foure elementes, as all naturall bodies are, ſo that by this meanes they are ſubiect to the like affections that wée are. In déede diſeaſes and ſickneeſſs may be diuers and contrary, according to the temperateneſſe of the ayre, and maner of lyuyng. Thoſe in that countrey that inhabite neare

the ſea, are ſubiecte to rotten diſeaſes, as Feuers, Catarres, and others. In the whiche theſe poore people are ſo perſuaded and abuſed of their Prophetes, of whome we haue ſpoken, the whiche are called for to heale them when they haue theſe diſeaſes: and they haue this fooliſhe opinion, that they can cure them:The fooliſhe opinion of the wilde men in their prophets and of their diſeaſes. we can not better compare theſe impes, thā to a companie of new fond fooliſh & ignorant Phyſitions in our dayes here in our realme yt perſuade the pore people, & make profeſſion that they can heale all kinde of diſeaſes curable and vncurable, the whiche I woulde very well beleue, if that ſcience were become ignorance. Therfore theſe Prophetes make them to beleue, that they doe ſpeake vnto the ſpirites and ſoules of their parentes, and that nothyng to them is vnpoſſible, alſo that they can cauſe the ſoule to ſpeake within the bodie. Moreouer, when ſoeuer any ſycke man féeleth his ſtomacke to ſwelle by the occaſions of ſome humours in the ſtomacke and liuer, the whyche by debilitie or otherwyſe he can not caſte or vomite vp, he thinketh that it is his ſoule that complaineth. Now theſe goodly Phrophetes for to heale this diſeaſe wil ſuck with their mouth the place where the ſore or diſeaſe lieth, thinking that by this meanes they drawe it oute. Lykewyſe they ſucke one an other, but not with ſuch belefe and opinion: the women vſe other meanes,A methode meane to heal the diſeaſe obſerued of theſe wylde men. they wyll put into the pacientes mouth a thréede of cotton a two foote long, the whiche afterwardes they ſucke, thynkyng alſo by thys thréede for to get away thys diſeaſe or ſickeneſſe. If one of them doe hurte an other in erneſt or otherwyſe, he is bounde to ſucke his wounde vntill the tyme that he bée healed. And in the meane tyme, they doe abſtayne frome certayne meates,

the which they thinke is contrary: They haue ye mean to lette bloud betwéene the ſhoulders, with a kynde of herbe very cutting, or with the teeth of ſome beaſt. The maner how to diet the pacient is this:How the pacient liueth whē he is ſicke. They wil neuer giue him no meate nor ſuſtenance before he doe aſke it, and they will rather let him languiſh a whole moneth. They are not ſo often grieued with ſickneſſe as we be, although they go all naked day and nyghte: alſo they vſe no exceſſe or ſuperfluitie in their meates or drinkes. In other things they are very curious to knowe the trées and fruites, they will not taſt of any fruite that is periſht, vnleſſe it be thorough ripe: The fruite of which they commonly eate in their ſickneſſes is named Naua,
               Naua, an excellent fruite. being great, made in maner of a Pine apple, thys fruite when it waxeth ripe, becommeth yelow, the which is very excellent, as wel for his ſweteneſſe as his reliſh, as pleaſant as fine ſuger and more: It is not poſſible to bring of them into this countrey, but conſerued, for being ripe they will not long kéepe. Furthermore, it beareth no grain, wherfore they plāt them by litle ſlippes, as the fruites that are grafted in our countrey: Alſo before it be ripe, it is ſo roughe in eating, that it will pull of the ſkinne of your lips: the leafe of this trée when it groweth, is like to the leafe of a large Iounck or ſags. I wil not forget, that amōg their diſeaſes they haue one maruellous indiſpoſition, which commeth by litle wormes that enter into their féete,Tom, a kinde of wormes. named in their language Tom, that are litle ones and I thinke that they ingender in their féet: for there will be ſomtimes ſuch a number in one place, that they wyll rayſe a knob as big as a beane, with doloure and paine in that place, the whiche paine alſo chaunced to vs: for being there, our féete and our handes were couered

with little clothes, in the which when they were broken, was onely one white worme with filthe. And for to ſhunne this griefe, the wilde men make a certain oyle of a fruite named Hibonconhu, like vnto a Date,Hibonconhu a fruit, and for what vſe. the which is not good to eate: they preſerue it in little veſſels of fruites, named in their language Caramenio, and therwith they rubbe the places that are grieued, a thing very neceſſary as they doe affirme againſt theſe wormes. Alſo ſometimes they anoynt therewithall their bodies when they be weary. Biſides this, the oyle is proper for woundes and ſores, as they haue knowne by experience. Thus much as touching their infirmities, and the remedies that theſe Americans vſe.
         
         
            The maner hovv to trade among theſe people: of a birde named Toucan, and of the ſpicerie of that Countrey. Cap. 47.
            ALthough that in America, there is diuers kindes of people: neuertheleſſe brutiſh and of diuers ſorts and faſhions, accuſtomed alwayes to make warre one with another. Notwithſtanding, they let not to trade & trafike as wel among themſelues,The trafike of the wild men. as with the chriſtians and ſtraungers, ſpecially thoſe that are néere to the Sea, with ſuch commodities as is to be had in the Countrey. Their greateſt trade is with Eſtridge fethers, garniſhings of ſwords made of fethers, & other fethers muche ſet by and eſtéemed, the which are brought from the higher Countrey to the ſea ſide, aboue a hundreth or ſixe ſcore leagues, alſo great quantitie of coloures white and blacke, alſo of the gréene ſtones that they beare hanging in their lips, as we haue before ſhewed. The others that

dwel on the ſea coaſt, where as the Chriſtians to trafike receiue certain hatchets, kniues, daggers, ſwordes, and other iron tooles, beades of glaſſe, combes, loking glaſſes, and other little trifles of ſmall value, which they trucke with their neighbors, hauing no other mean ſauing only to giue one marchandiſe for an other, and they vſe after this maner: giue me that, and I will giue thée this, without any further talk. On the ſea coaſt, the moſt frequented Marchandiſe, is the fethers of a birde, that is named in their language Toucan, the properties of which I wil deſcribe, ſéeing it commeth to purpoſe. This birde is of the greatneſſe of a Pigeon: there is an other kinde like to a Pie,The deſcription of Toucan, a bird of America. of like fethers that the other haue, that is to wit, bothe twaine blacke, ſauing that about the taile, there are ſome red fethers among the blacke. Vnder the breſt, the fethers are yellow about foure fingers broade, as well in bredth as in lengthe, and it is not poſſible to finde yellow more excellent, nor finer coloure than is the fethers of this birde: at the ende of the taile, there are little fethers as redde as bloud. The wilde men take the ſkin of that parte that is yellow, and they vſe it to make garniſhings of ſwordes after their maner, and certaine garments, hattes, and other things.
            I the author of this worke, brought a hatte of fethers very riche and faire out of America,
               A ſtraunge hat made of fethers the which was preſented to the King of Fraunce, Henry
                by name, as a precious iewell. And of theſe birdes there are none founde but in America, beginning from the riuer of Platte, vnto the riuer of Amazones. Ther are ſome ſene at Perou, but they are not ſo great as the others. At newe Spayne, Florida, Meſsique, and newe found lande, there is none to be ſéene, bicauſe the countreis are to cold, of the which

they ſtande in great feare. Moreouer this birde liueth with no other thing among the wooddes, where he maketh his reſidence, but with certaine fruites that the Countrey doeth bring forthe: ſome might thinke that this were a water birde, the which is not ſo, for that I haue ſéene the contrary. To the reſt, this birde is diſformed and monſterous, hauing the bill more greater and more longer than the reſt of the body. I haue alſo broughte one of them from thence that was giuen me,Secretes brought by the author into Fraunce or America. with the ſkinnes of many of diuers couloures: ſome as redde as fine ſcarlet, others yelow, blewe, and others of diuers colours. Theſe fethers be much ſet by of ye 
               Americans, with the which they trafike and trade, as we haue before ſhewed.
            This alſo is of a truthe, that before the vſe of money, they traded after this ſorte ware for ware, ſo that the wealth and richeſſe of men, yea of Kings, Princes, and Magiſtrates, did conſiſt in beaſtes, ſhepe, goates and Camels, of the which ye haue examples in Beroſus and Diodorus, the which ſhewe vs by wrytings, the maner and vſe that the elders before vs vſed to trade one with another, the which vſe I finde to differ very little from the Americanes order, and other barbarous people. So that in times paſt one thing was giuen for an other, as ſhéepe for corne, woolle for ſalte, and ſuche like.
            The trafike of one Countrey with an other,The order of the world, before the vſe of money. if we cōſider it wel, is maruellous profitable & neceſſary, for by it ciuil ſocietie is kept: alſo it is much eſtéemed throughout all nations. Plinie in his ſeuenth booke doeth attribute the firſt inuention and vſe thereof to be among the 
                  Ʋenicians. The trade that many of the Chriſtians

vſe with the Americanes, is braſell woode, Popengayes, cotten and other things,What the chriſtiās and Americans do trade together. A kinde of ſpice. in trucke and chaunge of thoſe things before ſhewed: they bring alſo from thence a kinde of ſpice, which is the graine of an herbe or little trée of thrée or foure foote highe, the fruit is like to our countrey ſtrawberies, as well in coloure as otherwiſe. When it is ripe, there is within it a ſéede like to fenell ſéede. Our chriſtian Marchants doe loade this kinde of ſpice being nothing ſo good as the ſpice that groweth on the coaſt of Ethiopia, and in Ginney, alſo it is not to compare to the ſpice that is had at Calicut, or of Tabroban. And this ye ſhall note by the way, that though it be named Calicut ſpice, ye muſt not thinke that it is all of Calicut,
               Of the ſpice of Calicut. The Ilād of Corchel. but commeth a fiftie leagues off, from Ilands vnknown, and chiefly from an Iland named Corchell. Notwithſtanding Calicut, is the chiefeſt place whether all the Marchaundiſe of the Eaſt countreys is broughte, and there it is ſhipte, and therefore it is called the ſpice of Calicut, the which is better than the ſpice of America. The King of Portingall as euery one knoweth, hathe greate profite of the ſpices, that he receiueth from thence, but not ſo muche as in times paſt, for bicauſe that ſince the Spanyardes haue diſcouered the Iland of Zebut,
               The Iland of Zebut. riche, and of a great compaſſe, the whiche ye ſhall finde after ye haue paſſed the ſtraight of Magellan. This Ilande beareth a Mine of Golde, Ginger, and great aboundaunce of white Purſelaine. Afterwarde they found out Aborney,
               Aborney. The Ilands of Moluqus, and of the ſpice that commeth from thence. fiue degrées from the Equinoctiall, and many other Ilandes inhabited with Neigers, vntill they came to Moloqus, where as is Atidora, Terenata, Mata, and Machian little Ilandes ſomewhat neare the one to the other, as are the Canaries of the which we haue ſpoken.

Theſe Ilandes are diſtant from Fraunce, more than .180. degrées lying to the Weſt, they bring forthe many good ſpices, muche better than thoſe of America. This much by the way of Moloquus, hauing firſt treated of the trafike and trade that the wilde men vſe of America.
            
         
         
            Of birdes moſt common in America. Cap. 48.
            AMong many kindes of birdes that nature diuerſly bringeth forthe, ſetting out hir giftes by particular properties, (truely worthy to be maruelled at,) the which ſhe hath giuen to euery liuing beaſt.The deſcription of Carinde, a birde of excellent beauty. There is not one found that excéedeth this birde, commonly ſéene in America, named of the wilde men Carinde, decked with ſo pleaſant and faire fethers, that it is not poſſible for no man but to wonder at the like worke. This birde excéedeth not the greatneſſe of a Crowe, and his fethers from the belly to the throte, is as yellow as fine gold: ye wings and the taile, which are very long, are of the coloure of fine Azure. To the likeneſſe of this bird, there is another founde of his greatneſſe, but differing in coloure, for in ſtead of hauing the breſt fethers yellow, this hathe them as red as pure ſcarlet coloure, and the reſt Azure. Theſe birds are a kinde of Parats, and of like forme as well in head and bil, as in féete. The wilde men of the Countrey ſell them déere, for that thrée or foure times a yeare, they plucke their fethers for to make hats, garniſhe bucklers, ſwordes of woodde, and other things requiſite, the which they doe commonly. The ſaide birdes are ſo priuie, that all the day they will ſit vpon the trées, rounde about the wilde mennes lodgings. And when the night commeth, theſe birdes withdrawe them, ſome into the houſes, and

ſome into the Woodes, but they faile not to retourne the next morowe, euen as our priuie or tame Doues or Pigeons, that will neaſtle in houſes. They haue diuers other kindes of Popengayes differing in Fethers the one from the other. There is one kinde more gréener than thoſe that are brought into oure Countrey,Aiouroub a greene birde. the which they name Aiouroub, others hauing on their heades blewe fethers, others all gréene, the which the wilde men doe name Marganas: there are none found gray as in Ginney,
               Marganas. and in high Affrica. The Americanes kéepe all theſe birdes in their lodgings, but they are not taught to ſpeake, as they are with vs, I meane being made priuie when they are yong, according to the cuſtome of our elders, as Plinie ſheweth in the tenth booke of his naturall Hiſtorie ſpeaking of birds, where he affirmeth that Strabo was the firſt that put birds into Cages, the which before had libertie to goe and come.Who it was that firſt caged birdes. The women in like maner nouriſhe ſome, the which they ſette ſuche ſtore by, that they call them their friends. Furthermore our Americanes doe learne theſe birdes in their language to aſke for meale made of rootes. But they teache them moſt commonly to ſay and profer, that they muſt goe a warfare againſt their enimies, for to take them, and for to eate them, and other things. They will for no good giue them fruite to eate, neither great nor little,Great plenty of Popengayes in America. for they ſay that it engendreth a worme that pierceth their heart. There is a multitude of other Popengayes that are in the wooddes, of the which they kill a great many with their arowes for to eate, and they make their neſts in the toppes of trées, for feare of ſtinging beaſtes.
            
               The time hathe bene, that theſe birdes were not knowne to the auncient Romaines, and other Countreis of Europe, but euen ſince as ſome doe witneſſe, that Alexander the great, ſent his lieuetenaunt Oneſecriteus into the Iland of Tabroba, who brought from thence a certaine number, and ſince they multiplied ſo wel, as well in the Eaſt countrey as in Italie, and chiefly at Rome, as Columella ſayeth in his thirde booke, of the ſayings of the elders, that Marcus Portius Cato, (of whome the life and Doctrine was an example to all Rome), as he felte him ſelfe ſlaundered, ſayd on a day to the Senate.
            
               O Fathers ouerſeene, O vvicked Rome, I knovv not I,
               The exclamation of Marcus Cato, againſt the abuſes of his time. 
               to vvhat dayes vve are falne, ſeing that I ſee in Rome ſuch diſſolute liuing, that is: for men to beare Popengayes on their handes, and to ſee the vvomen norishe in their deliciouſneſſe, little dogges.
            
            Well, let vs returne to our birdes, that are founde there of an other kinde, and more ſtraunger, as that birde named Toucan, of the which we haue before ſpoken, all differing from the coloure of thoſe of oure Himiſperie, as may be knowne by theſe before rehearſed, and of many others, of which I haue brought home the bodyes garniſhed with fethers, ſome yellow, red, gréene, purple, Azure, and of many other colours, the which wer preſented to the king as ſingular things, that was neuer ſéene with vs in our realme. There reſteth now to deſcribe and ſet forthe certaine other kinde of birdes being rare and ſtraunge. Among the which there is found one kind of the like greatneſſe and colour, as litle crowes, ſauing that before their breaſt, they haue a ſpot as red as bloud, & they are named Panon, his bil colored like aſhes, which bird liueth with no other thing, then wc a kinde of

Palme named Ierahuua,
               Ierahuua, a kind of Palme. Quiapian a birde. there are another kinde found like to oure Merlions, as redde as Dragons bloud, the which in their language they name Quiapian, there are another kinde of the greatneſſe of a litle Munkey, a birde ſo named,Annon a bird. the which is all blacke, liuing after a ſtraunge maner. When he is ful with Ants, and another little worme that he eateth, he wil flie to ſome little trée, and there wil flutter from one braunch to another without ceaſing: the wilde men name it Annon. Among al the reſt of the birdes that are there to be ſéene, there is found another kinde that the wilde men will not by no meanes kill nor hurt:Another kinde of birde. this birde hath hir voyce very pitifull, and theſe poore men ſay, that hir ſong cauſeth them to remē
               ber their friends that be dead, thinking that this birde is ſent by them, bringing to them good happe and fortune, and naughty lucke to their enimies. This bird is no bigger than a ſtocke Doue, being coloured like to aſhes, and liuing with a kinde of fruit, of a trée that they name Hiuourahe.
               Hiuourahe a tree. I will not yet forget another birde named Gouanbuch,
               Gouanbuch, a bird very litle. the which is no bigger than a great Flie, the which for all that it is little, is ſo faire to ſée too, that it is vnpoſſible to ſée a fairer: his bill is ſomewhat long and ſlender, and his coloure grayiſhe, and althoughe to my iudgement it is the leaſt birde liuing vnder the ſkye, neuertheleſſe it ſingeth very well, and pleaſant to heare. I omit héere the water birdes, as well of the freſhe water, as of the ſalte, which are all variable to thoſe that are in our Countrey, as well in proportion of body, as diuerſitie of fethers. I doubt not Reader, but thoſe that haue written of the kindes and properties of Birdes, will finde theſe things very ſtraunge that I haue rehearſed, but without ſhame it may be reputed to their ignorance,

being ignorant of theſe Weaſt partes, and alſo the ſmall knowledge that they had of ſtrange things. This therefore ſhal ſuffice thée which I haue truely gathered of the ſtrange birdes that are in America, or Fraunce Antartike, for the tyme that we dyd there remayne.
         
         
            Of Veneſon and wilde beaſtes that theſe wilde men take Cap. 49.
            I Thinke it neceſſarie gentle Reader, ſéeing that I haue treated of ſtrange Foules, ſomewhat to ſpeke as touching the wilde beaſtes that are founde in the woodes, and hills of America, and alſo to ſhewe how the inhabitantes of the countrey take them for their nouriſhment. I remember that I haue ſayde in ſome place,How the Americās take wilde beaſtes. that they nouriſh no domeſticall beaſts, but there are in the woodes greate quantitie of wilde beaſtes, as Hartes, Hyndes, wilde Bores and others. When theſe beaſtes ſtraye abroade to ſéeke their liuing, they will make a déepe hole couered ouer with leaues, in the place where the beaſte doth moſt frequent, the which is made ſo cunningly that with greate payne ſhall he eſcape. And they wil take him aliue or kill him in that hole ſometymes with their arrowes. The wilde Bore ſemeth to me more dangerous, he is altogether lyke to the wilde Bores in Fraunce, but more fiercer and more dangerous, and hath the tooth more longer and more apparant: he is altogether blacke and without tayle, moreouer he beareth a vent on his backe lyke to a ſworde fiſh.The wilde Bore of America. This wilde Bore will make a fearful noyſe, alſo ye ſhal here his téeth make a noiſe together when he is féeding or otherwiſe: the wilde men on a tyme brought vs one bounde, the which notwithſtanding eſcaped in our preſence: the Harte and the Hinde

haue not their beare ſo ſmoth and euen, as with vs, but more rougher and longer,The Harte of America. the Hartes haue their hornes more ſhorte than oures, the wilde men ſet much by theſe hornes, for bicauſe that after they haue pierced their childrens lippe,The property of a Harts horn they put moſt commonly into the hole a piece of Hartes horne for to increaſe it, thinking that therein is no poyſon nor danger, but to the contrarie, it letteth and kepeth that at that place of the lyppe there will engender no euill. Plinie ſheweth that a Hartes horne, is a remedie againſt poyſon. Alſo Phiſitions put thereof among Medicins that are cordiall, as a comforte to the ſtomacke, as Iuorie and others: the ſmoke of this horne burned hath power to driue awaye Serpentes. Some will ſay, that the Harte hath euery yeare newe hornes, and caſteth hir olde ones, and when he is without his hornes, he hideth himſelfe. The elders haue taken it for an yll ſigne for a man, to méete a Deare, or a Hare, but we thinke the contrarie: alſo the ſame ſuperſtition is fooliſh and repugnant to our Religion. The Turkes and Arabians,
               A fond opiniō of the wilde men. are at this day in that error. To this purpoſe: if our wilde men take an opinion he thinketh it true and it ſhalbe harde to perſwade them the contrarie, the which is, hauing taken a Buck or a Doe, they dare not beare it into their houſes, before that they haue cut of the haunches and the legs behinde, thinking that if they ſhoulde beare it with the foure quarters, it woulde take from them and from their children the meane to take their enimies in running, beſide many other fooliſh opinions, whereof their head is ful. They haue no other aſſurance thereof, but that their greate Charaibe ſhewed them ſo, as their Pages and falſe Seductors doe affirme. They will dreſſe theyr Veniſon by péeces, but with the ſkinne, and after it is ynough it ſhall be diſtributed to

euery houſholde, that inhabite vnder one roufe altogether, as ſchollers in colledges, they will neuer eate the fleſh of no rauening beaſte, or that doeth féede on vncleane things, be he neuer ſo priuie, but they will not force to kepe priuie ſuch a beaſte, as one which they name Coary, as greate as a Foxe,The deſcriptiō of Coary a ſtrange beaſte. hauing the mooſell a foote long, blacke like a Molle, and little lyke the mooſell of a Ratte, hir heare rough, a ſclender tayle lyke to the tayle of a wilde Cat, ſpotted white and blacke, hauing eares lyke a Foxe. This is a rauenous beaſte, and lyueth of praye or ſpoyle, about the water ſide. Furthermore there is founde kinde of Feſantes, as greate as a Capon,A kinde of Feſantes. but blacke fethered, onely the heade which is graye, hauing a little red combe, hanging lyke a Turkie Henne and redde féete. Alſo there are Partriges, named in their language Macouacanna, that are greater than oures.Macouacanna. a kind of Partriges, Tapihire a beaſte. Alſo there is founde in America, greate quantitie of thoſe beaſtes which they name Tapithire, the whiche is much deſired for his deformitie. Alſo the wilde men folowe them at the chaſe, not onely for the fleſh whiche is very good, but alſo for the ſkins, with the whiche they make bucklers that they vſe in the warres, and the ſkinne of this beaſte is ſo ſtrong and tough that a Croſbow can ſkant pierce it, and they take them as they doe the Harte or the wilde Bore,The deſcriptiō of Tapihire. of the which we ſpake euen nowe. Theſe beaſtes are of the height of a greate Aſſe, but they haue a greater necke, and the heade lyke the heade of a yong Bull of a yeare olde, the téeth ſharpe and cutting, neuertheleſſe he is not dangerous. When ſhe is chaſed, ſhe maketh no other reſiſtence, but to flée away, ſéeking ſome conueniente place for to hide hir, running more ſwifter than a Harte,

ſhe hath no tayle, but a very little one of a finger length, the which is without haire, & of ſuch beaſts without tayle there are found a great nūber, ſhe hath clouen féete, with a very long horne almoſt as much before as behinde, his beare is browne colour lyke ſome Mules and Oxen in our countrey. And for this cauſe the Chriſtians that are there, name ſuch beaſtes Kine, not differing much from Kine, ſauing onely ſhe wanteth hornes: and truely to my ſéeming it is as lyke an Aſſe as a Cow. For there are fewe beaſtes of diuers kindes that be lyke in al pointes, without ſome greate difference.A kinde of ſtrange fiſh. As alſo fiſhes that we haue ſene in the ſea on the coaſte of America, one among the others had the head like a Calf, and the body ſlender. So that in this ye maye ſée the induſtrie of nature, that hath altered the beaſts according to the diuerſitie of their kindes, as wel on the lande as on the water.
         
         
            Of a tree named Hiuourahe. Cap. 50.
            
               Hyuourahe a tree.I Will not by no meanes leaue out for his excellencie and ſecretneſſe, a trée named of the wilde men Hyuourahe, which is as much to ſay as rare a new. This trée is of a highe ſtature, hauing the barke ſhining lyke ſiluer, and within halfe redde. It hath almoſt the taaſte of ſalt, the which I haue many tymes taſted, the barke of this trée hath a maruelous propertie among al others: alſo it is in ſuch reputation among the wilde men, as the woode Gaiac: alſo ſome think it to be very Gaiac, ye which I denie, for it is not to the purpoſe, that all that hath the like propertie that Gaiac hath, is Gaiac. Notwithſtāding it ſerueth in ſtede of Gaiac to the Chriſtians, for the wild men are not ſo ſubiect to this common diſeaſe, of ye which

we wil ſpeake in another place more at large: the maner to vſe it is this, they take a quantitie of the barcke, the which giueth milke when it is ſeparated from the woode, the which being cut in little péeces,The vſage of the barcke of this tree. they make it to boyle in water the ſpace of thrée or foure houres, till that the colour be changed lyke claret wyne, & of this they drinke the ſpace of fiften or twentie dayes continually, making or keping a little diet, which helpeth well as I do vnderſtande. And the ſayd barcke is not onely good for the ſayd affection, but to all diſeaſes for to bring out ill humors, of the which in lyke maner vſe our Americans in their diſeaſes: and beſides,The excellency of the frute of this tree. this drinke is pleaſant to drinke in your ful health. Another ſingular thing there is in this trée bearing fruite of the greatneſſe of a little prune, as yellow as fine Angell Golde. And within it, is a little nut very pleaſant and ſwet, being good for ſicke folke to diſgeſt. But another thing is peraduenture ſtrange and almoſt incredible to thoſe that haue not ſene it, that is, that it beareth not fruite, but from fiften yeare to fiften yeare: ſome woulde haue made me beleue, from twentie yeare to twentie. But I hearde the contrary, being ſufficiently enformed of the anciente people of the countrey. I haue cauſed them to ſhewe me one, and he that ſhewed it me, ſayde that in his lyfe tyme, he had eaten but thre or foure tymes of the fruit. I remember of the good fruit of the trée named Loth, of which the fruit is ſo pleaſant, as Homer ſheweth, that after that Scipions men had taſted,Loth in Homer. they forced not but forgat to returne to their ſhippes to eate any other meates or fruites. Furthermore there are trées that beare Caſſa, but it is not ſo excellent as that of Arabia and of Egypt.
            
         
         
            
            Of a tree named Vhebehaſon and of the hony Bees that frequent it. Cap. 51.
            GOing on a day vnto a village diſtant from the place whereas was our remayning a ten leagues, being in my company fiue wilde men, and a Chriſtian to interpret, I was myndefull to beholde on all ſides the ttées, of the which there were diuers ſortes, among the which I ſtayed to beholde that of the which I minde to ſpeake,The deſcriptiō of a tree named Vhebehaſon. the which to ſée to, woulde be iudged to be an artificiall woorke, and not of nature. This trée is very hye the braunches paſſing one with in another, the leafs like the leafes of a Colwoort, euery braunche laden with his fruite, the which is a foote long. Therefore aſking one of the company, what kynde of fruite it was, he ſhewed me and byd me beholde a company of flyes or honey Bées about the ſame fruite, the which then was gréene, with the which theſe honey Bées doe lyue and nouriſh them ſelues, of the which Bées there were a greate number in a hole that was in the trée, whereas they made honey and waxe. There is twoo kyndes of the honey Bées,Two kinde of honey Bees. one kynde are as greate as oures, the which commeth not onely but of good ſmelling Floures, alſo theyr honey is very good, but their waxe not ſo yellow as oures: there is another kinde halfe ſo greate as the others, their honey is better than the others, and the wilde men name them Hira,
               Hira honey Bees. they lyue not with the others food, which to my iudgemente maketh their waxe to be as blacke as coales, and they make greate plenty, ſpecially neare to the Ryuer of 
                  Ʋaſſes and of Plate: there is alſo

founde a little beaſte named Hyrat,
               Hirat a beaſt. which is as much to ſay as a honey beaſte, for that this beaſte ſéeketh but all partes of this trée for to eate the honey that theſe flies make. This beaſte is tauney, and as greate as a Cat,The vſage of honey much commended of diuers people. and knoweth the meane to drawe out the honey with his pawes, without touching the flyes, nor they hym. This honey is much eſtemed in that countrey for bicauſe that the wilde men giue thereof to their ſicke people, mixed with meale, that they vſe to make of rootes: as for the waxe, they put it to no vſe, but to make their fethers holde together about there heade, or elſe they occupye it about their greate canes, in the which they put their fethers (the which) is the beſte and chiefeſt treaſure that theſe Americans haue.
            The aunciente Arabians and Egyptians, dyd vſe to miniſter vnto the ſicke, honey, more than any other medecine, as Plinie witneſſeth. The wilde men that inhabit about the Riuer of Marignam, eate almoſt no other meate but honey, with certayne boyled rootes, the whiche honey in thoſe parties droppeth downe from the trées and rockes, as Manna from Heauen (the which) vnto theſe Barbarous men is a good ſuſtenance. To this agréeth very wel Lactantius in his firſte booke of Deuine Inſtitutions (as farre as I can remember) that Meliſſus King of Creta,
               Meliſſus King of Creta. the which did firſte ſacrifice vnto the Goddes, had two daughters, Amalthea and Meliſſa, the which did nouriſh or féede Iupiter with goates milke,Why the Poets haue fayned that the honey Bees flied into Iupiters mouth. when he was a childe, and alſo with honey. So that the people of Creta, ſéeing and perceiuing that honey was a good ſuſtenance, beganne therewith to féede theyr children. The whiche thing hathe cauſed this argumente amongſt the Poetes, to ſay that honey Bées dyd flye into Iupiters mouth. The whiche alſo being

knowen of Solon, did permit that they might tranſport al kinde of fruit out of the citie of Athens and many other victuals, except honey. Likewiſe the Turckes haue honey in as great eſtimation as is poſſible, thinking after this life that they ſhall goe into ſome pleaſant places repleniſhed with al kinde of ſuſtenance, and chiefly of honey, the which opinion is fantaſticall and fooliſh. Now to returne to our former trée, it is greatly frequented of theſe flies or honey bées, although that the fruite is not good to eate as many others are in that countrey, for bicauſe that it commeth not to his ripeneſſe, but is eaten of theſe honey bées as farre as I can perceiue. Moreouer this trée bringeth forth a red gumme,Red gumme. good for many things, as they knowe wel how to vſe it.
         
         
            Of a ſtrange beaſte named Haut. Cap. 52.
            
               ARiſtotle and many others ſince his tyme haue with al their diligence and induſtrie enforced themſelues to finde out the nature of Beaſts, Trées, Hearbes, and other naturall things. Notwithſtanding it doeth appeare by their writings that they neuer had intelligence of America,
               America not knowen of the anciēt writers. for that it was not diſcouered before (nor in their tyme) neuertheleſſe their writing hath giuen vs ſome comforte and contentation. Therefore if we ſet out here and ſhewe of thoſe that are vnto vs ſtrange and vnknowen, I truſt it will not be taken in il parte, but to the contrary I truſte it will bring ſome contentation to the Reader, that loueth to heare of rare and ſingular things, the which nature wil not ſhal be common to euery countrey. This beaſte for to be ſhort, is aſmuch diſformed as is poſſible, and almoſte vncredible to thoſe that haue not

ſéene hir. They name hir Hau or Hauthy,
               The deſcriptiō of a beaſt named Hauthy. of the greatneſſe of a greate Munky of Afeca, hauing a great belly, and the head almoſt in proportion of a Childes head. She being takē, caſteth out ſighes lyke a Chyld féeling payne, hir ſkyn colored lyke aſhes, and rough lyke a litle Beare, hauing on each paw three nayles or clawes, a foure fingers long, and made lyke the fyn of a Carpe, with the which ſhe climeth on Trees, abyding there more than on the ground. Hir tayle is thrée fingers long, with lyttel heare thereon. Another thing there is worthy of memory, that this ſtraunge beaſt was neuer ſéene eating, for the wylde men of the coū
               try haue watched hir to ſée if ſhe would féede, but all was in vayne, as they them ſelues haue ſhewed me. Byſides this I would neuer haue beleued it if I had not proued it, for a captaine of Normandy, and the Captaine Mogneuylle, borne in Picardy, walking on a time in the great thick woods, dyd ſhoote with a Handgunne at two of theſe beaſtes, which were in the top of a trée, ſo that they fell bothe to the ground, the one ſore hurt, & the other onely amaſed or aſtonned, the which was giuen to me for a preſent, ſo it was well kept the ſpace of .xxvj. daies, and in the meane time it would neuer eat nor drinke, but always at one eſtate, but in the ende it was ſtrangled by certaine Doggs that we brought thyther: ſome thinke that this beaſt lyueth onely with leaues of a certaine Trée named in their language Amahut, this Trée is the higheſt Trée in that countrie, bearing leaues very ſmall and thin: and for that this beaſt is commonly in this Trée, ſhe is named Haut. Furthermore this beaſt is very louing to man, when ſhe is tame, coueting to be always on his ſhoulders, as if hir nature were to remayne on high

places, the which doings the wylde men of the countrey cannot abyde for that they are wicked, for this beaſt hath very ſharpe clawes, and longer than the clawes of a Lyon, or any other beaſt that euer I ſaw. To theſe wonders I haue ſéene by experience certain Chameleons in Constantinople,
               Chamellion. that liued only with the ayre. And by this I knew it was of a truthe, that the wylde men ſhewed me as touching this beaſt: moreouer if that this beaſt be abroade in the greateſt raine that is,The wonderfull workes of Nature. yet ſhe will be always as drie as before. By this ye may ſée the wonderfull works of nature, how that ſhe can make things ſtrange, great, incomprehenſible, and wonderfull to mans iudgement. Therefore it is a thing impertinent, to ſeke out the cauſe & reaſon, as many daily go aboute to doe. For this is a very ſecret of nature, ye knowledge whereof is reſerued and kept to the onely creator: alſo of many others that might be héere alleadged, but for that it is not my argument, I omit it for to finiſh the reſt.
         
         
            Hovv theſe Americans kyndle Fyer: of their opinion of the drowning of the World, and of their Yron works. Cap. 53.
            NOw yt I haue ſhewed you of ſome ſingular plātes and vnknowne beaſtes not onely to vs, but as I think to all the world, for that this countrey was neuer knowne nor diſcouered but of late daies, being minded to make an ende of this diſcourſe of America, I will ſhew you the ſtraunge maner and practiſe that theſe Barbarous people vſe to get fyre, as well as we doe with a flint ſtone and a tinder boxe, the which inuention

truely is celeſtial,The maner of the wyld men to get Fyre. giuen by diuine prouidēce to man for his neceſſitie. Now theſe wilde men haue another meane, almoſt vncredible to get fire, greatly differing from our vſe, that ſmite a flynt ſtone with an Yron. And ye muſt note, that they vſe cuſtomably fire for their neceſſities as we doe, & rather more, for to reſiſt the wicked ſpirit that tormenteth them, for thē which cauſe they neuer lye downe in what place ſo euer they be, but that they haue firſt fire lighted by their beds ſide. And therefore aſwell in their houſes or other where, be it in the foreſt or in the fieldes, whereas they are conſtrained to remaine a long time, as when they go a warfare or hunte for Veniſon, they beare commonly with them their inſtrumentes to make fire. Therefore they will take two ſtickes vnequal, the one which is the leaſt ſhalbe a two foote long or thereaboute, made of a certaine drie wood, hauing a rinde or pith, the other ſomewhat more longer. He that will make fire, will lay the leſſer ſticke downe on ye ground pierced through ye middeſt, ye which he holding with his féete, wil put the ende of the other ſticke into the hole that is in the other, with a littell cotton and dried leaues, then with turning of the ſtick, there engendreth ſuch a heate, that the leaues and cotton begin to burne, ſo that by this meanes they light fire, the which in their language they name Thata,
               Thata. Thatatin. and the ſmoke Thatatyn: and this maner or way to make fire ſo ſubtilly, they ſay came by a great Charaibe, more than a Prophete, the which taught it to their Elders, with other things alſo, of which they before had no intelligēce or knowledge. I know wel there are many fables, as touching ye inuention of fire.The firſt inuētiō of Fyre. Some ſay yt certaine paſtors or ſhepherds were ye firſt yt inuēted to

make fire, after the maner that theſe wilde men vſe, with certaine wood, being deſtitute of Yron and flint ſtone. By this we may euidently know, fier commeth neither of ſtone nor Yron,Vulcan inuentor of Fyer. as Aphrodiſius diſputeth in his probleames. Dioderus writeth, ye 
               
                  Ʋulcan was ye firſt inuenter of fier, the which for this reſpect was elected King by the Egiptians. Alſo the wylde men are almoſt of this opinion, the which before this inuention of fier,The opinion of the wylde men againſt a deluge. did eate their meates dried in the Sunne. And this knowledge was brought to them, as I haue before ſhewed, by a great Charaibe, one night in their ſléepe after a great deluge of waters, (the which) they maintaine to haue ben in times paſt, although they haue not memoriall by writing, but onely from age to age, ſo that they wil beare in memory things foure or fiue hundreth yeares paſt, the which is to be maruelled at. And by this meanes they are very curious to teach & inſtruct their Children things done and paſt, which are worthy of memory. The auncient men after their ſléepe in the night, doe no other thing but declare auncient ſtories to the young men, ſo that to heare them, you will ſay they are Preachers or Readers of Lectures: now ſay they, the water was ſo exceding great in this Deluge, that it couered the higheſt moū
               taines in that countrey, ſo that all the people were drowned, the which they tell of a truthe, and beleue as ſtedfaſtly as we doe, that which was in Noes time, that is read of in holy Scripture. Neuertheleſſe it is eaſy for them to fayle, conſidering they know nothing but by memory, and as they heaue heard ſayd of theyr Fathers.How the wild men do number. Alſo they number by ſtones or other lyke things, for otherwiſe they cannot number, but onely to fiue, and they count ye moneths by ye Moones, (as we

haue before made ſome mention) ſaying it is ſo many Moones ſince I was borne, and ſo many Moones ſince the Deluge was, the which tyme faithfully conſidered, commeth to a fiue hundreth yeares. They affirme and ſtifly ſtande in opinion of their Deluge. And if ye ſay the contrary, they wil efforce by certain arguments to ſuſtaine the contrary. They ſay after that the waters were gon back & retired, there came a great Charaibe, the greateſt that euer was among them, that brought thither a people from a far countrey, that people being naked as they are at this day,The original of theſe Americans. the which hath ſince ſo multiplied, that of them they ſay they are deſcended. It ſéemeth to me not repugnant to reaſon, that there hath ben countreys drouned ſince Noes time, (throughout the whole world) but ſeing we haue none but that the holy Scripture ſheweth, I will let it paſſe.How the wild men did firſt vſe to cut wood. Therefore let vs returne to theſe wilde mens fire, the which they vſe for many things, to roſt and ſéeth their meates, to burne downe Trées, vntill that they founde ſince the meanes to cut wood with ſtones, and now of late days with Yron, the which they haue learned of the Chriſtians that haue gon thether. I dout not that Europa, and other countreys haue ben without Yron. But Plinie writeth in the ſeuenth booke of his naturall hiſtory,Dedalus the firſt inuenter of a Forge. Pedris inuenter of the Saw A kinde of Fiſh. that Dedalus was the firſt inuenter of yron work, or forge, with the which he forged him ſelfe a wedge, an axe, a ſaw, & nayles. Notwithſtanding Ouid in the eight booke of his Metamorphoſis, ſaith, that one named Pedris, of the kindred of Dedalus, inuented a ſaw like to the finne of a fiſhe. And of that kinde of fiſhe (paſſing at our return vnder the Equinoctiall lyne,) we tooke one that had the fynne vpon ye back, aboue a foote long. Therefore theſe

wylde men deſiring ye vſe of yron worke of late days, for to ſerue their neceſſities, haue learned to forge, being firſt inſtructed by Chriſtians.
         
         
            Of the Ryuer of Vaſes, likewiſe of certaine beaſtes that are found thereabout. And of the lande named Morpion. Cap. 54.
            
               The lyeng of the Ryuer of Vaſes.THis Riuer of 
                  Ʋaſes, being there ſo much eſtemed as Charanta Loyre, or the Riuer of Sayne, being twenty fiue leagues from Ienaria, where we did remayne, and where as at this day doe inhabit Frenchmen, is much frequented, aſwell for the habundants of good Fiſh, as for the Nauigation and other things neceſſarie. This floud watereth a great countrey, aſwell the hylls, as the plaine. In the which is founde a certaine Myne of Golde, the which bringeth no great profit to the owner, for bicauſe that by the fire, it conſumeth almoſt all into ſmoke. There about are many Rocks, and likewiſe in many other places of America, the which beareth great quantitie of wedges, ſhining like fine Golde, but not ſo fine as thoſe of the Eaſt countrey, alſo other littell ſhining ſtones. There are founde no Rubies, Diamonds, nor other riche ſtones: beſides this, there is great plentie of Marbell and Iaſper ſtones. And in the ſayed place I hope may be founde Mynes either of Golde, or Siluer, the which as yet we dare not vnder take, bicauſe the enimies are neare hand. In thoſe hills are ſéene rauiſhing beaſts, as Lybards, wilde Stags, but no Lyons, nor

Wolues. There is alſo another kynde of beaſt that the inhabitants name Cacuycu,
               Cacuycu. hauing a beard on the chin lyke a Goate. This beaſt is greatly inclined to lechery. Alſo there is founde another kynde of yellow beaſt named Sagauius, not onely in this place,Sagauius a beaſt. but in other places, ye wyld men chaſe them for to eate them. And if they perceiue that they are followed, they wil get their young ones on their necks, and runne their ways. Of the former beaſts there are grey and black ones in Barbaria, and at Peru, lyke to the colour of a Fox. There are found no Apes as in Africa, but to the contrary, there are founde great number of Tattons,
               Tatton a beaſt. that are beaſts armed, of the which ſome are of the greatneſſe and height of a great pigge, the others leſſe, and this much will I ſay by the way, their fleſh is tender and pleaſant for to eate. As touching the people of that countrey, they are more warrelyke than in any other place of America, bicauſe they border their enimies, the which forceth them to excerciſe the fears of warre.Quoniambe
                     •
                   a King redouted. Their King in their language is named Quoniambec, the moſt feared and redouted that is in all the countrey, and ſo is he martial and a worthy warrier▪ And I think that neuer Menel
                     •
                  us King and 
                  •
               uider of the Grecians Army, was euer ſo feared nor redouted of the Troyans, as this King is of his enimies. The Portingalls, feare him aboue all others, for he hath cauſed many of them to die. Ye ſhall ſée his palaces which in a lodging made of purpoſe; but yet like to ye others, hanged without rounde aboute with Portingalls heade. For it is the cuſtome to cary away the heads of their enimies, and to hang them at their lodgings.
            This King hauing knowlege of our comming, came ſtraightways to ſée vs at the place where we were, &

there remained the ſpace of eightene dayes, occupying the moſt parte of the tyme, ſpecially thrée houres, to recite and tell his victories and noble actes againſt his enimies. Moreouer, threatning the Portingals, with certaine ieſtes and countenances, whome he named in their language Peroes.
               Peroes. This king is the moſt renoumed of all the countrey, his village & land is great: fortified all about with earth, planting therein certaine peces of Artillary, as Fauconnets, that he hath won from the Portingales. As touching townes & houſes of ſtone, there is none, but as I ſayd before, they haue lodgings very long & broade, the which at the beginning was not had, for the people that then were, did ſo little eſteme to be in ſauegard, yt they forced not for walled Townes, nor ſtrong holdes, but they wandered abroade, as doe the wilde beaſtes, without hauing any certaine place for to take their reſt, but they reſted thē euen in that place where the night ouertooke them, without feare of any theues, ye which the Americans doe not though they be very wylde. Now to conclude, this King of whome we ſpeake, thinketh him ſelfe very great, & hath nothing elſe to rehearſe, but his greatneſſe, reputing it a great glory & honor, to haue made to die many people, and to haue eaten them by and by, yea to the number of fiue thouſand as he ſayd. I cannot remember that there hath ben the lyke inhumanitie,How many it is to bee thought that Iulius Caeſar hath ſlaine in his battailes. as is in this people. Plinie ſheweth that Iulius Caeſar in his battailes as it is iudged, hath ſlaine nintie two thouſand & eleuen hundreth men. And there are ſhewed of many other warres & great ſlaughters, but they haue not eaten one another. Now to our purpoſe: this King and his ſubiects are in continual warre

with the Portingalles of Morpion,
               The diſcription of the land of Morpion. and with the wylde men of the countrey. Morpion is a place bending towards the Riuer of Plate, or to the ſtraight of Magnellan, diſtant from the lyne twenty ſix degrées, being ſubiect to the Portingales, ſo that the King of Portingale hath there a Lieutenant generall, with a great number of people of all eſtates, and ſlaues, whereas they behaue them ſelues ſo well, that there commeth from thence great profit to the King of Portingale.
               The fruitfulneſſe of Morpion. At the beginning they began to plant great quantitie of Canes to make Suger. But ſince they haue not greatly trauailed therein, but haue occupied them ſelues to a better worke, ſince that they haue found out Mynes of Siluer. This place hath greate quantitie of good fruite, with the which they make Conſerues, after their maner, and chiefly of a fruite named Nauas.
               Nauas. Among theſe Trées and fruites, I will rehearſe one named in their language Cochine, bearing fruite as great as Pompion, the leaues lyke to a Baye trée, the fruit made lyke an Eſtryge egge, it is not good to eate, but pleaſant to beholde when the trée is ful. The wyld men (beſyde that they make thereof veſſels or cups to drynk in,) they make a certaine miſtery as ſtraunge as is poſſible. After that this fruit is hollow, they fyll it with certaine graines of Myll, or ſuch lyke, then with a ſtick hauing one ende in the grounde, the other ende comming thorough, being decked all ouer with fayre fethers, will kepe euery houſholde after this ſort in their houſe two or thrée of them with great reuerence, thincking theſe poore idolaters in handling and ſounding this fruite, that their Toupan ſpeaketh vnto them, and that by this meanes they haue reuellation of all, by the meanes of their Prophets,

ſo that they eſteme and thinke therein to be ſome deuinitie. And they worſhip no other thing ſenſible, but this inſtrument that ſoundeth when it is handled. And for a rare and ſtraunge thing I brought one of them home, the which I got ſecretly from one, with many ſkinnes of Birdes of diuerſe colours, of the which I made preſent to Monſyer Nicolas of Nicolay, the Kings Geographer, a wittie man, and a louer, not onely of the antiquitie, but alſo of all vertuous things. And ſynce he ſhewed them to the King, being at Paris, in his houſe, who came of purpoſe to ſée the booke that he cauſed to be printed of the Eaſte partes, and he ſhewed mée, that the King tooke great pleaſure to ſée ſuch things for that they were vntyll then vnknowen. Moreouer there is plentie of Orenges, Citrous, Canes of Suger. To bée ſhort, this place is very pleaſaunt.
            There is alſo a Ryuer not very great, whereas there are founde little Pearles, and great ſtore of Fyſhe, chiefly of one kynde,Piraipouchy. the which they call Piraipouchi, which is as much to ſay as naughty Fiſhe: it is maruellouſly diſformed, bréeding or ingendrieg on the backe of a dogge Fiſhe, and being young followeth hir as his principall tutor. Furthermore in this place of Morpion, the which is inhabited by the Portingalls, are now nouriſhed many domeſticall beaſts, the which the ſayd Portingalls haue brought thether, the which enrytcheth greatly, and ſetteth out the countrey, beſyde his naturall excellencie, and huſbandry, the which is dayly more and more excerciſed.
         
         
            
            Of the Ryuer of Platte, and the countrey adiacent. Cap. 55.
            SEing that we are ſo farre in talke,The riuer of Platte, & why it is ſo named. I thinke it good to ſpeake a word or twaine by the way of this faire floude of America, the which the Spaniards haue named Platte, either for his largeneſſe, or for his Mines of Siluer that are founde hard by, the which in their language they name Platte. The wylde men of the countrey name it Paranagacu, which is as much to ſay, as Sea, or great congregation of water. This Riuer containeth of largeneſſe, twenty ſix leagues,The firſt voyage attempted by the Spanyards to the Riuer of Platte▪
                being beyond the lyne, fiue degrées, and diſtant from Caape Sainct Auguſtine, ſix hundreth and ſeuenty leagues. I thinke that name of Platte, hath ben giuen by thoſe that firſt did diſcouer it, for the reaſon before ſhewed. Alſo at their firſte arriuall thether they receiued a maruellous ioye, thincking that this ryuer ſo large, hadde ben the ſtraight of Magellan, the which they ſought for to paſſe on the other ſyde of Ameryca, neuertheleſſe knowing the veritie of the thing, they delibered to ſette foote on lande, the which they dyd. The wylde men of the countrey were maruellouſly amazed, hauing neuer ſéene Chriſtian before ſo to aborde their lymittes. But by ſucceſſion of tyme, the Spanyards acquainted them with the wylde men, alluring them by giftes and otherwyſe, ſo that in viewing the Countrey, they founde many Mynes of Syluer, and after that then hadde thus viewed the Countrey, and marked the place verie well, then

they retourned hauing loden their ſhips with Eraſill.The ſeconde voyage. With in a ſhort time after they made redy thrée great ſhippes with men and munitions for to returne, being couetous of the Mynes, and being aryued at the ſame place where before they had ben, they prepared their ſkiffes for to take land. Firſt ye Captaine, hauing with him foure ſcore Souldiers, for to withſtande the wylde men of the countrey, if that they had made any inſurrection. But the wylde men at their arriuall fled héere and there of purpoſe, to catch the Spaniards in their danger,A ſlaughter of Spaniards. ſo that when they were landed, there came vpon them thrée or foure hundreth of the wylde men, which in their fury and rage lyke hungry Lyons, they kylled and deuoured, as their cuſtom and maner is, and afterward they ſhewed their bones, legges and armes, vnto the reſt of the Spanyards that were in their Ships, threatning them with the lyke, if that they dyd deſcend on lande: the which things were ſhewed to me by a Spaniard that was in one of the ſhippes. Alſo the wylde men of the countrey wil ſhew thereof, as a thing worthy of memory, when it is in their myndes.The third voyage. After this, the Spanyards returned againe thether with a bande of two thouſande men, with other ſhippes, but for bicauſe that they were afflicted with ſickneſſe,The fourth voyage. they could attempt nothing. But afterwarde the Captaine Arual, in Anno. 1541. hauing with him onely two hundreth men, made a voyage thyther,The policie of Captaine Aruall. hauing alſo with him a fiftie Horſes, wherewith he vſed ſuch policie, that he made the wylde men of the countrey afrayde, which thought that theſe Horſes hadde ben deuouryng beaſtes, (for to them they were vnknowne,) this being done, hée cauſed his men to bée armed with bright ſhining Armour,

hauing painted vpon their Harnies many dreadfull Images, as heads of Lyons, Leopards, Beares, Wolues, and ſuch like, with their mouthes gaping, & figures of horned deuils, ye which ſight did ſo affraie ye wilde inhabitants of the countrey, yt they fled away, & by this meanes they were driuen out of theyr countrey, ſo that the Spaniards remained there Lordes and Maiſters, beſide many other lands adiacent, that ſince they haue conquered euen to Moluques in the Ocean, to the Weſt of the other coaſt of America, ſo that at this day they haue in poſſeſſion a great deale of lande about this fayre Riuer whereas they haue builded Townes & holds. And ſome of the wylde men adiacēt, are reconciled with them, and become Chriſtians, True it is that about a hūdreth leagues beyond, there are other wylde men that make warre with them, being ſtoute men and of great ſtature,Wylde men as great as Gyāts. almoſt like Gyants. And they liue with littell other foode than humaine fleſhe as the Canibals. This kinde of people go ſo ſwyftly on foote; that they will eaſely take wilde beaſtes in their chaſe: they liue longer than any of the other wilde men doe, as a hundreth and fiftie yeares, and the other leſſe, they are very prone and ſubiect to that damnable ſinne of lechery, haynous before God, the which I omit, not onely for the reſpect of this coū
               trey of America, but alſo many others.The richeſſe of the countrey about the riuer of Platte. Theſe Giants make warre aſwell with the Spaniards as the wilde men about them. Now to our purpoſe. This Riuer of Platte with the countrey adiacent, is now very riche aſwell in Siluer as in ſtones: this Riuer ſwelleth or encreaſeth certaine daies in the yeare as doeth Aurelana that is at Perou, and Nyll in Egipt. At the mouth of this Riuer there are many little Ilands, of the which

ſome are inhabited, the others not: this countrey is very full of Hylls and Mountaines, from the Caape S. Mary,
                vnto the white Caape, ſpecially that towardes Saint Helenes point, diſtant from the Riuer .65. leagues, and from thence to Arnes Govvrdes .30. leagues, then from thence to Baſſeas, to the other land ſo named bicauſe of the great valleis that there are. And from Baſſeas to the Abbey of Fonda .75. leagues. The reſt of the countrey hath not ben frequented of chriſtians, extending to the Caape Saint Dominik,
                or Caape Blanke,
                and from thence to the Promentary of the eleuen thouſand Virgins .52. degrées and a halfe beyond the Equinoctial, and thereby is the ſtraight of Magellan, of the which we mynde hereafter to ſpeake.
            As touching the flatte countrey, it is at this preſent very fayre, by an infinit number of Gardens, Fountaines and Riuers of ſwete freſh water, in the which are great plenty of very good Fiſh. And to the ſaid Riuers, there haunteth a kinde of beaſt, that the wylde men name in there language Saricouiemia,
               Saricouieme a daintie beaſt. which is as much to ſay, as fine or daintie beaſtes; the which beaſt remaineth more in the water than on the land, and is no bigger than a little Cat. The ſkynne of this beaſt which is intermedled with gray; white and blacke, is as fine and ſmooth as veluet, his féete made like the féete of a water Foule. And as for his fleſh, it is very pleaſant and good for to eate. More ouer, in this countrey toward the ſtraight, there are many ſtrange and monſtrous beaſtes, but not ſo cruell as in Africa. And to conclude, this countrey now is brought to ſo good a forme, that it would not be taken for a ſtrange countrey: for the wylde men of the countrey haue inuented of late days by the meanes of Chriſtians,

artes and ſciences very ingeniouſly, ſo that they may be a very ſpectacle to many people of Aſia, and of our Europe, I meane of thoſe that curiouſly obſerue and kéepe the damnable law of Mahomet, and other fonde and deuiliſh Doctrine.
         
         
            Of the ſtraight of Magellan, and of Daryen. Cap. 56.
            SEing that we are come ſo neare to this notable place, it ſhall not be out of the way to write ſomewhat thereof. Now this ſtraight, called in Greke Poeidinos, as the Weſt betwene two landes, named in Greke Iſtmas, a ſtraight or a pointe of lande betwene two waters, as that of Daryen confineth America toward the South, and there ſeperateth with an other land diſcouered but not inhabited, euen as Gebaltar doeth Europe with Africa, and that of Conſtantinople doeth Europe with Aſia, being named the ſtraight of Magellan, by his name that firſt dyd diſcouer it,The lyeng of the ſtraight of Magellan. lyeng fifty two degrées and a halfe beyonde the Equinoctiall, contayning of bredth, two leagues by one only height ſtraight Eaſt and Weſt, two thouſand two hundreth leagues from the North to the South, furthermore, from the Caape of Eſsead, which is at the entring of the ſtraight, vnto the other South Sea ſeuenty foure leagues, vntill the firſt Caape or Promentary, which is fortie degrées. This ſtraight hath ben long time deſired and ſought, more than two thouſand, eight hundreth leagues, for to enter by this ſtraight into the Sea of Magellan, to attayne to the Ilandes of Moluques.
            
            
               Americus Veſtucia, one of the beſt Pylots that

euer was, hath coaſted almoſte from Ireland vnto the Cape of Saint Auguſtin, by the commaundement of the king of Portingale the yeare .1501. And ſince another Captaine the yeare .1534. ſayled vnto the Region named of Gyants. In this Region betwene the Riuer of Platte, and this ſtraight, the inhabitaunts are very mightie, named in their language Pategones, Giants, bicauſe of their high ſtature, & forme of bodies. They which firſt diſcouered this countrey, tooke one of them finely, being twelue foote long, who was ſo vneaſie to holde, that .25. men had inough to doe about him, and for to kepe him it behoued them to bynde his féete and hands in their ſhippe, notwithſtanding they could not kepe him long aliue, but for ſorow & thought (as they ſaye) he died for hunger. This Region is of lyke temperatneſſe as Canada and other countries néere to our Pole, and therefore the inhabitants are clothed with the ſkynne of a certaine beaſt named in their ſpeach Su, which is as much to ſay, as Water, for bicauſe (to my iudgement) that this beaſt for the moſt part remaineth in the waters and flouds. This beaſt is a rauenous beaſt, made after a ſtraunge maner: beſides this if ſhe be chaſed or purſued, as the people of the countrey vſe to doe, for to haue the ſkinne, ſhe taketh hir yong ones on hir backe, and couering them with hir tayle that is thick and long, ſaueth hir ſelfe with running. Neuertheleſſe the wild men of the countrey vſe a policie for to take this beaſt, making a déepe pit in the grounde néere to the place where ſhe maketh hir moſt reſidence, the which they couer ouer with gréene leaues, ſo that in running knowing not of this pit, the poore beaſte falleth in with hir yong ones: and ſhe ſeing hir ſelfe thus taken, in hir rage ſhe kylleth

hir yong ones, and maketh ſuch a terrible noyſe, that ſhe maketh the wylde men afrayde. But for all this, in the ende, they kill hir with darts and arrowes, and then they take hir ſkinne. Now to our purpoſe. This captain Fernandus of Magellan, a couragious man,The voyage o
                     •
                   Frrnandus of Magellan. being informed of the riches that might be found in the Ilandes of Moluques, as great quantitie of ſpice, ginger, muſke, gray amber, myrabolanes, rubarbe gold, pearles, and other richeſſe, ſpecially in the Ilandes of Matel, Magian, Tidora, and Terenata, nere inough the one to the other, thinking by this ſame ſtraight to find a way more ſhorter and neceſſarie, was minded to attempt it, departing from the Canaries, to the Ilandes of Caape verde, keping his right courſe to the promontarie of ſaincte Auguſtine eight degrées, beſide the line,The Caape of Virgins. coaſting neare to the Caape of Virgins, diſtant from the Equinoctial fiftie two degrées, néere to the ſtraight before ſpoken. And after he had ſailed the ſpace of fiue dayes from the eaſt right to the Weſt on the Ocean, the which in ſwelling or flowing, caried them without ſayle right to the South, the which made them ioyful & glad, although the moſt part of their men were dead by the incōmodities of the ſea & the aire, but chiefly by hunger & thirſt. In this ſtraight are many fair Ilands, but not inhabited, the country about is very baren: ful of hilles and mountaines, and there is founde nothing but rauiſhyng beaſtes, birdes of diuers kindes, chiefly Eſtriges, woodde of diuers ſorts, Cedres, and others. Alſo an other kynde of trée bearing fruite almoſte like a cherie, but muche more pleaſant to eate. This is the occaſion, and how this ſtraight was founde out: ſince they haue founde out an other waye, ſailyng vpon a great riuer on the coaſt of Perou, in the land of Chagra,
               
foure lagues from Panana, and from the goulfe S. Michel .25. leagues. Not long after a captaine hauing ſailed a certaine time vpon theſe floodes, aduentured to viſite the countrey. And the king of the wylde men of that countrey,Therea. named in their language Therea, receiued hym very gently with preſentes of golde and pearles, as certaine Spaniardes haue ſhewed me, that were in their cōpanie, although yt in going on the land they were not without greate daunger, as well for the wilde beaſtes as other incommodities. They founde afterwarde a certaine number of the inhabitauntes of the countrey very wilde, and more to be feared than the firſt, to the which for the ſmal truſt and confidence that they had in them, they offered and promiſed theyr ſeruice and friendſhyp, ſpecially to their King, whome they call Atorizo,
               Atorizo. of whome alſo they receyued certaine preſentes, as great pieces of golde, waying ten pounde. After that they had giuen to him alſo of ſuche things, as they had and thought would be moſte to hys contentation, the which was ſmall yron wourke, ſhirtes and gownes of ſmall value: In the ende with good guide they came vnto Daryen,
               The ſtraighte of Daryen. from thence they entred in, and diſcouered the ſouth ſea, on the other coaſt or ſide of America,
               The Ilandes of the Moluques. in the which are the Moluques, wher as they hauing found ye cōmodities before ſhewed, haue fortified them ſelues hard by ye ſea, ſo yt by this ſtraight of land, they haue without compariſon ſhortened their way, without entring into the ſtraight of Magellan, as well for their tradings as for other commodities. And ſince that time they trafike and trade to the Ilande of Moluques, the which are great, & at this preſent inhabited and conuerted to the chriſtē faith, the which before was peopled with very cruel people, much more cruell

than thoſe of America, which wer blinded in ignorāce, and hauing no knowledge of the great riches and treſure that the countrey brought forth. About this place of the weſt ſea, ther are foure Ilands deſert inhabited (as they ſay) onely with Satyres, therfore they haue named them Ilands of Satyres. Likewiſe in this ſame ſea are found ten Ilands named Manioles, inhabited with wilde men, the which are of no religion, nere to the which there are great rocks that draw the ſhips vnto them, bicauſe of the yron wherwith they are nailed. For the which cauſe thoſe that trade into that country there, are conſtrained to vſe ſmall ſhips or ſkiffes pinned with wood for to eſchae the danger of theſe rockes or adamant ſtone. Thus far as touchyng ye ſtraight of Magellan. Nowe as touchyng the other lande named Australl,
               The lande of Auſtrall. which in coſting ye ſtraight is left on the left hand, is not yet known of chriſtiās, but only of an Engliſh pylote, being a man aſwell ſéene & eſtemed in nauigation as any that can be founde, who hauing paſſed this ſtraight, ſhewed me that he had deſcended on land ſo that I was bold to demaund of him what people did inhabit in ye cuntrey, he ſhewed me yt they wer mighty black men, which I know to be cōtrary: knowing that this land is almoſt of the height of England & Scotlād, for the countrey is of ſuche a temperatneſſe, that it is ſubiect to winter with continuall froſtes and ſnowes.
         
         
            How that thoſe that inhabite from the riuer of Plate vnto the ſtraight of Magellan, are our Antipodes. cap. 57.
            ALthough we ſe as wel in ye ſea as in riuers, many Ilandes diuided & ſeparated from the maine land, yet neuertheleſſe ye element of ye erth is eſtemed to

be one alone, and onely bodie, the whiche is no other thing than this largeneſſe of the earth, the which ſéemeth vnto vs all full for his great and wonderful amplitude. And ſuch was the opinion of Thales Mileſius, one of the ſeuen wiſe men of Grecia, and other philoſophers, as Plutarke ſheweth. Oecetes the great philoſopher,To know that there are two worlds or no. and Pythagoras ordained .ij. partes of the world, that is, this wherin we inhabit which we name Hemiſpheria, and that of the Antipodes, which we likewiſe cal the lower Hemiſpherie. Theopompus the hiſtoriograph ſayth after Hermogenes, that Silenas ſhewed king Midas, that there was an other world and globe of earth than this which we are in. Macrobius laſt of all, doth moſt amply treate of theſe two hemiſpheries and partes of the earth, to whoſe works ye may haue recourſe yf that ye minde to knowe farther on the opinions of Philsſophie. But thus much muſt be known, whether that theſe two partes of the earth ought to be altogether ſeparated as earths that differ, and ſo to be iudged to be two worldes, the which is not true, conſidering that there is but one element of the earth, the whiche wée muſt iudge, is cut by the ſea in two parts, as Solin writeth in his polyhiſtor, ſpeakyng of the people Hyperbores, but I had rather ſay, that the whole worlde is ſeparated into two equall partes by this imagined circle which we name equinoctiall. Furthermore, if ye behold the image and figure of the worlde in a globe or a earde, ye ſhall clerely ſée howe the ſea diuideth the earth in two parts, not altogether equall, whiche are the two hemiſpheries, ſo named by the Grekes, one parte of the world containeth Aſia, Affrica, and Europe, the other containeth America, Florida, Canada, and other regions comprehended vnder the names of the occidentall

of Weſt Indies, in the which many thinke our Antipodes to inhabite.Diuers opinions of the Antipodes. I knowe well that there are many opinions of the Antipodes: ſome iudge and think that there are none, others that there are, and that they are thoſe yt inhabite the other Hemiſpherie, which to vs is hidde. As for me, I am of this aduiſe, that thoſe that inhabit vnder the two Poles (for we haue ſhewed yt they are inhabited) are Antipodes, one to ye other. For example, thoſe that inhabite the Northe, the neerer they drawe to the pole, the higher it is:What people the Antipodes and Antichtones the one to the other. the pole oppoſite is abaſed, to the contrarye, ſo that it muſte nedes be, that ſuch are Antipodes, and the others, the farther they withdrawe to the Poles, approchyng to the Equinoctiall, are leſſe Antipodes. Therefore I take for right Antipodes, thoſe that inhabite the two Poles, and the two others taken directely, that is to wyt, Eaſte and Weſt, and the others in the midſt Anticthones, rather than Antipodes, to thoſe that inhabit in Lima, Luzco, Eariquipa, or Perou, to thoſe that aboute this greate floud Indus, in the countrey of Calicut, the Iland of Zeilan, and other landes of Aſia, the inhabitants of the Ilands of Moluques, from whence the ſpices come, to thoſe of Aethiopia, nowe called Ginney. And for thys reaſon, Plinie hath well ſpoken, that it was Tabroban, where as were the Antipodes,
               A difference betwene Antipodes and Antictones. confinyng as many Antipodes, with Anticthones. For truely thoſe that lyue in theſe Ilandes are Anticthones, to the people that inhabite that parte of Aethiopia, takyng from the riuer of Nyll, vnto the Ilande of Meroa. Although that thoſe of Mexicona, are directely Antipodes, to the people of Arabia, Felicia, and thoſe that are at the endes of the Caape of good hope. Nowe the Greekes haue named thoſe Antipodes, that goe with their féete ouerthwart

one ouer an other, as thoſe of which we haue ſhewed. And Anticthones,
               Anteci. thoſe that inhabite a land diuided, as thoſe whom they cal Anteci, as the Spanyards, Frēchmen, and Almaynes, to thoſe that inhabite nere to the riuer of Plate, and the Patagones, of the which we haue ſpoken in the former Chapter, whiche are nere to the ſtraight of Magellan, are Antipodes, the others named Pateci,
               Pataeci. that inhabite one onely zone, as Frenchmen, and Almaines, contrary to thoſe that are Antaeci. And although that theſe two proprely are not Antipodes, notwithſtanding they are commonly called ſo, and many mixe them one with an other.The maner of going of the Antipodes was not well knowen nor approued of the elders. And for this reaſon, I haue noted that thoſe of the Caape of good hope, are not to vs altogether Antipodes, but thoſe whome they call Anteci, the which inhabite a lande not oppoſite, but diuided, as thoſe that are beyonde the Equinoctiall, to vs that are here, euen to come to the Antipodes. I doubt not but that many do myſtake this maner of going of the Antipodes, which hath ben ye cauſe that many haue not approued it.Saint Auguſt. lib. 15. of the Citie of God. Alſo S. Auguſtine in the .xv. boke of the Citie of God. chap. ix. but he yt wold diligently conſider ſhal find it very eaſy to comprehēd. If it be ſo that the earth is round like a globe, hanging in the midſt of the worlde, it muſt nedes be, yt it be beholden of the firmament on all ſides. Therfore we that inhabite the higher Hemiſpherie, as touchyng vs, we ſée one part of the firmamēt to vs propre & particular. The others inhabiting the lower Hemiſpherie,) we being to them ſuperior) they ſe the other part of ye firmament which to them is appropried. There is like reſon of the one as of ye other: but ye ſhal note that theſe two Hemiſpheries haue one onely and common centrie in ye earth. Thus much of ye 
               Antipodes: now to our mater.
         
         
            
            How theſe wilde men exerciſe husbandry and make gardens of a roote named Manihot, and of a tree that they name Peno abſou. Ca. 58.
            OVr Americans in the time of peace, haue litle other occupations but to make gardens,The common occupations of the wild men. or when the time requireth, they are conſtrained to go to the warres, but ſome of them as we haue before ſhewed vſe certaine trades, neuertheleſſe neceſſitie conſtraineth them to labour the earth as we in our countries. And they in a maner folow the cuſtome of the elders, who after that they had endured and eaten the fruites that procéeded from the earth without any labour or induſtrie of man, ſo that being not ſufficiente to nouriſhe and ſuſtaine all that liued on the earthe, it cauſed rapines and inuaſions, preparing ech one a certaine portion of lande, which they ſeparated by certain limites, and then among men began the ſtate of the people and common weales.Howe theſe wilde men labour the earth And thus our wylde men of America haue lerned to labour the earth, not with oxen and horſes or other domeſtical beaſts as we haue here, for they haue none ſuch, but with the ſweat and labour of their bodies, as the like alſo in other prouinces, notwithſtanding that which they laboure is very little, as certaine gardens diſtant from their houſes about two or thrée leagues, where as they ſowe only Myll, and no other grayne, but they plante certaine rootes, the which they gather two tymes a yeare, at Chriſtmaſſe, whiche is their Sommer, when the Sun is in Capricornus and at Pentecoſt: this Myl is as great as a peaſe, commonly white and blacke,Myll white and blacke. the herbe that it beareth is like to ſea réedes. Nowe the faſhions of their garden is after this ſorte and manner; When

after that they haue cut ſeuen or eyght acres of wood, leauyng nothyng but the foote or body of the trée about a mans heygth, they put the fire therein, and burne it, and the graſſe about it, beyng all in a valey or low countrey: they ſcratche the earth with certayne inſtrumentes of woodde, or of yron, ſince that they haue had the knowledge, then the women plant this Myll and rootes which they name Hetich,
               Hetich. makyng a hole in the grounde with their fynger, as we plante Beanes in this countrey: To fatten and amende the earthe, they haue no practiſe, but it is frutefull inough of it ſelfe, beyng neuer lefte vntylled, as we do many landes in our Europe. Notwithſtanding, it is a wonderful thing that it will not beare oure corne, ſuche as wée haue and vſe. I my ſelfe haue ſometymes▪ ſowed, for we caried corne with vs for to proue, but it would neuer profite. And to my iudgement, it is not long of the grounde, but of ſome other litle vermine that eateth it in the earthe: Neuertheleſſe, thoſe that are remaining there, may in tyme make a ſurer triall and experience.In America no vſe of corne. Husbandrie hath bene of a long time. As touchyng oure Americanes, it is not to be maruelled, though they neuer had the vſe of corne: For likewiſe in our Europe, and in other countreys, at the firſt men liued with ſuch fruites as the earth brought forth of hir ſelfe without any mans labour. True it is that huſbandry is verie auncient, as appeareth in Holie Scripture by Abell and Cain.
               The firſt vſe of Corne. But thoughe that they had corne ſince the begynning, yet they knewe not the vſe therof. Diodorus writeth, yt the fyrſt bread was ſene in Italy, being brought thither by Iſis, Quene of Egipt, the whiche ſhewed the meane howe to grynde corne, and to bake bread: for before they dyd eate the fruites of the earth, as Nature brought them forthe,

whether that the earth was laboured or no: but that all men vniuerſally on the earth haue liued like as do the brute beaſtes, it is rather a fable than a true ſtory fained by Poets, and of ſuche as imitate them, as Virgile ſheweth in Georgicon. But I beleue rather the holie Scripture that maketh mention of Abell, and of his firſt fruites that he offered to God. Well the Americanes make meale of thoſe rootes that are called Manihot, which are as great as my arme,Meale of rotes Manihot. a foote and a halfe long, and they are writhen or crooked moſt commonly. And this roote is of a litle tree in height from ye grounde aboute foure foote, the leaues are like to thoſe which we call Patallionis, which are in number ſixe or ſeuen at the ende of euery trée, and euery leafe halfe a foote long, & thrée fingers brode. Their maner to make this ſuſtenaunce or meate is this: they bruſe theſe rootes either drie or gréene, with a large barke of a trée, garniſhed aboute with very harde ſtones: this beyng done, they make it hot in ſome veſſell of earth on the fire with a certaine quantitie of water, ſo that it gathereth into ſmall lumpes, and it is very good when it is thus vſed, and a good nouriſher. And ye ſhall vnderſtande, that from Perou, Canada, and Florida, in all the landes and countreys betwene the Ocean and Magellan, as America, Caniball, euen to the ſtraight of Magellan, they vſe this kinde of foode, the which is very cō
               mon, and yet there is diſtant from the one end to the other more than two thouſande leagues by lande, and they vſe it with their fleſhe and fiſhe as we doe breade. Theſe wilde men vſe a ſtrange maner in their eating,The ſtraunge maner of eating of the wylde men. for they neuer bryng their handes to their mouthes, but caſte theyr meate into their mouthes more than a foote off, to the whiche they are verie apte. Alſo they

mocke chriſtians that vſe otherwiſe. All the labours aboute theſe rootes are remitted to the women, thynking it not decent for mē to occupie them ſelues therin.A kinde of white beanes Theſe Americans doe plant beanes, the which are all white and flatte, more large and longer than ours. Alſo they haue a kynde of white gourdes, not differing to thoſe that grow in Turkey and Italy, they boyle them and then eate them with ſalte,How they make ſalte. the which ſalte is made with ſalt water boyled, when it is conſumed to halfe, with an other thyng they make it tourne into ſalt.
            
               Bread made of ſpice and ſalte.Likewiſe with this ſalt and a kind of ſpice of graines, they make loaues of bread as byg as a mans heade, of the which many eate with fleſhe and fiſhe, chiefly the women. Beſide this, they mingle many times ſpice with their meale, not beaten to duſt as we doe, but as it is gathered.Bread of drie fiſhe. Moreouer, they make bread with dried fiſhe very good to eate, with other things mingled with it, whiche I do not knowe: I will not forgette here a kinde of colewort leaues, almoſt like to the brode leaues that growe on ryuers ſides, the whiche they call Nenuphar,
               
                  Nenuphar, a kinde of colewort.
                  Peno abſou a tree.
                with an other kinde of herbe, growing like our thiſtles. Nowe there reſteth to ſpeake of a trée, which they name in their language Peno abſou. This trée beareth a fruite of the greatneſſe of a good bigge apple round like an egge, the which is not good to eate, but rather daungerous, as poyſon. This fruite hath within ſixe nuttes like our Almondes, but ſomewhat more larger and flatte, in the which is a kernel, which (as they ſay) is good to heale woundes and ſores, when that they haue bene hurte in the warre with the Arrowes of their enimies or otherwiſe. I haue brought of them into France, which I haue giuen vnto my frends: the meane to vſe them is this: Firſt they draw out of

this kernell certaine oyle, the which they put vpon the wounde. The barke of this trée hath a very ſtraunge ſmell, and the leafe always gréene, of the thyckeneſſe of a teſtorne, and made lyke the leaues of Pourſlane. In this trée frequenteth a byrde, hauing a great buſhe of feathers on hir head as yealowe as fyne golde,A birde of a ſtrange and wonderfull beautie. the tayle blacke, and the reſt of hir feathers yealow and blacke, with ſome ſtrikes of dyuers other coloures, redde aboute the chappes, betwéene the byll and the eyes lyke ſcarlette, and ſhe kéepeth this trée onely for hir foode, whyche is littell wormes that ſhe fyndeth in the ſayde trée. To make ſhorte, leauyng many kyndes of trées, I wyll ſay thus muche, that there are fiue or ſixe kinde of palme trées bearynge fruite, not as thoſe of Aegypte, that beare Dates, for theſe beare none, but other kynde of fruites, ſome as great as an egge, the others leſſe. Among the whiche palme trées,Gerahuua. Iry. is that whyche they calle Gerahuua, a nother named Iry, the whyche beareth a nother kynde of fruite, differing: there is alſo that dothe beare their fruite all rounde, and as greate as a prune or damſyn, beyng of the like coloure when it is rype, the whiche before hath a taſte lyke veriuyce: it beareth a whyte kernell of the greatneſſe of a haſyll nutte, the which theſe wylde men doe eate. Thus muche as touchyng oure America, the whiche I haue thoughte good to ſette oute after that I had knowne the ſecretes therof, the whiche wée maye hereafter ſette forth more at large. Lykewiſe of many trées, hearbes, and other ſecretes with their propreties, accordyng to the experience of the people of the cuntrey, the which we haue left out to auoyde prolixitie. Alſo we haue thoughte

good by the way ſomewhat to ſpeake as touchyng the lande of Braſile.
         
         
            Howe and after what ſorte the lande of America was diſcouered, and Braſill wood founde: with many other trees ſene no where but in that countrey. Cap. 59.
            THis we know of a truth, that Americus Veſputia is the firſte that diſcouered the mayne lande betwene the two ſeas,The lande of Braſile diſcouered by the Portingales. though not all the lande, but the moſte parte. And ſince the Portingals many tymes being not content with their limits, haue alwayes hazarded themſelues to diſcouer and fynd out countreis, euen as they founde the cōmodities, and as they were intertained of the people of the countrey. They therfore viſiting the countreys, and ſéeking as the Troyans dyd in the lande of Carthage, they ſawe diuers fourmes and manners of feathers, with the whiche they dyd trade and traffike, ſpecially redde ones, whiche were coloured, ſo that they were deſirous to knowe the meane howe to make this coloure. The people of the countrey ſhewed them the Braſille trée, whyche they doe name in their language Oraboutan,
               Oraboutan, the braſile tree. and is very fayre to looke on, the barke therof is of a gray colour withoute, and the woodde is redde within, and chiefly the harte, the whyche is more excellente than the reſte, whereof they do occupie moſte, ſo that then the Portingales broughte home their ſhyps laden therewyth. And ſynce that wée haue hadde the knowledge of yt, thereof is made a verie greate trade. The Portingales can not abyde that any other people or Nation

ſhould trade thether, for that they were the firſt that diſcouered that countrey which is of a truth. This braſill trée beareth leaues like vnto boxe, ſo litle but very thicke, it rendreth no gumme as others doe, neyther beareth it any fruite: It hath bene better eſtéemed thā it is at this preſent, ſpecially in the eaſt countreys: at the firſt it was thought, that this was of that kinde of wood that the Quéene of Saba brought to king Salomon, as is ſhewed in the firſt booke of the Kings.A voyage into the eaſt countrey by Oneſicritus captaine to Alexander the greate. Alſo the great Captaine Oneſicritus, in a voyage that he made into the Ilande of Tabroban, lying in the Ocean ſea, towarde the eaſt Indies, brought a greate quantitie of this wood and other things requiſite, the which his maſter Alexander did highly commende and eſtéeme. As touching this Braſill, that whiche is on the ſide of the riuer of Ianaria, Morpion, and Caape de Fria, is better than that of Caniball, and on the coaſt of Marignan. When that the Chriſtians are there for to laade Braſill, the wylde men of the countrey cut it them ſelues, and ſometimes they bring or carie it thrée or foure leagues to the ſhippes. I leaue to youre iudgement their paine and trauel, and al for to get ſome poore or courſe wéede and ſhirt. Moreouer in that countrie is founde an other wood yellow, with the which ſome make their ſwordes. Likewiſe an other of the coloure of purple,Yelow wood. Wood of the color of purple wyth the which to my iudgement may be made faire and goodly woorkes. I am in doubte whether it bée that woodde whiche Plutarke ſpeaketh of, ſaying that Caius Marius Rutilius, the firſt Dictatour of the publike weale among the Romanes, cauſed to bée drawne in a purple woodde a battayle,A battaile drawen in purple wood. wherein the perſonages were not greater than my thrée fingers. And thys woodde was brought from hye Affrica. Furthermore,

there are founde other trées, of which the woodde is as white as paper,white wood. and very tender, and therfore the wild men ſette not by them. The propertie of which trées I coulde not otherwyſe learne, ſauyng onely it commeth to my remembraunce of whyte woodde, wherof Plinie ſpeaketh,L
                     ••
                  . 10. ca. 19. Betula. the whiche he nameth Betula, white and tender, of the whiche were made the wandes that were borne before the Magiſtrates of Rome. And euen as there are found and ſene diuers kynds of trées differing in forme, color & other propreties, ſo in like maner is found diuerſitie of grounde and earth, ſome fatter than others.Diuerſitie in earth. Alſo clay grounde, of the which they make earthen veſſells, after their maner as we do for to eate and drinke. Thus much as touchyng our America, though not ſo much as I haue and might haue ſéene, but ſo much as I thought worthie to bee noted and written, for to ſatiſfie and content the gentle good will of the louyng Readers, if that it pleaſe them to take as great pleaſure and pacience to reade it, as I haue taken paines after ſo many trauailes and paines in this harde and daungerous voyage to ſette it forth. I am ſure that ſome will fynde this my diſcourſe t
                  •
                long, others to ſhorte. Therefore I ſéeke to kéepe a meane to ſatiſfie and contente euery mans deſire.
         
         
            Of oure departyng from Fraunce Antartike, or America. Capit. 60.
            WE haue here before gathered together, and ſhewed amply and at large of theſe nations, the which of auncient Hiſtoriographers was

vnknowne. Nowe therefore after we had remained there in that countreye, as long as oportunitie dydde ſerue, and alſo needefull for the contentation of the mynde, we beganne to make prouiſion for oure returne, beyng not mynded to remayne there any longer. Therefore vnder the conducte of Mounſieur Albois the Countie,How the Author returned from America. Captaine generall of the Frenche kings ſhyppes into America, a worthie Gentleman, and well ſéene in nauigation, as if all hys life time he had exerciſed it, beſide other vertues. We toke a clean contrary way to that whiche we came, bicauſe of the windes that are propre to retourne: but oure returne was longer by fiue hundreth leagues than the waye we went, and more dangerous: ſo the laſt day of Ianuarie at foure of the clocke in the mornyng, we toke ſhypping with thoſe that caried backe the ſhippes, we ſayled oute of the Riuer of Ianaria, into the greate ſea on the other ſyde, drawyng towarde the Weſte, leauyng vpon the ryghte hande the coaſte of Aethiopia, the whiche we coaſted thytherwarde. At the whyche departure, the wynde was to vs very fauourable, but not of long continuaunce: for ſodainly the winde dydde chaunge euen ryght a heade to the North, and Northweſt, the whyche wyth the ſea ragynge and vnconſtant in thoſe partes, kepte vs from our right courſe, caſtyng vs nowe here and there, vntyll at the laſt with greate difficultie, we diſcouered Cape de Fria, where as we came a lande at our firſt comming thyther. And agayne, we ſtayed there the ſpace of eyght days, And the nynthe daye the Southe wynde beganne to blowe, the whyche dydde conducte vs nynetie Leagues into the Mayne ſea, leauyng the lower countrey, and coaſtyng a farre off Mahouac,
               
bicauſe of the daungers. For the Portingals kéepe that quarter, and the wilde men, which vnto vs are bothe enimies (as I haue ſhewed) where as within theſe .ij. yeares, they haue founde Mynes of golde and ſyluer, which hath cauſed them to buylde in that place, and to ſtrengthen them ſelues there to inhabite. Nowe we ſailyng continually vpon the ſea wyth greate perill, vntill we came to the heigth of Caape ſaint Auguſtine,
               Caape Saint Auguſtine. the which to double we remained the ſpace of two moneths or therabout, beyng very great, lying farre out into the ſea:
                  Caape of good hope, why it is called Lyon of the ſea.
                  Caape of ſaint Michell.
                And no maruell, for I know ſome of good memorie, that haue bene doublyng of this Caape thrée or foure moneths: and if the wynde had not bene fauourable, we had bene in daunger to haue ſtayed longer, although there had hapned no other inconueniēce. This Caape is of length .8. leagues diſtant from the ryuer from whence we be departed .302. leagues. It entreth into the ſea nine or tenne leagues at the leaſt, and therfore it is as muche feared of the nauigants or ſailers on that coaſt, as the Caape of good hope, on the coaſt of Ethiopia, the which for this cauſe they haue named Lyon of the ſea, as I haue alreadie, ſhewed: Or like to that which in the ſea Aegee, in Acaia, the which is nowe called Moorelande. Alſo Caape S. Angell, the whiche alſo is very daungerous.Verie daungerous lands diſcouered by captaine Pynſon. This Caape was ſo named by thoſe that firſt did diſcouer it, which was as ſome ſay, one Pynſon, a Spanyarde. Alſo it is ſo marked in our Card Marins. This Pynſon with his ſonne haue maruellouſly diſcouered vnknowne countreyes, not before founde out. The yeare .1501. Emanuell kyng of Portingale ſent him into the baſe America, for to find the ſtraight of Forna, and Daryen, that they might paſſe more eaſier to Moluques, without going to the ſtraight

of Forna, and Daryē, that they might paſſe more eaſier to Moluques, without going to ye ſtraight of Magellan. And they ſayling on that coaſt diſcouered this fayre Promentary, whereas ſetting foote on lande they found the place ſo fayre and temperate; although it be but .340. Degrées of longitude minute .0. and eight of latitude, mynute .0. that they there ſtayed, to the which place ſince are gone other Portingals, with a number of ſhips and people, and by ſucceſſion of tyme, hauinge allured the people of the countrey by giftes, and pacified them, they made a holde named Caſtell Marin,
               Caſtel Marin. Fermanbow. & ſince they haue edified another néere vnto this named Fermanbow, trading there one with another. The Portingals laade cotton, wild beaſtes ſkynnes, ſpices, and among other things priſoners that the wild men of the countrey take in the warres of their enimies, the which they carrie into Portingall for to ſell.
         
         
            Of the Canibals as well of the mayne lande as of the Ilands, and of a tree named Acaion. Cap. 61.
            THis greate Promentary being this doubled and affronted with greate difficultie it behoued vs to attempt fortune and to ſhorten our way as much as was poſſible, not keping farre of from the mayne land, chiefly ceaſting ſomewhat néere to the Iland of S. Paule,
               The Ilrude of S. Paule. and other little Ilandes not inhabited neere to the main lande, whereas are the Canibals, the whiche countrey deuideth the King of Spayns lande from the King of Portingall, as hereafter ſhalbe ſhewed. Seing that we are come to theſe Canibals we will ſpeake our worde. This

people from the Caape S. Augustine, and beyond, néere to Marignan, is the moſte cruelleſt, and inhumayne people that are in America. Theſe imps eat moſt commonly humayne fleſh, as we do biefe or mutton, & haue therevnto more appetite and delight: and this is of a truthe, that when they haue any of their enimies in their hands, it is hard to get them from them, for the great deſire that they haue to eate them, like Rauening Lyons. There is no beaſt in the wilderneſſe neither in the deſartes of Africa or Arabia, that longeth ſo ſore or that is ſo gredie of humayne fleſh, as theſe wild and brutiſh people. Alſo ther is no nation that can be acquaynted w
                  •
               th them, neither Chriſtians nor others: And none can trade into their countrey without leauing of pledges, ſo miſtruſtfull they are, thinking themſelues of more credit than others. For this cauſe the Spaniards and Portingals, haue played them ſome ill tricks, in memorial whereof, whē that they may get any of them, God knoweth how they are handled, for there is no other way but death, and ſo to be eaten and deuoured of theſe imps. Therefore there is continuall warre betwene them and theſe people, and many Chriſtians they haue deuoured. Theſe Canibals haue on their lips,
                  Continuall warre betwene the Spaniardes and the Canibals.
                  The fruitfulneſſe of their countrey.
                ſtones gréene and white as the other wild mē haue, but without compariſon more longer, for they deſcende euen to their breaſt. Moreouer the countrey is fruitefull ynough, better than belongeth to ſuch wicked beaſts, for it beareth great quantitie of fruits, hearbes and wholſome rootes, with a great nomber of trées, named by them Acaion, bearing a fruit as big as my fiſt, faſhioned lyke a Gooſe egge: ſome of them therewith make a kind of beuerage, although the fruite is not good to eate, at the top of this fruite groweth a kynde of nuts, made lyke a Cunneys tayle, & the kernel within is very good to eate, after

it hath had ye heat of the fier. The ſhel is very ful of oyle, hauing a ſharpe taaſte, with the which the wilde men maye make more ſtore and plenty, than we can of our nuts: the leafe of this trée is lyke to the leafe of a peare trée, a little more pointed and red at the ende: the barcke of this trée, is tauney and bitter, the wilde men put this woode to no vſe, for that it is ſomewhat tender and ſofte. In the Ilandes of the Canibals, whereas there is greate plenty of theſe trées, they cut the woode to burne, for that they haue little other wood, and alſo Gaiac. This much as touching this trée Acaion. There are alſo other trées whereof the fruite is daungerous to eate, among the which there is one named Haouay. Furthermore this countrey is full of hills & mountaynes,Haouay a venemous tree. with good mynes of golde. There is a high and riche mountayne, where theſe wilde men get their gréene ſtones, that they beare at their lips, and therefore it is not vnpoſſible, but that there may be founde emerauldes and other riches, if this obſtinat people woulde permit, that we might go in ſa
               
                  •
               egarde: lykewiſe, there is founde white Marbell,The riches of the countrey of Canibals. and blacke, Iaſper, and Porphire. And in al this countrey from the Caape S. Auguſtine, vnto the Ryuer of Marignan, they vſe all one manner of liuing, as the others doe, at Caape de Fria: the ſame Riuer ſeparateth the lande of Perou, from the Canibals,
               
                  The Ryuer of Marignan ſeparateth Perou from the Canibals.
                  Aurelane a Riuer of Perou. The Ilād of the Trinitie very riche.
                and hath in bredth at the mouth fiftene leagues or thereabout, with ſome Ilandes peopled and riche in golde, for the wilde men haue founde, a meane howe to trye it, and to make broade rings lyke to buckles, and others, that they hang on their noſtrels, and on their chéekes, the whiche they carrie for magnificence. The Spaniardes ſay, that the greate Ryuer that commeth from Perou, named Aurelane, and this,

do méete: vpon this Riuer there is another Iland named the Trinitie, diſtant ten degrées from the lyne, hauing in length about .30. leagues, & in breadth about .8. leagues, the which is the richeſt Ilande that may be found in any parte, for that it beareth al kinde of mettals. But for that the Spaniardes, landing there many tymes for to bring it to their ſubiection and obedience, haue cruelly handled the inhabitantes, therefore they haue bene rudtly repulſed, and the better parte deſtroyed. This Ilande bringeth forth abundance of a certaine fruite,A kinde of tree like to a Palme tree. the trée whereof is lyke to a Palme trée, with the which they make drinke. Furthermore, there is founde good Frankinſence, and Gaiac: lykewiſe in many other Ilandes néere to the mayne lande. Alſo there is betwene Perou, and the Canibals, many Ilandes named Canibals, ſomewhat néere to Zamana, of which the chiefeſt is diſtant from the Spaniſh Iland .30. leagues, al the which Ilands are vnder the obedience of a King, whome they call Saſsique, of his ſubiectes he is wel obeyed. The greateſt Iland hath in length .60. leagues, and of bredth .48. rude and ful of mountaynes, almoſt comparable to the Iland of Corſa, in the which their King kepeth cuſtomably. The wilde men of this Ilande are mortall enimies to the Spaniards, after ſuch a ſorte, that they can by no meanes trade.
            Alſo theſe people are vglie to beholde, hye minded, and couragious, very ſubiect to thefte, there are many trées of Gaiac, and another that beareth a fruite of the greatneſſe of an Egge, very fayre to behold, neuertheleſſe it is venemous, therefore they temper therewith their arrowes, that they vſe to ayde them ſelues with againſte theyr enimies in the iuyce or lykor of this fruite.
            There is yet another, of the whiche the lykor that commeth forth is poyſon, notwithſtanding the roote

is very good to eate, and therewith they make breade as in America, although that the truncke, the branches, & the leaues do not greatly differ. The reaſon why this trée ſhoulde beare bothe ſuſtenance and poyſon, I leaue to the Philoſophers to iudge & contemplate. Their vſage in warre is, as the Americans and other Canibals, of which we haue ſhewed.
         
         
            Of the Riuer of Amazones, otherwiſe named Aurelane, by the which ye maye ſayle into the countrey of Amazones, and into Fraunce Antartike. Cap. 62.
            WHileſt that I haue pen in hande for to write of places diſcouered and inhabited beyonde our Equinoctiall, betwene the South and the Weſt, for to bring things to light, and to giue more euident knowledge, I am determined to ſet out in writing a voyage as farre, as difficile and hard and moſt dangerouſly aduentured of the Spaniards, as wel by water as by lande vnto the Territorie of the peaceable ſea,The ſeapacifick or peaceable or the ſea of Magellan. otherwiſe called Mare Magellan, or the ſea of Magellan, wheras are the Ilandes of Moluques and others. And for that ye ſhall note this better, ye ſhall vnderſtande, that the King of Spayne hath vnder his obedience much lande in the Weſt Indies, as wel in Ilands as mayn land at Perou & America, the which by ſucceſſion of time he hath obtained and gotten, by which meanes at this day he receiueth great profit from thence. Now among others, a Spaniſh Captayne being in his princes behofe at Perou,
               Mhe lying of the Riuer of Plate. minded on a day to diſcouer as wel by lande as by water to the Riuer of Plate, the which is diſtant from Caape S. Auguſtine. 700. Leagues beyonde the line, and from the ſayd Caape
               
to the Ilandes of Perou, about thrée hundreth leagues. This Captayne not waying the difficultie that there was in the long way, neither in the exceſſible high mountaines, neyther yet in the people nor in the wilde beaſts, but onely in the executing of this high enterpriſe, beſide the wonderfull riches, wich being done he ſhould get him ſelfe an immortall fame, for him and all his poſteritie.
            This Captayne hauing therefore made all things in a redineſſe, and in good order as the caſe required, carying with him certayne Marchandiſe whereby to get vittails by the way, and other munitions, hauing in his company fiftie Spaniards, with a certayne number of ſlaues, for to labor and to doe other ſeruice, with certayne Indians, that had bene made Chriſtians, as well for to conduct them, as for to intreprete the languages ſet forward with certaine Caruels or ſmal Skifs on the Ryuer of Aurelana,
               The lying and wonderfull greatneſſe of the Riuer of Aurelana, the which I may well teſtifie is the moſte longeſt and largeſt, that is in all the worlde, hys breadth is .59. leagues, and his length more than a thouſande. Many call it the ſwéete ſea, the which procedeth from the ſides of the high mountaynes of Molubeba, with the Ryuer of Marignan: notwithſtanding their entrie or beginning is diſtant .104. leagues one from another, and they are mixed aboue ſixe hundreth leagues, within the playne countrey, the ſea or floode entering in aboue .40. leagues.
            
               The originall of Nyll.This Ryuer increaſeth at certayne tymes of the yere as doeth Nill, that paſſeth by Egypte, proceding from the mountaynes of the Moone, according to the opinion of ſome, the which alſo I thinke to be ſo. It was named Aurelana, by the name of him, that firſte made vpon it a long Nauigation.Aurelana or the Riuer of Amazones. Neuertheleſſe, before it was diſcouered by ſome, that haue named it in their Cardes, the Ryuer of Amazones: it is very dangerous bicauſe of certayne

rockes, and other inconueniences which cannot be auoyded but with greate difficultie. Being entered ſomewhat farre into the Ryuer, there are certayne fayre Ilands, of whiche ſome are peopled, the others not.
            Moreouer this Riuer is dangerous all a long, for that it is peopled as wel in the Ilandes as on the banckes, with many ſtrange and Barbarous people, the whiche of a long tyme haue had enimitie and hatred to Spanyardes, and others ſtrangers, fearing leaſte they ſhoulde aborde theyr countrey, and ſpoyle them. Alſo if that by miſfortune they get any, they kill them without remiſſion. And eate them roſted and boyled, as they doe other fleſh.
            Therefore taking ſhip in one of theſe Ilandes of Perou,
               The Ilād of the Holy Croſſe. named the Holy Croſſe, in the greate Sea, for to get the ſtraight of this floode or Ryuer, with a fayre winde they ſet of, coaſting néere ynough to the lande, for to vew and knowe the countrey, the people, and for many other commodities. Coaſting then in their Nauigation nowe héere now there as the commoditie did permit, the wilde men of the countrey ſhewed themſelues in greate number on the bankes, with certayne ſignes of admiration, ſéeing this ſtrange Nauigatiō, and array of people, veſſels and munitions proper for warre. In the meane tyme, the Nauigantes were not a little aſtonyed for their parte for to ſée ſuch a multitude of vnciuill people and altogether brutiſh, which by their countenance ſhewed, that they would deſtreſſe them, the which occaſion cauſed them to ſayle & rowe a long time without caſting anker, or ſetting foote on lande. Notwithſtanding, at the laſt, famine and other neceſſities, cauſed them in the ende to ſtrike ſayle and let fall anker. The which they hauing done, about a handgunne ſhot from the lande, there reſted no other thing, but with flattering ſignes, and

other meanes to winne the fauor of the wild men, for to get ſome vittails, and ſpace to reſte their weary bones. So that ſome of the wild men being in their little boates made of the barcke of trées, being allured with theſe fayr ſhewes, did ieopard themſelues to approch, not without ſome doubt, hauing neuer ſene Chriſtiā come ſo néere to their limites. Notwithſtanding their feare, the Spaniards made ſigne of more friendſhip, ſhewing them kniues and other ſmall Iron workes ſhining, the which cauſed thē to approche. And after yt they had made vnto them preſentes of ſmall value, this wilde people went with al diligence to purchaſe and get them ſome vittails, ſo at length they brought them great plenty of fiſh, fruits of maruelous excellencie according as ye coūtrey brought forth. Among other things one of theſe wild men hauing bene the day before in ſkirmiſhe,The ſtature of theſe wild mē. had taken foure of his enimies Canibals, and preſented to them two members roſted, the which the Spaniards refuſed. Theſe wild men as they ſayde, were of high ſtature, fayre bodied and all naked as others are, bearing on their ſtomackes broade péeces of Golde, the others greate péeces ſhining of fine Golde well pooliſhed in forme of rounde looking Glaſſes. Ye nede not demaūde, if that the Spaniards change their marchandiſe for ſuch riches, I beleue truely they eſcaped not ſo, at the leaſt they did their good will. Now theſe poore Pilgrims, being thus refreſhed and vitteled for that tyme, reſeruing ſomewhat for after claps, before they tooke their leaue, they gaue more preſentes as before, and then for the continuance of their voyage it was nedefull to ſet ſayle and to ſhorten waye. From thence they ſayled more than a hundreth leagues, before they tooke lande, beholding about the Riuer ſide diuers kindes and a multitude of wild people, as before, the which I wil not ſtaye

to deſcribe for to auoide prolixitie: but it ſhall ſuffice to vnderſtand the place, where as at the ſeconde time they aboorded.
         
         
            Hovv certaine Spanyardes arriued into a countrey, vvhere they found Amazones. Cap. 63.
            THe ſaide Spanyardes did ſo much by their iourneys, that they arriued in a Countrey, where as were inhabiting Amazones,
               Amazones of America. the which would neuer haue bene thought, for that Hiſtoriographers haue made therof no mention, bicauſe they knew not this countrey late found out. Some may ſay, that they are not Amazoniſts, but as for me I iudge them ſuche, ſéeing that they liue euen ſo, as we finde the Amazoniſts of Aſia to haue liued. And before paſſing further, ye ſhall note, that theſe Amazones of which we ſpeake, are retired, inhabiting in certaine Ilands which are to them as ſtrong holdes, hauing alwayes perpetuall warre with certaine people, without any other exerciſe, euen as thoſe of whom haue ſpoken the Hiſtoriographers. Nowe then theſe warlike women of our America being fortified in Ilandes, are moſt commonly aſſailed of their enimies that ſéeke them on the water, with barkes and other veſſels, and there they fight with bowes and arrowes: contrariwiſe, the women defend them with the like couragiouſly, with threatnings, noiſe and countenaunces, the moſt fearfull that is poſſible: they make their bulwarkes of defence with mighty great ſhelles of Torterels. And bicauſe it commeth to our purpoſe, to ſpeake of the Amazoniſts, we will write ſomewhat in this place. The poore people find no great comfort among theſe rude and ſauage women.

I finde by the hiſtories, that there are .iij. ſorts of Amazones,
               Thre ſorts of Amazones. all a like, differing only in places & dwellings. The moſt ancieſt ſort were in Affrica, among ye which were Gorgoniſts, that had Meduſe for their Quéene. The other were in Scythia, néere to the riuer of Tanais, which ſince haue raigned in a part of Aſia, néere to the riuer of Hermodoon: and the third ſort of Amazones, are thoſe which we do treat of. Ther is diuers opinions why they were called Amazones. The moſt common is, for bicauſe that theſe women did burne their breſts in their youth, to be more apt in the warre.Many opiniōs on the naming and Etimology of Amazones. The which I finde very ſtraunge, and reporte me to medicines whether they can burne thoſe partes without death, knowing that they are tender, and alſo néere to ye heart, neuertheleſſe the moſt part are of this opinion. If it were ſo, I wold thinke that for one that eſcapeth death, there dieth a hundreth. Others take the Etymologie of this vowell A. priuatiue, and of Maza, that ſignifieth bread, for that they liue not with bread, but with other things, which is as abſurde as the others: for in that time they might call many that liued without bread Amazones, as the Troglodites and many others, in like maner all the Indians. The others of A. priuatiue & Mazos, as thoſe that haue bene noriſhed wtout womans milke, the which is moſt likelieſt to be true, of which opinion is Philoſtratus,
               Philoſtratus. or elſe of a nimphe named Amazoni, or of an other named Amazone, virgin to Diana, and Quéene of Epheſus, which I do better beleue, thā burning of their paps or breſts, let them that liſt, diſpute of the contrary.Amazones are warlike womē
                Wel, how ſo euer it is, theſe women are named warlike: and moreouer ye ſhall note that the Scithians which we name Tartarians, being driuen out of Egipt, ſubdued the better parte of Aſia, and made it all tributary, and vnder their obedience. In the meane time

whileſt the Scythians remained in this long cōqueſt, and expedition of Aſia, their wiues being wearied of their ſo long abſence, (as the good Penelope, of hir huſband Vlixes,) did admoniſhe them by many gracious letters and meſſages to returne, otherwiſe, that this long & vntollerable abſence wold cōſtraine them to make new aliances with their next neighbors, conſidering that the auncient lignage of the Scithians began to decay. Notwithſtāding without hauing regarde to the ſwéete requeſtes of their wiues, kept & inhabited Aſia with an obſtinate corage,Aſia tributarie to Scithia, the terme of .500. yeares. yea vntil the time that Ninus did deliuer it from this miſerable thraldome & bondage. During which time, theſe women neuer made aliaunce of Matrimonie with their neighbors, eſteming and thinking that Matrimonie was not a meane of libertie but of thraldome. But they with one accord & vertuous enterpriſe, conſented to take their weapons & begin warre, thinking yt they were deſcended of that mighty Mars, god of warres, which they executed ſo vertuouſly vnder ye gouernement of Lampedo & Martheſia, their Quéenes yt gouerned one after another,Lampedo and Martheſia, the firſt Quenes of Amazones. that they not only defended their coūtrey frō inuaſion of their enimies, in mainteining their liberty, but alſo made many goodly conqueſts in Europe & in Aſia, euen vnto ye riuer of which we ſhewed before. In which place, ſpecially at Epheſus, they cauſed to be made many caſtles and holds. This being done, they ſent ſome of their bāds into their countrey, with the riches, bootie, and ſpoile of their enimies, and the reſt remained in Aſia. Finally theſe good women for to kéepe their ſtocke and poſteritie, did willingly offer them ſelues to their neighbors, without any other kind of mariage. And of the fruit that procéeded, they killed the male children, kéeping alwayes the female for the warres, the feat wherof they wold learne

them with al diligence, they exerciſe the feats of chiualry and hunting aboue al other things. Their weapōs were bowes and arowes, with certain bucklers, of which Virgill ſpeaketh of in his Aeneidos, when that during the ſiege of Troy,
               How the Amazones of America liued. they went to helpe the Troyans againſt the Greekes. Some ſay alſo that they were the firſt that begā to ride a horſſe, and to fight on horſebacke. Well, now it is time to returne to the Amazones of America, and to ye 
               Spanyards. In that part they are ſeperated from men, and frequent them very ſeldome, but at ſometime ſecrete in the night, or at ſome appoynted time. Theſe women inhabite in litle lodgings and caues againſt the rockes, liuing with fiſhe and wilde beaſts, with rootes & ſome good fruits that this land bringeth forth. They kil their male children incōtinently after they are deliuered, or elſe they deliuer him to ye mā, to whom they think it doth pertain. If it be a female, they retaine it to them ſelues, euen ſo as did the firſt Amazones. They make warre ordinarily againſt ſome other nation.Hovv theſe Amazones put their enimies to death. And thoſe whom they take in the warre, they vſe moſt cruelly and inhumainely for to make them die, they hang them by one leg on a trée, and leauing them after this ſort, they goe their wayes, and if it happen that they be not dead, when they returne, they will ſhoote at them aboue ten thouſande times, but they eate them not as others doe, but they burne them vntill they be conſumed to aſhes.The originall of the Amazones of America are vncertaine. Furthermore, theſe women when that they approche to fight, they make maruellous cries & ſhootes for to affray their enimies. Of the originall of theſe Amazones in that countrey, it is vncertain: ſome thinke that after the warre of Troy, for thither they went (as we haue before ſhewed) vnder the conducte of Pantaſilla, they ſcattered abrode, and wandred héere and there. Others think that they are come from certain places

of Grecia i
                  •
                
               Affrica, from whēce a cruell king chaſed them. We haue many hiſtories of their acts and feats of warre, and of other women, the which I will leaue for to continue our purpoſe: for there are many Hiſtories, Greekes, Latines and others, that ſhewe thereof at large. We haue begon to ſhewe how that the Spanyardes remained there but a while, for to reſt them onely,How the Spaniardes arriued into the countrey of Amazones, and how they were receiued. and to get victuals, for that theſe women as all amazed to ſée ſuche an aray (which vnto them was ſtraunge) came together aboue ten thouſand of them, in leſſe ſpace than thrée houres, maids and women all naked, ſauing bowes and arrowes in their faſtes, beginning to make a great noiſe, as though they had ſéene their enimies, ſo that they began to looſe of their arrowes: the which the Spanyards ſéeing, wold make no reſiſtance but retiring, wayed their ankers, and hoiſed ſaile: but at their departing ſaying Adew, they ſaluted them with certaine gunſhot, among the thickeſt of them, ſo that theſe women eſcaped not without ſome loſſe and detriment.
         
         
            Hovv the Spanyardes continued their voyage to Morpion, and of the riuer of Plate. Cap. 64.
            FRom thence they continuing their way, wel a Cxx. leagues, they knew by their Aſtrolobia,
               How the Spanyardes continued their voiage to Morpiō. what height the place was where they were. The which is ſo neceſſary for the good Nauigation, that thoſe that ſaile into farre Countreys, can haue no aſſurance of their voyage, if that this practiſe faile them: wherfore this Arte of the height of the Sunne excéedeth all other artes. And this cunning our elders haue greatly commended and practized, alſo Ptolome and other great authors. Theſe Spaniardes leauing their ſkiffes and caruels they ſunke them,

then euery man laded them ſelues with the reſt of the victailes, munitions, and other marchaundiſe, chiefly the ſlaues that were there for that purpoſe, they went for the terme of .ix. dayes, by and ouer mountaines and dales decked with all ſortes of gréene trées, herbes, floures and fruites. In ſo much that at the laſt by their iorneys, they came to a great riuer procéeding from the highe Mountaines, wheras they found other wilde men, among the which ſome for feare fled their wayes, others climed vpon trées, and there remained in their lodgings none but a fewe olde men, to the which in ſigne of friendſhip and fauor, they made preſents with certaine kniues and glaſſes, the which to them were agréeable, ſo that they went and called the others, ſhewing them that theſe ſtrangers newe arriued were ſome great Lordes, that in no wiſe would hurt them, but make to them preſents of their riches. The wilde men being moued with this liberalitie went to fetche them victails, as fiſh, veniſon, and fruites according as the countrey brought forth. The which the Spanyardes ſéeing, were minded there to paſſe away the winter, & in the meane time to diſcouer the commodities of the countrey, and to ſée if that there might be foūd any Mine of golde or ſiluer, or any other thing wherby they might gather any profit. By this meanes they remained there .vij. months together, and ſéeing things fell not out according to their mind, they tooke their iorney forward, hauing to guide them .viij. of theſe wild mē, that brought them on their way about .lxxx. leagues, paſſing alwayes through the midſt of other wilde men, more rude & leſſe tractable thā they before, for the which their guides wer vnto them as neceſſary as profitable. Finally, they knew of a truth, that they were come to ye height of a place named Morpion, then inhabited of Portingals, ſome of them

being weary of ſo long a voyage, were determined to repaire to the place before named: others to ye cōtrary, ſaid it were better to perſeuer & goe forwarde to the riuer of Plate, diſtant farther by land .300. leagues. In which,Deuiſion of their company, for to k
                     •
                  pe on to the riuer of Plate. for to make agréement according to thaduiſe of the captain, the one part kept their way to Plate, and the others drue toward Morpion. Néere to which place, theſe poore pilgrims beheld if they could eſpie any booty, vntil that they found a riuer running at the foote of a hill, in which they that dranke,A very good Mine of ſiluer. did perceiue certaine ſtones ſhining like ſiluer, of the which they bare a certaine quantitie to Morpion, diſtant frō thēce .18. leagues, which place after proofe was found to bear good & natural ſiluer. And ſince ye king of Portingall hath had from thence an infinite deale of ſiluer after that he had ſoūded the Mine, and brought it to good perfection. After that theſe Spaniardes had reſted thē ſelues at Morpion, with the Portingall their neighbors, they ſet forwarde to folow the others, & to kepe the way to Plate, being diſtāt from Morpion, by ſea .250. leagues,
                  Mines of gold and ſiluer.
                  Plate a river, and why it is ſo named.
                and by land .300. wheras the Spanyards haue found many Mines of golde and ſiluer, and haue named it Plate, which ſignifieth in our language, ſiluer. And for to inhabite there, they haue edified certaine caſtles and holdes: and ſince ſome of thē with other Spanyards, newly come to that place, not content with this fortune, haue enterpriſed to ſaile euen to the ſtraight of Magellan,
               The ſtraight of Magellan. ſo named by him that firſt found it out which ioyneth with America toward the South. And from thence entreth into the peaceable Sea on the other ſide of America,
               The peaceable ſea. where as they haue found many faire Ilands: and in the end they came to Moluques,
               Ilands of Moluques inhabited by the Spanyardes. which they kepe and inhabite
                  •
               t this day. By the which meanes there cometh a great tribute of golde and ſiluer vnto the King of Spaine. This muche in effect of this voyage, the which I thought good to note

by the way, being ſhewed me in my Nauigation, by thoſe that of a truthe had bene in the voyage.
         
         
            Hovve the landes of the king of Spaine, and of Portingall are ſeparated. Cap. 65.
            THe kings of Spaine and of Portingall, after that they had obtained many happy and fortunate victories, as well in the Eaſt, as in the Weſt in places by ſea and land, not before knowne or diſcouered, deliberated for the greater aſſurance to deuide and limit al the countrey that they had conquered,The cape of three poynts. and alſo to auoide quarels that héere after might riſe, as they did of the mine of gold that they had at the Cape of thrée points which is in Guiney as alſo the Ilands of Cape verd, and many other places. Alſo euery one may know, yt one kingdome wil not haue two kings, no more than the world wil receiue two Sunnes.The lands of the king of Spaine in the Indies. So it is that from the riuer of Marignan, betwene America and the Ilands of Antilles, that ioyne at Perou, vnto Terra Florida, néere to newe found lande, belongeth to the King of Spaine, the which hath alſo great Lordſhip in America, comming from Perou toward the South, on the Weſt ſide towarde Marignan, as is before ſhewed.The lande that the king of Portingal hath in the Indies. To the King of Portingal did befall all that is from the ſaid riuer of Marignan towards the South vnto the riuer of Plate, which is .36. degrees from the Equinoctiall. And the firſt place towarde Magellan, is named Morpion, the ſecond Mahanhoc, in the which place hath bene found many mines of golde and ſiluer. The thirde Port Sigoura, néere to Caape S. Auguſtine.
                Fourthly the point of Croneſt Mon
                     •
                  ou, caſtel Marin, and Fernanbow; bordering the Canibals of America. To declare particularly

the places from one riuer to an other, as Curtana, Caribes, néere to the ſwéete or freſhe riuer, and royall. Likewiſe their lyings with other things, I wil forbeare at this time. It ſhall ſuffice onely to know, that in thoſe places before named, the Portingals are inhabited, and cā
               tel how to entertaine the wilde men of the countrey, ſo that they liue togither in peace, & trade many riche marchandiſe. And there they haue bartered and builded houſes and caſtles to reſiſt their enimies. Now to retourne to the Prince of Spaine, he hath done the like for his part,Countreys not yet diſcouered. the which is as we haue ſhewed from Marignan towards the Weſt vnto Moluques, as wel on this ſide, as beyond in the Weſt, & in the ſea peaceable, the Ilands of theſe two ſeas, and Perou in the maine land, ſo that altogether extendeth of a great compaſſe, beſide the countrey adioyning that in time may be found out, as Cartagera, Cata, Palmaria, Pariſa, great and little. The which two nations, ſpecially the Portingals haue diſcouered muche land in the Eaſt countrey for their trade, the which notwithſtanding they enioy not, as they do many places of America and Perou: For to beare rule in that Countrey, they muſt get the loue and fauor of the Indians: otherwiſe if that they reuolt, they will deſtroy all that they finde, ſo yt they muſt frame themſelues ſo to their wayes, that they by no wiſe may be offēded. Now ye muſt note that their attempts and diſcouerings, was not without great bloudſhed: ſpecially of poore Chriſtians, that haue ieoperded their liues without hauing reſpect to the cruell inhumanitie of theſe people. To be ſhort, there is no difficultie be it neuer ſo daungerous, that withdraweth a mannes manly heart. We ſée in our Europe, how muche the Romaines at the beginning, minding to enlarge their Empire but with a litle land, to the reſpect of that which

hath bene gotten within this ſixtie yeares, haue ſhed the bloud as well of them ſelues as of their enimies. What furious and horrible diſſipations of lawes, diſciplines & honeſt conuerſation hath raigned throughout the world, biſide the ciuile warres of Sylla and Marius, Cina, and of Pompey, of Brutus, of Anthony & Auguſtus, more hurtfull than the reſt: alſo hath folowed the ruine and decay of Italy by the Gothes, Hunns, and Wandallians, which alſo haue inuaded Aſia, and ouerthrowne the kingdome of Grece, to the which purpoſe, Ouid ſéemeth to haue ſpoken theſe woords.
            
               We ſee hovv things doe chaunge and come to paſſe,
               And novv a people raigne that nothing vvas.
               And he, the vvhich had might and poure,
               Dothe them homage, obey, and eke honoure.
            
            To conclude, all humaine creatures are ſubiecte to chaunge more or leſſe according as they be, rich or poore, high or lowe, little or great.
         
         
            The deuiſion of the Weſt Indies in three partes. Cap. 66.
            BEfore that I paſſe any farther to deſcribe this countrey by good right (as I thinke) named Fraunce Antarctike, or before America for the reaſons that we haue alleaged, bicauſe of his largeneſſe which is without compariſon, I am minded (for that I would the reader ſhould the better vnderſtand it) to deuide it in thrée parts: for ſince the time that other Countreis haue bene diſcouered, all the Countrey of America, Perou, Florida, and Canada and other places adiacent, to goe from the ſtraight of Magellan, haue bene cōmonly called the weſt Indies, and is for bicauſe the people liue al naked, barbarous

and rude, as thoſe that are yet in the Eaſt Indies. The which Countrey meriteth well the name of India, of the floud or riuer Indus, as we haue before ſhewed. This fair riuer entring into the Eaſt ſea called Indique by ſeuen mouthes or openings, as Nyll doth into the ſea Meditarium, taketh his originall of the Mountaines Arbiciennes and Beciennes. Alſo the riuer Gangis in like caſe entreth in by .v. openings into this ſea, deuiding India into two partes, ſeparating the one from the other. Therfore this region being ſo farre from America, for the one is in the Eaſt, and the other comprehēdeth from the South vnto the weſt, we cannot ſay that others thā thoſe that haue firſt diſcouered theſe landes, haue added this name of India, ſéeing the beaſtly behauior and crueltie of this people, ſo brutiſh without faith & without law and not vnlike to diuers people of the Indies of Aſia and of Ethiopia, of which Plinie maketh moſt ample mention in his natural hiſtory. By this meanes hath America obtained the name of India to the likeneſſe of that which is in Aſia, for yt they agrée in maners, beaſtly brutiſhneſſe, & other things, as we haue before ſhewed of the Occidē
                  tal people, to thoſe of the Eaſt parts. Therefore the firſt part of this land, containeth toward the South vnto the ſtraight of Magellan, which is .52. degrées .30. minutes of the Equinoctiall line, I meane of the Auſtreall line, comprehending no part of the other land that is beyond the ſtraight, the which was neuer knowne nor inhabited of vs, ſauing onely from that ſtraight comming from the riuer of Plate. From thence drawing towarde the Weſt, far betwéene theſe two Seas, are the prouinces of Patalia, Paranaguacu, Margageas, Patagones or region of Giaunts, Morpion, Tabaiares, Toupinambou, Amazones, the countrey of Braſil, vnto ye 
               Cape of S. Auguſtin,
               
the which is .viij. degrées beyonde the line, the Countrey of Canibals, Anthropophages, the which regions are comprehended in America, compaſſed with the Ocean ſea, and on the other ſide toward the South of the peaceable ſea, which is otherwiſe the ſea of Magellan. We will therfore ende this Indian land, at the riuer of Amazones, the which euen as Ganges maketh the ſeperation of one Indies from another towards the Eaſt: alſo this notable floud, the which hath of bredth .50. leagues, may make ſeparation of India, America, and of Perou. The ſeconde parte ſhall begin from the ſayde riuer, containing many kingdomes and Prouinces at Perou, the ſtraight of land containing Daryen, Furna, Popaian, Anzerma, Carapa, Quimbaya, Cali, Paſta, Quito, Canares, Cuzco, Chila, Patalia, Parias, Temiſtitan, Mexica, Cataia, Panuco, the Pigmeis euē to Florida, which lieth .25. degrées of latitude on this ſide the line. I leaue the Ilands out, not comprehending them, although that they are of no leſſe cōpaſſe and greatneſſe, than Sicilia, Corſica, Cypris or Candia, nor yet of leſſe value, therefore ſhall this parte be limitted towards the South to Florida. There reſteth now only to deſcribe the third parte, the which ſhall begin at Noua Eſpania, or new Spaine, comprehending all the prouinces of Anauac, Ʋcatan, Eulhuacan, Xalixa, Thalco, Mixtecapan, Tezeuco, Guzanes Apalachen, Pancho, Aute, and the kingdome of Micuacan, from Florida vnto the land of Bacalles, which is a great Region, vnder the which alſo is comprehended the land of Canada, and the prouince of Chicora, (which is .33. degrées on this ſide the line) the land of Labrodor, newe found land, compaſſed with the froſtie Sea on the Northe ſide. This Countrey of the Weſt Indies being thus deuided, not ſpecifying many things from the one ende to the other, that is to witte,

many things frō the one end to the other: that is to wit, from the ſtraight of Magellan, at the which we haue begon, vnto the ende of the fartheſt land of the Indies, it is more then .4800. leagues of length, and by this ye may deſcerne the bredthe, excepting the ſtraight of Parias before named, therfore they are now called ye great Indies, being without compariſon more greater than the Eaſt Indies. As touching the reſt, I deſire the reader to take in good parte this little deuiſion, vntil it pleaſe God to giue vs meane to make one more greater. Likewiſe to treate more at large of this countrey, but thus much I thought néedefull in the meane time to bring to light.
         
         
            Of the Iland of Rats. Cap. 67.
            LEauing theſe Canibals for the ſmall comfort yt there was to be had, hauing the winde at South, we ſailed to a very faire Iland, diſtant frō the line .iiij. degrées, the which is very daungerous in the aboording of it, for it is no leſſe daungerous to a front thā ſome great Cape or Promentary for that it entreth farre into the ſea, and for rockes that are about it, and ranged on the coaſt ſide. This Iland was vnluckely found out to the miſhappe of thoſe that firſt did diſcouer it. Some Portingall ſhip paſſing by on that coaſt, for default of good gouernment,The ſhipwrak of a Portingal. ſtriking againſt a rocke néere to this Iland, brake in pieces and drowned, excepting .xxiij. mē that ſaued them ſelues in this Iland, in which place they remained the terme of two yeares, wheras they died only two excepting, which in the meane time liued with Rattes; Birdes, and other beaſtes. And as on a time there paſſed by a ſhip of Normandie, that returned from America, they ſet their ſkiffe out for to reſt in that Ilande, whereas they found theſe

two poore Portingalls, that were onely lefte of this ſhipwrake,The Ilande of Rats & why it was ſo named. the which they brought away with them. And theſe Portingals had named it the Iland of Rats, bicauſe of the multitude of Rats of diuers kindes that there are, ſo that they ſay, that their companions died onely being vexed with theſe vermin. Theſe beaſtes liue with egs of Torterels, that they make on the Riuage of the Sea, and with birds egs, wherof there is great ſtore. Alſo when we went for to ſeke freſh water, whereof we had ſuch greate nede, that ſome amongſt vs were conſtrayned to drinke their owne water or bryn, the which dured the terme of thrée monethes, and the famyn foure moneths, we ſawe there ſo many birdes, and ſo priuie, that we might haue laden therewith our ſhips, neuertheleſſe we coulde not recouer freſh water, vnleſſe we had entred very farre into the coūtrey. As for the reſt it is fayre decked with many fayre trées, being gréene the moſte parte of the yeare, euen like a goodly gréene medowe in the moneth of May, although it be within foure degrées of the lyne. Though that this Iland is not inhabited,The cōmodites of the Ilande of Rats. yet it is not vnpoſſible no more than others in the Zone, as the Ilandes of S. Homer, vnder the Equinoctial, & others. And if it wer inhabited, I am wel aſſured, that it would make one of the faireſt places in al the Worlde and riche, there might be made very good Suger, Spices and other things of great value.The Zone betwene two Tropickes are inhabited. I know well that many Coſmographers haue had this opinion that the Zone betwene the two Tropickes was vnhabited for the extreame heate of the Sunne, notwithſtanding yt experience ſheweth the cōtrary without any farther contention, euen as the Zones to the twoo Poles, bicauſe of the colde. Heroditus and Solon, affirmeth that the hils Hiperbores, are inhabited, and likewiſe Canada, drawing néere to the North: and other count yet

more néere approching the colde Sea,A boundance of Rats. of the whiche we haue alredy ſpoken. Therefore let vs returne to our Ilād of Rats. This place by good right is ſo named, for bicauſe of the abundance of Rats that lyue there, of the whiche there are diuers kindes, one kinde among the reſte that the wilde men of America eat, named in their language Sohiatan, and they haue their hayre gray,
                  Sohiatan a kind of Rats.
                  Hiexouſou another kinde of Rats.
                the fleſh good & delicate, like a little leueret. There is another named Hiexouſou, greater than the others, but not ſo good to eat, they are as great as thoſe of Egypt, called Pharaos Rats. Others there are as greate as Wezels, that the wild mē eate not, for bicauſe that when they are dead, they ſtinke like carion, the which I haue ſene: alſo there are founde diuerſitie of Serpentes named Gerara,
               Gerara a kinde of Serpent. Theirab. the which are not good to eate, but there are others named Theirab, that are good, for of theſe Serpentes there are diuers kindes, that are nothing venemous, nor like to thoſe of our Europe, ſo that their biting is neither mortall, nor any thing dangerous: there are to be ſene redde ones ſcaled of diuers coloures: lykewiſe I haue ſene gréene ones, as gréene as the bay leafe, they are not ſo greate of body as the others, notwithſtanding they, are very long. Therefore it is not to be marueled at, how theſe wild men there aboutes eate theſe Rats without daunger, and Serpents euen as they do Lezardes, as before we haue ſhewed. Likewiſe néere to this Ilande is founde a kynde of fiſh, and alſo vpon the coaſte of America very daungerous, alſo much feared and redoubted of the wilde men, for that ſhe is a rauening fiſh, and as daungerous as a Lyon or a Woulfe famiſhed: this fiſh is named Houperou, in their language, and eateth other fiſh in the water, excepting one that is as greate as a little Carpe,

the which foloweth him alwayes, as if there were ſo
                  •••
                
               Sympathia or ſecrete loue betwene them, or elſe he foloweth him for to be preſerued and kept ſure from other fiſhes. So that the wilde men fiſhing all naked, as they do alwayes feare him, & not without a cauſe, for if he catche them, he will either drowne them, or ſtrangle them, or looke where he toucheth, he carieth away a piece with his téethe. Alſo they will take héede how to eate of this fiſhe: but if yt they can take him aliue, as they doe many times, for to be reuenged of him, they kill him with arrowes. Being therefore there a certaine ſpace of time, turning héere and there, I behelde many ſtraungs fiſhes that are not in Europe: among the which, I ſaw two very monſterous,A kinde of ſtraunge fiſhe. hauing vnder the throte like two Goates dugge
                  •
               , a thing on the chin; that for to ſée too, was like a Goates beard. Beholde how nature the great workemiſtreſſe, taketh pleaſure to varifie hir workes, as well by water as by land, as the cōning workman beutifleth his work, excéeding the common trade of his Arte and ſcience.
         
         
            Hovv vve continued our courſe, vvith a declaration of the Aſtrolabia of the ſea. Cap. 68.
            FOr bicauſe that we found no great conſolation, nor comfort of our trauails in this Iland. It behoued vs without any tarying, to hoiſe ſail with an indifferent winde,The euill diſpoſition of the aire by the Equinoctiall. vntill we came vnder the Equinoctiall, whereas the ſea and the windes are alſo vnconſtant. Alſo the aire is alwayes ſéene there troubled: if one ſide be faire, the other is troubled, and threatneth fowle weather, ſo that for the moſt parte there is raine and thunder, which can not be without danger to ye Nauigants. Now before they

come néere to this line, the good Nauigantes, Pilots, and Mariners, being expert, take counſel or beholde alwayes their Aſtrolabia, for to knewe the diſtance and lying of places from thence where they are. And bicauſe this ſo neceſſarie an Inſtrument for Nauigation commeth now in talke, I will ſpeake there of lightly by the way, for the inſtruction of thoſe that wil folow the ſea, being ſo great that the vnderſtanding of man cannot well comprehend it. And that which I ſpeake of the Aſtrolabia, as much may I ſay of the Rule or nedell of the ſea, by the whiche they may alſo conduct right the ſhip. This Inſtrument is ſo politike, that with a little paper or parchement, as broade as the palme of my hand, and certayne lines marked which ſignifieth the windes, and a little Iron with the which this Inſtrument is made, by his onely natural vertue that a ſtorie giueth him, and bloweth in his proper mouing, and without any touching, ſheweth where is the Eaſte, the Weaſte, the North and the South, and alſo al the thirtie two windes belonging to Nauigation, & it ſheweth them not onely in one place, but in al places of the worlde beſide other ſecretes, that I omit for this preſent, wherby it plainly appeareth that the Aſtrolabia, the nedell or compaſſe, with the Carde Marin, are well made, and that there ſhewing and perfection as is a wō
               derfull thing, for that a thing ſo great as the Sea, is pictured in ſo little a ſpace, and ſo agreable that by the ſame men vndertake to ſayle rounde about the worlde.The ſignification of the Aſtrolabia. Then the good and perfect Aſtrolabia, is no other thing than the Sphere preſſed and repreſented in a playn, accompliſhed in his compaſſe with .360. Degrées, that anſwere to the circute of the World, deuided in like number of degrées, the which agayne muſt be deuided into foure equal parts in our Inſtrument, that is .90. in euery parte, the whiche

afterwarde ye muſte parte by fiue and fiue, then holding your Inſtrument by the ring, rayſe it or hold it towarde the Sunne, ſo that the Sunne beames may enter in at the hole, then looking to your declination in what year
                  •
                moneth and day ye are in when ye take the height of the Sunne. And if the Sunne be towardes the South which is on the coaſt of America, and ye be towards the North, ye muſte take from your height as many degrées as the Sunne hath declined, from the line of ye which we ſpeke towarde the South. And if that in taking of the height of the Sunne, ye be towardes the South beyonde the Equinoctiall, and the Sunne be in the North, ye muſte in lyke manner take away ſo many degrées, as the Sunne hath declined from the lyne towarde our Pole, as for example: if ye take your height the Sunne being betwene the Equinoctiall and you, when ye haue taken the ſayde height, ye muſte for to knowe the place where ye are, be it in ſea or lande, adde your degrées which the Sunne is declyned from, farre from the lyne with your height, and ye ſhall finde that which ye demaunde, the which is to be vnderſtanded as much of the Pole Artike,
                as Antartike. Thus much by the way Gentle Reader of our Aſtrolabia, leauing the reſt of the knowledge and vſage of this Inſtrument to Aſtronomers and Aſtrologians, that make dayly profeſſion thereof. It ſhall ſuffice that which I haue ſpoken, the which I knowe to be neceſſary and nedefull to Nauigation, chiefly for thoſe that are ignorant and not yet exerciſed therein.
         
         
            
            Of the departing of our Equator or Equinoctiall. Cap. 69.
            I Thinke there is no man of Spirite, but that knoweth that the Equinoctiall is a trace or circle, imagined by the midſt of the Worlde, from the Eaſt to the Weaſt, in equall diſtance of two, ſo that from the fayde Equinoctiall to eche one of the Poles, it is .90. Degrées, as we haue at large treated before, and of the temperatneſſe of the ayre, that is there about, of the Sea and of the fiſhes. There reſteth nowe ſomewhat to ſpeake in our returne, of that which before we left out, paſſing therefore about the firſte day of Aprill with a fauourable winde kéeping our right courſe with ſayle ſpread right to the North,How the Author departed from Thequinoctiall. neuertheleſſe we were moleſted with one ill commoditie, the which was, that daye and night it ceaſed not to raine, the which notwithſtanding came well to paſſe for vs to drinke, conſidering our neceſſitie, for the ſpace of two monethes and a halfe, enduring thyrſt for that we colde get no freſh water.
            And God knoweth whether we drancke not our fill euē with open throte, conſidering the extreame heat that burned vs: it is true that the rayne water in thoſe parres are corrupted for the infection of the ayre, from whence it commeth: for that whereof the rayne engendreth, is depraued in ſuch ſort, that if a body waſh their hāds therewith, there wil ryſe puſhes & bladders.Certayne rayne water corrupted. I knowe well that many Philoſophers hold opinion, that ſome rayne water is vnholſome, & they ſet difference betwene theſe waters, with ye reaſons which at this time I wil not allege auoyding prolixitie: wel what corruptiō ſo euer came of it, yet neuertheleſſe it behoued vs to drink therof though it had

coſt vs our liues. Furthermore this water falling on a clothe woulde ſtayne it and leaue a ſpot that ſcant would be gotten out. Nowe therefore after we had paſſed the lyne, it was néedfull for our conduct, to beginne to counte our degrees, from thence vnto our Europe: as much muſte be done of them that goe thither, after that they are come vnder the ſayde-line. The Ancient Coſmographers, meaſured the earth the which we may alſo doe, by ſtades, paces, and féete, and not by degrées as we doe, as affirmeth Plinie, Strabo and others, but Ptolome did ſince inuente degrées, for to meaſure bothe the Sea and the land, which before was not a lyke meaſured, and this is much more eaſy. It is then Ptolome that hath compaſſed the whole worlde by Degrées, as wel in length as in bredth, finding 360. Leagues, and in euery degrée .17. Leagues & a half, as I vnderſtande of our Pilots, that are expert in Nauigation. So that the whole world hauing the Firmament and the Elementes in his conference, contayneth .360. degrées equally by twelue ſignes, whereof euery one hath 30.The diuiſion of a degree. degrées, for .12. tymes .30. make iuſt .360. A degrée contayneth .60. minutes, a minut .60. thirdes, a thirde .60. fourthes, a fourth .60. fifthes, vnto .60. tenthes. For the proportions of the firmament, may be parted in ſo many partes, as we haue ſayde. Then by the degrées we find the longitude, latitude and diſtance of places, the latitude from the line to our Pole, whereas there is .90. degrées, and ſo much beyonde,How ye may know the latitude longitude and diſtance of places. the longitude is taken from the fortunate Ilands to the Eaſte. Wherefore I ſaye to conclude, that the Pilot that woulde ſayle, ought to conſider thre things, the firſte in what hight of degrées, he findeth himſelfe, and in what hight the place is that he will goe to, ſecondly the place where he findeth himſelfe, and the place whether he hopeth to goe, that is to know, what diſtance

and length there is from one coaſte to another. Thirdly to knowe what winde or windes wil ſerue for Nauigation, all the whiche he may knowe and ſée by his compaſſe and other Inſtrumentes of the Sea. Folowing alwayes our courſe ſixe degrées at this ſide our lyne, kéeping the Caape on the North of vs vntill the .15. day of Aprill, at which tyme we knewe the Sunne to be directly vnder our Zenith, the which was not without enduring great heat as ye may wel thinke, if ye conſider the heat yt is hetherwarde the Sunne, being in Cancer, whiche is far from our Zenith to vs that inhabit in Europe. Nowe afore going any farther, I wil ſpeake of certayne flying fiſhes, that I left out when I ſpake of fiſhes vnder the lyne. It is therefore to be noted, that vnder the lyne ten degrées on this ſide, and beyonde there is founde aboundance of flying fiſh, that flyeth hye in the ayre, being folowed of another fiſh that woulde deuoure him. So that by the quantitie of him that flyeth, ye may eaſily coniecture the quantitie of the other lyuing by praye. Among the which the Dorade (of whom we haue before ſhewed) doeth folowe hym aboue all others, for that his fleſh is very delicate and tender: of the which alſo there are two kinds, the one is lyke a herring, the which is, that which is ſo chaſed of others, this fiſh hath foure wings, two great ones, lyke vnto the wings of a bat, and two other little ones néere to the tayle: the other is made lyke a Lampron, of the which kindes there are fewe found, but onely .15. degrées on this ſide, and beyonde the lyne, the which to my iudgement is the cauſe that thoſe that haue ſet out bookes of fiſhes,Pirauena. haue left them out beſide many others. The Americans name this fiſh Pirauena he flieth lyke a Partrige, and the little one flyeth much better and higher than the other, and ſometymes they are ſo néere

chaſed and folowed, ſpecially by night, that many tymes they ſtrike againſte the ſhip ſayles by heapes, and there remayne. There is another fiſh, which is called by them Albacore,
               Albacore a fiſh much more greater than the Porpas, the which is alſo a deuourer of the flying fiſh as wel as the Dorade, and he is very good and excellent to eate aboue all other fiſhes in the ſea, as well of the Weaſt as of the Eaſte. He is vneaſy to be gotten, and therefore they make a counterfet fiſh of white linnen, the which they make to ſpring aboue water, as doeth the flying fiſh, and by this meanes he is moſt commonly taken.
         
         
            Of Perou, and of the principal places contayned in the ſame. Cap. 70.
            NOw kéeping our courſe, hauing the wind very faire we coaſted the lande of Perou, and the Ilandes being on the coaſte of the Weaſt Sea, called the Ilandes of Perou,
               Perou a thirde part of the Spaniſh Indies. euen to the heigth of the Spaniſh Ilande, of the which we will ſpeake hereafter particularly. This countrey as we haue deuided it, is one of the thrée partes of the Weaſte Indies, hauing in length .700. Leagues, taking from the North to the South, and in bredth .100. Leagues, from the Eaſte to the Weaſte, being a firme lande, from Themestitan paſſing the ſtraight of Daryen, betwene the Weſt and the ſea,Of whence Perou tooke his name. which they name pacifik, and it was ſo named of a Riuer called Perou, which is in bredth about a little league, as many other prouinces in Africa, Aſia and Europe, haue takē their names of their moſt famous Riuers, as alſo we haue ſhewed of Senega. This Region is then incloſed, with the Weaſt and the South Sea, garniſhed with thicke foreſtes and mountaynes,

the which make the countrey in many places vnacceſſible, ſo that we cannot there driue our Cartes,The moſte renomed prouinces of Perou. Quito a Regiō. and Horſes loden there as we do héere. In this countrey of Perou, there is many faire prouinces among the which the moſt chiefeſt towardes the North is Quito, the which extendeth in length from the Eaſte to the Weaſt aboute 60. Leagues, and in bredth .30. Next to Quito is the prouince of the Canaries,
               The prouince of the Canaries hauing towardes the Eaſte the Riuer of Amazones, with many mountaynes and hills, and inhabited with a Barbarous and wilde people not yet conuerted: beſides this there is the prouince that the Spaniards haue named S. Iames of olde port,
               S. Iames of olde porte. Taxamilca. beginning within a degrée beyond▪ the lyne Equinoctiall. The fourth which they call in their language Taxamilca, extendeth to the greate Citie of Tongilla, the which after that their King Atabalyba was poyſoned, Pizare ſeing the fruitfull commodities of the countrey, cauſed there to be edified a Town and a Caſtel There is yet another named Cuzco,
               One Cuzco. The kingdome of the Iugies. in the which the Iugies haue long tyme raygned, being a people ſo named, whiche haue bene in tymes paſt mighty Lords. And this worde Iugies is as much to ſay as Kings. And in their time their Kingdome & limits was ſo greate and large, that it contayned aboue a .1000. Leagues from one end to another. Alſo this countrey beareth the name of the chiefeſt Citie, as doeth Rhodes, Metelin, Candia & other countreys taking their names of the moſt renomed Townes and Cities, as I haue ſhewed. Furthermore being on a tyme at Caape Finiſtra in Spayne, a Spaniarde ſhewed me, that in this countrey of Cuzco, there is founde a people that haue their eares hanging downe to their ſhoulders, hauing hanging on their eares, greate pieces of fine and pure ſhining Golde, well polliſhed and better than any other Golde in Perou, to whoſe

wordes I will ſooner giue credit, than to many Hiſtoriographers in theſe daies, that writ by heare ſay, reporting to vs things that they neuer ſawe. To this purpoſe I remember that they woulde perſwade vs, that in high Africa, there was people that had eares hanging downe to there hales, the which is nothing ſo but a manifeſt fable and lye.Canar a very cold countrey. The fifth prouince is Canar, hauing on the weſt ſide the South Sea, the which is a maruelous cold countrey, for the Froſt and Snowe lyeth there all the yeare long. And although that in others Regions of Perou, the colde be not ſo violent, and that there commeth and procedeth great plenty of good fruites, yet there is not ſuch tēperatneſſe in Sommer, for in Sommer in other places the ayre is extreme hot & vntemperat, the which cauſeth a corruption chiefly in the fruites. Alſo that venemous beaſtes are not founde in colde countries as they are in hote regions. Therefore al being conſidered, it is harde to iudge which of theſe countries ought to be preferred before the other: to this we may replie that there is no commoditie, but that hath his incommoditie. Moreouer there is yet another named Calao,
               The prouince of Calao. wherein is more trading and occupying than in any other countrey in Perou, the which alſo is the cauſe, that it is better peopled. It extendeth from the Eaſte coaſt, to the mountaynes of Andes, and from the Weaſte to the mountaynes of Nanades: the people in this countrey is named Xuli, Chilan, Acos, Pomata, Cepita and Trianguauaco. Although it be wilde and Barbarous, yet it is neuertheleſſe very tractable, bicauſe of the marchandiſe and trade that there is vſed, otherwiſe, it woulde not be leſſe confirmable than the reſt of America. In this countrey there is a great laake named in their language Titicata,
               Titicata a Lake whiche is to ſay,

Iland of Fethers, for that that in this Lake there are certaine lyttle Ilands,Laake. Carcas a countrey of Perou, Platte a large and rych Citie. The lande of Perou, is lyke the figure of a Tryangle. in the which are founde a great number of byrds great and ſmall, and of ſuch diuers kyndes as is almoſt vncredible. Now the laſt coūtrey that is in Perou, named Carcas, next adiacēt to Chila, in the which ſtandeth the famous and rich Citie of Platte, the countrey being very rych, bicauſe of the fayre Riuers and Mynes of Golde and Siluer. Therefore this great countrey containeth, & is called all that is comprehended from the Riuer of Platte vnto Quitto as we haue already ſhewed, and of which we haue declared ye eight principall countries and prouinces. This maine land being ſo long and broade is like to the fygure of a triangle, although that many call it an Ilande, the which cannot, or elſe will not make a difference betwene an Iland & that which we call almoſt an Iland. By this meanes ye nede not to doute that from the ſtraight of Magellan .50. degrees of latitude, and .30. minuts, and .303. degrées of longitude beyond the lyne, being more than .68. degrées, on this ſyde is the maine lande. In dede if that this little lande betwene new Spaine & Perou, hauing in bredth but .17. leagues from the Ocean to the South, were cut from the one Sea to the other, then Perou might be called an Iland, but Daryen, a ſtraight of lande,Daryen a ſtraight of land. ſo named of the Riuer of Daryen, doth let it, yet it behoueth ſomwhat to ſpeake of Perou. As touching the Religion of theſe wyld men of that countrey,
                  A great ſuperſtition of certaine people of Perou.
                  Bohitis certaine Prieſts.
                which are not yet reformed to our Fayth, they holde a very ſtraunge opinion of a great 
                  ••
               ttell that they kéepe ſecretly, ſaying that the Sea in times paſt paſſed out thereof with all his Fiſhes, and that out of a nother thing proceded the Sunne & the Moone, the firſt Man, and the firſt Woman, the

which their falſe and deceitfull prieſtes haue perſuaded and ſhewed them, named Bohitis, and they haue beleued and giuen credit thereto a long tyme, vntil that the Spanyards haue diſſuaded the moſt parte of theſe dreames and deluſions. Beſides this theſe people are very idolatrous aboue others.The Idolatry of theſe people One worſhippeth according to his minde what pleaſeth him. The fiſhers worſhip a fiſh named Lyburon, and the reſt worſhip certain beaſts and byrds: Thoſe that labor the ground & make gardens, worſhip the Earth, but they all in generall take the Sunne to be a great God, lykewiſe ye Moone & the earth, thinking that by the Sunne & the Moone, all things are ruled and gouerned. In ſwearing or taking an othe, they will lay theyr hand on the Earthz & beholde the Sunne, they alſo holde opinion that there hath ben a Deluge as thoſe of America, ſaying that there came a Prophet from the North parts, that dyd maruels, the which after he was put to death, had neuertheleſſe power to lyue.The Spaniards are lords of all Perou. The Spanyards occupy all this mayne land from the Riuer of Marignan, vnto Furna and Daryen, and yet more further on the weſt coaſt, which is the ſtraighteſt or naroweſt place of the mayne lande, by the which the way lyeth to Moluques. Furthermore it extēdeth to the Ryuer of Palme,
               The riches of the Ilandes of Perou. wheras they haue ſo well edified and peopled all the countrey, that it is a maruellous thing to ſée the riches that at this day, that countrey bringeth forth, lyke vnto a great kingdome. Firſt to begin almoſt thoroughout al the Ilands of Perou, there are Mynes of Gold or ſiluer, with certaine Emerauldes and Turkeſſes, neuertheleſſ e hauing not ſo lyuely a color as thoſe yt come from Malaca and Calicut. The moſt welthieſt people of all the countrey of Perou,
               Iugas a valiant and riche people. are thoſe yt they name Iugas, valiant

aboue other nations, they worſhip cattell and all other kynde of domeſticall beaſts, in greater number than we doe here, for the countrey thereto is giuen in ſuch ſorte, that beaſtes hydes and ſkyns of all ſorts, is their chief marchandiſe, and they kill the beaſts onely for theyr ſkynnes. The greateſt number of theſe domeſticall beaſts are become wylde, bicauſe that there are ſo great multitude, ſo yt they let them ſtray in the woods day & night, for that they haue no place to harbor thē in their houſes. And for to take: thē, they ſet ſnares and chaſe them as we doe Veniſon.
                  Corne wil not proſper nor grow in America.
                  Caſſade a kinde of ſuſtenance.
                As for Corne as I vnderſtand, it cannot profit there nor grow in no part of Perou, no more than in America. Therefore aſwell gentlemen as others, lyue with a kynde of ſuſtenance yt they name Caſſade, which is a kinde of cakes made of a roote named Manihot. Furthermore they haue great plenty of Myll & fiſh. As touching wine there groweth none, in ſtede whereof they make other kyndes of beuerege. This much as touching the circuit of Perou, the which with his Ilands of the which I wil treat hereafter, is brought to ſuch a forme, that at this preſēt ye ſhal finde townes, caſtels, cities, b
                  ••
               oughes, houſes, biſhopricks, cōmon weales, & all kende of liuings, ſo yt ye will iudge it to be a nother Europe. By this we know how great the power & goodneſſe of our God is,Perou may be thought to be a new Europe. & his prouidence to all people, for euen as ye 
               Turks, Mores & heathen people ſeke to deſtroy Chriſtes religion, ſo cō
               trarily, in other places it doeth more increaſe. Thus far touching Perou, which in our retourne we coaſted on ye left hand, as in ſayling thether we coſted Africa.
            
         
         
            Of the Ilands of Perou, and chiefly of the Spanish Iland. Cap. 71.
            NOw yt I haue ſhewed of ye lande of Perou, ſeing yt in ye courſe we haue in oure returne coſted certaine

Ilands on the Weaſt Sea,The Ilande of Spaine before named Haiti & Quiſquia. called the Ilands of Perou, for that they border the lande, I thinke it good in lyke caſe ſomewhat to write thereof, for bicauſe we were ſome to the heigth of one of theſe Ilandes named the Spaniſh Iland by thoſe that firſt did diſcouer it, being before named Haiti, which is as much to ſay, as ſharpe or ſower land.
                  The Promē
                     taries of the Spaniſh Iland, Tiburou, Higney, Lobos, Orane a Riuer, Saint Dominic the chiefeſt citie in that Iland.
                  The moſt renoumed riuers in Noua Eſpania.
                  The auncient Religion of the inhabitans of this Iland.
                Alſo it was named Quiſqueia the great, and of a truthe it is ſo faire and great, that from the eaſt to the weſt, it is .50. leagues long, and of bredth from the North to the South .40. and in compaſſe or cyrcuit more than .400. and is beyond the Equinoctiall lyne .18. degrees, hauing toward the Eaſt the Iland of Saint Iohn with many other ſmall Ilands, much to be feared and dangerous for Saylers, and toward the Weſt, it hath the Ilands of Cuba and Iamaica, on the North ſyde the Ilands of the Canibals, and toward the South the Cape of 
                  Ʋela, planted on the mayne land. This Iland ſheweth lyke to Sycilly, in tymes paſt that firſt was named Trinacria, for yt it had .3. promētaries very eminēt, lyke vnto that of which we ſpeake, the which hath thrée ſtanding very farre into the Sea, of the which the firſt is named Tyburon, the ſecond Higney, ye third Labos, which is a ſyde of ye Iland, which they haue named Beata, almoſt full of ye wood Gaiac. In this Spaniſh Iland, are found many fayre Riuers, among ye which yt chiefeſt named Orane, paſſeth rounde aboute ye chiefeſt Citie named by ye 
               Spaniards Sainſt Dominick,
                the others are Nequa Hatibonice & Haqua, full of very good fiſhe and pleaſant to eate, the which is bicauſe of the temperatneſſe of the Ayre and goodneſſe of the ground and of the water: theſe Riuers runne about into the Sea almoſt all on the Eaſt ſyde, ye which méeting together, make a very large Riuer bancked on

both ſydes, before that this Iland was diſcouered of yt Chriſtiās, it was inhabited with wilde men that were Idolaters, worſhipping the diuel, who ſhewed him ſelf to them in diuers ſimilitudes & lykeneſſe. Alſo they made many & ſundry Idols, according to the viſions & ſights that they had, as they do at this preſent in many Ilands & maine land of that countrey: the others worſhip many gods, chiefly one aboue the reſt, the which they eſteme to be a maker of all things: and they repreſēt his figure in an Idoll of wood, being ſet in ſome trée garniſhed with leaues and fethers. Likewiſe they worſhip the Sunne & the Moone, & other celeſtiall creatures, the which now the inhabitāts that are there do not vſe, for that they are reformed to yt Chriſtian faith and to all kynde of ciuilitie: I know wel that in times paſte there haue ben ſome yt haue not regarded it.
            We reade of Caius Caligula, an Emperor of Rome,
               C. Caligula Emperour of Rome. though he diſpraiſed & hated yt diuine power, yet neuertheleſſe he quaked & trembled for feare, when yt there appeared any ſhew or tokē of gods wrath. But before yt this Iland of which we ſpeake, was brought to ſubiection vnder the Spaniards, (as I haue ben enformed of thoſe that were at the conqueſt) the wylde men killed aboue ten thouſād Chriſtians, vntil yt the Spaniards had fortified thē ſelues in certain places: after which time they killed a great multitude of ye inhabitants, ye reſt yt were left they led captiue into diuers countreys, and made them ſlaues. And after this ſort they haue vſed them of ye Ilands of Cuba, of S. Iohn Iamaique, the holy croſſe, & the Canibals, with many other Ilands & maine countrys. For at the firſt the Spaniards & Portingals, for that they would haue the better dominion & rule, learned to liue after their maner, alluring them by gifts

and faire woordes, always keping them in their fauor, vntill that in proces of time they ſaw how that they were able to mate and ouercome them, then they began to reuolte from their former vſe, taking this rude people and vſing them lyke ſlaues, they prouoked them to labor the earth, otherwiſe they had neuer come to the perfection of their enterpriſe. The mightieſt kings of this countrey, are in Caſco,
               Caſco, & Apina rich & plentifull Ilands. and Apina, rich and famous Ilands, aſwell for the Golde and Siluer that there is founde, as for the fruitfulneſſe of the land. The inhabitāts weare nothing but Golde about them, as large bouckles of two or thrée pound waight ye péece, hanging at their eares, the weight whereof maketh their eares to hang halfe a foote long, the which cauſeth the Spaniards, to cal them greate eares. This Iland is very rich in Mynes of Golde,The fruitfulneſſe of this Iland named Noua Eſpania. as are many others of that countrey, for there are founde few or none but either hath Mynes of Gold or Siluer. Furthermore, it doeth abounde with horned beaſtes, as Oxen, Kyne, Shéepe, Goates and an infinit number of Hogs, alſo very fayre Horſes, the which beaſtes for the moſt parte are become wylde as we haue ſhewed of the maine lande. As touching Corne and wyne they haue none but that which is brought from other places, and therefore in ſtede of bread, they eate much Caſſade, made of the meale of Rootes, and in ſted of wyne, they haue very good and ſwéete drynks made of diuerſe fruites, as the Syder of Normandy. They haue an infinit number of good fiſh, of the which ſome are very ſtraunge, among the which there is one named Manaty, the which is taken in the ryuers, and alſo in the Sea, but the greateſt ſtore are in Ryuers. This fiſh is lyke to a Bucke or Goats ſkynne, being fylled wyth oyle or wine, hauing two féete on both ſydes of the ſhoulders, with the which he ſwimmeth, and

from the breſt to the tayle deminiſheth of greatneſſe,Deſcription of Manati a ſtrange fiſh. his head is lyke to the head of an Oxe, hauing a ſlender face, the chyn ful & great, and very lyttle eyes: this fiſh is ten foote broade & twenty foote long, hauing a graye ſkynne, heary lyke to an Oxe hyde, ſo that with his ſkynne the people of the coūtrey make ſhowes according to their maner: his féete are all rounde, garniſhed eche one with foure long clawes lyke to the féete of an Oliphant. This fiſh is more diſformed and miſhapen, than any kynde of fiſh in that countrey. Notwithſtanding very good to eate, hauing a taſt more lyke to vele, than fiſhe. The inhabitans of that countrey do gather the greaſe of the ſayde fiſhe, for that it is very good for their Goate ſkyns of the which they make very good marokyns: the black ſlaues or Neigers, do anoynt their bodies there with to make them better diſpoſed & their ioynts to be playable, as the Africans doe with oyle of Olyue. Within the head of this fiſh are found certaine ſtones, of the which they make great ſtore,Stones good for the colyke. for yt they haue proued them to be good againſt the colyke, be it in the Raynes or in the bladder. The femals of this fiſh bring forth their yong ones quick, with out egge, as doth ye Whale & the Grampyn, alſo ſhe hath .ij. rothers lyke beaſts on ye earth, with ye which they giue ſuck to their yong ones. A Spaniard that had dwelled long time in this Iland ſhewed to me, yt a gouerner of ye coūtrey did noriſh one in a ceſterne, ye terme of .30. yeares, the which in proces of time became ſo priuie, yt ſhe wold almoſt ſuffer one to lay his hand vpō hir.Diuers fayre workes made by the wylde men with fethers. The wyld men will take this fiſh hard by ye ſhore as ſhe féedeth vpon ye graſſe. I leue to ſpeake of many byrds clad with diuers rich coloured fethers, wt which they make tapiſſary, & figurs of mē, & womē, beaſts, birds & other things, they

trim them vpon ſome lynnen clothe, & therewith they garniſh hats, caps and gounes, the which is very fayre & pleaſant to beholde. Of ſtrange foure footed beaſtes there are none founde, but onely thoſe of which we haue ſpoken. Neuertheleſſe there is founde two kynde of lyttle beaſtes,Hulias and Caris a kinde of ſtrange beaſts. as little as Coneys, the which they name Hulias, and Caris, good to eate. That which I haue ſayde of this Iland, I may in lyke maner ſpeake of the Iland of S. Iames before named Iamaica, on the eaſt ſide it hath ye Iland of S. Dominike. There is a nother faire Iland named Bouriquan,
               S. Iames Iland. S. Iohns Iland. in their countrey ſpech, but in the carde Marius, it is named S. Iohns Iland, ye which on the Eaſt ſide hath lying the Iland of the holy croſſe, and other little Ilands of the which ſome are inhabited, the others are deſerte. This Ilande from the Eaſt to ye weſt containeth aboute .52. leagues, of length .300. degrées no minutes, and of latitude .18. degrées no mynutes. To be ſhort, there are many other Ilandes in thoſe parts, the which bicauſe of the multitude I omit. Alſo for that I could haue no particular knowledge of them, I will not here forget, that in all theſe Ilandes there are founde no rauening beaſtes no more than in England, and in the Ile of Creta.
            
         
         
            Of the Iland of Cuba, and of Lucaiae, Cap. 72.
            NOw there reſteth of all the Ilands of Perou, to reherſe ſome ſecrets of the Iland of Cuba,
               The deſcription of the Ile of Cuba. & of certaine others adiacēt, & yet to ſay the truthe there can be little more ſpoken than that which hath ben alredy ſayd of ye 
               Spaniſh Iland. This Iland is more greater & larger than the others, for it is reckned from the Promontarie that is on the Eaſt ſyde, to the other that

is on the weſt ſyde thrée hundreth leagues. And from the North to the South ſeuenty leagues. As touching the diſpoſition of the aire, there it is temperate, ſo that there is no exceſſe of heate, nor yet of colde. There are found rich mines of Gold & ſiluer, likewiſe other mettals. On ye ſea ſide are found faire riuers that procede from the high hills, the waters whereof are excellent, with great quantitie of good fiſh. Moreouer before it was diſcouered, it was better peopled with wyld men than any others, but at this day the Spaniards are lords and maſters. The myddeſt of this Ilande hath two hūdreth nintie degrées of longitude, no minuts, and of latitude twenty degrées no minutes. There is a hyll harde by the Sea ſyde that is all ſalte,A ſalte hill. Salt of the Earth. more higher than that of Cipris, greate number of trées of cotton, braſyll, hornebeame, alſo ſalte of the earth proceding out of a nother mountaine very high and brackiſhe. And of this kynde there is founde in lyke maner in the Iland of Cipris, named of the Grekes, Oryctos, the which alſo is gotten in a mountaine hard by the Sea. Furthermore, there is founde in this Ilande great ſtore of Azer, Vermilion, Alume and other things that are taken out of the bowels of the Earth.A kinde of Partriges. As touching byrds and foules of the Ayre, there is a kynd of Partrige very little, being of a red color, and alſo of dyuers other colours, their fleſhe is very delicate. The ruſticall people of the mountaines do nouriſh a number of them in their houſes, as we do here pullein, and many other things worthy to be noted and written. Firſt there is a valley that is in length thrée leagues betwene two mountaines, where as are founde an infinite number of bowles of ſtone, great and little, being naturally engendred in that place, although ſome

wold iudge them to be made artificially. Sometimes there is founde ſome ſo great, that foure men wold be combered to cary away one, the others are leſſe, and ſome ſo little that they excéede not the quantity of a little egge.
                  A wonderfull lykor proceding from a hyll.
                  Bre a kynde of lykor.
                The ſeconde thing worthy to be noted is, that in the ſame Ilande there is a mountaine néere to the riuage of the Sea, out of the which runneth a licor like to that which is made in the fortunate Ilandes named Bre as we haue before ſhewed, the which runneth doune into the Sea. Quintus Curtius in his bokes which he hath made of the Ieſtes of Alexander ye great, ſheweth that he being come to a citie named Memi, was deſirous to ſée a great pitte or caue, in the which there was a fountaine that rendred great quantitie of gumme very ſtrong, being vſed with other thinges, ſo that the authour thinketh for this onely reaſon the walles of Babilon to haue ben ſo ſtrong,Why in times paſt the wales of Babylon were ſo ſtrong The Ilands of Lucaia. for that they haue bene made of ſuch thinges, the which is not onely founde in the Ilande of Cuba, but alſo in the countrey of Themiſtitan, and on the coaſt of Florida. As touching the Ilands of Lucaia, (being ſo named for that they are many in number) they are northward of the Ilande of Cuba, and of S. Dominike, they are more than .iiij. hundreth in number, all little ones and not inhabited, vnleſſe it be the greateſt that beareth the name of all the others named Lucaia. The inhabitants of this Ilande commonly goe to trafficke on the maine lande, and to other, Ilands. They that inhabite there, as well men as women, are whiter and more fairer than in any of thoſe parties or countreis. Séeing that I am in talke with theſe Ilands & of their riches, I will not forget ſomewhat to ſpeake of the riches of Potoſsi, the which taketh his name of a highe mountaine yt hath in height

a great league, & halfe a league compaſſe.The moūtayne of Potoſſy, very rich in Mynes. This mountaine is maruellous riché, bicauſe of the great Mynes of ſiluer, tyn, and braſſe which hath ben found almoſt at the top of the mountaine, and this Myne of Syluer hath ben found ſo good that in one quintall of the Mine is found halfe a quintall of pure Syluer. The ſlaues do no other thing but worke & fetch Syluer from the Myne, & they cary it to the principall and chief towne of that countrey, the wich was edifyed at the bottome of the hyll by the Spaniards. Synce this Myne was found out, all the countries, Ilands & mayne lands be Inhabited with certaine wylde men all naked as in other places of America. Thus much as touching Perou, and of his Ilands.
         
         
            A deſcription of Noua Eſpania, and of the great citie of Themiſtitan edified in the vveſt Indies. Cap. 73.
            FOr bicauſe that it is not poſſible for all men to ſée ſēſibly all things during his age, be it either bicauſe of the continuall alteration and changing of things that are here in this world, or bicauſe of ye long diſtāce of places & countries, God hath giuen the meane to repreſent them not onely by writing, but alſo by picture by the induſtry & labor of thoſe that haue ſene them. I haue ſene ſet out by figure, many auncient, as thoſe of Iaſon, of Acteon, Eneas, Hercules, & many other things ye which we may dayly ſée in their proper forme, without figure, as are many kynds of wild beaſts. For this cauſe I mynd to ſet forth & rehearſe vnto you, ye great & large citie of Thimiſtitan, as nere as is poſſible,Themiſtitan. being ſure & certaine yt few among you haue ſene it, neither can ye well go & ſée it bicauſe of the long & dangerous

nauigation that it behoueth ye to make. Themiſtitan is a citie edified in newe Spayne, the which taketh his beginning at the ſtraight of Ariana, and endeth on the north ſide at the riuer of Canuca. In times paſt it was named Anauak, and ſince becauſe it was diſcouered and inhabited of Spaniardes, it hath receiued the name of newe Spaine. Among the which landes, the firſt inhabited was Iucathan, the which hath a point of lande lying out into ye ſea like vnto the lande of Florida, notwithſtanding that thoſe which make the Cardes Marius, haue forgottē to make the beſt, the which ſetteth out their ſhew or deſcription. Now this Noua Eſpania, on the Eaſt, Weſt, and South ſide, is compaſſed with the weſt ſea, and on the North ſide to the new world, the which being inhabited, is ſéene beyond in the ſame North, an other lande not known of the Modernes, for the which I will not ſtand therein. Themiſtitan, which is a ſtrong Citie, great and very riche in the countrey before named, is founded on a greate Lake, the way that goeth to this Citie is not broader than the length of two ſpeares, being ſo named of him that laide the foundation, named Tenuth, ſonne to the Kinge Iztacmixcoatz. This citie hath onely two gates, the one to enter in, the other for to come out at. And not farre from the Citie is a bridge of wood, a tenne foote broad, the which was made for the encreaſing & diminiſhing of the waters: for that Lake riſeth and falleth like vnto the Sea. And for the defence of the citie there is yet many others like in maner to 
                  Ʋenice, edified in the ſea. That countrey is cōpaſſed with very high mountains, & the plaine cuntrey hath in circuit .150. leagues, in the which is foūd .ij. lakes that occupy a great part therof, for bicauſe yt theſe .ij. lakes haue of circuit .50. leagues,

of the which thone is freſh water,The opinion of two Laake. in the which is many good ſmall fiſhe, and the other is ſalte water, the which beſyde his bitterneſſe is venemous, and therefore it can nouriſh no fiſh, the which is againſt the opinion of thoſe that thinck it to be but one Laake. The playne is ſeparated from the ſayd Laakes by certaine mountaynes, and at their fartheſt parte they are ioyned with a ſtraight or narow land, by the which men are conducted with barkes and boates euen into the Citie, the which is ſtanding on the ſalt water, & from thence to the mayne land on the cauſy ſide, it is foure leagues. And I cannot compare the greatneſſe thereof better than to 
                  Ʋeniſe.
               A compariſon of Themiſtitan. For to enter into the ſayd Citie there is foure ways made of ſtones artificially, wheras there are two cundits or fountaines of ye greatneſſe of two paces, and of a mans heigth, from one of the which is conducted freſh water into the Citie, ye which is of the heigth of fiue foote, and the water runneth a long euen to the middeſt of the Citie, of the which they drynke, and vſe it in their nedeful buſineſſe. The other Chanel they kéepe emptie for this reaſon: when yt they will 
                  •
               lenſe that ſame wherein the freſh water is, they bring all the filth of the Citie with the other to ye land, and bicauſe that the chanels paſſe by the bridges, & by the places whereas the ſalt water entereth & goeth oute, they conduct the ſayd water by ſwéete and cleane chanells the heigth of a pace. Vpon this Laake yt compaſſeth the Citie, the Spaniards haue made many fayre houſes & places of pleaſure, ſome vpon little Rocks & others vpon pyles of woode. Moreouer Themiſtitan, ſtādeth a .xx. degrées of eleuation aboue the lyne Equinoctiall, and hath .272. degrées of longitude.Ferdinand of Cortes. It was taken by ſtrength, by Ferdinand of Cortes, being captaine

generall for the Emperor in thoſe partes of the yeare of grace .1521. containing than .70000. houſes little and great.Mutuezuma. The kings palaice which was named Mutuezuma, with thoſe of the lords of ye towne, was faire, great and large. The Indians that then did inhabit this Citie, had a cuſtome to kepe euery fyue daies the market in places thereto appointed, their trade was fethers of byrds,How they vſe to trade. with the which they made diuers and ſundry things, as gounes faſhioned after their maner, Tapiſtry woorke, and other things. And to theſe ſciences were the oldeſt ſorte occupied. When they would go worſhip their great Idoll, the which was erected in the myddeſt of the Citie, lyke vnto a theatre, who when they had taken any of theyr enimies in the war, did ſacrifice them to their Idolls, and then eate them, holding this for a kynde of religion. Furthermore, their trade was beaſtes ſkynnes, of the which they made gounes, hoſe, and a kynde of hoodes for to kepe them as well from the colde, as from ſtynging flyes. The inhabitans at this daye, which before were cruel and vnhumaine, by ſucceſſion of time haue ſo well changed their maners and conditions, that in ſtead of barbarous and cruell, they are ciuill and gratious, in ſuch ſort that they haue left all theyr former naughtie and wicked doings, the which they were wont to vſe: as in killing one another, eating humayne fleſhe, to haue company with the firſt woman yt they met, without hauing regarde either to kindred or degrée, with other lyke vices and imperfections. Their houſes are ſumptuouſly buylded. Among other things there is a fayre palaice where as the Armour of ye Citie is kept: the ſtreates and places of this Citie are ſo ſtraight, that from one gate one may ſée to the other without

any let. To be ſhort, this citie at this preſent is ſo fortified and compaſſed with ſtrong walls and rampers, lyke in forme and faſhion to oures in Europe, and it is one of the greateſt, fayreſt and rycheſt that is in all the prouinces of ye weſt Indies, taking from ye ſtraight of Magellan, which is beyond the lyne .52. degrees, vnto the laſt & furtheſt land of Abrador, ye which holdeth .51. degrées of latitude on this ſyde ye lyne on ye North ſide.
         
         
            Of Florida. Cap. 74.
            SEing that in writing this diſcourſe we haue made mention of this lande called Florida, although that in our retorne we approched not ſo neare, conſidering that our courſe lay not altogether ſo low, neuertheleſſe, we ſayled cloſe by to take an eaſterly wynde. It ſéemeth to me not out of the way, to write thereof ſome thing. Lykewiſe of the land of Canada that is next to it toward ye North, being onely certaine moū
               taines betwene bothe. Therefore keping our courſe of the height of new Spaine, on ye right hande to attaine to Europe, not ſo ſone nor ſo right a courſe as we wiſhed to haue gone, we found the ſea fauorable ynough. But as by chaunce I put out my head for to beholde it, I ſaw it as farre as I could extend my ſight, all couered with herbes and floures, the which gaue me occaſion to think that we were nere to ye land, conſidering alſo yt in other places of ye ſea I had not ſo much ſéene, notwithſtanding I found my ſelfe incontinently fruſtrate of my opinion,The Sea lyke a mariſhe. knowing that they proceded of ye ſea, ſo ye we ſaw the ſea ſtrawed with thoſe hearbs for ye ſpace of .20. days. The ſea in ye part hath ſmal ſtore of fiſh, for th
                  •
               ſe places ſéeme rather to be mariſhes, than

otherwiſe.A ſtarre with a tayle. Shortly after appeared another ſigne, and forſhewing of a ſtarre, with a long tayle from ye Eaſt, into the North, the which forſhewings, I leaue to the iudgement of Aſtronomers and to the experience of thoſe that haue knowledge therein. After this which was worſe, we were troubled with a contrary wind, the terme of nyne dayes, euen to the heigth of our Florida.
               The lying of Florida. That place is a poynt of lande entring into the full Sea, a hundreth leagues, being .25. leagues a ſhelfe or ſhallow .25. degrées and a half on this ſyde the lyne, & a hundreth leagues from Caape de Baxa. Therfore this great land of Florida is very daungerous for thoſe that ſayle of the coaſt of Cataia, Canibalu, Panuca, and Themiſtitan: for to ſight a farre of, it would be iudged an Iland lying out in ye mayne Sea. Furthermore this place is dangerous bicauſe of the running waters, wyndes and tempeſts that are in that coaſt commonly. As touching the mayne lande of Florida, it hath on the eaſt ſyde the prouince of Chicoma, and the Ilands named Bahana and Lucaia. On the weſt ſyde lyeth noua Eſpania, the which diuideth in the land that is named Anauae, of the which we haue before ſhewed. The beſt and moſt fruitfulleſt countries that are in Florida, is Panuae, yt which bordereth Noua Eſpania. The people of the countrey are naturally cruell and mightie men, being all Idolaters, who when that they haue néede either of water or ſunne, for their gardens and rootes, with the which they dayly liue, then they will fall doune before their Idolls, that are ma
                  ••
                to the ſimilitude of men or of beaſtes. Beſides this theſe people are more and better practiſed in the feats of warre than the people of Perou. When they go to the warrs, they beare their king on foure mens ſhoulders

in a beaſtes ſkinne, and they that beare him, are clad and garniſhed with riche feathers. And when that they come to hande ſtrokes, they ſet their king in the middeſt of them, clad with fine ſkinnes, and he will neuer depart from thence, vntill the battell be ended: Alſo if that they feele them ſelues to bée the weaker ſort, and that their kyng beginneth to flée, they wyll not fayle to kill hym, the which order the Perſians and other barbarous nations in the Eaſt parte obſerue at this day: their weapons of defence are bowes and arrowes made of wood enuenomed, the whiche in ſtede of Iron heades are garniſhed at the ende with bones of fiſhes or wilde beaſts, the whiche is very ſharpe. Some of them will eate their enimies, as the Americanes will doe, of whom we haue ſpoken. And although this people as we haue before ſhewed are Idolaters, neuertheleſſe they beléeue the ſoule to be immortall. Alſo that there is a place appointed for the wicked, the whiche is a very colde land, and that the Gods permit that the ſinnes of the wicked ſhall be puniſhed. Alſo they beleue, that there is an infinite numbre of people in the ſkies, and as many vnder the earth with many other folies, the which may better be compared to the tranſformations of Ouide, than to any other thyng. Furthermore, they beleue theſe things to be true, as Turkes and Arabians do that which is writen in their Alcoran. This countrey towarde the ſea is not verie fruitfull, the people are very ruſticall more than thoſe of Perou, or of America, for that they are traded wyth ſtrangers. This lande was named Florida,
               Why Florida was ſo named in the yere 1512. by thoſe that firſt dyd diſcouer it: for bicauſe that by the ſea ſide it was flouriſhing with gréene trées, and with an infinite number of 
                  ••
               cures of diuers & ſundry

colours. Betwene this Florida, and the riuer of Palme, are to be ſeene diuers kinds of monſtrous and ſtrange beaſtes,A wylde bull. among which ther is a kind of great Bulles, hauing hornes a foote long, and on the backe a croupe like to a Camell, the heare long all about the bodie, hauing a dunniſh colour. Of theſe beaſts there were once two, that were broughte quicke into Spayne, of one of the which I ſaw the ſkin, and not otherwiſe, and they liued there but a ſhort time. This beaſt (as it is ſaid) is perpetual enimie to the horſſe, & can not abide him to be by him.Caape of Baxe. In Florida, toward the Caape of Baxe, there are certaine litle riuers, where as the wylde men gather oiſters,Oiſters hauing pearles. that haue pearles. Now ſeing that we ar come to the gathering of oyſters, I will not forget by what meanes they get out theſe pearles, as wel in the eaſt Indians, as in the Weſt. Ye muſt note that euery chiefe or head houſholder, hauyng a greate number of ſlaues, knowing not to what labour to ſet them about they ſende them to-gather oyſters, of the whiche they gather baſkets full for their maſters, putting them into certain great veſſells, which being halfe full of water, is an occaſion, that the oyſters beyng conſerued therin certaine dayes do open, and the water clenſing them, leaueth theſe ſtones or perles within theſe veſſels. And to get them out they firſt take the oiſters out of the veſſell, and then they lette the water oute by a hole, vnder the which they lay a linnen cloth, leaſt that with the water the ſtones or pearles that mighte be, ſhould runne out. As touching the figure of theſe Oyſters, they differ much from ours, as well in colour as in ſhell, hauing eche of them certain litle holes, which would be thought to haue ben made artificially, in the which holes are theſe pearles. Thus muche thought I

good to ſpeake of by the way, the like alſo are found at Perou, and certaine other ſtones in good number: but the fineſt are founde in the Riuer of Palme, and in the riuer of Panuco, the which are diſtant the one from the other .32. leagues, but the chriſtians haue not libertie to get them, bicauſe that the wilde men of that countrie, are not yet conuerted to our chriſtian faith.
            Now therfore coaſting Florida on the left hand, the winde beyng to vs contrary, we ſayled very néere to Canada, and to an other countrey that is called Baccalos, which was againſt our wills, and to our great diſpleaſure, bicauſe of the extreme colde that moleſted vs the terme of eightene dayes,The countrey of Baccalos. although that this lād of Baccalos entreth farre into the full ſea in forme of a point welnigh two hundreth leagues on the north ſide diſtant from the line onely fortie eight degrées.
                  The poynt of Baccales.
                  Baccales, a fiſh.
                Thys pointe was named Baccales, bicauſe of a certaine fiſhe that is found thereabout in the ſea, whiche they name Baccales, betwene which and the Cape Delgado, there is diuers Ilāds peopled, very dāgerous to aboord, bicauſe of the multitude of rocks that compaſſe the ſayd Ilandes, & they are called the Ilands of Cortes.
               The Ilandes of Cortes. Some iudge them not to be Ilands but mayne lande, hangyng vpon the point of Baccalles. Theſe places were firſt diſcouered by an Engliſhman named Sebaſtian Babat,
               A voyage by Sebaſtian Babat, Engliſhman. who informed Kyng Henry the ſeuenth, that by that waye he would ſayle into the countrie of Catia, towards the Northe, and that by this meanes he woulde fynde ſpices and other thyngs as well as the Kyng of Portingal dyd in the eaſt Indies: Neuertheleſſe his mynd was to go to Perou, & America, for to people that cuntrie with Engliſhmē, but his purpoſe toke no effect. True it is yt he landed toward the coaſt of Irelād in ye north .300. mē
               
where as bicauſe of the extreme colde the moſt part of his men dyed, thoughe it were in the moneth of Iuly. And ſince Iames Quartier a Briton made thither two voyages, as he hym ſelfe ſhewed me in the yeare .1530. and .1535.
         
         
            Of the lande of Canada, before named Baccalos, being diſcouered in oure time, and how the inhabitants liue. Ca. 75.
            FOr bicauſe that this countrey lying in the Northe was diſcouered in oure time,A voiage made by Sebaſtiā Babat and Iames Quartier into Canada. firſt by Sebaſtian Babat an Engliſheman, and then by Iames Quartier a Briton, beyng well ſéene in nauigation, who toke vpon him the voyage at the commaundemente of the kyng of France, Franciſce
                the firſt, I think it good therfore ſomewhat to write, the which ſemeth to me moſt worthie to be noted: although that accordyng to the order of our voyage homewardes, it ought to go before the next Chapter. Moreouer, that which moueth me ſo to doe, is that I haue not ſéene any that hathe treated otherwiſe, although to my iudgement the thyng doth merite it, and that I haue ſurely learned it of the ſayd Iames Quartier.
               How the land of Canade lyeth. This lande being almoſte vnder the Pole artike, is ioyned towarde the Weaſt to Florida, and to the Ilandes of Perou, and ſince is coaſted by the weſt toward Baccalles, of which we haue ſpoken. The which place I think be the ſame, that thoſe which lately haue diſcouered and named Canada, as it happeneth many times that ſome will giue name to that whiche is out of others knowledge, the which toward the eaſt extendeth to the ſea called Hyperbores,
               Caape de Loraine, or the land of Britōs & on the other ſide to a mayne lande called Campeſtra de Berga, to the

Southeaſt ioyning to this countrey. There is a Caape called Loraine, otherwiſe by them that diſcouered it, the lande of Britons, being nere to new founde lande, hauing not in diſtance aboue .x. or .xij leagues betwene them. This new founde land bordreth this hie lād, the which we haue named Caape Loraine, and towards the northeaſt betweene both lieth an Iland,The lying of Caape de Loraine. which hath in compaſſe about foure leagues. The ſaid lād beginneth euen at the ſayd Caape towards the Southe, and extendeth eaſt northeaſt, and weſt Southweſt, the moſt part thereof extending to the lande of Florida, lying like an halfe circle, drawing towarde Themistitan. Now to return to Caape Loraine, of the which we haue ſpoken, it lieth to the lande towards the north, whiche is ranged with the ſea Meditarium, as Italy betweene the ſea Adriatike, and the ſea Liguſtike. And from the ſayd Caape going towards the Weſt, and weſt ſouthweſt, the ſhore is to be ſéene about two hundreth leagues, and all ſandie and ſilte, without any port or hauen. This region is inhabited with many people of an indifferent gret ſtature, very malicious, hauing moſt cōmonly their faces diſfigured & couered with vizards of red and blew, which colours they haue of certayne fruites: This lande was diſcouered by Iames Quartier a Bryton, borne at S. Maloes, in the yeare .1535. At that time beſides the number of ſhippes that he had, for the performaunce of his voyage, with certaine barkes, ſome with .60. and 80. men a piece, he fought out this vnknowne countrie, vntill he came to a great & brode riuer, to the which they gaue a name, in the whiche is founde very good fiſh, chiefly Salmons, and that great plentie: then they traded into ſo many places adiacēt with kniues, hatchets, hookes and lynes to fiſhe with,

and ſuch like, for Hartes ſkinnes and ſkinnes of other wild beaſtes, wherof there is great ſtore. The wilde men of the countrey gaue them good entertainement, ſhewing them ſelues well affectioned towardes them, and glad of their comming, knowledge and amitie, and with their practiſe in bargainyng with them. After this, they paſſyng further, founde other people, contrary to the firſt, as well in their language, as in their maner of liuyng,Chelogua, a ryuer. the which people ſayd that they came from the great riuer Chelogua, for to make war againſt their neighbors, which afterward was known of a truthe by Iames Quartier, who toke one of their ſkiffes with ſeuen men, wherof he reſerued twaine, which he brought into Fraunce, and at his ſecond voyage did carie them backe againe, and alſo they returned againe, and were made Chriſtians, & ended their liues in Fraunce. Moreouer the ſayde Quartier coulde not learne the maner of liuing of the firſt Barbariens, neither what commoditie is in their countrey and region, bicauſe that it was not before frequented nor traded.
         
         
            Of an other countrey of Canada. Cap. 76.
            AS touching the other part of this Region of Canada,
               
                  An other region of Canada founde out by Quartier.
                  The amiable maners of theſe Canadiens.
               
where as remayne and inhabite the laſt wilde men: It hath ben ſince diſcouered beyond the ſayd riuer. of Chelogua, being more thā thrée or four hūdreth leagues by the ſaid Quartier, wheras he foūd the countrey well peopled, as well in his ſecond as firſt Nauigation: the people of that countrey is as obediente, and as amiable as is poſſible, & as familiar as though that alwayes they hadde bene broughte vp together

without any ſigne of yll will, or any other rigour. And there the ſayd Quartier made a certaine hold or caſtle for to winter him and his, likewiſe for to defend them againſt the colde weather, the which there is very rigorous. He was very wel intertained, conſidering the time & ſeſon: for the inhabitants brought them dayly boates ful of fiſh, as Eeles, Lampreys and others: like wiſe fleſhe and veniſon, wherof there is great plenty. Alſo they are greate hunters, be it either ſommer or winter with ſnares and otherwiſe: they vſe a kinde of rackets ſette together, with cordes of two foote and a halfe of length, and one foote broade, they were them on their féete in the froſt and in the ſnow,A kinde of rackets. chiefly when they go to hunt wild beaſts, to ye end that in folowing of their chaſe their féet ſinke not into the ſnow. Theſe people ar clad with ye ſkins of theſe wild beaſts, being corried & trimmed according to their maner.The vſe of theſe rackets. Nowe to take theſe beaſts they wil aſſēble .x. or .xij. together, being weponed with iauelins or boare ſpeares yt are xv. or .xvj. foote long, and garniſhed at the ende with the horne of ſome harte, or tooth of ſome other wild beaſt, the head wherof is at leaſt a foote long, the which they vſe in ſteade of yron, and Bowes and Arrowes, garniſhed wyth the ſame. Then they follow the footing of the Déere, and other wylde beaſtes in the Snowe,How theſe Canadians doe chaſe the dere & other wilde beaſtes. the whiche is common all the yeare long: and after that they haue founde out their trayne or footyng, they wil plant their braunches of Cedre which is gréene there all the yeare long, the which they plant in manner of nettes, and there they wil hide them being weaponed as before is ſhewed, ſo that the déere ſéeing the gréene boughes, drawe thytherwarde, and then they come forth, and cauſe the déere to quit and forſake that way,

and enter into the déepe ſnowes euen vnto the belly, where as they can not eaſily runne nor goe: and ſo by this meanes they are taken and killed, and opened in the fieldes, and ſo being wrapt in his ſkin, they drawe him to their houſes. And after this ſort they broughte them to the caſtle or hold that Iames Quartier did kepe both fleſhe and ſkinne, ſelling them for no other recō
               pēſe than kniues hatchets, and other yron tooles. Alſo I will not lette paſſe one thyng very ſingular, that is, when that theſe people are ſicke either of an ague, or any other inward diſeaſe, they take the leaues of a certaine trée, which is lyke to a Cedre, with the whiche they make a water that they drinke, ſo that there is no diſeaſe, be it neuer ſo feſtred in a mans body, but that this drinke will heale within .xxiiij. houres, which alſo Chriſtians haue tried, and haue brought the plantes therof into this countrey.
         
         
            What religion theſe Canadians vſe with their lyuing, and how they reſiſt the cold. Ca. 77.
            THeſe people in their liuyng and gouerning do not farre differ from the lawe of Nature,Howe theſe Canadians marrie. their matrimonie is, that a man may haue two or thrée wiues withoute any other ſolemnitie, as the Americans, of whiche we haue alreadie ſpoken. Of their Religion, they kéepe no meane, nor ceremonie in worſhyppyng or praying to God, ſauyng that they contemplate, the newe Moone,Oſannaha. called in theyr language Oſannaha, ſayeng that Andouagny dothe ſo call it, and then cauſeth it to ſpreade by litle and litle. Moreouer, they doe beleue, that there is a Creator more greater than the Sun or the Moone, and that hath all vnder his power,

and it is he whome they call Andouagny, and yet they neither knowe what waye to inuocate nor call vpon, to praye to him, nor to worſhip him, although that in ſome partes of Canada, they worſhip Idols,Andouagny, a God of the Canadians. and wyll haue them ſometimes in their lodgings aboue fortie or fiftie, the which was ſhewed me of a truth by a Portingall pylote, the which did on a time viſite two or thrée villages or hamlettes with the lodgyngs of the inhabitants. They beleue that the ſoule is immortall,The opinion of the Canadiās as touching the immortalitie of the ſoule.
and that if a man doe euil, when he is dead, a byrd beareth awaye his ſoule: Contrarywiſe, if that they doe well, the ſoule goeth into a place condecorate wyth goodly faire trees and floures, where as there are birds ſinging melodiouſly: of the which the lord of the countrey of Canada dyd informe vs,Donacoua Aguanna, king of the Canadians. beyng named Donacoua Aguanna, who dyed in Fraunce a good Chriſtian, and ſpake good frenche, for he had ben kept there foure yeres. And for bicauſe that I will not be tedious in this hiſtorie of theſe Canadians, ye ſhal note that theſe people vniuerſally are afflicted with continuall colde,The extreme colde of the countr
                     •
                  y of Canada. bycauſe of the abſence of the Sunne, as ye may wel vnderſtande, they inhabite in certaine villages and hamlettes, made like to halfe a circle, in greatneſſe twentie or thirtie paces, and ten of breadth, couered with barkes of trees, & ſome with réedes. And God knoweth whether that the colde doth greue them,The Canadians lodgings. hauing ſuche yll lodgings, yll couered, and worſe holden vp, ſo that many tymes the pillers with that which vpholdeth the houſe,Why the people toward the north pole are more couragious and hardie than thoſe toward the ſouth for the waight of the ſnowe that moſt commonly lieth vpon the houſe falleth down: yet notwithſtanding this extreme colde, they are mightie ſtrong and vnreaſonable great trauailers. Alſo all the people that dwell Northe are the lyke ſome more and ſome leſſe,

euen as thoſe that dwell towarde the Equinoctiall and ſouth pole, are contrary, bicauſe yt the vehement heate of the aire draweth out the naturall heate, fo that they are only hot without and cold within: the others haue their naturall heate encloſed, & prouoked to keepe in, bicauſe of ye outward cold,A ſea that is froſen. which maketh them ſtrong, ſtoute and valiant: for the force and facultie of all the parts of the body, dependeth of this natural heat. The ſea that is aboute thys countrey is froſen, bicauſe that it is ſo farre from the Sun, which from the eaſt to the weſt, paſſeth through the midſt of the world: And the greater that the naturall heate is, the better is a mās appetite, and the better doth he brooke and digeſt meates: ſo that theſe people towards the north eate more and haue a better ſtomacke than thoſe in other parts:Oftentimes there is famine in Canada and why. for the which cauſe oftentimes there is in Canada Famine: alſo for that their fruits, rootes, and other thinges, wherwith they ſuſtaine them, is froſen the moſte part of the yeare, likewiſe their riuers. We haue ſhewed how that they couer their houſes with barkes of trées: alſo they make boates to fiſh in, both for the ſalt water and the freſh. Thoſe of the lande of Labrador their neighbours,The countrey of Labrador founde out by the Spanyards. the which lande was diſcouered by the Spanyardes, thinking that by this coaſt they mighte finde a way more néerer to ſayle to Moluques, wheras ſpices are in lyke maner ſubiecte to theſe coldes, and they couer their lodgyngs with the ſkynnes of fiſhes and of wylde beaſtes, as alſo do other Canadians. Furthermore the ſayd Canadians liue together in common as doe the Americanes,
               How they labour the earth and they labour and worke ech one that whiche he can do. Some make pots of earth, others platters, dyſhes, ſpoones, and other thyngs of woode, others bowes and arrowes, baſkets, panniers

and other apparell of the ſkinnes that they doe vſe to weare to couer them from the colde. The women they labour the earth, and tourne it with certaine inſtruments of ſtones made long: and they ſow graine, ſpecially Myll as great as peaſon,Myll. and of diuers colours, the which they plante as we do Melons & gourdes, the ſtalke groweth like to Suger Canes, bearing thrée or foure eares, of which there is alway one more greate than the other, in manner like to our Artichokes. They plant alſo flatte Beanes,White beanes. as white as ſnow the which are very good, there are of that kind both in America, and in Perou.
               Cucumbers and how they vſe them., They haue alſo good plentie of Cucumbers, the which the eate roaſted in the imbers as we doe Peares and Wardens. Furthermore there is a litle ſede very ſmall like to Marioram ſéede, which bringeth forth an herbe ſomwhat great. This herbe is maruellouſly eſtéemed: alſo they drie it in the Sunne,A kinde of herbe. after that they haue gathered a greate quantitie, and cuſtomably they hāg it about their neck, being wrapped in leather with a kinde of thorne, hauing a hole in one end, where as they put an end of this herbe,The vſe of this herbe in parfume. being this dried, which after that they haue rubbed it a litle betwene their hāds, they put it to the fire, & ſo receiue the ſmoke by the other end of ye horn into their mouths and they take therof in ſuch quantitie, that it cometh forth both at the noſe, and at the eyes. And after that ſorte they parfume them all houres in the daye: The people of America, doe parfume them after an other maner, as we haue before ſhewed.
         
         
            Of theſe Canadians apparel, how they weare their haire, and howe their treate their children. Cap. 78.
            
               THeſe Canadians hauing much more ciuilitie thā ye inhabitants of America,
               The Canadians clothing. know the meane how to couer and cloth themſelues in beaſtes ſkins with their haire being trimmed after their manner, whereof wee haue here before ſpoken, peraduenture being conſtrained bicauſe of the extreme colde, and not otherwiſe, whiche occaſion being not ſhewed to others that inhabite America, cauſeth them to remaine naked without any ſhame one of an other. And yet the men of Canada, are not altogether clad, but only wrapped in theſe rough and heary ſkins like to an apron for to couer the ſhamfaſt parts of nature, brynging it betwixt their legs, & buttoned with buttons, on both the thighs, & thē they gird them with a brode girdle, which couereth all their body, and they haue their armes and legs bare, ſauing that vpō this they wear a long cloke with furred ſkinnes, ſowed ſo wel together, as if ſome maſter furrier or ſkinner of our countrey had thereto ſet his hand. Their clokes are made of Badgers ſkins Beares ſkins, Marterns, Panthers, Foxes, Hares, Ratts, and Coneys, & other ſkins corryed after their maner with haire & al: which to my iudgemēt hath cauſed this argument, that ſome think yt the wilde men ar all hearie.The auncient Galles in the time of Hercules wer like to wylde people. Some writers haue ſet out that Hercules of Lybia, comming into France, founde the people lyuing almoſt like to the wilde men that are as well in the eaſt Indies, as in America, without any ciuilitie, & the mē went almoſt al naked. Others were clad with beaſts ſkins of diuers colors. Such was the ſtate and condition of the firſt humaine kynde, being at the firſt rude & altogether out of frame, vntill yt by ſucceſſiō of time neceſſitie hath cōſtrained mē to inuēt many thinges for ye preſeruation and maintenance of their life.

Well now the poore wylde men wonder at our apparell, of what and howe it is made, demaundyng what trées heare ſuche things? as was demaunded of me in America, thinking that wooll dyd growe on trées, as doth their cotton: The vſe wherof was long time vnknowne: And as ſome writers doe affirme,The vſe of wooll, and by whome it was inuented. the firſte vſe thereof came from the Athenians, and by them it was firſt put in vre: others haue attributed it to Pallas, for bicauſe that wooll was vſed before that Athens was builded. For this cauſe the Athenians haue greatly honored and worſhipped the goddeſſe Pallas, for that they haue receiued of hir this greate benefite. And by this may be known that the ſayd Athenians and other people of Grecia, doe clothe them ſelues with ſkinnes like to theſe Canadians, and to the ſimilitude of our firſt parentes Adam and Eue, as witneſſeth Saint Hierom, leauing an example to all his poſteritie for to vſe the like, and not to go naked. For the which thing we can not giue ſufficient praiſe and thanks to God, the which of his prouidence farre aboue all other partes of the worlde, hath ſhewed fauour to our Europe. Now there reſteth to ſhewe how they weare their haire, the which is otherwiſe than the Americanes vſe.How theſe Canadiens weare their haire. Theſe people as well men as women haue their haire black and verie long: and they haue this difference, that the men haue their haire truſſed on their heades lyke a horſe taile, with certaine pinnes of woodde, that kéepeth it truſſed, hauyng beſides to couer their heads a Tygres ſkynne, or of a Beare, or ſome other wylde beaſt: ſo that to ſée them attired after this ſort, ye would iudge them to be ſome ſtage players: for that they lohe more like to the picture of Hercules, that the auncient Romanes were wont to make for their recreation and pleaſure,

and as he is ſet out nowe a dayes, than like any other thing: Others there are that couer their heads, and girde their bodies with marten ſables, beyng ſo named by the name of the religiō that is vſed in thoſe partes, where as this beaſt frequenteth, the whyche Furres we eſtéeme very precious and riche, bicauſe they are rare and ſcant, and therfore theſe ſkins with vs are for princes and great lordes to weare, for they are very ſcant. The Canadians haue no beards no more than thoſe of Breſſeill, for they ſhaue it of as ſoone as it buddeth.The clothyng that the wiues of Canada vſe to weare. As touching the women, they are clad wyth Bucke ſkinnes, béeing trimmed with the haire after their maner: and being therewith wrapped or couered they girde or bynde them ſelues wyth a girdell, that goeth thrée or foure tymes aboute, hauing always one arme and one pap or breſt out of the ſkinne at libertie the which ſkin couereth one of their ſhoulders, cōming croſſe their bodies like a pilgrims ſcrippe. Moreouer theſe women of Canada, weare hoſe of tawed lether, being well made after their maner, and painted or coloured with certaine herbes or fruites after their maner, their ſhoes are after the ſame ſorte. They obſerue matrimonie faithfully,Howe the Canadians marry eſchuing adulterie, and hating it aboue all things. True it is, that theſe men haue .iij. or .iiij. wiues, as we haue before ſhewed: the Kyng of that cuntrey may haue as many wiues as he wil, they name him Agahanna:
               Agahanna. the maidēs of that cuntry are not hated bicauſe they haue ſhewed pleaſure to yong men before that they haue ben maried (as they do in America, and therfore they haue certaine houſes in their villages, where as the men and women mete, being ſeparated from the yong men & maidens. Women that are widowes do neuer marie again, after the death of

their huſbands, but liue in ſorow the reſt of their life, and haue their face all blacked with the duſt of coales mingled with trayne oyle, with their haire hanging al about their face, and not truſſed vp behind, as ye others vſe: and after this ſort they go euen to their death.How they vſe their children. As touching the vſage of their yong children, they wrap them in .iiij. or .v. marterne ſkins being ſowed together, and then they haue a certain holow thing of wood which cōmeth betwene their legs without hurting thē in which the childe maketh water, & fileth, ſo that he neuer fileth nor toucheth his body, nor yet the ſkinnes that he is wrapped in. And this thing or gutter that is betwene their legs, is made of ſome tender and thinne barke of a trée. If this people were néerer Turkey, I wold thinke they had lerned this of the Turkes,
               A ſuperſtition vſed by the Turkes. or elſe that they had taught it them. I will neither ſaye nor iudge, that theſe wilde men thinke it to be ſinne, that their children ſhold weat them with their vrine, as the ſuperſtitious nation of the Turkes do, but rather for a ciuilitie that they haue aboue others. And by this may be knowne how much theſe poore brutiſh people do excell others in honeſtie. They plante or ſet a planke of wood for the childe bicauſe of the inferiour extremitie pointed into the earth, and the childe ſhall ſtand or lye vpright to ſleape with his head hanging downe.
         
         
            Howe theſe people make warre. Cap. 79.
            AS theſe people ſéeme almoſt to haue like maners and vſage, as other barbarous people haue:
                  The Canadiās are warlike people.
                  Toutaniens enimies to the Canadians.
                alſo there is no nation more prompt & readie to make warre one with a nother thā they are, & that vſe their feates of warre moſt likeſt vnto them, onely certaine things excepted. The Toutaniens, the Guadelphes, and

               Chicorins, make warre commonly againſt the Canadians,
               Of Ochelagua and Seguana. and other ſtraunge people that deſcende from the great riuer of Ochelagua and Saguena, which Riuers are verie faire and great, bearing very good fiſhe, and that great plentie. Alſo by theſe riuers ye may enter aboue three hundreth leagues into the countrey, and alſo into the land of theyr enimies with ſmall boates, bicauſe of the rockes. And the olde people of the countrey ſay,How they prepare them to make warre. that they which were minded to folow theſe two riuers, they ſhould in a fewe moones (for ſo they do recken) finde diuers kindes of people, and abundance of gold and ſiluer: beſides this, theſe two Riuers being ſeparated the one from the other, they mete and ioyne together in one place, and being thus together thei enter farre into newe Spayne, for they border one another as Fraunce doeth and Italie. And therefore when that they haue warre in Canada, theyr greate Agahanna, which is as much to ſay, their King or Lord doth commaunde all other Lords vnder his authoritie, for euery village hath his ſuperior, that they make them readie to come before him in their beſt araye, with men, victuals and munitions of warre, as their cuſtome and maner is to doe: and then euery one will make them ſelues readie to obey their lordes commandement: and ſo they will come together on the water with their litle barkes and ſkiffes, made of the barkes of trées, as they doe in America,
               Theſe Canadiens vſe feates and policie in their warre. and in other places. Then the aſſemblie being made, they goe to ſéeke their ennimies: and when they knowe that they ſhal mete them, they put them ſelues in aray to giue the onſet, in as good order as is poſſible, with many featſ and policies, according to their cuſtome. If that they tarry at home for their enimies, they fortifie their lodgings with certain

pieces of woode, fagots and braunches, being daubed or ſmeared with the greaſe of a Seawoulf, or with ſome other poyſon, to the ende that they may poyſon their enimies, if that they come néere, the which they ſet on fier, from the whiche procedeth ſuch a thicke blacke and dangerous ſmoke to ſmel on, bicauſe of the extreme ſtincke, that it killeth thoſe that ſmell it, and beſides this it ſo blindeth their enimies, that they cannot ſée one another. And they vſe ſuch a policie with this ſmoke,Another policy that what winde ſo euer bloweth, they will cauſe it to flye towards their enimies. Lykewiſe they vſe to make fiſhes of the leaues of certayne trées and of hearbes, the which being dried in the Sunne, they mingle amongſte theſe fagots and braunches, then they ſet fire thereon, when that they ſée their enimies comming a farre of. After this ſorts they did defende themſelues againſt the firſte Chriſtians that diſcouered their lande, doing their good willes with certayne of the foreſayde greaſe to ſet fire on their ſhips: but they were enformed of this enterpriſe, and therefore they gaue ſuch order that the Canadians were preuented. Neuertheleſſe as I was enformed, theſe poore wilde men had not conſpired this enterpriſe, but iuſtly and in a good quarrell, conſidering the wrong, that they had firſt receiued of others. For our men being deſcended a land ſome yong men among them for their pleaſure, moſte wicked and fooliſh, vſing themſelues more lyker Tyrantes than Chriſtians, dyd cut of bothe Armes and Legs of ſome of theſe poore people, bicauſe that they woulde proue whether their ſwordes woulde cut well or no: And yet the poore people receiued them gently. And for this occaſion they haue not permitted ſince any Chriſtian there to aborde nor ſet foote on lande, neither yet to trade or traffick as by experience hath ben knowen. Now to our purpoſe:

theſe Canadians ſet forwarde in the warre foure and foure,How theſe Canadians march in the warre. and when they are redy to ioyne battell, they make a great noyſe with exclamations and other fantaſies, euen like to the Amazones, of which we haue ſpokē, for to giue feare and dreade to their enimies, they carry many ſtandards made of braunches, being decked with Penons and Swans fethers.A kinde of Drummes that they vſe. Their drummes are of certayne ſkins being borne of two men, and one commeth behinde and layeth on with two ſtickes, as harde as he can, their flutes are made of the ſhanke bones of a bucke, or ſome other wilde beaſte. And after this ſorte the Canadians fight,Howe they vſe to fight. with Bowes and Arrowes, rounde Clubs of woodde, foure ſquare Staues, Launces, Moriſpikes, and others, the which are headed with bones in ſtede of Irō & ſtéele. They vſe alſo targets, & ſome of them vſe to haue and weare a coyfe made of a thicke Beares ſkin for the defence of their heades,Howe our elders in times paſt vſed to fight. ye ſhall note that the elders in times paſt vſed as the wilde men doe to fight with their fiſtes, ſpurne with their fete, to bite with their téeth & to pull one another by the hayre with ſuch like. And ſince they vſed ſtones in their fight, the which they threw one at another,Heroditus. as it appeareth in the holy Byble. Furthermore Heroditus, in his firſte booke ſpeaking of certayne people,
                  Virgins vſed to fight one with another at the feaſts of the Goddeſſe Minerua.
                  Diodorus. The Anciēt cuſtome of the men of Thebes & Lacedemonians in fighting.
                that fought with Staues and Clubs, ſaith that the Virgins of that countrey had a cuſtome to fight euery yeare with ſtones and Staues one agaynſt the other, in honor of the Goddeſſe Minerua, on that day that was celebrated to hir. Alſo Diodorus in his firſte booke ſayeth, that clubs and Lyōs ſkins were good for Hercules to fight with, for before that tyme other Armors was not vſed. Who ſo euer will reade Plutarchus, Iuſtinus and other Authors, ſhall finde that the Ancient Romaynes did fight naked: the men of Thebes and the Lacedemonians, did reuenge

themſelues of their enimies with Staues & clubs of woode. And ye ſhall note that the people were then as hardy as they are at this day, and yet they were naked, hauing no more clothing thā the Canadians haue of their ſkins, and they are alſo deſtitute and know not the feats & policies of warre, with the which theſe Canadians can ſhifte and helpe themſelues. Wel theſe people of Canada,
               How theſe Canadians treate their enimies. do not with their enimies as the Americans do, the which eate them (but that which is much more tolerable) but if that they take any of their enimies or otherwiſe remayn victors, they pull the ſkin quite ouer their eares and then drie it, and ſo they carrie it into their countrey, ſhewing it with greate glorie to their wiues, friends and olde people, which for age cannot go to the warres in ſigne of victorie. To conclude, they are not ſo prone to make warre, as thoſe people of Perou and Breſsill, peraduēture bicauſe of the difficultie that the froſt and ſnow cauſeth, with inconueniences that they haue in thoſe partes.
         
         
            Of Mynes, precious Stones, and other ſecretes that are founde in Canada. Cap. 80.
            THe land and countrey of Canada,
               The goodneſſe of the countrey of Canada. is faire and vnder a good clymate, and very good of it ſelf, excepting the vntemperatneſſe of the ayre, the whiche doeth hurte it as ye may eaſily coniecture, it beareth many trées and fruites, the which we knowe not with vs. Among the which there is one trée of the greatneſſe and lyke to one of our greate nut trées that we haue, the whiche hath remayned a greate tyme vnprofitable and not knowne, vntill ſuch tyme that one by chaunce cutte hym, and then there ranne forth a Iuyce, the whiche was

founde to haue ſo good taſte and as pleaſant, as the beſte wine in Fraunce:
               The iuyce of a tree hauing a taſte like good wine. alſo it was ſo iudged by our men that then taſted thereof, euen the Captayne with certayne Gentlemen of his company, and at that tyme they gathered of the ſayd Iuice aboue fiue or ſixe pots ful. Therfore iudge you if that the Canadians ſince that tyme haue not made great ſtore thereof, ſéeing that it is ſo good and excellent to drinke. This trée in their language is called Cotton.
               Cotton a tree. Naturall vine rootes in Canada. Alſo there is another almoſte vncredible to thoſe that haue not ſene it. There is founde in Canada, many places and countreys that beare very good vynes, euen of their owne nature, growing out of the earth, without mans labor, bearing great quantitie of Grapes, faire great and good for to eate, but yet I know not whether that the wine be good or no. It is not to be doubted, but that thoſe that firſt did diſcouer this land, foūd theſe things very ſtrange. In this countrey is goodly hils and valeys,Stones like in colour to a mine of golde. and in theſe hye hills and mountaynes be founde certayne ſtones, being in weight and colour like a golde mine, but whē it was tried, it was found good, for it brake & turned into aſhes. It is not vnpoſſible, but that in thoſe places may be founde mynes, as good and as perfect, as thoſe of Perou, if that the grounde were vndermyned. As touching mynes of Iron and Braſſe,Mynes of Iron, and mynes of Braſſe. there are ſtore. Moreouer there are ſtones made and faſhioned lyke to a Diamond, whereof there are ſome in the valleys, and others in the hills. They whiche firſte founde them, thought to haue bene made rich for euer, thinking that they were perfect Diamonds, wherof they brought home a greate number.Diamonds of Canada. A Prouerbe. And from thence came this prouerbe or common worde, (it is a Dyamond of Canada) it is lyke to the Diamonds of Calicut, and of the Eaſte Indies. Some ſay that theſe Diamonds are a kind of fine

Criſtall, of the which I can giue no other concluſion,Opinions on the creation of Cryſtall. but to ſay as Plinie ſayeth, that Criſtall procedeth of Snow and water, that is excedingly froſen, therefore in thoſe places that are ſubiect to froſt and ſnow, it may be made that ſome parte thereof by proceſſe of tyme conuerteth, and turneth lyke to Criſtall. Solon,
               Solon. thinketh this opinion to be falſe, that Criſtall ſhoulde not engender of ſnowe, for if it were ſo, it ſhoulde be founde onely in colde places as in Canada, and in other colde countreys, but the experience ſheweth the contrarie as appereth in the Iland of Cypris, Rhodes, and in many places of Egypt, and of Graecia, as I my ſelf haue ſene when I was there, that there was founde, and is founde at this preſent great plenty of Criſtall, by the whiche argument we may iudge, that Cryſtall commeth not of froſen water, conſidering that in thoſe countreys of whiche we ſpeake, the heate is more vehement (yea without compariſon) than in Canada, whiche countrey as afflicted with continuall colde. Diodorus ſayth,Diodorus Cryſtal of Canada. that Cryſtall is engendred of pure water, and not froſen together by colde, but rather dryed by vehement heate. Notwithſtanding the Criſtall of Canada, is more reſplendent and more finer than that of Cypris and other places. In times paſt the Emperours of Rome did greatly eſteme fine Cryſtall,How greatly Criſtall was eſtemed in tymes paſt of the Ancient Emperours of Rome, and to what vſe it was put. and therewith cauſed their veſſels to be made wherein they did eate. Others made therewith ſimilitudes the whiche they kept cloſed in their cloſets and treaſuries. Lykewiſe the Kings of Egypte, in thoſe dares when the great Citie of Thebes flouriſhed, dyd beautifie their ſepulters with fine Cryſtall, the which was brought from Armenia the greate, and from the coaſte of Siria, and of Cryſtal was the pictures and images of Kings made to their lykeneſſe, for to remayne as they thought and to be in

perpetuall memorie. By this ye may ſée how much Criſtall hath ben eſtemed, and to what vſe it was employed. And now a dayes it is beſtowed to make cups & veſſels, a thing greatly eſtemed, if that it were not ſo weake. To conclude,Iaſper ſtones & Caſsidonies. in Canada is founde great ſtore of Iasper ſtone and Caſsidonies.
            
         
         
            Of Earthquakes and hayles to the which this countrey of Canada is very ſubiect. Cap. 81.
            THis Region of Canada is greatly ſubiect to earthquakes and to hayles,The countrey of Canada is ſubiect to earthquakes, & why. and therefore theſe poore people being ignorāt of natural things, yea much more of heauēly things, are greatly afrayd, although that theſe things are common, they think that theſe things procede from their Gods, for that they haue offended them. Notwithſtanding, earthquakes commeth not but of windes that are ſhut in in certayn craſſes of the earth, the which by greate power cauſeth it to ſhake, as in lyke manner it cauſeth many times great trées to ſhake, yea and bloweth them vp by the rootes, of the which Ariſtotle doth ſhewe. As touching hayle,Hayle rife in Canada. it is not to be maruell though it be rife bicauſe of the vntemperatneſſe and vnconſtancie of the ayre, being very colde in this Region, bicauſe of the diſtāce of the Sunne, the which commeth no néerer than when it commeth to our Tropicke. And therefore the water that falleth from the Firmamēt is alwayes froſen, bicauſe that the aire is alwayes colde, and therefore it is alwayes haile or ſnow. Now theſe Canadians when that they féele ſuch incommodities, for the affliction that they receiue, they kepe thēſelues in their houſes with certaine domeſtical beaſts that they nouriſh. And there they make

their mone to their Idols; whoſe forme and lykeneſſe is not much vnlike to the fabulouſe picture of Meluſin of Luſignam, being halfe a Serpent and halfe a Woman: for the heade of their Idoll with hir haire repreſenteth according to their brutiſh maner a woman. And the reſt of their body is lyke to a Serpent. The which may cauſe Poets to fayne that Meluſin was their Goddeſſe. The earthquakes be dangerous, although the caſe be euident.Earthquakes are dangerous. The opinion of ſome Philoſophers as touching earthquakes. Séeing that we are come to ſpeake of earthquakes, we will ſhewe thereof one word, according to the opinion of naturall Philoſophers, with the inconueniences that folowe. Thales Mileſius, one of the ſeuen wiſe men of Grecia, ſayde that water was the beginning of al things, and that the earth floting in ye middeſt of this water was in a continuall quaking, ſometymes more, and ſometymes leſſe. Of this ſame opinion was Democrites, and fayde furthermore, that the water vnder the earth being burſt out by rayne, coulde not bicauſe of his exceſſe quantitie, be contayned in the vaynes and compaſſe of the earth, but cauſed theſe earthquakes, and of this procedeth the Springs and Fountaynes that we haue. Anaxagoras ſayd, it was fier the which coueting (as it is his nature) to riſe hye and to ioyne with the fier Elementarie, cauſeth not onely this quaking, but certayne openings, goulfes, and ſuch lyke in the earth, as we may ſée in certa yne places, and confirmed his opinion in that the earth burneth in certayne places. Anaximines doeth affirme the earth it ſelfe to be the cauſe of this quaking, the whiche being opened bicauſe of the exceſſiue heate of the Sunne, the ayre entereth in greate quantitie, and with vyolence, the whiche after that the earth is cloſed agayne, hath no iſſue: And by this meanes

the belly of the earth beginneth to moue, & this cauſeth the earthquake.What the wind 
                     ••
                  . The which ſemeth more to agrée with reaſon and trueth than the others, according as we haue folowing Ariſtotle, alſo that the winde is no other thing than an ayre that riſeth rangingly. But leauing theſe opinions of naturall cauſes and of earthquakes the which may come by other reaſons only by the permiſſion of the moſt higheſt vnknowen to vs.The inconueniences that folowe earthquakes. The inconueniens and miſhaps, that come thereby, is ouerwhelming of Towns and Cities as happened in Aſia, of ſeuen Cities in the time of Tiberius Caeſar, and of the Metropolitane Citie of Bithinie, during the raigne of Cōſtantinus. Many alſo haue ben ſwallowed vp by the earth, and others drowned with waters, as was Elicea and Aura at the ports of Corinth. And for to be ſhort, this earthquake commeth ſometimes with ſuch vehemence that beſide the inconueniences afore ſhewed, it maketh Ilandes of mayne land, as it hath done Sicily, with certayne places in Siria and others, it ioyneth ſometymes Ilandes to mayne land, as Plinie ſaith, to be happened of thoſe of Doromſcia Parua, in millites. In Africa many playnes and valleys are at this day turned to lakes and riuers.Seneca. Alſo Seneca ſheweth that a flocke aboue fiue hundreth Shepe and other beaſtes and foules were on a tyme ſwallowed vp and loſt by an earthquake. And for this reaſon the moſte parte kepe them by the Riuers ſides for to eſchewe this earthquake, being taught by experience and not by reaſon, that mariſh grounde and wet places, are not ſo ſubiect to earthquakes, as the mayne and the hyelande, and therefore this reaſon is very eaſy to thoſe that vnderſtād the occaſion of the earthquakes before alleged. And for this cauſe the riche and renomed temple of Diana in Epheſus, the which continued more than two hundreth

yeares, being ſo ſtrongly edified that it meriteth to be in the number of one of the ſpectacles of the world,Why the Tēple of Diana was edified on a mariſh ground. was ſet on piles of woode in a mariſhe place, for bicauſe that it ſhould not be ſubiect to Earthquakes, vntil ſuch time as one Heluidius, or as ſome terme him Eratoſthenes, being fooliſhly minded, for bicauſe that he would be knowne, and that his memorial might be ſhewed, did ſet it on fire, and conſumed it to aſhes. Alſo for this cauſe the Romains had edified a Temple to Hercules, by the riuer of Tyber, and there they did pray and offer ſacrifices.Earthquakes in Canada very violent. Nowe this earthquake is ſo vehement and contagious in Canada, that within .v. or .vj. leagues of their houſes within the Countrey, there ſhall be found more than two thouſand trées ouerthrowne to the earth, as well on hils as on valeys, rockes ouerthrowne one vpon an other, the ground to ſinke and to be ſwalowed vp, and all this hapneth not, but of mouing and ſtirring of the earth. The like may happen to other Countreys that are ſubiecte to earthquakes. Thus much thought I good to ſpeake of earthquakes, without ſtraying farre from our matter.
         
         
            Of the Countrey called New found land. Cap. 82.
            AFter that we were departed from the heigth of the gulfe of Canada, it behoued vs to paſſe further, kéeping our courſe right North, leauing the lande of Labrador, and the Ilands called the Ilands of Deuils,
                  The Ilands of Deuils.
                  Cape de Marco Newe found lād a very cold countrey.
                and the Cape of Marco diſtant from the line .56. degrées, we coaſted on the left hand the Countrey that is named Newe founde lande, the which is very colde, and therfore thoſe that did firſt finde it out, made there no long abiding, nor thoſe neither that goe thither oftentimes for

fiſhe. This new found land is a region, that is one of the fartheſt partes of Canada, and in the ſame land there is found a riuer, the which bicauſe of his bredth and length ſéemeth to be almoſt a Sea, and it is named the riuer of the thrée brethren, being diſtant from the Ilands of Eſsores foure hundreth leagues, and from Fraunce nine hundreth: it ſeparateth the Prouince of Canada from this New found land. Some iudge it to be a narow Sea, like that of Magellan, by the which ye may enter from the Weſt ſea, to the South ſea. Gemafrigius, although he was expert in Mathematike, hath herein failed & erred, for he maketh vs beleue, that this Riuer of which we ſpeake is a ſtraight, the which is named Septentrionall, and ſo hath he ſette it out in his Mappa Mundi. If that which he hath written be true, in vaine then haue the Portingals bene, and Spanyards to ſéeke a new ſtraight diſtant from this, aboue .3000. leagues, for to enter into the South ſea, to goe to the Ilands of Moluques, where as the ſpices are. This Countrey of New found land is inhabited with barbarous men, being clothed in wilde beaſtes ſkinnes, as are thoſe of Canada: this people is very frowarde and vntractable, as our men can well teſtifie that goe thither euery yeare a fiſhing. They that dwel by the Sea, liue with little kinde of other meate than fiſhe, which they take in the ſea, wherof they take a great multitude,Oyle of the fat of fiſhe. & chiefly ſea Wolues, of which they eate the fleſh, which is very good. With the fat of this fiſh, they make a certaine Oyle, that after it is come to his perfection, hath a redde colour, which they drink at their tables as we do wine or béere. Of the ſkin of this fiſh which is ſtrōg and thick, as if it were of ſome wild beaſts, they make clokes & garments according to their maner, which is a meruellous thing, that in a element ſo moiſt as that is, which is moiſt of it ſelf, cā be noriſhed a beaſt or fiſh, that hath the

ſkin hard and dry, as beaſts of the earth haue. Likewiſe they haue other fiſhes that haue hard ſkins, as ye Grampas & the Dog fiſh and others with ſtrong ſhels, as Torterels, Oyſters, Muſcles, & ſuche like. Beſides this, they haue great plenty of other good fiſh bothe ſmal and great, of which they liue daily. I maruell that the Iewes, Turkes,
               The ſuperſtition of diuers nations in Leuant. 
               Grekes, & many other natiōs in the Eaſt eat no Dolphins nor of many other kinde of fiſhes, that are without ſhell, as wel in the ſea as in freſh waters, which maketh me to iudge that theſe people are more wiſer & better aduiſed to finde the taſt in meats more delicate, than wheras are Turks, Arabians, and other ſuperſtitious people. In thoſe parts there is alſo found Whales, (I meane in ye hie ſea, for ſuch fiſh neuer cometh toward the ſhore) to liue with ſuch little fiſh. Notwithſtanding,With what fiſh the Whale liueth. the fiſh that the Whale doth moſt commonly eate, is no greater than a Carpe, a thing almoſt vncredible conſidering hir greatneſſe, the reaſon therof as ſome ſay, is for bicauſe yt the whale hath but a litle throte in cōpariſon of ye greatneſſe of his body, & therfore he cannot deuour a greater fiſh. The which is a wonderfull ſecrete, & vnknowne as well to our elders as to vs, although that they haue treated of fiſhes, the female hath but one yōg one at a time, which ſhe bringeth forth as a beaſt of ye earth without egge, & that which is more wōderful, ſhe giueth ſuck to hir yōg one after yt ſhe hath brought it forth. And therfore ſhe hath .ij. rothers vnder hir belly vnder ye nauel, which no other fiſh hath, neither in the ſea nor in freſh water, but only ye ſea Wolfe, as witneſſeth Plinie.
               Plinie ſheweth that a Whale is dangerous on the ſea to mete. This whale is dangerous to méete on the ſea, as the Bayones cā wel tel by experiēce, for they vſe to take them. To the purpoſe, ye ſhall note when that we wer in America, ſome Marchantes ſhip yt paſſed from one lād to another for marchādiſe was ouerthrown, & all yt was within hir loſt by a whale yt touched hir wt hir tail.

In the ſame place wheras the Whale frequenteth,A fiſhe that is perpetuall enimie to the Whale. there is found moſte commonly a fiſhe that is his mortall enimie, ſo that if ſhe méete the Whale, ſhe will pricke the whale vnder the belly, which is the ſofteſt and tendereſt place, with hir tong that cutteth like a Barbars raſer, ſo that he being thus hurt, cannot ſaue himſelf, but that he dieth as the inhabitants of New found land do ſhew, and the common fiſher men. In this Sea of Newe found land, there is a kinde of fiſhe that the people of the countrey call Hehec,
               Hehec a fiſhe. hauing a bil like a Popengay, and other fiſhes with ſhell. There is found in the ſame place great ſtore of Dolphins, that ſhewe themſelues many times aboue water, leaping and floting; the which ſome iudge to be foreſhewings of tempeſts and fowle weather, from the part or coaſt that they come from,Foreſhewings of tempeſts. Iſidorus. as Plinie ſheweth, & Iſidorus in his Etymologies, which I haue alſo knowne by experience, the which is more ſurer than the witneſſing either of Plinie or of any other. Some haue written that there is fine kindes of ſignes and forthe wings of tē
               peſts and ſtormes on the Sea, as Polybius being with Scipio Aemilian in Affrica. Furthermore, there are great plenty of great muſcles: and as for beaſtes of the earth, there are a great number very wilde and daungerous,Straūge beaſts. as great Beares, the which are almoſt all white, and biſides beaſtes, there are foules of the aire, of which the fethers are all white, the which I thinke happeneth bicauſe of the extréeme coldneſſe of the Countrey: but theſe Beares which I ſpake of, are day and night about the houſes of this people, for to deuoure their Oyle and Fiſhe. As touching theſe Beares, although that we haue treated thereof at large in our Coſmographie of Leuant, yet notwithſtanding we will ſpeake ſomewhat thereof by the way, howe the inhabitants of the Countrey take

them, being afflicted with ye importunitie that they make them. Therfore they make certaine pittes in the ground very déepe, néere to trees and rockes, and then they couer them finely with leaues and braunches, and this they vſe where as are hiues or multitude of Hony Bées, which theſe Beares ſéeke and follow with all diligence, & thereof they are very deſirous, not only ſo much for to fil them therewith, but for to heale their eyes, the whiche they haue naturally blemiſhed and all their braine: alſo that being ſtinged with theſe Hony Bées, there falleth from them a bloud, ſpecially from the head, wherby their paine is eaſed, ſo that they are comforted thereby. There is alſo ſéene a kinde of great beaſtes like to Buffles, hauing hornes very great, their ſkin is grayiſhe, of which they make garments, and of many other beaſts, whoſe ſkins are very riche. This Countrey is full of hils and mountaines, and very barraine, as well for bicauſe of the vntemperateneſſe of the aire, as of the condition of ye lande ſmally inhabited, and ill tilled. As for birds, there are not found ſuche quantitie as in America, or at Perou, nor yet ſo faire. There are two kinde of Egles, of which the one kinde kéepeth the waters, and liueth onely with fiſhe,Two kindes of Egles. chiefly with ſhell fiſhe, the which ſhe taketh vp, and flieth into the aire, and ſo letteth it fall, and breaketh it, for to get the fiſhe out: this Egle maketh hir neſt in great hie trées by the ſea ſide. Alſo in this Countrey there is many faire riuers, and a multitude of good fiſhe. This people prepareth for nothing, but that which is néedefull to ſuſtaine nature, ſo that they are not curious in meates, for they goe not to ſéeke any thing in farre Countreys, and yet their nouriſhment is healthſome, and therefore they know not what ſickneſſe meanes, but they liue in peace and in continuall health, ſo that they haue no occaſion

to conceiue enuie one againſt an other, bicauſe of their goods and patrimonie: for they are in a maner all equall in goodes and riches, being in one mutuall contentation and equalneſſe in pouerty. Alſo they haue no place ordained for to miniſter iuſtice, for bicauſe that among them, they do nothing worthy of reprehenſion. They haue no lawes no more than the worthy Americanes & other people, but only the law of nature. The people that dwell toward the ſea as I haue ſhewed liue with fiſh, and others that are farre from the ſea, are content with fruits of the earth that commeth forth, the moſt part without labour of mannes hands: and after this ſorte liued the people in the firſt age as Plinie witneſſeth:
                  In his .xvj. boke of his naturall hiſtory.
                  Virgill Foreſtof Dodona.
                alſo we ſée in our dayes how the earth bringeth forth fruit without labor. Virgill ſheweth that the Foreſt Dodana began to die bicauſe of his age, or elſe for bicauſe that it could not ſatiſfie the multitude of people that then did multiply, and therefore they began to labor and till the earth, for to receiue the fruits therof for the ſuſtainmēt of their liues, ſo that they began huſbādry.Howe the men of Newe found land do warre. Moreouer theſe people make not warre vnleſſe that their enimies come to ſéeke them, & then they put them al to defence like to the Canadians, their inſtruments that giue men corage to fight, are beaſtes ſkinnes ſpread in maner of a circle, which ſerueth them in ſteade of drummes, with fluites of bones of Déere like to the Canadians, if that they perceiue their enimies a farre of, they will prepare to fight with their armors and weapōs which are bowes and arrowes. And before yt they enter into battell, their principall guide the which they honour as a King, ſhal goe the firſt, being armed with faire ſkins and fethers, ſitting on the ſhoulders of two mighty men, to the ende that euery one ſhould ſée him, and know him alſo to be ready to obey him, what ſo euer he ſhall commaund.

And when they obtaine victory, he ſhall lacke no honor, & ſo they returne ioyfull to their houſes with their banners diſplayed,Strange bāners. which are braunches of trées garniſhed with fethers of ſwannes wauering in the aire, and bearing the ſkin of the face of their enimies ſpred in litle circles in token of victorie.
         
         
            Of the Ilands of Eſſores. Cap. 83.
            THere reſteth now nothing of all our voyage,The Ilandes of Eſſores why it is ſo named & feared of the Nauigantes. but to ſpeake of certain Ilands that they call Eſſores, which we coaſted on the right hand, not without great dā
               ger of ſhipwracke. For .iij. or .iiij. degrées beyond, and on this ſide there bloweth alwayes a winde ſo cold & contagious, that for this reſpect it is feared of the Pilots & Nauigants, as the moſt dangerous place that is in the voyage, be it to goe either to the Indies or to America: by this ye may know yt the Sea in thoſe parts are neuer calme, but alwayes rough & growne, as we ſée many times the winde to blow vp the duſt into the aire, the which we cal a tempeſt or fowle weather, which is as well vpon ye land as on the ſea, for in the one and the other, it riſeth like a poynt of fire that raiſeth the water of a heigthe when it plaweth or boileth, as I haue many times ſene. And therfore it ſéemeth that the wind hath a mouing vpward like a whirle wind of which I haue ſpoken in an other place. For this cauſe theſe Ilands wer ſo named, bicauſe of the great Eſſor that cauſeth this winde in the ſaid Ilands,Eſſores. for Eſſores is as much to ſay, to dry or to wipe cleane. Theſe Ilands are diſtant from Fraunce, about .x. degrées and a halfe, and they are .ix. in nūber, of which the beſt of them are inhabited with Chriſtians Portingalles,
               The fruitfulneſſe of the Ilāds of Eſſores. whether as they did ſend many ſlaues for to laboure the ground, the which by their great paine and diligence they haue made

fruitfull with all good fruits neceſſary for mannes ſuſtenaunce, chiefly with wheat, the which groweth there ſo plentifully, that therewith all the land of Portingall is furniſhed. The which they tranſport in their ſhips, with many good fruits, as well naturally of the Countrey, as other where: but there is one amongſt others, named Hyrcy,
               Hyrcy. the plant wherof was brought from the Indies, for there was none thereof found before, euen as in the Canaries. Likewiſe in our Europe, before they began to labor the earth, to plant and to ſowe diuers kinds of fruits men were contented onely with that the earth brought forthe of his nature, hauing then to drinke nothing but cléere water, and for their clothing the barks and leaues of trées with certaine ſkins of beaſtes, as we haue already ſhewed. In the which we may cléerely ſée a wonderful prouidence of our God, the which hath placed in the ſea great quantitie of Ilands bothe little and great, which doeth abide and ſuſtaine the brunt of the waues of the ſea, that goeth not beyonde their compaſſe or limits, neither hurteth the inhabitaunts: for the Lord as the Prophet ſayth, hath appoynted his limits, the which he doeth not ouerpaſſe. Of theſe Ilands, ſome are inhabited that before were deſert, and many are forſaken, that in times paſt were inhabited and peopled, as we ſée hath hapned to many Cities and Townes of the Empire of Greece, Trapezande and Egipt, ſuch is the ordinance of God, that things héere in earth ſhall not be perdurable, but ſubiect to chaunging. The which being conſidered of our Coſmographers in our dayes, they haue added to the Tables of Ptolomeus newe matters of our time, for ſince ye time and knowledge that he hath written, there hath happened many newe things. Now theſe Ilands of Eſſores; were deſert, before that the Portingalls knew them. Neuertheleſſe

they were full of woods of all ſorts, among the which is founde a kynd of Ceder named in their ſpeach Orcantine,
               Orcantine a kinde of Ceder. with the which they make fyne karued works, as tables, cofers and many veſſels for the Sea. This wood hath a very good ſmel, and wil not rot neither be worme eaten, be it dry or wette as other wood wil. Of the which alſo Plinie ſpeaketh,Plynie. that in his time was found at Rome, in an old Sepulcher certaine bookes of Philoſophy betwene two ſtones within a lyttle cheſt made of Ceader wood, the which had ben vnder the grounde aboue fyue hundreth yeares.A cheſt of Ceder. Furthermore, I remember that I haue read in times paſt, that Alexander the great, paſſing into the Iland of Tabroban, founde a ſhip of Ceder wood on the borders or coaſt of the ſea,A ſhip of Ceder. whereas it had remayned aboue two hūdreth yeares without rotting. And thereof this prouerbe in Lattin came (Digna Cedro.)
               A Prouerbe. Theſe Ceders are not ſo hye neither of ſuch a ſauor as thoſe that are in the ſtraight of Magellan, although it be of the ſame highneſſe as are theſe Ilands of Eſſores. Lykewiſe ther is found many other trées ſmall & great, bearing faire fruite, chiefly in the beſt & moſt notable Ilande, the which they haue named the Iland of S. Michael,
               The Iland of S. Michel. and it is the beſt peopled. In this Iland there is a very faire towne lately builded with a caſtle, where as the ſhips aſwell of Spayne as Portingal, at their retourne from the Indies do harbor, before that they ſayle home into their countries. In one of theſe Ilands there is a hyll or moūtaine almoſt as high as that of Teneryf, of which we haue ſpoken, where as groweth great plenty of Paſtel
               ▪ of Suger, and ſome wyne, there is no rauening beaſts to be found, but there is certaine wylde Goats & many foules in the woods. From the heigth of theſe

trées it behoued vs to ſayle forwarde, vntill we came to the Caape Finistra,
               Cape Fyniſtra. on the coaſt of Spayne, where as we landed very late for to recouer victuals, whereof we had great néed for to ſuſtaine vs, vntill that we arriued into Britayn, which is a countrey vnder the power and obedience of Fraunce.
            
            
               The Authors concluſion.Here haue I louyng readers, ſhewed the diſcourſe of this may farre and long voyage to the Ponent, the which I haue ſet forth as well as God hath gyuen me grace, for that I woulde not be founde vnprofytable, neither that this my enterpriſe ſhould be in vayne, peraduenture not ſo eloquently, as your delicate eares and ripe iudgement doth require. Therefore ſeing that it hath not bene the pleaſure of God, that I ſhould beſtow my youth in learning, nor to obtain ſo much perfection as others, but rather in nauigation, I moſte heartily beſeeche you to excuſe me. In the meane tyme if that it pleaſe you to take in good part this preſent worke, the which I haue gathered together being in the tempeſts and other diſcommodities of the ſea, you ſhall encourage me, after that I haue reſted my ſelfe, and reconciled my ſpirites, whiche are as ſcattered here and there, to ſet forth more fully and at large the lyeng and diſtāce of places, the which I haue obſerued by eye as well in Leuant,
               The Authors Cardes, contayning the lyeng & diſtances of places. as in the Ponent, and in the South, the which I hope to ſhew you by eye, & repreſent by liuely figures beſides the Carde Marins, the which to ſpeake the truthe, without offence or hurt of any man, do erre and fayle in many things, whether it be the faulte of thoſe that pricke them or ſet them out, I leaue you to iudge. Furthermore, as it is vneaſie ſo is it alſo vnpoſſible for any one iuſtly to repreſent the moſt notable places their lyengs, and diſtances, without hauing

ſéene them, the whiche is the ſureſt knowledge of all, as all men may well iudge and vnderſtande.
            By this ye may ſée how long tyme we haue bene ignorant of many countreys, as well Ilands as maine landes, beleeuyng onely that, whiche oure Elders hadde ſet forth, vntyll that ſince of late yeares men haue ieoparded them ſelues in the Nauigation: So that nowe all our Hemiſpherie is diſcouered and founde inhabited: of the which Ptolomeus, and others knewe not the halfe.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶The Table of the Chapters of this preſent Boke.
            
               HOvv the Author toke shipping. cap. 1
               Of the ſtraight auncienly named Calpe, and novv Gebaltary. cap. 2
               Of Africa generally. cap. 3
               Of Africa particularly. ca. 4
               Of the fortunate Ilands, now called the Canaries. ca. 5
               Of the hie mountaine of Pyke properly called Pike hil. ca. 6
               Of the yle of Yron. cap. 7
               Of the Ilands of Madera. ca. 8
               Of the vvyne of Madera. ca. 9
               Of the Promentary Verd, and of his Ilands. cap. 10
               Of the vvine of Palme trees. cap. 11
               Of the Riuers of Senega. ca. 12
               Of the Ilāds Hiſperides otherwiſe named Caape Verd. cap. 13
               Of Torterells and of an herbe that they call Orſeilla. ca. 14
               Of the Iland of Fyer. cap. 15
               Of Ethiopa. cap. 16
               Of Gynney. cap. 17
               Of the Equinoctiall lyne, and of the Ilandes of S. Homer. cap. 18
               That not onely all that is vnto the line is inhabited, but alſo all the vvorld is inhabited, contrary to the opinion of our Elders. cap. 19
               Of the multitude and diuers kyndes of fishes being vnder this lyne Equinoctiall. ca. 20
               Of an Ilande named the Aſſention. cap. 21
               Of the Promentary of good hope and of many ſecrets obſerued in the ſame, lykevviſe our aryual to the Indians of America, or France Antartike. cap. 22
               Of the Iland of Madagaſcar otherwiſe named S. Laurēce. cap. 23
               Of our aryuall to France Antartike otherwiſe named America, to the place named Caape de Fria. cap. 24
               Of the Ryuer of Ganabara, othervviſe named Ianaria & how the land where we aryued was named France Antartike. cap. 25
               
                  Of the fish that is in this great Ryuer before named. ca. 26
               Of America generally. cap. 27
               Of the Religion of theſe Americans. cap. 28
               The maner and cuſtome of liuing of theſe Americans, aſvvell men as women. cap. 29
               Of their eating and drynking cap. 30
               Againſt the opinion of thoſe that thynck the wylde men to be heary. cap. 31
               Of a tree named Genipat in the American tong, vvith the vvhich they make collours. cap. 32
               Of a tree named Paquouer. cap. 33
               How theſe Americans or wyld men do difforme thēſelues, eſteming it a great glory. cap. 34
               Of viſions, dreames and delluſions that theſe Americans haue, and of the perſecution that they receiue of vvycked ſpirits. cap. 35
               Of falſe Prophets and Magitians that are in this coūtrey of America, the which inuocate and call vpon vvicked ſpirits, and of a tree named Ahouai. cap. 36
               How theſe Americans beleue the ſoule to be immortall. cap. 37
               Hovv theſe wylde make warre one agaynſt a nother, ſpecially againſt thoſe vvhome they name Margageas Thabaiares. Alſo of a tree which they name Hairy, of the which they make their weapons for warre. cap. 38
               Their maner of fighting aſwel on the land as on the water. cap. 39
               How theſe barbarous and wild men put their ennimies to death that they haue taken in the warres, and howe they eate them. cap. 40
               Howe theſe wilde men couet greatly to reuenge their harmes and iniuries. cap. 41
               How theſe wild men of America are maried. cap. 42
               Of the ceremonies, burial, and funeralls that they vſe to the deceaſed. cap. 43
               Of Mortugabes, and of the charitie that they vſe towardes ſtrangers. cap. 44
               The deſcription of a ſickneſſe named Pians, to the whiche

are ſubiecte thoſe people of America, as wel in the Ilan
                     •
                  
                  des as the main land. cap. 45
               Of the Diſeaſes moſt ryfe in America, and the meane that they obſerue to cure them. cap. 46
               The maner hovv to trade among theſe people: of a byrd named Toucan, & of the Spicery of that countrey. cap. 47
               Of byrdes moſt common in America. ca. 48
               Of Veniſon and wyld beaſtes that theſe wylde men take. cap. 49
               Of a tree named Hauorahe. cap. 50
               Of a tree named Vhebehafou and of the honey Bees that frequent it. cap. 51
               Of a ſtraunge beaſt named Haute. cap. 52
               How theſe Americans kyndle fier, of their opinion of the vvorld, and of their Yron works. cap. 53
               Of the riuer of Vaſes, lykewiſe of certaine beaſtes that are found there about. And of the land named Morpiō. 54
               Of the Ryuer of Platte, and of the countrey ad
                     •
                  acent. ca. 55
               Of the ſtraight of Magellan, and of Daryen. ca. 56
               Hovv that thoſe that inhabit from the Ryuer of Platte vnto the ſtraight of Magellan are our Antipodes. cap. 57
               How theſe wylde men excercyſe husbandry, and make gardens of a roote named Manihot, and of a tree that they name Penoabſou. ca. 58
               How and after vvhat ſorte the land of America vvas dyſcouered, and Braſſyll wood found out, with many other trees not ſeene elſe vvhere, but in that countrey. cap. 59
               Of our departing from France Antartik or America. ca. 60
               Of the Caniballs, aſwell of the maine land as of the Ilands, & of a tree named Acaiou. cap. 61
               Of the Ryuer of Amazones, otherwiſe named Aurelana, by the which ye may fayle into the country of Amazones and into France Antertike. cap. 62
               How certayne Spaniards aryued into a countrey vvhere

they found Amazons. ca. 63
               How theſe Spaniards contynued theyr voyadge to Morpion, and of the Ryuer of Platte. cap. 64
               How the lands of the kings of Spayne and of Portingall are ſeperated. cap. 65
               The deuiſion of the Weſt Indies in thre partes cap. 66
               Of the Iland of Rats. cap. 67
               How we continued our courſe w
                     ••
                  h a declaratiō of Aſtrolabia of the Sea. cap. 68
               Of the departing of our Equator or Equinoctiall. cap. 69
               Of Perou and of the principal places cōtained in the ſame. cap. 70
               Of the Ilandes of Perou, and chiefly of the Spanish Iland cap. 71
               Of the Ilands of Cuba, and of Lucaia. cap. 72
               A deſcription of Noua Eſpania, and of the great citie of Themeſtitan, edified in the vveſt Indies. cap. 73
               Of Florida. cap. 74
               Of the Ilande of Canada before named Baccalos, being diſcouered in our tyme, and how the inhabitans lyue. cap. 75
               Of a nother countrey of Canade. cap. 76
               What Religion theſe Canadians vſe, with theyr lyuing & how they reſiſt the Colde. cap. 77
               Of theſe Canadians apparell, how they weare theyr haire, and hovv they treate their children. cap. 78
               Hovv theſe people make war. cap. 79
               Of Mynes, precious ſtones & other ſecrets that are found in Canada. cap. 80
               Of Earthequakes & hayles, to the which the countrey of Canada is very ſubiect. ca. 81
               Of the countrey called Nevv found land. cap. 82
               Of the Ilands of Eſſores. ca. 83
            
         
         
            ¶Imprinted at London, in Knightrider ſtrete, by Henry Bynneman, for Thomas Hacket. 1568.
         
      
   