
      
         
            
            THE FOLLOWING OF CHRIST.
            Diuided into foure Bookes.
            Written in Latin by the Learned and deuout Man, THOMAS A KEMPIS, Canon-Regular of the Order of S. AVGVSTINE.
            Whereunto alſo is added the golden EPISTLE of S. BERNARD.
            And Alſo certaine rules of a Chriſtian life, made by IOHN PICVS the elder, Earle of MIRANDVLA·
            Tranſlated into Engliſh by B. F.
            Printed with licence. 1615.
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE HONORABLE AND VERTVOVS ELIZABETH VAVX, Mother to the Lord HARRODOVVNE.
            
               HOnorable & Right Worthy, the publike demonſtration which you haue lately giuen of your true deſire to follow the footſteps of our Lord, vndergoing ſo heauy a Croſſe for his ſake, with ſo ready and reſolued a minde, hath moued mee to dedicate this little Booke of the IMITATION OF CHRIST vnto you: aſſuring my ſelfe that it will be no leſſe gratefull to you to ſee it appeare in light, purged from many miſtaken ſentences which were in the former Tranſlation, then the reading and practiſe thereof wil be profitable to others; it being ſo diuine and excellent a worke, as in the opinion

of ſuch as can beſt judge of this matter, of all the Bookes which are written, that treate of Spirit & Chriſtian Perfection, the holy Scripture excepted, it is inferiour to none, if it excelleth not all.
            No book hath bin more approued by generall conſent, none more often printed & tranſlated into diuers languages, none more eſteemed, commended, yea commanded alſo by the chiefe Maſters of Spirit of ſome religious Orders, to be often read by euery one in priuate, and once a week publikely to al. So full of ſweet ſenſe is this diuine Flower, that the moſt ſpirituall Bees may daily draw from thence great plentie of celeſtiall hony. It is a diſh of ſo diuine meat, that it neuer ſatiates the deuout mind: but as the Wiſdome of God doth promiſe to all ſuch as ſit at that heauenly banquent; ſo ſhal they find in this ſpiritual food, The more they eat it, the more

they ſhall hunger after it. Eccleſ. 4.
            And the reaſon hereof is, for that it containeth ſo great depth of ſpirit, and ſo great ſtore and variety of heauenly documents, that it ſeemeth euer new to the Reader, and like another Manna, affordeth to euery one that delightfull taſte which beſt agreeth with the palate of his ſoule: and none can loath it, but they whoſe luſtes doe carry them to Aegyptian ſlauery. A true Iſraelite may feed vpon it forty yeares together, and euer finde ſuch pleaſing taſte and encreaſing ſtrength by vſe therof, as wil ſuſtaine him in the deſert of this world, and enable him to goe on without fainting, till he arriue at his promiſed inheritance of eternall reſt.
            The practiſe of that which this booke doth teach, couereth the ſoule with the rich garment of grace, and adorneth it with the ſplendent pearls of Euangelical perfection, which maketh

vs more pleaſing in the ſight of God, then can the deckings of all earthly jewels make the faireſt Lady in the Kingdome, where you are, appeare beautifull to the eyes of men. It returneth abundant gaine for ſuſtained loſſes, and enlargeth the liberty which is now reſtrained. It raiſeth vp to cheerefull confidence the debaſed head, & placeth in a Throne of endleſſe honour thoſe who in this world doe ſeeme impriſoned in the blacke cloud of diſgrace.
            To you therefore who haue ſo willingly endured the loſſe of your earthly ſubſtance, I haue thought good to preſent this Euangelicall Pearle, and incomparable Treaſure contained in a little roome. Here you ſhall find the moſt perfect manner of conforming our ſelues to Chriſt our heauenly paterne, & ſee the vertues ſet forth in their colours, which did moſt ſhine in the life of our Lord

himſelfe; and reade in plaine and vulgar phraſe thoſe Leſſons of high perfection, which are commended vnto vs by the higheſt Wiſdome, & which haue made as many Saints, as they haue had diligent and obſeruant followers.
            Accept therefore, I beſeech you, this little Preſent, preſented by him who wiſheth you much more temporall happines, then your preſent ſtate affordeth; and that endleſſe glory, whereof your preſent ſuffering is no vncertaine pledge. This firſt of Nouember. 1612.
            
               Yours in all dutie. B. F.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS OF THIS enſuing Booke.
            
               THE FIRST BOOKE.
               
                  OF the imitation of Chriſt, and contempt of all the vanities of the world. pag. 1
               Of the humble conceit of our ſelues. pag. 4
               Of the doctrine of truth. pag. 7
               Of prudence and foreſight in our actions. pag. 13
               Of the reading of holy Scriptures. pag. 14
               Of inordinate deſires, and affections. pag. 16
               Of flying vaine hope and pride. pag. 17
               That too much familiarity is to be ſhunned. pag. 19
               Of obedience and ſubiection. pag. 21
               Of auoiding ſuperfluitie of words. pag. 23
               Of the obtaining of peace, and zeale of ſpirituall profit. pag. 25
               Of the profit of aduerſitie. pag. 29
               Of reſiſting temptations. pag. 30
               Of auoiding raſh iudgement. pag. 36
               Of workes done of charitie. pag. 38
               Of bearing with the defects of others. pag. 40
               
                  Of religious life. pag. 42
               Of the examples of the holy Fathers. pag. 44
               Of the exerciſe of a good and religious perſon. pag. 48
               Of the loue of ſolitude and ſilence. pag. 54
               Of compunction of heart. pag. 60
               Of the conſideration of humane miſery. pag. 64
               Of the conſideration of death. pag. 70
               Of iudgement, and the puniſhment of ſin. pag. 77
               Of the feruent amendment of our whole life. pag. 83
            
            
               THE SECOND BOOKE.
               OF ſpirituall conuerſation. pag. 93
               Of humble ſubmiſsion. pag. 99
               Of a good and peaceable man. pag. 101
               Of a pure minde and vpright intention. pag. 104
               Of the conſideration of ones ſelfe. pag. 106
               Of the comfort of a good conſcience. pag. 108
               Of the loue of Ieſus aboue all things. pag. 111
               Of familiar conuerſation with Ieſus. pag. 114
               Of the want of all comfort. pag. 118
               Of thankefulnes for the grace of God. pag. 124
               How few the the louers of the Croſſe of Chriſt are. pag. 128
               Of the high way of the holy Croſſe. pag. 131
            
            
               
               THE THIRD BOOKE.
               OF the inward ſpeech of Chriſt vnto a faithfull-ſoule pag. 143
               That truth ſpeaketh inwardly without noiſe of words. pag. 145
               That the words of God are to bee heard with humilitie, and that many weigh them not. pag. 147
               That we ought to liue in truth and humilitie in the ſight of God. pag. 152
               Of the wonderfull effect of diuine grace. pag. 156
               Of the proofe of a true Louer. pag. 161
               That grace is to be hid vnder the veile of humilitie. pag. 165
               Of a meane conceit of our ſelues in the ſight of God. pag. 170
               That all things are to bee referred vnto God, as vnto the laſt end. pag. 173
               That deſpiſing the world, it is ſweet to ſerue God. pag. 175
               That the deſires of our heart are to be examined and moderated. pag. 179
               Of the effects of patience, and of ſtrife againſt concupiſcence. pag. 182
               Of the humble obedience of a ſubiect, according to the example of Chriſt. pag. 185
               
                  Of the ſecret Iudgements of God to bee conſidered, leſt wee bee extolled in our good deeds. pag. 188
               What we ought to doe and ſay in euerie thing which we deſire. pag. 191
               That true comfort is to be ſought in God alone. pag. 194
               That all our care is to be placed in God. pag. 196
               That temporall miſeries, by the example of Chriſt, are to be borne patiently. pag. 198
               Of ſuffering of iniuries, and who is proued to be truely patient. pag. 201
               Of the acknowledging of our owne infirmitie: and of the miſeries of this life. pag. 204
               That wee are to reſt in God aboue all his gifts. pag. 208
               Of the remembrance of the manifold benefits of God. pag. 213
               Of foure things that bring much peace. pag. 217
               Of flying curious inquiry of the life of others pag. 221
               Wherein doth the firme peace of the heart, and true profit conſiſt. pag. 223
               Of the excellencie of a free minde, which humble prayer better deſerueth then reading. pag. 226
               
                  That priuate loue moſt hindereth from the chiefeſt good. pag. 229
               Againſt the tongue of ſlanderers. pag. 432
               How we ought to call vpon God, and bleſſe him when tribulation draweth neere. pag. 233
               Of crauing the diuine aide, and confidence of recouering grace. pag. 235
               Of the contempt of all creatures to finde our Creator. pag. 240
               Of the deniall of our ſelues, and forſaking our affections. pag. 244
               Of inconſtancy of heart, and of directing our finall intentions vnto God. pag. 247
               That God is ſweet aboue all things, and in all things to him that loueth. pag. 249
               That there is no ſecurity from temptation in this life. pag. 252
               Againſt the vaine iudgements of men. pag. 255
               Of a full and pure reſignation of our ſelues for the obtaining freedome of heart. pag. 257
               Of good gouernment in outward things, and of recourſe to God in dangers. pag. 260
               That a man be not ouer earneſt in his affaires. pag. 262
               That man hath no good of himſelfe, nor any thing whereof he can glory. pag. 264
               Of the contempt of all temporall honors. pag. 267
               
                  That our peace is not to be placed in men. pag. 268
               Againſt vaine and ſecular knowledge. pag. 271
               Of not drawing outward things to our ſelues. pag. 274
               That credit is not to be giuen to all men: and how prone man is to offend in words. pag. 275
               Of putting our truſt in God, when euill words ariſe. pag. 280
               That all grieuous things are to be endured for life euerlaſting. pag. 284
               Of the euerlaſting day, and ſhortneſſe of this life. pag. 287
               Of the deſire of euerlaſting life, and how great rewards are promiſed to thoſe that fight valiantly. pag. 292
               How a deſolate perſon ought to offer himſelfe into the hands of God. pag. 299
               That a man ought to imploy himſelfe in workes of humilitie, when force is wanting for higher exerciſes. pag. 305
               That a man ought to eſteeme himſelfe vnworthy of comfort, and to haue deſerued ſtripes. pag. 307
               That the grace of God is not giuen to thoſe that ſauour of earthly things. pag. 310
               Of the different motions of Nature and Grace. pag. 313
               
                  Of the corruption of nature, and efficacie of diuine grace. pag. 320
               That we ought to deny our ſelues, and imitate Chriſt by the Croſſe. pag. 325
               That a man bee not too much deiected, when he falleth into ſome defects. pag. 329
               Of not ſearching into high matters, and into the ſecret iudgements of God. pag. 333
               That all our hope and truſt is to be fixed in God alone. pag. 341
            
            
               THE FOVRTH BOOKE.
               WIth how great reuerence Chriſt is to be receiued. pag. 349
               That great goodnes and charity of God is beſtowed vpon man in this Sacramēt. pag. 356
               That it is profitable to communicate often. pag. 361
               That many benefits are beſtowed vpon them that communicate deuoutly. pag. 365
               Of the dignity of this Sacrament, and Prieſtly function. pag. 371
               An Interrogation of the exerciſe before Communion. pag. 374
               Of the diſcuſsing of our owne conſcience, and purpoſe of amendment. pag. 375
               Of the oblation of Chriſt on the Croſſe, and reſignation of our ſelues. pag. 379
               That we ought to offer vp our ſelues, and

all that is ours vnto God, and to pray for all. pag. 381
               That the holy Communion is not lightly to be forborne. pag. 386
               That the Body of Chriſt, and the holy Scripture are moſt neceſſary vnto a faithfull ſoule. pag. 392
               That he that is to communicate, ought to prepare himſelf with great diligence. pag. 399
               That a deuout ſoule ought to deſire with her whole heart to be vnited vnto Chriſt in the Sacrament. pag. 403
               Of the feruent deſire of ſome deuout perſons to receiue the body of Chriſt. pag. 406
               That the grace of deuotion is obtained by humilitie and deniall of our ſelues. pag. 409
               That we ought to manifeſt our neceſsities vnto Chriſt, and to craue his grace. pag. 412
               Of burning loue and vehement deſire to receiue Chriſt. pag. 414
               That a man bee not a curious ſearcher of this Sacrament, but an humble follower of Chriſt, ſubmitting his ſenſe vnto faith. pag. 418
            
         
      
      
         
            
            OF THE FOLLOWING OF CHRIST. THE FIRST BOOKE.
            
               CHAP. I. Of the Imitation of Christ, and contempt of all the vanities of the world.
               
                  HEE that followeth me▪ walketh not in darknes, ſaith our Lord. Ioh. 8. Theſe are the words of Chriſt, by which we are admoniſhed, that we ought to imitate his life, and manners, if we will be partakers of his diuine light, and be deliuered from all blindneſſe of heart. Let therefore our chiefe care be to meditate vpon the life or Ieſus Chriſt.
               
                  2 The doctrine of Chriſt exceedeth all the doctrine of the Saints: and hee that had the light of ſpirit, would diſcouer therein a ſecret and hidden Manna. But it falleth out that many, who often heare the Goſpell of Chriſt, doe yet feele in themſelues but ſlender motion of any holy deſire, becauſe they are voide of the Spirit of Chriſt. But whoſoeuer will fully and feelingly vnderſtand the words of Chriſt, muſt endeauour to conforme his life wholly to the life of Chriſt.
               3 What will it auaile thee to diſpute profoundly of the Trinitie, if thou be void of humility, and thereby diſpleaſing to the Trinitie? High words ſurely, make a man neither holy nor juſt; but a vertuous life maketh him deare to God. I had rather feele compunction, then vnderſtand the definition thereof. 1. Cor. 
                     ••
                  . If thou diddeſt know the whole

Bible by heart, and the ſayings of all the Philoſophers, what would all that profit thee, without charity, and the grace of God; Vanity of vanities, and al is vanity, but only to loue God, and wholly to ſerue him. Eccleſ. 1. This is the higheſt wiſdome, by contempt of the world, to tend towards the Kingdome of heauen.
               4 It is therefore vanity to ſeeke after fading riches, and to repoſe truſt in them. It is alſo vanity to gape after honors, and to climbe to high degrees. It is vanity to follow the appetites of the fleſh, and to labour for that, for which thou muſt afterwards ſuffer more griueuous puniſhment. Vanity it is to wiſh to liue long, and to be careleſſe to liue well. It is vanity to minde onely this preſent life, and not to fore-ſee thoſe things which are to come. It is vanity to ſet thy loue on that which ſpeedily paſſeth away, and not to haſten

thither, where euerlaſting joy is permanent.
               5 Call often to minde this prouerbe: That the eye is neuer ſatisfied with ſeeing, nor the eare filled with hearing. Eccleſ. 1. Endeauour therefore to withdraw thy heart from the affection of viſible things, and to turne thy ſelfe to the inuiſible. For they that follow their ſenſuality, doe ſtaine their owne conſciences, and loſe the grace of God.
            
            
               CHAP. II. Of the humble conceit of our ſelues.
               ALL men by nature deſire to know: but what auaileth knowledge without the feare of God? Eccleſ. 1. & Ariſt. l. 1. Metaph. cap. 1. Surely, an humble husbandman that feareth God, is better then a proud Philoſopher that neglecting himſelfe, laboureth to vnderſtand the courſe of the heauens. Who ſo

knoweth himſelfe wel, groweth daily more contemptible in his owne conceit, and delighteth not in the praiſes of men. If I vnderſtood all that is to be knovvne in the vvorld, and were not in charity, what would that helpe me in the ſight of God, vvho vvill judge mee according to my deeds?
               2 Giue not thy ſelfe to inordinat deſire of knowledge: for therein is much diſtraction and deceit. The learned are willing to ſeeme ſo to others, and to bee accounted wiſe. 1. Corinth. 8. There be many things, vvhich to knovv, doth little or nothing profit the ſoule: and he is very vnvviſe, that beſtovveth his labour about other things, then thoſe that may auaile him for the health of his ſoule. Many vvords doe not ſatisfie the deſires of the heart: but a good life comforteth the minde, and a pure conſcience giueth great

aſſurance in the ſight of God.
               3 Hovv much the more thou knovveſt, and hovv much the better thou vnderſtandeſt, ſo much the more grieuouſly ſhalt thou therefore bee judged, vnleſſe thy life bee alſo more holy. Be not therefore extolled in thy owne mind for any arte or ſcience which thou knoweſt; but rather let the knowledge giuen thee, make thee more fearefull. If thou thinkeſt that thou vnderſtandeſt and knoweſt much; know alſo that there be many things more, which thou knoweſt not. Thinke not too well of thy ſelfe, but rather confeſſe thine ignorance. Rom. 12. Why wilt thou preferre thy ſelfe before others, ſith there bee many more learned and skilfull in the Law then thou? If thou wilt know or learne any thing profitable, deſire not to be knowne, and to be little eſteemed of by men.
               4 The higheſt and moſt profitable

reading, is the true knowledge and conſideration of our ſelues. It is great wiſedome and perfection to eſteeme nothing of our ſelues, and to thinke alwaies wel and commendably of others. If thou ſhouldeſt ſee another openly ſinne, or commit any heynous offence; yet oughteſt thou not to eſteeme the better of thy ſelfe, for thou knoweſt not how long thou ſhalt bee able to remaine in good eſtate. Wee are all fraile, but thou oughteſt to eſteeme none more fraile then thy ſelfe. Gen. 8.
            
            
               CHAP. III. Of the doctrine of Truth.
               HAppy is he, whom Truth by it ſelfe doth teach, not by figures, and voices that paſſe away; but as it is in it ſelfe. Pſal. 93.1. Our owne opinion and ſenſe doe often deceiue vs, and it diſcernes little. What auaileth it to diſpute and contend about

darke and hidden things; whereas for being ignorant of them, we ſhall not ſo much as once be reprehended at the day of Iudgment? Eccl. 3. It is a great folly to neglect the things that are profitable and neceſſary, and giue our mindes to that which is curious and hurtfull: we haue eies and doe not ſee. Pſal. 113.
               2 And what haue we to doe with the termes and diſtinctions of Logitians? Hee to vvhom the eternall Word ſpeaketh, is deliuered from multitudes and diuerſities of opinions. By that one Word all things doe ſpeake, and all declare the ſame: and this is the beginning, and that which ſpeaketh vnto vs. No man without that Word vnderſtandeth or judgeth rightly. Hee to vvhom all things are one, vvho draweth all things to one, and ſeeth all things in one, may enjoy a quiet minde, and remaine peaceable in God. O God,

the eternal Truth, make me one with thee in euerlaſting charity. It is tedious to me often to reade and heare many things. In thee is all that I vvould haue, and can deſire. Let all Doctors hold their peace: let all creatures be ſilent in thy ſight: ſpeak thou alone vnto me.
               3 How much the more one is retired vvithin himſelfe, and becommeth inwardly ſincere and pure; ſo much the more, and higher myſteries doth he vnderſtand vvithout labour: for that he receiueth light of vnderſtanding from aboue. Mat. 11. Luk. 10. A pure, ſincere and ſtayed ſpirit is not diſtracted, though hee be imployed in many vvorkes: for that hee worketh all to the honor of God, and laboureth for invvard tranquillitie, without ſeeking himſelfe in any thing he doth. Who hinders and troubles thee more then the vnmortified deſires of thine owne

heart? A good and deuout man firſt of all diſpoſeth in himſelfe his outvvard vvorks: neither do they draw him to the deſires of an inordinate inclination; but he ordereth them to the preſcript of reaſon. Who hath a greater combate, then he that laboureth to ouercome himſelfe? This ought to be our endeauour, to conquer our ſelues daily, to vvaxe ſtronger, and be more able to ſubdue our paſſions, and alwayes in this way to get ſome ground.
               4▪ All perfection in this life hath ſome imperfections mixt with it: and no knowledge of ours is voide of darknes and ignorance. An humble knowledge of thy ſelfe is a more ſecure way to God, then a deep ſearch after learning: yet learning is not to be blamed, nor the only knowledge of any thing whatſoeuer is to be diſliked, it being good in it ſelfe, and ordained by God: but a good conſcience,

and a vertuous life is to be preferred before it. And for that many endeauour, rather to get knowledge, then to liue well: therefore they are often deceiued, and reape either none, or very ſlender profit of their labours.
               5 O, if men beſtowed as much labour in the rooting out of vices, and planting of vertues, as they do in mouing doubts and queſtions; neyther would there ſo much hurt bee done, nor ſo great ſcandall be giuen in the world, nor ſo much looſnes be practiſed in places erected for vertue! Truely at the day of Iudgement we ſhall not be examined what wee haue read, but what we haue done: nor how well we haue ſpoken, but how vertuouſly we haue liued. Math. 23. Tell me now, where are all thoſe great Doctors and Miniſters, with whom thou waſt well acquainted, whileſt they liued and flouriſhed in

learning? Now others poſſeſſe their liuings, and perhaps doe ſcarce euer think of them. In their life-time they ſeemed ſomething, and now they are not ſpoken of.
               6 O, how quickly doth the glory of this world paſſe avvay! Eccl. 2. Would God their life had beene anſwerable to their learning, then had their ſtudy and reading bin to good purpoſe. How many periſh in this world by reaſon of vaine learning, who take little care of the ſeruice of God? Tit. 1. And becauſe they rather chooſe to bee great then humble; Rom. 1. therefore they vaniſh away in their owne thoughts. Mat. 18. and 23. He is truely great, that is great in charity. He is truly great, that is little in himſelfe, and that maketh no account of the height of honor. He is truly wiſe, that accounteth all earthly things as dung, that he may gaine Chriſt. And he is truly learned that

fulfilleth the will of Chriſt, and forſaketh his owne. Phil. 3.
            
            
               CHAP. IV. Of Prudence and Fore-ſight in our actions.
               WE muſt not giue eare to euery ſuggeſtion or inſtinct, but ought warily & leaſurely to ponder things according to the wil of God. 1. Io. 4. But (alas) ſuch is our weakeneſſe, that wee rather often beleeue, and ſpeake euill of others, then good. Thoſe that are perfectly vertuous, do not eaſily giue credit to euery thing that is told them, Gen. 8. for they know that humane frailtie is prone to euill, and very ſubiect to faile in words. Iam. 3.
               2 It is great wiſedome not to be raſh in thy proceedings, nor to ſtand ſtiffely in thine owne conceits. Prouerb. 19. as alſo not to beleeue euery thing which thou heareſt; nor preſently to relate againe to others,

what thou haſt heard, or doeſt beleeue. Prou. 17. Conſult with him that is wiſe, and of a good conſcience, and ſeeke to be inſtructed by a better then thy ſelfe, rather then to follow thine owne inuentions. A good life maketh a man wiſe, according to God, and giueth him experience in many things. Prou. 15. and Eccl. 1. How much the humbler one is in himſelfe, and more ſubiect and reſigned vnto God; ſo much the more prudent ſhall hee bee in all his affaires, and enioy greater peace and quiet of heart.
            
            
               CHAP. V. Of the reading of holy Scriptures.
               TRuth, not eloquence, is to bee ſought for in holy Scriptures. Each part of them is to be read with the ſame ſpirit it was made. Wee ſhould rather ſearch after ſpirituall profit in Scriptures, then ſubtility of

ſpeech. Rom. 15. We ought to reade deuout and ſimple books, as willingly as high and learned. Let not the reputation of the writer offend thee, whether he be of great or ſmall learning: but let the pure word of truth moue thee to reade. Search not who ſpake this, or that, but marke what is ſpoken. 1. Cor. 2.
               2 Men paſſe away; but the truth of our Lord remaineth for euer. Pſal. 110. and Luk. 21. God ſpeaketh vnto vs ſundry wayes, without reſpect of perſons. Our owne curioſity often hindereth vs in reading of the Scriptures, when as we will examine and diſcuſſe that which wee ſhould rather paſſe ouer without more ado. Rom. 2. & 10. & Col. 3. If thou deſire to reape profite, reade humbly, plainly and faithfully: neuer deſire the eſtimation of learning. Inquire willingly, and heare with ſilence the words of holy men: diſlike not the

Parables of Elders, for they are not recounted without cauſe. Prou. 1. and 18.
            
            
               CHAP. VI. Of inordinate deſires, and affections.
               WHenſoeuer a man deſireth any thing inordinately, he is preſently diſquieted in himſelfe. The proud and couetous can neuer reſt. The poore and humble in ſpirit, liue together in all peace. The man that is not wholly dead in himſelfe, is quickely tempted, and ouercome in ſmall and trifling things. The weake in ſpirit, and that is yet in a manner ſubiect to his appetites, and prone to ſenſible things, can hardly withdraw himſelfe altogether from earthly deſires. And therefore hee is often afflicted, when hee goeth about to retire himſelfe from them▪ and eaſily falleth into indignation, when any oppoſition is made againſt him.
               
                  2 And if he hath followed therein his appetite, hee is preſently diſquieted with remorſe of conſcience; for that hee yeeldeth to his paſſion, which profiteth him nothing to the obtaining of the peace hee ſought for. True quiet of minde therefore, is gotten by reſiſting our paſſions, not by obeying them. There is no peace in the heart of a carnall man, nor of him that is addicted to outward things, but in the ſpirituall and feruent.
            
            
               CHAP. VII. Of flying vaine Hope, and Pride.
               HEE is vaine that putteth his truſt in men, or creatures. Hier. 17.1. Bee not aſhamed to ſerue others for the loue of Ieſus Chriſt: nor to be eſteemed poore in this world. Preſume not vpon thy ſelfe, but place thy hope in God. Pſalm. 30. Doe vvhat lyeth in thy power, and

God will aſſiſt thee. Truſt not in thine owne knowledge, nor in the wiſdome or prudence of any liuing creature: but rather in the grace of God, who helpeth the humble, and humbleth the preſumptuous and proud. Hier. 9.
               2 Glory not in wealth, if thou haue it, nor in the power of thy friends; but in God, who giueth all things, and aboue all deſireth to giue thee himſelfe. Extol not thy ſelfe for the ſtature and beauty of thy bodie, which is diſſolued & disfigured with euery little ſicknes. Take not pleaſure in thy naturall gifts, or wit, leſt therby thou diſpleaſe God, to whom appertaineth all the good whatſoeuer Nature hath giuen thee.
               3 Eſteeme not thy ſelfe better then others, leſt perhaps in the ſight of God, who knoweth what is in man, thou be accounted worſe then they. Exod. 3. & 12. Bee not proud

of thy good workes, for the iudgements of God are far different from the iudgements of men: and that often offendeth him, which pleaſeth them. Iob 9. If there be any good in thee, beleeue that there is much more in others, that ſo thou mayſt the better keepe within thy heart the precious treaſure of humility. It is no preiudice vnto thee to eſteeme thy ſelfe worſe then all the world: but it hurteth thee very much, to preferre thy ſelfe before any one. The humble enioy continuall peace; but in the heart of the proud is enuy, and often indignation.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII. That too much familiarity is to be ſhunned.
               LAy not thy heart open to euery one: but treate of thy affaires with the wiſe, and ſuch as feare God. Eccl. 8. Conuerſe not much with yong people and ſtrangers. Flatter not the

rich; neither doe thou appeare willingly before great perſonages. Keep company with the humble, ſimple, deuout, and vertuous; and conferre with them of thoſe things, that may edifie. Be not familiar with any woman: but in generall commend all good women to God. Prou. 5. Deſire to bee familiar with God alone, and his Angels, and fly the knowledge of men.
               2 Wee muſt haue charitie towards all, but familiaritie with all is not expedient. Sometimes it falleth out, that the fame of ſome perſon that is not knowne, is much eſteemed; whoſe preſence notwithſtanding is not gratefull to the eyes of the beholders. Wee thinke ſometimes to pleaſe others by our company, and wee rather diſtate them with our diſordered manners, and the euill cuſtomes which they diſcouer in vs.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX. Of Obedience, and Subiection.
               IT is a great matter to liue in Obedience, to be vnder a Superiour, and not to be at our owne diſpoſition. It is much ſafer to liue in the ſtate of ſubiection, then of gouernment. Many liue vnder Obedience, rather for neceſſitie, then for charitie: and ſuch are diſcontented, and doe eaſily repine and murmure. Neither can they attaine to freedome of minde, vnleſſe they willingly and heartily put themſelues vnder Obedience for the loue of God. Goe whither thou wilt, thou ſhalt finde no reſt, but in humble ſubiection vnder the gouernment of a Superiour The imagination and change of places haue deceiued many.
               2 True it is, that euery one willingly doth that which agreeth with his owne ſenſe and liking; and is apt

to effect thoſe moſt, that are of his owne minde: But if God bee amongſt vs, we muſt leaue our owne judgement, that ſo peace and quietneſſe may bee the better preſerued. Who is ſo wiſe, that he can fully know all things? Truſt not therefore too much to thine owne conceits: but bee willing to heare the judgement of others. If that which thou thinkeſt be good, and notwithſtanding doeſt leaue it for God, and followeſt the opinion of another, it ſhall be better for thee.
               3 I haue often heard, that it is more ſecure to heare and take counſell, then to giue it. It may alſo fall out, that each ones opinion may bee good: but to refuſe to yeeld to others, when as reaſon, or cauſe requireth it, is a token of wilfulneſſe and pride.
            
            
               
               CHAP. X. Of the auoiding ſuperſluity of words.
               FLy the vnquietneſſe of men as much as thou canſt: for the talke of vvorldly affaires hindereth very much, although they bee recounted with ſincere intention: Mat. 4. & 14. for wee are quickely defiled, and as it were, enthralled with vanitie. Ioan. 6. I could vviſh that I had often times held my peace, vvhen I haue ſpoken: and that I had not beene in company. Why doe wee ſo willingly ſpeake, and talke one with another, when notwithſtanding wee ſeldome returne to ſilence, vvithout hurt of conſcience? The cauſe wherefore we ſo willingly talke, is, for that by diſcourſing one with another, wee ſeeke to receiue comfort one of another: and deſire to eaſe our minde, ouer-wearied with ſundry thoughts:

Matth. 7. and wee talke willingly, and thinke of thoſe things which we loue beſt, and moſt deſire; or of thoſe, which we feele moſt contrary vnto vs. Rom. 2.
               2 But alas, oftentimes in vaine, and to no end: for this outvvard comfort is cauſe of no ſmall loſſe of invvard, and diuine conſolation. Therefore we muſt watch and pray, leſt our time paſſe without any fruit or profit. If it be lawfull and expedient for thee to ſpeake; ſpeake thoſe things that may edifie. An euill cuſtome, and neglect of our owne good, doth very much ſlacke the raynes to inconſiderate ſpeech: Yet deuout diſcourſes of heauenly things, doe greatly further our progreſſe in ſpirit, Act. 1. eſpecially vvhere perſons of one minde and ſpirit be gathered together in God. Rom. 15.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI. Of the obtaining of peace, and zeale of ſpirituall profit.
               WEE might enioy peace, if wee would not buſie our ſelues with the words and deeds of other men, which appertaine nothing to our charge. How can hee liue long in peace, that thruſteth himſelfe into the cares of others, or that little or ſeldome recollecteth himſelfe within his owne breaſt? Bleſſed are the ſimple and pure minds: for they ſhal enioy much peace.
               2 What is the reaſon why ſome of the Saints were ſo perfect, and contemplatiue; Becauſe they laboured to mortifie themſelues wholly to earthly deſires; and therefore they could with their whole heart, giue themſelues to God, and freely attend to their owne affaires. Wee are too much led by our owne paſſions,

and too ſolicitous for tranſitory things. Wee alſo ſeldome ouercome any one vice perfectly, and are not inflamed with a feruent deſire to profit in ſpirit: and therefore we remaine cold in deuotion, and full of tepiditie.
               3 If we were perfectly dead vnto our ſelues, and not intangled within our owne breaſts: then wee might alſo haue ſome taſte of diuine things, and feele the ſweetneſſe of heauenly contemplation. The greateſt, and indeed the whole impediment is, for that wee are not free from our paſſions, and diſordered inclinations: neither doe wee endeauour to enter into that path of perfection, which the Saints haue walked before vs: and when any ſmall aduerſitie befalleth vs, we are too quickly deiected, and turne our ſelues to humane comforts.
               4 If wee endeauour like men of

courage, to ſtand continually in the battell; ſurely wee ſhould feele the fauourable aſſiſtance of God from heauen. For he who giueth vs occaſion to fight, to the end we may get the victory, is ready to ſuccour thoſe that fight manfully, and doe truſt in his grace. If wee eſteeme our progreſſe in religious life, to conſiſt only in theſe exteriour obſeruations; our deuotion will quickly be at an end. Let vs ſet the axe to the roote, that being freed from paſſions, wee may enioy true peace of minde.
               5 If euery yeare we would roote out one vice, we ſhould quickly become perfect men. But now oftentimes we perceiue it goeth contrary, and that wee were better, and of a more pure conſcience at the beginning of our conuerſion, then after many yeares of our profeſſion. Our feruour and profit ſhould encreaſe daily; but now it is accounted a

great matter, if one can retaine but ſome part of his firſt ſpirit. If vvee vvould vſe but a little violence in the beginning, then ſhould wee bee able to performe all things aftervvards vvith eaſe and joy of heart.
               6 It is a hard matter to leaue that to which wee are accuſtomed; but harder to doe againſt our owne vvills. But if thou doeſt not ouercome little and eaſie things; how wilt thou ouercome harder matters? Reſiſt thy inclination in the firſt motions, and breake off euill cuſtomes, leſt perhaps by little and little they dravv thee to greater difficultie. O, if thou diddeſt conſider how much inward peace to thy ſelfe, and joy to others thou ſhouldeſt procure by demeaning thy ſelfe vvell; I ſuppoſe thou wouldeſt be more carefull of thy ſpirituall profit.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII. Of the profit of Aduerſitie.
               IT is good that we haue ſometimes griefe and aduerſities: for they often make a man enter into himſelfe, and remember that he is heere in baniſhment, and ought not to place his truſt in any worldly thing. It is good that we be ſome times contradicted; and that there bee an euill or hard conceit had of vs: and this, although wee doe, and intend well. Theſe things helpe often to the attaining of humilitie, and defend vs from vaine-glory: for then wee chiefely ſeeke God for our inward witneſſe; when outwardly we be contemned by men, and when there is no credit giuen vnto vs.
               2 And therefore a man ſhould ſettle himſelfe ſo fully in God, that hee needed not to ſeeke many comforts of men. When a good & vertuous

man is afflicted, tempted, or troubled with euill thoughts; then hee vnderſtandeth better the great neede hee hath of Gods aſſiſtance, without whoſe helpe he perceiueth hee can doe nothing that is good. Then alſo he ſorroweth, lamenteth, and prayeth for the miſeries he ſuffereth. Then is he weary of liuing longer, and wiſheth that death would come, that hee might be diſſolued, and bee with Chriſt. Then alſo hee well perceiueth, that complete ſecurity, and perfect peace cannot be had in this world.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII. Of Reſiſting Temptations.
               SO long as wee liue in this world we cannot be without tribulation and temptation: for as it is written in Iob: Temptation is the life of man vpon earth. Euery one therefore ought to be carefull, and diligently

to arme himſelfe with prayer againſt his temptations, leſt the Diuell finde time and place to deceiue him; who neuer ſleepeth, but goeth about ſeeking whom he may deuour. No man is ſo perfect and holy, but hath ſometimes temptations: and we cannot be altogether free from them.
               2 Temptations are often profitable vnto men; though they be troubleſome and grieuous: for in them man is humbled, purged and inſtructed. All the Saints haue paſſed and profited through many tribulations and temptations; and they that could not beare temptations, became reprobate and fell from God. There is no order ſo holy, nor place ſo ſecret, where there be not temptations or aduerſities.
               3 There is no man that is altogether free from temptations, whileſt he liueth on earth: for in our ſelues is the cauſe thereof, being borne

with inclination to euill. When one temptation or tribulation goeth away, another commeth: and we ſhal euer haue ſomething to ſuffer, becauſe wee haue loſt that innocencie with which we were created. Many ſeeke to flie temptations, and do fall more grieuouſly into them. By flight alone we cannot ouercome; but by patience and true humility, wee become ſtronger then all our enemies.
               4 Hee that onely auoideth them outwardly, and doth not pluck them vp by the root, ſhall profit little: yea temptation will the ſooner returne vnto him; and he ſhall feele himſelfe in worſe caſe then before. By little and little, and by patience with longanimitie (through Gods help) thou ſhalt more eaſily ouercome, then with violence, and thine owne importunity. Often take counſell in temptation, and deale not, roughly with him that is tempted; but giue

him comfort, as thou wouldeſt wiſh to be done to thy ſelfe.
               5▪ The beginning of al euil temptations, is inconſtancie of minde, and little confidence in God: for as a ſhippe without a ſterne is toſted to and fro with the waues: ſo the man that is negligent, and leaueth his purpoſe, is many wayes tempted. Fire trieth iron, and temptation a juſt man. We know not oftentimes what we are able to doe, but temptations doe ſhew vs what wee are. We muſt be watchfull, eſpecially in the beginning of the temptation, for the enemie is then more eaſily ouercome, if hee bee not ſuffered to enter the dore of our hearts, but bee reſiſted without the gate at his firſt knocke. Wherefore, one ſaid: Ouid. libr. 1. de remed. amoris. Withſtand the beginnings, for an after-remedie comes often too late. Firſt there commeth to the minde an euill

thought, then a ſtrong imagination thereof, afterwards delight, and an euill motion, and then conſent: and ſo by little and little our wicked enemie getteth full entrance, whileſt he is not reſiſted in the beginning. And how much the longer one is negligent in reſiſting; ſo much weaker doth he become daily, and the enemy ſtronger againſt him.
               6 Some ſuffer greateſt temptations in the beginning of their conuerſion; others in the later end; others againe are much troubled almoſt through the whole time of their life. Some are but eaſily tempted, according to the wiſdome, and equity of the diuine appointment, which weigheth the ſtate and deſerts of men; and ordaineth al things for the ſauing of his elect and choſen ſeruants.
               7 We ought not therefore to deſpaire when we are tempted; but ſo

much the more feruently to pray vnto God, that hee will vouchſafe to helpe vs in all tribulation; who ſurely according to the ſaying of S. Paul, Will make with temptation ſuch iſſue, that we may be able to ſuſtaine it. Let vs therefore humble our ſelues vnder the hand of God in all temptation and tribulation; for he wil ſaue and exalt the humble in ſpirit.
               8 In temptations and afflictions man is proued, how much he hath profited; and his merit is thereby the greater before God, and his vertues doe more openly appeare. Neither is it any great matter if a man bee deuout and feruent, when he feeleth no heauines: but if in time of aduerſitie he beare himſelfe patiently, there is hope of great good. Some are kept from great temptations, and are often ouercome in ſmal ones, which do daily occurre; to the end that being humbled, they may neuer preſume

on themſelues in great matters, who in ſo ſmall things doe ſee themſelues ſo weake.
            
            
               CHAP. XIV. Of auoiding raſh Iudgement.
               TVrne thine eyes vnto thy ſelfe, and beware thou judge not raſhly the deeds of other men. Mat. 7. Rom. 25. Eccls. 3. In judging of others a man alwaies laboureth in vaine, often erreth, and quickely ſinneth; but in judging and diſcuſſing of himſelfe, he alwaies laboureth fruitfully. We often judge of things according to our owne deſire; for priuate affection bereaues vs eaſily of true judgement. If God were alwaies the pure intention of our deſire, wee ſhould not be ſo much troubled with the repugnance of our ſenſualitie.
               2 But oftentimes ſome inward ſecret inclination, or outward affection occurreth, which draweth vs after

it. Many ſecretly ſeeke themſelues in their actions, and know it not. They ſeeme alſo to liue in good peace of minde, when things are done according to their will and opinion; but if it ſucceed otherwiſe then they deſire, they are ſtraight waies troubled and much afflicted. The diuerſities of judgements and opinions, cauſe often diſſentions betweene friends and neighbours; betweene religious and deuout perſons. Matth. 12. Luk. 12.
               3 An old cuſtome is hardly broken, and no man is willingly led further then himſelfe liketh. If thou doſt more rely vpon thine own reaſon or induſtry, then vpon the vertue of obedience to Ieſus Chriſt; Hier. 13. it will be long before thou be illuminated with grace, for almighty God will haue vs perfectly ſubiect vnto him, and that we tranſcend the narrow limits of humane reaſon, enflamed with his loue.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV. Of Workes done of Charity.
               FOr no worldly thing, nor for the loue of any man, is any euill to be done: Matth. 18. but yet for the profit of one that ſtandeth in need, a good worke is ſometimes to be left off, or changed alſo for a better. For by doing this, a good worke is not loſt, but changed into another of greater merit. The exteriour worke without charity profiteth nothing; 1. Cor. 13. but whatſoeuer is done of charitie, be it neuer ſo little and contemptible in the ſight of the world, it is fruitfull, and of great eſteeme in the ſight of God. For God weigheth more with how much loue one worketh, then how much he doth. Hee doth much, that loueth much. Luk. 7.
               2 He doth much, that doth a thing well: he doth well, that rather ſerueth the common good of others, then his

owne will. Phil. 2. Oftentimes it ſeemeth to bee charity, and it is rather carnality: becauſe naturall inclination, ſelfe-will, hope of reward, and deſire of our owne commodity will ſeldome be wanting.
               3 He that hath true and perfect charity, ſeeketh himſelfe in nothing; but onely deſireth in all things that the glory of God ſhould be exalted. Phil. 2.3. & 1. Cor. 13. He alſo enuieth none; becauſe he loueth no priuat good: neither will he reioyce in himſelf; but wiſheth aboue al things to enioy God. Pſal. 
                     •
                  7.24. He attributeth nothing that is good to any man, but wholly referreth it vnto God, from whom, as from the fountaine, all things proceed: in whom finally all Saints haue perfect reſt, by fruition of his glory. O, he that had one ſparke of perfect charitie, how eaſily would hee diſcerne, that all earthly things be full of vanity!
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVI. Of bearing with the defects of others.
               THoſe things that a man cannot amend in himſelfe or in others, he ought to ſuffer patiently, vntill God ordaine otherwiſe. Thinke that perhaps it is better ſo, for thy triall and patience, without which our merits are not much to be eſteemed. Thou oughteſt to pray, notwithſtanding, when thou haſt ſuch impediments, that God would vouchſafe to helpe thee, and that thou mayeſt beare them patiently. Matth. 6. Luk. 11.
               2 If one that is once or twice warned doth not amend, contend not with him; but commit all to God, that his will may be fulfilled, and his name honored in all his ſeruants, vvho knovveth hovv to turne euill into good. Matth. 6. Endeauour to be patient in bearing with the defects and infirmities of others: for

that thy ſelfe alſo haſt many things, which muſt bee ſuffered by others. Theſſ. 5. & Ioh. 1. Luk. 6. If thou canſt not make thy ſelfe ſuch an one as thou wouldeſt; how canſt thou expect to haue another in all things to thy liking? Wee vvould vvillingly haue others perfect, and yet vvee amend not our owne faults.
               3 We vvill haue others ſeuerely corrected, and vvill not be corrected our ſelues. The large libertie of others diſpleaſeth vs: and yet we will not haue our deſires denied vs. Wee will haue others kept vnder by rigorous lawes; but in no ſort wil we our ſelues be reſtrained. And thus it appeareth, how ſeldome we weigh our neighbour in the ſame balance with our ſelues. If all men were perfect, vvhat ſhould vvee haue to ſuffer of our neighbour for God?
               4 But novv God hath thus ordained, that vve may learne to beare

one anothers burden: Gal. 6. for no man is without defect, no man without burden, no man ſufficient of himſelfe, no man endued with ſo much wiſdom as he needeth: but we ought to beare with one another, comfort one another, helpe, inſtruct, and admoniſh one another. 1. Theſſ. 5. and 1. Cor. 12. Aduerſitie beſt diſcouereth how great vertue each one hath: for occaſions make not a man fraile, but doe ſhew what he is.
            
            
               CHAP. XVII. Of Religious life.
               THou muſt learne to breake thy owne will in many things, if thou wilt haue peace and concord with others. It is no ſmall matter to dwell in community, or in a congregation, and to conuerſe therein without complaint, and to perſeuer there faithfully vntill death. Bleſſed is he that hath there liued well, and ended

happily. If thou wilt perſeuer in grace as thou oughteſt, and profit in vertue, eſteeme thy ſelfe as a baniſhed man, and a pilgrime vpon earth. Thou muſt be contented for the loue of Chriſt to be eſteemed as a foole in this world, if thou deſire to leade a vertuous, and perfect religious life.
               2 The wearing of religious habit and ſhauing of the crowne, doe little profit; but change of manners, and perfect mortification of paſſions make a true religious man. 1. Pet. 2. He that ſeeketh any thing elſe but God, and the health of his ſoule, ſhal finde nothing but tribulation and ſorrow. Eccls. 1. & 4. Neither can he remaine long in peace, that laboureth not to be in the meaneſt place, and ſubiect to all.
               3. Thou cameſt to ſerue, not to be ſerued. Know that thou waſt called to ſuffer and to labour, not to be idle or to ſpend thy time in talke. Mat. 20.

Heere in the Schoole of Chriſt men are prooued as gold in the fornace. Heere no man can ſtand, vnleſſe hee humble himſelfe vvith his vvhole heart, for the loue of God.
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII. Of the examples of the holy Fathers.
               COnſider the liuely examples of the holy Fathers, in whom true perfection and religion ſhined; and thou ſhalt ſee how little it is, and almoſt nothing, which we doe now in theſe dayes. Heb. 11. Alas, what is our life, if it be compared to them! The Saints and friends of Chriſt ſerued our Lord in hunger and thirſt, in cold and nakedneſſe, in labour and vvearineſſe, in vvatching and faſting, in prayer and holy meditations, in perſecutions and many reproaches.
               2 O, how many and grieuous tribulations ſuffered the Apoſtles, Martyrs,

Confeſſors, Virgins, and all the reſt that endeauoured to follow the ſteppes of Chriſt! They hated their liues in this world, Ioh. 12. that they might poſſeſſe their ſoules in euerlaſting life. Mat. 7. O, how ſtrait and poore a life led the holy Fathers in the vvildernes! How long and grieuous temptations ſuffred they! How often and how grieuouſly were they aſſaulted by their ghoſtly Enemie! How feruent prayers offered they daily to God! How rigorous abſtinence did they vſe! Hovv feruent zeale and care had they of their ſpirituall profit! How ſtrong, and continuall a combate had they for the ouercomming of vices! How pure and vpright intention kept they vnto God! In the day they laboured, and in the night they attended to continuall prayer, although when they laboured alſo, they ceaſed not from mentall prayer.
               
                  3 They ſpent all their time with profit: euery houre ſeemed ſhort for the ſeruice of God: and for the great ſweetnes they had in contemplation, they forgot the neceſſity of corporall refection. They renounced all riches, dignities, honors, friends and kinsfolkes; they deſired to haue nothing vvhich appertained to the world; they ſcarſe tooke things neceſſary for the ſuſtenance of life; they grieued to ſerue their bodies, euen it neceſſity. They were poore in earthly things, but rich in grace and vertues Outwardly they wanted, but inwardly they were repleniſhed with grace and ſpirituall comfort.
               4 They were ſtrangers in the world, but neere and familiar friends to God. They ſeemed to themſelues as nothing, and abiect to this world: but they were precious, and beloued in the eyes of God. They were groū
                  ded in true humility, liued in ſimple

obedience, walked in charity and patience: and therefore they profited daily in ſpirit, and obtained great grace in Gods ſight. They were giuen for an example and patterne of perfection in Gods Church, & their example ſhould more ſtir vs vp to a deſire of our ſpiritual profit, then the nūber of the luke-warme & diſſolute liuers draw vs to the neglect therof.
               5 O, how great was the feruour of all religious perſons in the beginning of their holy inſtitution! How great was their deuotion to prayer! How diligent emulation of vertue! How exact diſcipline flouriſhed! How great reuerence and obedience vnder the rule of their Superiour obſerued they in al things! Their footſteps yet remaining, doe teſtifie that they were indeed holy and perfect men; who ſighting ſo valiantly trode the world vnder their feet▪ Now he is greatly accounted of, that breaketh

not the rule, & that can with patiēce endure that which he hath profeſſed.
               6 O coldnes and negligence of our time, that we ſo quickly decline from our firſt feruour, and are come to that paſſe, that very ſlouth and coldneſſe of ſpirit makes our owne liues tedious vnto vs! Would to God the deſire to profite in vertue did not wholly ſleepe in thee, who haſt often ſeene the holy examples of deuout and religious ſoules.
            
            
               CHAP. XIX. Of the Exerciſe of a good and Religious perſon.
               THe life of a religious perſon ought to ſhine with all vertues; that he may inwardly be ſuch, as outwardly he ſeemeth to men. Mat. 5. And with reaſon thou oughteſt to bee much more within, then is perceiued without: for God beholdeth the heart, Pſal. 33. Heb. 4. Pſal. 15. whom we ought moſt highly to reuerence

whereſoeuer wee are, and walke in purity like Angels in his ſight; and to renue daily our purpoſes, and ſtir vp our ſelues to feruour, as though this were the firſt day of our conuerſion; and to ſay: Helpe me, my God, in this my good purpoſe, and in thy holy ſeruice; and grant that I may now this day begin perfectly: for that which I haue done hitherto, is nothing.
               2 According to our purpoſe, ſhall be the ſucceſſe of our profit, and much diligence is neceſſary to him that will profit much. And if he that firmely purpoſeth, often faileth; what ſhall he doe, that ſeldome purpoſeth any thing, or with little certainty? It may fall out ſundry waies that we leaue off our purpoſe: and if for light occaſions wee omit our accuſtomed exerciſes, it ſeldome paſſeth without ſome loſſe. The purpoſe of juſt men is rather grounded

vpon the grace of God, then on their owne wiſdome, in whom alſo they alwayes haue confidence, in whatſoeuer they take in hand. For man doth purpoſe, but God diſpoſeth: neither is the way of man in his own hands. Prou. 16.
               3 If an accuſtomed exerciſe bee ſometimes omitted for ſome worke of charitie, or of intention to profit our neighbour, it may eaſily afterward be recouered: Eccleſ. 7. but if it be lightly left through inconſtancie or negligence, it is an offence, and will proue hurtfull. Though vve endeauour what we can, yet ſhall we faile in many things. But yet me muſt alwaies purpoſe ſomething certaine, eſpecially againſt that which moſt hinders vs. We muſt examine well, and order both our exteriour and interiour actions; for that both are expedient for our progreſſe in vertue.
               4 If thou canſt not alwaies recollect

thy ſelfe, yet do it ſometimes, and that at leaſt once euery day; to wit, in the morning, or euening. In the morning make thy good purpoſe; Deu. 4. in the euening examine thy ſelf what thou haſt bin that day in word, deed or thought: for that in theſe oftentimes perhaps thou haſt offended God and thy neighbour. Arme thy ſelfe with courage againſt the malicious attempts of thine enemy. Refraine gluttony, and thou ſhalt more eaſily bridle all the diſordered inclinations of the fleſh. Neuer be altogether idle, but either reading, or writing, or praying, or meditating, or labouring ſomething of profit for the common good: but bodily exerciſes are to be diſcreetly vſed, and not to be vndertaken equally of all.
               5 Thoſe things that be not common, are not to be done in the ſight of al: for priuate things are beſt done in ſecret. But thou muſt beware, thou

neglect not that to which thou art bound by common rule, and be ready in performing thy priuate deuotions: but hauing fully and faithfully accompliſhed all thy duties, & thoſe things that were enioyned thee, if thou haſt further leaſure, returne to thy ſelfe as thy deuotion deſireth. All cannot vſe the ſame exerciſe, but one is more conuenient for this perſon, another for that. According to the diuerſity of times alſo, diuers exerciſes are fitting: for ſome ſuite better with feſtiuall daies, others with daies of labour. We haue need of one kind in temptations, and of others in time of peace and quiet. Wee deſire to thinke of other things when we are ſorrowfull, then we do when we are cheerefull in our Lord.
               6 When principall feaſts draw neere, good exerciſes are to be renued; and the interceſſions of Saints more feruently to be implored. From

feaſt to feaſt, we ſhould make ſome good purpoſe, as though wee were then to depart out of this world, and to come to the euerlaſting feaſts of heauen. And therefore we ought to prepare our ſelues carefully at holy times, and to liue more deuoutly, and to keepe more exactly all things that wee are to obſerue, as though ſhortly we were to receiue reward of our labour at Gods hands.
               7 And if it bee differred, let vs thinke that we were not well prepared, nor worthy as yet of ſo great glory, as ſhal be reuealed in vs at the time appointed: and let vs labour to prepare our ſelues better for our departure. Rom. 8. Bleſſed is that ſeruant (ſaith S. Luke the Euangeliſt) whom when his Lord commeth, he ſhall finde watching: Luk. 13. verily I ſay vnto you, he ſhall place him ouer all that he poſſeſſeth. Mat. 24.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XX. Of the loue of Solitude and Silence.
               SEeke a fit time to attend to thy ſelfe, and often thinke of the benefits of God. Leaue curious things. Reade ouer ſuch matters, as may cauſe rather compunction, then the labour of much ſtudy. If thou withdraw thy ſelfe from ſuperfluous talk, and idle wandring about, as alſo from hearing of newes & tales; thou ſhalt finde ſufficient and fit time to thinke of good things. The greateſt Saints auoided the company of men as much as they could, and choſe to liue to God in ſecret. Hebr. 3.
               2 One ſaid: As often as I haue bin amongſt men, I haue returned leſſe man. Senec. ep. 7. The ſame we finde by experience when wee talke long. It is eaſier to keepe ſilence altogether, then not to exceed in words. It is eaſier for a man to keep home, then

to demeane himſelfe as he ought in all things abroad. He therefore that deſireth to attaine to internal, & ſpirituall graces, ought with Ieſus to withdraw himſelfe from the people. Mat. 4. No man goeth ſafely abroad, but hee that gladly keepeth home. Eccl. 3. No man ſecurely gouerneth, but he that delighteth to liue in ſubjection. No man ſecurely commandeth, but he that hath learned readily to obey.
               3 No man ſecurely reioyceth, vnleſſe he hath within him the teſtimony of a good conſcience. And yet the ſecurity of Saints was alwaies full of the feare of God. Neither were they leſſe carefull and humble in themſelues, for that they ſhined outwardly with grace and great vertues. But the ſecurity of euill men riſeth of pride and preſumption, and in the end deceiueth them. Neuer promiſe to thy ſelfe ſecurity in this life, although

thou ſeeme to be a good religious man, or deuout Hermite.
               4 Oftentimes thoſe, who in the judgement of men were of better eſteeme, haue bin in greateſt danger, by reaſon of their too much confidence. Wherefore it is more profitable to many, not to bee altogether free from temptations, but to be often aſſaulted; leſt they ſhould be too ſecure, and ſo perhaps be lifted vp in pride: leſt alſo they ſhould too freely giue themſelues to outward comforts. O how good a conſcience ſhould he keepe, that would neuer ſeeke tranſitory joy! Would neuer buſie himſelfe with the things of this world! And how great peace and quietneſſe ſhould hee poſſeſſe, that would cut off al vaine ſolicitude, and only think of diuine things; and ſuch as are profitable for his ſoule, and place all his hope in God!
               5 No man is worthy of heauenly

comfort, vnleſſe hee haue diligently exerciſed himſelfe in holy compunction. If thou deſireſt true contrition of heart, retire thy ſelfe into ſome ſecret and ſolitary place, and exclude from thy minde the tumults and vnquietneſſe of the world, as it is written: In your chambers be yee ſorry. Pſal. 4. In thy Cell thou ſhalt finde that which abroad thou ſhalt often loſe. The Cell, if thou continue in it, waxeth ſweete, and if thou loue not to ſtay in it, it becommeth irkeſome. If in the beginning of thy conuerſion thou accuſtome thy ſelfe to remaine in it, and keepe it well, it will be aftervvards vnto thee a deare friend, and a moſt pleaſant comfort.
               6 In ſilence and quietneſſe a deuout ſoule perfecteth her ſelfe, and learneth the ſecrets of holy Scriptures. There ſhee findeth flouds of teares, vvith vvhich ſhee may euery

night waſh and clenſe her ſelfe, and be made ſo much the more familiar with her Creator, by how much the further off ſhe liueth from all worldly diſquiet. Pſal. 6. Who ſo therefore withdraweth himſelfe from his acquaintance & friends; God with his holy Angels will draw neare vnto him. It were better for a man to lye hidden, and haue care of himſelfe, then being careleſſe of his ſoule, to worke miracles in the world. It is commendable for a religious perſon to goe abroad ſeldome, to fly to bee ſeene, & to be vnvvilling to ſee men.
               7 Why wilt thou ſee that which is not lawfull for thee to haue. The world paſſeth away, and all his delights. The deſires of our ſenſuality draw vs to vvalke abroad, but vvhen the houre is paſt, what bringeſt thou home, but a burdened conſcience, and diſtracted thoughts? A joyfull going abroad, bringeth often a ſorrowfull

comming home; and a merry euening maketh a ſad morning. Prou. 14. So all carnall joy entereth gently, but in the end it cauſeth remorſe and deſtruction. What is elſewhere to be ſeene, which thou canſt not ſee here? Eccl. 1. Here thou ſeeſt heauen and earth, & al the elements, of which all other things are made.
               8 What is there any where to be ſeene, that can long continue vnder the Sunne? thou thinkeſt perhaps to ſatiate thy ſelfe, and haue thy fill; but thou ſhalt neuer attaine it. If it were poſſible for thee to ſee all things created, preſent before thine eyes, what were it all but a vaine and vnprofitable ſight? Eccl. 3. Lift vp thine eyes to God in heauen, and aske pardon of thy ſins and negligences. Pſa. 122. Leaue vaine things to the vaine. Attend thou to that which God cō
                  mandeth. Shut thy dore vpon thee, & cal vpon Ieſus thy beloued. Mat. 6.

Be thou with him in thy Cell, for thou ſhalt not finde ſo great peace in any other place. If thou hadſt ſtayed within, and not giuen eare to idle newes, thou haddeſt kept thy ſelfe better in good peace. But now that thou delighteſt ſometimes to heare nouelties, it is fit thou ſuffereſt for it ſome trouble and diſquiet of minde.
            
            
               CHAP. XXI. Of Compunction of heart.
               IF thou wilt profit any thing, keepe thy ſelfe alwayes in the feare of God, and yeeld not too much ſcope to liberty. Prou. 19. Containe all thy ſenſes vnder the rule of diſcipline, and giue not thy ſelfe to fooliſh mirth. Giue thy ſelfe to compunction of heart, and thou ſhalt finde deuotion. Compunction diſcouereth much good, which with too much liberty is quickly loſt. It is meruaile that a man can euer perfectly reioice

in this life, if he conſider his baniſhment, and weigh the many perills, wherwith his ſoule is inuironed. The leuity of our minds, & the little care we haue of our faults, makes vs not to feele the ſorrowes of our ſoule.
               2 But oftentimes we vainly laugh, when wee haue juſt cauſe to weepe. There is neither true libertie, nor good mirth, but that which is in the feare of God, accompanied with a good conſcience. Happy is he, that can auoid all cauſe of diſtraction, and draw himſelfe to the vnion of holy compunction. Happy is he, that can abandon all that may defile, or burden his conſcience. Fight manfully: one cuſtome ouercomes another. If thou canſt forbeare to intermeddle with that which belongs to others; they will not hinder thee in that which thou haſt to doe.
               3 Buſie not thy ſelfe in matters which appertaine to others: neither

doe thou meddle at all with the affaires of thy betters. Looke firſt of al to thy ſelfe, and haue a more eſpecial care to admoniſh thy ſelf, then whō
                  ſoeuer thou loueſt beſt. If thou haſt not the fauour of men, be not therefore grieued; Gal. 1. but let this ſeeme vnto thee a moſt juſt cauſe of griefe, that thou lookeſt not to thy ſelf with that care, which beſeemeth the ſeruant of God, and a deuout religious perſon. It is oftentimes better and more ſecure, that a man hath not many conſolations in this life, eſpecially ſuch, as are agreeable to the inclination of our corrupt nature. But that we haue none at all, or doe ſeldome taſte diuine comforts, the fault is ours, that doe not ſeeke for compunction of heart, nor do wholly forſake the vaine comforts of this world.
               4 Acknowledge thy ſelfe vnworthy of diuine comforts, & that thou haſt deſerued great tribulatiō. Whē a

man hath perfect contrition, then is the whole world grieuous and lothſome vnto him. Iudg. 2. & 20. A good man findeth alwaies ſufficient cauſe of teares and ſorrow; for whether he conſider himſelf, or weigh the eſtate of his neighbour, hee knoweth that none liueth here without tribulatiō. 2. King. 13. And how much the more throughly he conſidereth himſelfe; ſo much the more is his ſorrow. Our ſinnes and vices in which wee are ſo plunged, that we can ſeldome contemplate the things of heauen, doe miniſter vnto vs matter of moſt juſt ſorrow and hartie contrition.
               5 If thou didſt thinke more diligently of thy death, then of liuing long, thou wouldeſt without doubt be more careful in the amendment of thy life. Eccleſ. 7. And if thou wouldeſt conſider within thy ſelfe, the paines of hell, or of Purgatory. Mat. 25. I am perſwaded it would moue

thee to endure any labour or paine whatſoeuer in this world, and not to feare any kinde of auſterity. But becauſe theſe things enter not to the heart, and wee ſtill loue that which delighteth vs, therefore we remaine cold and void of ſpirituall vigour.
               6 Oftentimes our want of ſpirit is the cauſe, that our wretched bodies do ſo quickly complaine. Pray therefore with all humility to our Lord, that he will vouchſafe to giue thee the ſpirit of contrition, and ſay with the Prophet: Feed me, O Lord, with the bread of tears, & giue me to drink with teares in meaſure. Pſ. 79.
            
            
               CHAP. XXII. Of the conſideration of humane miſery.
               MIſerable thou art whereſoeuer thou be, & whitherſoeuer thou turneſt, if thou turneſt not thy ſelfe to God. Why art thou troubled when things ſucceed not as thou

wouldeſt, and deſireſt? Who is there that hath all things as he wil? Eccls. 7. Neither I, nor thou, nor any man vpon earth. There is not any man in this world without ſome tribulation or affliction, though he be a King, or a Pope. Who thinkeſt thou then is in beſt caſe? Truely he that willingly ſuffereth ſomething for God.
               2 Many weake and feeble men ſay: Behold how well ſuch a one liues, hovv rich, hovv povverfull, hovv beautifull, how great a man he is: but lift vp thine eyes to the riches of heauen, Luk. 12. and thou ſhalt ſee that al temporal proſperity is as nothing, full of vncertainty, and which rather oppreſſeth then otherwiſe: for it is neuer had vvithout ſolicitude and feare. The felicitie of man conſiſteth not in hauing abundance of temporall riches: a meane ſufficeth. Prou. 19. Iob. 14. It is truely miſery enough to liue vpon earth.

How much more a man deſireth to bee ſpirituall, ſo much the more diſtaſteful is this preſent life vnto him: for hee better perceiueth, and ſeeth more clearely the defects of humane corruption. Eccls. 2. To eat, to drink, to watch, to ſleepe, to labour, to repoſe, and to bee ſubiect to all other neceſſities of nature, is doubtleſſe a great miſery to a deuout minde, that would gladly be free, and deliuered from all ſinne.
               3 The inward man is much oppreſſed with theſe corporall neceſſities, whileſt he is in this world. And therefore the holy Prophet prayeth with great deuotion to be deliuered from them, ſaying: Deliuer mee, O Lord, from my neceſſities. Pſal. 24. But wo bee to them that know not their miſery, and much more to them that loue this miſerable and corruptible life. For ſome there bee ſo dotingly affected vnto it, that although

with labor and begging, they ſcarce get bread to eate, yet if they might liue heere alwaies, they would care but little for the kingdom of heauē.
               4 O ſenſeleſſe creatures, and infidels in hart, who lie buried ſo deep in earth, that they haue no taſte nor feeling, but of ſenſuall things! Rom. 8. But miſerable wretches, they ſhall in the end feele, to their coſt, how vile, & of no eſteeme was that which they loued. The Saints of God, & the deuout ſeruants and friends of Chriſt reſpected little what pleaſed their naturall inclinations, or what flouriſhed in this life; but with their whole hopes and intentions they ſought after the riches of heauen. 1. Pet. 51. Heb. 11. Their whole deſire was carried vp to thoſe euerlaſting treaſures which are inuiſible; leſt they might haue bin drawne to baſe affections, by the loue of viſible things. Loſe not thy hope to profit in ſpirituall

matters: there is yet time: the houre is not yet paſt. Rom. 13.
               5 Why wilt thou defer thy good purpoſe? Riſe vp in this very inſtant, and beginne, and ſay: Now is the time to worke, the time to fight: novv is it a fit time to amend my ſelfe. When any tribulation or affliction doth befall thee, then is the time to merit. Thou muſt paſſe thorovv fire and vvater before thou come to reſt. Pſalm. 65. Vnleſſe thou vſe violence to thy ſelfe, thou ſhalt not ouercome thy euill inclinations. As long as vvee carrie about vvith vs this fraile bodie of ours, vvee can neuer bee vvithout ſinne, nor liue vvithout tediouſnes and griefe. We vvould gladly enjoy quietneſſe, and bee deliuered from all miſerie; but for that vvee haue by ſinne loſt our innocencie, wee haue together with it loſt alſo our happineſſe. Rom. 7. Gen. 3. and therefore it behoueth vs

to haue patience, and to expect the mercie of God till this iniquity haue an end, and that which is mortall be ſwallowed vp of life. 2. Cor. 5.
               6 O, how great is the frailety of man, alwaies inclined to euil! Gen. 6 To day thou confeſſeſt thy ſins, and to morrow thou committeſt againe the ſame which thou didſt confeſſe. Now thou propoſeſt to take heed, and within an houre thou doeſt as if thou haddeſt made no purpoſe at al. We may therefore with great reaſon humble our ſelues, and neuer admit any thought of our owne eſteeme, being ſo weak as we are, and ſubiect to euery change. 2. Mach. 9. Full ſoone (God-knowes) is that loſt by negligence, which with much labour was hardly gotten by grace.
               7 What will become of vs in the end, that doe ſo timely beginne to wax cold? Woe be vnto vs, if wee will now giue our ſelues to eaſe, as

if all were already in peace and ſecurity; when as yet there ſcarce appeareth ſo much as any ſigne of true ſanctity in our conuerſation. It were needfull that we were taught good manners againe like children, if ſo perhaps there might be ſome more hope of our amendment and profit in ſpirit.
            
            
               CHAP. XXIII. Of the conſideration of death.
               THe houre of death will quickly ouertake thee, and therefore looke how thou liueſt. To day a man is liuing, and to morrow he doth not appeare; and being once out of ſight, he is alſo quickly out of minde. Iob. 9. & 14. Luk. 12. O dulnes and hardnes of mans heart, who thinketh only on that he ſeeth, and foreſeeth not that which is to come! Hebr. 9. Thou ſhouldeſt alwayes ſo order thy thoughts and actions, as if this very

day thou wert to depart this life. If thou hadſt a good conſcience, thou wouldeſt not much feare death. Luk. 12. It is better to auoid ſin, then to flie death. Sap. 4. If thou be not prepared to day; how wilt thou be prepared to morrow? Mat. 24. & 25. To morrow-day is vncertaine, and whether thou ſhalt ſee it or no, thou knoweſt not.
               2 What doth it auaile vs to liue long, when we do ſo little amend? A long life doth not alwaies make vs better, nay rather it oftentimes heapeth vpon vs a greater load of ſins, O that wee had ſpent one day well in this world! Many doe reckon the yeares of their conuerſion, but full ſlender oftentimes is the fruit of amendment. If it be a dreadfull thing to die, perhaps it will be more dangerous for thee to liue long. Bleſſed is hee, that hath alwayes before his eyes the houre of hia death, and diſpoſeth

himſelfe daily therunto. Eccl. 7. If thou haſt at any time ſeen a man die, thinke with thy ſelfe, that thou muſt one day paſſe the ſame way.
               3 When it ts morning, think that perhaps thou ſhalt not liue vntill night; and when euening comes, do not dare to promiſe vnto thy ſelfe the next morning. Heb. 9. Be alwaies ready, & ſo order thy ſelfe, that death may neuer take thee vnprepared. Many die ſuddenly: for the Sonne of Man will come, when we leaſt think of it. Luk. 21. When that laſt houre ſhal come, thou wilt begin to thinke far otherwiſe of thy life, and much lament that thou haſt beene ſo ſlack and negligent. Matth. 24. Luk. 12.
               4 O, how wiſe and happy is hee, that now laboureth to be ſuch in his life, as he wiſheth to be found at the houre of his death! For the perfect contempt of the world, the feruent deſire to profit in vertue, the loue of

diſcipline, the labour of penance, the readines of obedience, the forſaking of our ſelues, and the bearing patiently of all aduerſitie for the loue of Chriſt, will giue great confidence of a happy end. Thou mayeſt doe much good whileſt thou art wel; but when thou art ſick, what thou wilt be able to doe, I know not. Few doe grow better, and amend themſelues with ſickneſſe; as alſo they that wander much abroad, ſeldome become holy.
               5 Truſt not vpon thy friends or neighbours; neither do thou put off to future time the care of thy ſoules health: for thou ſhalt ſooner be forgotten, then thou doeſt imagine. Eſay 30. & 31. Hier. 17. & 48. It is better now to prouide in time, and doe ſome good before thou goeſt, then to truſt in the helpe of others, when thou art gone. Mat. 6. If thou haſt no care of thy ſelfe now when thou haſt time, who will be carefull

for thee hereafter? The time which now thou haſt is very precious. Now are the daies of health. Now is the time acceptable. But alas, that thou ſpendeſt it ſo little to thy profit, in which thou mighteſt gaine eternall life! The time will come, when thou wilt deſire one day or one houre to amend, and I cannot aſſure thee that thou ſhalt obtaine it.
               6 O my deareſt brother, from how great danger mayeſt thou deliuer thy ſelfe! From how great feare maeyſt thou bee freed, if thou doeſt now liue fearefull, and carefull of thy death! Labour to liue in ſuch ſort, that at the houre of death thou maiſt rather reioyce then feare. Learne now to die to the world, that thou maiſt then begin to liue with Chriſt. Learne now to contemne all earthly things, that thou mayeſt then freely go to Chriſt. Chaſtiſe now thy body with pennance, that thou mayſt then

haue aſſured confidence. 1. Cor. 9.
               7 Ah foole, why doſt thou thinke thou ſhalt liue long, being not certaine of ſo much as one day! Luk. 12. How many haue been deceiued, and taken out of this world on a ſudden, when they leaſt expected it? How often haſt thou heard, how ſuch a one was ſuddenly ſlaine, another was drowned, another falling from ſome high place brake his necke, another died at his meate, another when hee was playing: one came to his end by fire, another by ſword, another by plague, another died by the hands of theeues? So as death is the end of al, and the life of man paſſeth away like a ſhadow.
               8 Who will remember thee; and vvho vvill pray for thee after thy death? Iob 14▪ Do now, beloued brother, doe novv vvhat thou canſt, for thou knoweſt not how ſoone thou ſhalt die, nor what ſhall befall thee

after thy death. Now whileſt thou haſt time, heape together eternall riches. Matth. 1. Luk. 11. Thinke on nothing, but on the health of thy ſoule Gal. 6. Haue care only on that which belongeth to God. Luk. 16. Make the Saints of God thy friends by honouring them, and imitating their vertues, that when thou departeſt this life, they may receiue thee into their euerlaſting dwellings. Hebr. 11.
               9 Eſteeme thy ſelfe as a pilgrime, and ſtranger vpon earth, and as one to whom the affaires of this world doe nothing appertaine. 1. Pet. 2. Keepe thy heart free, and lifted vp to God: for thou haſt not heere any permanent Citie. Heb. 13. Send thither thy prayers daily, with ſighes and teares; that thy ſoule may deſerue to paſſe with much happineſſe to our Lord after death.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXIV. Of Iudgement, and the puniſhment of ſinne.
               IN all things conſider the end, and how thou wilt be able to ſtand before that ſeuere Iudge, from whom nothing can be hidden, and is not appeaſed with gifts, nor admitteth excuſes, but judgeth according to juſtice. Heb. 10. O moſt wretched and fooliſh ſinner, that feareſt ſometimes the countenance of an angry man; what anſwer wilt thou make to God to whō al thy wickednes is known? Iob 9. Why prouideſt thou not for thy ſelfe againſt that rigorous day of Iudgement, in which no man can be excuſed, or defended by another, but euery one will be burden enough to himſelfe? Luk. 16. Now thy paines are profitable, thy teares acceptable, thy cries are heard, thy ſorrow ſatiſfieth for thy ſinnes, and purgeth thy ſoule. 2. Cor. 6.
               
                  2 The patient man hath a great and healthfull purgatory, Iam. 1. who receiuing iniuries, grieueth more for the others malice, then for his owne wrongs; Luk. 23. prayeth willingly for his aduerſaries, and from his hart forgiueth their offences; Act. 7. delayeth not to aske forgiueneſſe of whomſoeuer hee hath offended; is ſooner moued to compaſſion then to anger; vſeth often violence to himſelfe; and laboureth with his whole force to ſubdue the fleſh in all things to the ſpirit. It is better to purge our ſinnes and vices now, then to reſerue them for Purgatory. Verily the inordinate loue we beare to our ſelues deceiueth vs.
               3 What other thing ſhal that fire feed on, but thy ſinnes? How much the more thou ſpareſt thy ſelfe now, and followeſt the deſires of thy corrupt nature: ſo much the more grieuouſly ſhalt thou be puniſhed hereafter:

and ſo much the more matter doſt thou keep for that purging fire. In the ſelfe-ſame wherin a man hath ſinned, ſhall he be more grieuouſly puniſhed. There ſhall the ſlouthfull be pricked forwards with burning goads. There ſhall the Gluttons be tormented with inſatiable hunger and thirſt. There ſhall the laſciuious and the louers of pleaſures be couered ouer vvith burning pitch and brimſton. The enuious like raging dogs, ſhall there howle for griefe.
               4 There is no vice that ſhall not haue his proper torment. The proud ſhall be full of all ſhame and confuſion. The couetous ſhall be in miſerable want. One houre of paine there ſhall be more ſharp, then an hundred yeares of moſt hard pennance heere. There is no reſt there, nor comfort for the damned. Iob. 40. Heere yet ſometimes our labours ceaſe, and we enioy the comfort of our friends. Be

now ſolicitous and ſorrowfull for thy ſinnes; that in the day of judgement thou mayeſt bee ſecure in the company of the bleſſed ſoules. For then ſhal the juſt ſtand in great conſtancy, againſt thoſe that afflicted and oppreſſed them. Wiſd. 5. Then ſhall hee ſtand to judge, who now doth humbly ſubmit himſelfe to the judgement of men. Then ſhall the poore and humble haue great confidence, and the proud ſhall be compaſſed about on all ſides with feare.
               5 Then will it appeare, that hee vvas vviſe in this vvorld, vvho had heere learned to be as a foole, and diſpiſed for Chriſt. Then ſhall affliction patiently ſuffered delight vs, and iniquity ſhall ſtoppe her mouth, Then ſhall the deuout reioyce, and the irreligious mourne. Then ſhall the chaſtiſed fleſh more flouriſh, then if it had bin alwaies nouriſhed in delights. Pſal. 106. Then ſhall the poore

garment ſhine, and the precious robes appeare contemptiple. 2. Cor. 4. Then ſhall the meane cottage be more commended, then the ſumptuous Palace. Then will conſtant patience more auaile vs, then all earthly power. Then will ſimple obedience bee more eſteemed, then all worldly wiſdome. Eſay 29.
               6. Then ſhall a good and pure conſcience yeeld vs more comfort, then the profound learning of Philoſophy. Then ſhall the contempt of riches weigh more then al the worldlings treaſures. Then wilt thou bee more comforted that thou haſt prayed deuoutly▪ then that thou haſt fared daintily. Then wilt thou be more ioyful that thou haſt obſerued ſilēce, then that thou haſt talked much. Then will good workes appeare of much more eſteem, then faire words. Then a ſtrict life and hard pennance will be more pleaſing, then all earthly

delights. Accuſtome thy ſelfe now to ſuffer a little, that thou mayſt then bee deliuered from more grieuous paines. Proue heere firſt what thou canſt endure hereafter. If now thou canſt beare ſo little, how wilt thou be able to endure euerlaſting torments? If now a little ſuffering make thee ſo impatient, what will hell fire doe hereafter? Aſſure thy ſelfe, thou canſt not haue two Paradiſes. It is impoſſible for thee to enioy delights heere in this world, and raigne hereafter with Chriſt in heauen.
               7 If thou haddeſt hitherto liued alwaies in honors and delights; what would it auaile thee, if thou ſhouldeſt preſently die? Luk. 12. All is vanity, but to loue God, and onely to ſerue him. Eccleſ. 1. And he that loueth God with his whole heart, needeth to feare neither death, puniſhment, judgement, nor hell: for perfect loue giues ſecure acceſſe to God.

Rom. 8. But hee that delighteth alwaies in ſinne, what wonder though he alwaies feare death, and be terrified with the thought of judgement. Yet it is good, that if loue be not of force to withhold thee from ſinne, that at leaſt the feare of hell may reſtraine thee. And he that layeth aſide the feare of God, can neuer continue long in good ſtate, but falleth quickly into the ſnares of the diuell.
            
            
               CHAP. XXV. Of the feruent amendment of our whole life.
               BE watchfull and diligent in the ſeruice of God, and often thinke with thy ſelfe wherfore thou cameſt, and why thou didſt leaue the world. 2. Tim. 4. Was it not that thou mighteſt liue to God, and become a ſpirituall man? Goe on therefore with courage: thou ſhalt ſhortly receiue the reward of thy labours, and there ſhall be no more feare nor ſorrow in

the confines of thy habitation. Mat. 5. Apoc. 21. Thou muſt labour heere a while: thou ſhalt afterwards haue great reſt; yea euerlaſting ioy. Eccleſ. 51. If thou continueſt faithfull and diligent in ſeruing of God, doe not doubt but God will be faithfull and liberall in giuing thee reward. Apoc. 21. & 22. Matth. 25. Thou oughteſt to haue a good hope of getting the victory, but thou muſt not make thy ſelfe aſſured thereof, leſt thou waxe negligent, or bee puffed vp with pride. Rom. 5.
               2 When one that was in great anxiety of mind, often wauering betweene feare and hope, did once, being oppreſſed with griefe, proſtrate himſelfe in a Church in praier before an Altar, and ſaid within himſelfe: O, if I knew that I ſhould yet perſeuer! He preſently heard, as it were, a voice from God, which ſaid: What if thou diddeſt know it, what wouldeſt thou

doe? Doe now what thou wouldeſt doe then, and thou ſhalt bee ſecure. And being herewith comforted, and ſtrengthened in minde, he committed himſelfe wholly to the will of God, & that noyſom anxiety ceaſed, neither had hee any minde to ſearch curiouſly any further, to know what ſhould befall him; but rather laboured to vnderſtand what was the perfect and acceptable will of God, for the beginning and accompliſhing of euery good worke, Rom. 12.
               3 Hope in our Lord, and doe good, ſaith the Prophet, and inhabit the land, and thou ſhalt be fed in the riches thereof. Pſa. 36. One thing there is that draweth many backe from that ſpirituall good, & the diligent amendment of their liues: the horror of the difficulty, and the labor of the combat. But they aboue others profite moſt in vertue, that endeauour moſt to ouercome thoſe things

which are grieuous, and contrary vnto them. For there a man profiteth more, and deſerueth greater grace, where hee more ouercommeth and mortifieth himſelfe in ſpirit.
               4 But all men haue not alike to ouercome and mortifie: yet he that is zealous and diligent, though hee haue more paſſions, ſhall profit more in vertue, then another that is of a more temperate diſpoſition, if he be leſſe feruent in the purſuit of vertue. Two things chiefely helpe to our amendment, to wit, to withdraw our ſelues violently from that to which nature is viciouſly inclined, and to labor earneſtly for that vertue, which we moſt want. Be carefull alſo to auoide vvith great diligence, thoſe things in thy ſelfe, which doe moſt diſpleaſe thee in others.
               5 Gather ſome profit to thy ſoule out of euery occaſion and whereſoeuer thou bee: ſo as if thou ſeeſt or

heareſt any good, ſtir vp thy ſelfe to the imitation therof. But if thou ſeeſt any thing vvorthy of reproofe, beware thou doeſt not the ſame. And if at any time thou haſt done it, labour quickely to amend it. As thine eye obſerueth others, ſo art thou alſo noted againe by others. O, how ſweet and comfortable a thing it is, to ſee the ſeruants of Chriſt feruent and deuout, endued with vertuous and decent manners! And on the contrary, how pitifull and grieuous a thing it is, to ſee them that liue in a diſſolute and diſordered ſort, not applying themſelues to that, for which they were called! O, how great domage and great danger it is, to neglect the good purpoſes of their vocation, and to buſie themſelues in that which appertaineth not vnto them, nor is committed to their care!
               6 Bee mindefull of the purpoſe thou haſt made, and haue alwayes

before the eyes of thy ſoule, the picture of thy Sauiour crucified. Thou haſt good cauſe to be aſhamed, looking vpon the life of Chriſt, ſeeing thou haſt ſo ſlackly endeauoured to conforme thy ſelfe vnto him, though thou haſt walked a long time in the way of the ſeruice of God. A religious perſon that exerciſeth himſelfe ſeriouſly and deuoutly in the moſt holy life and paſſion of our Lord, ſhall there abundantly finde whatſoeuer is neceſſary and profitable for him; neither ſhall hee need to ſeeke any thing elſewhere, but only in Ieſus. O, if Ieſus crucified would come into our hearts, how quickely and fully ſhould we be inſtructed in all truth! Gal. 2. & 6.
               7 A feruent religious perſon taketh and beareth all vvell that is commanded him: but he that is negligent and cold, hath tribulation vpon tribulation, and on all ſides is afflicted:

for he is void of inward conſolation, and is forbidden to ſeeke externall comforts. A religious perſon that liueth not according to diſcipline, is in great danger of the ruine of his ſoule. He that ſeeketh liberty and eaſe, ſhall euer liue in diſquiet: for one thing or other will alwaies diſpleaſe him.
               8 How doe ſo many other religious perſons, vvho liue vnder the ſtrict rule of Monaſticall diſcipline? They ſeldome goe abroad, they liue retiredly, they feede meanely, they are cloathed courſely, they labour much, ſpeake little, watch long, riſe early, ſpend much time in prayer, reade often, and keep themſelues in all kinde of diſcipline. Conſider the Carthuſians, Ciſtercians, and the Religious men and women of diuers Orders, how they riſe euery night to ſing praiſes vnto God. And how vnſeemely then it is for thee to

be ſlouthfull in ſo holy a worke, when as ſo great multitudes of religious perſons doe beginne to glorifie God.
               9 O, that we had nothing elſe to doe, but alwaies with our mouth, and whole heart to praiſe our Lord God! O, that thou mighteſt neuer haue need to eate, nor drinke, nor ſleepe, but mighteſt alwaies praiſe God, and onely imploy thy ſelfe in the exerciſes of ſpirit: thou ſhouldeſt then be much more happy, then now thou art, when for ſo many neceſſities, thou art conſtrained to ſerue thy body. Would God theſe neceſſities were not at all, but only the ſpirituall refections of the ſoule, which (alas) we taſte of too ſeldome.
               10 When a man commeth to that eſtate, that he ſeeketh no comfort of any creature, then doth he begin to take perfect contentment and delight in God. Then ſhall he be contented

with whatſoeuer doth befall him in this world. Then ſhall he neither reioyce in great matters, nor be ſorrowfull for ſmall, but with great integritie and confidence commit himſelfe to God; who ſhall be vnto him al in all: to whom nothing doth periſh, nor die, but all things do liue vnto him, and ſerue him at a becke without delay. Rom. 11.
               11 Remember alwaies the end, and hovv that time loſt neuer returnes. Eccleſ. 7. Without care and diligence thou ſhalt neuer get vertues. If thou beginneſt to wax cold, it will be euill with thee: but if thou giue thy ſelfe to feruour of ſpirit; thou ſhalt find much peace, and feele leſſe labour, through the aſſiſtance of Gods grace, and loue of vertue. Apocal. 3. The feruent and diligent man is ready, and prepared for all things. It is harder to reſiſt vices and paſſions, then to toile in bodily labours.

Eccls. 19. He that auoideth not ſmall faults, by little and little falleth into greater. Thou wilt alwayes reioyce in the euening, if thou ſpend the day profitably. Be watchfull ouer thy ſelfe, ſtirre vp thy ſelfe, warme thy ſelfe, and whatſoeuer becomes of others, neglect not thy ſelfe. The greater violence thou vſeſt againſt thy ſelfe, the more thou ſhalt profite.
            
            THE END OF THE FIRST BOOKE.
         
         
            
            OF THE FOLLOWING OF CHRIST. THE SECOND BOOKE.
            
               CHAP. I. Of ſpirituall conuerſation.
               
                  THe Kingdom of God is within you, ſaith our Lord. Luk. 7. Turne thee with thy whole heart vnto our Lord, and forſake this miſerable world, and thy ſoule ſhall finde reſt. Ioel. 2. Learne to deſpiſe exteriour things, and to giue thy ſelf to the interiour, & thou ſhalt perceiue the Kingdome of God to come into thee. Ro. 19. For the kingdome of God is peace, and joy in the

holy Ghoſt, which is not giuen to the wicked. Chriſt will come vnto thee, and ſhew thee his diuine comfort, if thou prepare for him a worthy manſion within thee. Pſal. 44. Al his glory and beauty is within, and there he pleaſeth himſelfe. The inward man he often viſits, and hath with him ſweet diſcourſes, pleaſant comfort, much peace, wonderfull familiarity.
               2 O faithfull ſoule, make ready thy hart for this Bridegrome, that he may vouchſafe to come vnto thee; and dwell within thee. For he ſaith: If any loue mee, hee will keepe my Word, and we will come vnto him, and will make our aboad with him. Ioh. 14. Giue therefore vnto Chriſt a place in thy heart, and deny entrance to all others. When thou haſt Chriſt, thou art rich, and he will ſuffice thee. Hee will be thy faithfull and prouident helper in all things, ſo as thou

ſhalt not need to truſt in men. For men are ſoone changed, and quickly decay; but Chriſt remaineth for euer, and ſtandeth firmely vnto the end. Ioh. 12.
               3 There is little truſt to be put in a fraile and mortall man, though hee be profitable and deare vnto thee: neither oughteſt thou much to bee grieued, if ſometimes hee croſſe and contradict thee. Hier. 17. They that to day take thy part, to morrow may be againſt thee; and ſo on the contrary, they often turne like vnto the winde. Put all thy truſt in God, and feare and loue him: 1. Pet. 5. He wil anſwere for thee, and do in al things what is beſt. Heb. 13. Thou haſt not heere a dwelling Citie: and whereſoeuer thou bee, thou art a ſtranger and pilgrime: neither ſhalt thou euer haue reſt, vnleſſe thou be perfectly vnited vnto Chriſt.
               4 Why doeſt thou linger and

make delayes heere, ſince this is not the place of thy reſt? Phil. 3. In heauen ought to be thy dwelling, and al earthly things are to be regarded, as it were, in the way. Sap. 5. Al things paſſe away, and thou together with them. Beware thou cleaue not vnto them, leſt thou be enthralled; and ſo doeſt periſh. Let thy thought be on the higheſt, and thy prayer directed vnto Chriſt without ceaſing. If thou canſt not contemplate high and heauenly things, reſt thy ſelfe in the paſſion of Ch
                     ••••
                  , and dwell willingly in the wounds of his ſacred body. For if thou flie deuoutly vnto his holy wounds, and to th
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   markes of his paſſion, thou 
                     •
                  hal
                     •
                   feele great comfort in tribulation▪ neither wilt thou much care for being deſpiſed of men, and wilt eaſily be
                     •
                  re the words of ſlanderous tongues.
               5 Chriſt was alſo in the world deſpiſed, and in great neceſſity: forſaken

by his acquaintance & friends in the middeſt of ſlanders. Matth. 1.12.5.26. & Ioh. 15. Chriſt would ſuffer, and be contemned; and dareſt thou complaine? Chriſt had aduerſaries and backbiters; and wilt thou haue all men thy friends and benefactors? For what ſhall thy patience be crowned, if no aduerſitie happen vnto thee? 2. Tim. 21. If thou wilt ſuffer no aduerſity, how wilt thou be the friend of Chriſt? Suffer vvith Chriſt, and for Chriſt, if thou deſire to raigne with Chr
                     •••
                  
                  ▪
               
               6 If thou 
                     〈…〉
                   perfectly entered into the heart of Ieſus, and taſted a little of his burning loue: then wouldeſt thou not weigh thy owne commodity or diſcommodity▪ but wouldeſt rather reioyce at ſlanders, when they ſhould chance to the caſt vpon 
                     〈…〉
                   for the loue of Ieſus maketh a man to deſpiſe himſelfe. A louer of Ieſus, and of truth, and a

true ſpirituall perſon, and free from inordinat affections, can freely turne himſelfe vnto God, and lift himſelfe aboue himſelfe in ſpirit, and with great joy of his ſoule reſt in God.
               7 He that judgeth of all things as they are, and not as they are ſaid, and eſteemed to bee, is truely wiſe, and taught rather by God then men. Eſa. 54. He that can liue ſpiritually, and make ſmall reckoning of outward things: neither requireth places, nor attendeth times for performing of deuout exerciſes. A ſpirituall man quickly recollecteth himſelf: becauſe he neuer yeeldeth ouer himſelf wholy to outward things. He is not hindred by outward labour or buſines, which may be neceſſary for the time: but as things fall out, ſo he frameth himſelfe vnto them. Hee that hath well ordered and diſpoſed all things within, careth little for the vaine inuentions and peruerſe inclinations

of men. So much is a man hindred and diſtracted, how much he draweth matters vnto himſelfe.
               8 If all went well with thee, and thou haddeſt thy heart well purged, all things would fall out to thy good and profit. But many things diſpleaſe and often trouble thee, becauſe thou art not yet perfectly dead vnto thy ſelfe, nor free from the affection of earthly things. Rom. 8. & 1. Cor. 4. Nothing ſo defileth and intangleth the heart of man, as the impure loue to creatures. If thou refuſe outward comfort; thou wilt be able to contemplate the things of heauen, and often receiue internall joy.
            
            
               CHAP. II. Of humble ſubmiſsion.
               REſpect not much who is with thee, or who is againſt thee. Endeauour, and take care, that God may be for thee in euery thing thou

doeſt. Pſal. 27. Haue a good conſcience, and God will defend thee. For whom God will helpe, no malice of man can hurt. If thou canſt hold thy peace and ſuffer, without doubt thou ſhalt ſee that our Lord wil help thee. He knoweth the time, and manner how to deliuer thee, and therefore thou oughteſt to reſigne thy ſelfe vnto him. It belongs to God to help, and to deliuer from all ſhame. Oftentimes it is very profitable, for the better keeping of humilitie, that others know, & reprehend our faults.
               2 When a man humbleth himſelfe for his faults, then he eaſily pacifieth others, and quickly ſatisfieth thoſe that are offended with him. God protecteth and deliuereth the humble: he loueth and comforteth the humble: vnto the humble man he inclineth himſelfe: vnto the humble he giueth great grace, and after his humiliation, hee raiſeth him vnto

glorie. Vnto the humble hee reuealeth his ſecrets, and ſweetely draweth and inuiteth him vnto himſelfe. Matth. 12. The humble, when hee hath receiued confuſion, is in peace, for that hee reſteth in God, and relieth not on the world. Doe not thinke that thou haſt profited any thing, vnleſſe thou eſteeme thy ſelfe inferiour to all.
            
            
               CHAP. III. Of a good and peaceable man.
               FIrſt keepe thy ſelfe in peace, and then maiſt thou pacifie others. A peaceable man doth more good, then he that is well learned. A paſſionate man turneth good into euill, and eaſily beleeueth the worſt. A good peaceable man turneth all things into good. He that is well in peace, is not ſuſpitious of any. 1. Cor. 15. But hee that is diſcontented, and troubled, is toſſed with diuers ſuſpitions:

he is neither quiet himſelfe, nor ſuffereth others to be quiet. He often ſpeaketh that which he ought not to ſpeake; and omitteth that which were more expedient for him to doe. Hee conſidereth what others are bound to doe: and neglecteth that which he is bound to himſelfe. Ma. 7. Firſt therefore haue a carefull zeale ouer thy ſelfe, and then thou mayeſt juſtly ſhew thy ſelfe zealous of thy neighbours good. Act. 1.
               2 Thou knoweſt well how to excuſe and colour thine owne deeds, and thou wilt not receiue the excuſes of others. It were more meet that thou diddeſt accuſe thy ſelfe, and excuſedſt thy brother. Gal. 6. If thou wilt be borne withal, beare alſo with another. 1. Cor. 13. Behold how far off thou art as yet from true charitie and humility, which knoweth not how to be angry with any, or to bee moued with indignation, but only againſt

himſelfe. It is no great matter to conuerſe with the good, and thoſe that are of a gentle diſpoſition, for that is naturally pleaſing to all, and euery one willingly enioyeth peace, and loueth thoſe beſt that agree with him. But to bee able to liue peaceably with the vnquiet and peruerſe mindes, or with the diſorderly, or ſuch as contradict vs, is a great grace, and very commendable.
               3 Some there are, that keep themſelues in peace, and are in peace alſo with others. And there are ſome, that neither are in peace themſelues, nor ſuffer others to be in peace: they are troubleſome to others, but alwayes more troubleſome to themſelues. And others there are that keep themſelues in peace, and labour to bring others vnto peace. Our whole peace in this miſerable life, cōſiſteth rather in humble ſuffering, then in not feeling aduerſities. He that can beſt tell

how to ſuffer, will beſt keep himſelfe in peace. He is a conquerour of himſelfe, a Lord of the world, friend of Chriſt, and heire of heauen.
            
            
               CHAP. IV. Of a pure minde and vpright intention.
               WIth two wings man is lifted vp from earthly vanities, that is, with ſimplicity & purity. Simplicity ought to be in our intention. Purity in our affection. Simplicity fixeth the eyes of the ſoule in God. Purity apprehendeth and taſteth his ſweetnes. No good action will hinder thee, if thou be inwardly free from inordinate affection. If thou intend and ſeeke nothing elſe but the will of God, and the profite of thy neighbour, thou ſhalt enioy eternall libertie. If thy heart were ſincere and vpright, then euery creature would be vnto thee a looking-glaſſe of life, and a booke of holy doctrine. There is no creature

ſo little and abiect, that repreſenteth not the goodnes of God.
               2 If in thine owne heart thou wert good and pure, then thou wouldeſt be able to ſee and vnderſtand all things without any impediment. Rom. 1. Prou. 3. A pure heart penetrateth heauen, and pierceth the depth of hell. Pſal. 118. Such as euery one is inwardly: ſo hee iudgeth outwardly. If there bee ioy in the world, ſurely a man of a pure heart poſſeſſeth it. And if there bee any where tribulation and affliction, an euill conſcience feeles it. As iron put into the fire leeſeth his ruſt, and becommeth bright like fire: ſo he that wholly turning himſelfe vnto God, becommeth feruent, and is changed into a new man.
               3 When one beginneth to wax cold: then he is afraid of a ſmall labour, and willingly receaueth externall comfort. But when he once

beginneth to ouercome himſelfe perfectly, and to walke manfully in the way of God: then hee eſteemeth thoſe things to be light, which before ſeemed grieuous vnto him.
            
            
               CHAP. V. Of the conſideration of ones ſelfe.
               WE cānot truſt much to our ſelues, for that grace oftentimes and vnderſtanding is wanting. There is but little light in vs, and that which wee haue, we quickly loſe by our negligence. And oftentimes wee doe not perceiue our owne inward blindnes. We often do euil, & excuſe it worſe. Matth. 7. We are ſometimes moued with paſſion, and we thinke it to be zeale. We reprehend ſmall things in others, and paſſe ouer greater matters in our ſelues. We quickly feele, and vveigh vvhat vvee ſuffer at the hands of others; but wee minde not what others ſuffer from vs. Hee that

doth well and deepely conſider his owne workes, will finde little cauſe to judge hardly of another.
               2 A ſpirituall man preferreth the care of himſelf, before all other cares. Mat. 16. And he that diligently attendeth vnto himſelfe, doth ſeldome ſpeak much of others. Thou wilt neuer be recollected & deuout, vnleſſe thou paſſe ouer other mens matters with ſilence, and looke eſpecially to thy ſelfe. If thou attend wholly vnto God and thy ſelfe, thou wilt be little mooued with whatſoeuer thou ſeeſt abroad. 1. Cor. 4. Where art thou, when thou art not with thy ſelfe? Galat. 1. And when thou haſt runne ouer all, what haſt thou profited, if thou doeſt neglect thy ſelfe? If thou deſireſt peace of mind & true vnion, thou muſt eſteeme little of all earthly things, and look only to thy ſelfe.
               3 Thou ſhalt therfore profit much, if thou keepe thy ſelfe free from all

temporall cares. Thou ſhalt hinder thy ſelfe greatly, if thou eſteeme any thing of this vvorld. Let nothing be great vnto thee, nothing high, nothing gratefull, nothing acceptable, but only God himſelfe purely, or that which is for God. Eſteeme all comfort vaine which thou receiueſt from any creature. Eccleſ. 1. A ſoule that loueth God, deſpiſeth all things that be inferiour vnto God. God alone is euerlaſting, and of infinite greatnes, filling all creatures: the comfort of the ſoule, and the true ioy of the heart.
            
            
               CHAP. VI. Of the confort of a good Conſcience.
               THe glory of a good man, is the teſtimony of a good conſcience. 2. Cor. 1. Haue a good conſcience, and thou ſhalt euer haue ioy. A good conſcience is able to beare much, and is cheerefull in aduerſities. An euill

conſcience is alwayes fearefull and vnquiet. Thou ſhalt reſt ſweetly, if thy heart doth not reprehend thee. Wiſd. 17. Do thou neuer reioyce, but when thou haſt done well. Sinners haue neuer true mirth, nor feele inward peace: becauſe there is no peace to the impious, ſaith our Lord. And if they ſhould ſay: Wee are in peace, no euill ſhall fall vpon vs, and who ſhall dare to hurt vs? Luk. 12. Eſay. 27. Beleeue them not: for vpon a ſudden will ariſe the wrath of God, and their deeds ſhall be turned into nothing, and their conceits ſhall periſh.
               2 To glory in tribulation is no hard thing for him that loueth. Rom. 8. For to glory ſo, is to glory in the Croſſe of our Lord. That glory is ſhort, which is giuen and receiued from men. Galath. 6. Sorrow alwaies accompanieth the glory of the world. The glory of the good is in

their cōſciences, & not in the tongues of men. 2. Cor. 2. The gladnes of the juſt is of God, and in God: and their joy is of the truth. Hee that deſireth true & euerlaſting glory, careth not for that which paſſeth away vvith time. And he that ſeeketh temporall glory, or contemneth it not from his heart, ſheweth himſelfe but little to eſteeme of the glory of heauen. He enioyeth great tranquillitie & peace of minde, that careth neither for the praiſes, nor diſpraiſes of men.
               3 Hee will eaſily be content and pacified, whoſe cōſcience is pure. He is not the more holy, though thou commend him: nor the more, abiect though thou diſpraiſe him. What thou art, that thou art: neither canſt thou be truly ſaid to be greater, then what thou art in the ſight of God. If thou conſider what thou art within thee, thou wilt not care what men ſay of thee. Man ſeeth in the face, but

God looketh into the heart. 1. King. 16. Man conſidereth the deeds, but God weigheth the intentions. To do alwayes well, and to eſteeme little of himſelfe, is a token of an humble minde. To refuſe to be comforted by any creature, is a ſigne of great purity, and inward confidence.
               4 Hee that ſeeketh no outward witnes for himſelfe, doth ſhew that he hath wholly committed himſelfe vnto God. For not he that commendeth himſelfe, the ſame is approued (ſaith S. Paul) but whom God commendeth. 2. Cor. 10. To walk inwardly with God, and not to be poſſeſſed with any outward affection, is the ſtate of an inward & ſpirituall man.
            
            
               CHAP. VII. Of the loue of IESVS aboue all things.
               BLeſſed is hee that vnderſtandeth what it is to loue Ieſus: and to deſpiſe himſelfe for Ieſus. Pſal. 116.

Thou oughteſt to leaue thy beloued, for thy beloued; for that Ieſus will be beloued alone aboue all things. Deut. 6. The loue of things created is deceitfull and vnconſtant: the loue of Ieſus is faithfull and conſtant. Mat. 22. He that cleaueth vnto creatures, ſhall fall with that which is ſubiect to fall. He that imbraceth Ieſus ſhall ſtand firmely for euer. Loue him, and keepe him for thy friend, who when all goe away, will not forſake thee, nor ſuffer thee to periſh in the end. Thou muſt once bee left of men, whether thou vvilt or no.
               2 Liue and die with Ieſus; and commit thy ſelfe vnto his truſt, who when all faile, can alone helpe thee. Thy beloued is of that nature, that he will none of that which appertaineth to others: but vvill haue thy heart alone, and ſit like a King in his owne throne. If thou couldeſt purge

thy ſelfe perfectly of all creatures, Ieſus vvould vvillingly dwell vvith thee. Whatſoeuer thou putteſt in men, out of Ieſus, is all no better then loſt. Truſt not, nor rely vpon a reedefull of vvinde: for that all fleſh is as hay, and all the glory therof ſhall wither away as the flower of the field. Eſay 4.
               3 Thou ſhalt quickely be deceiued, if thou looke onely to the outvvard ſhew of men. And if in them thou ſeekeſt thy comfort and profit: thou ſhalt often feele loſſe. If thou ſeekeſt Ieſus in all things, thou ſhalt ſurely finde Ieſus. But if thou ſeekeſt thy ſelfe, thou ſhalt alſo finde thy ſelfe, but to thy owne harme. For man doth more hurt himſelfe, if hee ſeeke not Ieſus, then the vvhole vvorld, and all his aduerſaries could annoy him.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII. Of familiar conuerſation with IESVS.
               
               WHen Ieſus is preſent, all is well, and nothing ſeemeth difficult: but when Ieſus is abſent, euery thing is hard. When Ieſus ſpeaketh not inwardly vnto vs, our comfort is nothing worth: but if Ieſus ſpeake but one word, we feele much conſolation. Did not Mary Magdalen preſently riſe frō the place where ſhe wept, when Martha ſaid vnto her: Thy Maſter is here, and calleth thee. Ioh. 11. Happy is the houre whē Ieſus calleth from teares to ſpiritual ioy. How dry and hard art thou without Ieſus? How fooliſh & vaine, if thou deſire any thing out of Ieſus? Is not this a greater loſſe, then if thou ſhouldeſt loſe the whole world? Matth. 16.
               2 What can the world profit thee without Ieſus? To be without Ieſus is a grieuous hell; and to be with Ieſus

is a ſweet Paradiſe. If Ieſus be with thee, no enemy can hurt thee. Rom. 8. He that findeth Ieſus, findeth a good treaſure: yea a good aboue al goods. Mat. 13. And he that leeſeth Ieſus, leeſeth too much, & more then the whole world. Hee is moſt poore that liueth without Ieſus: & he moſt rich that is well with Ieſus. Luk. 12.
               3 It is a great skill to know how to conuerſe with Ieſus, and a great wiſdome to know how to keepe Ieſus. Prou. 8. Be humble & peaceable, and Ieſus will be with thee. Be deuout and quiet, and Ieſus will ſtay with thee. Thou mayeſt driue away Ieſus & loſe his grace, if thou giueſt thy ſelfe to outward things. And if thou ſhouldeſt driue him from thee, and leeſe him, vnto whom wilt thou fly, and what friend wilt thou then ſeeke? Without a friend thou canſt not well liue: and if Ieſus be not aboue al a friend vnto thee; thou ſhalt

be too too ſorrowfull and deſolate. Thou doeſt therefore fooliſhly, if thou doeſt truſt or reioyce in any other. It is better for thee to haue all the vvorld againſt thee, then Ieſus offended with thee. Gal. 6. Amongſt al things therefore that be deare vnto thee, let Ieſus alone be thy chiefeſt beloued.
               4 Loue all for Ieſus, but Ieſus for himſelfe, Ieſus Chriſt alone is eſpecially to bee beloued; who alone is found to be good, and faithful aboue all friends. For him, and in him, let as well friends as foes be deare vnto thee: Mat. 5. and all theſe are to bee prayed for, that all may know & loue him. Luk. 6. Neuer deſire to be ſingularly commended or beloued, for that appertaineth onely vnto God, who hath none like vnto himſelfe. Neither do thou deſire that the hart of any ſhould be ſet on thee; nor do thou ſet thy heart on the loue of any:

but let Ieſus be in thee, and in euery vertuous and good man.
               5 Bee pure and free within, and intangle not thy hart with any creature. Thou oughteſt to be, as it were, naked, and carry a pure heart to God, if thou wilt conſider; and proue, and ſee how ſweete our Lord is. And truely vnleſſe thou be preuented, and drawne by his grace, thou ſhalt neuer attaine to that happines, to forſake and caſt away all, that 
                     〈…〉
                   mayeſt bee vnited to him 
                     〈◊〉
                  . For when the grace of God commeth vnto a man, then hee is ſtrong, and nothing is hard vnto him. And vvhen it goeth away, hee is poore and weake, and as it vvere, left vnto the vvill of whomſoeuer will afflict him. In this thou oughteſt not to bee deiected, nor deſpaire, but to reſigne thy ſelfe with all indifferency vnto the will of God, and to beare all things that befall

thee for the glory of Chriſt: for after winter followeth ſummer: after night commeth day, and after a tempeſt, faire weather.
            
            
               CHAP. IX. Of the want of all comfort.
               IT is no great matter to deſpiſe humane comfort, when wee haue diuine. It is much, and very much, to be able to want both humane & diuine comfort: and for the honor and glory of God, to be willing to endure deſolation of hart; and to ſeeke himſelfe in nothing, nor to regard his owne merit. What great matter is it, if thou be cheerefull and deuout at the cōming of heauenly grace? This houre is wiſhed for of all men. He rideth eaſily whom the grace of God carieth. And what maruell if he feele not his burden, who is borne vp by the Almighty, and led by the greateſt guide?
               
                  2 We are alwaies willing to haue ſomething for our comfort; and a man doth hardly put off, and forſake himſelfe. The holy Martyr S. Laurence ouercame the world with his Prelate: becauſe he deſpiſed whatſoeuer ſeemed delightſome in the world: and for the loue of Chriſt he patiently ſuffered the high Prieſt of God, S. Syxtus, to be takē from him, whom he moſt loued. He ouercame therfore the loue of man, by the loue of the Creator; and he rather choſe the diuine pleaſure, then humane cō
                  fort. See thou alſo learne to forſake ſome neceſſary thing, and a beloued friend for the loue of God. Bee not grieued when thou art forſaken by a friend, knowing that we al at length muſt be ſeparated one from another.
               3 A man muſt fight long, & with a conſtant minde, before hee get the victory, & be able to place his whole heart in God. When a man confideth

in himſelfe, he eaſily ſlideth vnto humane comforts. But a true louer of Chriſt, & a diligent follower of vertue, giueth not himſelfe to ſuch ſolace, nor ſeeketh ſenſible ſweetnes: but rather forcible exerciſes, and to ſuſtaine hard labours for Chriſt.
               4 When therefore ſpiritual comfort is giuen thee from God, receiue it thankfully: but know that it is the gift of God, not any deſert of thine. Be not puffed vp, ioy not too much, neither do thou preſume vainely: but be rather the more humble for that grace, and more wary and fearefull in all thy actions: for that houre wil paſſe away, and temptation will ſucceed. When conſolation is taken frō thee, deſpaire not preſently; but with humility & patience attend the heauenly viſitation: for God is able againe to giue thee greater conſolation. This is not new nor ſtrange vnto them, that haue experience in the

way of God: for in the great Saints and ancient Prophets, there was oftentimes ſuch kinde of alteration.
               5 For which cauſe, one when he had grace, ſaid: I ſaid in my plentie, I will not be moued euerlaſtingly. Pſalm. 29. But vvhen this vvas gone from him, hee addeth vvhat he found in himſelfe, ſaying: Thou turnedſt thy face from mee, and I became troubled. Ibid. Yet doth hee not deſpaire in the middeſt of theſe changes, but more earneſtly prayeth vnto our Lord, and ſaith: Vnto thee (O Lord) I will cry, and I will pray vnto my God. Ibid. Laſtly, he receiueth the fruite of his prayer, and witneſſeth that hee was heard, ſaying: Our Lord hath heard mee, and taken pitie on mee: our Lord is become my helper. Ibid. But wherein? Thou haſt turned (ſaith he) my ſorrow into joy, and thou haſt compaſſed me about with gladnes. Ibid.

If great Saints haue beene ſo dealt withall, we that are poore and weake ought not to deſpaire, if we be ſomtimes feruent, and ſometimes cold: for the ſpirit commeth and goeth, according to the good pleaſure of his will. Ioh. 3. For which cauſe bleſſed Iob ſaith, Thou viſiteſt him early in the morning, and ſuddenly thou proueſt him. Iob 7.
               6 Whereupon therefore can I hope, or wherin ought I to truſt, but in the great mercy of God alone, and in the only hope of heauenly grace? For whether I enioy the preſence of good men, or deuout brethren, or faithfull friends, or holy bookes, or learned treatiſes, or ſweet ſongs and hymnes: all theſe helpe little, & haue little ſauour, when grace forſaketh mee, and I remaine left in my owne pouerty. At ſuch a time there is no better remedy then patience, and the reſigning of my ſelfe vnto the will of God. Luk. 9.
               
                  7 I neuer found any ſo religious and deuout, that hath not had ſometimes a withdrawing of grace, or felt not a decreaſe of feruour. There was neuer Saint ſo highly wrapt, and illuminated, who firſt or laſt was not tempted. For he is not worthy of the high contemplation of God, who hath not bin exerciſed with ſome tribulation for God ſake. For temptation going before, is wont to bee a ſigne of enſuing comfort. And vnto thoſe that are proued by temptations, heauenly comfort is promiſed. He that ſhal ouercome, ſaith he, I wil giue him to eate of the wood of life. Apocal. 21.
               8 But diuine comfort is giuen, that a man may be ſtronger to beare aduerſities. There followeth alſo temptatiō, leſt we ſhould wax proud of that good. The diuel ſleepeth not, neither is our fleſh as yet dead: 1. Pet. 5. therefore ceaſe not to prepare thy

ſelfe to the battaile: for on thy right hand, and on thy left, are enemies that neuer reſt.
            
            
               CHAP. X. Of thankefulneſſe for the grace of God.
               WHy ſeekeſt thou reſt, ſince thou art borne to labour? Iob▪ 3. Diſpoſe thy ſelfe to patience, rather then to comforts: and to the bearing of the Croſſe, rather then to gladnes. What ſecular perſon is there, that would not willingly receiue ſpirituall joy and comfort, if hee could alwayes haue it? Luk. 14. Spirituall comforts exceed all the delights of the world, & all the pleaſures of the fleſh. All worldly delights are either vaine, or vncleane: but ſpirituall delights are onely pleaſant and honeſt, produced by vertues, and infuſed by God into pure hearts. But no man can alwayes enioy theſe diuine comforts, according to his deſire: for the

time of temptation is not long away.
               2 Falſe freedome of minde, and great truſt of our ſelues, is very contrary to heauēly viſitation. God doth well in giuing grace: but man doth euill in not returning it againe wholy vnto God, with thankeſgiuing. And therefore the gifts of grace cannot flow in vs, becauſe wee are vngratefull to the giuer: and returne them not wholly to the head-fountaine. Eccleſ. 1. For grace is euer due to him that is thankefull: and from the proud ſhall be taken that which is wont to be giuen to the humble.
               3 I deſire not that conſolation that taketh from me compunction: nor that contemplation which breedeth a haughtie minde. For all that is high, is not holy: nor all that is ſweet, good: nor euery deſire, pure: nor euery thing that is deare vnto vs, is gratefull to God. I do willingly accept of that grace, whereby I may

euer become more humble and fearfull, and be made more ready & able to forſake my ſelfe. He that is taught by the gift of grace, & by the ſcourge of the withdrawing thereof; wil not dare to attribute any good to himſelfe; but will rather acknowledge himſelfe poore and naked. Giue vnto God that which is Gods; Mat. 22. and aſcribe vnto thy ſelfe that which is thine owne: that is, giue thankes vnto God for his grace, and acknowledge that nothing is to be attributed to thee, but only ſinne, and the puniſhment due thereunto.
               4 Content thy ſelfe, and deſire alwaies the meaneſt & loweſt things, and the higheſt ſhall be giuen thee: for the higheſt ſtand not without the loweſt. The higheſt Saints before God, are the leaſt in their own iudgments. Luk. 14. And how much the more glorious, ſo much the humbler within themſelues. Thoſe that are ful

of truth, and heauenly glory, are not deſirous of the vaine-glory of this world. Thoſe that are firmely ſetled and grounded in God, can no way be proud. And they that aſcribe all vnto God, what good ſoeuer they haue receiued, ſeeke not glory one of another: Ioh. 5. but would haue that glory which is from God alone: and deſire aboue all things to praiſe God in himſelfe, and in all the Saints, and alwaies tend vnto the ſame.
               5 Bee therefore gratefull for the leaſt gift, and thou ſhalt bee made worthy to receiue greater. Let the leaſt bee vnto thee alſo as the greateſt: and the moſt contemptible as an eſpeciall gift. If thou conſider the worth of the giuer, no gift wil ſeeme little, or of meane eſteeme. For it is not little that is giuen by the ſoueraigne Maieſty of God. Yea if hee ſhould giue puniſhment and ſtripes, it ought to be gratefull, for that hee

doth it alwayes for our ſaluation, whatſoeuer he permitteth to happen vnto vs. He that deſireth to keep the grace of God, let him be thankefull for the grace giuen, and patient for the taking away thereof. Let him pray that it may returne. Let him be wary and humble, leſt he leeſe it.
            
            
               CHAP. XI. How few the louers of the Croſſe of Chriſt are.
               IEſus hath now many louers of his heauenly kingdome, but few bearers of his Croſſe. He hath many deſirous of comfort, but few of tribulation. He findeth many companions of his Table, but few of his abſtinence. Al deſire to rejoyce with him, few will ſuffer any thing for him, or with him. Many follow Ieſus vnto the breaking of bread; but few to the drinking of the Chalice of his Paſſion. Many reuerence his miracles, few follow the ignominy of his Croſſe.

Luk. 9.22. Many loue Ieſus, as long as aduerſities happen not. Many praiſe and bleſſe him, as long as they receiue any comfort from him. But if Ieſus hide himſelfe, and leaue them but a while, they fal either into complaint, or into too much deiection of minde.
               2 But they that loue Ieſus, for Ieſus, and not for ſome comfort of their own, bleſſe him in al tribulation and anguiſh of hart, as wel as in the greateſt comfort. And although he ſhould neuer giue them comfort, they notwithſtanding would euer praiſe him, and alwayes giue him thankes.
               3 O how powerfull is the pure loue of Ieſus, which is mixed with no ſelfe-loue nor proper intereſt! Phil. 2. Are they not all to be called hirelings that euer ſeeke comforts? Doe they not ſhew themſelues to be rather louers of themſelues, then of Chriſt, that alwaies think of their cō
                  moditie

and gaine? Where may one be found that will ſerue God, without looking for reward?
               4 It is hard to finde any one ſo ſpirituall, that is free from the loue of all earthly things. For where is any that is indeed poore in ſpirit, and free from all affection of creatures? Far hence, and from the end of the world is his price. Prou. 31. If a man ſhould giue all his wealth, yet is it nothing. And if he ſhould doe great penance, yet is it little. And if hee ſhould attaine to all knowledge, hee is yet far off. And if hee ſhould haue great vertue, and very feruent deuotion, yet there is much wanting: to wit, one thing which is moſt neceſſary for him. What is that? That leauing all, he forſake himſelfe and goe perfectly from himſelfe, and retaine nothing of ſelfe-loue. Matth. 16. And vvhen hee hath done all that hee knoweth to bee done, let him

thinke that hee hath done nothing.
               3 Let him not weigh that much, which might be much eſteemed, but according to truth, let him affirme himſelfe to bee an vnprofitable ſeruant, as our Sauiour hath ſaid: When you ſhall haue done all things that are commanded you, ſay: Wee are vnprofitable ſeruants. Luk. 17. Then may he be truely poore in ſpirit, and naked, and ſay with the Prophet: I am alone and poore: yet no man more powerfull, no man more free then he that can leaue himſelfe and all things, and put himſelfe in the meaneſt and loweſt place. Pſal. 24.
            
            
               CHAP. XII. Of the high way of the holy Croſſe.
               VNTO many ſeemeth hard this ſpeech: Deny thy ſelfe, take vp thy croſſe, and follow Ieſus, Mat. 16. But it will be much harder to heare that laſt word: Get ye away from me; ye

curſed, into euerlaſting fire. For they that now willingly heare and follow the word of the Croſſe, ſhall not then feare to heare the ſentence of euerlaſting damnation. This ſigne of the Croſſe ſhall be in heauen, when our Lord ſhall come to judgement. Then all the ſeruants of the Croſſe, who in their life time conformed themſelues vnto Chriſt crucified, ſhal draw neere vnto our Lord with great confidence.
               2 Why therefore feareſt thou to take vp the Croſſe, which leadeth thee to a Kingdome? In the Croſſe is health, in the Croſſe is life, in the Croſſe is protection againſt our enemies, in the Croſſe is infuſion of heauenly ſweetneſſe, in the Croſſe is ſtrength of mind, in the Croſſe is joy of ſpirit, in the Croſſe is the height of vertue, in the Croſſe is the perfection of ſanctity. There is no health of the ſoule, nor hope of euerlaſting

life but in the Croſſe. Take vp therefore thy croſſe and follow Ieſus, and thou ſhalt goe into life euerlaſting. Hee is gone before, bearing his Croſſe, Luc. 14. and is dead for thee on the Croſſe; Ioh. 19. that thou mayeſt alſo beare thy Croſſe, and deſire to die on the Croſſe, with him. For if thou dieſt with him, thou ſhalt alſo liue with him. And if thou bee his companion in paine, thou ſhalt bee partaker with him alſo in glory. 2. Cor. 1.
               3 Behold in the Croſſe all doth conſiſt, and all lyeth in ending our life vpon it: for there is no other way vnto life, and vnto true inward peace, but the vvay of the Holy Croſſe, and of daily mortification. Goe where thou wilt, ſeeke whatſoeuer thou wilt: thou ſhalt not finde a higher way aboue, nor a ſafer way belovv, then the vvay of the holy Croſſe. Diſpoſe and order all things

according to thy will & judgement: yet thou ſhalt euer finde, that of neceſſity thou muſt ſuffer ſomwhat, either willingly or againſt thy will, ſo as thou ſhalt neuer fully auoid the Croſſe. For either thou ſhalt feele paine in thy body, or in thy ſoule thou ſhalt ſuffer tribulation of ſpirit.
               4 Sometimes thou ſhalt be forſaken of God, ſometimes thou ſhalt be troubled by thy neighbors, & which is more, oftentimes thou ſhalt bee irkſome to thy ſelfe: neither canſt thou be deliuered or eaſed by any remedie or comfort: but ſo long as pleaſeth God, thou oughteſt to beare it. For God wil haue thee learn to ſuffer tribulation without comfort; and that thou ſubmit thy ſelfe wholly to him, and become more humble by tribulation. No man hath ſo liuely a feeling of the Paſſion of Chriſt, as hee who hath chanced to ſuffer the like. The Croſſe therefore

is alwaies ready, and euery where attendeth thee. Thou canſt not eſcape it, whither ſoeuer thou flyeſt: for whereſoeuer thou goeſt, thou carieſt thy ſelfe with thee, & ſhalt euer find thy ſelfe both aboue & below, without and within: which way ſoeuer thou doeſt turne thee, alwaies thou ſhalt find the Croſſe: & euery where of neceſſity thou muſt haue patience, if thou wilt haue inward peace, and deſerue an euerlaſting Crowne.
               5 If thou beare the croſſe willingly, it wil beare thee, and lead thee to thy deſired end: to wit, where there ſhall be an end of ſuffering, though heere there ſhall not. If thou beare it vnwillingly, thou makeſt for thy ſelf a new burden, & encreaſeſt thy load, and yet notwithſtanding thou muſt beare it. If thou caſt away one croſſe, without doubt thou ſhalt finde another, and that perhaps a more heauy.
               6 Thinkeſt thou to eſcape that

which no man could euer auoid? Which of the Saints in the vvorld was vvithout croſſes and tribulations? Verily Ieſus Chriſt our Lord was neuer one houre without paine of ſuffering, ſo long as hee liued. Chriſt (ſaith he) ought to ſuffer, and riſe againe from death, and ſo to enter into his glory: and how doeſt thou ſeeke any other way, then this high way, which is the way of the holy Croſſe? Luk. 24.
               7 The whole life of Chriſt was a Croſſe and Martyrdome: and doeſt thou ſeek reſt and joy? Thou art deceiued, thou art deceiued, if thou ſeekeſt any other thing, then to ſuffer tribulations: for this whole mortall life is full of miſeries, and inuironed on euery ſide with Croſſes. Iob. 7. And how much the more one hath profited in ſpirit; ſo much the heauier Croſſes he oftentimes findeth: for the loue he beareth to God encreaſeth

the griefe which hee endureth for his baniſhment.
               8 But yet this man; though ſo many waies afflicted, is not without the remedy of ſpirituall conſolation, for the great good which he perceiueth to grow vnto him by the bearing of his Croſſe. For whileſt he willingly putteth himſelfe vnder it, all the burthen of tribulation is turned into the confidence of diuine comfort. And how much the more the fleſh is vvaſted by affliction, ſo much the more is the ſpirit ſtrengthened by invvard grace. 2. Cor. 11. & 12. And ſometimes hee is ſo comforted with the deſire of tribulation, and aduerſitie, for the loue of conforming himſelfe to the Croſſe of Chriſt, that he would not wiſh at any time to bee without ſorrow and tribulation: becauſe hee beleeueth, that ſo much the more gratefull hee ſhall be vnto God, how much the more hee can ſuffer for him. This is not a

worke of humane vertue; but it is the grace of Chriſt, that can, and doth ſo much in fraile fleſh: that what naturally it alwaies abhorreth and flieth, that, by feruour of ſpirit, it taketh hould on, and loueth.
               9 It is not according to mans inclination to beare the croſſe, to loue the croſſe, to chaſtiſe and ſubdue the body, to fly honors, to ſuffer contumelies with a ioyfull hart, to deſpiſe himſelfe and to wiſh to be deſpiſed, to beare al aduerſities, and domages, and to deſire no proſperity in this world. If thou conſidereſt thy ſelfe, thou ſhalt bee able to performe no ſuch matter of thy ſelfe. 2. Cor. 3. But if thou truſteſt in our Lord, ſtrength ſhall be giuen thee from heauen, and the world and fleſh ſhall bee made ſubiect to thy command. Neither ſhalt thou feare thy enemy the Diuell, if thou be armed with faith, and ſigned with the Croſſe of Chriſt.
               10 Reſolue therfore with thy ſelfe,

like a good and faithfull ſeruant of Chriſt, to beare manfully the Croſſe of thy Lord, who was crucified for thy loue. Prepare thy ſelfe to beare many aduerſities and diuers kinds of troubles in this miſerable life: for ſo it will be with thee, wherſoeuer thou be: and ſo ſurely thou wilt finde it, wherſoeuer thou hide thy ſelfe. So it muſt be, and there is no remedy, or means to auoid tribulation & ſorow but to beare them. Drink of the chalice of our Lord willingly, if thou wilt be his friend, & deſireſt to haue part with him. Mat. 20. Leaue the deſire of comforts to God: let him do therin as ſhal beſt pleaſe him. Io. 28. Set thou thy heart vpon the ſuffering of tribulations, & account them the greateſt comforts: for that the paſſions of this life are not according to future glory, although thou alone couldeſt ſuffer them all. Rom. 8.
               11 When thou ſhalt come to this eſtate, that tribulation ſhall ſeeme

ſweet, and pleaſant vnto thee for Chriſt: then thou mayeſt thinke it is well with thee, for thou haſt found a Paradiſe vpon earth. Galath. 6. As long as it is grieuous vnto thee to ſuffer, and that thou deſireſt to flie it; ſo long ſhalt thou be ill at eaſe: and the tribulation thou flieſt will follow thee euery where.
               12 If thou ſetleſt thy ſelfe to that thou oughteſt, to wit, to ſuffer, and to die to thy ſelfe, it will quickly be better with thee, and thou ſhalt find peace. Although thou ſhouldeſt haue beene rapt euen vnto the third heauen with Paul, 1. Cor. 12. thou art not for this aſſured, that thou ſhalt ſuffer no contradiction. I (ſaith Ieſus) will ſhew him how great things he muſt ſuffer for my name. Act. 9. It reſteth therefore, that thou ſuffer, if thou wilt loue Ieſus, and perpetually ſerue him.
               13 O, would to God thou wert worthy to ſuffer ſomthing for Ieſus!

How great glory would it be vnto thee, what joy to all the Saints of God, how great edification alſo to thy neighbour! For al do commend patience, though few deſire to ſuffer. With great reaſon thou oughteſt to be willing to ſuffer a little for Chriſt; ſince many ſuffer far greater things for the loue of the world. Pſal. 43.
               14 Know for certaine that thou oughteſt to leade a dying life. And how much the more euery one dyeth to himſelfe; ſo much the more doth hee begin to liue to God. No man is fit to attaine vnto heauenly things, vnleſſe hee ſubmit himſelfe to the bearing of aduerſities for Chriſt. Nothing is more gratefull vnto God, nothing more vvholeſome to thee in this vvorld, then to ſuffer vvillingly for Chriſt. And if it were in thy choice, thou ſhouldeſt rather wiſh to ſuffer aduerſities for Chriſt, then to enjoy the delight of many comforts: becauſe by theſe

meanes thou ſhouldeſt be more like vnto Chriſt, and more conformable to all the Saints. For our merit, and the perfection of our eſtate conſiſteth not in much ſweetneſſe and comforts: but rather in ſuffering great afflictions and tribulations.
               15 If there had beene any better thing, and more profitable to the health of man then ſuffering, ſurely Chriſt would haue ſhewed it by word and example. But hee plainly exhorted al the diſciples that followed him, and all that deſire to follow him, to the bearing of the Croſſe, and ſaith: If any man wil come after me, let him deny himſelfe, & take vp his Croſſe and follow me. Luk. 9. So as when we haue read and ſearched all, let this be the laſt concluſion: That by many tribulations we muſt enter into the Kingdome of God. Act. 14.
            
            The end of the ſecond Booke.
         
         
            
            OF THE FOLLOWING OF CHRIST. THE THIRD BOOKE.
            
               CHAP. I. Of the inward ſpeech of Christ vnto a faithfull ſoule.
               
                  I Will heare what our Lord God will ſpeake in me. Pſal. 84. Bleſſed is the ſoule that heareth our Lord ſpeaking in her: and receiueth from his mouth the word of comfort. 1. King. 3. Bleſſed are thoſe ears that receiue the ſound of the diuine voice, and liſten not to the whiſpering of the world. Bleſſed indeed are thoſe eares that harken not to the voice which ſoundeth outwardly,

but vnto truth which teaceth inwardly. Matth. 13. Bleſſed are the eyes that being ſhut vp to outward things, are attentiue to thoſe things that are internall. Bleſſed are they that enter into the inward things, and endeauour to prepare themſelues more and more by daily exerciſes to the attaining of heauenly ſecrets. Bleſſed be they that delight to attend to the ſeruice of God, and caſt from them all impediments of this world.
               2 Conſider theſe things my ſoule, and ſhut vp the dores of thy ſenſuall deſires: that thou mayeſt heare what thy Lord God ſpeaketh in thee. Pſal. 84. Thus ſaith thy beloued: I am thy ſafety, thy peace, and thy life. Keepe thy ſelfe with me, and thou ſhalt find peace. Forſake all tranſitory things, and ſeeke thoſe that be euerlaſting. Pſal. 34. What are temporall things, but deceiuing ſnares? And what do all creatures auaile thee, if thou bee

forſaken by the Creator? Forſake therefore all earthly things, and labour to pleaſe thy Creator, and bee faithfull vnto him, that thou mayeſt attaine vnto true happineſſe.
            
            
               CHAP. II. That truth ſpeaketh inwardly without noyſe of Words.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  SPeake Lord, for thy Seruant heareth. I am thy Seruant, grant mee vnderſtanding, that I may knovv thy teſtimonies. Stirre vp my heart to heare the words of thy mouth. 1. King. 3. Pſalm. 118. Let thy ſpeech deſcend as the dew into my ſoule. The children of Iſrael in times paſt ſaid vnto Moyſes: Speake thou vnto vs, and wee ſhall heare thee: Let not our Lord ſpeake vnto vs, leſt perhaps wee die. Exod. 20. Not ſo Lord, not ſo, I beſeech thee. But rather with the Prophet Samuel, I

humbly and earneſtly intreate: ſpeak Lord, for thy ſeruant heareth. 1. Reg. 3. Let not Moyſes ſpeake vnto mee, nor any of the Prophets: but thou rather ſpeake, my Lord God, the inſpirer and inlightner of all the Prophets: for thou alone without them canſt perfectly inſtruct me, but they without thee can profit nothing.
                  2 They can pronounce words, but they giue not ſpirit. They ſpeake meruailous well, but if thou hould thy peace, they inflame not the hart. They deliuer the letters, but thou openeſt the ſenſe. They bring foorth myſteries, but thou diſcloſeſt the vnderſtanding of ſealed things. They declare thy Commandements, but thou helpeſt to fulfill them. They ſhew the way, but thou giueſt ſtrēgth to walke it. They worke only exteriourly, but thou inſtructeſt and enlightneſt the hearts. They water outwardly, but thou giueſt fruitfulnes.

They ſound foorth words, but thou giueſt vnderſtanding to the hearing.
                  3 Let not therefore Moyſes ſpeak vnto me, but thou my Lord God, the euerlaſting truth; leſt perhaps I ſhold die, and become without fruit, if I be warned outwardly onely and not inflamed within: leſt the word heard and not fulfilled, knowen & not loued, belieued & not obſerued, ſhould increaſe my judgement. Speak therfore Lord, for thy ſeruant heareth, for thou haſt the words of euerlaſting life. 1. King. 3. Speak vnto me to the comfort of my ſoule, & to the amēdmēt of my whole life, & to thy praiſe & glory, & euerlaſting honor. Ioh. 6.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III. That the words of God are to be heard with humility, and that many weigh them not.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne heare my words, words of great comfort, excelling all the

knowledge of the Philoſophers and wiſe men of this world. My words are ſpirit and life, not to be weighed by the vnderſtanding of man. Ioh. 6. They are not to be drawne to vaine liking, but to be heard with ſilence, and to be receiued with all humility and great affection.
               
               
                  SER.
                  And I ſaid: Bleſſed is the man whom thou ſhalt inſtruct, O Lord, and ſhalt teach thy Law, that thou mayeſt giue him quietnes from euill daies, and that hee bee not deſtroyed vpon earth. Pſal. 93.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  2 I (ſaith our Lord) haue taught the Prophets from the beginning, and ceaſe not continually to ſpeake to euery one: but many are deafe and giue no eare to my ſpeech. Heb. 1. The greater number do more willingly liſten to the world, then to God: and follow ſooner the deſires of their fleſh, then the will of God. The world promiſeth temporall and

ſmall things, and is ſerued with great diligence: I promiſe moſt high and eternal things, and the hearts of men are nothing moued with it. Who is he that ſerueth and obeyeth me with equall care, to that, with which the world, and the Lords thereof are ſerued? Bluſh Sidon, ſaith the ſea. Eſa. 23. And if thou aske the cauſe, heare vvhereof. For a little prebend a long jorney is vndertaken: for euerlaſting life many will ſcarce once lift a foot from the ground. A thing of ſmall value is ſought after greedily: for a peny ſometimes there is great contention: for a vaine thing and ſleight promiſe, men doubt not to toile day and night.
                  3 But alas, for an vnchangeable good, for an ineſtimable revvard, for the higheſt honour and glorie without end, they are loath to take the leaſt paines. Bluſh therefore ſlouthfull and complaining Seruant,

that they are found more ready to deſtruction, then thou to life. They reioyce more at vanity, then thou at truth. And yet they are ſometimes fruſtrated of their hope, but my promiſe deceiueth none, nor ſendeth him away empty that truſteth in me. Rom. 1. Matth. 24. I will giue that which I haue promiſed. I will fulfill that which I haue ſaid, but to him that remaines faithfull in my loue to the end. Apoc. 2. I am the reward of all good, and do try my deuout ſeruants in forcible proofes. Mat. 5.15.
                  4 Write my words in thy heart, and thinke diligently of them: for they will bee neceſſary in time of temptation. What thou vnderſtandeſt not whē thou readeſt, thou ſhalt know in the day of viſitation. I am wont to viſite my elect two ſeuerall wayes, to wit, with temptation, and comfort. And I daily reade two leſſons vnto them, one reprehending

their vices, another exhorting them to the encreaſe of vertues. Hee that hath my words and deſpiſeth them, hath within him that ſhal judge him at the laſt day.
               
               
                  A prayer to implore the grace of deuotion.
                  
                     SER.
                     5 Lord my God, thou art all that I can deſire. Who am I, that dare ſpeake vnto thee? I am thy pooreſt ſeruant, and a moſt vile worme: much more poore and contemptible then I can or dare expreſſe. Gen. 18. Remember Lord, that I am nothing, haue nothing, and can doe nothing. Thou alone art good, juſt, and holy; thou canſt doe all things, performeſt all things, leauing only a ſinner void of al good. Call to mind thy mercies, and fill my hart with thy grace, who wilt not that thy workes be void.
                     6 How can I ſupport my ſelfe in this miſerable life; vnleſſe thy mercy and grace comfort me? Turne not thy face from me: delay not thy viſitation;

draw not away thy comfort, leſt my ſoule become as earth without water vnto thee. Pſal. 68. Lord teach me to fulfill thy will; teach me to liue worthily and humbly in thy ſight; for thou art my wiſdome, thou doeſt perfectly know me, and didſt know me before the world was made, and before I was borne in the world. Pſal. 142.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. IV. That we ought to liue in truth and humility in the ſight of God.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, walke in my ſight in ſincerity and truth; and euer ſeeke me in plaineneſſe of heart. He that walketh in my ſight in truth; ſhal be defended from euill incurſions, and truth ſhall deliuer him from ſeducers, and from the detractions of the wicked. Gen. 17. Wiſd. 1. If truth ſhall haue deliuered thee, thou ſhalt be truely free,

and ſhalt not care for vaine ſpeeches of men. 1. Ioh. 8.
               
               
                  SER.
                  Lord it is true. According as thou ſayeſt, ſo I beſeech thee let it be done with me, and keepe me, and bring mee to a happy end. Let thy truth teach me, and let it deliuer me from all euill affection and inordinat loue: and I ſhall walke with thee in great freedome of heart.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  2 I wil teach thee (ſaith the Truth) thoſe things that are right and pleaſing in my ſight. Thinke of thy ſins with great ſorrow & griefe; and neuer eſteem thy ſelfe any thing for thy good workes. Thou art in very deed a ſinner, and ſubiect to many paſſions. Of thy ſelfe thou alwayes tendeſt to nothing, and art quickly caſt downe and ouercome: quickly troubled, quickly diſſolued. Thou haſt nothing wherin thou canſt glory. 2. Cor. 4. But many things for which thou oughteſt to humble, and

deſpiſe thy ſelfe: for thou art much weaker then thou art able to comprehend.
                  3 And therfore let nothing ſeeme much vnto thee whatſoeuer thou doſt. Let nothing ſeem great, nothing precious, & wonderful, nothing worthy of eſtimation: nothing high, nothing truly commendable, and to be deſired, but that which is euerlaſting. Let the eternall truth aboue al things pleaſe thee. Let thy owne great vnworthineſſe alwayes diſpleaſe thee. Feare nothing, blame, & flie nothing ſo much, as thy ſins and vices: which ought to diſpleaſe more then the loſſe of any thing whatſoeuer. Some walke not ſincerely in my ſight, but led by a certain curioſity & pride, wil know my ſecrets, and vnderſtand the high myſteries of God, neglecting themſelues and their own ſaluation. Eccleſ. 3. and 2. Cor. 3. Theſe oftentimes (for that I reſiſt them) doe fall

into great temptations and ſinnes, for their pride and curioſity.
                  4 Feare the judgements of God, dread the wrath of the almighty. But diſcuſſe not the workes of the Higheſt. Search thine owne iniquities, in how much thou haſt offended, and how much good thou haſt neglected. Some carry their deuotion onely in books, ſome in pictures, ſone in outward ſignes & figures, ſome haue me in their mouthes, but little in their harts. There are others that being illuminated in their vnderſtanding, and purged in their affection▪ doe alwaies aſpire with an earneſt mind to euerlaſting happines: Eſa. 29. and are vnwilling to heare of the things of this world, & to ſerue the neceſſities of nature with griefe; and theſe perceiue what the Spirit of truth ſpeaketh in them. Pſal. 24 Becauſe it teacheth them to deſpiſe earthly, and loue heauenly things: to neglect th
                        •
                     
                     
world, and day and night to deſire heauen.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V. Of the wonderfull effect of diuine grace.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  I Praiſe thee, O heauenly Father, Father of my Lord Ieſus Chriſt, for that thou haſt vouchſafed to remember mee a poore and wretched creature. O Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, thankes be vnto thee, who ſometimes with thy comfort refreſheſt mee vnworthy of all comfort. 2. Cor. 1. I euer bleſſe and glorifie thee with thy only begotten Son, & the holy Ghoſt for al worlds. O God my Lord, the holy louer of my ſoule, when thou ſhalt come into my heart, all that is within me will reioyce. Thou art my glory, and the exultation of my heart. Pſal. 3. Thou art my hope, and my refuge in the day of my tribulation. Pſal. 31.
                  
                     2 But for that I am yet weake in loue, and imperfect in vertue, I haue need to be comforted by thee: viſite me therefore often, and inſtruct mee with thy holy diſcipline. Deliuer me from euill paſſions, and heale my heart of al inordinate affections: that being cured within, and wel purged, I may be made fit to loue, ſtrong to ſuffer, and conſtant to perſeuere.
                  3 Loue is a great matter, in very truth a great good: which alone maketh euery thing that is heauy light; and beareth equally vnequall burdens. Mat. 11. For it carrieth a burden without a burden, and maketh euery thing that is bitter ſweet, and delightſome. The noble loue of Ieſus enforceth man to worke great things, and ſtirreth him vp to deſire alwayes the moſt perfect. Loue will be aloft, and not kept downe with any baſe things. Loue will be free from all worldly affection, to

the end his inward ſight be not obſcured, that he be not intangled with the deſire of any tranſitory gaine, or troubled with the want thereof. Nothing is ſweeter then loue, nothing ſtronger, nothing higher, nothing more ample, nothing more pleaſant, nothing fuller nor better in heauen or in earth: for that loue hath his beginning from God, and cannot reſt but in God aboue all creatures.
                  4 He that loueth, flyeth, runneth, and reioyceth, he is free, and not held in. He giueth all for all, and hath all in al, for that he reſteth in one Higheſt aboue all, from which all good floweth and proceedeth. Hee reſpecteth not the gifts, but turneth himſelfe aboue all goods vnto the giuer. Loue oftentimes knoweth no meaſure, but inflameth aboue al meaſure. Loue feeleth no burthen, weigheth no paines, deſireth aboue it ſtrength, complaineth not of impoſſibility, for

that it thinketh all things lawful and poſſible. It is therefore able to vndertake all things, and performeth and bringeth many things to effect: whereas he that doth not loue, fainteth and can doe nothing.
                  5 Loue alwaies watcheth, & ſleeping, ſleepeth not: being wearied, is not tired: ſtraitned, is not preſſed: frighted, is not troubled: but like a liuely flame, and burning torch, breaketh vpwards, and paſſeth through al with great ſecuritie. Rom. 8. If any one loueth, hee knoweth what this voice cries. A lowd cry in the ears of God, is the burning loue of the ſoul, which ſaith: My God, my loue, thou art wholy mine, and I wholy thine.
                  6 Enlarge mee in loue, that my heart may taſte how ſweete it is to loue, and to be diſſolued, & ſwimme in thy loue. Let me be poſſeſſed by loue, mounting aboue my ſelfe, with exceſſiue feruour & admiration. Let

me ſing the ſong of loue, let me follow thee on high my beloued, let my ſoule faint in thy praiſes reioycing with loue. Let mee loue thee more then my ſelfe, and not my ſelfe but for thee, and al in thee, and truly loue thee, as the law of loue commandeth which ſhineth in thee.
                  7. Loue is ſwift, ſincere, pious, ſweet and delightfull: ſtrong, patient, faithful, prudent, ſuffering, ful of courage, and neuer ſeeking it ſelfe. 1. Cor. 13. For where one ſeeketh himſelf, there he falleth from loue. 1. Cor. 10. Loue is circumſpect, humble, and vpright: not remiſſe, not mutable, nor attending vnto vaine things; ſober, chaſt, conſtant, quiet, and guarded in al the ſenſes. Pſal. 2. Loue is ſubiect and obedient to Superiours, meane and abiect to it ſelfe, deuout & thankfull vnto God, truſting and hoping alwaies in him, euen then, when God imparteth no ſweetnes vnto it: for

without ſorrow none liueth in loue.
                  8 He that is not ready to ſuffer al things, and ſtand to the will of his beloued, is not worthy to be called a louer. A louer ought to embrace willingly al that is hard, and diſtaſtefull for his beloued; and not to turne away from him, for any contrary accidents.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI. Of the proofe of a true Louer.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, thou art not yet a ſtrong and prudent louer.
               
               
                  SER.
                  Wherefore, Lord?
               
               
                  LORD.
                  Becauſe thou giueſt ouer for a ſmall aduerſitie, and too earneſtly ſeekeſt comfort. A conſtant louer ſtandeth firmely in temptations, & giueth not credit to the crafty perſwaſions of the enemy. As I pleaſe him in proſperity, ſo I am not vnpleaſant to him in aduerſity. Phil. 4.
                  
                     2 A prudent louer conſidereth not ſo much the gift of his louer, as the loue of the giuer. He rather eſteemeth the good will, then the value, and placeth all gifts vnder his beloued. A noble louer reſteth not in the gift, but in mee aboue any gift. All therfore is not left, if ſometimes thou haſt leſſe taſte of mee, and my Saints then thou wouldeſt. That good and ſweet deſire which thou ſometimes feeleſt, is the effect of preſent grace, and a certaine taſte of the heauenly Country: whereon thou muſt not rely too much, for it goeth and commeth. But to fight againſt euil motions of the minde which may happen vnto thee, and to deſpiſe the ſuggeſtion of the diuel, is a ſigne of vertue and great merit. Matth. 4.
                  3 Let not therefore ſtrange fancies forced into thee, of any matter whatſoeuer, trouble thee. Retaine a firme purpoſe and vpright intention

to God. Neither is it an illuſion, that ſometimes thou art ſuddenly rapt on high, and preſently returneſt againe vnto the accuſtomed vanities of thy hart. For thou doſt rather vnwillingly ſuffer them, then commit them: and as long as they diſpleaſe thee, and thou ſtriueſt againſt them, it is a merit and no loſſe.
                  4 Know that thy ancient enemy doth euer ſtriue to hinder thy deſire to good; and to diuert thee from all deuout exerciſe: to wit, from the worſhipping of Saints, from the deuout memory of my paſſion, frō the profitable remembrance of thy ſins, from the guard of thine owne heart, and from the firme purpoſe of profiting in vertue. He thruſteth many euill thoughts into thy minde; that he may cauſe a weariſomnes and horror in thee, to draw thee from deuout prayer and reading. Humble confeſſion is diſpleaſing vnto him, and if he

could, he would cauſe thee to ceaſe from receiuing the Sacrament of my Body. Truſt him not, nor care for him, although hee ſhould often ſet ſnars of deceit to intrap thee. Charge him with it, when he ſuggeſteth euil and vncleane thoughts vnto thee: Say vnto him: Auant filthy ſpirit: bluſh miſerable wretch, thou art filthy that bringeſt ſuch things into mine eares. Away from me wicked deceiuer, thou ſhalt haue no part in me: but Ieſus ſhall be with me as a ſtrong warriour, and thou ſhalt remaine confounded. Mat. 4. & 16. I had rather die and vndergo any torment, then to conſent vnto thee. hold thy peace and be ſilent. I will heare thee no more, though thou ſhouldeſt worke me many troubles. My Lord is my light and ſaluation, whom ſhall I feare? Pſ. 26. If whole armies ſhould ſtand together againſt me, my hart ſhal not feare. Our Lord

is my helper, and my Redeemer.
                  5 Fight like a good Souldiour: and if thou ſometimes fall through frailetie, recouer greater forces then before, truſting in my more aboundant grace: and take great heede of vaine pleaſing of thy ſelfe, and pride. Pſal. 26. & 1. Tim. 6. This brings many into error, and makes them ſometimes fal into almoſt incurable blindnes. Let the fall of the proud, fooliſhly preſuming of themſelues, ſerue thee for a warning, and a perpetuall humiliation.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII. That grace is to be hid vnder the veile of humilitie.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, it is more profitable and ſafe for thee to hide the grace of deuotion, not to extoll thy ſelfe, nor to ſpeake much, nor to eſteeme much thereof: but rather to deſpiſe

thy ſelfe, and feare it, as giuen to one vnworthy thereof. This affection is not to bee cleaued vnto, which may be quickly changed into the contrary. Thinke when thou art in grace, how miſerable and needy thou art wont to be without it? Neither doth therein only conſiſt the profit of ſpirituall life, when thou haſt the grace of comfort; but when thou humbly, reſignedly, and patiently ſuffereſt the withdrawing thereof: ſo that thou be not then leſſe diligent in the exerciſe of prayer, nor ſuffer thy ſelfe to paſſe ouer the reſt of thy accuſtomed good works: but that thou willingly performe what lieth in thee, according as thou art able and vnderſtandeſt to be fit: not neglecting thy ſelf wholy for the drines, and trouble of minde, which thou feeleſt.
                  2 There are many, that when it ſucceedeth not well with them, preſently they become impatient or

ſlouthfull. The way of man is not alwaies in his power, but it belongeth to God, to giue, & to comfort when he will, how much he will, & whom he will, as it ſhall pleaſe him and no more. Hier. 10. & Rom. 9. Some vnaduiſed perſons haue ouerthrowne thēſelues, for the greedy deſire which they had of the grace of deuotion: attempting more then they were able to performe, not weighing the meaſure of their weakeneſſe, but following rather the deſire of their hart, then the judgement of reaſon. And becauſe they preſumed on greater matters then was pleaſing to God, they quickly loſt their grace. They were made needy, and left in a deiected eſtate that built thēſelues neſts in heauē; to the end that being humbled and impoueriſhed, they may learne not to flie with their owne wings, but to liue in hope vnder my fethers. Eſay 24. They that are yet

new, and vnacquainted in the way of our Lord, vnleſſe they gouerne themſelues by the counſel of diſcreet perſons, may eaſily be deceiued and ouerthrowne.
                  3 And if they will rather follow their owne judgment, then giue credit to others that are experienced, their end will be dangerous, if they cannot be drawne from their owne conceit. Seldome thoſe that are wiſe in their owne opinion, ſuffer themſelues humbly to be gouerned by others. A little knowledge with humility, and a ſlender vnderſtanding, is better then great treaſures of learning with a vaine ſelfe-liking. Pſal. 15. & 16. It is better for thee to haue leſſe, then much of that wherof thou maiſt be proud. He doth not diſcreetly, that wholy giueth himſelf ouer to mirth, forgetting his former pouerty and the chaſt fear of God, which feareth to loſe the grace which he hath

obtained. Neither is he vertuouſly wiſe, that in time of aduerſitie or any tribulation whatſoeuer, yeeldeth to deſpairing thoughts, and thinketh and imagineth of me leſſe confidently then he ought.
                  4 He that will be ouer ſecure in time of peace, ſhall be often found in time of war too deiected & feareful. 1. Theſſ. 5. If thou couldeſt alwaies continue humble and lowly within thy ſelfe, and temper & gouerne thy ſoule wel, thou ſhouldeſt not ſo ſoon fall into danger & offence. It is good counſell, that when thou conceiueſt feruour of ſpirit, thou ſhouldeſt think what will become of thee, when that light ſhall leaue thee. And when that doth happen, remember the light may returne againe, which for thy inſtruction and my glory I haue withdrawne for a time. Iob 17.
                  5 Such proofe is often more profitable, then if thou ſhouldeſt alwaies

enioy proſperity according to thy deſire. For merits are not to be weighed in a man by the number of viſions and comforts which he hath, or by his knowledge in Scriptures, or by his being placed in high degree: but in that he is grounded in true humility, and repleniſhed with diuine charity: if he alwaies purely and entirely ſeeke the honor of God, if he eſteem himſelfe nothing, and with a ſincere heart deſpiſe himſelfe, and reioyce more to be deſpiſed and humbled by others, then to be honored. Pſal. 83.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII. Of a meane conceit of our ſelues in the ſight of God.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  SHall I ſpeake vnto my Lord, ſith I am duſt and aſhes? If I eſteem better of my ſelfe, behold thou ſtandeſt againſt me, and my iniquities beare true witnes, neither can I ſpeake againſt

it. Gen. 18. But if I abaſe and eſteeme nothing of my ſelfe, and caſt off all ſelfe-conceit, and (as I am) account my ſelfe to be duſt, thy grace will be fauourable vnto me, and thy light will bee neere vnto my heart: and all eſtimation how little ſoeuer, ſhall bee ſwallowed vp in the depth of my nothing, & periſh euerlaſtingly. There thou ſheweſt my ſelfe vnto me, what I am, what I haue bin, and whither I am come: for alas I am nothing, and I knew it not. And if I be left to my ſelfe, behold I become nothing, and a maſſe of infirmyty. But if thou ſuddenly looke vpon me, I am preſently made ſtrong, & filled with new joy. And it is a great meruaile, that I am ſo ſuddenly lifted vp, and ſo graciouſly embraced by thee, that of mine owne waight alwaies ſinke downeward.
                  2 Thy loue is cauſe hereof, freely preuenting me, and releeuing mee in

ſo many neceſſities, preſeruing mee alſo from grieuous dangers, and (as I may truly ſay) deliuering me from innumerable euils. For ſurely by euill louing my ſelfe, I loſt my ſelfe: and by ſeeking thee alone, and ſincerely louing thee, I haue found both my ſelfe and thee, and for thy loue haue more deepely brought my ſelfe to nothing. Ioh. 12. For that thou, O moſt ſweet Ieſu, dealeſt with me aboue all deſert, and aboue all that I dare hope and requeſt.
                  3 Bleſſed be thou my God, for although I be vnworthy of all good, yet the noblenes of thy bounty and thy infinite goodnes, neuer ceaſeth to doe good euen to the vngratefull, and to them that bee turned away farre from thee. Matth. 5. Turne vs vnto thee, O Lord, that we may bee gratefull, humble and deuout: for thou art our ſafety, our power, and our ſtrength.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX. That all things are to be referred vnto God, as vnto the last end.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, I ought to bee thy chiefeſt and laſt end, if thou deſire to bee truly bleſſed. With this intention thy affection ſhall be purified, which is oftentimes inclined inordinately to it ſelfe, and vnto creatures. For if in any thing thou ſeeke thy ſelfe, thou preſently fainteſt and drieſt vp within thy ſelfe. Direct therfore al things chiefely vnto me, for I am hee that haue giuen all. Conſider euery thing as flowing from the higheſt good: and therefore all things are to be reduced vnto me, as vnto their firſt beginning. Eccleſ. 1.
                  2 Out of mee, as out of liuing fountaines, the little and the great, the poore and the rich, doe draw the water of life: and they that willingly

and freely ſerue mee, ſhall receiue grace for grace. Ioh. 4. But hee that will glory out of me, or be delighted in any particular good, ſhall not bee grounded in true ioy, nor enlarged in his heart, but ſhall be many waies hindred and ſtraitned. 1. Cor. 1. Thou oughteſt therfore to aſcribe no good vnto thy ſelf, nor attribute the praiſe of vertue vnto any man: but giue all vnto God. without whom man hath nothing. I haue beſtowed all, and wil that al be returned to me againe: and with great ſeuerity I require thanks. 1. Cor. 4.
                  3 This is the truth that putteth to flight vaine-glory. And if heauenly grace, and true charity enter in, there ſhall be no enuy nor grudging of heart, neither ſhall there bee any place for ſelfe-loue. For diuine charity ouercommeth all, and enlargeth all the forces of the ſoule. If thou vnderſtand aright, in mee alone thou

wilt reioyce, in mee alone thou wilt hope: for none is good, but God alone, who is to be praiſed aboue all things, and to be bleſſed in all. Mat. 19. & Luk. 18.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X. That deſpiſing the world, it is ſweet to ſerue God.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  NOw I wil ſpeake againe, Lord, and will not be ſilent. I wil ſay in the eares of my God, my Lord, and my King that is on high: O how great is the multitude of thy ſweetnes Lord, which thou haſt hidden for thoſe that feare thee! Pſal. 30. But what art thou to thē that loue thee? What to them that ſerue thee with their whole heart? Truly vnſpeakable is the ſweetneſſe of thy contemplation, which thou beſtoweſt on them that loue thee. In this chiefly thou haſt ſhewed me the ſweetnes of thy charity, Gen. 1. for that when I

was not, thou madeſt me: and when I went aſtray far off from thee, thou broughteſt me backe againe, that I might ſerue thee: and haſt commanded mee to loue thee. Pſalm. 118. and Matth. 15.
                  2 O fountain of euerlaſting loue, what ſhall I ſay of thee? How can I forget thee, that haſt vouchſafed to remember me, euen when I whithered away and periſhed! Thou haſt vſed mercy with thy ſeruant beyond all the expectation of my heart: and haſt beſtowed thy grace and friendſhip beyond all merit. What ſhall I returne vnto thee for this grace? Pſal. 115. For it is not granted to euery one to forſake all things, to renounce the world, and to vndertake a life of religion and perfection. Is it much that I ſerue thee, whom all creatures are bound to ſerue? It ought not to ſeeme much vnto mee to ſerue thee: but this rather ſeemeth

much, and meruailous vnto me, that thou vouchſafeſt to receiue into thy ſeruice one ſo poore and vnworthy, and to joyne him with thy beloued ſeruants. Iudg. 16.
                  3 Behold all is thine which I haue and whereby I ſerue thee. And yet in very deed thou rather ſerueſt mee then I thee. 1. Cor. 4. Behold heauen and earth, which thou haſt created for the ſeruice of man are ready at hand, and doe daily performe whatſoeuer thou doſt command; and this is little: yea thou haſt alſo appointed the Angels to the ſeruice of man. Pſa. 90. & Heb. 1. But that which exceedeth all, is that thou thy ſelfe haſt vouchſafed to ſerue man, and promiſed to giue thy ſelfe vnto him.
                  4 What ſhall I giue thee for all theſe thouſands of benefits? I would I could ſerue thee al the daies of my life! I would I were able at leaſt for one day to doe thee ſome

worthy & acceptable ſeruice! Thou art truly worthy of all ſeruice, of all honor and euerlaſting praiſe. Thou art my Lord, & I thy poore ſeruant, that am bound to ſerue thee with all my forces, neither ought I euer to ceaſe to praiſe thee. And this I wiſh to doe, this I deſire: and whatſoeuer is wanting vnto me, vouchſafe I beſeech thee to ſupply.
                  5 It is a great honor, a very great glory to ſerue thee, and to deſpiſe all things for thee. For great grace ſhall be giuen to them that ſhall willingly ſubmit themſelues vnto thy moſt holy ſeruice. They ſhall receiue moſt ſweete comfort of the holy Ghoſt, that for thy loue ſhall renounce all carnall delights. Mat. 19. They ſhall attaine great freedome of mind, that for thy names ſake ſhall enter into the narrow way, and ſhall haue left off all care of this world. Matth. 7.
                  6 O ſweet and delightfull ſeruitude

of God, by which man is truely made free & holy! Mat. 11. & 1. Ioh. 5. O ſacred ſtate of religious bondage, which maketh man equal to Angels, pleaſing to God, terrible to diuels, and grateful, and of great eſteeme to all the faithfull! O ſeruice to be imbraced, and alwaies wiſhed for, by which we obtain the greateſt good, and attaine to that joy which neuer ſhall haue end!
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI. That the deſires of our heart are to be examined and moderated.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, thou oughteſt to learne many things more, which thou haſt not yet well learned.
               
               
                  SER.
                  What are thoſe Lord?
               
               
                  LORD.
                  That thou frame thy deſire wholy according to my pleaſure: and be not a louer of thy ſelfe▪ but a diligent follower of my will. Thy

deſires oftentimes doe ſtirre thee vp, and driue thee forwards with violence: but conſider whether thou art mooued rather for my honour, then for thine owne profit. If I bee the cauſe, thou wilt bee well content with whatſoeuer I ſhal ordaine: but if there lurke in thee any ſelfe inclination, behold this is it that hindreth thee, and weigheth thee downe. Phil. 2.
                  2 Beware therefore thou incline not too much vpon any deſire that commeth to thy minde, before thou aske my counſaile; leſt perhaps afterwards it repent thee, and that thou beginne now to diſlike that which before did pleaſe thee, and vvhich thou earneſtly deſiredſt as the beſt. For euery affection that ſeemeth good, is not preſently to be-followed: nor euery contrary affection at the firſt to be fled. It is expedient ſometimes to vſe a reſtraint

euen in good deſires and endeauours: leſt by importunitie thou incurre diſtraction of minde, and by euill example become a ſcandall vnto others: or being gaine-ſaid by others, thou bee ſuddenly troubled and fall.
                  3 Yet ſometimes thou oughteſt to vſe violence, and reſiſt manfully thy ſenſuall appetites, Philip. 2. and reſpect not what thy bodie vvould, or vvould not: but rather to labour, that euen perforce it bee ſubiect to the ſpirit. Rom. 8. and 2. Cor. 4. And it is to be chaſtiſed ſo long, and to be forced vnder ſeruitude, 2. Cor. 10. vntill it readily obey in all things, and learne to bee content with a little, and to be pleaſed with ordinary things, and not to murmure againſt any inconuenience. 1. Cor. 9.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII. Of the effect of Patience, and of ſtrife againſt Concupiſcence.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  LOrd God, I perceiue patience is very neceſſary vnto me: for that many aduerſities doe happen in this life. Heb. 10. Howſoeuer I ſhall diſpoſe of my peace, my life cannot be without warre and affliction. Iob 7.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  So it is Son. And my wil is not that thou ſeek after that peace which is void of temptation, or that feeleth no contrarieties: but then thinke that thou haſt found peace, when thou art exerciſed with ſundry tribulations, and tried in many aduerſities. Iam. 1.
                  2 If thou ſay that thou art not able to ſuffer much, how then wilt thou endure the fire of Purgatory? Of two euils the leſſe is alwayes to be choſen. That thou maiſt therefore

auoid euerlaſting puniſhments in the next world, endeauour to ſuffer patiently for God the preſent euils of this. Doeſt thou thinke that men of this world ſuffer little or nothing? Thou art deceiued. Looke into the life euen of them that liue in greateſt delicacies, and thou ſhalt finde it otherwiſe. But thou wilt ſay they haue many delights, and follow their own wills, and therefore they make ſmall account of their tribulations. Be it ſo, that they haue whatſoeuer they will; but how long doſt thou thinke it will laſt?
                  3 Behold the vvealthy of this world vaniſh away like ſmoke, and there ſhall bee no memory of their joyes paſt. Pſal. 67. Yea euen while they liue alſo, they reſt not in them without griefe, irkſomnes and feare. For the ſelfe-ſame thing in which they take their delight, is oftentimes the cauſe of ſorrow vnto them, and

much affliction. They haue their deſert, who, for that they immoderately ſeeke and follow delights, they do not obtaine them, but with ſhame and ſorrow.
                  4 O how ſhort and deceitfull, how inordinate, and filthy are thoſe pleaſures! Yea ſo ſenſeleſſe and blind are men that they vnderſtand it not: but like dumbe beaſts, for a little pleaſure of a corruptible life, they incur the eternall death of their ſoule. Doe not thou therefore, my Sonne, follow the diſordinate inclinations of thy corrupt nature, but forſake thine owne will. Delight in our Lord, and he will giue thee the deſires of thy heart. Eccls. 28. Pſal. 36.
                  5 If thou deſire true light, and to be more plentifully comforted by me: behold in the contempt of all worldly things, and in the cutting off of all baſe delights: ſhall be thy bleſſing, & aboundant comfort ſhall

be giuen thee. And how much the more thou withdraweſt thy ſelfe from all comfort of creatures, ſo much the ſweeter and more forcible conſolations ſhalt thou finde in me. But at firſt thou canſt not attaine vnto them without a certaine griefe, labour and ſtrife. The old cuſtome wil make reſiſtance, and thou muſt ouercome it with another cuſtome that is better. Thy fleſh will murmure; but thou muſt bridle it with feruour of ſpirit. The olde Serpent will ſting and trouble thee: but by prayer hee ſhall be put to flight: and with profitable labour thou ſhalt ſhut the dore againſt him.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII. Of the humble obedience of a ſubiect, according to the example of Chriſt.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, hee that endeauoureth to withdraw himſelf from obedience,

withdraweth himſelfe from grace. And hee that ſeeketh to haue things in priuate, ſhall loſe the common. Mat. 16. He that doth not willingly and freely ſubmit himſelfe to his Superiour, it is a ſigne that his fleſh is not yet perfectly obedient vnto him, but oftentimes rebelleth and murmureth againſt him. Learne therfore readily to ſubmit thy ſelfe to thy Superiour, if thou deſireſt to ſubdue thine owne paſſions. For the outward enemy is ſooner ouercome, if the inward man be in good eſtate. There is no worſe enemy, nor more troubleſome to the ſoule, then thou vnto thy ſelfe, not agreeing well with the ſpirit. Thou muſt of neceſſity haue a true contempt of thy ſelfe, if thou wilt preuaile againſt fleſh and bloud.
                  2 Becauſe thou loueſt thy ſelfe as yet too inordinatly, therfore thou art afraid to reſigne thy ſelfe wholly to the will of others. But what great

matter is it if thou that art duſt, and nothing ſubmitteſt thy ſelf to a man for God: when I the Almighty and higheſt ſoueraigne, who created all things of nothing, humbly ſubmitted my ſelfe vnto man for thee? Luk. 2. & Ioh. 12. I became the moſt humble and abiect of all men, that thou mighteſt ouercome thy pride with my humility. Learne to obey, thou that art duſt. Learne to humble thy ſelfe, thou earth and clay, and put thy ſelf vnder th
                        •
                      feet of all men. Learne to breake thine owne will, and to yeeld thy ſelfe to all ſubiection.
                  3 Take courage againſt thy ſelfe, and ſuffer not pride to liue in thee: but humble and ſubmit thy ſelfe to all, that euery one may go ouer thee, and treade thee as dirt of the ſtreets vnder their feet. Vaine man, what canſt thou complaine of? what canſt thou anſwere foule ſinner to them that reproue thee, who haſt ſo often

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
offended God, and ſo many times deſerued hell? But mine eye hath ſpared thee, becauſe thy ſoule was precious in my ſight: that thou mighteſt know my loue, and alwaies remaine gratefull for my benefits: that thou mighteſt continually giue thy ſelfe to true ſubiection and humilitie, and mighteſt beare patiently the contempt of thy ſelfe.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIV. Of the ſecret Iudgements of God to be conſidered, leſt we be extolled in our good deeds.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  THou thundreſt thy judgements ouer me, Lord, and ſhakeſt all my bones with feare and trembling, and my ſoule is ſore afraid. I ſtand aſtoniſhed, and conſider; for that heauens are not pure in thy ſight. Iob 15. If thou haſt found wickedneſſe in Angels, and haſt not pardoned

them, what ſhal become of me? Iob 4. Starres fell from heauen, and what doe I preſume that am duſt? Apoc. 8. They whoſe workes ſeemed laudable, fell into the loweſt: and I haue ſeene them, that did eate bread of Angels, to be delighted with the huskes of ſwine.
                  2 There is no ſanctity, if thou, O Lord, withdraweſt thy hand. No wiſdome auaileth, if thou ceaſeſt to gouerne. No ſtrength helpeth, if thou leaueſt to defend. No chaſtity ſecure, if thou doſt not protect it. No cuſtodie of our owne profitable, if thy ſacred watchfulnes be not preſent. For if thou leaueſt vs, we ſinke, and periſh; but if thou vouchſafeſt to viſit vs, we are raiſed vp, and doe enioy life. We are inconſtant, but by thee we are ſtrengthned: we wax could, but by thee we receiue heate.
                  3 O how meanely and baſely ought I to thinke of my ſelfe! How

little, yea nothing ought I to eſteem it, if I ſeeme to haue any good! O Lord, how ought I to ſubmit my ſelf vnder thy vnſearchable judgements: where I finde my ſelfe to be nothing elſe, but nothing, & nothing! O vnmeaſurable waight! O ſea that can neuer be paſſed ouer: where I finde my ſelfe onely and wholly nothing! Where then is the lurking hole of glory? Whrre is the confidence conceiued of vertue? All vaine-glory is ſwallowed vp in the depth of thy iudgmēts, which hang ouer my head.
                  4 What is all fleſh in thy ſight? Shall clay glory againſt him that frameth it? Eccls. 23. & Eſay 29. How can he be lifted vp with vain words, whoſe heart is truly ſubiect to God? All the world cannot mooue him to any elation of minde, whome truth hath ſubiected vnto it, neither ſhall hee be mooued with the tongues of all his praiſers, that hath ſetled his

whole hope in God. For they alſo that ſpeake, behold, are nothing: they ſhall paſſe away with the ſound of the words: but the truth of our Lord remaineth for euer. Pſal. 116.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XV. What we ought to doe, and ſay in euery thing which we deſire.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOn, ſay thus in euery thing: Lord if it be pleaſing vnto thee, let this be done in this ſort. Lord if it be to thy honour, let this bee done in thy name. Iam. 3. Lord if thou ſeeſt it expedient for me, and alloweſt it to be profitable, then grant vnto me, that I may vſe this vnto thine honor. But if thou knoweſt it wil be hurtfull vnto me, & not profitable to the health of my ſoule, take from me al ſuch deſire. For euery deſire proceeds not from the holy Ghoſt, though it ſeeme vnto man right and good. It is hard to

judge whether a good ſpirit, or the contrary driue thee to deſire this or that: or whether alſo by thine owne ſpirit thou be moued therunto. Many are deceiued in the end, who at the firſt ſeemed to be led by a good ſpirit.
                  2 Alwaies therefore, whatſoeuer occurreth vnto thy minde to be deſired, let it be deſired with the feare of God, and with humility of heart: and aboue al thou oughteſt to commit it vnto me with full reſignation of thy ſelfe: and thou oughteſt to ſay: Lord thou knoweſt what is beſt, do this, or that, as thou pleaſeſt. Giue what thou wilt, and how much thou wilt, and when thou wilt. Doe with me as thou knoweſt, & as beſt pleaſeth thee, and is moſt for thy honor. Set me where thou wilt, and deale with mee in all things according to thy will, I am in thy hand, turne me, and turne me againe which way ſoeuer

thou pleaſe. Behold I am thy ſeruant, ready to obey thee in all things: for I deſire not to liue vnto my ſelfe, but vnto thee: and would to God it might be in ſome worthy and perfect manner.
               
               
                  A prayer for the fulfilling of the will of God.
                  
                     SER.
                     3 Grant mee thy grace, ſweet Ieſus, that it may be with me, and labour with me, and perſeuere with me vntill the end. Grant me alwaies to deſire and will that which is moſt acceptable vnto thee, & beſt pleaſeth thee. Sap. 9. Let thy will be mine, and let my will euer follow thine, and agree perfectly with it. Let my will and nill be all one with thine: and not to be able to will, or refuſe any thing elſe, but what thou wilt, or reiecteſt.
                     4 Grant that I may die to all things that are in the world, and to loue for thy ſake to bee contemned, and not to be knowne in this world.

Grant that aboue all things that can be deſired, I may reſt in thee, and make my hart to enioy peace in thee. Thou art the true peace of the heart, thou art the only reſt: out of thee all things are troubleſome and vnquiet. In peace, in the ſelfe-ſame: that is, in thee, one chiefeſt, eternall good, I will ſleepe and reſt. Amen. Pſal. 4.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVI. That true comfort is to be ſought in God alone.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  WHatſoeuer I can deſire, or imagine for my cōfort, I look not for it in this life, but hereafter. For if I ſhould alone haue all the comforts of the world, & might enioy al the delights thereof, it is certaine that they could not long endure. Mat. 16. Wherfore, my ſoule, thou canſt not bee fully comforted, nor haue perfect delight but in God, the cōforter of the poor, & the receiuer of the humble. Pſ. 76.

Expect a while my ſoule, expect the diuine promiſe, and thou ſhalt haue abundance of al good things in heauen. If thou deſire inordinately the things that are preſent, thou ſhalt loſe the celeſtiall and eternall. Haue temporall things in vſe, and the eternal in deſire. Thou canſt not be filled with any temporall goods, becauſe thou art not created to enioy them.
                  2 Although thou enioyeſt al that is created, yet canſt thou not be happy thereby nor bleſſed: but in God that hath created all things, thy whole beatitude and happineſſe conſiſteth: Sap. 2. not ſuch as is ſeene, and commended by the fooliſh louers of the world; but ſuch as the good faithful ſeruants of Chriſt expect, & the ſpirituall, & cleane of heart, whoſe conuerſation is in heauen, ſometimes take a taſte of. Phil. 3. Vaine & ſhort is al humane comfort. Bleſſed & true is the comfort which is receiued inwardly

from truth. A deuout man euery where carrieth with him Ieſus, his comforter, and ſaith vnto him: Be preſent with me Lord Ieſus in euery place and time. Let this be my comfort, to bee alwayes willing to want all humane comfort. And if thy comfort be wanting, let thy will and juſt proofe be vnto me, as the greateſt comfort: for thou wilt not be angry alwaies, neither wilt thou threaten for euer. Pſal. 102.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVII. That all our care is to be placed in God.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, ſuffer mee to doe with thee what I pleaſe. I know what is expedient for thee. Thou thinkeſt as man: thou judgeſt in many things as humane affection perſwadeth thee.
               
               
                  SER.
                  Lord, what thou ſayeſt is true. Thy ſolicitude for me is greater, then all the care that I can take for

my ſelfe. Matth. 6. & Ioh. 6. For he ſtandeth at too great a hazard, that caſteth not his whole care vpon thee. Lord, ſo that my will may remaine right and firme in thee, doe with me whatſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe thee. For it cannot be but good, whatſoeuer, thou doeſt with me.
                  2 If it be thy will, I ſhould be in darknes, be thou bleſſed: and if it be thy will, I ſhould be in light, be thou againe bleſſed. If thou vouchſafeſt to comfort me, be thou bleſſed: and if thou wilt afflict mee, be thou alſo euer bleſſed.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  Sonne, ſo thou oughteſt to be, as ready to ſuffer, as to receiue joy. Thou oughteſt to be as willing to be poore and needy, as plentifull and rich.
               
               
                  SER.
                  3 Lord, I wil willingly ſuffer for thee, whatſoeuer thy pleaſure is ſhall befall me. I will receiue indifferently from thy hand, good and

euill, ſweete and ſower, delightfull and ſorrowfull: and giue thee thanks for all that hapneth vnto me. Iob 2. Keepe me from all ſinne, and I will neither feare death nor hell: ſo as thou doeſt not for euer caſt me from thee, and blot me out of the booke of life, what tribulation ſoeuer befall me, ſhall not hurt me. Pſal. 22.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII. That temporal miſeries, by the example of Chriſt, are to be borne patiently.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, I deſcended from heauen for thy health: I took vpon me thy miſeries, my charity, and not any neceſſitie drawing me thereunto: that thou mighteſt learne patience, & not refuſe to beare temporall miſeries. Ioh. 8. For from the houre of my birth, vntill my death on the Croſſe, I was not without ſuffring of griefe. Eſa. 53. I ſuffered great want of temporall

things: I often heard many complaints againſt me: I bare patiently ſhame and reproches for benefits I receiued ingratitude; for miracles, blaſphemies, for heauenly doctrine, reprehenſions. Luk. 2.
               
               
                  SER.
                  2 Lord, for that thou wert patient in thy life-time, chiefly in fulfilling the commandment of thy Father, it is reaſon that I miſerable ſinner ſhould haue patience in al things according to thy will, and for mine own health beare the burden of this corruptible life, as long as thou wilt. Ioh. 5. For although this preſent life be burdenſome, yet notwithſtanding it is now by thy grace made very meritorious: & by thy example, and the foot-ſteps of thy Saints, more plaine & tolerable to the weak. Yea, much more comfortable alſo, then it was in times paſt in the olde Law, when the gate of heauen remained ſhut: and the way alſo to heauen ſeemed

darker, when ſo few tooke care to ſeeke after thy Kingdom. Neither they alſo that then were juſt, & were ordained to be ſaued, could enter into the heauenly glory before thy Paſſion, and the debt of thy ſacred death was diſcharged. Mat. 7.
                  3 O how great thanks am I bound to giue thee, that thou haſt vouchſafed to ſhew vnto me, and to al faithful ſoules, a direct & ſure way to thy euerlaſting Kingdome! For thy life is our way, and by holy patience we go vnto thee, that art our Crowne. If thou hadſt not gone before vs, and taught vs, who would haue takē care to follow? Alas, how many would ſtay behind, & remaine far off, if they beheld not thy excellent examples! Behold we are yet cold, although we haue heard of ſo many of thy wonders, & thy heauēly documēts! What would become of vs if we had not ſo great light to follow thee? Ioh. 12.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIX. Of ſuffering of iniuries, and who is proued to be truely patient.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  WHat is it thou ſayeſt, Son? Ceaſe to complain, conſidering my paſſion, and that of my other Saints. Thou haſt not yet made reſiſtance to the ſhedding of bloud. Heb. 12. It is but little thou ſuffreſt, in compariſon of them that haue ſuffered ſo much, ſo ſtrongly tempted, ſo grieuouſly afflicted, ſo many wayes tried and exerciſed. Heb. 11. Thou oughteſt therfore to call to minde the heauy ſufferings of others, that thou mayeſt eaſier beare the little aduerſities which thou ſuffereſt. And if they ſeeme not little, beware leſt thy impatience be cauſe thereof. Yet whether they be little or great, endeauour to beare all patiently.
                  2 How much the better thou diſpoſeſt

thy ſelfe to ſuffering, ſo much the more wiſely thou doeſt, and ſo much the more doſt thou merit: thou ſhalt more eaſily alſo endure it, if thy minde be prepared, and thy ſelfe accuſtomed thereunto. Doe not ſay; I cannot ſuffer theſe things of ſuch a one, at the hands of ſuch a perſon, nor ſuch things are not to be ſuffred by mee, for hee hath done me great wrong, and vpbraided me with thoſe things which I neuer thought of: but of another I wil willingly ſuffer, and as I ſhall ſee cauſe. Such a thought is fooliſh, it conſidereth not the vertue of patience, nor by whom it ſhall be crowned; but rather weigheth the perſons, and the iniuries offered.
                  3 He is not truly patient, that wil not ſuffer but as much as he thinketh good, and by whom he liſteth. But he that is indeed patient, mindeth not by whom he is exerciſed, whether by his ſuperiour, or ſome of his equals,

or by his inferior: whether by a good and holy man, or by a peruerſe and vnworthy perſon. But indifferently from al creatures, how much ſoeuer, or how often ſoeuer any aduerſitie happeneth vnto him, hee taketh all thankefully, as from the hands of God, and eſteemeth it a great gaine: for that nothing before God, how little ſoeuer, ſo it be ſuffred for God, can be without merit.
                  4 Be thou therefore alwaies prepared for the fight, if thou wilt haue the victory. Without combate thou canſt not attaine vnto the crowne of patience. If thou wilt not ſuffer, thou refuſeſt to be crowned. But if thou deſireſt to be crowned, fight manfully, and endure patiently: without labour there is no comming to reſt; nor without fight can the victory be obtained. 2. Tim. 2.
               
               
                  SER.
                  Lord, let that bee made poſſible to me by thy grace, which

ſeemeth impoſſible to me by nature. Thou knoweſt that I can ſuffer little, and that I am quickly diſmayed, when a ſmall aduerſitie ariſeth. Let all exerciſe of tribulation be made pleaſing vnto me, and be welcome for thy name: for to ſuffer, and to be troubled for thee, is very profitable for my ſoule.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XX. Of the acknowledging of our owne infirmity: and of the miſeries of this life.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  I Will confeſſe againſt me my iniuſtice: I will confeſſe vnto thee, O Lord, my infirmitie. Oftentimes it is a ſmal matter that diſcomforteth and grieueth me. Pſal. 31. I purpoſe to reſiſt with courage, but when a ſmal temptation commeth, it bringeth me into very narrow ſtraits. It is ſometimes a very trifle, from whence great temptations do proceed. And whilſt

I thinke my ſelfe ſomewhat ſafe, when I leaſt expect it, I find my ſelfe ſometimes ouercome with a ſmall blaſt.
                  2 Behold therfore, Lord, my humility, & my frailty euery way knowne vnto thee. Pſalm. 24. Haue mercy on me, and deliuer me out of the mire of my infirmities, that I ſticke not faſt therein: let me not for euer remaine deiected. Pſal. 68. This is that which oftentimes beareth me back, & confoundeth me in thy ſight: for that I am ſo ſubiect to fall, and weak in reſiſting of my paſſions. And though I do not altogether conſent, yet their continuall aſſaults are troubleſome and grieuous vnto me: & it is tedious and a very irkſome thing to liue thus daily in ſtrife. Hereby my infirmitie is made knowne vnto me: for that wicked fancies doe alwayes much more eaſily enter in vpon me, then they can be caſt out againe.
                  
                     3 O mightie God of Iſrael, the zealous louer of faithfull ſoules; let it pleaſe thee to conſider the labour and ſorrow of thy ſeruant, and aſſiſt him in all whatſoeuer he vndertaketh. Strengthen me with heauenly force, leſt my old man, my miſerable fleſh, not fully as yet ſubiect to the ſpirit, preuaile & get the vpper hand: againſt which I ought to fight, as long as I breath in this miſerable life. Alas, what a kind of life is this, where tribulations and miſeries are neuer wanting! where al is ſet with ſnares, and compaſſed with enemies! For when one tribulation or temptation goeth away, another commeth, yea and during the firſt conflict alſo, many others come vnlooked for one after another.
                  4 And how can a life bee loued that hath ſo many afflictions, and is ſubiect to ſo many calamities & miſeries? How is it called a life, that begetteth

ſo many deaths, & plagues? And yet it is loued, and many ſeek to delight themſelues therin. The world is oftentimes blamed, that it is deceitful and vaine, & yet it is not eaſily forſaken, becauſe the inclinations of our fleſh do too much ouerrule vs. Some things draw vs to loue it, others to contemne it. To the loue of the world doe draw vs the concupiſcence of the fleſh, the concupiſcence of the eyes, and the pride of life: but the paines and miſeries that do juſtly follow them, cauſeth a hatred and loathſomeneſſe thereof. 1. Ioh. 2.
                  5 But alas, wicked pleaſure ouercommeth the minde which is giuen ouer to the world, and ſhe eſteemeth it a delight to be vnder thornes: becauſe ſhee hath neither ſeene nor taſted the ſweetnes of God, and the inward delight of vertue. Iob. 30. But they that perfectly contemne the world, and endeauour to liue to God

vnder holy diſcipline, theſe are not ignorant of the diuine ſweetnes, promiſed to the true forſakers of the world, and do more clearely ſee how grieuouſly the world erreth, and how it is many wayes deceiued.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXI. That we are to reſt in God aboue all his gifts.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  ABoue all things, and in all things, my ſoule, thou ſhalt euer reſt in God, for he is the euerlaſting reſt of the Saints. Grant me moſt ſweet and louing Ieſu, to reſt in thee aboue all creatures, aboue all health and beauty, aboue all glory and honor, aboue all power and dignitie, aboue all knowledge and learning, aboue all riches and artes, aboue all joy and gladnes, aboue all fame and praiſe, aboue all ſweetnes and comfort, aboue all hope and promiſe, aboue all merit and deſire, aboue all gifts and

preſents that thou canſt giue and impart vnto vs, aboue all joy and jubily that the minde of man can receiue and feele: laſtly, aboue Angels and Archangels, and aboue all the heauenly Hoſt, aboue all viſible and inuiſible things, and aboue all that, that thou art not, my God. Rom. 8.
                  2 For that thou, my Lord God, ſurpaſſeſt all, thou alone moſt high, thou alone moſt powerfull, thou alone moſt full and ſufficient, thou alone moſt ſweete, and comfortable, thou alone moſt beautifull and louing, thou alone moſt noble and glorious aboue all things: in whom all good things together both are perfectly, and euer haue beene and ſhall be: and therefore it is too little and not ſufficient, whatſoeuer thou beſtoweſt on me beſides thy ſelfe, or reuealeſt vnto mee of thy ſelfe, or promiſeſt whileſt thou art not ſeene, and not fully obtained: for ſurely my

heart cannot reſt, nor be fully cōtented vnleſſe it reſt in thee, & ſurmount all gifts and creatures whatſoeuer.
                  3 O my moſt beloued Spouſe Chriſt Ieſus, the moſt chaſt louer, the gouernour of all creatures: who wil giue me wings of true libertie to flie and reſt in thee! Pſalm. 53. O when ſhall it be fully granted me to conſider in quietnes of mind, and ſee how ſweet thou art, my Lord God! When ſhall I fully recollect my ſelf in thee, that for thy loue I may not feele my ſelfe, but thee alone, aboue all ſenſe, and feeling, in a manner not knowne vnto al. But now I oftentimes lament and beare my infelicity with griefe. Dan. 13. For that many euils occurre in this vale of miſeries, which do often trouble, grieue, and darken me, often hinder and diſtract me, allure and intangle me, to the end I ſhould not haue free acceſſe vnto thee, and that I ſhould not enioy thoſe ſweete

and heauēly imbracings, which thou alwaies giueth to the bleſſed & celeſtial ſpirits. Let my ſighes and manifold deſolation on earth moue thee.
                  4 O Ieſus, ſplendor of eternal glory, & comfort of the pilgrime ſoule! With thee is my tongue without voice, and my ſilence ſpeaketh vnto thee. How long doth my Lord delay to come! Let him come vnto me his poore ſeruant, & make me glad. Let him put out his hand, and deliuer me miſerable wretch from all anguiſh. Come, come bleſſed Lord: for without thee I ſhall haue no joyfull day, nor houre. Thou art my joy, & without thee there is nothing but want. A wretched creature I am, and in a manner impriſoned, and loaden with irons: vntill thou comforteſt me with the light of thy preſence, and giueſt me liberty, and ſheweſt a fauourable countenance vnto me.
                  5 Let others ſeeke vvhat they

pleaſe inſteed of thee: but for me, nothing elſe doth, nor ſhall delight me, but thou only my God, my hope, my euerlaſting health. I will not hold my peace, nor ceaſe to pray, vntil thy grace returne againe, and thou ſpeak inwardly vnto me.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  Behold I am here, behold I come vnto thee, becauſe thou haſt called vpon me, thy teares, and the deſire of thy foule, thy humility, and the contrition of thy heart, haue inclined and brought me vnto thee.
               
               
                  SER.
                  And I ſaid: Lord, I haue called thee, & haue deſired to enioy thee being ready to forſake all things for thee. For thou firſt haſt ſtirred me vp that I might ſeek thee. Bleſſed be thou therefore, O Lord, that haſt ſhewed this goodneſſe to thy ſeruant, according to the multitude of thy mercies.
                  6 What hath thy ſeruant more to ſay before thee, but that he do greatly humble himſelfe in thy ſight, alwayes

mindfull of his owne iniquity and baſeneſſe? For there is none like vnto thee in all whatſoeuer is wonderfull, in heauen and earth. Pſal. 85. Thy words are good, thy judgements true, and by thy prouidence all things are gouerned. Praiſe therefore and glory be vnto thee, O wiſdome of the eternall Father: let my tongue, my ſoule, and all creatures together praiſe and bleſſe thee.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXII. Of the remembrance of the manifold benefits of God.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  OPen, O Lord, my heart in thy Law, and teach me to walke in thy Commandements. Grant me to vnderſtand thy will, and to remember thy benefits, as well in generall, as in particular, vvith great reuerence and diligent conſideration: that hence forvvard I may bee able

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
worthily to giue thee thankes. Pſal. 118. But I know and confeſſe, that I am not able to giue thee due thanks for the fauours which thou beſtoweſt vpon me, euen in the leaſt moment. I am leſſe then the leaſt of thy benefits: and when I conſider the excellencie of thy Maieſtie, the greatneſſe thereof maketh my ſpirit to faint.
                  2 All that wee haue in our ſoule and body, & whatſoeuer we poſſeſſe outwardly or inwardly, naturally or ſpiritually, are thy benefits, and doe praiſe thee as bountifull, pious, and good, from whom we haue receiued all that is good. Although one hath receiued more, another leſſe, all not withſtanding are thine, and without thee euen the leaſt cannot be had. He that hath receiued greater, cānot glory of his owne deſert, nor extol himſelf aboue others, nor inſult ouer the leſſer: for he is greater & better that aſcribeth leaſt vnto himſelfe, and is

more humble & deuout in rendring thankes. And he that eſteemeth himſelfe baſeſt of all men, and judgeth himſelfe moſt vnworthy, is fitteſt to receiue greater bleſſings.
                  3 And he that hath receiued fewer, ought not to be ſory, nor beare it impatiently, nor enuy them that are enriched with greater ſtore, but attend rather vnto thee, and chiefely praiſe thy goodnes, for that thou beſtoweſt thy gifts ſo bountifully, ſo freely, and ſo willingly, without reſpect of perſons. All things proceed from thee, and therefore in all things thou art to be praiſed. Thou knoweſt what is fit to be giuen to euery one: & why this man hath leſſe, and he mo
                        •
                     e, it is not ours, but thine to determine, who doeſt weigh in juſt meaſure the deſerts of euery one.
                  4 Wherefore my Lord God, I eſteeme it as a great benefit not to haue much, whereby outwardly and

before men I might ſeem worthy of praiſe and glory: ſo that he, who conſidereth his own pouerty & baſenes, ought not therfore to conceiue grief or ſorow, or to be therfore troubled, but rather to take great comfort, and to be glad: for that thou, O God, haſt choſen the poore and humble, & the deſpiſed of this world for thy ſelfe, and for thy familiar and domeſticall friends. 1. Cor. 1. Pſal. 44. Witneſſes are thy Apoſtles themſelues, whom thou haſt appointed Princes ouer all the earth. 1. Theſſ. 2. And yet they liued without cōplaint in the world, ſo humble and ſimple, meane to the eyes of men, without all malice and deceit, that they reioyced to receiue contumelies for thy name: and what the world abhorreth, they embraced with great affection. Act. 5.
                  5 Nothing therefore ought ſo to reioyce him that loueth thee, and acknowledgeth thy benefits, as the accompliſhment

of thy wil in himſelf, and the pleaſure of thy eternall appointment: wherewith he ought to be ſo contented and comforted, that he would as willingly be the leaſt, as any would wiſh to be the greateſt: and as peaceable and content in the laſt, as in the firſt place: and as willing to be deſpiſed and contemned, and to be of no eſteeme or account, as to be preferred in honor before al others, & to be greater in the world. For thy will and the loue of thy glory, ought to be preferred before all things: and to comfort him more, and pleaſe him better, then all the benefits which he hath receiued, or can deſire.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXIII. Of foure things that bring much peace.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, now I will teach thee the way of peace and true liberty.
               
               
                  
                  SER.
                  Doe Lord, I beſeech thee, as thou ſayeſt, for I ſhal be very glad to heare it.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  Endeauour, my Sonne, to do rather the will of another, then thine owne. Euer chooſe rather to haue leſſe then more. Matth. 26. and Ioh. 5.6. Alwayes ſeeke the loweſt place, and to bee inferiour to euery one. 1. Cor. 10. Wiſh alwayes, and pray, that the will of God may bee wholy fulfilled in thee. Luk. 14. Behold ſuch a man entreth into the limits of peace and moſt quiet reſt. Matth. 6.
               
               
                  SER.
                  2 Lord, this thy ſhort ſpeech containeth much perfection. It is little in words, but full in ſenſe, and abundant in fruit. Mat. 5. For if it could exactly be kept by me, then ſhould I not ſo eaſily bee troubled. For as often as I feele my ſelfe vnquiet, and afflicted, I finde that I haue ſtrayed from this doctrine. But

thou that canſt all things, and euer loueſt the good and profite of my ſoule, increaſe in me thy grace, that I may fulfill thy words, and perfect mine owne health.
               
               
                  A prayer againſt euill thoughts.
                  
                     SER.
                     3 My Lord God, be not far from me: my God haue regard to helpe me, for ſundry thoughts haue riſen vp againſt me, and great feares afflicting my ſoule. Pſalm. 70. How ſhall I paſſe through them without hurt? How ſhall I breake them?
                  
                  
                     LORD.
                     I, ſaith he, will goe before thee, and will humble the glorious of the earth. I will open the dores of the priſon, and reueale vnto thee the hidden ſecrets. Eſay 45.
                  
                  
                     SER.
                     Doe Lord as thou ſayeſt, and let all euill thoughts flie from before thy face. This is my hope, and my only comfort, to flie vnto thee in all tribulation, to truſt in thee, to call vpon thee from my heart, and

to expect patiently thy comfort.
                  
               
               
                  A prayer for enlightning of the minde.
                  
                     SER.
                     4 Enlighten me, good Ieſu, with the clearnes of inward light, and expel al darknes of my hart. Repreſſe the many wandring thoughts, and beat down the fury of the temptations which violently aſſault mee. Fight ſtrongly for me, and vanquiſh the euill beaſts, that is, the alluring concupiſcence, that peace may bee made in thy vertue, & abundance of thy praiſe ſound in thy holy Court, which is a pure conſcience. Command the windes and tempeſts; ſay vnto the Sea, Bee ſtill; and to the North-winde, Blow not; and a great calme ſhall enſue. Mat. 8.
                     5 Send foorth thy light and thy truth, that they may ſhine vpon the earth, for I am emptie and vnprofitable earth, vntill thou imparteſt thy light vnto me. Pſal. 42. Powre out thy grace from aboue, waſh my hart

with heauenly dew, giue waters of deuotion, to waſh the face of the earth, to bring forth good and perfect fruit. Lift vp my mind, ouercharged with the waight of ſinne: draw vp my whole deſire to heauenly treaſures, that hauing taſted the ſweetnes of celeſtial happines, it may loath to thinke of earthly vanities.
                     6 Take me violently to thee, and deliuer mee from all vnſtable comfort of creatures: for no created thing can fully quiet and ſatisfie my deſire. Ioyne me vnto thee with an vnſpeakable band of loue: for thou onely filleſt the minde of him that loueth thee, and without thee all things are diſtaſtefull.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXIV. Of flying curious enquiry of the life of others.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, be not curious: trouble not thy ſelfe with idle cares. What

is this or that to thee? Doe thou follow me. Eccls. 3. and 1. Tim. 5. For what is it to thee, whether that man be ſuch or no, or whether this man do, or ſpeak this or that? Thou ſhalt not need to anſwere for others, but ſhalt giue account. of thy ſelfe. Io. 21. Why therefore doſt thou trouble thy ſelfe? Behold, I know euery one what he is, and doe ſee all things that are vnder the Sunne: and do vnderſtand how it is with euery one, what hee thinketh, what he would, & at what his intentiō aimeth. Gal. 6. Al things therfore are to be cōmitted vnto me: but doe thou keepe thy ſelfe in good peace, and ſuffer the vnquiet to do as they wil. Whatſoeuer they ſhal haue done, or ſaid, ſhall fall vpon themſelues, for they cannot deceiue me.
                  2 Deſire not too great fame in this world, nor to be knowne to many, nor to haue the priuate loue of men: for theſe things breed diſtractions,

and cauſe great darkenes of heart. I would willingly vtter my words, and reueale my ſecrets vnto thee, if thou didſt diligently obſerue my cōming: and didſt open the dore of thy heart vnto me. Be careful & watch in praier and humble thy ſelfe in all things.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXV. Wherein doth the firme peace of the heart, and true profit conſiſt.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, I haue ſaid: Peace I leaue to you, my peace I giue to you: not as the world giueth, doe I giue to you. All do deſire peace, but all care not for thoſe things that appertaine vnto true peace. My peace is with the humble and meeke of heart. Ioh. 4. Thy peace ſhal be in much patience. If thou wilt heare me and follow my voice, thou maiſt enioy much peace.
               
               
                  SER.
                  What then ſhall I doe?
               
               
                  LORD.
                  In euery thing attend vnto

thy ſelfe what thou doeſt, & what thou ſayeſt: and direct thy whole intention vnto this, that thou mayeſt pleaſe me alone, and deſire or ſeeke nothing out of mee, Of the ſayings and doings of others judge nothing raſhly: neither do thou intangle thy ſelf with things not committed vnto thee: and doing thus, it may be thou ſhalt be little or ſeldome troubled.
                  2 But neuer to feele any trouble at all, nor to ſuffer any griefe of hart or body, is not the ſtate of this life, but of euerlaſting reſt. Thinke not therefore that thou haſt found true peace, if thou feeleſt no ſorrow, nor that then all is well, if thou haue no aduerſary: nor that it is perfect, if all things be done according to thy deſire. Neither doe thou then eſteeme highly of thy ſelfe, or imagine thy ſelfe to be eſpecially beloued, if thou be in great deuotion, and ſweetnes: for in theſe things a true louer of

vertue is not tried: neither doth the profit and perfection of man conſiſt in hauing them.
               
               
                  SER.
                  3 Wherein then, Lord?
               
               
                  LORD.
                  In offering thy ſelf from the very bottom of thy heart, vnto the diuine ſeruice, not ſeeking thine owne intereſt or commodity, neither in great nor little, neither in time nor eternity: ſo that with equall countenance, thou mayeſt perſiſt in thanksgiuing, both in proſperity and aduerſity, weighing all things with an equal ballance. If thou be of ſuch courage, & ſo patient in hope, that when inward comfort is withdrawne from thee, thou prepare thy heart to ſuffer greater matters, and not juſtifie thy ſelfe, as though thou oughteſt not to ſuffer theſe, and ſo great afflictions, but juſtifie me in whatſoeuer I appoint, and praiſe my holy name; then thou walkeſt in the true and right way of peace: and thou ſhalt

haue vndoubted hope to ſee my face againe with great joy. And if thou attaine to the full contempt of thy ſelfe; then ſhalt thou enioy as great abundance of peace, as thy baniſhment may permit.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXVI. Of the excellency of a free minde, which humble prayer better deſerueth, then reading.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  LOrd, it is the worke of a perfect man, neuer to ſlack his mind from the attentiue thought of heauenly things, and as it were, to paſſe without care through many cares: not faintingly, but with a certaine priuiledge of a free mind, adhering by inordinate affection to no creature.
                  2 I beſeech thee, moſt mercifull God, preſerue me from the cares of this life: leſt I ſhould be too much intangled thereby: and from the many neceſſities of the body, leſt I ſhould

be enthralled by pleaſure from all hinderances of the ſoule, leſt broken with troubles, I ſhould be deiected and diſmayed. I mean not from thoſe things that worldly vanity ſo greatly deſireth: but from thoſe miſeries, that as puniſhments, do weigh down and hinder the ſoule of thy ſeruant, with the general curſe of mortality, that it cannot enter into liberty of ſpirit, as often as I would. Gen. 3. & Rom. 7.
                  3 O my God, the vnſpeakable ſweetneſſe, make bitter vnto mee all carnall comfort, which may draw me away from the loue of euerlaſting happines, and wickedly allure me to it ſelfe with the force of a certaine preſent delight. Rom. 12. Let not fleſh and bloud ouercome mee, O Lord. Let not the world, & the ſhort glory therof deceiue me. Let not the Diuell and his ſubtill fraud ſupplant me. Giue me force to reſiſt, patience to ſuffer, and conſtancy to perſeuere.

Giue me inſteed of all the comforts of the world, the moſt ſweet vnction of thy Spirit: and in lieu of carnall loue, powre into my ſoule the loue of thy name.
                  2 Behold, meat, drinke, cloathes, and other neceſſaries for the maintenance of the body, are burdenſome vnto a feruent ſpirit. Grant mee to affect ſuch nouriſhments in due meaſure, and not to bee intangled vvith an ouer great deſire of them. It is not lawfull to renounce them wholy, for that nature is to bee maintained: but to deſire ſuperfluities, and thoſe things that doe rather delight, then ſuſtaine, the Law of God forbiddeth: for otherwiſe the fleſh would rebell againſt the ſpirit. Herein I beſeech thee, let thy hand gouerne mee, and teach mee, that I may not exceed.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXVII. That priuate loue moſt hindreth from the chiefeſt good.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, thou oughteſt to giue all for all, and to retaine nothing of thy ſelfe. Know that the loue of thy ſelfe doth hurt thee more, then any thing in the world. According to the loue and affection thou beareſt them, ſo doth euery thing cleaue vnto thee more or leſſe. If thy loue be pure, ſimple, and well ordered, thou ſhalt bee free from bondage. Couet not that which thou mayeſt not haue. Mat. 6. Bee not willing to haue that which may hinder thee, and depriue thee of inward libertie. It is a wonderfull thing that thou committeſt not thy ſelfe wholy vnto me, from the bottom of thy heart, with all things that thou canſt deſire, or haue.
                  2 Why doeſt thou conſume thy

ſelfe with vaine griefe? Why tyreſt thou thy mind with needleſſe cares? Reſigne thy ſelfe to me, & thou ſhalt feel no loſſe at al. Exo. 18. & Mic. 4. If thou ſeekeſt this or that, & wouldeſt be here or there, to enioy thine own cōmodity & pleaſure, thou ſhalt neuer be in quiet, nor free from trouble of mind, for in euery thing ſomewhat will be wanting, and in euery place there wil be ſome that wil croſſe thee.
                  3 Not euery external thing therfore attained, and heaped together helpeth thee: but it rather auaileth, if thou deſpiſe it, and doeſt root it out from thy heart, which thou muſt not vnderſtand onely of thy reuenewes and wealth, but of the deſire of honor alſo, & vaine praiſe; all which do paſſe away with this fading world. The place auaileth little, if the ſpirit of feruour be wanting: Eſa. 4.8. neither ſhall that peace which is ſought abroad long continue, if the ſtate of

thy heart be deſtitute of a true foundation: that is, vnleſſe thou perſiſt in me, thou maiſt change, but not better thy ſelfe. For whē occaſion doth happen, thou ſhalt find that which thou ſoughteſt to fly, and perhaps more.
               
               
                  A prayer for cleanſing the heart, and obtaining of heauenly wiſdome.
                  
                     SER.
                     4 Confirme mee, Lord, with the grace of thy holy Spirit. Pſ. 50. Giue me force to ſtrengthen my inward man, and to purge my heart from all vnprofitable care & griefe; Eph. 3. not to be drawne away with ſundry deſires of any thing either little or great: Mat. 6. but to conſider all things, how they are tranſitory, and do quickly fade, & that my ſelfe do alſo paſſe away togither with thē: for nothing is permanent vnder the Sun, where all things are vanity and affliction of mind. O, how wiſe is he that ſo cōſidereth them! Eccl. 1. & 2.
                     5 Grant me, Lord, heauenly wiſdome,

that I may learne aboue all things to ſeek and find thee, aboue al things to delight in thee, and to loue thee; & to think of all created things as they are, according to the diſpoſition of thy wiſdome. Grant me prudently to auoid him that flatters me, & to ſuffer patiently him that cōtradicts me. Eph. 4. It is great wiſdome not to be moued with euery blaſt of words; nor to giue eare to dangerous flattery: for ſo we ſhall go on ſecurely in the way which we haue begun.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXVIII. Againſt the tongue of Slanderers.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, be not grieued if ſome think euill of thee, and ſpeake that which thou doſt not willingly heare. Thou oughteſt to judge the worſt of thy ſelfe, and to thinke no man weaker then thy ſelfe. 1. Cor. 4. If thou walk according to ſpirit, thou wilt not

much eſteeme of flying words. It is no ſmal wiſdome to be ſilent in time of euil, and inwardly to turne to me, and not to bee troubled with the judgement of men.
                  2 Let not thy peace bee in the tongues of men: for whether they judge well or euill, thou art neuertheleſſe alwaies the ſame. Where is true peace and true glory? Is it not in me? and he that coueteth not to pleaſe men, nor feareth to diſpleaſe them, ſhall enioy much peace. From inordinate loue and vaine feare ariſeth all diſquiet of heart, and diſtraction of the ſenſes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXIX. How we ought to call vpon God, and bleſſe him, when tribulation draweth neere.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  BLeſſed (O Lord) be thy name for euer: ſince it pleaſeth thee that this temptation and tribulation

ſhould fall vpon me. Iob 1. & Pſal. 112. I cannot fly it: but haue need to fly to thee, that thou maiſt helpe me, and turne it to my good. Lord, I am now afflicted, and it is not well with mee, I am much troubled with this preſent griefe. And now, beloued Father, what ſhall I ſay? I am taken in narrow ſtraits, ſaue me in this houre. Mat. 26. Yea therefore I am fallen in this houre, that thou maiſt be glorified, when I ſhal be greatly humbled and by thee deliuered. Let it pleaſe thee, Lord, to deliuer me: for poore wretch that I am, what can I do, and whither ſhal I go without thee? Grāt patience, Lord, euen this time alſo. Help me my God, and then I wil not fear how much ſoeuer I be oppreſſed.
                  2 And now in this, what ſhall I ſay? Lord, thy will be done. Mat. 6. I haue well deſerued to be afflicted and grieued. Surely I ought to beare it; and I would to God I might beare

it with patience, vntil the tempeſt be paſſed ouer, & it become calme. But thy omnipotent hand is able to take this temptation from me, and to aſſwage the violence thereof, that I vtterly ſinke not vnder it, as oftentimes heretofore thou haſt done vnto mee, my Lord, my Mercy. And how much the more hard it is to mee, ſo much the more eaſie is this change of thy mighty hand to thee.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXX. Of crauing the diuine aide, and confidence of recouering grace.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, I am thy Lord, who doe vſe to giue comfort in the day of tribulation. Come vnto me when it is not wel with thee. Nahum. 1. This is that which moſt of all hindreth heauenly conſolatiō, that thou art ſlow in turning thy ſelfe vnto prayer. Mat. 11. For before thou doſt earneſtly commend

thy ſelf to me, thou ſeekeſt many comforts, and delighteſt thy ſelfe in outward things. And hence it proceedeth that al doth little profit thee vntil thou conſider that I am he, that deliuer thoſe that truſt in me: & that out of me there is neither powerfull helpe, nor profitable counſell, nor remedy that can continue. But now thou hauing recouered breath after the tempeſt, gather ſtrength againe in the light of my mercies: for I am at hand, ſaith our Lord, to repaire al, not only entirely, but alſo abundantly. Mat. 23.
                  2 Is there any thing hard to me? or am I like vnto him that promiſeth and performeth not? Where is thy faith? Be firme and conſtant. Take courage and be patient, comfort will bee giuen thee in due time. Attend me, expect, I wil come and cure thee. It is a temptation that vexeth thee: and a vaine feare that affrighteth

thee. What elſe doth the care for future incertainties bring thee, but ſorrow vpon ſorrow? Sufficient for the day is the euil therof. It is a vain and vnprofitable thing to be grieued, or to reioyce for future things, that perhaps will neuer happen. Mat. 6.
                  3 But it is incident to man, to be deluded with ſuch imaginations: and a ſigne of little courage to be ſo eaſily drawne away by the ſuggeſtion of the enemy. For he careth not, ſo he delude & deceiue thee, whether it be true or falſe which he propoſeth: whether he ouerthrow thee with the loue of preſent, or the feare of future things. Let not therefore thy heart be troubled, neither doe thou feare. Pſal. 90. Beleeue in me, and put thy truſt in my mercy. When thou thinkeſt thy ſelfe furtheſt off from mee, oftentimes I am neareſt vnto thee. When thou judgeſt that almoſt all is loſt, then oftentimes greateſt

gaine of merit is at hand. All is not loſt, when any thing falleth out contrary vnto thee. Thou muſt not judge according to that which thou feeleſt for the preſent; nor giue thy ſelfe ouer to any griefe, from whence ſoeuer it commeth, as though all hope of deliuery were quite gone.
                  4 Think not thy ſelfe wholy left, although for a time I haue ſent thee ſome tribulation, or withdrawne thy deſired comfort; for this is the way to the kingdom of heauē. And without doubt it is more expedient for thee, and the reſt of my ſeruants, that yee be exerciſed with many aduerſities, then that yee ſhould haue all things according to your deſires. I know the ſecret thoughts of thy hart and that it is very expedient for thy ſoules health, that thou be left ſometimes without taſte & feeling of ſpirituall ſweetneſſe, leſt perhaps thou ſhouldeſt bee puffed vp with good

ſucceſſe, and ſhouldeſt pleaſe thy ſelf in that which thou art not. That which I haue giuen, I can take away, and reſtore it againe when I pleaſe.
                  5 When I giue it, it is mine; when I withdraw it, I take not any thing that is thine: for mine is euery good, and euery perfect gift. If I ſend thee affliction, or any croſſe whatſoeuer, repine not, nor be not diſmayd: I can quickly lift thee vp againe, & turne al thy ſorrow into joy. Neuertheleſſe I am juſt, and greatly to be praiſed, when I do all this vnto thee. Iam. 1.
                  6 If thou be wiſe, & conſider wel thy caſe, thou wilt neuer yeeld ſo cowardly to griefe, for any aduerſitie that befalles thee, but rather reioyce and giue thanks; yea to account this thy only joy, that afflicting thee with ſorrowe
                        •
                     , I do not ſpare thee. As my Father hath loued me, I alſo loue you, ſaid I vnto my beloued Diſciples, whom certainly I ſent not to temporal

joyes, but to great cōflicts: Io. 15. not to honors, but to contempts: not to idlenes, but to labors: not to reſt, but to bring much fruit in patience. My Sonne remember theſe words.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXXI. Of the contempt of all creatures to find our Creator.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  LOrd, I ſtand yet in need of great grace, if I muſt go ſo far, as that no man or creature can hinder me. For as long as any thing holdeth mee, I cannot fly freely vnto thee. He deſired to fly with great liberty, that ſaid, Who will giue me wings like a doue, and I will fly and reſt? Pſa. 54. What thing more quiet then a ſimple eye? Mat. 6. And what more free then he that deſireth nothing vpon earth? Man ought therfore to aſcend aboue all creatures, and perfectly to forſake himſelfe, and to remaine in

exceſſe of minde: and conſider that thou, who art the maker of al things, haſt nothing amongſt creatures like vnto thee. And vnleſſe a man be free from the affection of all creatures, he cannot with freedome of minde attend vnto diuine things. And for this cauſe there are ſo few contemplatiue men to bee found, for that few can wholy ſequeſter themſelues from fading creatures.
                  2 Much grace is neceſſary to lift vp a ſoule, and to carrie it aboue it ſelfe. And vnleſſe a man be lifted vp in ſpirit, and deliuered from all creatures, and wholy vnited vnto God: whatſoeuer he knoweth, and whatſoeuer hee hath, is of little account. Long ſhall hee bee little, and lye in earthly baſeneſſe, that eſteemeth any thing great, but the one only vnmeaſurable and eternall good. For whatſoeuer is not God, is nothing, and ought to bee accounted as nothing.

There is great difference betweene the wiſdome of a ſpirituall and deuout perſon, and the knowledge of a learned and ſtudious Clerke. Farre more noble is that learning which floweth from aboue, from the diuine influence, then that which is painfully gotten by the wit of man.
                  3 There are many that deſire contemplation, but they endeauour not to exerciſe thoſe things that are required thereunto. It is a great hinderance that we reſt in ſignes and ſenſible things, & haue little true mortification. I know not what it is, nor by what ſpirit we are led, nor what we pretend, we that ſeeme to be called ſpirituall, that we take ſo much paines, and ſo great care for tranſitory & baſe things, & ſcarce or ſeldom thinke of our owne inward profite, with full recollection of our ſenſes.
                  4 Alas, preſently after a ſleight recollection, we breake foorth: and

weigh not our workes with diligent examination. We minde not where our affections lie: nor bewaile the impurity and many faults that are in all our actions. For all fleſh had corrupted her way, & therefore did that generall floud enſue. Gen. 6. & 7. Sith our inward affection then is much corrupted, it muſt needs be that our action proceeding therof, be corrupted, as a ſigne of the want of inward vigour. From a pure heart proceedeth the fruit of good life.
                  5 Wee aske how much one hath done; but how vertuous his actions are, is not ſo diligently conſidered. We enquire whether hee be ſtrong, rich, beautifull, handſome, a good writer, a good ſinger, or a good laborer: but how poore he is in ſpirit, how patient & meek, how deuout & ſpiritual, is ſeldome ſpoken of. Nature reſpecteth outward things, grace turneth her ſelfe to the inward vertues.

That is often deceiued: this hath her truſt in God, to the end ſhee be not deceiued.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXXII. Of the deniall of our ſelues, and forſaking all our affections.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, thou canſt not poſſeſſe perfect libertie, vnleſſe thou wholy denie thy ſelfe. All ſuch as bee louers of themſelues are bound in fetters, they are couetous, curious, wanderers, ſeekers of eaſe, and not of thoſe things that appertaine to Ieſus Chriſt; but oftentimes deuiſing and framing that vvhich vvill not continue. Matth. 16. and 19. For all ſhall periſh that proceedeth not From God. Keep this ſhort and complete word, Forſake al, and thou ſhalt finde all. Leaue thy inordinate deſires, and thou ſhalt find reſt. Conſider this well: and when thou haſt

fulfilled it, thou ſhalt vnderſtand all.
               
               
                  SER.
                  2 Lord, this is not one dayes vvorke, nor childrens ſport: yea in this ſhort ſentence all the perfection of Religious perſons is included.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  Sonne, thou muſt not go back, nor ſtraight waies be deiected, when thou heareſt the way of the perfect; but rather bee ſtirred vp to more worthy and noble attempts, or at leaſt to conceiue an earneſt deſire thereof. I would it were ſo well with thee, and thou wert come ſo far, that thou wert no longer a louer of thy ſelfe, but didſt ſtand meerely at my beck, & at his whom I haue appointed a Father ouer thee; then thou ſhouldeſt exceedingly pleaſe me, and all thy life would paſſe away in joy and peace. Thou haſt yet many things to forſake, which vnleſſe thou wholy reſigne ouer vnto mee, thou ſhalt not attaine to that which thou

deſireſt. I counſell thee to buy of me purified gold, that thou mayeſt become rich, that is, heauenly wiſdom, which treadeth vnder foote all baſe and earthly things. Apoc. 3. Set little by the wiſdome of this world, and eſteeme not of the contentment of men, nor thine owne fancies.
                  3 I ſaid, that thou ſhouldeſt buy the meane and baſe things, with the precious, and thoſe that were with men of great eſteeme. For true heauenly wiſedome ſeemeth very baſe, and of ſmall account, and is ſcarce thought of by men: for that eſteemeth not highly of it ſelfe, nor ſeeketh to bee magnified vpon earth, which many praiſe from the teeth outward, but in their life they are farre from it: yet is it the precious pearle which is hidden from many. Mat. 13.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXIII. Of inconſtancy of heart, and of directing our ſmall intentions vnto God.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOn, truſt not to thy affection: that which now is, will quickly change into another. As long as thou liueſt thou art ſubiect to mutability, euen againſt thy will: ſo that now thou art mery, now ſad, now quiet, now troubled, now deuout, now diſtracted, now diligent, now idle, now heauie, now light: But he that is wiſe, & wel inſtructed in ſpirit, remaines alwaies one in the middeſt of theſe changes, not heeding what he ſeeketh in himſelfe, or which way the winde of mutability bloweth: but that the whole intention of his mind, may tend as it ought, to the moſt perfect and beſt end. For ſo he may continue one, and the ſelfe-ſame, without any change in the midſt of ſo many ſundry chances,

directing alwaies the ſincere eye of his intention vnto me.
                  2 And how much purer the eye of the intention is, ſo much the more conſtantly doth hee paſſe through the varietie of many contrary waues. Matth. 6. But in many things the eye of a ſincere intention waxeth blinde, for it quickely looketh vpon ſome delight, ſome obiect that occurreth. And it is rare to finde one that is wholy free from all blemiſh of ſeeking himſelfe. So the Iewes in times paſt came into Bethania to Martha and Mary, not for Ieſus alone, but to ſee Lazarus alſo. Ioh. 11. The eye of our intention therefore, is to bee purged, that it may be ſincere and pure, and to be directed vnto mee, neglecting the multitude and variety of earthly obiects. Mat. 6.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXIV. That God is ſweete aboue all things, and in all things to him that loueth.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  BEhold, my God, and all things! What would I haue more, and what can I deſire more happy? O ſweete and comfortable word! but to him that loueth the word, not the world, nor thoſe things that are in the world. My God, and all things! Inough is ſaid to him that vnderſtandeth; and it is pleaſant to him that loueth, to repeate it often. For when thou art preſent, all things do yeeld delight, but when thou art abſent, all becomes irkeſome. Thou giueſt quiet of heart and much peace, and pleaſant joy. Thou makeſt men think well of all, and praiſe thee in all things: neither can anything pleaſe vs long without thee: but if it bee pleaſant and delightſome, thy grace

muſt be preſent, & it muſt be ſeaſoned with the ſweetnes of thy wiſdome.
                  2 What can bee diſtaſtefull vnto him, to whom thou art pleaſing? And whom thou delighteſt not, what can be pleaſant? But the wiſe of the world and that haue their contentment in ſenſuall things, cannot attaine to thy wiſdom, for in the world is much vanity, & in the fleſh is death. 1. Cor. 1. Rom. 8. & 1. Io. 2. But they that follow thee by the contempt of worldly things, and mortification of the fleſh, are proued to be truly wiſe; for they are changed from vanity to truth, from fleſh to ſpirit. To theſe God is ſweet, and what good ſoeuer is found in creatures, they wholy referre vnto the praiſe of their Maker. Notwithſtanding, great, yea very great is the difference betweene the ſweetnes of the Creator, and of the creature, of eternity and of time, of vncreated and created light.
                  
                     3 O euerlaſting light, ſurpaſſing al created lights, caſt forth the beams of thy brightnes frō aboue, & pierce the moſt inward corners of my hart: purifie, reioyce, clarifie and quicken my ſpirit with all the powers thereof, that I may cleaue vnto thee with exceſſe of vnſpeakable joy. O when will that bleſſed and deſired houre come, that I may be filled with thy preſence, and thou mayeſt be vnto me all, in all things: as long as this is not granted me, I ſhal not haue ful nor perfect joy. Alas! my old man yet liueth in me, he is not wholy crucified, he is not perfectly dead. Rom. 7. He doth yet couet ſtrongly againſt the ſpirit, and moueth ciuill warres, and ſuffereth not the kingdome of my ſoule to be in peace.
                  4 But thou that ruleſt the powers of the ſea, and aſſwageſt the motion of the waues, riſe & help me: Pſa. 88. diſſipate the people that deſire war,

and deſtroy them in thy might, and let thy hand be glorified: Pſal. 72. for there is no hope nor refuge for me, but in thee my Lord God. Pſal. 30.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXXV. That there is no ſecuritie from temptation in this life.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, there is no ſecurity in this life: as long as thou liueſt thou ſhalt alwayes haue neede of ſpirituall armour. Thou liueſt among enemies, and art aſſaulted on all ſides: Iob 7. if therefore thou defendeſt not thy ſelfe on euery ſide with the ſhield of patience, thou canſt not be long vnwounded. 2. Cor. 6. Moreouer, if thou fix not thy hart on me, with a ſincere will to ſuffer all things for me, thou canſt not ſuſtain the heat of this battaile, nor get that victorious crowne which they haue that are in glory. Thou oughteſt therefore manfully to

go through all, and to vſe a ſtrong hand againſt whatſoeuer withſtandeth thee. For to him that ouercommeth is giuen Manna; and to the negligent is left much woe. Apoc. 2.
                  2 If thou ſeekeſt reſt in this world, how wilt thou then attain to euerlaſting reſt? Giue not thy ſelfe to much eaſe, but to much patience. Seek true peace, not in earth, but in heauen; not in men, nor in any creature, but in God alone. Thou oughteſt for the loue of God willingly to vndergoe whatſoeuer labours, to endure whatſoeuer griefes, temptations, vexations, anxieties, neceſſities, infirmities, iniuries, detractions, reprehenſions, humiliations, confuſions, corrections and contempts; theſe help to the attaining of vertue; theſe try a Nouice of Chriſt, theſe make a heauenly Crowne. I will giue an euerlaſting reward for a ſhort labour, and infinit glory for tranſitory confuſion.
                  
                     3 Thinkeſt thou, that thou ſhalt alwayes haue ſpirituall conſolations at will? My Saints had not ſo, but many afflictions, and ſundrie temptations, and many diſcomforts: all which they endured patiently, and truſted rather in God, then in themſelues: knowing that the ſufferings of this time are not condigne to the deſeruing of future glory. Rom. 8. Wilt thou haue that ſtraight waies, which many after teares, and great labours haue hardly attained? Expect the comming of thy Lord, doe manfully, be of good courage: feare not, doe not flie, but offer both bodie and ſoule for the glorie of God. Pſalm. 26. I vvill revvard thee in moſt plentifull manner, and I vvill bee vvith thee in all thy tribulations.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXVI. Againſt the vaine Iudgements of men.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, fixe thy heart ſtedfaſtly on God, and feare not the judgements of men, when thy conſcience giueth teſtimony of thy juſtice & innocency. It is a good and happy thing to ſuffer in that ſort: neither will it bee burdenſome to an humble mind, nor to him that truſteth rather in God, then in himſelf. The moſt part of men are giuen to talke much, and therfore litle care is to be had of their words: neither is it poſſible to ſatisfie all. 1. Cor. 9. Though the Apoſtle endeauoured to pleaſe all in our Lord, and made himſelfe all vnto all, 2. Cor. 4. yet hee little regarded that hee was judged by humane day. Coloſſ. 1.
                  2 He did for the edification and health of others as much as he could and lay in him: yet could he not hinder,

but that he was ſometimes judged, and deſpiſed by others. Therfore he committed all to God, who knew all, and defended himſelfe with patience & humility againſt euil tongues and ſuch as thought vanities & lies, and ſpake what they liſted: Yet ſomtimes notwithſtanding he anſwered, leſt the weake might haue receiued ſcandall by his ſilence.
                  3 Who art thou, that feareſt a mortall man? To day he is, and to morrow he is not ſeene. Feare God, & the terror of men ſhall not trouble thee. 2. Mac. 2. What harme can the words or iniuries of any do thee? he rather hurteth himſelfe then thee: neither can he auoid the judgments of God, be he what he wil. Rom. 2. Haue thou God before thine eyes, and contend not with complaining words. 1. Cor. 11. And if for the preſent thou ſeemeſt to be troden downe, and to ſuffer ſhame and confuſion, without

deſert, do not repine, neither do thou leſſen thy crowne by thy impatience; but rather lift vp thine eyes to me in heauen. Hebr. 12. I am able to deliuer thee from all ſhame and wrong, and to repay euery one according to their workes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXXVII. Of a full and pure reſignation of our ſelues for the obtaining freedome of heart.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, leaue thy ſelfe, and thou ſhalt finde me. Make choice of nothing, appropriate nothing to thy ſelfe, and thou ſhalt euer gaine. For greater grace ſhall alwaies be giuen thee, when thou doſt perfectly reſigne thy ſelfe, and not turne backe to take thy ſelfe againe.
               
               
                  SER.
                  Lord, how often ſhall I reſigne my ſelfe? And wherein ſhall I forſake my ſelfe?
               
               
                  LORD.
                  Alwayes, and in euery

thing, as well in little as in great. I do except nothing, but doe require that thou be, as it were, naked & void of al things. Otherwiſe, how canſt thou be perfectly mine, & I thine, vnleſſe both within & without thou be free from all ſelfe-will? And how much the ſooner thou doſt this, ſo much the better ſhalt thou find thy ſelf, & how much the more fully and ſincerely thou doſt it, ſo much the more ſhalt thou pleaſe mee, and ſo much the more ſhalt thou gaine.
                  2 Some there are that reſigne themſelues, but with ſome exception. For they put not their whole truſt in God, and therefore doe labour to prouide for themſelues. Some alſo at the firſt do offer all, but afterwards being aſſailed with temptations, doe returne againe to that which they had left, and therefore they goe not forwards in the way of vertue. Theſe ſhall not attaine to the true libertie

of a pure heart, nor to the grace of my diuine familiarity, vnleſſe they firſt make an entire reſignation, and offer themſelues a daily ſacrifice vnto me. For without this can neuer bee obtained the vnion with mee, wherewith my Saints enioy me.
                  3 I haue often ſaid vnto thee, and now againe I ſay the ſame: Forſake thy ſelfe, reſigne thy ſelfe, and thou ſhalt enioy internall peace. Mat. 16. Giue all for all, ſeek nothing, require nothing, repoſe thy ſelfe purely and with a full confidence in mee, and I will giue my ſelfe vnto thee, & darknes ſhall not couer thee. Let this bee thy whole endeauour, let this be thy prayer, let this be thy deſire, that caſting off all propriety, thou mayeſt al naked follow thy naked Sauiour Ieſus: and dying to thy ſelfe, mayeſt liue eternally to me. Then ſhall vaine fantaſies, euill perturbations, and all ſuperfluos cares flie away: then ſhal

immoderate feare leaue thee, and inordinate loue ſhall die.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXXVIII. Of good gouernment in outward things, and of recourſe to God in dangers.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, thou oughteſt with all diligence to procure, that in euery place and action, or external buſines, thou be inwardly free, and maſter of thy ſelfe, and that all things be vnder thy diſpoſition, & thou not ſubiect to them; that thou mayeſt bee Lord and Maſter of thy actions, not a ſeruant or a hireling, but rather a freeman, and a true Hebrew, belonging to the lot and freedome of the ſonnes of God, who put the things that are preſent vnder their feet, and place their thoughts on that which is eternall: who looke on tranſitory things with the left eie, and with the right doe behold the things of heauen:

who ſuffer not themſelues to be drawne to cleaue vnto them, but rather diſpoſe and vſe them, as they are ordained by God, and appointed by the Creator of all, who hath left nothing in his creatures without due order.
                  2 If thou remaine firme and ſtedfaſt in all euents, and doſt not weigh by the outward apparence, nor with a carnall eye, the things which thou ſeeſt and heareſt; but preſently in euery occaſion doſt enter with Moſes into the Tabernacle, to aske counſell of our Lord, Exod. 33. thou ſhalt ſometimes heare the diuine and celeſtiall Oracle, and ſhalt returne inſtructed of many things both preſent and to come. Moſes had alwaies recourſe to the Tabernacle, for the deciding of all doubts and obſcure queſtions, and fled to the helpe of prayer, for the remedy of the iniquitie and dangers of men. So oughteſt

thou in like maner to fly to the cloſet of thy heart, earneſtly crauing the diuine fauour. For the Scripture teſtifieth, that therefore was Ioſue & the childrē of Iſrael deceiued by the Gabaonites, becauſe they conſulted not firſt with God, but giuing too lightly credit to faire words, were deluded with counterfeit piety. Ioſue 9.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXXIX. That a man be not ouer earneſt in his affaires.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, alwaies commit thy cauſe to me, I will diſpoſe well of it in due time: expect my ordination, and thou ſhalt find it will be for thy good.
               
               
                  SER.
                  Lord, I do moſt willingly commit al vnto thee, for my care can profit little. O that I cleaued not too much to future euents, but offred my ſelfe with all readineſſe of minde to thy diuine pleaſure!
               
               
                  LORD.
                  2 Son, oftentimes a man

doth earneſtly labour for that which he deſireth: and when he hath gotten it, hee beginneth to be of another minde, and not to eſteeme ſo much of it, as before he did: for mans affections doe not long continue fixed on one thing, but do paſſe from one to another. It is therefore a matter, not of leaſt moment, to forſake our ſelues euen in the leaſt things.
                  3 The true ſpirituall profite of man, conſiſteth in denying and forſaking of himſelfe: and he that is reſigned, liueth in great freedome and ſecurity. But the ancient enemie, who alwaies laboureth to withſtand the ſeruants of God, omitteth at no time his wonted temptations, but day and night lieth ſtill in waite, to caſt the vnwary, if hee can, into the ſnare of deceit. 1. Pet. 5. Watch therefore and pray, ſaith our Lord, that you enter not into temptation. Matth. 26.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XL. That man hath no good of himſelfe, nor any thing wherof he can glory.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  LOrd, what is man, that thou art mindefull of him, or the ſonne of man, that thou vouchſafeſt to viſite him? Pſalm. 8. What hath man deſerued, that thou ſhouldeſt giue him thy grace? Lord, what cauſe haue I to complaine, if thou forſake me? Or if thou doeſt not that which I deſire, what can I juſtly ſay againſt it? Surely, this I may truely thinke and ſay: Lord, I am nothing, I can doe nothing, I haue nothing that is good of my ſelf: but in al things I do faile, and am defectiue, and doe euer tend to nothing: and vnleſſe thou helpe me, and doſt interiourly inſtruct me, I become cold, and am diſſolued.
                  2 But thou, O Lord, art alwayes the ſame, and endureſt for euer, alwaies

good, juſt and holy, doing all things well, juſt, and holily, and diſpoſing al things with wiſdome. Pſa. 101. But I that am more inclined to fall, then to goe forwards, doe neuer continue in one eſtate: for ſeuen different times are changed ouer mee, yet doth it ſoone turne to the better, when it ſo pleaſeth thee, and when thou vouchſafeſt to ſtretch forth thy helping hand. For thou alone canſt help me without the fauour of man, and ſo ſtrengthen me, that my countenance ſhall be no more changed, but my heart ſhall be conuerted, and reſt in thee alone.
                  3 Wherefore, if I could once perfectly forſake all humane comfort, either for the loue of deuotion, or for mine own neceſſity, which inforceth me to ſeeke after thee (for none elſe can comfort mee) then might I well hope in thy grace, and reioyce in the gift of new conſolation.
                  
                     4 Thankes by vnto thee, from whence all proceedeth, as often as it goeth well with me: but I am meere vanity, & nothing before thee, an vnconſtant and weake man. Whereof then can I glory? Or why do I deſire to be eſteemed of? Is it not of nothing? and this is moſt vaine. Truly vain-glory is an euill plague, and very great vanity: becauſe it draweth from true glory, & robbeth the ſoule of heauenly grace. For whileſt a man pleaſeth himſelf, he diſpleaſeth thee: whileſt hee gapeth after the praiſe of men, he is depriued of true vertue.
                  5 But true glory, & holy exultation and joy, is for a man to glory in thee, and not in himſelfe; Abac. 3. to reioyce in thy name, and not in his owne vertue, nor to delight in any creature, but for thee. Praiſed be thy name, not mine: magnified bee thy worke, not mine: let thy holy name be for euer bleſſed, but to me let no

part of mens praiſes be giuen. Pſ. 112. and 113. Thou art my glory, thou art the joy of my hart. In thee wil I glory and reioice al the day; but for my ſelf I will not joy, but in my infirmities.
                  6 Let the Iewes ſeeke the glory, which one man giueth ro another: I will deſire this, which is from God alone. Ioh. 5. For all humane glory, all temporall honor, al wordly highnes, compared to thy eternall glory, is vanity and folly. O my truth, my mercy, my God, moſt bleſſed Trinity, to thee alone be all praiſe, honor, vertue, and glory for all eternity.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XLI. Of the contempt of all temporall honors.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, trouble not thy ſelfe, if thou ſeeſt others honoured and aduanced, and thy ſelfe contemned and debaſed. Lift vp thy heart vnto mee in heauen, and the contempt of men

in earth will not grieue thee.
               
               
                  SER.
                  Lord, we are blind, & quickly ſeduced with vanity. If I look wel into my ſelfe, I cannot ſay, that any creature hath done me wrōg, & therfore I cānot juſtly complain of thee.
                  2 But becauſe I haue often & grieuouſly ſinned againſt thee, all creatures do juſtly take arms againſt me: for ſhame and contempt is due vnto me, but vnto thee praiſe, honor, and glory. And vnleſſe I do ſo prepare my ſelf, that I be willing, & do reioyce to be deſpiſed and forſaken of all creatures, and to be eſteemed nothing at all, I cannot obtain internal ſtrength and peace, nor be ſpiritually enlightned, nor wholy vnited vnto thee.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XLII. That our peace is not to be placed in men.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, if the peace thou haſt with any bee grounded on the opinion

which thou haſt of him, or on the contentment thou receiueſt in his company, thou ſhalt euer be vnconſtant and ſubiect to diſquiet: but if thou haue recourſe vnto the euer-liuing and eternall Truth, a friend going from thee, or dying, ſhall not grieue thee. The loue of thy friend ought to reſt in me, and for me is he to bee beloued, whoſoeuer hee bee, whom thou thinkeſt well of, and is verily deare vnto thee in this life. No friendſhip can auaile, or continue without me; neither is the loue true and pure, which they haue, whoſe hearts are not joyned together by me. Thou oughteſt to be ſo dead to ſuch affections of beloued friends, that (for as much as appertaineth vnto thee) thou ſhouldeſt wiſh to be without all company of men. Man approcheth ſo much the neerer vnto God, how much the further off hee departeth from all earthly comfort:

ſo much the higher alſo he aſcendeth vnto God, by how much lower hee deſcendeth into himſelfe, and how much the baſer hee is in his owne conceit.
                  2 But hee that attributeth any good vnto himſelfe, hindereth the comming of Gods grace vnto him. For the grace of the holy Ghoſt euer ſeeketh an humble heart. If thou couldſt perfectly annihilate thy ſelf, and purge thy ſelfe of all created loue, then ſhould there flow into thee great abundance of my grace. When thou caſteſt thy eies on creatures, the ſight of thy Creator is taken from thee. Learne to ouercome thy ſelfe in al things, for the loue of thy Creator; and then ſhalt thou be able to attain to heauenly knowledge. How little ſoeuer it be, if it be inordinately loued and regarded, it defileth the ſoule, and hindreth the enjoying of the chiefeſt good.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XLIII. Againſt vaine and ſecular knowledge.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOn, let not the faire ſpeeches and ſubtill ſayings of men moue thee. For the Kingdom of God conſiſteth not in words, but in vertue. 1. Cor. 4. Obſerue well the words which I ſpeake; for they inflame the hart, and enlighten the mind, induce compunction, and bring ſundry comforts. Do thou neuer reade to ſhew thy ſelf learned or wiſe: but labour to mortifie thy vices, for that wil profit thee more, then the knowledge of many hard and difficult queſtions.
                  2 When thou ſhalt haue read and knowne many things, thou oughteſt euer to returne to one beginning. I am he that teacheth man all knowledge: and doe giue to little ones a more cleare vnderſtanding, then can be taught by man. He therefore to

whom I ſpeake, ſhall quickely bee wiſe, and ſhall profit much in ſpirit. Woe be to them, that inquire many curious things of men, and doe little deſire to know the way how to ſerue me. The time will come, when the Maſter of Maſters ſhall appeare, Chriſt the Lord of Angels, to heare the leſſons of all, that is, to examine the conſciences of euery one: and then he will ſearch Hieruſalem with a candle, and the hidden things of darkneſſe ſhall be laid open, and the inuention of tongues ſhall be ſilent. 1. Cor. 4.
                  3 I am hee that in an inſtant doe raiſe vp the humble mind, to vnderſtand more reaſons of the euerlaſting truth, then can bee gotten by ten years ſtudy in ſchooles. I teach without noiſe of words, without confuſion of opinions, without ambition of honor, without contention of arguments. I am he that teacheth to deſpiſe

earthly things, to loath things preſent, to ſeeke the euerlaſting, to delight in the things that are eternall, to fly honors, to ſuffer ſcandals, to place all hope in me, to deſire nothing out of me, and aboue all things feruently to loue me.
                  4 For one by louing me entirely, learned diuine things, and ſpake wonders: he profited more in forſaking all things, then in ſtudying ſubtilties. To ſome I ſpeake ordinary things, to others, things more eſpeciall: to ſome I appeare ſweetly by ſignes and figures, but to ſome I reueale myſteries with much light. The voice of bookes is one, but it teacheth not all men alike. For I am the internal Teacher, I am the Truth, the Searcher of the heart, the Vnderſtander of thoughts, the Setter forwards of good workes, diſtributing to euery one according to my will.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XLIV. Of not drawing outward things to our ſelues.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOn, in many things thou oughteſt to be ignorant, and to eſteeme thy ſelfe as dead vpon earth; and as one to whom the whole world is crucified. Thou muſt alſo paſſe ouer many things with a deafe eare, and rather thinke of that, which appertaineth to thy peace. It is more profitable to turne thine eies from the ſight of vnpleaſing things, and to leaue vnto euery one his owne opinion, then to ſtriue with contentious words. If thou ſtandeſt well with God, & conſidereſt his judgments, thou ſhalt the more eaſily yeeld to the wil of others.
               
               
                  SER.
                  2 O Lord, to what an eſtate are we come! Behold, we bewaile a temporall loſſe, and for a little gaine we toile and ſpare no labour, and the ſpirituall domage of our ſoule is forgotten,

and hardly at length called to mind. That which little or nothing profiteth, is alwaies remembred, and that which is chiefely neceſſary, is negligently paſſed ouer, becauſe mans nature carrieth him to external things; and vnleſſe he quickly returne vnto himſelfe, he lieth drowned in them with delight.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XLV. That credit is not to be giuen to all men: and how prone man is to offend in words.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  HElpe me, Lord, in my tribulation, for vaine is the defence of man. How often haue I bin deceiued, finding wāt of faith, where I thought it ſure? Pſal. 59. And how often haue I found faith, where I leaſt expected it? It is vaine therefore to truſt in men; but the ſafetie of the juſt, O Lord, is in thee. Bleſſed be thou my God, in all things that befall vs. We

are weake and inconſtant, quickely deceiued, and ſoone changed.
                  2 Who is he that is able ſo warily to keep himſelfe, that he neuer fal into any deceit or doubt? But he that truſteth in thee, O Lord, and ſeeketh thee with a pure heart, doth not eaſily fal; & if he fal into any tribulation, be he neuer ſo much inthralled, yet he ſhal quickly be deliuered or comforted by thee. Pro. 10. For thou wilt not forſake him for euer that truſteth in thee. The friend is rare to bee found, that continueth faithful in his friends diſtreſſe, but thou, O Lord, thou alone art faithfull at all times, and there is none like vnto thee.
                  3 O how wiſe was that holy ſoule that ſaid: My minde is firmely ſetled and grounded in Chriſt! If it were ſo with me, then would not humane feare ſo eaſily trouble me, nor words mooue mee. Who can foreſee all things? Who is able to beware beforehand

of future euils? If things euen foreſeene do oftentimes hurt vs, how can things vnlooked for chooſe but wound vs grieuouſly? But why did I not prouide better for my ſelf, miſerable wretch? Why alſo haue I ſo eaſily giuen credit to others? But alas we are men, and God knoweth, weake and fraile men, although by many we are reputed and called Angels. To whom ſhall I giue credit, Lord? To whom but to thee? Thou art the truth that neither doeſt deceiue, nor canſt be deceiued. And on the otherſide, euery man is a lyar, weak, vnconſtant, and ſubiect to fal, eſpecially in words: and therfore we muſt not eaſily giue credit euen to that, which in outward ſhew ſeemeth at the firſt a certaine truth.
                  4 O with how great wiſdom haſt thou warned vs to take heed of mē! and becauſe the enemies of man are his familiar and domeſticall acquaintance,

not to truſt if one ſhould ſay: Behold heere, or behold there. Mat. 7. I am tought to my coſt, and I would to God I might thereby encreaſe my care, and not my folly. Be wary, ſaith one, be wary, keepe vnto thy ſelfe what I tell thee; and whilſt I hold my peace, and thinke it is ſecret, he cānot keep that ſecret, which he deſired ſhould bee ſecret, but preſently diſcloſeth me and himſelf, and goeth his way. From ſuch tales, and ſuch improuident people, protect me Lord, that I fall not into their hands, nor euer commit ſuch errours. Giue me grace, my God, to obſerue truth and conſtancie in my words, and remoue far from me a deceitful tongue. What I am not willing to ſuffer, I ought by all meanes to auoid.
                  5. O how good and quiet a thing it is to be ſilent, and not to talke of others, nor to beleeue all that is ſaid, nor eaſily to report what we haue

heard; Prou. 25. to lay ones ſelfe open to few; Eſa. 24. alwaies to ſeeke after thee, the beholder of the heart; not to be carried away with euery winde of words, but to deſire that all things both within and without, be accompliſhed according to thy will and pleaſure. How ſecure is it for the keeping of heauenly grace, to fly the ſight of men? And not to ſeek thoſe things, that ſeeme to cauſe admiration abroad, but to follow that with al diligence, which bringeth amendment of life, and encreaſe of feruour.
                  6 To how many hath vertue, knowne and ouer haſtily commended, bin hurtful? how profitable hath grace beene kept with ſilence in this mortall life, which is nothing but a perpetual temptation, and a warfare?
               
            
            
               CHAP. XLVI. Of putting our truſt in God, when euil words ariſe
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOn, be conſtant, and put thy truſt

in mee. For what are words, but words? They paſſe through the aire, but hurt not. Pſa. 36. If thou be guiltie, determine willingly to amend thy ſelfe: if thou be innocent, reſolue to ſuffer this willingly, at leaſt for God. It is a ſmall matter to ſuffer ſometimes a fevv vvords, if thou haſt not yet the courage to endure ſtripes. And why doe ſmall matters go to thy heart, but for that thou art yet carnall, and regardeſt men more then thou oughteſt? Becauſe thou art afraid to bee deſpiſed, therefore wilt not bee reprehended for thy faults, and therefore ſeekeſt ſhaddowes of excuſes.
                  2 But look better into thy ſelf, and thou ſhalt ſee that the world yet liueth in thee, & a vain deſire to pleaſe men. For when thou refuſeſt to be humbled, & reproued for thy faults, it is ſurely euident, that thou art neither truely humble, nor dead to the

world, nor the world perfectly crucified to thee. But giue diligent eare to my words, & thou ſhalt little reſpect ten thouſand words ſpoken by men. Behold, if al ſhould be ſpokē againſt thee that could be maliciouſly inuented, what would it hurt thee, if thou ſuffredſt it to paſſe, & madeſt no reckoning at all of it? Could all thoſe words pluck as much as one haire from thy head? Mat. 10. Luk. 11.
                  3 But he that hath not his heart within him, nor God before his eies, is eaſily moued with euery little diſpraiſe, whē as he that truſteth in me, and confideth not in his own judgement, ſhal be free from human fears. For I am the Iudge and the diſcerner of all ſecrets. I know how the matter paſſed, I know him that offereth the iniury, and him that ſuffereth it. Pſal. 7. From me hath this word proceeded: this hath happened by my permiſſion, that out of many hearts

thoughts may bee reuealed. I ſhall judge the guilty and the innocent, but by a ſecret judgement I would beforehand try them both. Luk. 2.
                  4 The teſtimony of men oftentimes deceiueth: my judgement is alwaies true, it ſhall ſtand, and not be ouerthrown. It is commonly hidden and ſecret, and not knowne in euery thing but to few: notwithſtanding it neuer erreth, neither can it erre, although to the eyes of the fooliſh it ſeemes not right. Men ought therefore to returne to me in euery judgement, and not to ſtand in their owne opinions. For the juſt man will not be troubled, whatſoeuer happeneth vnto him for God: Pro. 12. and if any thing be wrongfully brought forth againſt him, hee will not much care, neither will he vainly be glad, if by others hee be with reaſon excuſed. For he conſidereth that I am he that ſearcheth the heart and reines, & do

judge, not according to the outward face, nor humane apparence. For that is oftentimes found culpable in my ſight, that in the judgement of men is commendable.
               
               
                  SER.
                  5 O Lord my God, the juſt Iudge, ſtrong & patient, thou knoweſt the frailty and peruerſity of man, be thou my ſtrength, & all my truſt, for mine owne conſcience ſufficeth me not. Thou knoweſt that which I cannot reach vnto, and therefore in euery reprehenſion I ought to haue ſubmitted my ſelfe, & to haue borne it patiently: vouchſafe mercifully to pardon me, as often as I haue failed herein, and giue me againe grace of greater ſufferance. For thy bountiful mercy is more auaileable to me for the obtaining of pardon, then my conceiued juſtice for the defence of my hidden conſcience. Although my conſcience accuſe me not, yet I cannot hereby juſtifie my ſelfe; 1. Cor. 4.

for if thy mercy be away, no man liuing ſhall bee juſtified in thy ſight. Pſal. 142.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XLVII. That all grieuous things are to be endured for life euerlaſting.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOn, let not the paines diſmay thee which thou haſt vndertaken for me, neither be thou diſcomforted for the tribulatiōs which do befal thee; but let my promiſe ſtrengthen and comfort thee in all euents. I am able to reward thee aboue all meaſure. Thou ſhalt not long toile heere, nor alwaies be oppreſſed with griefe. Attend a while, and thou ſhalt ſee a ſpeedy end of thy euils. There will come an houre when all labour and trouble ſhall ceaſe. Little and ſhort is all that paſſeth away with time.
                  2 Do as thou doeſt, labour faithfully in my Vineyard, I will be thy

reward. Write, reade, ſing, mourne, obſerue ſilence, pray, ſuffer croſſes manfully: Matth. 20. life euerlaſting is worthy of all theſe, and greater combates. Peace ſhall come in the day which is known vnto our Lord, and it ſhall not be day nor night, to wit, of this time, but euerlaſting light, infinite brightneſſe, ſtedfaſt peace, and ſecure reſt. Then thou ſhalt not ſay, Who ſhall deliuer mee from the body of this death? Rom. 7. nor crie, Woe be vnto mee, for that my dwelling in a ſtrange Countrey is prolonged! Pſal. 119. For death ſhall be throwne downe, and health ſhall be without decay, no anxietie, bleſſed joy, ſweete and glorious company.
                  3 O if thou hadſt ſeene the euerlaſting crownes of the Saints in heauen, and with how great glory they now reioice, who in times paſt were contemptible to this world, & eſteemed

vnworthy of life it ſelfe: Sap. 3. and 5. truly thou wouldeſt preſently humble thy ſelf euen vnto the earth: and wouldeſt rather ſeeke to be vnder the feete of al, then to haue command, ſo much as ouer one: neither wouldeſt thou deſire pleaſant dayes of this life, but rather reioyce to be afflicted for God, and eſteeme it thy greateſt gaine to bee reputed as nothing amongſt men.
                  4 O if thou haddeſt a feeling of theſe things, and didſt ſuffer them to enter into the depth of thy hart, how durſt thou ſo much as once to complaine! Are not all painfull labours to be endured for euerlaſting life? It is no ſmall matter to leeſe or to gain the Kingdome of heauen. Lift vp thine eyes therfore vnto heauen: behold I, and all my Saints with mee, who in this world had great conflicts, do now rejoyce, now are comforted, now are ſecure, now do reſt,

and ſhall remaine with mee euerlaſtingly in the kingdom of my Father.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XLVIII. Of the euerlaſting day, and ſhortnes of this life.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  O Moſt bleſſed manſion of the heauenly City! O moſt cleare day of eternity, which night obſcureth not, but the higheſt truth euer enlightneth, day euer pleaſant, euer ſecure, and neuer changing into contrary ſtate! Apoc. 21. O that, that day would once appeare, & all theſe temporall things were at an end! To the Saints it ſhineth gliſtering with euerlaſting brightnes, but to thoſe that are Pilgrimes vpon earth, it appeareth only a far off, and as it were through a glaſſe.
                  2 The inhabitants of heauen doe know how joyfull that day is: but the baniſhed children of Eue bewaile the bitterneſſe and tediouſnes

of this. The daies of this life are ſhort and euill, full of ſorrow and anguiſh, where man is defiled with many ſins, incumbred with many paſſions, diſquieted with many feares, filled with many cares, diſtracted with many curioſities, intangled with many vanities, compaſſed about with many errors, worne away with many labours, vexed with temptations, weakened with delights, tormented with want. Iob 7.
                  3 O when ſhall theſe euils be at an end! Rom. 7. When ſhall I be deliuered from the miſerable bondage of ſin! Pſal. 70. When ſhall I thinke, O Lord, of thee alone! When ſhall I perfectly reioyce in thee! When ſhal I bee free from all impediments in true liberty, without al grief of mind and body! When ſhall I haue firme peace, peace ſecure & without trouble, peace without and within, peace euery way aſſured▪ O good Ieſu, whē
                     
ſhall I ſtand to behold thee! When ſhall I contemplate the glory of thy Kingdom! When wilt thou be vnto me all in all things! O when ſhall I be with thee in thy Kingdom, which thou haſt prepared for thy beloued, from before all worlds! I am left a poore and baniſhed man in the Land of mine enemies, where there are daily warres, and great misfortunes.
                  4 Comfort my baniſhment, aſſwage my ſorrow: for my whole deſire ſendeth vp ſighes vnto thee. For all is burdenſome to me, whatſoeuer this world offereth for my comfort. I deſire familiarly to enioy thee, but I cannot attaine vnto it. I would gladly fixe my heart to the things of heauen, but temporall cares and vnmortified paſſions weigh me downe. In mind I would be aboue al things, but to my fleſh I am inforced to be ſubiect againſt my will. Ro. 7. & 8. Thus vnhappy mā that I am, I fight againſt

my ſelfe, and am become grieuous to my ſelfe, whileſt my ſpirit ſeeketh after the things that are aboue, and my fleſh that which is below.
                  5 O what doe I inwardly ſuffer, when in minde I conſider heauenly things, and preſently in my prayers a multitude of fleſhly fantaſies preſent themſelues before me! My God, be not farre from me, depart not in thy wrath from thy ſeruant. Pſa. 70. Caſt forth thy lightning, & diſperſe them: ſend out thy darts, and breake all the fantaſies of my enemy. Gather my ſenſes together vnto thee, make mee forget the things of this world: grant me grace to caſt away ſpeedily the fantaſies of vices. Succour me, O euerlaſting truth, that no vanity may moue me. Come heauenly ſweetnes, and let al impurity fly from thy face. Pardon me alſo, and mercifully forgiue me as often as I think vpon any thing elſe, beſides thee, in prayer. I

truly confeſſe, that I am wont to be ſubiect to many diſtractions: for oftentimes I am not there, where I do corporally ſtand or ſit, but rather there, whither my thoughts do carry me. Where my thought is, there am I: there is oftentimes my thought, where my affection is. That quickly occurreth vnto me, which is naturally delightſome, & by cuſtome pleaſing.
                  6 And for this cauſe, thou that art truth it ſelf, haſt plainly ſaid: Where thy treaſure is, there is alſo thy heart. Mat. 6. If I loue heauen, I willingly thinke of heauenly things. If I loue the world, I reioyce at the felicity of the world, & grieue for the aduerſity thereof. If I loue the fleſh, I imagine oftētimes thoſe things that are pleaſing to the fleſh. If I loue the ſpirit, I delight to thinke of ſpirituall things. For whatſoeuer I loue, thereof doe I willingly ſpeake, and heare, and cary home with me the formes and repreſentations

thereof. O bleſſed is that man, that for thee (O Lord) forſaketh all creatures; that violently reſiſteth nature, & out of the feruour of ſpirit crucifieth the concupiſcence of the fleſh; that with a cleare conſcience he may offer ſincere prayers vnto thee, and be worthy of the company of the Angelicall quiers, all earthly things outwardly and inwardly being excluded.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XLIX. Of the deſire of euerlaſting life, & how great rewards are promiſed to thoſe that fight valiantly.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOn, whē thou perceiueſt the deſire of euerlaſting bliſſe to be giuē thee from aboue, & deſireſt to depart out of the Tabernacle of this body, that thou maiſt without ſhaddow of any enterchange behold my light; open thy heart, and receiue this holy inſpiration with thy whole deſire. Giue

great thankes to the heauenly goodnes, that dealeth with thee ſo fauourably, viſiteth thee mercifully, ſtirreth thee vp feruently, holdeth thee vp powerfully, leſt through thine owne waight thou fall downe to the vanities of the earth. Neither doeſt thou obtaine this by thine owne thought or endeauour, but by the only fauour of heauenly grace & diuine bounty, that thou maiſt profit in vertue, & obtaine greater humility, and prepare thy ſelfe to future battailes, and endeauour to cleaue vnto mee with the whole affection of thy hart, and ſerue me with a feruent deſire.
                  2 Sonne, fire often burneth, but the flame aſcendeth not vp without ſmoke: ſo likewiſe the deſires of ſome men are earneſtly carried to heauenly things, and yet they are not free from temptation of carnall affection: and therefore it is not altogether purely for the honour of God,

that which they ſo earneſtly requeſt of him. Such is alſo oftentimes thy deſire, which with ſuch importunity thou preſenteſt vnto me. For that is not pure & perfect, which is infected and defiled with the loue of thine owne proper commodity & intereſt.
                  3 Ask not that which is delightſome and profitable to thee, but that which is gratefull to me, and appertaineth to my honor, for if thou judgeſt aright, thou oughteſt to preferre and follow my appointment, rather then thine own deſire, or any deſired thing. I know thy deſire, and haue heard thy often grones. Now thou wouldeſt bee in the freedome of the glory of the ſons of God: now doth the euerlaſting habitation, and the heauenly Country full of joy delight thee, but this houre is not yet come: it is yet another time, to wit, of war, time of labour & triall. Thou deſireſt to bee filled with the chiefeſt good,

but thou canſt not attaine it for the preſent. I am he (ſaith our Lord) expect vntill the Kingdome of God doth come. Iob 7.
                  4 Thou art yet to be tried vpon earth, and to bee exerciſed in many things. Comfort ſhall be ſometimes giuen thee, but abundant fulnes therof ſhal not be granted. Take courage therfore, & be conſtant as wel in doing, as in ſuffring things contrary to nature. Ioſue 1. Thou oughteſt to put on a new man, and to be changed into another. Eph. 4. Thou muſt oftentimes doe that which thou wouldeſt not, & leaue vndone that thou wouldeſt do. That which is pleaſing to others, ſhall goe well forwards, that which thou wiſheſt, ſhall not ſpeed. That which others ſay, ſhal be heard, what thou ſayſt ſhall be nothing regarded. Others ſhall aske, & ſhal receiue, thou ſhalt aske & not obtaine.
                  5 Others ſhall bee great in the

praiſes of men, but of thee there ſhall be no ſpeech; to others this or that ſhall be committed, but thou ſhalt be accounted fit for nothing. At this nature will ſometimes repine, and it is much if thou endureſt it with ſilence. In theſe and ſuch like a faithfull ſeruant of our Lord is wont to be tried, how he can deny and ouercome himſelfe in all things. There is ſcarce any thing, wherein thou haſt ſuch need to mortifie thy ſelfe, as in ſeeing and ſuffering thoſe things that are contrary to thy will, eſpecially when that is commanded, which ſeemeth vnto thee inconuenient, or to little purpoſe. And for that thou being placed vnder authority, dareſt not reſiſt a higher power, therefore it ſeemeth hard vnto thee, to walke at the becke of another, and to leaue wholy thine owne opinion.
                  6 But conſider, Sonne, the fruit of theſe labours, the end neere at

hand, and the reward aboue all meaſure, and thou ſhalt receiue no griefe therby, but great comfort of thy patience. For in regard of that little of thy will, which now thou willingly forſakeſt, thou ſhalt alwaies haue thy will in heauen. There thou ſhalt haue all that thou wilt, or canſt deſire: there thou ſhalt enioy all good without feare of looſing it, there ſhal thy will be euer one with me; it ſhall deſire nothing, ſtrange or priuate; there no man ſhall withſtand thee, no man complaine of thee, no man hinder thee, nothing come againſt thee: but all things deſired ſhall bee there together preſent, and delight thy whole deſire, and fulfill it to the higheſt degree: there I will giue thee glorie for the reproach which heere thou ſufferedſt, a garment of praiſe for former griefe, for the loweſt place, a ſeat of an euerlaſting Kingdome; there ſhall the fruit of

obedience appeare, the labour of pennance reioyce, and humble ſubjection ſhall bee gloriouſly crowned.
                  7 Now therefore bow thy ſelfe with great humility vnder the hands of all, and regard not who ſaid, or commanded this; but take great heede, that whether thy Superiour, or thy Inferiour, or thine equall require any thing of thee, or doe inſinuate their deſire, thou take it all in good part, and endeauour to fulfill it with a ſincere intention. Let one ſeeke this, another that, let him glorie in this, the other in that, and be prayſed a thouſand thouſand times; but doe thou neither reioyce in this, nor in that, but in the contempt of thy ſelfe, and in my pleaſure and honour a lone. This art thou to wiſh, that whether by life or death, God may be alwayes glorified in thee.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. L. How a deſolate perſon ought to offer himſelfe into the hands of God.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  LOrd God, holy Father, thy holy name be now and for euer bleſſed; becauſe as thou wilt, ſo is it done, and what thou doſt, is good. Let thy ſeruant rejoyce in thee, not in himſelfe, nor any thing elſe, for thou alone art the true gladnes, thou art my hope and my crowne, thou art my joy and my honor, O Lord. What hath thy ſeruant, but what he receiued from thee, euen without any deſert of his? 1. Cor. 4. Thine is all that thou haſt giuen, & whatſoeuer thou haſt made. I am poore, and in labours from my youth: and ſometimes my ſoule is heauy vnto teares, ſomtimes alſo it is troubled in it ſelfe, by reaſon of paſſions which riſe againſt her. Pſal. 87.
                  
                     2 I deſire the joy of peace, I craue the peace of thy children, that are fed by thee in the light of comfort. If thou giue peace, if thou infuſe holy joy, the ſoule of thy ſeruant ſhall be full of heauenly ſweetnes, and ſhall become deuout in thy praiſe, but if thou withdraw thy ſelfe, as very often thou art wont, he wil not be able to runne the waies of thy Commandements, but rather hee boweth his knees, and knocketh his breaſt, for that it is not with him, as it was yeſterday, and the day before, when thy light ſhined vpon his head, and he was protected vnder the ſhadow of thy wings, from the temptations which violently aſſault him.
                  3 O righteous Father, and euer to be praiſed, the houre is come, that thy ſeruant is to be proued! Behold, Father, it is fit, that in this houre thy ſeruant ſuffer ſomething for thee. O Father worthy of eternall honour,

the houre is come, which from all eternity thou didſt fore-know ſhould come: that for a ſhort time thy ſeruant ſhould outwardly bee oppreſſed, but inwardly liue for euer with thee: he ſhould be a little deſpiſed, and humbled, and made as an abiect in the ſight of men, and much afflicted with paſſions and infirmities, that he may riſe againe with thee, in the riſing of new light, and be clarified in heauen. Holy Father, thou haſt ſo appointed it, and wilt haue it ſo: and this is fulfilled which thy ſelfe haſt commanded.
                  4 It is a grace and a fauour to thy friend to ſuffer, and to be afflicted in the world for the loue of thee, how often ſoeuer, and by whom ſoeuer thou permitteſt it to fall vpon him. Without thy counſell and prouidence, and without cauſe nothing is done in earth. Pſalm. 118. It is good for mee, Lord, that thou haſt

humbled me, that I may learne thy righteous judgments, and caſt away al haughtines of hart & preſumptiō. It is profitable to me, that ſhame hath couered my face, that I may rather ſeeke to thee for comfort, then to men. I haue learned alſo hereby to dread thy inſcrutable judgment, that afflicteſt the juſt with the wicked, but not without equity and juſtice.
                  5 I giue thee thanks, that thou haſt not ſpared my ſinnes, but haſt worne me away with bitter ſtripes, inflicting ſorows, & ſending griefs within and without. There is none vnder heauen that can comfort mee, but thou my Lord God. Tob. 13. the heauēly Phiſitian of ſouls, that ſtrikeſt & healeſt, bringeſt into hell, and draweſt out againe: Pſal. 17. let thy correction be vpon me and let thy rod inſtruct me.
                  6 Behold beloued Father, I am in thy hands, I bow my ſelfe vnder the rod of thy correction: let my neck &

ſhoulders feel the ſtripes of thy chaſtiſement, that my crookednes may be conformed to thy wil. Make me a deuout & humble diſciple of thine, as thou art wōt wel to do, that I may be ready at euery beck of thy diuine pleaſure. I commend my ſelfe and all mine vnto thee to be corrected. It is better to be rebuked here, then hereafter. Thou knoweſt all and euery thing, and there is nothing hidden in the conſcience of man, which can be hidden from thee. Before things are done, thou knowſt that they wil happen, & haſt no need that any ſhould teach thee, or admoniſh thee of thoſe things, which are done on earth. Thou knoweſt what is expedient for my good, and how much tribulation is fit for purging the ruſt of my ſins. Do with me according to thy deſired pleaſure, and deſpiſe not my ſinfull life, better and more clearely knowne to none then to thee alone.
                  
                     7 Grant me, Lord, to know that which is to be knowne: to loue that which is to be beloued: to praiſe that which pleaſeth thee moſt: to eſteem that which is precious vnto thee: to deſpiſe that which is contemptible in thy ſight: ſuffer me not to judge according to the ſight of the exteriour eyes, nor to giue ſentence according to the hearing of the eares of ignorant men; but to determine of viſible & ſpiritual things with a true judgement, & aboue all things, euer to ſearch after thy will and pleaſure.
                  8 The ſenſes of men are often deceiued in their judgements, the louers of the world are alſo deceiued, in louing only viſible things. What is a man the better, for that he is eſteemed great by man? The deceitfull man deceiueth the deceitfull, the vaine, the vaine, the blinde deceiueth the blinde, and one feeble likewiſe another, whileſt he exalteth

and praiſeth him. For how much euery one is in thy ſight, ſo much hee is, and no more, ſaith humble Saint Francis.
               
            
            
               CHAP. LI. That a man ought to imploy himſelfe in the works of humilitie, when force is wanting for higher exerciſes.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, thou art not able alwaies to continue in the feruent deſire of vertue, nor to perſiſt in the high pitch of contemplation, but thou muſt ſometimes of neceſſitie, by reaſon of originall corruption, deſcend to inferiour things, and beare the burthen of this corruptible life euen againſt thy will, and with irkeſomenes. As long as thou carrieſt a mortall body, thou ſhalt feele trouble and heauines of hart. Thou oughteſt therefore in fleſh oftentimes to bewaile the burthen of fleſh: for that

thou canſt not alwaies perſeuere in ſpirituall exerciſes, and diuine contemplation.
                  2 It is then expedient for thee to fly to humble and exteriour workes, and to refreſh thy ſelfe with good and vertuous actions, to expect with a firme confidence my comming, and heauenly viſitation, to beare patiently thy baniſhment, and the drineſſe of thy minde, till thou bee viſited againe by mee, and deliuered from all anxietie. For I will make thee forget thy former paines, and enioy inward quietneſſe. I will lay open before thee the pleaſant fields of holy Scripture, that with an enlarged heart thou mayeſt beginne to runne the way of my Commandements. And thou ſhalt ſay, that the ſufferings of this time are not condigne to the glorie to come, that ſhall be reuealed in vs. Rom. 8.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. LII. That a man ought to eſteeme himſelfe vnworthy of comfort, and to haue deſerued ſtripes.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  LOrd I am not worthy of thy comfort, nor of any ſpiritual viſitation, and therfore thou dealeſt juſtly with me, when thou leaueſt me poore and deſolate. For if I could ſheed teares like a ſea, yet I were not worthy of thy comfort. For (alas) I deſerue nothing, but to be ſcourged & puniſhed, in that I haue grieuouſly and often offended thee, and ſinned in many things. All things therefore duely conſidered, I am not worthy euen of the leaſt comfort. But thou milde and merciful God, who wilt not that thy workes do periſh, to ſhew the riches of thy goodnes in the veſſels of mercy, euen beyond his deſert, vouchſafeſt to comfort thy ſeruāt aboue humane meaſure. For thy comforts are

not like to the vaine words of men.
                  2 What haue I done, O Lord, that thou ſhouldeſt impart any heauenly comfort vnto me? I remember not, that I haue euer done any good, but haue beene alwaies prone to ſin, and ſlouthfull in my amendment. It is true, and I cannot deny it. If I ſhould ſay otherwiſe, thou wouldeſt ſtand againſt me, and there would be none to defend mee. Iob 9. What haue I deſerued for my ſinnes, but hell and euerlaſting fire? I confeſſe in the truth of my heart, that I am worthy of all ſcorne and contempt, and it is vnfit that I ſhould be remembred amongſt thy deuout ſeruants. And although I be vnwilling to heare this, yet notwithſtanding for the loue of truth, I will lay open my ſins againſt my ſelfe, that I may the better deſerue to obtaine thy mercy.
                  3 What ſhall I ſay, being guilty, and ful of confuſion? I can vtter out

of my mouth no other word but this: I haue ſinned, Lord, I haue ſinned, haue mercy on me: Pſa. 50. Pardon me, ſuffer me a little, that I may bewaile my griefe, before I go vnto the land of darknes, and be couered with the ſhaddow of death. Iob 20. What doſt thou require of a guiltie and miſerable ſinner, but that hee be contrite and ſorowful, & do humble himſelf for his offences? In true contrition and humbleneſſe of heart, is bred a 
                        •
                     ope of forgiueneſſe, a troubled conſcience is reconciled againe, grace loſt is reſtored, man is defended from future wrath, and God and the penitent ſoule meet together in the holy kiſſe of peace.
                  4 Humble contrition for ſins, is an acceptable ſacrifice to thee, O Lord, ſauouring much ſweeter in thy ſight then burning frankincenſe. Pſal. 50. This is alſo the pleaſant oyntment, which thou wouldeſt haue powred

vpon thy ſacred feet, Luk. 7. for thou neuer deſpiſeſt a contrite & humble heart. Pſal. 50. There is a place of refuge from the face of the wrath of our enemy: there is amended, and waſhed away whatſoeuer vncleannes hath beene elſewhere gathered, and whatſoeuer is defiled.
               
            
            
               CHAP. LIII. That the grace of God is not giuen to thoſe that ſauour of earthly things.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOn, my grace is precious, it ſuffereth not itſelf to be mingled with externall things, nor earthly comforts. Thou oughteſt therfore to caſt away al hinderances of grace, if thou deſire to receiue the infuſion thereof. Chooſe therfore a ſecret place to thy ſelfe, loue to liue alone with thy ſelf, deſire the conuerſation of none: but rather powre out deuout praiers vnto God, that thou mayeſt keepe thy

minde compunct and thy conſcience pure. Eſteeme the whole world as nothing: prefer my ſeruice before al outward things; for thou canſt not attend vnto me, and be delighted alſo in trāſitory vanities. Mat. 19. Thou oughteſt to ſequeſter thy ſelfe from thy acquaintāce & friends, & to keep thy minde depriued of all temporall comfort. So the bleſſed Apoſtle Peter required, that the faithfull of Chriſt ſhould keep themſelues as ſtrangers and pilgrimes in this world. 1. Pet. 2.
                  2 O how great a confidence ſhal he haue at the houre of death, whom no affection to any earthly thing detaineth in the world. But the weake mind is not yet capable of ſo retired a hart; neither doth the fleſhly perſon vnderſtand the freedom of a recollected minde. Notwithſtanding, if he wil be truly ſpiritual, he ought to renounce as well that which is far off, as that which is neareſt vnto him, &

to beware of no man more then of himſelfe. It thou perfectly ouercome thy ſelfe, thou ſhalt with more eaſe ſubdue the reſt. It is a glorious victory to triumph ouer our ſelues. For he that keepeth himſelfe ſubiect in ſuch ſort, that his ſenſuality be ſubdued to reaſon, & reaſon in al things be obedient to mee, he is truely a conquerour of himſelf, & Lord of the world.
                  3 If thou deſire to mount vnto this height of perfection, thou muſt begin manfully, & ſet the axe to the root, that thou maiſt pluck vp & deſtroy thy hidden and inordinat inclination to thy ſelfe, & vnto al priuate and earthly good. Of this vice (that man too inordinatly loueth himſelf) almoſt all dependeth, whatſoeuer is wholy to be ouercome: which being once ouercome & ſubdued, there wil preſently enſue great peace and tranquillity. But for that few endeauour perfectly to die vnto themſelues, and

to forſake themſelues wholy, therefore they remaine intangled in themſelues, and cannot bee lifted vp in ſpirit aboue themſelues: but hee that deſireth to walke freely with me, it is neceſſary that he mortifie all his inordinate affections, and not adhere vnto any creature by priuate loue.
               
            
            
               CHAP. LIV. Of the different motions of Nature and Grace.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, marke diligently the motions of thine owne nature, and my grace, for in very contrary and ſecret manner theſe are moued, and can hardly be diſcerned, but by him that is ſpirituall and inwardly enlightned. All men deſire that which is good, and pretend ſome good in all their words and deeds, and therefore vnder pretence of good,

many are deceiued. Nature is deceitfull and ſeduceth, intangleth, and deceiueth many, and alwayes propoſeth her ſelfe for her end, but grace walketh with great ſinceritie, and auoideth all ſhew of euill, pretendeth not deceits, and doth all things purely for God, in whom alſo ſhee finally reſteth.
                  2 Nature will not willingly die, nor bee kept in, nor ouercome, nor bee ſubiect to any, nor bee ſubdued: but Grace laboureth to mortifie her ſelfe, reſiſteth ſenſuality, ſeeketh to be ſubiect, is willing to bee ouercome, and will not vſe her owne libertie, ſhee loueth to be kept vnder diſcipline, and deſireth not to rule any, but alwaies to liue and remaine wholy ſubiect vnto God, and for God, is readie humbly to bow vnto all men. Nature ſtriueth for her owne commoditie, and conſidereth what profit ſhee may reape by another:

but Grace conſidereth not what is profitable and commodious vnto her ſelfe, but rather what is profitable to many. Nature willingly receiueth honour and reuerence: but Grace faithfully attributeth all honor and glory vnto God.
                  3 Nature feareth ſhame and contempt, but Grace reioyceth to ſuffer reproach for the name of Ieſus. Nature loueth idleneſſe, and bodily reſt, but Grace cannot be idle, but willingly embraceth labour. Nature ſeeketh to haue thoſe things that bee curious and precious, abhorreth that which is meane and baſe: but Grace delighteth in plaine and humble things, deſpiſeth not courſe and meane, nor refuſeth to weare that which is old and torne. Nature reſpecteth the things of this world, reioyceth at earthly gaine, ſorroweth for loſſe, is moued with euery little iniurious word; but Grace

thinketh on that, which is euerlaſting, and cleaueth not to that which fadeth with time; ſhee is not troubled with loſſe, nor exaſperated with iniuries, for that ſhe hath placed her treaſure and joy in heauen, where nothing periſheth.
                  4 Nature is couetous, and doth more willingly receiue then giue, ſhe loueth proper and priuate things: but Grace is pitifull and liberall to all, auoydeth ſingularitie, is content with a little, thinketh it happier to giue, then to receiue. Nature inclineth to creatures, yeeldeth to her owne fleſh, followeth vanities, and liſtneth to diſcourſes: but grace draweth vnto God, and ſeeketh after vertues, renounceth creatures, flieth the world, hateth the deſires of the fleſh, reſtraineth wandrings abroad, bluſheth to be ſeene in publike. Nature is willing to haue ſome outward comfort, wherein ſhee may

delight her ſenſes, but grace ſeeketh comfort in God alone, and delighteth aboue all viſible things in the higheſt good.
                  5 Nature worketh all for her owne gaine and profite, ſhee can do nothing freely, but for beſtowed benefits: ſhee hopeth to obtaine either that which is equall, or better, either praiſe or fauour, and coueteth to haue her workes and gifts much eſteemed: but Grace ſeeketh no temporall thing, nor asketh any other reward for her deſerts then God alone, nor deſireth more of temporal neceſſaries, then what may ſerue her for the obtaining of euerlaſting glory.
                  6 Nature rejoyceth to haue many friends, and kinsfolkes, ſhee glorieth of Noble birth and deſcent, pleaſeth the powerfull, fawneth vpon the rich, applaudeth thoſe that are like her ſelfe: but grace loueth

her enemies, and is not puffed vp with multitude of friends, nor eſteemeth place or birth, but where it is joyned with greater vertue, ſhee rather fauoureth the poore, then the rich, hath more compaſſion of the innocent, then the powerfull, reioyceth in the ſimple, and reſpecteth not the deceitfull, exhorteth euer the good to labour for the better gifts, and by vertue to reſemble the Sonne of God. Nature quickely complaineth of any want and trouble: Grace conſtantly ſuffereth all kinde of need.
                  7 Nature turneth all things to her ſelfe, ſtriueth and contendeth for her ſelfe: but Grace reduceth all to God, from whence originally they proceede: ſhee aſcribeth no good to her ſelfe, neither doth ſhee arrogantly preſume of her ſelfe: ſhe contendeth not, nor preferreth her opinion before others, but in euery

ſenſe and vnderſtanding ſubmitteth her ſelfe vnto the eternall Wiſdome, and to the diuine Iudgement. Nature coueteth to know ſecrets, and to heare newes: ſhee will appeare abroad, and make proofe of many things by the experience of her own ſenſes, ſhee deſireth to be knowne, and to doe thoſe things, for which ſhee may bee praiſed and admired: But Grace careth not for hearing newes, nor to vnderſtand curious matters, for that all this ſpringeth from the ancient diſorder of our corrupt nature, ſeeing nothing that is new is durable vpon earth. Shee teacheth therefore to reſtraine the ſenſes, to auoid vaine-pleaſing and oſtentation, humbly to hide thoſe things that are worthy of praiſe and admiration, and of euery thing and euery knowledge to ſeeke profitable fruit, and the praiſe and honor of God: ſhe will not haue her ſelfe, nor

hers, publikely praiſed, but deſireth that God ſhould bee bleſſed in his gifts, who of meere charity beſtoweth all things.
                  8 Thus Grace is a ſupernaturall light, and a certaine ſpeciall gift of God, and the proper marke of the elect, & pledge of euerlaſting ſaluation, which lifteth vp a man frō earthly baſenes to loue things of heauen, and of a carnall, maketh him a ſpirituall perſon. How much the more therefore Nature is depreſſed & ſubdued, ſo much the greater grace is infuſed, and the inward man daily by new viſitations more perfected according to the Image of God.
               
            
            
               CHAP. LV. Of the corruption of Nature, and efficacie of diuine Grace.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  MY God, who of thy meere goodneſſe haſt created mee to

thy Image and likeneſſe, Geneſ. 1. graunt mee this grace which thou haſt ſhewed to bee ſo great, and ſo neceſſary to ſaluation, that I may ouercome my wicked nature, which draweth me to ſinne, and to the loſſe of my ſoule. For I feele in my fleſh the law of ſinne, contradicting the law of my minde, and leading mee captiue, to obey ſenſuality in many things: neither can I reſiſt the paſſions thereof, vnleſſe thy holy grace, feruently infuſed into my heart, doe aſſiſt me. Rom. 7.
                  2 Thy grace, O Lord, and great grace is needfull, that nature may be ouercome, which is euer prone to euil from her youth. For by Adam the firſt man, in falling and being corrupted by ſinne, the penalty of this ſtaine hath deſcended vpon all mankind in ſuch ſort, that Nature it ſelf, which by thee was created good, and without defect, is now accounted

for vice, and for the infirmitie of a corrupted nature, for that the motion thereof left vnto it ſelfe, draweth to euill and abiect things. For the little force which remaineth, is like a certaine ſparke, lying hidden in aſhes. This is naturall reaſon it ſelf, compaſſed about with great darkneſſe, ſtill retaining power to diſcerne good and euill, and the diſtance betweene true and falſe, although it be vnable to fulfill all, that it approueth and enioyeth not now the full light of truth, nor the former integrity of her affections.
                  3 Hence it is, my God, that according to my inward man, I delight in thy law, knowing thy Commandements to bee good, juſt and holy, reprouing alſo all euill and ſin, and doe know that it is to be fled. Rom. 7. But in my fleſh I ſerue the law of ſin, whileſt I rather obey ſenſualitie then reaſon. Hence it is, that

I haue a will to doe good, but know not how to performe it. For this cauſe I often purpoſe many good things, but for that I want grace to helpe my infirmity, for a light reſiſtance I go backe, and faint. I know the way of perfection, & ſee clearely enough what I ought to do, but preſſed with the waight of mine owne corruption, I riſe not vnto it.
                  4 O Lord, how needfull is thy grace for me, to beginne any good worke, to go forward, and to accompliſh it. Ioh. 13. For without it I can do nothing, but in thee I can doe all things, when thy grace doth comfort me. O heauenly grace, without which our owne merits are nothing, and no gifts of nature are to bee eſteemed. Arts, riches, beautie, and ſtrength, wit, or eloquence, are of no worth with thee, O Lord, without thy grace. For gifts of nature are common to good and euill, but the

peculiar gift of the elect is grace and loue, wherewith being marked, they are eſteemed worthy of euerlaſting life. This grace ſo much excelleth, that neither the gift of propheſie, nor the working of miracles, nor any ſpeculation; how high ſoeuer, is of any eſteeme without it. Neyther faith, nor hope, nor other vertues are acceptable vnto thee without charitie and grace. 1. Cor. 13.
                  5 O moſt bleſſed grace, that makeſt the poore in ſpirit rich with vertues, and the rich in many bleſſings, humble in heart, come downe vnto me, repleniſh mee in the morning with thy comfort, leſt my ſoule ſhould faint with wearines, and wither away with drines of mind. I beſeech the Lord, that I may find grace in thy ſight, for thy grace ſufficeth, though other things that nature deſireth be wanting. Pſal. 22. If I be tempted and vexed with many tribulations,

I will not feare euils whileſt thy grace is with me: ſhee is my ſtrength, ſhe giueth aduice and help: ſhe is ſtronger then all enemies, and wiſer then all the wiſe.
                  6 Thy grace is the miſtreſſe of truth, the teacher of diſcipline, the light of the heart, the ſolace in affliction: ſhe driueth away ſorrow, ſhe expelleth feare, ſhe is the nurſe of deuotion, the bringer foorth of teares. What am I without it, but a rotten peece of wood, and an vnprofitable ſtalke, only meet for the fire? Let thy grace therefore, Lord, alwaies preuent me, and follow mee, and make mee euer diligent in good workes, through Ieſus Chriſt thy Son, Amen.
               
            
            
               CHAP. LVI. That we ought to deny our ſelues, and imitate Chriſt, by the Croſſe.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, looke how much thou

canſt goe out of thy ſelfe, ſo much mayeſt thou enter into me. As to be void of all deſire of externall things, maketh inward peace; ſo the forſaking of our ſelues joyneth vs internally to God. I will haue thee learne the perfect leauing of thy ſelfe vnto my will, without contradiction and complaint. Follow me, I am the way, the truth, and the life. Ioh. 14. Without the way there is no going, without truth there is no knowledge, without life there is no liuing. I am the way which thou oughteſt to follow, the truth which thou oughteſt to truſt, the life for which thou oughteſt to hope. I am the way which cannot lead amiſſe, the truth which cannot erre, the life which cannot end. I am a moſt ſtrait way, a ſupreme truth, a true life, a bleſſed life, an increated life, if thou remaine in mee, thou ſhalt know the truth, and truth ſhall deliuer thee, and thou

ſhalt apprehend euerlaſting life.
                  2 If thou wilt enter into life, keep the Commandements: if thou wilt know the truth, beleeue me. Mat. 19. If thou wilt be perfect, ſell al. If thou wilt be my diſciple, deny thy ſelfe. Luk. 9. If thou wilt poſſeſſe a bleſſed life, deny this preſent life. Ioh. 12. If thou wilt be exalted in heauen, humble thy ſelfe vpon earth. Luk. 14. If thou wilt raigne with me, beare the Croſſe with mee. For onely the ſeruants of the Croſſe finde the way of bliſſe and true light.
               
               
                  SER.
                  3 Lord Ieſus, for as much as thy way is narrow, ſtrait and contemptible vnto the world, grant me grace to imitate thee in ſuffring willingly all worldly contempt. For the ſeruant is not greater then his Lord, nor the Diſciple aboue his Maſter. Mat. 7. Let thy ſeruant be exerciſed in thy holy life, for there is the health and the true ſanctitie of my ſoule:

whatſoeuer I reade or heare beſides, doth not recreate or delight me fully. Luk. 6.
               
               
                  LORD.
                  4 Sonne, now that thou knoweſt and haſt read theſe things, happie ſhalt thou be, if thou fulfill them. Hee that hath my Commandements and keepeth them, hee it is that loueth me, and I will loue him, and will manifeſt my ſelfe vnto him, and wil make him ſit with me in the Kingdome of my Father.
               
               
                  SER.
                  Lord Ieſus, as thou haſt ſaid and promiſed, ſo giue mee grace to deſerue, that it be fulfilled. I haue receiued the Croſſe, I haue receiued it from thy hand, and I will beare it, and beare it till death, as thou haſt laid it vpon me. Truely the life of a good religious perſon is the Croſſe, and it is a ſure guide to heauen. It is now begunne, it is not lawfull to go backe, neither is it fit to leaue that which I haue vndertaken.
                  
                     5 Let vs then take courage, my brethren, and go forwards together. Ieſus will be with vs, for Ieſus ſake we haue vndertaken this Croſſe: for the loue of Ieſus let vs perſeuere in the Croſſe. Hee will be our helper, who is our guide and forerunner. Behold our King goeth before vs, who alſo will fight for vs: let vs follow him cheerefully, let vs not bee diſmayed, but be readie to die with courage in the battaile, and let vs not blemiſh our glory by flying from the Croſſe.
               
            
            
               CHAP. LVII. That a man be not too much deiected, when he falleth into ſome defects.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, patience and humilitie in time of aduerſitie, are more pleaſing to mee, then much comfort and deuotion in proſperitie. Why art thou grieued for euery little

trifle ſpoken and done againſt thee? Although it had beene much more, thou oughteſt not to haue been moued. But now let it paſſe, it is not the firſt that hath happened, nor any new thing, neither ſhall it bee the laſt, if thou liue long. Thou art cheerefull enough as long as no aduerſity occurreth. Thou canſt giue good counſell alſo, and canſt ſtrengthen others with thy words, but when any tribulation ſuddenly knocketh at thy dore, thou art deſtitute of counſell, and voide of force. See therefore thy great frailtie, which thou often proueſt in very ſmall occaſions. It is notwithſtanding permitted for thy good, when theſe and ſuch like occaſions befall thee.
                  2 Put it out of thy heart the beſt thou canſt, and if it touch thee, yet let it not deiect thee, nor trouble thee long: beare it at leaſt patiently, if thou canſt not ioyfully. Although

thou bee vnwilling to heare it, and feeleſt in thy heart ſome motion of diſdaine, yet repreſſe thy ſelfe, and ſuffer no inordinate word to paſſe out of thy mouth, which may bee a ſcandall to the weake. The ſtorme which now is raiſed, ſhall quickly be appeaſed, and inward griefe ſhall be aſſwaged by the returne of grace. I do yet liue (ſaith our Lord) and am ready to helpe thee, and to giue thee greater comfort then before, if thou put thy truſt in mee, and calleſt deuoutly vpon me. Eſay 49.
                  3 Be more patient, and prepare thy ſelfe to greater ſuffering. All is not loſt, if thou feele thy ſelfe often afflicted, or grieuouſly tempted. Thou art a man, and not God: thou art fleſh, not an Angell. How canſt thou looke to continue euer in the ſame ſtate of vertue, when an Angell in heauen hath fallen, and the firſt man in Paradiſe loſt his ſtanding? I

am hee that doe giue healthfull comfort to them that mourne, and doe raiſe vp vnto my God-head thoſe that know their owne frailtie. Gen. 3.
               
               
                  SER.
                  4 Lord, bleſſed be thy ſacred Word, more ſweete vnto my mouth then the hony, and the hony-combe. What ſhould I doe in theſe my ſo great tribulations and anguiſhes, vnleſſe thou diddeſt comfort mee with thy holy, ſweete, and heauenly ſpeeches? Pſal. 118. What matter is it, how much, and what I ſuffer, ſo as at length I may attaine to the hauen of bliſſe? Grant mee a good end, grant mee a happie paſſage out of this world. Be mindfull of me, my God, and direct mee the ſtraight and ready way to the euerlaſting Kingdome, Amen.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. LVIII. Of not ſearching into high matters, and into the ſecret iudgements of God.
               
                  OVR LORD.
                  SOnne, beware thou diſpute not of high matters, not of the ſecret judgements of God, why this man is forſaken, and he aſſumed to ſo great grace: why alſo this man is ſo much afflicted, and he ſo greatly aduanced. Theſe things exceede all humane power, neither can any reaſon, or diſcourſe of any man, ſearch out the judgement of God. When the enemy therfore ſuggeſteth theſe things vnto thee, or ſome enuious people demand them of thee, anſwere that of the Prophet: Thou art juſt, O Lord, and thy judgement is right. Pſa. 218. And againe: The judgements of our Lord are true & juſtified in thēſelues Pſa. 18. My judgments are to be fearead, not to be diſcuſſed, for they are

ſuch as cannot be comprehended by the vnderſtanding of man.
                  2 In like maner I aduiſe thee not to enquire, nor diſpute of the merits of the Saints, which of them is holier then the other, and which is greater in the Kingdome of heauen. Theſe things oftentimes breed ſtrife & vnprofitable contentions, they nouriſh alſo pride & vain-glory, from whēce do vſually ſpring enuy & diſſenſions, whilſt one will needs fooliſhly haue this Saint preferred, & the other another. 1. Tim. 2. To deſire to know & ſearch out ſuch things, is to no purpoſe, but to diſpleaſe the Saints, of whom they ſpeake. For I am not the God of diſſenſiō, but of peace, which peace conſiſteth rather in true humilitie, then in exalting our ſelues.
                  3 Some are carried with zeale of affectiō, to loue theſe, or thoſe moſt, but this loue is rather humane then diuine. I haue made al the Saints, and

haue giuen them grace: I haue made them partakers of my glory. I know the merits of euery one, I haue preuented them in the benedictions of my ſweetnes. I foreknew my beloued before the beginning of the world. I choſe thē out of the world, they choſe not me firſt. Ioh. 15. I called them by grace, I drew them by mercy, I led them through ſundry temptations. I haue ſent thē great inward cōforts, I haue giuen thē perſeuerāce, I haue crowned their patiēce.
                  4 I know the firſt and laſt: I embrace all with ineſtimable loue. I am to be praiſed in al my Saints, I am to be bleſſed aboue al things, and to be honored in euery one, whom I haue thus gloriouſly exalted, and predeſtinated without any precedent merits of their owne. He therefore that contēneth one of the leaſt of my Saints, honoreth not the greateſt, for that I made both the leſſe and the greater.

Iam. 2. Wiſd. 6. And he that diſpraiſeth any of my Saints, diſpraiſeth alſo me, & al the reſt in the Kingdome of heauen. All are one by the band of Charity, they thinke the ſame, they will the ſame, and are all knit together in one perfect-band of loue.
                  5 But yet (which is much more high) they loue me more then themſelues, & more then their owne merits. For being rauiſhed aboue themſelues, & drawne out of the affection of themſelues, they tend wholy vnto the loue of mee, in which alſo they reſt, enioying me with vnſpeakable glory. Nothing can put them backe, nothing preſſe them down; for being full of euerlaſting truth, they burne with the fire of vnquenchable charity. Let therfore carnal & earthly mē, that can affect no other but priuate joyes, forbeare to diſpute of the ſtate of Saints. They adde and take away according to their owne fancies, not

as it pleaſeth the euerlaſting Truth.
                  6 There is in many great ignorāce, ſpecially in thoſe that bee ſlenderly enlightned, & theſe can ſeldom loue any with perfect ſpiritual loue. They are alwaies much drawne by a natural affection & humane friendſhip, to this man or to that, and according to the experience they haue of themſelues in their earthly affections, ſo they frame an imagination of heauē
                     ly things. But there is an incōparable diſtance betweene the things, which the imperfect frame in their conceits, and thoſe which illuminated perſons do ſee by reuelation from aboue.
                  7 Beware therefore, my Sonne, that thou treat not curiouſly of theſe things, which exceed thy knowledg, but rather ſo apply thy endeauours, that thou maiſt at leaſt haue the meaneſt place in the Kingdom of heauē. Eccleſ. 3. And if any one did know which of the Saints exceeded others

in ſanctity, or is eſteemed greater in the kingdom of heauen, what would this knowledge auaile him, vnleſſe he ſhould thereby humble himſelfe the more in my ſight, and ſtirre vp his minde to praiſe my name with greater feruour. His labour is much more acceptable vnto God, that thinketh of the greatnes of his ſins, and his want of vertues, and how far off he is from the perfection of the Saints; then he that diſputeth of their greatnes. It is better to pray to the Saints with deuotion and teares, and to craue their glorious ſuffrages with an humble mind, then to ſearch their ſecrets with a vaine curioſitie.
                  8 They are well, and right well contented, if men could content thē
                     ſelues, and refraine from theſe vaine diſcourſes. They glory not of their own merits for they aſcribe no good vnto themſelues, but attribute all to me, who of my infinite charity haue

beſtowed my bleſſings vpon them. They are repleniſhed with ſo great loue of my Godhead, and ſo ſuperabundant joy, that there is no glory nor happines, that is, or can be wanting vnto them. All the Saints, how much the higher they be in glory, ſo much the more humble they are in themſelues, and neerer and dearer vnto me. And therefore thou haſt it written, That they did caſt their crownes before God, and fel downe vpon their faces before the Lambe, and adored him that liueth for euer. Apocal. 4.
                  9 Many enquire who is greateſt in the Kingdome of God, that know not whether they ſhall euer be numbred there amongſt the leaſt. It is no ſmall matter to bee euen the leaſt in heauen, where all are great, for that all there ſhall be called, and ſhall be indeed the Sonnes of God. The leaſt there ſhall bee great among thouſands,

and the ſinner of an hundred yeares ſhall die. For when the Diſciples asked who was the greater in the Kingdome of heauen, they receiued this anſwere. Matth. 18. Vnleſſe you be conuerted, and become as little children, you ſhall not enter into the Kingdome of heauen. Whoſoeuer therefore ſhall humble himſelfe as this little childe, he is the greater in the Kingdome of heauen.
                  10 Woe be vnto them that diſdaine to humble themſelues willingly with little children. Mat. 6. For the low gate of the Kingdom of heauen, wil not giue them entrance. And wo be to the rich, that haue their comforts heere, for whilſt the poore enter into the Kingdom of God, they ſhall be waiting without. Reioyce you that be humble; and you that bee poore, be you glad, for yours is the Kingdome of God, if you walke according vnto truth. Mat. 5.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. LIX. That all our hope and truſt is to be fixed in God alone.
               
                  THE SERVANT.
                  LOrd, what truſt haue I in this world? Or what is the greateſt comfort, that all things vnder heauen doe yeeld mee? Is it not thou, my Lord God, whoſe mercies are without number? Where hath it beene well with mee without thee? Or when could it bee ill with mee, when thou wert preſent? I had rather bee poore for thee, then rich without thee. I rather chooſe to be a Pilgrime in earth with thee, then to poſſeſſe heauen without thee. Where thou art, there is heauen: and there is death and hell, where thou art not. Thou art my deſire, and therefore it behoueth mee to ſend forth deep ſighes from my heart, and crie and pray vnto thee. For I haue

none to truſt vnto, none that can help mee in time of neceſſitie, but thee alone, my God. Thou art my hope, and my truſt; thou art my comforter, and moſt faithfull vnto mee in all my diſtreſſes.
                  2 All men ſeeke their owne gaine, thou only ſeekeſt my ſaluation, and my profit, and turneſt all things to my good. Phil. 2. Although thou permitteſt many temptations to aſſault me, and many aduerſities to befall me, yet thou ordaineſt all this to my good and profit, who art wont to proue thy beloued ſeruants a thouſand wayes. In which proofe thou oughteſt no leſſe to bee loued and praiſed, then if thou diddeſt repleniſh me with heauenly comforts.
                  3 In thee therfore, my Lord God, I put my whole hope and refuge: in thee I place my tribulation and anguiſh, for I finde all to be weake and vnconſtant, whatſoeuer I behold out

of thee. For neither can many friends auaile, nor forcible helpers aide, nor wiſe counſellers giue profitable anſwere, nor the bookes of the learned comfort, nor any wealth deliuer, nor any ſecret or pleaſant place defend, if thou thy ſelfe doſt not aſſiſt, helpe, comfort, inſtruct, and keepe vs.
                  4 For all things that ſeeme to be ordained for the reſt and ſolace of man, when thou art abſent, are nothing, and doe bring indeed no joy, nor comfort at all. Thou therefore art the end of all that is good, the light of life, the depth of wiſdome: and the moſt forcible comfort of thy ſeruants, is to truſt in thee aboue all things. To thee therefore do I lift vp mine eyes: In thee my God the Father of mercies, I put my whole truſt. Bleſſe and ſanctifie my ſoule with thy heauenly bleſſings, that it may be made thy holy habitation, and the ſeat of thy eternall glory: and that

nothing may be found in the Temple of thy greatnes, that may offend the eyes of thy Maieſtie. According to the greatnes of thy goodnes, and multitude of thy mercies, take pitie vpon mee, and heare the prayer of thy poore ſeruant, who is farre exiled from thee in the land of the ſhadow of death. Protect and keepe the ſoule of thy ſeruant, amidſt ſo many dangers of this corruptible life, and by the aſſiſtance of thy grace, direct it in the way of peace, to the Countrey of euerlaſting light, AMEN.
               
            
            The end of the third Booke.
         
         
            
            OF THE FOLLOWING OF CHRIST. THE FOVRTH BOOKE. A deuout Exhortation vnto the bleſſed Sacrament. The voice of Chriſt.
            
               COme vnto mee all yee that labour and are burdened, and I will refreſh you, ſaith our Lord. Matth. 11. The bread which I will giue, is my fleſh, for the life of the world. Ioh. 6. Take yee and eate, this is my body that ſhall be deliuered for you. Matth. 26. Doe this for the commemoration of me. He that eateth my fleſh, and drinketh my

bloud, remaineth in me, and I in him. 1. Cor. 11. The words which I haue ſpoken vnto you, are Spirit and life. Ioh. 6.
            
               CHAP. I. With how great reuerence Chriſt ought to be receiued.
               THeſe are thy words, O Chriſt, euerlaſting Truth, though not ſpoken all at one time, nor written in one and the ſelfe-ſame place. Becauſe therefore they are thine and true, they are al thankfully and faithfully to be receiued by me. They are thine, & thou haſt ſpoken them, and they are mine alſo, becauſe thou haſt ſpoken them for my ſaluation. I willingly receiue them from thy mouth, that they may be the deeper imprinted in my heart. Theſe deuout words ſo full of ſweetnes and loue, do ſtirre me vp, but mine owne offences doe amaze me, & my impure conſcience

driueth me back from the receiuing of ſo great myſteries. The ſweetnes of thy words doth encourage mee, but the multitude of my ſinnes doe oppreſſe me.
               2 Thou commandeſt me to come confidently vnto thee, if I will haue part with thee: and to receiue the food of immortality, if I deſire to obtaine euerlaſting life & glory. Come (ſayeſt thou) vnto me, all ye that labour and are burdened, and I wil refreſh you. Mat. 11. O ſweet and louely word in the eare of a ſinner, that thou, my Lord God, ſhouldeſt inuite the poore and needy to receiue thy moſt bleſſed body. But who am I, Lord, that I may preſume to approach vnto thee? Behold the heauens cannot containe thee, and thou ſayſt: Come ye all vnto me. Mat. 11.
               3 What meaneth this moſt pious benignity, and ſo louing inuitation? How ſhal I dare to come, that know

not any good in mee, whereupon I may preſume? How ſhal I bring thee into my houſe, that haue often offended thy moſt gracious countenance? The Angels and the Archangels honor thee, the Saints and juſt men doe feare thee; and thou ſayeſt, Come ye all vnto me. Mat. 11. Vnleſſe thou, O Lord, didſt ſay it, who would beleeue it to be true? And vnleſſe thou didſt command it, who would dare to come vnto thee? Behold, Noe, a juſt man, laboured an hundred yeares in building of the Arke, that he might be ſaued with a few: and how can I in one houres ſpace prepare my ſelfe to receiue with reuerence the Maker of the world? Gen. 6.
               4 Moſes thy great ſeruant, and eſpeciall friend, made an Arke of incorruptible wood, which alſo he couered with moſt pure gold, to put the Tables of the Law therein: and I a rotten creature, how ſhall I ſo

lightly dare to receiue the Maker of the Law, and the giuer of life? Salomon the wiſeſt of the Kings of Iſrael, beſtowed ſeuen yeares in building a magnificent Temple, in praiſe of thy name, and celebrated the feaſt of the Dedication therof eight daies together: 3. King. 6. hee offered a thouſand peaceable ſacrifices, and ſet the Arke in the place prepared for it, with the ſound of trumpets, and joy: 3. King. 8. and I the moſt vnhappie and pooreſt of men, how ſhall I bring thee into my houſe, that I can ſcarce ſpend one halfe houre deuoutly? And I would to God it were once almoſt one halfe houre, in worthy and due manner!
               5 O my God, how much did they endeauour to pleaſe thee, and alas how little is that which I doe? How ſhort time doe I ſpend, when I prepare my ſelfe to receiue? I am ſeldome wholy recollected, very ſeldome

altogether free from diſtraction; & yet ſurely no vndecent thought ſhould occurre in the preſence of thy Deity, nor any creature draw me vnto it: for I am not to harbour an Angell, but the Lord of Angels.
               6 And yet there is great difference betweene the Arke & the Reliques therof, and thy moſt pure body with his vnſpeakable vertues: betweene thoſe legall Sacrifices, figures of future things, and the true ſacrifice of thy body, the complement of all ancient Sacrifices. Why therefore doe I not become more feruent in thy venerable preſence? Wherefore doe I not prepare my ſelfe with greater care to receiue thy ſacred gifts, ſith thoſe holy ancient Patriarkes and Prophets, yea Kings alſo and Princes with the whole people haue ſhewed ſo great zeale of deuotion to thy diuine ſeruice?
               7 The moſt deuout King Dauid

danced before the Arke of God with all his force, calling to minde the benefits beſtowed in times paſt vpon his fore-fathers. 2. King. 6. He made Inſtruments of ſundry kinds, he publiſhed Pſalmes, and appointed them to be ſung with joy: himſelfe alſo oftentimes played vpon the Harpe. Being inſpired with the grace of the holy Ghoſt, he taught the people of Iſrael to praiſe God vvith their whole heart, and with pleaſant voyces euery day to bleſſe & praiſe him. If ſo great deuotion was then vſed, and ſuch memory of diuine praiſe before the Arke of the Teſtament, what reuerence and deuotion is now to be performed by me, and al Chriſtian people in the preſence of this Sacrament, in receiuing the moſt precious body of Chriſt?
               8 Many goe to ſundry places to viſite the Reliques of Saints, and are aſtoniſhed when they heare of their

miraculous workes: they behold the ſpacious buildings of their Churches, and kiſſe their ſacred bones, wrapped in ſilke and gold: And behold thou art heere preſent with me on the Altar, my God, the Holy of Holies, the Maker of all things, and Lord of Angels. Oftentimes in thoſe deuotions there is but curioſitie of men, and nouelty of the beholders in the ſeeing of ſuch ſights, and little fruit of amendment is gotten thereby, eſpecially where there is ſo vnconſtant wandring, without true contrition. But heere in the Sacrament of the Altar, thou art preſent, my Lord, God and Man, Chriſt Ieſus, where alſo plentifull fruit of euerlaſting ſaluation is obtained, as often as thou art worthily and deuoutly receiued. No leuity, no curioſity, or ſenſuality draweth vnto this, but firme faith, deuout hope, and ſincere charity.
               
                  9 O God the inuiſible Creator of the world, how wonderfully doſt thou deale with vs! How ſweetly and graciouſly doeſt thou diſpoſe of all things with thy Elect, to whome thou offereſt thy ſelfe to be receiued in the Sacrament! O this exceedeth all vnderſtanding of man: this chiefly draweth the hearts of the deuout, and inflameth their deſire. For thy true faithfull ſeruants that diſpoſe their whole life to amendment, by this moſt worthy Sacrament, oftentimes receiue great grace of deuotion, and loue of vertue.
               10 O admirable and hidden grace of this Sacrament, which onely the faithfull of Chriſt do know: but the vnfaithfull, and ſuch as are ſlaues vnto ſinne, cannot conceiue nor feele. In this Sacrament ſpirituall grace is giuen, and loſt vertue is reſtored in the ſoule: and beautie disfigured by ſinne, returneth againe. This grace

is ſometimes ſo great, that with the fulneſſe of deuotion, which is heere giuen, not only the minde, but the weake body alſo feeleth great increaſe of ſtrength.
               11 Our coldnes and negligence ſurely is much to be bewailed and pitied, that wee are not drawne with greater affection to receiue Chriſt in whom al the hope and merit of thoſe that are to be ſaued doth conſiſt. For he is our ſanctification and redemption: he is the comfort of paſſengers, and the euerlaſting fruition of Saints. It is much therefore to be lamented, that many doe ſo little conſider this comfortable myſtery, which rejoyceth heauen, & preſerueth the whole world. O blindnes and hardneſſe of mans hart, that doth not more deeply weigh the greatnes of ſo vnſpeakable a gift, but rather comes by the daily vſe thereof, to regard it little or nothing.
               
                  12 For if this moſt holy Sacrament ſhould be celebrated in one place only, & conſecrated by one only Prieſt in the world: with how great deſire, doſt thou think, would men be affected to that place: and what eſteeme would they haue of ſuch a Prieſt of almighty God, by whom they might enioy the conſolation of theſe diuine myſteries? But now there are many Prieſts, & Chriſt is offred vp in many places, that ſo the grace and loue of God to man may appeare ſo much the greater, how much the more this ſacred Cōmunion is cōmon through the world. Thāks be vnto thee, good Ieſu, euerlaſting Paſtor of our ſoules, that haſt vouchſafed to refreſh vs poore & baniſhed men, with thy precious Body & Bloud, & to inuite vs to that receiuing of theſe myſteries, with the words of thy owne mouth, ſaying: Come vnto me all ye that labour & are burdened, and I will refreſh you. Mat. 11.
            
            
               
               CHAP. II. That great goodnes and charity of God is beſtowed vpon man in this Sacrament.
               The voice of the Diſciple.
               PReſuming of thy goodneſſe and great mercy (O Lord) being ſick, I approach vnto my Sauiour, hungry and thirſtie to the Fountaine of life, needy to the King of heauen, a ſeruant vnto my Lord, a creature to my Creator, deſolate to my mercifull Comforter. But whence is this to me, that thou vouchſafeſt to come vnto mee? Who am I, that thou ſhouldeſt giue thy ſelfe vnto mee? Luk. 1. How dare a ſinner preſume to appeare before thee? And thou, how doeſt thou vouchſafe to come vnto a ſinner? Thou knoweſt thy ſeruant, and ſeeſt that hee hath no good thing in him, for which thou ſhouldeſt beſtow this benefit vpon him. I confeſſe therefore my vnworthineſſe,

& I acknowledge thy goodnes: I praiſe thy mercy, and giue thee thanks for this thy vnſpeakable charity. For thou doſt this for thine own goodnes, not for any merits of mine, to the end that thy goodnes may be better knowne vnto me, thy charity more abundantly ſhewed, and thy humility more highly commended. Since therefore it is thy pleaſure, and haſt commanded that it ſhould bee ſo, this thy bounty is alſo pleaſing to me, and do wiſh that my offences may be no hinderance.
               2 O moſt ſweet and bountiful Ieſu, how great reuerence and thankes with perpetuall prayſe is due vnto thee for the receiuing of thy ſacred Bodie, whoſe worth and dignitie no man is able to expreſſe! But what ſhall I thinke of at this time, now that I am to receiue this diuine Sacrament, and to approach vnto my Lord, to whome I am not able to

giue due reuerence, and yet I deſire to receiue him deuoutly? What can I thinke better, and more profitable, then to humble my ſelfe wholy before thee, and to exalt thy infinite goodnes aboue me? I praiſe thee my God, and wil exalt thee for euer: and I do deſpiſe, and ſubmit my ſelfe vnto thee, euen into the depth of my vnworthineſſe.
               3 Behold thou art the Holy of Holies, and I the skumme of ſinners! Behold thou boweſt thy ſelf downe vnto mee, who am not worthy ſo much as to looke vp vnto thee! Behold thou commeſt vnto me: it is thy will to be with me, thou inuiteſt me to thy banket. Pſ. 77. Thou wilt giue me the food of heauen, and bread of Angels to eat, which is no other truly then thy ſelf, the liuely bread, that deſcendeſt from heauen, and giueſt life vnto the world. Ioh. 6.
               4 Behold from whence this loue

proceedth! What kind of fauour and benignity is this which ſhineth vpon vs! What thanks and praiſes are due vnto thee for theſe benefits! O how good and profitable was thy counſell, when thou ordainedſt it! How ſweet & pleaſant the banket, when thou gaueſt thy ſelfe to be our food! How wonderfull thy work, O Lord, how powerfull thy vertue, how vnſpeakable thy truth! For thou ſaidſt the word, and all things were made; and this was done which thou commandeſt. Gen. 1. & Pſal. 148.
               5 A thing of great admiration, and worthy of faith, and ſurpaſſing the vnderſtanding of man, that thou, my Lord God, true God and Man, ſhouldeſt be wholy contained vnder a ſmall forme of bread and wine, and ſhouldeſt bee eaten by the receiuer without being conſumed. Thou who art the Lord of all things, and ſtandeſt in need of none, haſt pleaſed to

dwell in vs by meanes of this thy Sacrament: preſerue my heart and body vnſpotted, that with a cheerefull and pure conſcience I may often celebrate thy myſteries, and receiue them to my euerlaſting health, which thou haſt chiefely ordained and inſtituted for thy honor, & perpetuall memory.
               6 Reioyce my ſoule, & giue thanks vnto God for ſo noble a gift, and ſingular comfort left vnto thee in this vale of teares. For as often as thou calleſt to mind this myſtery; and receiueſt the body of Chriſt; ſo often doſt thou worke the worke of thy redemption, and art made partaker of all the merits of Chriſt. For the charity of Chriſt is neuer diminiſhed, and the greatnes of his mercy is neuer leſſened. Therefore thou oughteſt alwaies to diſpoſe thy ſelfe hereunto, by a freſh renuing of thy mind, and to weigh with attentiue conſideration this great myſtery of thy

ſaluation. So great, new, and joyfull it ought to ſeem vnto thee, when thou ſayeſt or heareſt Maſſe, as if the ſame day Chriſt firſt deſcending into the wombe of the Virgin, were become man, or hanging on the Croſſe, did ſuffer and die for the ſaluation of mankind.
            
            
               CHAP. III. That it is profitable to Communicate often.
               BEhold, O Lord, I come vnto thee, that I may be comforted in thy gift, and be delighted in thy holy banquet, which thou, O Lord, haſt prepared in thy ſweetneſſe, for the poore. Pſal. 67. Behold in thee is all whatſoeuer I can, or ought to deſire: thou art my health and my redemption, my hope, and my ſtrength, my honor, and my glory. Make joyfull therefore this day, the ſoule of thy ſeruant, for that I haue lifted it vp to thee, my ſweete Ieſus. Pſalm. 85.

I deſire to receiue thee now with deuotion, and reuerence. I do long to bring thee into my houſe, that with Zachaeus I may deſerue to be bleſſed by thee, and numbred amongſt the children of Abraham. My ſoule thirſteth to receiue thy Body, my heart deſireth to be vnited with thee.
               2 Giue thy ſelfe to me, and it ſufficeth. For beſides thee no comfort is auailable. I cannot be without thee, nor liue without thy viſitation. And therfore I muſt often come vnto thee, and receiue thee as the only remedy of my health, leſt perhaps I faint in the way, if I be depriued of thy heauenly food. For ſo, moſt mercifull Ieſus, thou once didſt ſay, preaching to the people, & curing ſundry diſeaſes: I will not ſend them home faſting, leſt they faint by the way. Matth. 15. Mat. 8. Deale thou therefore in like manner now with mee, who haſt vouchſafed to leaue thy ſelfe in the

Sacrament for the comfort of the faithfull. For thou art the ſweet refection of the ſoule, and he that eateth thee worthily, ſhall be partaker, and heire of euerlaſting glory. It is neceſſary for me, that do ſo often fall and ſinne, ſo quickly waxe dul and faint, that by often prayers and confeſſion, and receiuing of thy ſacred body, I renue, clenſe, and inflame my ſelfe, leſt perhaps by long abſtaining I fall from my holy purpoſe.
               3 For man is prone vnto euil from his youth, and vnleſſe this diuine remedy help him, he quickly ſlideth to worſe. Gen. 8. This holy Communion therefore draweth backe from euill, and comforteth in good. For if I be now ſo often ſlack and negligent when I communicate, or ſay Maſſe, what would become of me, if I receiued not this remedy, and ſought not after ſo great a helpe? Though euery day I be not fit, nor well prepared

to ſay Maſſe, I will endeauour notwithſtanding at conuenient times to receiue the Diuine Myſteries, and make my ſelfe partaker of ſo great a grace. For this is the onely chiefe comfort of a faithfull ſoule, whileſt ſhe wandreth from thee in this mortall body, that being mindfull of her God, ſhee often receiue her Beloued with a deuout minde.
               4 O wonderfull benignity of thy mercy towards vs, that thou, Lord God, the Creator and giuer of life to all ſpirits, doſt vouchſafe to come vnto a poore ſoule, and with thy whole Godhead and humanity to repleniſh her hunger. O happy mind and bleſſed ſoule, that deſerueth to receiue thee, her Lord God, with deuout affection, and in receiuing of thee, to be filled with ſpirituall joy! O how great a Lord doth ſhee entertaine! How beloued a gueſt doth ſhee harbour! How pleaſant a companion

doth ſhee receiue! How faithfull a friend doth ſhee accept! How beautifull and noble a Spouſe doth ſhee embrace! She embraceth him who is to be loued aboue al that is beloued, and aboue al things that may be deſired. Let Heauen and Earth and all their beauty be ſilent in thy preſence. For what beauty and praiſe ſoeuer they haue, it is receiued from thy bounty, and ſhal not equal the beauty of thy name, of whoſe wiſedome there is no end. Pſal. 146.
            
            
               CHAP. IV. That many benefits are beſtowed vpon them that Communicate deuoutly.
               The voice of the Diſciple.
               MY Lord God, preuent thy ſeruant in the bleſſings of thy ſweetneſſe, that I may deſerue to approach worthily and deuoutly to thy holy Sacrament: ſtirre vp my heart vnto thee, and deliuer me from

all heauines & ſlouth: Pſ. 20. viſit me with thy comfort, that I may taſte in ſpirit thy ſweetnes, which plentifully lieth hid in this Sacramēt, as a foū
                  taine. Pſ. 105. Giue light alſo to mine eyes to behold ſo great a myſtery, and ſtrengthen me to beleeue it with vndoubted faith. For it is thy worke, and not mans power, thy ſacred inſtitution, not mans inuention. For no man is of himſelfe able to comprehend and vnderſtand theſe things, which ſurpaſſe the vnderſtanding euen of Angels. What therefore ſhall I vnworthy ſinner, earth and aſhes, be able to ſearch and comprehend of ſo high and ſacred a myſtery?
               2 O Lord, in ſinceritie of heart, with a good and firme faith, and at thy commandement, I come vnto thee with hope and reuerence, and do verily beleeue, that thou art heere preſent in the Sacrament, God and Man. Thy holy pleaſure is, that I receiue

thee, & by charity do vnite my ſelf vnto thee. Wherfore I do recurre vnto thy Clemencie, and doe craue ſpeciall grace, that I may wholy melt in thee, and abound with loue, and hereafter neuer admit any externall comfort. For this moſt high and worthy Sacrament is the health of the ſoule and body, the remedy of al ſpirituall ſicknes: by it my vices are cured, my paſſions bridled, temptations ouercome or weakned, greater grace infuſed, vertue increaſed, faith confirmed, hope ſtrengthened, and charity inflamed and enlarged.
               3 For thou haſt beſtowed, and ſtill oftentimes doſt beſtow many benefits in this Sacrament vpon thy beloued that receiue it deuoutly, my God the protector of my ſoul, the ſtrēgthner of humane frailty, and the giuer of all inward comfort. Thou imparteſt vnto them much comfort againſt ſundry tribulations, and lifteſt them

vp from the depth of their own baſeneſſe, to the hope of thy protection, and doſt inwardly refreſh & illuſtrat them with a certaine new grace, in ſuch ſort, that they who before Communion felt themſelues heauy & indiſpoſed, afterwards being ſtrēgthened with heauenly meat and drinke, do find in themſelues a great change to the better: which thou doſt ſo diſpoſe to thy Elect, that they may truly acknowledge, and patiently proue how great their owne infirmity is, and what benefit and grace they receiue from thee. For they of themſelues are cold, dull, and vndeuout; but by thee they are made feruent, agile, and full of deuotion. For who is there, that approaching humbly vnto the Fountain of ſweetnes, doth not carry away from thence at leaſt ſome little ſweetnes? Or who ſtanding by a great fire, receiueth not ſome ſmall heat thereby? Thou art a

Fountaine alwayes full, and ouerflowing, a fire euer burning, and neuer decaying. Eſa. 12. Leuit. 6.
               4 Wherefore if I cannot draw at the full out of this Fountaine, nor drinke my fill, I will notwithſtanding ſet my lips to the mouth of this heauenly conduite, that I may draw from thence at leaſt ſome ſmall drop to refreſh my thirſt, to the end I wither not wholy away and periſh. And though I be not altogether celeſtial, nor ſo inflamed as the Cherubims and Seraphims, notwithſtanding I will endeauour to apply my ſelfe to deuotion, and diſpoſe my heart to obtaine ſome ſmall ſparke of diuine fire by humbly receiuing of this Life-giuing Sacrament. And whatſoeuer is hereunto wanting in mee, good Ieſu, moſt bleſſed Sauiour, doe thou ſupply for mee, moſt benigne and gratious Lord, who haſt vouchſafed to call vs vnto thee, ſaying:

Come vnto me all yee that labour and are burdened, and I will refreſh you. Mat. 11.
               5 I labour in the ſweate of my browes, I am vexed with griefe of heart, I am burdened with ſinnes, I am troubled with temptations, I am intangled and oppreſſed with many euill paſſions, and there is none to helpe me, none to deliuer and ſaue me, but thou, Lord God, my Sauiour, to whome I commit my ſelfe, and all mine, that thou mayeſt keepe me, and bring me to life euerlaſting. Receiue me to the honor and glory of thy name, who haſt prepared thy Body and Bloud to be my meat and my drinke. Gran
                     •
                  , Lord God, my Sauiour, that by frequenting thy myſteries, my zeale and deuotion may encreaſe.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V. Of the dignitie of this Sacrament, and Prieſtly function.
               The voice of Chriſt.
               IF thou hadſt angelicall purity, and the ſanctity of Saint Iohn Baptiſt, thou wert not worthy to receiue, nor handle this Sacrament. Mat. 11. For it is not within the compaſſe of the deſerts of men, that man ſhould conſecrate and handle the ſacrament of Chriſt, & receiue for food the bread of Angels. A great myſtery, & great is the dignity of Prieſts, to whom is granted that, which is not permitted to the Angels. Pſal. 77. For Prieſts only inſtituted in the Church, haue power to celebrate, and conſecrate the Body of Chriſt. The Prieſt is the Miniſter of God, vſing the words of God, by Gods commandement and appointment; but God is there the principall Actor, and inuiſible worker,

to whome is ſubiect all that he pleaſeth, and all that hee commandeth, doth obey. Gen. 1. Pſal. 148. Rom. 9.
               2 Thou oughteſt therfore to giue more credit to God Almightie in this moſt excellent Sacrament, then to thine owne ſenſe, or to any viſible ſigne. And therefore thou art to come vnto this Myſterie with feare and reuerence. Conſider attentiuely with thy ſelfe, what that is, whereof the Miniſtrie is deliuered vnto thee by the impoſition of hands of the Biſhop. Behold thou art made a Prieſt, and conſecrated to ſay Maſſe: ſee now that in due time thou offer Sacrifice vnto God faithfully and deuoutly, and carry thy ſelfe ſo, as thou maiſt be without reproofe. 1. Tim. 4. Thou haſt not lightned thy burthen, but art now bound with a ſtraiter band of diſcipline, and art obliged to a more perfect degree of ſanctitie.

A Prieſt ought to be adorned with al kind of vertues, and to giue example of good life to others. His conuerſation ſhould not bee according to the ordinary and common proceedings of men, but like to the Angels in heauen, or to perfect men on earth. Philip. 3.
               3 A Prieſt clothed in ſacred garments is the Vicegerent of Chriſt, to pray humbly, and with a proſtrate mind vnto God for himſelfe and the whole people. Heb. 5. He hath before and behind the ſigne of the Croſſe of our Lord, to the end he may euer remember the Paſſion of Chriſt: hee beareth the Croſſe before him in the Veſtement, that hee may diligently behold the foote-ſteps of Chriſt, and feruently endeauour to follow them. Hee is behinde marked with the Croſſe, that he may patiently ſuffer for God, whatſoeuer aduerſities ſhall bee laid vpon him for others.

He beareth the croſſe before, that he may lament his owne ſinnes, and the ſame hee hath alſo behind, that hee may with a compaſſionate heart bewaile the offences of others, & know that he is placed as a mediatour betweene God and the ſinner. Neither ought he to ceaſe from prayer & holy oblation, till he deſerue to obtaine grace & mercy. When a Prieſt doth celebrate, he honoreth God, reioyceth the Angels, edifieth the Church, helpeth the liuing, giueth reſt to the dead, and maketh himſelfe partaker of all good deeds.
            
            
               CHAP. VI. An Interrogation of the exerciſe before Communion.
               The voice of the Diſciple.
               WHen I weigh thy greatneſſe, O Lord, and my vnworthineſſe, I tremble, and am confounded in my ſelfe. For if I come not vnto thee, I

fly from life, and if I vnworthily intrude my ſelfe, I incurre thy diſpleaſure. What therefore ſhall I do, my God, my helper, and my counſeller in neceſſitie?
               2 Teach mee the right way, appoint me ſome briefe exerciſe ſutable to this holy myſtery of ſacred Communion. For it is good for me to know, how I ſhould reuerently and deuoutly prepare my heart vnto thee, for the profitable receiuing of thy Sacrament, or for the celebrating of ſo great and diuine a Sacrifice.
            
            
               CHAP. VII. Of the diſcuſsing of our owne conſcience, and purpoſe of amendment.
               The voice of the Beloued.
               ABoue al things, the Prieſt of God ought to come to celebrate, handle, and receiue this Sacrament with great humility of hart, and lowly reuerence, with a full faith, and a godly

deſire of the honour of the diuine Maieſty. Examine diligently thy cō
                  ſcience, and to thy power, purge and clenſe it with true contrition, and humble confeſſion: ſo as there may be nothing in thee, that may be burdēſome vnto thee, or that may breed thee remorſe of conſcience, and hinder thy free acceſſe to theſe heauenly myſteries. Repent thee of all thy ſinnes in generall, and in particuler bewaile thy daily offences. And if thou haſt time, confeſſe vnto God in the ſecret of thy heart, all the miſeries of thy diſordered paſſions.
               2 Lament and grieue, that thou art yet ſo ſubiect to ſenſuality, and ſo addicted to the world, ſo vnmortified in thy paſſions, ſo full of the motions of concupiſcence, ſo vnwatchfull ouer thy outward ſenſes, ſo often intangled with many vaine fantaſies ſo vehemently inclined to outward things, ſo negligent in the

interiour, ſo prone to laughter and immodeſty, ſo hard to teares and compunction, ſo prompt to eaſe and pleaſures of the fleſh, ſo dul to auſterity and feruour, ſo curious to heare newes and ſee vaine ſights, ſo ſlacke to imbrace that which tends to thine owne humiliation and contempt, ſo couetous of abundance, ſo niggardly giuing, ſo faſt in keeping, ſo inconſiderate in ſpeech, ſo vnbridled to ſilence, ſo looſe in manners, ſo outragious in deedes, ſo greedie to meate, ſo deafe to the word of God, ſo haſty to reſt, ſo ſlow to labour, ſo watchfull to tales, ſo drowſie to watch in the ſeruice of God, ſo haſty to the end therof, ſo inconſtant in attention, ſo negligent in ſaying thy office, ſo vndeuout in ſaying Maſſe, ſo dry in receiuing, ſo quickely diſtracted, ſo ſeldome wholy recollected, ſo ſodainly moued to anger, ſo apt to take diſpleaſure againſt another, ſo

prone to judge, ſo ſeuere to reprehend, ſo joyful in proſperity, ſo weak in aduerſitie, ſo often purpoſing much good, and performing little.
               3 Theſe and other thy defects confeſſed, & bewailed with ſorrow, and great diſlike of thine owne infirmity, make a firme purpoſe alwayes to amend thy ſelfe, and to goe forwards in vertue. Then with full reſignation, and with thy whole will offer thy ſelfe vp to the honor of my name, a perpetuall ſacrifice in the altar of thy heart, faithfully committing thy body and ſoule vnto mee, that thou mayeſt ſo alſo deſerue to come worthily to offer ſacrifice vnto God, and to receiue profitably the Sacrament of my body.
               4 For there is no oblation more worthy, nor ſatisfaction greater, for the waſhing away of ſins, then to offer vp our ſelues vnto God purely and wholy with the oblation of the

Body of Chriſt in the Maſſe, and in Communion. And when a man ſhall haue done what lieth in him, & ſhall be truly penitent, As I liue, ſaith our Lord, who will not the death of a ſinner, but rather that he be conuerted and liue, I will not remember his ſinnes any more, but they ſhall be all forgiuen him, and fully pardoned. Ezec. 18.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII. Of the Oblation of Chriſt on the Croſſe, and reſignation of our ſelues.
               The voice of the Beloued.
               AS I willingly offered vp my ſelfe vnto God my Father, with my hands ſtretched forth on the Croſſe, and my body naked for thy ſins, ſo that nothing remained in mee that was not turned into a ſacrifice, for the appeaſing of the diuine wrath: ſo oughteſt thou alſo to offer vp thy ſelf willingly vnto me daily in the Maſſe,

as a pure and holy oblation, with thy whole force, and deſire, in as heartie a manner as thou canſt. What doe I require of thee more, then that thou reſigne thy ſelfe wholy vnto mee? Prou. 23. Whatſoeuer thou giueſt beſides thy ſelfe, is of little account in my ſight, for I ſeeke not thy gift, but thee.
               2 As it would not ſuffice thee to haue all things whatſoeuer beſides me; ſo neither can it pleaſe mee, whatſoeuer thou giueſt, if thou offereſt not vp thy ſelfe. Offer thy ſelfe vnto me, and giue thy ſelfe, all that thou art, for God, and thy offering ſhall be gratefull. Behold I offered vp my ſelfe wholy vnto my Father for thee, and gaue my whole body and bloud for thy food, that I might be wholy thine, and thou remaine mine. But if thou abideſt in thy ſelfe, and doeſt not offer thy ſelfe vp freely vnto my will, thy oblation is not

entire, neither ſhall the vnion betweene vs be perfect. Therefore a free offering vp of thy ſelfe into the hands of God, ought to goe before all thy actions, if thou wilt obtaine freedome and grace. For this cauſe ſo few become inwardly illuminated, and enjoy true liberty of heart, for that they do not reſolue wholy to deny themſelues. My ſaying is vndoubtedly true: Vnleſſe one forſake all, hee cannot bee my Diſciple. Ioh. 14. If thou therefore wiſh to bee mine, offer vp thy ſelfe vnto mee with thy whole deſires.
            
            
               CHAP. IX. That we ought to offer vp our ſelues, and all that is ours vnto God, and to pray for all.
               The voice of the Diſciple.
               THine, O Lord, are all things that are in heauen & in earth. Pſ. 23. I deſire to offer vp my ſelf vnto thee is a free oblation, and to remaine

alwaies thine. O Lord, in ſincerity of my hart, I offer my ſelf vnto thee this day, in ſacrifice of perpetuall praiſe, to be thy ſeruant for euer. Receiue mee with this holy oblation of thy precious body, which in the preſence of the Angels inuiſibly attending heere vpon thee, I offer vp this day vnto thee, that it may be to the health of my ſoule, and the ſaluation of all thy people.
               2 I offer vnto thee, O Lord, al my ſins and offences, which I haue committed in the ſight of thee, and thy holy Angels, from the day wherein I firſt could ſin, to this houre, vpon thy holy Altar, that thou maiſt conſume and burne them all with the fire of thy charity, & waſh out all the ſtains of my ſins, and clenſe my conſcience from all offence, and reſtore to me againe thy grace, which I loſt by ſin, forgiuing me all my offences, and receiuing me mercifvlly in the kiſſe of peace.
               
                  3 What can I do for my ſins, but humbly confeſſe and bewaile them, and intreat alwaies for mercy without intermiſſion? Pſal. 31. I beſeech thee, heare me in thy abundant mercy, whē I ſtand before thee my God. All my ſins are very diſpleaſing vnto me; I will neuer commit them any more, but I am ſory, and will be ſory for them as long as I liue, & am ready to do penance, and to ſatisfie for them to the vttermoſt of my power. Forgiue me, O God, forgiue mee my ſinnes, for thy holy names ſake: ſaue my ſoule, which 
                     ••
                  ou haſt redeemed with thy precious bloud. Behold I commit my ſelfe vnto thy mercy, I reſigne my ſelfe ouer into thy hands. Do with me according to thy goodneſſe, not according to my wickednes, and manifold iniquities.
               4 I offer vp alſo vnto thee, all whatſoeuer is good in me, although it be very little and imperfect, that

thou mayeſt amend and ſanctifie it, that thou mayeſt make it gratefull and acceptable vnto thee, and alwaies perfect more and more that which thou haſt begunne, and bring me alſo, who am the ſlouthfull and vnprofitable creature, to a good and bleſſed end.
               5 I offer vp alſo vnto thee all the godly deſires of deuout perſons, the neceſſities of my parents and friends, my brethren and ſiſters, and of all thoſe that are deare vnto me, and that haue done good either to my ſelfe or others for thy loue, and that haue deſired mee to ſay Maſſe and pray for them, and all theirs, whether they be yet aliue, or already dead: that they all may receiue the help of thy grace and comfort, protection from dangers, deliuery from paine, and being freed from all euils, may joyfully giue worthy thankes to thee.
               6 I offer vp alſo vnto thee my

prayers, and ſacrifices, eſpecially for them who haue in any thing wronged, grieued, or ſlaundered mee, or haue done mee any domage or diſpleaſure, and for thoſe alſo, whome I haue at any time grieued, troubled, and ſcandalized by words, or deeds, wittingly, or at vnawares: that it may pleaſe thee to forgiue vs all our ſinnes and offences, one againſt the other. Take, O Lord, from our hearts all jealouſie, all indignation, wrath and contention, and whatſoeuer may hurt Charitie, and weaken brotherly loue. Haue mercie, O Lord, haue mercie on thoſe, that craue thy mercie: giue grace vnto them, that ſtand in need thereof, and grant that wee may bee worthy to enioy thy grace, and attaine to life euerlaſting, Amen.
            
            
               
               CHAP. X. That the holy Communion is not lightly to be forborne.
               The voice of the Beloued.
               THou oughteſt often to haue recourſe to the Fountaine of grace, and of diuine mercy, to the Fountaine of goodneſſe, and of all piety, that thou mayeſt bee cured of thy ſinnes and paſſions, and deſerue to be made more ſtrong and vigilant againſt all temptations and deceits of the Diuell. The enemie knowing the greateſt profit, and remedy to conſiſt in the holy Communion, endeauoureth by all meanes and occaſions to withdraw and hinder faithful and deuout perſons from it.
               2 Some when they purpoſe to receiue the ſacred Communion, ſuffer greateſt aſſaults of the Diuell. For that wicked ſpirit (as is written in Iob) commeth amongſt the Sonnes

of God, to trouble them with his accuſtomed malice and impiety, or to make them ouer fearefull and perplexed, that ſo he may diminiſh their affection, or by his ſubtile aſſaults, take away their faith, to the end they may either altogether abſtaine from this diuine foode, or at leaſt come vnto it with leſſe deuotion. But there is no heed to be taken of his frauds and malicious ſuggeſtions, be they neuer ſo filthy and hideous, but all is to be turned backe vpon his owne head. Wee ought to contemne and ſcorne him miſerable wretch, and not to omit the ſacred Communion for his aſſaults, and the troubles which he raiſeth.
               3 Oftentimes alſo an exceſſiue care for the obtaining of deuotion, and a certaine anxiety for the making of our Confeſſion hindreth vs. Follow in theſe occaſions the counſell of the wiſe, and put away all

anxiety and ſcruple, for it hindereth the grace of God, and ouerthroweth deuotion. Omit not (for euery vexation of the minde which happeneth) to receiue this holy Sacrament, but goe preſently to confeſſion, and willingly forgiue others, whatſoeuer offences they haue done againſt thee: and if thou haſt offended any, humbly craue pardon, and God will willingly forgiue thee.
               4 What auaileth it to delay confeſſion, and to defer receiuing? Purge thy ſelfe with ſpeed, ſpit out the venom preſently, make haſt to take a remedy, and thou ſhalt find it better, then if thou deferredſt it long. If thou omitteſt it to day for this cauſe, perhaps to morrow ſome greater wil fall out, and ſo thou mayeſt bee hindred a long time from theſe diuine Myſteries, and become more vnfit. Stirre vp thy ſelfe, and ſhake off all heauines and ſlouth, with the greateſt

force and ſpeed thou canſt. For it profiteth nothing to continue long in diſquietnes and trouble of minde, and for daily incurring impediments to withdraw thy ſelfe from the Sacraments. Yea it hurteth very much to defer Communion long, for it is wont to breed a great and dangerous dulnes. Alas, ſome cold and diſſolute people, doe willingly delay their confeſſion, and do therefore defer the ſacred Communion, leſt they ſhould bee bound to greater watch ouer themſelues.
               5 O how little charity and weak deuotion haue they, that ſo eaſily omit the receiuing of theſe holy myſteries! How happy is he, and gratefull to God, who ordereth ſo his life, and keepeth his conſcience in ſuch puritie, that hee may bee readie and fit to communicate euery day, if it were conuenient, and might be done without note. If any one ſometimes

abſtaine of humility, or by reaſon of ſome lawfull impediment, he is to be commended for the reuerence which therein he ſheweth. But if it proceedeth of coldnes, he muſt ſtirre himſelfe vp, and doe what lieth in him, and God will proſper his deſire, for the good will he hath to do it, which God doth chiefely reſpect.
               6 And when any lawfull hinderance doth happen, he muſt alwayes haue yet a good will, and louing deſire to communicate, and ſo ſhall hee not loſe the fruit of the Sacrament. For a deuout perſon may euery day and houre profitably and without let, receiue Chriſt ſpiritually: and yet on certaine daies, and at time appointed, he ought to receiue Sacramentally with a reuerend deſire, the Bodie of his Redeemer, and rather ſeeke the honour and glory of God, then his owne comfort. For he communicateth myſtically, and is inuiſibly

fed, as often as he deuoutly calleth to minde the myſterie of the Incarnation, and the Paſſion of Chriſt, and is inflamed with his loue. 1. Cor. 11.
               7 He that prepareth not himſelf, but when a Feaſt draweth neere, and when cuſtome compelleth him therunto, ſhal often be vnprepared. Bleſſed is he that offereth himſelfe vp as an Holocauſt and burnt offering to our Lord, as often as hee doth celebrate or communicate. Bee not too long nor too ſhort in ſaying Maſſe, but keepe the accuſtomed manner of thoſe, with whom thou liueſt. Thou oughteſt not to be tedious and troubleſome to others, but to obſerue the common courſe according to the appointment of thy Superiours: and rather frame thy ſelfe to the profit of others, then to thine owne deuotion or deſire.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI. That the Body of Chriſt, and the holy Scripture are moſt neceſſary vnto a faithfull ſoule.
               The voice of the Diſciple.
               O Moſt ſweet Lord Ieſu, how great is the delight of a deuout ſoule that feaſteth with thee in thy banquet, where there is no other meat offred to be eaten, but thy ſelfe her only beloued, and moſt to be deſired aboue al the deſires of her hart. And verily it would be a great comfort vnto mee, to powre out teares from the bottome of my heart in thy preſence, and with deuout Magdalen, to waſh thy feet with the teares of mine eyes. Luk. 7. But where is this deuotion? Where is ſo plentifull ſhedding of holy teares? Surely in the ſight of thee and thy holy Angels, my whole heart ſhould be inflamed, and diſſolue into teares for

joy. For I enioy thee in the Sacrament really preſent, although hidden vnder another forme.
               2 For to behold thee in thine owne diuine brightneſſe, mine eyes would not be able to endure it, neither could the whole world ſtand in the clearenes of the glory of thy Maieſty. Thou therefore prouideſt for my weakneſſe, in that thou couereſt thy ſelfe vnder the Sacrament. I doe really enioy and adore him, whome the Angels adore in heauen; but I as yet for the time, in faith, they in his proper forme, and without ſhadow. I ought to be contented with the light of true faith, and to walke therein, vntill the day of euerlaſting brightnes breake forth, and the ſhadowes of figures paſſe away. But when that ſhall come which is perfect, the vſe of Sacraments ſhal ceaſe. 1. Cor. 13. For the bleſſed in heauenly glory need not the remedie

of Sacraments, who rejoyce without end in the preſence of God, beholding his glory face to face, and being transformed by his brightneſſe into the brightneſſe of the incomprehenſible Deitie, they taſte the word of God made fleſh, as he was from the beginning, and as hee remaineth for euer.
               3 Whileſt I remember theſe thy wonderfull works, all ſpirituall comfort whatſoeuer becommeth very tedious vnto me: for that as long as I behold not my Lord openly in his glory, I make no account of whatſoeuer I ſee or heare in this life. Thou art my witneſſe, O God, that nothing can confort mee, no creature giue mee reſt, but thou, my God, whom I deſire to behold euerlaſtingly. But this is not poſſible whileſt I remaine in this mortall life. Therfore I muſt frame my ſelfe to much patience, and ſubmit my ſelfe to thee in

all my deſires. For thy Saints alſo, O Lord, who now rejoyce with thee in the Kingdome of heauen, whilſt they liued expected in faith and great patience the comming of thy glory. Heb. 10. & 11. What they beleeued, I beleeue; what they hoped for, I expect; whither they are come, I truſt I ſhall come by thy grace. In the meane time I will goe forward in faith, ſtrengthened by the examples of the Saints. I haue alſo deuout bookes for my comfort, and for the guide of my life, and aboue all theſe, thy moſt holy Body for a ſingular remedie and refuge.
               4 For I perceiue two things to be chiefely neceſſarie for me in this life, without which this miſerable life would bee inſupportable vnto mee. Whilſt I am kept in the priſon of this body, I acknowledge my ſelfe to ſtand in need of two things, to wit, food and light. Thou haſt therefore

giuen vnto me, weake creature, thy ſacred Body, for the refection of my ſoule & body, Ioh. 6. and haſt ſet thy word as a light vnto my feet. Pſ. 118. without theſe two I could not well liue. For the word of God is the light of the ſoule, and thy Sacrament the bread of life. Theſe alſo may be called the two Tables ſet on the one ſide and the other, in the ſtore-houſe of the holy Church. Pſal. 22. Heb. 9. and 13. One is the Table of the holy Altar, containing the Sacred bread, that is, the precious Body of Chriſt: the other is of the diuine law, containing holy doctrine, teaching true faith, & certainly leading to the part of the Temple within the veile, where are the Holy of Holies. Thankes be vnto thee▪ Lord Ieſu, light of euerlaſting light, for thy table of holy doctrine, at which thou ſerueſt vs by thy ſeruants, the Prophets and Apoſtles, and other Doctors.
               
                  5 Thanks be vnto thee Creator & Redeemer of man, who to manifeſt thy charity to the whole world, haſt prepared a great Supper, Luk. 14. wherin thou haſt offred to be eaten, not the myſticall Lambe, but thine owne moſt ſacred Body and Bloud, Ioh. 6. reioycing all the faithful with thy holy banquet, and repleniſhing them to the full with thy heauenly Cup, Pſal. 22. in which are all the delights of heauen, and the holy Angels doe feaſt with vs, but with a more happy ſweetneſſe. Wiſd. 16.
               6 O how great and honorable is the office of Prieſts, to whom it is granted with ſacred words to conſecrate the Lord of Maieſtie, with their lippes to bleſſe him, with their hands to hold him, with their owne mouth to receiue him, and to adminiſter him to others! O how cleane ought to be thoſe hands! How pure that mouth! How holy the bodie!

How vnſpotted the heart of the Prieſt, into whom the Author of purity ſo often entreth! Nothing but holy, no word but chaſte and profitable ought to proceed from the mouth of the Prieſt, which ſo often receiueth the Sacrament of Chriſt.
               7 Simple and chaſte ought to be the eyes, that are wont to behold the body of Chriſt, the hands pure and lifted vp to heauen, that vſe to handle the Creator of heauen and earth. Vnto the Prieſts eſpecially it is ſaid in the Law: Bee yet holy, for that I your Lord God am holy. Leuit. 19. and 20.
               8 Aſſiſt vs Almighty God with thy grace, that we, who haue vndertaken the office of Prieſthood, may ſerue thee worthily and deuoutly in all purity, and with a ſincere conſcience. And if wee cannot liue in ſo great innocency as we ought to do, graunt vs notwithſtanding in due

manner to bewaile the ſinnes which we haue committed, and in the ſpirit of humility, and ſincere intention to ſerue thee hereafter with more feruour.
            
            
               CHAP. XII. That he that is to Communicate, ought to prepare himſelfe with great diligence.
               The voice of the Beloued.
               I Am the louer of purity, and the giuer of all ſanctitie, I ſeek a pure heart, and there is the place of my reſt. Pſal. 23. & Mat. 5. Make readie and adorne for me a great chamber, and I will make with thee the Paſch with my Diſciples. Mark. 14. Luk. 22. If thou wilt haue me come vnto thee, and remaine with thee, purge the old leuen, and make cleane the dwelling of thy heart: 1. Cor. 5. ſhut out the whole world, and all tumult of vices: ſit like a ſparow ſolitary vpon the houſe top, and thinke of thy

offences in the bitterneſſe of thy ſoule. For euery louer prepareth the beſt and faireſt roome for his beloued, and herein is knowne the affection of him that entertaineth his beloued.
               2 Know thou notwithſtanding that the worth of no action of thine, is able to make this preparation ſufficient, although thou ſhouldeſt prepare thy ſelfe a whole yeare together, and thinke on nothing elſe: but of my mercy and grace onely, thou art ſuffred to come to my Table, like a begger inuited to dinner to a rich man, who hath nothing elſe to returne him for his benefits, but to humble himſelfe, and giue him thanks. Do what lieth in thee, and do it diligently, not for cuſtome, nor for neceſſity, but with feare and reuerence, and harty affection receiue the Body of thy beloued Lord and God, who vouchſafeth to come vnto thee.

I am he that haue called thee, I haue commanded it to be done, I will ſupply what is wanting in thee, come and receiue me.
               3 When I beſtow the grace of deuotion on thee, giue thankes to God, for it is giuen thee, not for that thou deſerueſt it, but becauſe I haue mercy on thee. If thou haue it not, but rathere feele thy ſelfe dry, continue in prayer, ſigh and knocke, and giue not ouer vntill thou deſerue to receiue ſome crumme or droppe of grace. Thou haſt need of me, not I of thee, neither commeſt thou to ſanctifie me, but I come to ſanctifie and make thee better. Thou commeſt, that thou mayeſt bee ſanctified by me, and vnited vnto mee, that thou mayeſt receiue new grace, and bee ſtirred vp againe to amendment. Neglect not this grace, but prepare thy heart with all diligence, and receiue thy beloued into thy ſoule.
               
                  4 But thou oughteſt not only to prepare thy ſelfe to deuotion before Communion, but carefully alſo to conſerue thy ſelfe therein, after thou haſt receiued the Sacrament. Neither is the carefull guard of thy ſelf after, leſſe exacted, then deuout preparation before. For a good guard afterwards is the beſt preparation thou canſt make for the obtaining againe of greater grace, becauſe that mans minde becommeth very indiſpoſed, if hee preſently powre himſelfe out to outward comforts. Beware of much talke, remaine in ſome ſecret place, and enjoy thy God. For thou haſt him whome all the world cannot take from thee. I am hee, to whom thou oughteſt wholy to giue thy ſelfe, that ſo thou mayeſt liue hereafter, not in thy ſelfe, but in me, without all care.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIII. That a deuout ſoule ought to deſire with her whole heart to be vnited vnto Chriſt in the Sacrament.
               The voice of the Diſciple.
               HOw may I obtaine this, O Lord, that I may finde thee alone, and open my whole heart vnto thee, and enjoy thee as my ſoule deſireth? And that no man may looke vpon me, nor any creature mone me or reſpect me, but thou alone mayeſt ſpeake vnto me, and I to thee, as the Beloued is wont to ſpeake to his Beloued, and a friend to banquet with his friend. Exod. 33. & Cant. 8. This I pray for, this I deſire, that I may be wholy vnited vnto thee, and may withdraw my heart from all created things, and more and more, by ſacred Communion and often celebrating, learne to taſte of heauenly and euerlaſting ſweetnes. O Lord God,

when ſhall I bee wholy vnited and abſorpt by thee, and altogether forgetfull of my ſelfe! Thou in me, and I in thee, and ſo grant vs both to continue in one. Ioh. 15.
               2 Thou art my Beloued, the choiceſt amongſt thouſands, in whome my ſoule hath taken pleaſure to dwel all the daies of her life. Cant. 5. Thou art my Peace-maker, in whome is greateſt peace, and true reſt, without whom is labour and ſorrow, and infinit miſery. Thou art a hidden God, and thy counſell is not with the wicked, but thy ſpeech is with the humble and ſimple of heart. Prou. 3. O Lord, how ſweet is thy Spirit, who to the end thou mighteſt ſhew thy ſweeteneſſe towards thy children, vouchſafeſt to feede them with the moſt delightſome bread which deſcendeth from heauen, and is full of all ſweetnes. Wiſd. 12. Surely there is no other Nation ſo great, that hath

Gods approching vnto them, as thou our God art preſent to all thy faithfull, vnto whom for their daily comfort, and for the lifting vp of their hearts to heauen, thou giueſt thy ſelf to be eaten and enioyed. Deut. 4.
               3 For what other Nation is there ſo famous, as the Chriſtian people? Or what creature vnder heauen ſo beloued, as a deuout ſoule, to whom God himſelfe commeth to feed her with his glorious fleſh? O vnſpeakable grace! O admirable fauour! O infinit loue, ſingularly beſtowed vpon man! But what ſhall I giue vnto our Lord in returne of this grace, for ſo ſingular a charitie? Pſal. 115. There is no other thing more gratefull that I am able to giue, then to beſtow my heart wholy on my God, and to vnite it perfectly vnto him. Then ſhall all my bowels reioyce, when my ſoule ſhall be perfectly vnited vnto God. Then hee will ſay

vnto me: if thou wilt be with me, I will bee with thee. And I will anſwere him: Vouchſafe, O Lord, to remaine with me, and I will be with thee: This is my whole deſire, that my heart be vnited vnto thee.
            
            
               CHAP. XIV. Of the feruent deſire of ſome deuout perſons to receiue the Body of Chriſt.
               The voice of the Diſciple.
               O How great is the ſtore of thy ſweeteneſſe, O Lord, which thou haſt hidden for them that feare thee! Pſalm. 30. When I remember ſome deuout perſons, who come vnto thy Sacrament, O Lord, with great deuotion and affection, I am oftentimes confounded, and bluſh within my ſelfe, that I come ſo negligently and coldly to thy Altar, to the Table of holy Communion, that I remaine ſo drie, and without ſpirituall motion or feeling, that

I am not wholy inflamed in thy preſence, my God, nor ſo earneſtly drawne and moued, as many deuout perſons haue beene, who out of a vehement deſire of receiuing, and a feeling affection of heart, could not containe themſelues from weeping, but with the deſire both of ſoule and body, they earneſtly longed after thee, O God, the liuely Fountaine, being not otherwiſe able to temper nor ſatisfie their hunger, but by receiuing thy Body with all joy and ſpirituall greedineſſe.
               2 O moſt ardent faith of thoſe perſons, a probable argument of thy ſacred preſence. For theſe truely know their Lord in the breaking of bread, whoſe heart burneth ſo within them, whileſt thou, O bleſſed Ieſu, walkeſt with them. Luk. 24. Such deſire and deuotion, ſo vehement loue and feruencie, is oftentimes far off from me. Be mercifull vnto me,

good Ieſu. ſweet and benigne Lord, and grant me, thy poore needy creature, to feele ſometimes at leaſt, in this holy Sacrament, a little cordiall deſire of thy loue, that my faith may be more ſtrengthened, my hope in thy goodnes encreaſed, and that my charity once perfectly inflamed, after the taſting of heauenly Manna, may neuer decay.
               3 Thy mercy, O Lord, is able to giue me the grace I deſire, and to viſit me in thy bounteous clemencie with the ſpirit of feruour, when it ſhall pleaſe thee. For although I burne not with ſo great deſire as thoſe that are ſo eſpecially deuoted vnto thee: yet notwithſtanding by thy grace, I deſire to haue this great inflamed deſire, praying and crauing that I may participate with all ſuch thy feruent louers, and be numbered among them in their holy company.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV. That the grace of deuotion is obtained by humilitie and deniall of our ſelues.
               The voice of the Beloued.
               THou oughteſt to ſeeke the grace of deuotion inſtantly, to aske it earneſtly, to expect it patiently and conſidently, to receiue it joyfully, to keep it humbly, to worke with it diligently, and to commit the time and manner of this heauenly viſitation to God, vntill it ſhall be his pleaſure to come. Thou oughteſt chiefly to humble thy ſelfe, when thou feeleſt inwardly little or no deuotion, and yet not to be too much deiected, nor to grieue inordinately for it. God often giueth in a ſhort moment that, which he hath long time denied: he giueth ſometimes in the end that, which in the beginning of prayer he differred to grant.
               2 If grace ſhould be alwaies preſently

giuen, and at hand euer with a wiſh, it could not be well endured by a weake man. Therefore deuotion is to be expected with good hope, and humble patience: yet impute it to thy ſelfe, and thy ſinnes, when it is not giuen thee, or when it is ſecretly taken from thee. It is ſometimes a ſmall matter that hindreth & hideth grace from vs, if it bee to bee called ſmall, and not rather a great matter, that hindreth ſo great a good. And if thou remooue this, bee it great or ſmal, and perfectly ouercome it, thou ſhalt haue thy deſire.
               3 For preſently, as ſoone as thou giueſt thy ſelfe to God, and ſeekeſt not this, nor that, for thine owne pleaſure or will, but ſetleſt thy ſelfe wholy in me, thou ſhalt find thy ſelfe vnited vnto him, and quiet. For nothing will taſte ſo well, and pleaſe thee ſo much, as the will and pleaſure of God. Whoſoeuer therefore

with a ſincere heart directeth his intention to God, & purgeth himſelfe from all in ordinate loue, or diſlike of any creature, ſhall be moſt fit to receiue grace, and worthy of the gift of deuotion. For our Lord beſtoweth his bleſſing there, where he findeth his veſſels empty. And how much the more perfectly one forſaketh theſe baſeſt things, and dieth to himſelfe by contempt of himſelfe; ſo much the more ſpeedily grace commeth, and entreth in more plentifully, and lifteth vp the heart that is free, to a higher ſtate of grace.
               4 Then ſhall he ſee, and abound, and wonder, and his heart ſhall be enlarged, becauſe the hand of our Lord is with him, and hee hath put himſelfe wholy into his hand for euer. Eſa. 60. Behold ſo ſhall the man bee bleſſed, that ſeeketh Almighty God with his whole heart, and taketh not his ſoule in vaine. This man

deſerueth great grace of diuine vnion, in receiuing the holy Euchariſt, for that hee regardeth not his owne deuotion and comfort, but aboue all deuotion and comfort, he prizeth the honor and glory of God.
            
            
               CHAP. XVI. That wee ought to manifeſt our neceſsities vnto Chriſt, and to craue his grace.
               The voice of the Diſciple.
               O Moſt ſweete and louing Lord, whom I now deſire to receiue deuoutly, thou knoweſt my infirmitie, and the neceſſity which I endure, with how many ſins I am oppreſſed, how often I am grieued, tempted, troubled and defiled. I come vnto thee for remedie, I craue of thee thy heauenly comfort, and the eaſe of my paine. I ſpeake to him that knoweth all things, to whom all my ſecrets are open, and who can only perfectly comfort and helpe mee. Thou

knoweſt what it is, whereof aboue all things I ſtand in moſt need, and how poore I am in vertues.
               2 Behold I ſtand before thee, poore and naked, calling for grace, and crauing mercy. Refreſh this thy hungry and needy creature, giue heat vnto my coldnes with the fire of thy loue, giue light vnto my blindneſſe with the brightnes of thy preſence. Turne al earthly things vnto me, into bitternes, all things grieuous and contrarie, into patience, all baſe and created things, into contempt and obliuion. Lift vp my heart to thee in heauen, and ſuffer me not to wander vpon earth: be thou only ſweete and delightſome vnto mee, from hence-forth for euermore, for thou only art my meat, and my drinke, my loue and my joy, my delight and all my good.
               3 O that with thy preſence thou wouldeſt wholy inflame, burne, and

change me into thee, that I might be made one ſpirit with thee, by the grace of inward vnion, and melting of burning loue. Suffer me not to go from thee hungry and drie, but deale mercifully with me, as thou haſt oftentimes dealt wonderfully with thy Saints. What meruaile if I ſhould be wholy inflamed by thee, and die in my ſelfe, ſith thou art fire euer burning, and neuer decaying, loue purifying the heart, and enlightning the vnderſtanding.
            
            
               CHAP. XVII. Of burning loue and vehement deſire to receiue Chriſt.
               The voice of the Diſciple.
               WIth great deuotion and burning loue, with moſt hearty affection and feruour I deſire to receiue thee, O Lord, as many Saints and deuout perſons haue deſired thee, when they receiued thy Sacrament, who were

moſt pleaſing vnto thee in holines of life, and moſt feruent in deuotion. O my God, the euerlaſting loue, my whole good, my happineſſe without end, I would gladly receiue thee with the moſt vehement deſire, and worthy reuerence, that any of the Saints euer had, or could feele.
               2 And although I be vnworthy to haue all thoſe feelings of deuotion, yet I offer vnto thee the whole affection of my hart, as if I alone had thoſe moſt ſweet inflamed deſires: yea whatſoeuer alſo a deuout minde can conceiue and deſire, all that, with greateſt reuerence, and moſt inward affection I offer & preſent vnto thee. I wiſh to reſerue nothing to my ſelf, but freely and moſt willingly to ſacrifice my ſelfe & all mine vnto thee, my Lord God, my Creator, and my Redeemer. I deſire to receiue thee this day with ſuch affection, reuerence, praiſe & honor, with ſuch gratitude,

worthines and loue, with ſuch faith, hope and purity, as thy moſt bleſſed Mother the glorious Virgin Mary receiued, and deſired thee, when ſhe humbly and deuoutly anſwered the Angel, who declared vnto her the myſtery of the Incarnation, and ſaid: Behold the Handmaid of our Lord, let it be done vnto mee according to thy word. Luk. 1.
               3 And as thy bleſſed Forerunner, the moſt excellent amongſt the Saints, Iohn Baptiſt, cheerefully leaped with joy of the holy Ghoſt, whileſt he was yet ſhut vp in his mothers wombe: and afterwards ſeeing Ieſus walking amongſt men, humbling himſelfe very much, ſaid with deuout affection: The friend of the Bridegrome that ſtandeth and heareth him, reioyceth with joy for the voice of the Bridegrome: Ioh. 3. ſo I alſo wiſh to be inflamed with great and holy deſires, and to offer my ſelf

vp vnto thee with my whole heart. Wherefore I offer alſo and preſent vnto thee the joyes, feruent deſires, exceſſes of minde, ſpirituall illuminations, and heauenly viſions of all deuout hearts, with all the vertues and praiſes exerciſed, and to be exerciſed by all creatures in heauen and earth, for my ſelfe and all ſuch as are commended to me in prayer, that by all thou mayeſt be worthily praiſed, and glorified for euer.
               4 Receiue, my Lord God, the affections of my heart and deſires, which I haue to giue thee, infinite praiſe and thankes, which according to the meaſure of thy vnſpeakable greatneſſe are due vnto thee. Theſe I yeeld thee, and deſire to yeeld thee euery day and moment, and I doe intreate and inuite all the heauenly Spirits, and all thy deuout ſeruants to giue thanks and praiſes together with me.
               
                  5 Let all People, Tribes, and Tongues praiſe thee, and magnifie thy holy and ſweet name with great joy and feruent deuotion: and let all that reuerently and deuoutly celebrate thy moſt high Sacrament, and receiue it with full faith, deſerue to finde grace, and mercy at thy hands, and pray humbly for mee ſinfull creature. And when they ſhall haue obtained their deſired deuotion and joyfull vnion, and depart from thy ſacred heauenly Table well comforted and meruailouſly refreſhed, let them vouchſafe to remember my poore and needy ſoule.
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII. That a man be not a curious ſearcher of this Sacrament, but an humble follower of Chriſt, ſubmitting his ſenſe vnto faith.
               The voice of the Beloued.
               THou oughteſt to beware of curious and vnprofitable ſearching

into this moſt profound Sacrament, if thou wilt not ſinke into the depth of doubt. He that is a ſearcher of Maieſtie, ſhall be oppreſſed by Glorie. Prou. 25. God is able to worke more then man can vnderſtand. A pious and humble inquirie of truth is tolerable, ſo he be alwaies ready to bee taught, and doe endeauour to walke in the ſound pathes of the ancient Fathers doctrine.
               2 Bleſſed is that ſimplicity, that forſaketh the difficult waies of queſtions, and goeth on in the plaine and aſſured path of Gods Commandements. Many haue loſt deuotion, whileſt they would ſearch after high things. Faith and ſincere life are exacted at thy hands, not height of vnderſtanding, nor the depth of the myſteries of God. If thou doeſt not vnderſtand, nor conceiue thoſe things that are vnder thee, how ſhalt thou bee able to comprehend

thoſe that are aboue thee? Submit thy ſelfe to God, and let thy ſenſe be ſubiect to faith, and the light of knowledge ſhall bee giuen thee in that degree, as ſhall bee profitable and neceſſary for thee.
               3 Some are grieuouſly tempted about Faith and the Sacrament, but this is not to bee imputed to them, but rather to the enemie. Do not regard nor diſpute with thy thoughts, neither doe thou giue anſwere to the doubts mooued by the enemie, but beleeue the words of God, beleeue his Saints and Prophets, and the wicked Serpent will flie from thee. It is oftentimes very profitable to the ſeruant of God to ſuffer ſuch things: for he tempteth not Infidels and ſinners, whom he alreadie ſecurely poſſeſſeth, but hee ſundrie waies tempteth and vexeth the faithfull and deuout.
               4 Goe forward therefore with a

ſincere and vndoubted faith, and come to the Sacrament with vnfained reuerence. And whatſoeuer thou art not able to vnderſtand, commit ſecurely to Almightie God. God deceiueth thee not: hee is deceiued that truſteth too much to himſelfe. Pſalm. 18. and 118. God walketh with the ſimple, reuealeth himſelfe to the humble, giueth vnderſtanding to little ones, openeth the ſenſes of pure minds, and hideth grace from the curious and proud. Mat. 11. Humane reaſon is weake, and may be deceiued, but true faith cannot be deceiued.
               5 All reaſon and naturall ſearch ought to follow faith, not to go before it, nor impugne it. For faith and loue doe chiefely excell, and worke in a hidden manner in this moſt bleſſed and excellent Sacrament. God, who is euerlaſting, and of infinite power, doth great and inſcrutable

things in heauen and in earth, and there is no ſearching of his wonderfull workes. If the workes of God were ſuch, as might bee eaſily comprehended by humane reaſon, they were not to be called wonderfull and vnſpeakable.
            
            Heere endeth the fourth and laſt booke of the following of Chriſt, the which fourth booke treateth moſt principally of the bleſſed Sacrament of the Altar.
         
         
            
            HERE BEGINNETH A GODLY TREAtiſe, and it is called a notable Leſſon, otherwiſe it is called the Golden Epiſtle.
            
               The expoſition of the name of this little booke.
               A Right good and wholeſome Leſſon, profitable vnto al Chriſtians, aſcribed vnto S. Bernard, and put among his Works, I thinke by ſome vertuous man, that would it ſhould thereby haue the more authoritie, and the rather be read, & better bee borne away: for doubtleſſe, it is a good matter, and edificatiue vnto all them that haue zeale and care to their ſoules health, and deſire of ſaluation. It is called in the Title (Notabile documentum) that is to ſay; A notable Leſſon: And ſome doe call it the Golden Epiſtle. It followeth immediatly after a little worke called Formula honeſtae vitae, the forme and manner of an honeſt life, or of honeſt liuing.
            
            
               
THE GOLDEN EPISTLE.
            
               IF you intend to pleaſe God, and would obtaine grace to fulfill the ſame, two things be vnto you very neceſſary. The firſt, you muſt withdraw your mind from all worldly and tranſitory things, in ſuch maner, as though you cared not whether any ſuch things were in this world or no. The ſecond is, that you giue and apply your ſelfe ſo wholy to God, and behaue your ſelf in ſuch ſort, that you neuer do, ſay, or thinke that you know, ſuppoſe, or beleeue ſhould offend or diſpleaſe God, for by this meanes you may ſooneſt and moſt readily obtaine and winne his fauour and grace. In all things eſteeme and account your ſelfe moſt vile, and moſt ſimple, and as verie nought, in reſpect and regard of vertue: and thinke, ſuppoſe, and beleeue,

that all perſons be good and better then you bee, for ſo ſhall you much pleaſe our Lord. Whatſoeuer you ſee, or ſeeme to perceiue in any perſon, or yet heare of any Chriſtian, take you no occaſion therein, but rather aſcribe and apply you all vnto the beſt, and thinke or ſuppoſe all is done or ſaid for a good intent or purpoſe, though it ſeeme contrarie: for mans ſuppoſition and light judgements bee ſoone and lightly deceiued, or beguiled. Deſpiſe no perſon willingly, nor euer ſpeake euill of any perſon, though it were neuer ſo true that you ſay. For it is not lawful to ſhew in confeſſion the vice or default of any perſon, except you might not otherwiſe ſhew and declare your owne offence. Speake little or nothing vnto your proper and ſelfe laude or praiſe, though it were true, and vnto your familier fellow or faithfull friend, but ſtudie

to keepe ſecret and priuie your vertue, rather then your vice: yet were it a cruell deed for any perſons to defame themſelues. Be more glad to giue your eare and hearing vnto the praiſe, rather then vnto the diſpraiſe of any perſon, and euer beware as well of hearing, as ſpeaking of detraction, and when you ſpeake, take good deliberation, and haue few words, and let thoſe bee true and good, ſadly ſet, and wiſely ordered. If any words be ſpoken vnto you of vice or vanity, as ſoone as you may breake off, and leaue that talke or communication. And euer returne and apply your ſelfe vnto ſome appointed good and godly occupation, bodily or ghoſtly. If any ſodaine chance fall or happen vnto you, or vnto any of yours, leane not too lightly thereunto, or care much therfore. If it be of proſperitie, reioyce not much therein, or bee ouer glad

thereof: If it be aduerſitie, bee not ouercome or ouerthrowne therwith, or brought to ſorrow or ſadneſſe, thanke God for al, and ſet little therby. Repute all things tranſitory as of little price or value. Giue euer moſt thought and care vnto thoſe things, that may profite and promote the ſoule. Fly and auoid the perſons, and the places of much ſpeech, for better it is to keepe ſilence, then to ſpeake. Keepe the times, & places of ſilence preciſely, ſo that you ſpeak not without reaſonable and vnfained cauſe. The times of ſilence in religion bee theſe. From Collation vntill Maſſe be ended, after the houre of Tierce: from the firſt Grace in the Fratour vntill the end of the latter Grace. And from the beginning of Euenſong, vntill Grace bee ended after ſupper, or elſe (Benedicite) after the common beuer. The places of ſilence be the Church and Cloiſter, the Fratour

and the Dortour. If you be ſlandered, and doe take occaſion at the fault or offence of any perſon, then looke well vpon your ſelfe, whether you be in the ſame default ſometime your ſelfe, and then haue compaſſion vpon your brother or ſiſter. If there be no ſuch default in you, think verily and beleeue there may be, and then doe as (in like caſe) you would bee done vnto. And thus, as in a glaſſe, you may ſee and behold your ſelfe. Grudge not, neither complaine vpon any perſon for any manner of cauſe, except you ſee and perceiue by large coniecture, that you may profit and edifie thereby. Neither deny, nor affirme your minde or opinion ſtiffely or extremely, but that your affirmation, denegation, or doubt be euer powdred with ſalt, that is to ſay, wiſdome, diſcretion and patience. Vſe not in any wiſe to mocke, check, or ſcorne, neither yet to laugh or

ſmile but right ſeldome. And that alway to ſhew reuerence or louing manner, light countenance or looſe behauiour becommeth not a ſad perſon. Let your communication bee ſhort, and with few perſons, alwaies of vertue, learning, or good & Chriſtian edification, and euer with ſuch warineſſe, that no perſon in things doubtfull may take any authoritie of your words or ſentence. Let all your paſtime be ſpent in bodily labours, good and profitable, or elſe godly in ſtudy, or that paſſeth all, in holy and deuout prayer, ſo that the heart and mind be occupied with the ſame you ſpeake. And when you pray for any certaine perſons, remember their degree, eſtate & condition. For a forme and order of your prayer, this may bee a good and ready way, to follow the order of the ſix Gramaticall caſes: The nominatiue, the genitiue, the datiue, the accuſatiue, the vocatiue,

and the ablatiue. The nominatiue, that is, firſt to pray for your ſelfe, that you may haue ghoſtly ſtrength and conſtancie, that you fall not into any deadly offence by frailtie, and that you may haue right knowledge of God by faith, and of your ſelfe, by due conſideration of your eſtate and condition, and of the lawes of God for your conduct and countenance: and thirdly, that you may haue grace and good will, according to the ſame ſtrength and knowledge, and that hauing vnto God a reuerend dread, you neuer offend in thought, word, or deed, but that you may euer loue him for himſelfe, and all his creatures in due order for him, and in him. The ſecond is the genitiue caſe. Then muſt you pray for your genitours, your progenitours and parents, that is to ſay, your fathers and mothers, ſpirituall and carnall, as your ghoſtly fathers,

or ſpirituall ſoueraignes, your godfathers, your godmothers, your natural father and mother, your grandfathers and grandmothers, your brothers and ſiſters, and all your kindred. In the third place is the datiue caſe. There muſt you pray for benefactors, good doers, of whom you haue receiued any manner of gifts ſpirituall or temporall, vnto the wealth of your ſoule or body. In the fourth place is the accuſatiue caſe, where you ſhould pray for your enemies, ſuch perſons as by any meanes haue annoyed, hurt, or grieued you, either ghoſtly or bodily, that is to ſay, in your ſoule or manners by any ſuggeſtion, intiſing, euill counſell, or euill example. In your fame or good name, by detraction, back-biting, or ſlandering, or yet by familier company. For a perſon commonly is reputed & ſuppoſed to be of ſuch condition, as they bee, with whom hee

hath conuerſation & company. And for them that hurt your body, either by ſtrokes, or by any other occaſion haue hindered the ſtate and health thereof. And likewiſe of your worldly goods or poſſeſſions. For all theſe manner of enemies muſt you pray, that our Lord God would forgiue them as you doe, and as you would be forgiuen, and that they may come to right charity and peace. The fifth caſe is called vocatiue, that is to ſay, the calling caſe, where you conueniently may call, cry, and pray vnto our Lord for all manner of perſons that be out of the ſtate of grace, either by infidelity, as Turkes, Sarazens, and ſuch other: or elſe by errour, as all manner of Heretikes: or elſe by any deadly ſinne or offence to God. Pray for all theſe manner of perſons, that they may come vnto the right way of their ſaluation. In the ſixt and laſt place is the ablatiue

caſe, where thou muſt pray for all thoſe that be taken out of this life, & that died or paſſed the ſame life in charitie, & now haue need of prayer. In the which you may keep a forme of the ſame order that is before, that is to ſay: In ſtead of the nominatiue, where you prayed for your ſelfe, you may now pray for all thoſe that doe abide in paine for any default or offence done by your example or occaſion: and for the genitiue in the ſecond place, for your parents, and all your kindred departed this life: and in the third place for the datiue, pray for your benefactors paſſed: and for the accuſatiue in the fourth place, you may pray for them that liue in paine, for any occoſion or example that they gaue vnto you: and in the fift place for the vocatiue, pray for al them that haue greateſt pains in Purgatory, & leaſt help heere by the ſuffrage of prayers: and for the ablatiue

in the ſixt and laſt place, pray for all ſoules in generall. And that you may be the more apt to pray, call three things oft times to remembrance, that is to ſay, what you haue beene, what you be, and what you ſhall be. Firſt, by reaſon of your body, you were conceiued of the moſt filthy abominable matter of man, ſhamefull to be ſpoken, far more vile then the ſlime of the earth, and after borne in a ſinfull ſoule, and purged only by grace. And now (as vnto the body) you bee a muckheape or dunghill of filth, more vile then any vpon earth if you remember what doth iſſue daily, and come forth out of the meates of your body. And your ſoule is daily in ſome ſin, or (at the leaſt) full like to be. What you ſhall bee, as vnto your body, you may ſee by experience, wormes meat, & earth againe. And what ſhal become of your ſoul, no man in this world can aſſure you.

To remember then the joyes of heauen and paines of hell, and that both be infinit, endleſſe, and without rebate, but both euer encreaſing, and neuer ceaſing, neuer haue eaſe nor reſt, but euer continue & euerlaſting. To remember then, I ſay, theſe things may greatly mooue you to behaue your ſelfe in a good ſort, & to ſtudie how you may auoid the one, and obtaine the other. Remember ſpecially how great a loſſe it is to loſe heauen, and how vncomfortable gaines to winne hell, and how ſoone and how lightly either of them may be gotten or loſt. When any thing then, of aduerſity, hurt or diſpleaſure, happen vnto you, thinke then, or imagine, that if you were in hell, you ſhould haue the ſame diſpleaſure, and many worſe. And ſo to auoid thoſe, you ſhall heere the better ſuffer, and for our Lord the more patiently beare al theſe that now bee preſent, or any

that may come hereafter. And in like manner, if any good proſperity or pleaſure happen vnto you, think then that if you were in heauē, you ſhould haue that pleaſure, and many mo excellent joyes. And ſo for the feruent deſire of thoſe joyes, you ſhall ſet little by any worldly comfort or pleaſure. A good contemplation therefore may it bee vnto you in feaſts of holy Saints, to thinke & record how great paines they ſuffred here for the loue of our Lord, & how ſhort theſe were, & how ſoone paſſed: and then againe, how marueilous reward they had therefore in bliſſe and joy euerlaſting. So the troubles and torments of good perſons be ſoone & ſhortly gone and ended, and the joyes and pleaſures of ſinfull perſons do ſoone fade and fly for euer. The good perſons, for their troubles ſuffered heere vpon earth, doe get and win eternall and euerlaſting glory, which the euil

perſons do loſe. And contrary, theſe euill and ſinfull perſons, for their joy and pleaſure heere, do receiue by exchange eternall & euerlaſting ſhame and rebuke, with paine and woe vnſpeakable. Whenſoeuer then you be diſpoſed to ſluggiſhneſſe, or to bee drowſie, remiſſe in prayers, or dull in deuotion, then take this little worke, or els ſome other good Treatiſe, and reade therein, and euer note well the contents thereof, and what is meant thereby. And if you be not thereby deliuered or eaſed thereof, then ſhift vnto ſome other work or occupatiō, ſo that euer you auoid idlenes, and al vaine paſtimes, which indeed is loſſe of time. And then remember, that thoſe that now abide in paine, either in hell, or yet in Purgatory, for ſuch times ſo paſſed or loſt, had rather then all the world haue ſuch time to redeeme their paines by, as you may haue if you will. Time then vnto all

perſons well occupied, is very precious and deare. Take good heede therefore, how you ſpend it or paſſe it, for you can neuer reuoke it or call it backe. If the time paſſe you by trouble and vexation, thinke they be happy and gracious, that be paſt this wretched life, and now in bliſſe, for they ſhall neuer haue any ſuch miſerie. And when you feele a comfort or conſolation ſpirituall, thanke God therof, and thinke the damned ſoules ſhall neuer haue any ſuch pleaſure. And thus let this bee for your exerciſe in the datiue. At night when you goe to reſt, firſt make account with your ſelfe, and remember how you haue ſpent or paſſed the day & time that was giuen you to bee vſed in vertue, and how you haue beſtowed your thoughts your words, and your workes. And if you finde no great thing amiſſe, giue the whole laude and praiſe vnto our Lord God. And

if you perceiue contrary, that you haue miſpent any part thereof, bee ſory therefore, and beſeech our Lord of mercie and forgiuenes, and promiſe, and verily purpoſe to make amends the next day. And if you haue oportunitie thereupon, it ſhall be very conuenient for you to bee confeſſed the next morning, and eſpecially, if the matter done, ſaid, or thought, by deliberate conſent, doe grieuouſly weigh and worke with a grudge in your conſcience, then would I aduiſe you neuer to eate nor drinke, till you bee diſcharged thereof, if you may conueniently get a ghoſtly father. Now for a concluſion of this worke, put before you, as by caſe or imagination, two large Cities, one full of trouble, turmoile and miſery, and let that bee hell. The other Citie full of joy, gladneſſe, comfort, and pleaſure, and let that bee heauen. Looke well on them

both, for in both be many dwellers and great company. Then caſt and thinke within your ſelfe, what thing heere might ſo pleaſe you, that you ſhould chooſe the worſe Citie, or what thing ſhould diſpleaſe you on the other part, whereby you ſhould withdraw your ſelfe from that vertue that might conuey and bring you vnto the other Citie. And when you haue ſtudied well hereupon, and can nothing finde, I dare well aſſure you, if you keepe well the precepts and counſailes of this little Leſſon, you ſhall finde the right way, for the holy Ghoſt will inſtruct and teach you, where you be not ſufficient of your ſelues, ſo you endeauour and giue diligence to beare away and follow that which heere is taught. Reade it euery weeke once or twice, or oftner if you will. And where you profite, giue the thankes, laude and praiſe vnto our Lord God, and

moſt ſweet Sauiour Ieſu Chriſt, who ſend you his mercie and grace, that alway liueth God world without end. Amen.
            
               THis Leſſon was brought vnto me in Engliſh, of an old tranſlation, rough and rude, with requeſt to amend it. I thought leſſe labour to write new the whole, which I haue done according to the meaning of the Authour, though not word for word: and in diuers places added ſome things following vpon the ſame, to make the matter more ſententious and full. I beſeech you take all vnto the beſt, and pray for the olde wretched brother of Sion, RICHARD WHITFORD.
            
         
         
            
            A SPIRITVALL GLASSE.
            REade diſtinctly, pray deuoutly, ſigh deepely, ſuffer patiently, humble your ſelfe lowly, giue no ſentence haſtily, ſpeake but ſeldome, and that truely, preuent your ſpeech diſcreetly, do your deeds in charitie, temptations reſiſt ſtrongly, break he head ſpeedily, weepe bitterly, haue compaſſion tenderly, do good works buſily, loue perſeuerantly, loue hartily, loue faithfully, loue God all-only, and all other for him charitably, loue in aduerſitie, loue in proſperitie, thinke alwaies of loue, for loue is none other but God himſelfe. Thus to loue, bringeth the louer to loue without end. Amen.
         
         
            
            THE RVLES OF A CHRISTIAN LIFE, made by IOHN PICVS the elder, Earle of Mirandula.
            
               FIrſt, if to man or woman the way of vertue doth ſeeme hard or painefull, becauſe wee muſt needes fight againſt the fleſh, the diuell, and the world, let him or her call to remembrance, that whatſoeuer life they will chooſe according to the world, many aduerſities, incommodities, much heauines and labour are to be ſuffered.
            Moreouer, let them haue in remembrance, that in wealth & worldly poſſeſſions is much and long contention, laborious alſo, and therewith vnfruitfull, wherein trauaile is the concluſion or end of labour, and

finally, paine euerlaſting, if thoſe things be not well ordered, and charitably diſpoſed.
            Remember alſo, that it is very fooliſhneſſe, to thinke to come vnto heauen by any other meanes, then by the ſaid battaile, conſidering that our head and Maſter Chriſt did not aſcend vnto heauen, but by his paſſion: and the ſeruant ought not to be in better eſtate or condition then his Maſter or Soueraigne.
            Furthermore, conſider that this battaile ought not to be grudged at, but to be deſired and wiſhed for, although thereof no price or reward might enſue or happen, but onely that thereby wee might bee conformed or joyned to Chriſt our God and Maſter. Wherefore as often as in reſiſting any temptation, thou doeſt withſtand any of thy ſenſes or wits, think vnto what part of Chriſts paſſion thou mayeſt apply thy ſelfe,

or make thy ſelfe like: As reſiſting gluttonie, whileſt thou doeſt puniſh thy taſte or appetite: remember that Chriſt receiued in his drinke, ayſell mixed with the gall of a beaſt, a drinke moſt vnſauoury and loathſome.
            When thou vvithdraweſt thine hand from vnlawfull taking or keeping of any thing, which liketh thine appetite, remember Chriſts hands, as they were faſt nailed vnto the tree of the Croſſe. And reſiſting of pride, thinke vpon him, who being very God almightie, for thy ſake receiued the forme of a ſubiect, and humbled himſelfe vnto the moſt vile and reproachfull death of the Croſſe. And when thou art tempted with wrath: Remember that hee, which was God, and of all men the moſt juſt and righteous, when hee beheld himſelfe mocked, ſpit on, ſcourged, and puniſhed with all diſpites and

rebukes, and ſet on the Croſſe betweene two theeues, as if he himſelfe were a falſe harlot, hee notwithſtanding ſhewed neuer token of indignation, or that he were grieued, but ſuffering all things with wonderfull patience, anſwered all men moſt gently. In this wiſe, if thou peruſe all things one after another, thou mayeſt finde, that there is no paſſion or trouble, that ſhall not make thee in ſome part conformable or like vnto Chriſt.
            Alſo put not thy truſt in mans helpe, but in the onely vertue of Chriſt Ieſu, which ſaid: Truſt well, for I haue vanquiſhed the world. and in another place hee ſaith: The Prince of this world is caſt out thereof. Wherefore, let vs truſt by his onely vertue, to vanquiſh the world, and to ſubdue the Diuell. And therefore ought wee to aske his helpe by our owne prayers, and by

the prayers of his bleſſed Saints.
            Remember alſo, that as ſoone as thou haſt vanquiſhed one temptation, alway another is to bee looked for: The Diuell goeth alway about and ſeeketh for him whom he would deuour. Wherefore wee ought to ſerue diligently and be euer in feare, and to ſay with the Prophet: I will ſtand alway at my defence.
            Take heed moreouer, that not onely thou bee not vanquiſhed of the Diuell, that tempteth thee, but alſo that thou vanquiſh and ouercome him. And that is not onely when thou doeſt not ſinne, but alſo when of that thing wherein hee tempted thee, thou takeſt occaſion for to doe good. As if hee offereth to thee ſome good act to bee done, to the intent that thereby thou maiſt fall into vaine-glorie: forthwith thou thinking it, not to bee thy deede or worke, but the benefite or

reward of God, humble thou thy ſelfe, and judge thee to bee vnkinde vnto God in reſpect of his manifold benefits.
            As often as thou doeſt fight, fight as in hope to vanquiſh, and to haue at the laſt perpetuall peace. For that peraduenture God of his abundant grace ſhall giue vnto thee, and the Diuell being confuſed of thy victorie, ſhall returne no more againe. But yet when thou haſt vanquiſhed, beare thy ſelfe ſo, as if thou ſhouldeſt fight againe ſhortly. Thus alway in battaile, thou muſt thinke on victory; and after victory, thou muſt prepare thee to battaile immediatly againe.
            Although thou feeleſt thy ſelfe well armed and readie, yet flye (notwithſtanding) all occaſions to ſinne. For as the Wiſeman ſaith: Who loueth perill, ſhall therein periſh.
            
               In all temptations reſiſt the beginning, and beate the children of Babylon againſt the ſtone, which ſtone is Chriſt, and the children bee euill thoughts and imaginations. For in long continuing of ſinne, ſeldome worketh any medicine or remedie.
            Remember, that although in the ſaid conflict of temptation the battaile ſeemeth to be very dangerous: yet conſider how much ſweeter it is to vanquiſh temptation, then to follow ſinne, whereto ſhee inclineth thee, whereof the end is repentance. And herein many be foulely deceiued, which compare not the ſweetneſſe of victorie to the ſweetneſſe of ſinne, but onely compareth battaile to pleaſure. Notwithſtanding, a man or woman, which hath a thouſand times known what it is to giue place to temptation, ſhould once aſſay, what it is to vanquiſh temptation.
            
               If thou bee tempted, thinke thou not therefore that God hath forſaken thee, or that hee ſetteth but little by thee, or that thou art not in the ſight of God, good or perfect: but remember, that after Saint Paul had ſeene God, as hee was in his Diuinitie, and ſuch ſecret myſteries as bee not lawfull for any man to ſpeake or rehearſe, hee for all that ſuffered temptation of the fleſh, wherewith God ſuffered him to bee tempted, leſt he ſhould be aſſaulted with pride. Wherein a man ought to conſider, that Saint Paul, which was the pure veſſell of election, and rapt into the third heauen, was notwithſtanding in perill to be proud of his vertues, as hee ſaith of himſelfe. Wherefore aboue all temptations men or women ought to arme themſelues moſt ſtrongly againſt the temptations of pride, ſince pride is the roote of all miſchiefe, againſt

the which, the onely remedie is to thinke alway that God humbled himſelfe for vs vnto the Croſſe. And moreouer that death hath ſo humbled vs, whether wee will or no, that our bodies ſhall be the meat of worms lothſome and venimous.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
            
            
         
      
   