
      
         
            
            
            
               Encomium Salopiae, OR THE DESCRIPTION OF THE PLEASANT SITVATION, COMmendable Gouernement, and Rarities, of the ancient and famous Towne of SHROWESBVRY.
            
            
               By EDWARD THORNES of Mclverley Gent.
            Qui sibi natus, frustranatus. Et mihi, & patriae.
            
            LONDON, Printed for Richard Meighen. 1615.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE WORshipfull IOHN GARDNER, and Thomas Fawkener, GentleMEN BAYLIVES OF THE TOWNE OF SHREWESBVRIE.
            
               IT hath beene an ancient custome, not onely with vs, but also with forraine Nations, that in the beginning of the new yeare, 
                  〈◊〉
                gifts should passe & bee bestowed by equals vnto their equals, Inferiors to their Superiors, and sometimes by Superiors vnto their Inferiors, as signes and tokens of well wishing mindes, for increase of Loue and Amitie; which were commonly called new Yeares gifts, and were of diuers kindes agreeable to

the abilitie and disposition of the Giuer: some, ornaments for the Bodie, as Ringes, Gloues, Jewls, and such like; some, of another kinde to recreate and refresh the mind, as Epigrams, or Pamphlets. Which cōmendable custome continuing still in vse, least I should be taxed to be vngratefull to those vnto whome I owe obedience, or a bad obseruer of time in my selfe, I haue presumed to presēt vnto your Worships (on the behalfe of our renowned Ladie Dame Salopia) this small Pamphlet as a token of my great good wil: being most agreeable vnto my estate and disposition. Which if you wil deign to accept in good part as my poore mite, It will incourage me to giue you better satisfaction hereafter. Poore Bancis could not serue Iupiter in siluer plate, but in a woodden dish 
                  •
                since I cannot doe as I would, I hope you will accept of what I can. I know you haue gifts of greater value, but none bestowed with greater good will: and in gifts it is not the matter, but the minde that should bee respected. And yet least you should thinke that it wanteth weight, I will adde this more vnto it: Which is my heartie prayer vnto the Almightie (that the gouernment now imposed vpon you may bee so discharged, as may tend

principally to the glory of God, next to the good of the Common-wealth of this worthie Towne, and lastly to your owne credits and commendations in times present and ensuing. Many eyes looke vpon you, and you shall bee subiect to many censures: but not what is spoken of you, but what shall bee done by you, will be beleeued. As you haue well begunne, God of his mercy assist you with his Holy Spirit, that you may so perseuer to the end. And so I end with my pen, but not with my loue to you; Bentstone this first of Ianuarie, 1615.
            
               Your louing friend to, bee commanded,
               Edward Thornes.
            
         
         
            
            
            In amorem Authoris & opusculi.
            
               
                  A Friend to flatter with a clawing rime,
                  Or foe to slander with a venomd tongue,
                  Argues the foule contagion of our time,
                  For they from hence may find the greatest wrong:
                  These two extreames, I pluck vp in the root;
                  For at this worke, no such like bolts ile shoot.
               
               
                  First, for this Author, as a friend I deeme him,
                  His conuersation not to me vntride:
                  The more for this I neuer will estee me him,
                  But that his worke the censure will abide
                  Of good and bad: for in his verse I find,
                  Besides inuention, honesty of mind.
               
               
                  For if a stranger bred in forraine soile,
                  With iudgements eye should this discourse suruay,
                  He would award him guerdon for his toile,
                  That could in such fit termes your fame display,
                  Not led with passion, nor with fond desire,
                  But with bare truth he doth your state admire.
               
               
                  
                  The Magistrate for ciuill gouernment,
                  The graue diuine for vertuous life approu'd,
                  The toyling tradesman to his profit bent,
                  Through his industrious quill he makes belou'd,
                  Then bruise not vertue in her fairest flowre,
                  For it will liue when time doth all deuoure.
               
               
                  IOHANNES SMITH
Norfolciensis.
            
            
               In amorem Authoris & opusculi.
               
                  WHo so shal read thy verse & not cōmendit,
                  He vnderstands it not: If he disprayse it,
                  He is an Asse, his shallownesse bewrayes it.
                  And as for fooles; Ile sweare you neuer pend it.
                  For there appeares in all and euery part,
                  Learning, inuention, iudgement, wit and art.
               
               
                  
                  Let self-conceited enuious Criticks kick
                  Against the Thorne, perhaps they may be taught,
                  Phlebotomizing often times is naught,
                  If so the season be not fit for it:
                  But howsoeuer such base Mushromes deeme them,
                  Sound and true iudgments euer shall esteeme them.
               
               
                  Thomas Smith
Norfolciensis.
            
            
               Rogerus Thornes generosus Salopiensis, in amorem Authoris.
               
                  HEre's one example that no forraine dare,
                  Like man, like gift with Salopine compare,
                  He is vnkind vngratefully that scornes,
                  Such winter blossomes yeelded heere by Thornes.
                  
                  My loue vnto the worke and towne is such,
                  Compels me write so little, thinke so much.
               
            
            
               
               Iohannes Stafford Ar. Leceistrensis, in laudem Authoris.
               
                  I (Though a stranger of Lecestrum breed)
                  Thy censure and thy iudgement do approue:
                  For Polus is a worthie dame indeed.
                  Thy commendation comes from truth and loue:
                  I know not whether I may more commend
                  That noble Dame, or this that thou hast pend.
               
            
            
               Richardus Mountgomery generosus Salopiensis, in laudem Authoris.
               
               
                  THe Nightingale delights her selfe,
                  Vpon the Thornes to rest,
                  Where she tunes forth melodious notes,
                  To cheere the hearers brest.
                  The Thornie branch, the fragrant Rose
                  Puts forth in pleasant spring,
                  And did vnite two houses great,
                  From whence discends our King.
               
               
                  
                  And Thornes vnto our worthy towne,
                  Doth yeeld deserued fame:
                  Then loue Ned Thornes, Salopians all:
                  For he deserues the same.
                  His worke and him I must commend,
                  And would, if I were able,
                  In golden letters paint his prayse,
                  And set them in a Table.
               
            
            
               The Author to his Pamphlet.
               
                  PAsse, Pamphlet, like a Pilgrim poore,
                  To the Salopians kind:
                  The time hath beene, that for my sake,
                  Thou might'st some welcome find:
                  But time breeds change; and I am old,
                  And almost cleane forgot:
                  My old acquaintance now are gone,
                  The yonger know me not;
                  Time past, when I did walke, I should
                  Find friends in euery street,
                  
                     And now I may walke all the day
                  And scarsly one man meet.
                  If any after thee enquire,
                  Or doe conuerse with thee,
                  Thou maist confesse from whence thou cam'st,
                  And greet them wel from mee.
                  Behaue thy selfe in Ciuil sort,
                  And cap to rich and poore;
                  When others presse into the hall,
                  Doe thou stand at the doore.
                  Repaire to market place and mill,
                  And Backhouse without stop,
                  And to the waterload likewise,
                  And to the Barbors shop.
                  Sometime into the Tauerne goe,
                  And trudge it vp and downe:
                  For in these places thou shalt learne,
                  The newes of all the Towne.
                  Take paines, for by obseruing well
                  Thou shalt both heare and see,
                  What newes abroad, and also what
                  They speake of thee and mee.
                  
                     Be diligent in these affaires,
                  Obseruing word and deed:
                  Make haste, for I shall stand on Thornes,
                  
                  To heare how thou shalt speed.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ENCOMIVM SALOPIAE.
            
               A new yeares gift containing a perswasion for a congratulation and thankesgiuing vnto God for the good estate, health, wealth, and prosperitie of the famous & renowned lady dame SALOPIA, with a commemoration of her learned Pastors, diligent Schoolemasters, prouident Balifes, and discreet Councellors, presented by one of her euer wel-wishing subiects, now liuing within the Precinct of her laudable Gouernment.
            
            
               TO thee faire dame (O 
                     〈◊〉
                   I flatter not)
               To thee that sitst on seemely Sabrine shore,
               To thee these rude, and homely lines I wrot
               That hast bene famous in the times of yore,
               To thee I send the labours of my quill,
               As Riuers runne from fountaines of good will.
            
            
               Twise thirtie yeares I liued haue and three
               Whereby my wits are almost withered now,
               And yet thy Swaine will sing a song to thee
               If thy good nature will the same allow.
               I neuer suckt of Helicon the sappe,
               Nor was my head Iuld on Mineruas lap.
            
            
               
               And yet like Pan, Ile tune mine Oaten Pipe
               And seeke to set my warbling notes in frame,
               Ile make a show, as though my wits were ripe
               And ready still to canonize thy name,
               No lawrell Bay my barren brow adornes,
               On thistle figs grow not, nor grapes on thornes.
            
            
               In Broghwels time a famous Brittaine Prince,
               Thou wast his seat a thousand yeares agoe,
               Then Pengwern Powis, and Salopia since,
               For tract of time hath chang'd the title so,
               Though time breed change, & he be falne asleep,
               The place is known, where he his court did keep.
            
            
               No maruell, though he tooke delight in thee,
               Thou art so pleasant, fertile, fresh and faire,
               There are but few that may compared bee,
               So sweet thy scite, so healthfull is thy ayre,
               Being enterlac'd with fountains and with springs,
               Besides the pleasures sweet Sabrina brings.
            
            
               Whose rysing from Plimhimmous loftie hill,
               Where Wye and Rhydol their beginning take,
               With siluer streames her course continueth still,
               And Eastward doth her way directly make,
               First to Llan Idlos, then Kaer Sows runnes by,
               Thence to Newtowne, and so to Poole doth hye.
            
            
               
               And thence in hast, as one that long'd to see,
               A dame so faire, and of so great renowne,
               Shee did direct her speedy course to thee,
               Leauing behind the last recited towne.
               And when she view'd thy face she stood at gaze,
               The sight whereof her sences did amaze.
            
            
               And then with slower course shee tooke her way,
               From Cotton hill a neighbouring mount of sand,
               And shot the bridge although with much delay,
               Where Leoline once Prince of Wales doth stand,
               Where she did make a whirlepoole, large & deep:
               Intending there that night to lodge and sleep.
            
            
               But sturdie streames that still on her attend,
               Enforst her forwards much against her mind,
               Yet as she passed, she did much commend,
               Thy wals and turrets which she left behind,
               And so with lingring pace against her hill,
               She past Stonebridge, and came to Castell hill.
               
            
            
               Whence looking back, with teares & heauy groanes
               Desirous still thy louely face to see,
               The water Nymphes did then record the moanes,
               That shee did make in parting so from thee:
               She would haue staid, but force her forwards driue
               It is in vaine against the streame to striue.
            
            
               
               Being discontent with griefe, and sorrow great,
               As fast as Swallow she doth forward slide,
               
                  Bridgenorth, and Beawdley, could her not entreate,
               Nor Worster faire, nor Teuxbury to abide,
               Nor Gloucester great, commended so of some,
               Vntill that she to Bristows bay doth come.
            
            
               From whence she sends such tokens vnto thee,
               As with her loue and true affection suites,
               Corne, Wine and Oyle, and Fish that needfull bee,
               With great abundance of all kind of fruits,
               What vp or downe into her storehouse come,
               Out of her loue she dayly sends thee some.
            
            
               There is a land that vale of Ambrose height,
               A fertile soile, for butter, milke, and cheese,
               For wood and cole that serue the turne aright,
               And other things of value great as these.
               And all things else that are of ought account,
               From Brythin braue vnto great Gilbarts mount.
            
            
               The neighbouring townes, & countries round about
               Doe bring thee daily of their chiefest store,
               Which makes thee rich, and glorious in and out,
               Increasing still thy plentie more and more,
               
                  Llanuylling, Poole, W
                        〈◊〉
                     mme, Elsmer, Oswestree,
               
               All these doe serue as handmaids vnto thee.
            
            
               
               Thou hast thy Preachers, learned, graue and wise,Thomas Higgons Doctor in diuinitie.
               
               One borne and bred, within thy Royall seate,
               Who doth bestow his dayly exercise,
               To doe thee good, with care and labour great.
               He doth more good then many others doe,
               He feeds the soule, and heales the body too.
            
            
               Since learning and good gifts doe him adorne,
               O let him for the same be duly deem'd,
               Though in a Countrie where a man is borne,
               They say a Prophet is not well esteemd.
               When he is gone (for all at last must die)
               He will be wail'd, with many a weeping eye.
            
            
               There is another lamp that giueth light,Master Bright a graue and learned Preacher.
               
               Dispersing foggie cloudes of ignorance,
               He still is shining and is euer Bright,
               
               And readie prest the Gospell to aduance,
               His words, and workes, to godlinesse incline,
               His preaching pure, his exercise diuine.
            
            
               There is a third, borne of the Brittish bloud,Master Thomas Price 
                        〈◊〉
                      zealous and religious Paestor.
               
               Now aged almost threescore yeares and twelue,
               He hath continued long, and done much good,
               And in the Vineyard still doth digge and delue,
               Whereat though some yong wits do fume & fret,
               He's not dismaid, nor will giue ouer yet.
            
            
               
               From his old stemme such liuely branches spring,Daniel Price doctor in diuinity. Sampson Price master of Arts, a worthy professor.
               
               As flourish like the Palme on water side,
               Which to thy people daily comfort bring,
               Bestowing of their talents farre and wide,
               The tree and branches still remaine in Price,
               
               Long may they liue, to beat downe sin and vice.
            
            
               All these as they doe teach, so doe they hue,
               Which to their Doctrine brings no credit small:
               For why? the life, that good example giues,
               Yeeldes great content vnto the hearers all,
               The prayse of them, with euery man is rife,
               That doe confirme their doctrine with their life.
            
            
               Thou hast free Schooles, and Masters of the same,Master 
                        〈◊◊〉
                      Meighen.
               
               As Nurseries of youthfull tender plants,
               Where learned Meighen, chiefe for place and fame,
               Bestowes his dayes wherein no labour wants,
               They all doe spend their time & wast their health,
               To make fit members for a Common wealth.
            
            
               Now giue me leaue a little to relate,
               A matter that should yeeld thee much content,
               How happie thou art in the Magistrate,
               That rules thy state in ciuill gouernment.
               This is the thing, that doth thy glory raise,
               For want whereof, a Common wealth decayes.
            
            
               
               
                  Lysurgus-like earst Lacedemons stay,
               Who made good lawes his subiects to combine,
               Which being good, they willingly obay,
               With one consent, and none thereat repine,
               By those good lawes which he so well ordaind,
               Vertue was rais'd, and ougly vice restraind.
            
            
               So doe thy Rulers labour with effect,
               To cherish vertue, and to punish vice,
               No day, no time, no season they neglect,
               To doe the same by counsell and aduise,
               The fruits whereof are found with good successe,
               When due obedience maketh vp the messe.
            
            
               The ground was laid by such as went before,
               Continued well by such as did fucced,
               Now put in practise daily more and more,
               By those whose trauell haue thy blisse decreed,
               Last yeare a Hunter, and a Gardner gainfull,
               This yeare a Gardner, and a Falckner painfull.
            
            
               The Hunter did his time so well imploy,
               In working for thy safetie and thy health,
               The Bore, the Fox, the Woolfe he did destroy,
               As enemies vnto thy Common-wealth,
               He stroke the Beare and Catterpillar downe,
               And did his best to chase them out of towne.
            
            
               
               That Gardiner did manure thy garden plot,
               And thereupon his labor did bestow,
               His care, his toile, his rime he spared not,
               To pluck the weedes wherby the hearbs might grow
               He did his best, and labour'd hand and foot
               To pull vp tare and cockle by the root.
            
            
               This Gardiner not vnlike the fathers sonne,
               Whose memory remaineth for his deedes,
               Doth well continue, what was well begonne,
               And with like diligence therein proceedes,
               There is good hope, heele set and plant in prime,
               And cut down Hemlock, and make much of time.
            
            
               The Fawkner seekes those birds for to destroy,
               That doe in any sort thy state incumber,
               The greedy gripes that doe the same annoy,
               The iangling lay, the Bitter he keeps vnder,
               The Cormorants in rauening that delight,
               The lazie Puttock, and the greedy Kite.
            
            
               The sinnes reprou'd by Preachers of the word,
               They both doe ioyne, to vnderstand and know,
               And then they cut them off with iustice sword,
               That by their wils againe they neuer grow:
               They doe their best to punish luxurie,
               And drunkennesse, but cannot vsurie.
            
            
               
               These two (if I prognosticate aright)
               Will adde to that which hath bin done before,
               And vnto those that follow giue such light,
               As may increase thy profit more and more,
               By their good meanes before the yeare be ended;
               What is amisse, I hope shall be amended.
            
            
               There is one vice that's noted farre and wide,
               (Aye me for griefe) that I must now expresse it,
               This vice is called a Salopian pride,
               And I doe feare they neuer can suppresse it:
               This vice doth soare so high, it is past cure,
               They cannot make it stoop vnto the lure.
            
            
               It hath foure daughters worthy such a mother,
               Hatred, and malice, Enuie and Disdaine,
               The one of these could neuer loue the other,
               Whereby their nature is discouered plaine,
               There whole delight consists in doing euill,
               Much like vnto their Grandfather the Deuil.
            
            
               O that they might be chased hence away,
               So might thy subiects bin at rest and peace.
               O that I might but liue to see that day,
               So Charitie and Concord would increase,
               These furies fiue doe in thy Pallace dwell,
               I know the place, but yet I dare not tell.
            
            
               
               Whiles here they stay, they will endeuor still,
               To foster strife, and factions to maintaine,
               If they prevaile herein, and haue their will,
               Thy Preachers and thy Rulers worke in vaine.
               For this disease to finde a salue in season,
               (In my opinion) passeth humane reason.
            
            
               Then from the hope of humane help decline,
               And pray to God to keepe these furies vnder,
               And also by his might and power diuine
               In his good time to breake their bonds in sunder,
               He can and may for thy vtilitie,
               Depressing Pride exalt Humilitie.
            
            
               And then shall Loue put Hatred vnto flight,
               And Charitie shal Enuie chase away,
               And grudge and malice then shall loose their might,
               And Amitie in stead of them shal stay,
               And in the place of discord and disdaine,
               Goodwill and Concord shall the fort maintaine:
            
            
               Then friend with friend shall louingly conuerse,
               And flatterers and falshood set aside,
               And neighbour vnto neighbour shall rehearse,
               The happie state wherein they then abide:
               And blesse the time wherin such chāge was made,
               When rich and poore liue well vpon their trade.
            
            
               
               The idle sluggard then will painfull proue,
               The hastie person will commend forbearance,
               The drunkard his affections will remoue,
               The greedy Glutton turne to Temperance,
               He that before was couetous and greedy,
               will now make hast to help the poore and needy.
            
            
               He that did loue contention and debate,
               Will then desire to liue in quietnesse,
               And is contented with his owne estate
               And will releeue his neighbour in distresse
               Thus as they vice detest, and vertue nourish,
               Thou maist be sure thy Cōmōwealth wil flourish.
            
            
               Behold how good and pleasant eke it is,Sampson Price vpon Innocents day.
               
               For brethrtn still to liue in vnitie,
               It comprehends the ioyes of heauenly blisse
               And pleasing much vnto the Trinitie,
               This lesson sweet was lately taught to thee:
               Out of the Psalme, one hundred thirtie three.
            
            
               Adde zeale and true Religion vnto this,
               Abolish superstitious and precise,
               Compell the Newters to amend their misse,
               So shal thy state to happinesse arise.
               When these predictions thou at last shalt see,
               Giue God the thankes that sent them vnto thee.
            
            
               
               For of our selues we nothing can demerite,
               So are we taught, and so we ought to learne,
               What good we haue it commeth from the spirit:
               The good from bad we cannot well discerne.
               So doe we read, so Scriptures doe discusse,
               We haue no good till God doth giue it vs.
            
            
               What haue we wherevpon to make our brags,
               Vnprofitable seruants euery one,
               Much like a sort of rotten ragges,
               Most vile and loathsome for to looke vpon.
               The great compassion he on vs did take,
               Came from his loue not for our merits sake.
            
            
               When God the father after Adams fall,Master Bright vpon Saint Stephens day.
               
               These sweet and comfortable words did speake,
               Ile not from man my mercy cleane recall,
               The womans seed the Serpents head shall breake
               In prayse and giuing thankes vpon him call,
               Who as he made, so is he heire of all.
            
            
               He came both poore and bare into the world,Sampson Price vpon the day of the Natiuitie of Christ.
               
               Was borne in Bethelem in a stable base,
               The Inne to him no lodging would afford,
               His mother in a manger did him place,
               The cloaths but meane that Mary wrapt him in,
               As he tooke life, so died he for our sin.
            
            
               
               Then giue him thankes and euerlasting prayse,
               From Sathans bondage that hath set thee free,
               By death, from death to life he did thee rayse:
               A ransome great, if thou the same couldst see.
               For all these blessings spoken of before,
               Giue him thy heart, he doth desire no more.
            
            
               The hungry Hogge that eateth all and some,
               And vnderneath the Oake on Acornes feedes,
               Doth not looke vp to see from whence they come,
               Nor once consider whence this food proceedes,
               Be not vngratefull to that God of thine,
               Lift vp thy lookes, shew not thy selfe a Swine.
            
            
               He all bestowes, which little we regard,
               He giues vs health, and wealth, and libertie,
               And sence, and mouing, seeking no reward,
               But faithfull loue without hypocrisie,
               Of Lepers ten which he did cleanse alone,
               None did returne to giue him thankes, but one.
            
            
               If I haue bin too sawcy or too bold,
               In giuing counsell where I ought to learne,
               I am contented for to be controld,
               By such a Pilot as can rule the sterne,
               Since what I write doe my affections proue,
               Pardon presumption that proceedes from loue.
            
            
               
               If 
                     〈◊〉
                   carpe and seeme to keepe a stirre,
               He hath no cause if truth be vnderstood,
               If Momus barke, I care not for the Curre,
               He comes by due discent from Enuies brood:
               What I haue writ, is for loue of thee,
               More will I write if this accepted bee.
            
            Finis.
         
      
   