
      
         
            
            
            The debate betweene
Pride and Lowlines,
pleaded to an iſſue in
Aſſiſe:
And hovve a Iurie vvith great indifferencie
being impannelled, and
redy to haue geuen their verdict,
were ſtraungely intercepted,
no leſſe pleaſant
then profitable.
F. T.
            
            O taſte and ſee hovv gratious the Lord
is, Bleſſed are all they that put
their truſt in him.
            Seene, and allowed.
            Imprinted at London
by Iohn Charlwood, for Rafe
Newbery, dwelling in Fleete-ſtrete
a litle about the
Condite.
(⸫)
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧To the godly and
gentle Reader.
            
               THou haſt (good Reader) in this short volume
               Sum matters that to thee may ſeeme vncooth:
               As ſpeach, to things improper, made commune,
               But yet marke thon if what they ſay bee ſooth.
            
            
               And if thou finde it ſo haue thou no ſcorn,
               Therof, for their vnlikelines that ſpake:
               For euident it is long heretoforn,
               Chriſt ſaid the ſtones should ſpeaken for his ſake.
            
            
               I could proue if me liſt to ſtand thereon,
               Such maner ſpeaking not to be ſo newe:
               As that they haue not been right long agon,
               Sometime admitted, but ſometime very true.
            
            
               For Balams Aſſe did ſpeake in very deede,
               And him reproued for his couetiſe:
               That went to curſen Iſrael for meede,
               VVhich cauſed him to chaungen his aduiſe.
            
            
               Reade we not of a horne that did blaſpheme,
               The name of God through pride and arrogance:
               Yet of his woords and ſpeach who did miſdeeme,
               Or ſought not rather their ſignifiance.
            
            
               
               Haue therefore (gentle Reader) in good part,
               This litle volume wherin thou maieſt finde:
               Some matters (though not pullished with art,)
               To make thee laugh and recreate thy minde.
            
            
               If other matter it may yeelden thee,
               As morall counſel, whereby thou may lerne:
               VVhat thinges are good to folowe, what to flee,
               Then thanke me when we meeten at the terme.
            
            
               And pray God bleſſe our Queene and Conntrey,
               And graunt her long to raigne and proſperous:
               And to vs all after this iourney,
               In heauen with him ſelfe a dwelling houſe.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               MEN talken diuerſly concernyng dreames,
               Some ſay they come of cauſes naturall:
               Of cholers, melancholies, blood, and fleames,
               And béen ſuch as their cauſe materiall.
            
            
               Some ſay they come of ſuperfluitie,
               That any wight hath take of meate or drinke:
               Engendring in the head fumoſitie,
               Whyle thyther frō the ſtomake they doo ſwynk.
            
            
               And therefore doo diſtinguiſhe of the time,
               When they appeare, yf in the latter ſléepe:
               The more remarkable they them define,
               If in the fyrſt they take the leſſer keepe.
            
            
               Some holden that they come of loue or feare,
               Which any wight by day time hath icaught:
               To thing or place, and wiſheth to be there,
               And this is deepe imprinted in the thought.
            
            
               And ſo ſayth Cato in his litle booke,
               And therewith dooth their credit elleuate:
               As thing whereof, but ſmall regard he tooke,
               All for the cauſe ye heard me tell of late.
            
            
               Others them holden ſignificatife,
               Of trueth not to be vily pended:
               As meſſages to men of death or life,
               How things begoon are likely to be ended.
            
            
               
               Now whether this come of perfection,
               Which God hath geuen to the ſoule of man:
               Such prouidence and ſuch direction,
               By proper kynde when he him firſt began.
            
            
               Me thinke to iudgen ſo were arrogance,
               As from the deitie to derogate:
               And man aboue his qualitie aduaunce,
               So making him forgetten his eſtate.
            
            
               And as it were a man to deifie,
               And to ſuch ma
                     •
                  ters him to intromit:
               Whereof our God alone hath propertie,
               But as him pleaſeth to reuealen it.
            
            
               And ſhewe to man by reuelation,
               Some matter ſtraunge that he hath purpoſed:
               It were great wrong and vſurpation,
               To ſay that mans wit had it for warned.
            
            
               For proofe dooth ſhew that it is otherwyſe,
               Namely for that we can not reade aryght:
               Theffect of them, ne in our hart compriſe,
               Except that God haue put it in our might.
            
            
               And that by gyft and grace eſpeciall,
               Such as he hath, but geuen vnto fewe:
               Who grew in princes fauours therewithal,
               For they ſuch ſecrete matters coulde ſhewe.
            
            
               
               As Ioſeph did to Pharao as we reade,
               And Daniel to Nabuchodonoſor:
               Whoſe dreames were frightful & of myckel dreade,
               Therefore I thinke as I haue ſayd before.
            
            
               That ſuch béen rare and very ſpeciall,
               And vnto ſuch as God before dooth warne:
               Of his intent, and things that wyl befall,
               Concerning dearth or cheape, goodneſſe or harme.
            
            
               This gather I by Saul in holy booke,
               Now fallen into miſeries extreame:
               He deemed that of God he was forſooke,
               For he appeared not to him in dreame.
            
            
               Ne other viſion as ſaith the ſtorie,
               Wherefore he thought his life in diſtreſſe:
               But yet for to relieue his hart full ſorie,
               He aſked counſel at the Phitoneſſe.
            
            
               As in that booke is to be read at length,
               And many a matter after and before:
               Concerning dreames, their vertue & their ſtrength
               Thereof as nowe ye get of me no more.
            
            
               But thus much I haue ſaid for this reſpect
               That dreames though ſome be vaine & of no force
               Yet are there ſome that bringen their effect,
               And would of men be waied any remors.
            
            
               
               Now hauing oft ſpoken of their efficacie,
               And of their cauſe as much as I can tell:
               From thence to other matters I wyll paſſe,
               To ſhewe not long agoe what me befell.
            
            
               And namely in this moneth of May,
               The time I doo remember very well:
               For it was iuſt vpon the ſixtéenth day,
               And eyght a clock had rong S. Pulchres bell.
            
            
               Mée thought the weather was not very calme,
               For it had raigned al the day beforn:
               Wherefore I tooke my booke and red a Pſalme,
               And bad my hoſt good night vntil the morne
            
            
               So when I had mée ſhrowded in my bed,
               And thanked God for graces manifold:
               Full ſoone had ſleepe icaught mée by the head,
               And Straightly with his armes he can me fold.
            
            
               This pleaſaunt ſleepe, this gentle creature,
               Nurs of diſgeſtion to man and beaſt:
               Withouten whom none of both can endure,
               Of no degrée from greateſt to the leaſt.
            
            
               But now to tellen thée my chéefe purpoſe,
               That hath mée cauſed all this thing to write:
               And orderly the ſame for to diſcloſe,
               And all the circumſtances to endite.
            
            
               
               By that time I had ſlept an houre or leſſe,
               I gan to dreame ſo woonderfull and ſtraunge:
               As but a fewe haue done before I geſſe,
               Ne yet in ſléepe ſo farre dyd euer raunge.
            
            
               Mée thought that I was walking in a Parke,
               Amyd the wooddes among the pleaſaunt leaues:
               Where many was the bird did ſwéetly carpe,
               Emong the thornes, the buſhes, and the greues.
            
            
               Whiche in my hart dyd kindle ſuch deſyre,
               To heare their ſonges, their myrth, and melodie:
               So chaungeable as no hart could require,
               That ſodenly mée thought, Lord where am I.
            
            
               Beſides the ſtately trées which to behold,
               With bodyes ſtraight vpryght and of ſuch length:
               As ſkant ye would beleeue mee yf I told,
               Ne of their bulke for timber and their ſtrength.
            
            
               By that time I had walked there a whyle,
               About a quarter of an houre foorth right:
               I thinke a litle more then halfe a mile,
               Of pleaſaunt féeldes I gan to haue a ſight.
            
            
               So paynted and ſo coloured I wéene,
               As by her leaue, and with her pacience:
               Nas Floras land, that freſh & luſty quéene,
               Ne with ſuch verdure, and ſuch redolence.
            
            
               
               This (may ye ihinke) me ſeemed very ſtraunge,
               And ſo it dyd, I put you out of doubt:
               I could not ſatiſfie mee ſelfe to raunge,
               Theſe pleaſaunt feelds, & medowes round about.
            
            
               Till at the laſt I came into a dale,
               Amid two mighty hils on eyther ſide:
               From whence a ſweete ſtreame downe dyd auale,
               And cleare as Chriſtal through the ſame did ſlide.
            
            
               Whiche to behold I had ſuch great pleaſure,
               That power had I none from thence to goe:
               Conſydered alſo that I had leaſure,
               And in ſuch place had neuer béen or thoe.
            
            
               Till at the laſt as I ſtood by this brooke,
               And on theſe matters muſed in my minde:
               I chaunced vp the hil to caſt my looke,
               If happyly ſome people I might finde.
            
            
               And ſodenly mée thought I had eſpied,
               A thing come downe the hilward toward me:
               But not on foote, ne yet on horſe dyd ryde,
               Which mee thought very ſtrange there for to ſee.
            
            
               And it beheld with full and whole intent,
               Howe downeward al at eaſe it helld the way:
               I muſed not a litle what it ment,
               When of the hill it paſſed had the ſway.
            
            
               
               I did perceyue then what it was in deede,
               That is to weete a goodly veluet bréech:
               Which in it furniture dyd ſo excéede,
               As hardly ſhal ye finde yf that ye ſeech.
            
            
               For it was all of veluet very fine,
               The neather ſtockes of pure Granado ſilke:
               Such as came neuer vpon legges of myne,
               Their cooller cleane contrary vnto mylke.
            
            
               This bréech was paned in the fayreſt wyſe,
               And with right ſatten very coſtly lyned:
               Embrodered according to the guiſe,
               With golden lace ful craftely engined.
            
            
               So when they were come downe beneath the hill,
               Into the valley whereas I dyd ſtand:
               I them beheld and looked on my fill,
               But 
                     •
                  old ſomuch as touche them with my hand.
            
            
               For ſtrange mée thought frō whence they ſhoulde be
               Some body wyl come after them anone:
               Wherefore I wyl attende (thought I) to ſee,
               For woonder is if ſuch things been alone.
            
            
               Then to that other hill I caſt myne eye,
               Whyle I was muſing as I haue ye told:
               And ſodenly (mee thought) I dyd eſpie,
               That euen as the veluet breeches rold.
            
            
               
               There came another paire, but ſofter paſe,
               And neuer ceaſed rolling tyll they came:
               Into the dale, and there had taken place,
               Now liſten, for me thought this litle game.
            
            
               Theſe bréeches I did bound on eyther ſide,
               As one that was in middle them betweene:
               Theſe laſt were but of cloth withouten pride,
               And ſtitche ne gard vpon them was to ſéene.
            
            
               Of cloth (I ſay) both vpper ſtocke and neather,
               Paned and ſingle lyned next to the thie:
               Light for thée were, méete for al ſort of weather,
               Nowe paraduenture ye wyl thinke I lye.
            
            
               Then veluet breeches dyd begyn to ſay,
               To them of cloth, as ye ſhall after here:
               But leſt ye maruayle how and by what way,
               Theſe things dyd ſpeake, that neuer ſpeaken ere.
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                  e wot it is a dreame that I you tell,
               Whoſe demonſtrations are very darke:
               And yet vnto the trueth accorden well,
               Admitted as they muſt be, therefore harke.
            
            
               The dreame of ſeuen blaſted eares of corne,
               Which Pharao the kyng ſawe whyle he ſlept:
               Deuoure the ſeuen good eares them beforn,
               Were ſtraunge as this, & yet their promiſe kept.
            
            
               
               And eke the ſeuen kine that were ſo leane
               And euyl fauoured as they might bée:
               The ſeuen fat kyne dyd eate vp cleane,
               What likely hood of trueth was there to ſée.
            
            
               And many other thinges that ſéeme vntrue,
               In figures, and in vncooth termes of ſpeache:
               Haue béen and wyl, this matter is not newe,
               For diuers béen the wayes and meanes to teache.
            
            
               Wherefore to turne agayne where I dyd leaue,
               And of my dreame the whole effect to tell:
               In naked woordes and eaſie to perceiue,
               And euery thing and matter as they fell.
            
            
               Vp ſtoode this veluet bréeche of which I ſayde,
               And ſpake to them of cloth in great diſdayne:
               Thou breeche of cloth, how art thou not afrayde,
               Of our diſpleaſure to incurre the payne.
            
            
               That haſt preſumed here to take thy place,
               Without regard of vs or reuerence:
               But as it were to berd vs and to face,
               I hold it beſt for thee to get thee hence.
            
            
               The other at theſe woordes was not afeard,
               Ne chaunged collour ne yet countenaunce:
               And at the laſt to this effect anſweard.
               Great were thy pride, yf thou had ſuffiſaunce.
            
            
               
               I ſée betwéene vs litle difference.
               Or none at all, ſaue only woorkmanſhip:
               Whereto yf there belong preeminence,
               Make thou no claime to thy miſtres woorſhip.
            
            
               I meane the woorkman which thée garniſhed,
               With ſilke and golde, and with imbroderie:
               By meane whereof Pride hath thee rauiſhed,
               To boſt in things belonging not to thee.
            
            
               This mooued not the veluet bréech a lit,
               Thou beggers weede (quoth he) baſe and villayn:
               Ill can I take at thy hand ſuch deſpit,
               And that to dooe thée force I mée refryan.
            
            
               How dare thou ſpeake ſuch language vnto mée,
               Thy better, and thy ſelfe with me compare:
               So farre inferiour in eche degree,
               As they that néere vs both, witneſſes are.
            
            
               Beſides that, I was borne in Italy,
               Sometime the miſtres of the world ſo wide:
               Famous in learning and chiualry,
               As in this world there hath been none beſide.
            
            
               Beſides all that, my foote is woorth thy yard,
               So am I iolif fayre and precious:
               Where I am preſent, who dooth thée regard,
               Or thée vouchſafe to dwellen in his houſe.
            
            
               
               I let him in, for thée might ſtand without,
               Am biddē ſpeake, when thou muſt hold thy peace:
               And many a matter dayly bring about,
               To hard for thee, therefore I redd thee ceaſe.
            
            
               Nowe ſure this gere is paſſing ſtrange thought I,
               What (trow I) wil become betweene theſe twayn
               With that the breech of cloth gan to replie,
               And thus began his ſentence for to ſaien.
            
            
               Whereas thou ſayeſt I am inferiour,
               And vnto thee am nothing comparable:
               For thou doeſt ſerue the riche, and I the poore,
               That reaſon is both fals and deceauable.
            
            
               For yf that vertue and humanitie,
               Were tyed to riches or appropriate:
               As Pride and vices are moſt commonly,
               Then I 
                     •
                  old in this caſe with thée debate.
            
            
               But ſith apparell dooth not him amend,
               That weareth it according to the coſt:
               But only helpeth to conſume and ſpend,
               The more is layd on thee, the more is loſt.
            
            
               And where thou ſayeſt thou art of Italy,
               Borne and bred in that noble region:
               Why liueſt thou not at home in thy country,
               Woe woorth him brought thee fyrſt to Albion.
            
            
               
               Which nowe of vs is called England,
               Where ſometime I haue couered the beſt:
               And ſuch as then were thought to vnderſtand,
               Whoſe lyfe and maners vices did deteſt.
            
            
               For in thy countrey were thou not alone,
               Ne haſt béen euer ſithe thy dwellyng here:
               But art with many a vice wayted vpon,
               Which doo and haue done this land mickle déere.
            
            
               As for the learning and the chiualrie,
               Wherein thy countrey thou dooſt ſe commend:
               About thy comming into that country,
               Of both their dwelling there they made an end.
            
            
               And loſt the diademe imperiall,
               Ne can it bold as their forefathers dyd:
               Loe what thou haſt to boſten thee withall,
               They loſt the landes their fathers conquerid.
            
            
               Whereas thou ſayeſt thy foote is woorth my yard,
               That is vntrue, ſaue that for argument:
               Thinges are to man as he dooth them regard,
               And other reaſon none to myne intent.
            
            
               Whereas thou ſayeſt that in thy preſence,
               I am of no regarde ne countenaunce:
               That is a lye ſauing your reuerence,
               Though with the fooles it often ſo doo chaunce.
            
            
               
               With that the veluet bréeches as mée thought,
               Began toward the other faſt to roll:
               And ſurely but for mee they would haue fought,
               So I was faine the matter to controll.
            
            
               And ſpake vnto them both as ye ſhall heere,
               At leaſt as I my ſelfe imagined:
               Nay freend (quoth I) ye ſhall doo him no déere,
               But eche of them ſware other ſhould be dead.
            
            
               Not ſo (quoth I) I know a better way,
               And more indifferent vnto you bothe:
               For when ye haue done eyther what ye may,
               Ye muſt be ruled be ye léefe or lothe.
            
            
               For here ye dwellen in a lande of peace,
               And vnder lawes, and vnder Magiſtrate:
               God graunt them in his graces to encreaſe,
               That enden wyll full iuſtly your debate.
            
            
               And I my ſelfe for better was in place,
               Though for my learnyng farre vnwoorthy:
               Towards the lawe theſe long xv. yéeres ſpace,
               And thereof ſworne to be an atturney.
            
            
               If I may pleaſer you with my ſeruice,
               I am yours to commaund right as ye liſt:
               For doubt in lawe ye ſhall haue myne aduiſe,
               Till better come that wyl herein aſſiſt.
            
            
               
               For that I ſée the matter is not ſmall,
               Ne yet no trifle wherefore ye contend:
               One would fayne haue his owne, the other all,
               And herevpon the matter dooth depend.
            
            
               The one him boſteth of his woorthyneſſe,
               And of his natiue ſoyle where he was borne:
               And how that he hath rowm in throng and preſſe,
               Becauſe that of the wealthy he is worne.
            
            
               The other ſayth he is this countrey man,
               Here hath he dwelt and here led all his lyfe:
               And here wyll dwell ſay thother what he can,
               Nowe for to end all this debate and ſtrife.
            
            
               And both your mindes therein to ſatiſfy,
               The beſt is all your quarell and complaint:
               To haue heard and debated orderly,
               And eche man tell his tall without reſtraint.
            
            
               But howe ſo ye your ſelues doo eſtéeme,
               Ye are not Iudges thereof nor ſhalbe:
               But twelue, or foure & twentie ſhal it déeme,
               And this is reaſonable thynketh me.
            
            
               To tell your price and vertues ye haue leaue,
               And your effectes, your cauſes and your end:
               Which their well vnderſtood wyl not deceaue,
               Nor ſuffer vs to erre as I entend.
            
            
               
               And for you veluet bréeches finde ye gréeued,
               And of this clothen bréech to haue had wrong:
               Ye may ſeeke orderly to be relieued,
               So wyll I doo (quoth he) or it be long.
            
            
               And make him yéeld to myne obeyſaunce,
               And to confeſſe that he hath nothing here:
               Bnt only at my wyll and ſufferaunce,
               As I doubt not it plainely ſhall appere.
            
            
               The other ſaide, as for obeyſaunce,
               He ought him none homage ne fealtie:
               All were his lookes bigge and his countenaunce,
               And fréendſhyp great, all that ne doubted hee.
            
            
               His cauſe was good, his title aunceſtrell,
               For in this Countrey was he borne and bred:
               And but yf lawe ſayd nay, here would he dwel,
               So then vnto them both I anſweared.
            
            
               Sith eche of you dooth thinke he hath a right,
               And for to trye the ſame ye are ſo bent:
               Declare and bring your title into light,
               Treſpaſſe or diſſeiſon of franke tenement.
            
            
               And ſhewe your title and whence ye deriue it.
               And yf ye thinke this good ye veluet bréeche:
               The clothe ſhall pleade ye non diſſeſimit,
               And thus without long circumſtaunce of ſpéeche.
            
            
               
               Vpon this iſſue ye haue libertie,
               For proofe that he hath done ye diſſeaſon:
               To alledge what ſo ye can bethinke ye,
               And therein at our handes to aſke for reaſon.
            
            
               He anſwerd, to be plentiffe in thaſſiſe,
               He thought not good, ne ment not ſo to be:
               And that it was not good I dyd aduiſe,
               A Iury may be perciall (quoth he.)
            
            
               For I am woorthyer by muche then he,
               For many cauſes that I can alledge:
               But yf they wyll ſéeme ſuche to the Countrie,
               I doubt, or of them yf they wyl take knowledge.
            
            
               For I am here a ſtraunger in this lande,
               And ſaue of late yéeres of ſmall acquayntaunce:
               The common people dooth not vnderſtand,
               My woorthyneſſe, eſtate, ne countenaunce.
            
            
               My aduerſarie is their countrey man,
               And is not ſo chargeable vnto them:
               Therefore wyll they doo for him what they can,
               But yf they were of Towne and Citizen.
            
            
               For of the hyndes or of the payſauntie,
               I feare I ſhould not haue indifferents:
               For I know they beare no good wyll to me,
               Becauſe my freendes their purſes often rents.
            
            
               
               This doubt is vaine thereof aſſure yée,
               (Quoth I) for whom ye thinke not indifferent:
               Ye may may him chalenge from your Iury,
               And ſhewe your cauſe why from him ye diſſent.
            
            
               And as that cauſe ſhall ſéeme allowable,
               By proofe or reaſon that ye for it make:
               It ſhalbe holden acceptable,
               Thereafter to receyue or to forſake.
            
            
               Goe foorth therefore as ye began in order,
               Vntill ye come to matter iſſuable:
               Of all the which I ſhalbe the recorder,
               And howe ſo it ſhalbe determinable.
            
            
               To wit by Iury or by iudgement,
               I ſhall direct you by my ſkill:
               And to you both ſhalbe indifferent,
               Nowe haue I ſayd, truſte me yf ye wyll.
            
            
               Your woordes (quoth he) dooth ſound to reaſon,
               So I may haue my cauſe heard all at large:
               Let him pleade me null ne fort null diſſe
                     •
                  ſon,
               Enter my pleas where with I wyll him charge.
            
            
               For I am ſure they wylbe ſumwhat long,
               And ſo the Iury gladly wyl mée take:
               Or leaue ſome of my plea to doo me wrong,
               The other partie would it not forſake.
            
            
               
               But pleaded him the iſſue generall.
               And prayed as the other prayed before:
               To enter his matter eſpeciall,
               One thing the veluet bréeches moued more.
            
            
               For who ſhall iudge our chalenges (quoth he)
               I anſweard, yf it fall in learning, I:
               If not, ye ſhall haue triers two or thrée,
               That ſhall iudge of their indifferencie,
            
            
               I am content (quoth he) my chalenge ſaued,
               My matter ſhalbe tryed by thaſſiſe:
               It is but right (quoth I) that ye haue craued,
               And foorth they went, as I ſhall you deuiſe.
            
            
               I meane the bréeche of cloth in his replie,
               And tooke his holde agayne whereas he left:
               Whereas thou ſayeſt thou canſt doo more then I.
               I knowe great is thy ſubteltie and craft.
            
            
               To let one in, where I can not doo ſo,
               And ſpeake where I am hidden hold my peace:
               Full many a wight that woorketh mikell wo,
               When of their farme expired is their leaſe.
            
            
               In penall ſtatute and concealed land,
               For ſo thou tearmeſt it for thyne encreas:
               Full hardly can the poore eſcape thy hand.
               That they ne finde thy lampe both oyle & greas.
            
            
               
               THus haue I anſwered (quoth he) thine argumēt,
               From point to point, that haſt thou not (qd, he:)
               With that I looked vp and had a glent,
               Of one that came toward vs leaſurely.
            
            
               Soft then (quoth I) ye be at a good point,
               Your pleas and anſwears I haue fully hard,
               Perchaunce an iſſue hereon may be ioynt,
               Whereon thaſſiſe foorthwith we may award.
            
            
               And here me thinke dooth come a gentleman,
               Whom if ye thinke as I haue thought it beſt:
               We wyll entreate by all the meanes we can,
               That he wyll be the foreman of the queſt.
            
            
               Gladly quoth one, with good wyl quoth the other,
               By, then he was come néere, and bad god ſpéede,
               And we againe ſayd, welcome gentle brother,
               Piked he was and handſome in his wéede.
            
            
               A faire blacke coate of cloth withouten ſleue,
               And buttoned the ſhoulder round about:
               Of .xx. s. a yard as I beleeue,
               And layd vpon with parchment lace without.
            
            
               His dublet was of Sattin very fine,
               And it was cut and ſtitched very thick:
               Of ſilke it had a coſtly enterlyne.
               His ſhirt had hands and ruffe of pure Cambrick.
            
            
               
               His vpper ſtockes of ſylken Grogerane,
               And to his hippes they ſate full cloſe and trym,
               And laced very coſtly euery pane,
               Their lyning was of Satten as I wyn.
            
            
               His neather ſtockes of ſilke accordingly,
               A veluet gyrdle rounde about his waſt:
               This knight or ſquyre what ſo he be (quoth I,)
               We wyll empannell, let him not goe paſt.
            
            
               He condiſcended ſoone to our requeſt,
               Then I beholding him aduiſedly:
               Sawe where a néedle ſticked on his breſt,
               And at the ſame a blacke thréed hanging by.
            
            
               So then I aſked him of his eſtate,
               He ſaid he was a Taylour by his art:
               All in good time (quoth I) here is debate,
               Which to appeaſe I pray you doo your part.
            
            
               Here is a matter pleaded to enqueſt,
               Wherein it may pleaſe you to take ſome paine:
               Your wyſedome may directen all the reſt,
               I ſhall ye read it, euident and plaine.
            
            
               I challenge him then ſaith the clothen bréeche,
               Why ſo (quoth I) dooth be not make you both?
               What then, his gayne by vs is not aléeche,
               Quoth he, and therewithal he ſwore an oath.
            
            
               
               He gayneth more by byeng ſilke and laſe,
               Of golde and ſiluer and ſuch trumperie:
               To welt, to edge, to garde, to ſtitche and face,
               By one of theſe, then .xv. payre of mée.
            
            
               In making mee, there is no gaine but one,
               Which is, for labour and for woorkmanſhip:
               Except ſometime a péece of cloth come home,
               As yf that by miſchaunce the ſhere did ſlip.
            
            
               Nowe is that trade become a marchandice,
               Wherein ſith pride in peoples harts dooth raigne:
               So great hath been and is his exerciſe,
               That only God dooth knowe what is his gaine.
            
            
               And howe, though he thereof doo litle reck,
               So that to ſetten downe a bill of charge:
               There is no Auditor, ne Clarke of Check,
               Can penne it bett then he, ne more at large.
            
            
               So that I doubt of his indifference,
               As in that tryall here betwéene vs twayne:
               Leſt for him he would ſtraine his conſcience,
               I ſee this worlde is ſet to folowe gayne.
            
            
               
                  I Sayd, all this might come of good intent,
               And for to puniſhe pride as he was able:
               Then were no reaſon for it he were ſhent,
               For he nys Officer, ne Conſtable.
            
            
               
               Nor otherwyſe ſet in aucthoritie,
               To execute the ſtatute of aurai:
               Then how to puniſhe them ſuppoſeth he,
               The beſt meane for their pride to make them pay.
            
            
               And aſke for ſilke, for laſe, and other ſtuffe,
               To face and lyne without ſide and within:
               Twyſe as much at the leaſt as were inoffe,
               And kéepe the third part, and the reſt put in.
            
            
               And reache them with a bill of reckening,
               Shal make them ſcrat wheras it itcheth nought:
               If this may be a neceſſarie thing,
               Then of this chalenge well aduiſe we ought.
            
            
               For although ſom through pride thus down are caſt
               And waſte their liuing that their freends thē laft:
               Yet others by their meanes aryſe as faſt,
               Som by their cunning, & ſome by their craft.
            
            
               Wherefore the cauſe ſhalben examined,
               By tryors whom we wyll chooſe for that end:
               To try them or they béen empanelled,
               They were content both, and did condiſcend.
            
            
               Wherefore I prayed hym to ſtand a ſide,
               And watche yf any other cam that way:
               Leſt of vs they eſcaped vneſpied,
               He was contented with all that I dyd ſay.
            
            
               
               WIth that the veluet bréeches had me ſtaien,
               Our iſſue is not perfect yet (quoth he:)
               I haue much other matter for to ſaien,
               Say on (quoth I) you haue good libertie.
            
            
               With that he gan to ſtretchen and to ſtare,
               And ſayd that he dyd ſuffer villany:
               That ſuch a Caytiue ſhould with him compare.
               A Carters wéede, and meete for huſbandry.
            
            
               For who would ſet his ſonne to ſchoole quoth he,
               To ſtudie ſcripture, phiſicke, or the lawe:
               But that he beareth good wyll vnto me,
               If otherwyſe I hold him but a dawe.
            
            
               Sayeth not the prouerbe, honors noriſhe artes,
               Why trotten men ſo farre for marchandiſe:
               Who hath the credite at the faires and martes.
               Not he that commeth in a coate of fryſe.
            
            
               What man or ladde is he that were not loth.
               In youth to trauell, and to faren harde:
               If he ne purpoſed to weare but cloth.
               In time to come, nor further dyd regarde.
            
            
               Hence ryſen learned men in eche eſtate,
               Coonnyng in handy craft and facultie:
               And getten dignities of doctorate,
               Who is their marke, what ſhoot they at but me.
            
            
               
               I am the roote, thoriginal of lawes,
               Whoſe learned maſtes holden are in price:
               Vnto the ſimple folke I am the cauſe.
               That many a foole and dolt is holden wyſe.
            
            
               Who dooth ſo ſharpen correction as I,
               Vpon all ſuch as doone the lawes offend:
               If thereto be annexed penalty,
               Of money that to mee thence may deſcend.
            
            
               That this is true and may not be denyed,
               I wyll auerte, and yf he it gayne ſay,
               I am content by verdict it be tryed.
               Then ſpake the bréech of cloth without delay.
            
            
               PRoteſting alwayes that he dyd not iudge,
               Man, maide, ne wyfe by their array:
               Ne yet much leſſe that euer he dyd grudge.
               Obſeruing comelineſſe yf they were gay.
            
            
               Namely, the circumſtaunce obſerued.
               The birth, the time, the place, or dignitie:
               Who hath of Prince or common wealth deſerued,
               His weede of right may anſwear his degeée.
            
            
               Which matters although they béen to allow,
               With comelineſſe for good and tollerable:
               Yet who (ſayth Chriſt) him ſelfe dooth meeke & bow,
               Exalted ſhal he be and acceptable.
            
            
               
               Example he did make him ſelfe herein,
               Who thinking it no wrong ne robberie:
               With God the father equall for to byn,
               Was here in earth in all ſimplicitie.
            
            
               But for to followe him it were to muche,
               Or Iohn the Baptiſt with his coate of here:
               Yet may we ſhewe our ſelues to be ſuche,
               As more eſteeme our bodyes then our gere.
            
            
               Namely our ſoules whiche are celeſtiall,
               Whoſe braue apparell and whoſe ornament:
               Whoſe diademe and crowne imperiall,
               Is hart that ſéeketh God with whole intent.
            
            
               But to the point, and for plea to the matter.
               Alledged for thy commendation,
               As they aryſen this is myne anſwer,
               And fyrſt thy vayne imagination.
            
            
               That thou art cauſe, that thou art finall end,
               Of learning, I ne thinke thée to be ſo:
               And that thou were, the liuing God defend,
               For ſure thou were not in principio.
            
            
               Nor art among the godly at this day,
               Though with a number, I thinke it be true:
               No litle vnto vertues ruine and decay,
               Where it is ſo, the godly doon it rue.
            
            
               
               For where thou ſayeſt, honor dooth noriſhe art,
               True honour I ſuppoſe thou neuer knewe:
               That iudgeſt it in arrogance of hart,
               In ſilke and veluet, and in outward ſhewe.
            
            
               The very baightes and lures of Satanas,
               Who for thy ſake was throwen out of heauen:
               For the Nabuchodonoſor eat graſſe,
               And fed with Oxen well nigh yeeres ſeuen.
            
            
               Which is the honor man hath for thy ſake,
               Hath béen and is and euermore ſhalbe:
               Who Idols of their carcaſſes dooe make,
               Through foule preſumption and vanitie.
            
            
               For he that thorow learning ſéeketh port,
               Ne maketh other purpoſe of the ſame:
               His learning puffeth him in ſuch a ſort,
               That oft in ſted of honor he hath ſhame.
            
            
               NOwe for the marchaunt and his marchaundiſe,
               His credite in his mart and cheuiſaunce:
               Thou geueſt him to ſéeme both riche and wyſe,
               Where through he bringeth many to miſchance.
            
            
               Of this me néedeth litle for to ſpeake,
               Sith I could know a peny from a grote:
               I knewe not many forced for to breake,
               If Pride ne made him or his wyfe a coate.
            
            
               
               And where thou ſayeſt that man or boy were loth,
               In youth to trauell and to faren hard:
               Yes ſure & God, there are that haue done both,
               And onely heauen hoped for reward.
            
            
               As for this world and her fickle glory.
               They haue eſtéemed it a thyng of nought:
               And for their neighbour, freend, and territory,
               Imployed haue their ſtudie, care, and thought.
            
            
               I could reherſe the ſtories many a one,
               Of Greekes and Romanes that are memorable:
               Though wormes ſome eat, their fleſh ſo long ago
                     •…
                  ,
               Yet are their names accompted venerable.
            
            
               But I nyl ſtay to recken them as nowe.
               How ſome aroſen vnto counſelſhyp:
               And thereto weren called from the plow,
               Whē they thought nothing leſſe then maſterſhip.
            
            
               So that of woorſhip I dooe diſtinguiſhe,
               Some ſeeken it, and ſome of it are ſought:
               And thoſe are ſuch as nothing leſſe doo wiſhe,
               Some thinke with golde and ſiluer it is bought.
            
            
               Which maketh offices beare ſuch a price,
               And that ſo gréedely they béen icaught:
               Before thy time men were not halfe ſo wyſe,
               As ſythen in thy ſchoole they haue béen taught.
            
            
               
               To bye and ſellen offices for gaine,
               No queſtion made of his woorthyneſſe:
               That ſhall them haue, but yf he may not paien,
               How ſo he powle and pill for his redreſſe.
            
            
               Then which of theſe thrée (for there is but one)
               Woorſhyp in déede, and of right venerable:
               To vertue freend, to vice a deadly ſone,
               I ſhall you tell as néere as I am able.
            
            
               The one dooth begge an office, to what end,
               For there are two as it is euident:
               Theffect wyll ſhewe whereto he dooth it bend.
               His chaunge of cheere, and eke his gouernment,
            
            
               The other byeth, payeth déere therefore,
               His meaning may be good, poſſible it is:
               But (by your leaue) twiſe as vnlike and more,
               And yet no rule ſo ſure but it may miſſe.
            
            
               The thirde is called vtterly vnwitting,
               For whom ſpake neither ſiluer, golde, ne fréend:
               Thriſe happy countrey where ſuche are ſitting,
               Whom grace and vertue only doon commend.
            
            
               For there are trueth and mercie met togeather,
               And thither looketh ryghteouſneſſe from heauen:
               All were they cloth or veluet chooſe them whether,
               For pride ne ſhal their wits from them bereuen.
            
            
               
               THat thou art cauſe of art and faculty.
               Of handy craft which may not be forgon:
               Pride found them not fyrſt but neceſſity,
               In déede thou haſt corrupted them eche one.
            
            
               And cauſed them to béen adulterate,
               And chaunged cleane into another guiſe:
               Deceipt a Iorneyman with eche eſtate,
               Through whom they waxen riche, & ſéemen wyſe,
            
            
               Which whyle I was in fauour might not be,
               The father was contented that his ſonne:
               Should leade a lyfe ſuch as before did he,
               And end in ſuch eſtate as he begoon.
            
            
               Vnto the which ſmall thing is requiſite,
               I meane a godly minde to ſatiſfie:
               Whereas to vanitie and foule delite.
               And Pride I dare affirme the contrary.
            
            
               To wyt, he waſteth much vnorderly,
               And of his coſt and charge ſo ſmall purpoſe:
               That of the good fewe faren bett thereby,
               For it is ſpent on vertues vtter foes.
            
            
               As dayly is to ſée who lyſt to looke,
               The Vſurer and eke Thextorcioner:
               Full ſure they are, his name is in their booke,
               Vntill his houſe and land be come to their.
            
            
               
               Then come deuiſes, many a ſhamefull ſhift,
               To begge, to borowe, and to deceiue their freend:
               And many another lewde and preuie lyft,
               Tyll laſtly foule and ſhamefull is the end:
            
            
               And where thou ſayeſt thou art a puniſher,
               Of ſinne, it is full true I doo confeſſe:
               As thou haſt ſayd, and in ſuch foorme order,
               Which is to robbe, to rauiſhe, and oppreſſe.
            
            
               And ſo farre from all collour to doo good,
               And further I dare ſafely vndertake:
               Then deuils to caſt out through Beelzebub,
               No truer gloſe of that text can I make.
            
            
               Here are thy fruites by whiche (as Chriſt doth ſay)
               The trée is knowen for good or ill therefore:
               Of all theſe preſence, iudgement I doo pray,
               And that I may haue right I aſke no more.
            
            
               Nought ſéeke I for, ſuperioritie,
               Ne thing of thyne, ne of none other man:
               To hold myne owne if I haue libertie,
               Though it be ſmall right well content I am.
            
            
               WIth that I gan to ſpeake vnto them both,
               Is this theffect of all ye haue to ſay?
               Ye here is all then anſweared he of cloth,
               The other held his peace, & ſayd not nay.
            
            
               
               Your matters are iregeſtred quoth I,
               Euery plea and euery argument:
               Here is a paper witneſſe wyll not lye,
               Nowe hearken if it pleas you myne intent.
            
            
               Ye are nowe come to maſter iſſuable,
               On eyther ſide as dooth appeare at large.
               And many poyntes therein are inquirable,
               Whereof the Iurie taken ſhall thee charge.
            
            
               As I ſhall reade it to them orderly,
               Wherfore vnto your chalenges be ſure:
               Ye take good heede, that blameleſſe I may be.
               Which muſt recorden here your procedure.
            
            
               They anſwered me both, they were content,
               With that mee thought I heard a company:
               That downe the hill vnto vswardhem bent,
               And comming neere they dyd vs curteſy.
            
            
               The formoſt weren thrée that went togeather,
               And eke in clokes they weren homely clad.
               Both plaine and light accordyng to the weather,
               And in their geſture ſober, wyſe, and ſad.
            
            
               And Seruing men there wayted them vpon,
               Comely arayed, and in number eleuen:
               Fiue of the whiche were ſeruantes all to one,
               A knight as after I dyd apperceyuen.
            
            
               
               And namely, for they ware for cogniſaunce,
               A Pecock (as mée thought) without a tayle:
               Not newe, ne yeſterdayes remembraunce,
               What ware the reſt my memory dooth faile.
            
            
               I could haue told ye euen at that tyme,
               For foure of them to one dyd apparteyne:
               Aſquire of an auncient race and lyne,
               And to thirde a gentleman, but twayne.
            
            
               So when I ſawe them doon vs curteſy,
               And bidden vs with gentle woordes god ſpéede:
               I anſweard them agayne accordingly.
               And forward in this cauſe I dyd procéede.
            
            
               And tolde them what was fallen in debate,
               At wixt theſe paires of cloth and veluet bréeches:
               Concerning maintenance of their eſtate,
               Their matters, allegations, and ſpéeches.
            
            
               And prayed them of their humanitie,
               If they were ſuch as veryly they ſéemed:
               To wyt, of knighthood and gentle progeny,
               By whom of right, ſuch cauſes ſhoulde be déemed.
            
            
               As which concerned very gentilleſſe,
               Wherein in it ſtant what is thereof the roote:
               Ye ſhall doo God high ſeruice as I geſſe,
               And to your countrey men no litle boote.
            
            
               
               The knight as he that gentle was of chéere,
               He anſweared his learning was but ſmall:
               But els herein his good wyll ſhould appeere,
               Then afterward I vp and tolde him all.
            
            
               Howe that he ſhould not béen alone him ſelue,
               Ne ſhould aboue his learning haue in charge:
               For he ſhould be the foreman of the twelue,
               And of their matter ſhould enquire at large.
            
            
               And of ſuch thinges as are in their knowledge,
               And of which no man can be ignoraunt:
               That liueth on this earth, I dare alledge,
               They were content all thrée, and didden graunt,
            
            
               Then came there other company a paſe,
               By two and two togeather, thrée and thrée:
               I ſought to knowe ſome of them by their face,
               But I ne might, ne geſſe what they ſhould be.
            
            
               The fyrſt thrée ſéemed for to béene of Towne,
               For they were handſomely apparelled:
               Eche of them in a very ſéemely gowne,
               The one a white knit cappe vpon his hed.
            
            
               His coate was faced with graie Coonie ſkinne,
               I iudged him a baker by his trade:
               As he confeſſed when I aſked him,
               For of his language nothing ſtraunge he made.
            
            
               
               Another was a Bruer by his art,
               The third a Vitayler, and did retaile:
               Bought by the barell, & ſold by pinte & quart,
               And had his liuing by that trauayle.
            
            
               And were clothed after Citizen,
               Neither in ſlouenrie ne yet in pride:
               Ne had they terme of inkhorne ne of penne,
               But plaine in ſpeache which gladly I eſpied.
            
            
               And after them there came all in a rowt,
               Sixtéene or ſeuenteene as I dyd geſſe:
               All likely men, and neither knaue ne lowt,
               But chéefely two that came before the preſſe.
            
            
               One of them had a fiddle in his hand,
               And pleaſaunt ſonges he played therevpon:
               To queynt and hard for me to vnderſtand,
               If he were braue I make no queſtion.
            
            
               Or yf his furniture were for the daunce,
               His bréeches great, full of ventoſitie:
               Deuiſed in the caſtle of playſaunce,
               And maſter of a daunſing ſchoole was he.
            
            
               The other was by trade a Vintener.
               That had full many a hoggeſhed looked in.
               Trauayled he had and was a languager,
               His face was redd as any Cherubyn.
            
            
               
               A Spaniſhe cloke he ware fine with a cape.
               A ſine Frenche cappe on his head accordyng:
               Both which vpon him faire and ſéemely ſate,
               And one his finger ware a mightie ring.
            
            
               When they came néere, I aſked what they were,
               For nought ſaid they ſo much as once god ſpeede:
               But to my queſtion ſaid the Tauerner,
               Anſwear they might, but therto lay no néede.
            
            
               But told me at the laſt of their degrée,
               As ye haue heard before then I them prayed:
               If they were ſuche as they would ſéeme to be,
               That in this matter we might haue their ayde.
            
            
               Yet was there one whom I had nigh forgot,
               And he was maſter of a dyſing houſe:
               No woord had he, but pay the boxe and pot,
               So braue he was, that mée thought marueylous.
            
            
               The reſt were people of the common ſort,
               Of whom I tooke no héede eſpeciall:
               Ne made enquirie of their liues or port,
               Saue ſeuen of the whiche tell you I ſhall.
            
            
               One of them ware a ierken made of kuffe,
               A mightie pouche of canuas at his belt:
               Wherein me thought there ſéemed to be ſtuffe,
               A faire cloke on his backe, & on his head a felt.
            
            
               
               Vpon his ſhoulder he bare a forreſt Byll,
               I aſked what he was, wherfore (quod he)
               Aſke ye: Friend (quod I) for none yll,
               And told him as I told the reſt perdye.
            
            
               But he made aunſwere farre from my purpoſe,
               And aſked me if I could tell of leaſe:
               Of paſture that was to be ſet or cloſe,
               Now to beginne, or by ſome mans deceaſe.
            
            
               Or office if I wyſt any to ſell,
               He had a ſonne or twaine be would aduaunce:
               And ſayd they ſhould take paines vntyll it fell,
               He that wyll thriue (quod he) muſt tary chaunce.
            
            
               And marchaunt tarye for the market daye,
               On Gods name ſyr (quod I) yée ſaye full well:
               Then what he was, he tolde without delaye,
               To wytte a graſier, alſo where he dyd dwell.
            
            
               Another was there much of his entaile,
               Both for his geſture and his habilement:
               His handes were ſtained, both the ſkyn and naile,
               Full many peece of barke they hadden rent.
            
            
               He was in very déede a ritche Tanner,
               And aſked where I thougvt he might purchaſe:
               Som great domayn, ſom Lordſhip, or ſom maner,
               But I reherſed to them both our caſe.
            
            
               
               And tolde them that of Lordſhips I ne knewe,
               Nor in ſuch matters was inquiſitiue:
               Who bought, who ſould, ſyr Richard, or ſyr Hew,
               And from thoſe purpoſes I dyd them driue.
            
            
               Beſides all theſe a Bricklayer there was,
               A man right cunning in his facultie:
               He had hope build full many a ſtatelye place,
               A trewell at his gyrdle weared hee.
            
            
               And in his hand he had a flat meaſure,
               Ywrought with figures of Arithmetick,
               Whereby his length and bredth he tooke full ſure,
               And wiſely couched both his ſtone and brick.
            
            
               Then was there yet another in a gowne,
               Of fine blacke cloth, and faced faire with budge:
               A blacke bagge from his girdle hung a downe,
               And full it was, wherewith I could not iudge.
            
            
               He gaue no worde, ſo much as once God ſpéede,
               I prayed him to tell vs what he was:
               Why ſo (quod he) therein lyeth no néede,
               I told him yes as thinges might come to paſſe.
            
            
               I am then an infourmer anſwered he,
               All in good time ſir, and welcome quoth I:
               For we haue néede of ſuche men as are ye,
               We haue to fewe here of your facultie.
            
            
               
               That could infourme vs of the right vppon,
               A matter here before vs come to controuerſed:
               Here is none learned but if I be one,
               And ſomwhat of the matter him reherſed.
            
            
               He aunſwered that his experience,
               Was better then his learning a great deale:
               Namely in the Statutes of penitence,
               For in theſe and none others doth he deale.
            
            
               Then was there yet another whom I ſée,
               Which ſtoode one of the hindmoſt of the route:
               For ſoft and no whit forthputting was hée,
               Full ſunbrunt was his forehead and his ſoute.
            
            
               A man about a fiftie yéeres of age,
               Of Kendall very courſe his coate was made:
               My thought of truth his face was an Image,
               Vpon his gyrdle hong a ruſtye blade.
            
            
               Full ſimple was thereof both haft and ſheath,
               A ſtrawen batte he had vpon his head:
               The which his Chinne was faſtened vnderneath,
               His chéekes dyd ſhew he earned well his bread.
            
            
               A payre of ſtartvppes had he on his féete,
               That laſed were vp to the ſmall of the legge:
               Homelie they were, and eaſier then méete,
               And in their ſoles full many a woodden pegge.
            
            
               
               He had a ſhyrt of Canuas hard and tough,
               Of which the band and ruffes were both of one:
               So fyne that I might ſee his ſkinne them through,
               Which is as much to ſay as he had none.
            
            
               This was a huſbandman, a ſimple hinde,
               Whome when I called had, and bad come néere:
               And of the matter told him all my minde,
               He aunſwered with milde and gentle chéere.
            
            
               Syr (quod he) gladlye would I doon ye prowe,
               If in this matter I had halfe the ſkyll:
               That I haue in my harrow and my plowe,
               I pray ye of my wordes, to thinke none yll.
            
            
               I bad him not doubt therof, and told him more,
               He ſhould haue fellowſhip and aſſiſtence:
               Lyke as ye had, ne tell the knight before:
               And of the matter certen euidence.
            
            
               Then was he well contented therewithall,
               Looke what is in my knowledge & my might:
               Helpe you (quod he) with all my hart I ſhall,
               Then on my matter further I gan me dight.
            
            
               To make them full, then found I other me,
               A Shoemaker, a Weauer, and a Smith:
               A Haberdaſher of ſmale wares alſo,
               I now me thought to trie our matter with.
            
            
               
               For I remember not the certaintie,
               Of all the reſidue that weren there:
               Their names, their ſcience, and their facultie,
               For haſte alſo I nould of them enquere.
            
            
               But theſe vnto my pannell dyd I wryte
               And read their names, that euery man might here
               And not full fowre and twentie names recite,
               For ſure I was twelue of them would appere.
            
            
               Then ſpake the parties vnto me and ſayd,
               Them thought that ſom of theſe were chalēgable:
               Whereof aduantage either of them praid,
               If any vpon cauſe they could diſable.
            
            
               Reaſon (quod I) that was agréed vpon before,
               But who ſhall iudge and trye your challenges:
               Your ſelfe (quod they) no ſure (quod I) therfore
               Appoint ſome other to that buſines.
            
            
               Yea twoo or thrée thereto wyll ſcant ſuffice,
               To iudge of them and theyr indifference:
               For ſecréete cauſe of fauour maye ariſe.
               Which muſt be ſearched which great aduertence.
            
            
               By ſuch as haue experience therein,
               And of aduerſitye haue had theyr part:
               For who ſo beaten in the world hath bene,
               No further néede he take degrée of art.
            
            
               
               With that they were content and dyd agrée.
               To choſe them tryers as I had thought méef:
               I aſked them how many, they ſayde thrée,
               In the name of God (quod I) ſo be it.
            
            
               Nowe did there in the place alreadie ſtand
               A woman well nigh fiftye yeres of age:
               A young boye and a young wench at her hand,
               Thinne was their weede and light their cariage.
            
            
               The woman and the wenche were clad in ruſſet,
               Both courſe and olde, and worne ſo very neere:
               That ye might ſee cleane through both ſléeue & guſſet
               The naked ſkinne whereas it dyd appeere.
            
            
               Their hoſen and their ſhooes were all of one,
               I meane both for the woorkmanſhyp and leather:
               To wyt their ſkinnes, for other had they none,
               And chapped were they ſore with wind & weather.
            
            
               With homely clouts I knitt vpon their head,
               Simple, yet white as thing ſo courſe might be:
               The boy much like them was apparelled,
               For hoſe ne ſhoe vpon his foote had he.
            
            
               With that I called them, and they came nere,
               And bad god ſpéede and ſaue the company:
               Then I did aſke them, who and whence they were,
               They anſweared me of the North country,
            
            
               
               In Comberland, as farre hence as Kendall,
               And Copie holders were of tenant right:
               I wotte not howe the Lorſhip they dyd call
               But hold they dyd by ſeruice of a knight.
            
            
               To ſerue the Prince at an howres warning,
               And aſken neither wages, fée, ne hyre:
               Ne choiſe of time at midnight, or at morning,
               All were it raine or ſhine, in durt and myre.
            
            
               Nowe hath a churle (quod they) take it in leace,
               To wytte the Lordſhyp with the perquiſite:
               And for I we mought not pay our terme doth ceaſe,
               So our inheritaunce haue loſten quite.
            
            
               The company thought pitie this to héere,
               Alas, quod I, this is great crueltye:
               All gate I bad them all be of good cheere,
               And praye to God to ſend you remedye.
            
            
               And ſith ye ben come hether at this time,
               I wyll not let you ſtand in ydelneſſe:
               For ye ſhall haue the charge ſhould haue ben mine,
               And méete are ye that haue ben in diſtreſſe.
            
            
               Which teacheth man to know the good from yll,
               And eke to trye a true friend from a ſhrow:
               Which vnto them that haue all thinges at wyll,
               And liue in welth is verye hard to know.
            
            
               
               With that I vp and told them all the caſe,
               Whereof before they hadden hard the chiefe:
               And that of no ſmall credite was the place,
               Of truth and vertue for to maken pryef.
            
            
               They all alledged theyr ſimplicitie,
               So dyd the veluet breches them diſable:
               And of their choyſe miſliked vtterlye,
               As them that were too vyle and miſerable.
            
            
               To iudge in cauſes of ſuch importaunce,
               For howe can it be poſſible (quod he)
               But they ben lewd and of great iguoraunce,
               And would in no caſe that it ſhould ſo be.
            
            
               The breche of clothe ſayd, that it was not ſo,
               They were right méete the challenges to trye:
               As ſymple folke were choſen long agoe,
               To greater charge, but if the byble lye.
            
            
               And is reſerred to the multitude,
               Who aunſwered, they were not to refuſe:
               So therevppon we dydden all conclude,
               Theyr ſeruice in this buſines to vſe.
            
            
               WEll then widow, quod I, and fatherleſſe,
               Which both by god vnto vs are commended:
               Haue good regard vnto this buſineſſe,
               Vntyll that with your helpe we haue it ended.
            
            
               
               For you can ſpeake of your experience,
               That ye haue ſéene, felte, hard, and vnderſtood:
               And of the paſſed gather conſequence,
               And iudge betwéene the euill and the good.
            
            
               And if it fall in reaſon to decide,
               Morall decrée or conſtitution:
               My helpe and knowledge ſhall not be denide,
               Vntill we haue them tried one by one.
            
            
               And ſithe we become this farre in the caſe,
               As ye haue hard from preſent haue ye been:
               And loked both the parties in the face,
               That ſharpe are ſet, as ye haue hard and ſéene.
            
            
               And ſpecially the playntiue whom ye here,
               his eſtymation how he doth hold:
               And of him ſelf how he accompteth deere.
               So is his aduerſarie partie bold,
            
            
               And other wayes accompteth woorthyneſſe,
               Beſides alledgeth his antiquitie:
               And that nought but his owne he would poſſeſſe,
               Diſcended to him from his aunceſtrie.
            
            
               And for this cauſe we are aſſembled here,
               My ſelfe, and all theſe others whom ye ſee:
               To make this matter that is doubtfull cleere,
               If God wyll therein, wyl graunt vs facultie.
            
            
               
               Therefore as I ſhal reade their names eche one,
               If eyther party chalenge any man:
               And ſhew cauſe: ye are iudges therevpon,
               Vnto that cauſe to ſpeaken what ye can.
            
            
               And it alowe for good or otherwyſe,
               To diſalow it in your iudgement:
               Wherin I redd you that ye be preciſe,
               And for the trueth to doo your good intent.
            
            
               They anſweared with all their harts they would,
               Proteſting their vnablenes of ſkil:
               I bad them doo no more but what they could,
               For God requireth of a man but wyl.
            
            
               With that I read their names for to appere,
               And fyrſt the knight▪ the ſquire, and gentleman,
               Who at the firſt made anſwear & ſayd here,
               Then to the reſt to paſſen I began.
            
            
               Fyrſt, of the Taylours challeng made rehearſal,
               And aſked yf he were indifferent:
               The tryors thought him not, and ſo dyd al
               The reſt, and therfore from vs we him ſent.
            
            
               Then gan I for to call the vitayler,
               He anſweared and ready was at hand:
               The Baker, Bruer, and the Vintener,
               Come nere (quoth I) & with your felowes ſtand.
            
            
               
               Then to the Tanner and the Graſier,
               Who anſweared me both without delay:
               The daunſing maſter and the Bricklayer,
               I bad thinformer alſo come away.
            
            
               The maiſter of the dyſing houſe alſo,
               The Smith, the Weauer, and the Huſbandman:
               And there I ceaſſed, and dyd call no mo.
               But for to count their number I began.
            
            
               And found the number of them iuſt ſixtéene,
               Nowe maſters (to the parties then ſaide I:)
               Here is a Iury complet as I wéene,
               Looke to your chalenges aduiſedly.
            
            
               And fyrſt the knight I called to the booke,
               Who had no ſooner anſweared thereto:
               Then veluet bréeches to him chalenge tooke,
               And ſaid he would ſhew cauſe, I bad hym doo.
            
            
               THis knight was neuer fréend of mine (quod he,)
               So plaine in his apparel and his port:
               The godly be dooth more eſtéeme then me.
               And ſpend his liuing on the poorer ſort.
            
            
               He lyueth very well content at home,
               Nor to the Citie hath deſyre to goe:
               Ne vp and downe there in the ſtréetes to rome,
               And for him ſelfe enquire at placebo.
            
            
               
               His Tenaunts and his Fermars lyue at eaſe,
               To whom he rayſeth not a peny rent:
               Which thyng dooth not a litle me diſpleaſe,
               As vnto pride a thing impertinent.
            
            
               And I thinke to ſpeake plainely at a woord,
               He had a great deale rather for to ſee:
               Then ſilke on backe, good vitayles on his boord,
               And ſpend his rent his hoſpitalitée.
            
            
               Which ſith it is a thyng agaynſt my kind,
               It muſt needes folowe that he hateth me:
               And to my aduerſarie is enclinde,
               Therfore of this enqueſt ought not to be.
            
            
               Then ſpake the wydow and the fatherleſſe,
               And ſayd a méeter man then he was one:
               Whoſe chalenge was his zeale to godlyneſſe,
               If he be drawen (quoth they) we ſhal haue none.
            
            
               Of all the chalenges that haue béen taken,
               In all the dayes and place where we haue ben:
               Ne hard wée man for vertue yet forſaken,
               Such fauour hath ſhe with the ſonnes of men.
            
            
               Or at the leaſt ſhe ought to haue of ryght,
               That whom ſo both the parties would admit,
               A man that in her had his whole delight,
               There ſhould no priuate chalenge to him ſyt.
            
            
               
               To wyt, of kynred or affinitie.
               Induſing fauour as the Lawyers ſay:
               And true, but yet among the vngodly,
               Who, for their fréendes ſake from the trueth wyl ſtray.
            
            
               But of the godly other is thintent,
               For they remember what their maiſter bad:
               Thou ſhalt know no mans face in iudgement,
               This earth to winne, from trueth they nyl be lad.
            
            
               For brotherhood ne yet for cooſſinage,
               For hope nor feare, loue, ne alliaunce:
               For faire or foule countenaunce or language.
               Vnto them all for trueth they bid defiaunce.
            
            
               As they that to no perſon bearen hate,
               Ne wyſhen euil vnto any wyght:
               Or would him hinder for their fréend his ſake,
               Such loue haue they to God, ſuch zeale to ryght.
            
            
               Yet are they often iudged of thunwyſe,
               To hate ſome perſons, for they doon hem blame:
               Which is, for they loue them and hate their vice,
               And gladly would them bring to better frame.
            
            
               Wherefore this knight as we haue ſayd beforne,
               We thinke right méete to leaden this enqueſt:
               And our aſſent be ſhall haue to be ſworne,
               So paſſed we from him, and vnto the reſt.
            
            
               
               Yea for the loue of God then anſweared I,
               And bad him lay his hand vpon the booke,
               And as he was a knight of aunceſtry.
               Bad him regard his trueth and oath he tooke.
            
            
               Which is (quoth I) that ye ſhall ſay the trueth,
               If that the bréeches of cloth haue doon diſſeiſon:
               To him of veluet that here as plaintife ſueth,
               Or from hym hath bereaft his right or reaſon.
            
            
               Throughout this land in any place or coaſt,
               Namely in London, and parties there about:
               Where he him ſelfe complayneth wronged moſt,
               And from fee and franke tenement put out.
            
            
               And him ſhall repoſſeſſe yf ye it finde,
               And coſt and domage geue him for the wrong:
               And this to doo your oth here dooth ye binde,
               If not ſay ſo, and therein be not long.
            
            
               That doon I called next vnto the ſquyre,
               To whom like chalenge as vnto the knight:
               The veluet bréeches tooke, but dyd retyre,
               The gentleman alſo he let goe quite.
            
            
               So three we had our Iury to begyn,
               Now wyll we to the meaner ſort quoth I:
               And bad the Baker and Vitayler come in,
               Alſo the Bruer who came as readely.
            
            
               
               The veluet bréeche then chalenged all three,
               And that he ſayde his cauſe was principall:
               I am in debt vnto them all (quoth he)
               And by my good wyll pay them nere ſhall.
            
            
               And fourtie pound it is to whom is leaſt,
               Wherefore to tell you trueth I doo them hate:
               And as myne enimies I them deteſt,
               Ne ſhall they in that cauſe of myne debate.
            
            
               The bréeche of cloth made anſweare and defence,
               And ſaide, with pride this chalenge rightly ſtood:
               To yéeld diſpite and hate for recompence,
               To ſuch as in his néede had doon hym good.
            
            
               And this is not of late, ne yeſterday.
               For Ieſus that was the ſonne of Syrack:
               Reade, yf the very ſame he dooth not ſay,
               Which of ſuch matter and of others ſpake.
            
            
               Wherefore he thought this chalenge could be none,
               Though on his ſide were parcialitie:
               That proued neither of them ſuch an one,
               As therefore beare to him inimitie.
            
            
               We aſked then the triours what they thought,
               I meane the wydowe and the fatherleſſe:
               They anſweared the chalenge ſeemed nought,
               Yet aſked myne aduiſe neuertheleſſe.
            
            
               
               For that the veluet bréeches further ſayd,
               That he had béen arreſted at their ſute:
               Deſiring that the matter might be wayd,
               And further of the cauſe they would diſpute.
            
            
               And yf the common lawe dyd it alowe,
               As he dyd thinke in reaſon well it ought:
               Thoſe three be vtterly would diſauowe,
               With that I anſweared, and ſayd I thought.
            
            
               The lawe would not, ne could intend ſo ill,
               If him that ſueth for to haue his debt:
               That he of malice or of euyll wyll,
               Would ſéeke to be his hinderaunce or let.
            
            
               Which were they ware his debtor to diſable,
               And bring him ſelfe to loſſe and hinderaunce:
               Which is not to be thought nor intendable,
               So thought the reſt in finall concordaunce.
            
            
               Wherefore they were itaken euery one,
               So ſeuen of our Iury ſworeu were:
               Then called I the Bricklayer alone,
               Who anſweared, but or he were come néere.
            
            
               The bréeche of cloth to him this chalenge toke,
               Of fourtie Chimneys that by him were built:
               In one houſe there are ſcantly fiue that ſmoke,
               So was there much good bricke and morter ſpilt.
            
            
               
               So held he him vnfaithful in his hart,
               That taketh wage and woorketh all in vaine:
               Ne for his hyre dooth wyllyngly his part,
               But only ſéeketh howe to rayſe his gaine.
            
            
               And ſo thereof he drew this conſequent,
               He that dooth faile in one, wyll fayle in all:
               For profyt or for fréendſhyp wyll relent,
               And thought this chalenge was materiall.
            
            
               The veluet bréeches hereunto replyed,
               The chalenge was both falſe and ſlaunderous:
               And want of ſmoke to be his fault denyed.
               But rather of the dweller in the houſe.
            
            
               Which was no fault in houſes where he dwelt,
               I built for pleaſure cheefely and for ſhewe:
               Where roſt ne ſodde is very ſeeldome ſmelt,
               Saue for our ſelfe and others very fewe.
            
            
               The fyre then being ſmall or none within.
               It muſt néedes folowe of neceſſitie:
               The ſmoke that commeth thence for to be thyne,
               I am the cauſe thereof my ſelfe, not he.
            
            
               So this was thought by all the multitude,
               A good excuſe and fully anſweared:
               And him a lawfull man they dyd conclude,
               For proofe whereof was further alledged,
            
            
               
               Howe greatlie was the ſcience to commend,
               Which maketh houſes wherein men may dwell:
               In him is not to lymytte other end,
               To witte if men them vſen yll or well.
            
            
               Or féeden there the poore or els the riche,
               Ne in what part their bellies or theyr eyes,
               For hoſpitalyties are not all aliche:
               With them that now adaies are holden wyſe.
            
            
               But as I ſayde before it was agréed,
               The craftes man could not dooe there with all:
               That truelie dyd employ his worke in déede,
               As well vpon the kytchin as the hall.
            
            
               Wherefore he was admitted to the reſt,
               And numbred vnto them they weren eyght:
               Thence to thinformer forthwith I me dreſt,
               And called him, and he appeared ſtraight.
            
            
               The breche of clothe him forthwith challenged,
               I aſked him the cauſe he would ſhew none:
               But that the name it ſelfe was deteſted,
               What néede he ſhew cauſe vnto ſuch a one.
            
            
               Whoſe very name, and whoſe profeſſion,
               Throughout this land is foule and ſclaunderous,
               Ye ſpeake (quod I) without diſcreſſion.
               And in your iudgement are prepoſterous.
            
            
               
               That for an euill member twoo or thrée,
               Or more or leſſe that be degenerate:
               And fallen from their office and degrée,
               Condemneth all the bodies whole eſtate.
            
            
               And geueth priuate faulte, a blame publicke,
               I meane the office for his Officer:
               Alas yet the common ſort ſo wicke,
               Of Innocence to make a treſpaſſer.
            
            
               This wickedneſſe is not of yeſterday,
               That priuate faulte doth geue publick offence
               For one yll man of thouſandes to myſſay,
               Of callinges and Eſtates of reuerence.
            
            
               That in a common welth ben ſeruiſable,
               And of the ſame the preſeruation:
               Degrées and Lawes ſo highe venerable.
               That who can ſaye theyr commendation.
            
            
               That for theyr worthines they ought to haue,
               Yet theſe I ſaye dooe ſuffer euyll name:
               And ſclaunder for naught els, but that a knaue,
               Hath of them made a cloake for deede of ſhame.
            
            
               What wickedneſſe can greater be then this,
               Of honeſt trade, ſo euyll for to ſpeaken:
               For one or twoo that vſen it amis,
               On whom it hath not might it ſelfe to wreken.
            
            
               
               For lawes and ſtatutes, are naught els but words,
               And doo not ſpeake them ſelues, which is worſe.
               For if they could, or handle kniues and ſwords,
               A number ſhoulde be leaner in the purſe.
            
            
               Wherefore I wiſhe no man that feareth God,
               To iudgen all after the déede of Sum:
               For that by common reaſon is forbod,
               And Chriſt hath ſayd there ſhalbe ſcandalum.
            
            
               Men ought therefore to proue or they allowe,
               Or haſtilye done any wight deſpiſe:
               As Chriſt and Paul I know, but who are you,
               To find them out that vſe his name for lyes.
            
            
               And proue if they be ſuch in very déede,
               As in their worde, and in their countenaunce.
               For falſehood ofte is clad in coſtly wéede,
               And yll men com by offices by chaunce.
            
            
               In whome although there be miſgouernaunce,
               As ſom for lacke of wiſedome or of ſkyll:
               Others for they make of it cheuiſaunce:
               And to commaund, and haue the world at wyll.
            
            
               Wherefore to turne whereas we lefte before.
               And of this challenge better to enquire:
               For of this trade me neeneth ſay no more,
               As of it ſelfe pure honeſt and entyre.
            
            
               
               But to the perſon what ye can obiect,
               Or put it to the tryours to defyne:
               If ye can him of any vice detect,
               Let them vpon the matter determine.
            
            
               With that the widdowe and the fatherleſſe,
               Sayd, they knewe not his perſon what he was:
               Yet with our leaue they woulden make a geſſe,
               And we ſhould ſée howe it would come to pas.
            
            
               For we that dwell farre from this town, quod they,
               Thought we come not at Innes of Court to lern:
               Yet dearely for our learning dooe we pay,
               As peraduenture héere ye ſhall diſcern.
            
            
               And for to trye this matter firſt of all,
               (For we muſt goe quod they by circumſtaunce:
               His bagge is full, let vs ſée wherewithall,
               Which he was lothe, but dyd at our inſtaunce.
            
            
               It was a great bagge like a Fawconere,
               And hong vpon his gyrdle by a ring:
               And hundreth writtes at leaſt within it were,
               Nowe ſhall ye ſee, quod they, for your learning.
            
            
               And bad me readen them as they aroſe,
               Naught but the Labell, and the parties name,
               She aſked then thinformer who were thoſe,
               And where they dwelt, wherin they were to blame
            
            
               
               But of an hundreth he ne knew but thrée,
               Ne what they were, ne what towne they dwelt in
               Nor what they had offended more then wée,
               And ſo me thought ſtraunge matter dyd begin.
            
            
               How that this widowe and this fatherleſſe,
               Which both were of no learning neither ſkyll,
               Should by ſuch circumſtaunce this matter geſſe,
               To trye a man his inward thought and wyll.
            
            
               Then they him aſked what was his purpoſe,
               He aunſwered it was yet longe to term:
               And ſure he was there were ſuch men as thoſe,
               For he had meſſagers abrode to lern.
            
            
               So that or terme he could them ſerue eche one,
               And for all thoſe that he thought would appere
               He would not want his declaration,
               And though he dyd yet were they not the nere.
            
            
               For I declare (quod he) in the Tam quam,
               How ſo the matter goe they gette no coſt:
               For alwaies on the ſurer ſyde I am,
               To agree with me is beſt, and ſo dooe moſt.
            
            
               And better then vppon it to appere,
               And ſtand to tryall to their great expence:
               And though not guyltie, yet neuer the nere:
               They get of me no peny in recompence.
            
            
               
               So that the beſt is alwayes to agrée,
               Although they haue offended in nothing:
               And geue a crowne to ſaue fourtie,
               Yea rather then faile ſmaller offering.
            
            
               Somtime I take a Capon, or a Gooſe,
               A peece of Bacon or a peece of Béefe:
               Or for a pecke of Corne we let one looſe,
               A ſmall price to redeeme ſo great a miſchiefe.
            
            
               With that the company gan on him looke,
               Namelye the widow and the fatherleſſe:
               And bad hym take his hand of from the hooke,
               For they beléeued all he dyd confeſſe.
            
            
               And bad him goe his waye ſuch as he was,
               The ſclaunder of an honeſt miſterye,
               Suborned therevnto by Sathanas,
               What is there that abuſed may not be.
            
            
               THen to the Maſter of the daunſing ſchoole,
               And eke the Maſter of the dyſing houſe:
               The worſt of them no howball, ne no foole,
               To them the breche of clothe dyd crye reſcouſe.
            
            
               As they that in no wiſe were to admitte,
               Profeſſed foes to vertue by theyr trade:
               To godlineſſe and goodneſſe oppoſitte,
               And of all miſchiefe verye roote and blade.
            
            
               
               So for the Maſter of the dyſing houſe,
               He ſayd he would not aunſwere to that name,
               And thereof he miſlyked meruelous,
               And for I termed him ſo he dyd me blame.
            
            
               Would God it were ſo ſayd the company.
               And that men dyd accompt as myckle ſhame:
               In deede to execute iniquitye,
               As them were lothe thereof to haue the name.
            
            
               In déede (quoth he) I kéepe an ordinarye,
               Eight pence a meale who there, doth ſup or dyne:
               And dyſe and cardes, are but an acceſſarye.
               At aft meales who ſhall paye for the wine.
            
            
               Theſe wayten all vppon our principall,
               As collourable cauſe to bring them in,
               And then from thence to ſheere money they fall,
               Tyll ſome of them be ſhrieuen of theyr ſinne.
            
            
               But of this game and other harlotrye,
               That there is vſed both by daye and night:
               Suffiſeth me to waren riche thereby.
               Thereafter yet in name I wyll not hight.
            
            
               This challenge was holden peremptorye,
               Such as of further tryall had no néede:
               A trade maintained though vaine glorye,
               And pride, and many a lewde and ſhamefull déede
            
            
               
               The veluet brech ſayd that it was not ſo,
               He ſayd it was both falſe and ſclaunderous:
               To his good name and to a number mo,
               By ſuch as were of his welth enuious.
            
            
               And of his good eſtate and countenaunce,
               Which was not ſmall, ne with the loweſt ſort:
               And praied witneſſe of his fowle miſparlaunce,
               That of a Gentleman gaue ſuch report.
            
            
               A man that for his welth, his land and fée,
               Is taken as I ſayd among the beſt:
               For fortye pound a yéere diſpend maye hée,
               That he hath purchaſed this is the leaſt.
            
            
               The bréeche of cloth ſayd, whereto is this gloſe,
               Of welth, of friendſhip and poſſeſſion:
               Which ſerueth not to this preſent purpoſe.
               But from our matters are dygreſſion.
            
            
               For welth wée holden no concluſion,
               What ſo it be, of golde or reuenew:
               Namelye, gotten by the confuſion,
               Of youth, and other meanes, lewd and vntrew.
            
            
               But he remaineth that he was before,
               A wicked wretche, yea and a great deale worſe:
               His craft and lewdneſſe cauſe of his great ſtore,
               His houſe of ſinne, a mother and a nurſe.
            
            
               
               But to the wydowe and the fatherleſſe,
               Their iudgement and experience:
               They anſweared, and that with quicke addreſſe,
               And this was all theffect of their ſentence.
            
            
               That his attendaunce here was litle woorth,
               Nor yf it were gods wyl in other place:
               So thought the reſt, and bad him get him foorth,
               And forward on our matter gan we pace.
            
            
               Then came the daunſing maſter well be ſéene,
               Who ſomewhat eke miſliked of that name:
               Maſter of Muſicke termed would haue béene,
               A Science liberall of noble fame.
            
            
               The bréeche of cloth to him a chalenge tooke,
               And ſayde to hym he neuer yet was fréend:
               For in his ſchoole his arſe be neuer ſhooke,
               The ſchoole of pride where only it dooth end.
            
            
               Where well is him that braueſt ſhewe can make,
               In hoſe and doubled leueled by lyne.
               Poynted & bottoned as in a brake.
               No ſilke ne veluet there is holden fyne.
            
            
               And as for me, I am as welcome there,
               As yf in Pairis garden ye haue béene:
               The dogges are welcome to the Bull or Beare,
               Which for to doon them miſchiefe are ful kéene.
            
            
               
               The veluet bréeches foorthwith anſweared,
               And ſayd he ſpake full like ſuch as he was:
               A foole that knewe nothing of luſtiehed,
               But all his liue had liued like an aſſe.
            
            
               Ne knew what dyd become a gentleman,
               And brought him into fauour and to grace:
               And to no ſmall preferment now and than,
               If finely with a woman he couth trace.
            
            
               A thing not inferior to vertue,
               And hath preſcription for her vſage:
               The ſtory of king Dauid is not newe,
               What ſo the fooliſh breeche of cloth doth rage.
            
            
               The breech of cloth as touching luſtiehead,
               Made anſweare that he knew not what it was:
               But it were youth with wealth yrauiſhed,
               To ſpoyle them ſelues and their name to deface.
            
            
               As many he had knowen do thereby,
               And as for fauour that it purchaſeth:
               A wanton minde may caſt a fantaſie,
               But as it lyghtly came it vaniſheth.
            
            
               And whereas of preſcription ye tel
               And for ſuch filth aledgen vſage:
               Of that good patriarke of Iſrael.
               To that good king ye doon great diſparage.
            
            
               
               His daun
                     •
                  ſſ
                     •
                  ng was ſul far vnlike to this,
               Who hath the ſtory read and vnderſtood:
               For woman led he none certaine that is,
               And on his backe ware a linen Ephood.
            
            
               Ne there did tricke of xv. or eleuen,
               Of both the which to whom he came the next
               I dare wel vndertake he lacked ſeuen,
               Read yf ye fynd ſuch matter in the text.
            
            
               Or in his daunce obſerued cinquopas,
               Saue playne and ſimplie leaped as for ioye:
               His wyfe Mycholl ne liked of the grace,
               Reſemblyng him to a light head boye.
            
            
               For ſturdie proud and arrogant was ſhée,
               And thought it ful vnſéemely and vnméet:
               To ſee a prince of that humilitie,
               To daunce amid the people in the ſtréet.
            
            
               And namely in a ſimple white Ephod,
               Wherefore ſhe caſt him in the téeth withal:
               But what ſayd he I wyl yet ſerue my god,
               And lower yet before his face wyl fal.
            
            
               Which hath diſherited thy fathers houſe,
               And choſen me to ſit vpon his ſeate:
               He bryngeth downe the proud preſumptuouſe,
               And kindly doth the humble ſort entreat
            
            
               
               Her woordes and eke his anſweare to the ſame,
               Ye may finde written in the booke of kinges:
               How earneſtly the good king ſhee dyd blame,
               And him diſdayned for his dooinges.
            
            
               So when I ſawe the matter goe ſo hard,
               And ſo defended by the breeche of cloth:
               Well (ſaid I) let the triours then award,
               And iudge indifferently betwéene ye both.
            
            
               With that the wydowe and the fatherleſſe,
               Sayd, they thought well of mirth and melody:
               As things that heauy mindes dyd oftredreſſe.
               So that no further euyl came thereby.
            
            
               Which was a matter hard to vndertake,
               Where daunſing was practiſed to much:
               And luſty gallant for his Ladyes ſake,
               Suppoſeth as him ſelfe there is none ſuch.
            
            
               For there is woonderfull abuſe quoth ſhe,
               Euen among the playne and ſimple ſort:
               Where nought els but a Bagge piper is to ſee,
               Yet is there pride and follie in their ſport.
            
            
               And rather then they wyll not be as fine.
               As who is fineſt, yea as ſmooth and ſlicke:
               And after ſit vppermoſt at the wine,
               Or nale to make hard ſhift they wyll not ſticke.
            
            
               
               Suche humble curteſies, and ſuch louing lookes,
               As there béen vſed, practiſed, and taught:
               There neede to lecherie none other bookes,
               Ne other ſchooles to bring young folke to naught.
            
            
               Shortly they ſayd he was a man vnméete,
               And to the veluet breeches perciall:
               So then I ſpake to him, and bad him fléete,
               And take his eaſe, and dyd another call.
            
            
               Which was the huſbandman the ſéelie Hinde,
               And he no ſooner was come in the place:
               Then veluet breeches gan great fault to finde,
               And for his ſimpleneſſe dyd him diſgrace.
            
            
               And tooke not his chalenge particular,
               But ſayd he was vnwoorthy and vnable:
               As he by proofe and reaſon would auer,
               And to the cloth bréeche alſo fauourable.
            
            
               And for the fyrſt poynt was to him denied,
               Which was concerning his habilitie:
               He ſayd that his addicion implyed,
               No thing ſo litle as ciuilitie.
            
            
               Nor knowledge in ſuch cauſes to debate,
               Of pollicie or educacion:
               But rather of his mattockes and his rake,
               With whom he hath his conuerſacion.
            
            
               
               For of al other folke he knoweth leſt,
               And fartheſt is from learnyng & from ſkil:
               But yf it be in fodderyng of a beaſt,
               Then howe can he be iudge of good and ill.
            
            
               And ſo much for his fyrſt exception,
               To prouen that he was a man vnméet:
               And partial he would him proue anone.
               For cauſes that he would vs done to wéet.
            
            
               Beſides that he was inſufficient,
               And had not .xl. s. of fréeholde:
               Which was another matter that he ment,
               That from this charge alſo doth him withold.
            
            
               The breech of cloth mayntayned the reuers,
               And in the matter ſayd he would be ſhort:
               And fyrſt he would the chalengers rehearſe,
               And to theyr anſweare orderly reſort.
            
            
               For ignorance and inſufficience,
               For want of .xl. s. of free holde:
               Becauſe that of his non indifference,
               No cauſe was ſhewd he knewe not what there would.
            
            
               Conſerning fyrſt of al his ignorance,
               And that he was vnwoorthy for to déeme:
               In matters of ſo great importance,
               He ſayd the contrary was dayly ſéene.
            
            
               
               And that they ſhould not charged be to ſaine,
               Matter that was in learning and iudgement:
               For to their handes it ſhalbe made ſo plaine,
               And eke by proofe ſo playne and euident.
            
            
               That ere they could not but of wylfulneſſe.
               And of their proper malice wittingly:
               Then want of learnyng is not wickedneſſe,
               Nor yet appropriate to huſbandry.
            
            
               An art aboue all others commendable,
               For eld of tyme and for neceſſitie:
               I meane to mans lyfe ſo ſeruiſable,
               As other none ſcience ne facultie.
            
            
               Requireth learning, payne, and diligence,
               To dealen with the earth that is ſo iuſt:
               Where but he marke the heauens influence,
               In ſteade of corne oft ſhall he gather duſt.
            
            
               And but he deale with iudgement and with ſkyll,
               Obſeruing well his ſeaſons, tymes, and houres:
               And in due order plant, ſowe, ſet, and till:
               And wyſely can foreſée the wyndes and ſhowres.
            
            
               He dooth not well deſerue to haue that name,
               And that theſe thinges are not of importance:
               Who ſo it ſayth, I holde him much to blame,
               As of our lyues the greateſt ſuſtenance.
            
            
               
               A Science holden alway reuerend,
               Of which alſo yf I ſhould ſpeake the prayes:
               And for the woorthyneſſe ſhould it commend,
               It might ſuffice a woorke for many dayes.
            
            
               By kinges and patriarkes that han it vſed,
               An art by God ſo loued that from thence:
               To chooſe a king oft tyme he not refuſed,
               As Samuel dooth beare good euidence.
            
            
               As touchyng his fréehold I wyll not mell,
               But put it to the tryours to enquire:
               And as they finde the trueth ſo let them tell,
               Which is aſmuche as ye both can deſyre.
            
            
               The tryours ſayd he had ſufficient,
               And quickly of that doubt reſolued vs:
               They ſayd he myght ſpend .xls. rent,
               And in the Queenes booke was aſſeſſed thus.
            
            
               Thus are thoſe cauſes fully anſweared,
               Then ſaid the bréech of cloth, and further prayed,
               He might be ſworue that was more baſt then nede,
               Quoth they of veluet, for he had not ſayd.
            
            
               Ne ſpoken for to proue him parciall.
               Which at the fyrſt was one exception:
               Goe to (quoth wée) he anſweared ſo I ſhall,
               And forward with his matter is he gon.
            
            
               
               As ſure (quod he) as where is diſcordaunce,
               And oppoſition of qualitie:
               Can be no friendſhip ne alliaunce,
               So ſure I am this plowman hatcth me.
            
            
               For veluet bréeche are not for his weare,
               To toyle and tomble in the durt withall:
               He hateth too much coſtlineſſe of geare,
               And ſayth therein is purpoſe none at all.
            
            
               Beſides all this howe he doth ſclaunder mée,
               As one that geueth daungerous counſell:
               Both againſt him and eche other degrée,
               A whole day would not ſerue me for to tell.
            
            
               He ſayth I was the chiefeſt counſellor,
               And firſt that bad his Landlorde rayſe his rent:
               And after for to ſell both farme and manor,
               And made him borrow where he might haue lent
            
            
               Such extréeme pylling, and ſuch bryberie,
               As neuer was hard tell of or this age:
               The villain ſayth it is all long of me,
               He ſayth I haue brought men into that rage.
            
            
               That no man is content with his eſtate,
               No nor yet woman by your leaue ſaith he:
               And thence ariſeth ſuch ſute and debate,
               At Weſtminſter as daily is to ſée.
            
            
               
               And Offices ſo very profitable,
               That by a man hath had one ſeuen yéere:
               Is ſome can vſe them now he may be able,
               With Eſquier Knight or Baron to be péere.
            
            
               I know I haue had oft his bitter curſe,
               For he is ſomtime pynched for my ſake:
               But no force for his words he ſhall fare worſe,
               This is the third exception that I take.
            
            
               The bréech of cloth made anſwer that him thought,
               This oppoſition of qualitie.
               And all the other cauſes by him brought,
               Were no proofe that he parciall would be.
            
            
               To any wight that truth had on his ſyde,
               Whom for to doubt is almoſt to confeſſe:
               That by a iuſt iudge he dare not be tried,
               And ſaid his challeng did implie no leſſe.
            
            
               For he him thought of that indifference,
               That he in all this earth ne hateth wight,
               Ne would but for pure zeale of truth diſpence,
               Ne ſhrinke for King ne Caeſar from the right.
            
            
               And prayed me to ſpeaken what I thought,
               If this obiection were anſwered:
               Which he againſt the huſbandman had brought,
               For long he thought to be deliuered.
            
            
               
               He prayed the widow and the fatherleſſe,
               Their minde & what they thought therof to tell:
               Who ſhortly did their mindes therin expreſſe,
               And ſaid the challeng was auoyded well.
            
            
               So was the plowmen taken to the reſt,
               And ſworn to deale according to the troth:
               Then forward in our matters we vs dreſt,
               Betwene this bréech of veluet and of cloth.
            
            
               Then called I the Shoemaker and Smyth,
               The Tanner graiſier and the Vintener:
               Who ready were at hand and came full ſwith,
               And challenged of neither part they were.
            
            
               As men like fauorable vnto both,
               No more vnto the one then to the other:
               Saue to the vyntener the bréeche of clothe,
               Spake thus in gentle wordes & ſaid my brother▪
               
            
            
               Your lycour is ſo mightie and ſo ſtrong,
               And therewithall it goeth down ſo ſoft,
               That of your gueſtes ſome bibb therof ſo long,
               Till from the ground it lifteth them aloft.
            
            
               Higher (as they ſuppoſe) then any ſtéeple,
               In all this Towne, Saint Mighell or the Bow▪
               
               No longer are they of the common people,
               And if they talke of beggers, no I trowe.
            
            
               
               But all of Myllions of markes and poundes,
               And of their credite, and their great chaffare:
               An Oake is but a trée, no by his woundes.
               So that ye wynne theee by, what dooe ye care.
            
            
               Or els for other fowle and filthye talke,
               Which is ſo lou'de aud common in your houſe:
               Your cheker man for it doth kéepe no chalke,
               Wherefore me thinketh it were perillous.
            
            
               By ſuch a man as ye are, to be tryed,
               Whoſe trade is galiaudiſe, drinke and diſport:
               Both which are friendes to wylfulneſſe and pride,
               Contrary to the ſober godly ſort.
            
            
               For from your houſe, you ſend them forth ſo hotte,
               So verye ranke their blood ſo ſore incenſed:
               That ſhame and feare of ſinne is cleane forgotte,
               And hart and minde are therevnto licenſed.
            
            
               The filthye whoredome I take to witneſſe,
               That is ſo common, and ſo exerciſed:
               I wyll not ſaye the Sodomites had leſſe,
               Ne for it ſmaller puniſhment deuiſed.
            
            
               Then vp and downe to haue them by cart,
               To ſhame ſuch as knew neuer any ſhame:
               And leſſe of Godlye nurture any part,
               But oft laughan ſlylic at the ſame.
            
            
               
               The Veluet bréeches for him aunſwered,
               And for ſtrength of his drinke excuſed him:
               For he allayed them both white and red,
               And oft with water made them ſmall and thinne▪
               
            
            
               Or with ſome other wine that was full yll,
               So that if any it miſtempered:
               It ſhould ſéeme at the leaſt againſt his wyll,
               That from him went ſo many a drunken hed.
            
            
               As for theyr lewde talke and their harlotrye,
               He was no officer to puniſhe them:
               But as he might and had aucthoritye,
               Their good drinke (as I ſayd) to ming & blenne.
            
            
               And good inought (he thought) to ſpoyle and waſte,
               For when the drinke hath once their hed poſſe
               The good and yll to them hath all one taſte,
               So that they paye for it, as for the beſt.
            
            
               And where he ſayth that whoredome is in wine,
               And dronkenneſſe he ſayd that was not true:
               In all, though in ſome, and namely for the time,
               For ſome (quod he) had more néede to goe ſpue.
            
            
               As they that béen full ill at eaſe and ſicke,
               And haue not might ſo much as they haue will,
               Till they haue ſlept but after if they kicke,
               Allas the day is that ſo great an ill.
            
            
               
               That it ſhould néede ſo great a pnniſhment,
               The vintener amercing them ſo déepe:
               That though they haue not grace for to repent,
               Their wife and children oft for hunger wéepe.
            
            
               And this he doth the rather for my ſake,
               The other anſwered he thought no leſſe:
               And ſaid thereof non oath him neadeth take,
               So was it put vnto the fatherleſſe.
            
            
               And widowe for to ſaie therof their minde,
               They ſaid the chaileng was not principall:
               And that the creature of proper kinde,
               Was good though we offenden therewithall.
            
            
               As for the Seller though there were abuſe,
               And much vngodlines within his houſe,
               He might alledge vnwares for his excuſe,
               And eke to deale with ſuch is daungerous.
            
            
               No further then by faire perſwaſion,
               Which to theſe drunkerds and vngodly:
               Doth rather kindle more occaſion,
               To wickednes and life vnthriftie.
            
            
               Therefore was he admitted to the reſt,
               And as his fellowes all did him before.
               Vpon his othe did faithfully proteſt,
               They had me count or I tooke any more,
            
            
               
               So then I called them as ye ſhall here,
               The Knight the ſquire and the gentleman:
               The Baker Brewer and the vittaller,
               The Tanner graiſier and the huſbandman.
            
            
               The Haberdaſſher and the Vintener,
               The Bricklayer and the Smyth alſo:
               The weauer and with him the Shoomaker,
               So was onr Iury full complet and mo.
            
            
               For I them counted no leſſe then fiftéene,
               Yet would I put none of them out againe,
               The moe (thought I) the better wyll they déeme,
               So then to open them the matter plaine,
            
            
               I read them ouer all the whole record,
               Euery point and article at large:
               And eke the ſenſe and meaning of eche word,
               I ſhewd, and therwithall what was their charg
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               And had them for a time to go aſide,
               And ripely of the matter to debate:
               And pray to God therein to be their guide,
               That they ne did but right to none eſtate.
            
            
               With that they went from me a certaine ſpace,
               Not full the diſtaunce of a hundred foote:
               I with the reſt abode ſtyll in the place,
               And ſodainlye while I aſide dyd looke.
            
            
               
               Me thought I was ware of a company,
               That downe the hyll dyd come an eaſie pace:
               Thinking to me they meant to gone vs by,
               As, paſſagers that would to further place.
            
            
               Tyll I perceaued by the way they tooke,
               They meant to turne from vs to neither hand:
               Then gan I neerer vpon them to looke,
               Whence and who they ſhould be to vnderſtand.
            
            
               And ſawe them thrée in number, moe ne leſſe,
               Youthfull as theyr apparell dyd report:
               But who they were, or whence I could not geſſe,
               Weaponed in verye defenſable ſort.
            
            
               Eache of them hauing at his ſyde a ſword,
               And in his hand a buckler large and brode:
               Wée muſed all what would hereof beword,
               Yet ſayd nothing ſayd, but in our place abode.
            
            
               And loe where yet came from the other ſyde,
               Thrée other like in euery regard:
               Vnto the fyrſt, and faſte againſt them hyde,
               To meten them, who came as ye haue hard.
            
            
               We gan to maruell what they ment to doone,
               And geſſed diuerſly of their intent:
               For that they dyd eche toward other come:
               We iudged all ſome ſtraunge purpoſe they men
            
            
               
               One geſſed, ſurely here wyll be ſome fray,
               For whiche this tyme and place appoynted are:
               And truely: but alas and well away,
               Farre other wyſe then all we were aware.
            
            
               And that the bréeche of cloth fall dew abought,
               As ye ſhal here, before this matter end:
               And of their crueltie whiche there they wrought,
               Vpon the gyltleſſe who might not defend.
            
            
               A ſtorie pitifull and lamentable,
               Inough to warne eche wyght that he ne truſt:
               To worldly proffer, fals and deceyuable,
               Which turneth as the wheele of fortune luſt.
            
            
               Agaynſt all wyſedome, counſell, and forecaſt,
               Agaynſt all hope and expectation:
               Howe ſo we builde, howe ſo we
                     •
                  tyen faſt,
               When we thinke ſureſt, fare well all is gon.
            
            
               What ſo it was in ſhewe or likelyneſſe,
               Of what ſecuritie or aſſuraunce:
               One minute turneth it to nothing leſſe,
               As in this matter ye ſhall ſée dyd chaunce.
            
            
               This breeche of cloth hauing in all our ſight,
               His cauſe ſo good that néedelie muſt he winne:
               And that the verdict muſt néedes fynde his right,
               And that in all our iudgementes well 
                     •••…
                  hym.
            
            
               
               Yet came he to a miſerable ende,
               A great example of al humane chaunce:
               From which yet no wyght may himſelf defend,
               While Fortune hath his matter in ballaunce.
            
            
               Which plainely for to ſhew as it befell,
               And where I left to take my hold agayne:
               Theſe fire of whom I told you fayre and wel,
               In two companyes as ye heard me ſayne.
            
            
               Directly came toward the bréech of cloth,
               By vs tyll vnto hym they came ſo nere,
               As that the breech was midd betwene them both.
               And then ſpake one of them as ye ſhal here.
            
            
               Tho
                     ••••••…
                   of cloth thou wéede of lowlines,
               That haſt not feared to mayntayne thy cauſe:
               Agaynſt this garment of ſuch woorthynes,
               And al of confidence the
                     •
                   haſt  in lawes.
            
            
               And told and vttered haſt in thy defence,
               Such thinges as were not meete to béene i know
               And better had thou of them kept ſilence,
               Then tel them to thyne vtter: ouerthrow.
            
            
               Thou ſhalt therefore be a memorial,
               Of ſuch as with their betters daren ſtryve:
               In cauſe neuer 
                     〈◊…〉
                  , and there withal,
               Upon the breech they al tooke hold belyue.
            
            
               
               But for to ſee how they him puld and halde,
               My ſelfe and others of the company:
               That it beheld for pitie were appald,
               To ſée them ſhew that extreme crueltie.
            
            
               For thrée and thrée laid hold vppon a ſyde,
               Vpon the panes before and eke behynde:
               That one pane from another gan to ride,
               Both out ſyde and that where with it was lyude.
            
            
               So that they were defaced in a throw,
               And péece by peece ſo very ſmal itorn:
               That there nys man ſo connyng that couth know,
               Or geſſe what garment they had ben beforn.
            
            
               Not ſo much as the codpéece was exempt,
               Or for his ſeruice ſo much fauor found:
               As not to be in péeces al to rent,
               And here and there in péeces throwen a ground.
            
            
               I reade of no ſuche execution,
               But it were Pentheus that dyd diſpiſe:
               The Bachanals and diſſolution,
               Done to that dronken god in ſacrifice,
            
            
               Of whom his mother and his néereſt fréendes,
               In maintenaunce of their idolatrie:
               Became the truel murderers and féends,
               Reade Ovids Metamorphoſe it I lye.
            
            
               
               The Iury when they ſawe the bréeche itorne,
               And ſawe by conſequent the ſtrife was ended:
               For which they were impanelled and ſworne,
               And for they wiſt not what was them intended.
            
            
               Away ranne they eche man in all he might,
               Ne choſe their way, but as aduenture fell:
               Or I it wiſt they were nigh out of ſight,
               To folowe them I néede aſke no councell.
            
            
               But after them as hard as I could gon,
               So faſt mee thought as neuer yet dyd man:
               But he were legged as was Acteon,
               When he vnware had looked on dyan.
            
            
               Nor neuer turned once to looke behinde,
               For all our matters and our buſineſſe:
               They were the furtheſt thing out of my minde,
               For that no hope remayned of redreſſe.
            
            
               But for to make an end as I haue ſayd,
               Thus ended was our matter of debate:
               I ſodenly out of my ſléepe abraid,
               And at the fyrſt full penſiue was and mate.
            
            
               And looked all my chamber round about,
               And called to remembraunce all my ſweuen:
               And yf I were at home yet gan I doubt,
               I meane where as I layd me downe at euen.
            
            
               
               So when I had a whyle conſydered,
               And viewed well the wyndowe and the wall:
               And founde my ſelfe betwéene my ſhéetes in bed,
               I gan to ſigh and thanked God for all.
            
            
               I ſawe the day that now gan to diſcloſe,
               And Phebus ryſing with his golden beame:
               Then thought I ſodenly vpon my hoſe,
               Such was yet my remembraunce of my dreame.
            
            
               I looked where I layde them ouernight,
               Vpon my bedde euen at the very féele:
               And when I ſawe them whole & in good plight,
               If I were glad it was not for to wéete.
            
            
               Then caſt I in my minde where I had béene,
               And muſed of theſe matters that I mett:
               So ſtraunge, and ſo incredible to weene.
               And to that end I would them not forget.
            
            
               I purpoſed to write them in a booke,
               Yet therewithall I had this fantaſie:
               They wyll but laugh at me that on it looke.
               And yf they doo, I loſe not all thought I.
            
            
               For laughter healthy is and profitable,
               And ſigne of both, men ſay where I haue béen:
               Of heale and weale which both are delectable,
               For common is this 
                     〈◊〉
                  , they laugh that wyn.
            
            
               
               So that it hurt no wyght ſhal me ſuffice,
               Which yet it can not do but yf they wyl:
               For they may ſhutt theyr eares or cloſe theyr eyes▪
               
               That feare in hearing it taken ill.
            
            
               Thus wandred my mynd in matters ſmal,
               And how that as ſmal things were put in thought
               Though ſome iudge of it i
                     •
                  , ſo wyl not al,
               Nor hym condemne of folie that it wrought.
            
            
               So after al theſe thinges conſydered,
               As alſo that it was long to endite:
               Now wyl I proue (quoth I) my ſimple hed,
               What he hath kept and what he can recite.
            
            
               And helpe me all this matter to contryue.
               In order as it paſſed in my ſléepe:
               If in hym be vertue memoratiue,
               To hold the thinges geuen hym to kéepe.
            
            
               And haue it written to my remembrance,
               Without omitting matter principal:
               Although that ſome what of the circumſtance,
               I haue for want of caryage let fal.
            
            
               Therefore beſech I euery gentle wyght,
               That ſhal it reade to iudge of it the beſt:
               The rather for it is not in our might,
               What we wyl dreame in bed when we do reſt.
            
            
               
               But as it falleth vs by aduenture,
               Both for the ſubſtance and the qualitie:
               We can not couenant by Indenture,
               Ne yet compound before what it ſhalbe.
            
            
               And therfore though it haue ſmal appearance,
               To be a trueth let no man it diſpiſe:
               Or him that wrot it for no recompence,
               Saue labour for his paine without reprice.
            
            
               For who ſo ſhal eſtéeme his labour loſt,
               That ſhal it read, he may thinke therewithal:
               I loſt more manifold both paine and coſt,
               Yet neuer gréeued me ne neuer ſhal.
            
            
               For while I wrote this I dyd nothyng els,
               Saue that I kept mynd from idleneſſe:
               The cauſe of harlottry as Ouid tels,
               So wyl it them that read it as I geſſe.
            
            
               Better I wys then Amadis de Gaule,
               Or els the pallas forced with pleaſure:
               Who though they promiſe honny yelden gale,
               And vnto coales do turne theyr fained treaſure.
            
            
               Or Ballads that entreate of naught but loue,
               Of plaints, vnkindneſſe, and of geloſie:
               Which are of woonderfull effectes to moue,
               Young peoples mindes that reade them to folly.
            
            
               
               Of whiche neuertheleſſe we dayly ſee,
               How many, and how cunning are the Clarkes:
               I bidde ye not herein to credite me,
               Beleeue their writinges & their noble warkes.
            
            
               But to my purpoſe whiche I haue attained,
               For my defence and of my dreame alſo:
               There is no man alyue that here is blamed,
               I knowe not ſuch a man as weren tho.
            
            
               That by the bréeche of cloth were chalenged,
               Nor I thinke neuer were, for to my wyt:
               They were fantaſticall imagined,
               Onely as in my dreame I dyd ſurmit.
            
            
               Wherefore no man thinke him ſelfe ſpoken to,
               For any thing that I haue told you in my ſweuen,
               Who thinketh he dooth well, ſo let him doo,
               And chooſe him how this matter he wyl leeuen.
            
            
               Beſides all this, leaſt any man miſiudge,
               Of theſe my woordes, or hold me parciall:
               As bearyng to the buttockes any grudge.
               More then vnto the other members all.
            
            
               Becauſe my matter hath ben of a breeche▪
               
               Which is their habit and their couerture:
               To thinke none ill therein I them beſeeche,
               Or that their loſſe, I haue ment to procure.
            
            
               
               As that they might not weare as may the reſt,
               I meane the members of more worthines:
               For ſure I hold they ought to weare the beſt,
               And if ye read S. Paule, he ſaith no leſſe.
            
            
               Wherefore to buttockes euil I ne ment,
               More then vnto the belly or the backe:
               Or elſe the head concerning ornament,
               For nature hath more furniſhed their lack.
            
            
               They may with leſſe ſhame be diſcouered,
               And naked then the lower partes may be:
               Though yet vnſeemely ſauing for the head,
               Of man: for why of God th'image is hee.
            
            
               And is the ground of reaſon and the roote,
               The ſeate of vnderſtanding and of wit:
               Guide of the reſt, yea both of hand and foote,
               And Royall as a king on high doth ſit.
            
            
               And therefore if the buttockes do excéede,
               Or be to monſtrous in that they weare:
               The head ought to be blamed for the deede,
               For reaſon ought to haue his dwelling there.
            
            
               Not in the buttockes who know nothing leſſe,
               Then what is ſeemely for them to put on:
               And are appointed other buſyneſſe,
               But if the head they chaunes to ouer gone.
            
            
               
               And take vpon them for to beare the ſway,
               For reaſon let in Senſualitie.
               Which ſure they will do if they get the kaye,
               As proue ſome weddings made to haſtelie.
            
            
               Withouten any councell had before,
               Of them that ſhould of right haue delt therein:
               Fie fie let be, I pray ye of that no more,
               What ſhould we aſke aduiſe of friend or kynne,
            
            
               Among our youth this chaunceth now and then,
               But ſéeld or neuer with the elder ſort:
               That ſet their childrens partes at ſix or tenne,
               And all for neither counſell and comfort.
            
            
               But this is ſomwhat out of my purpoſe,
               Whoſe meaning was naught but to ſatiſfie:
               Such as (becauſe my matter was of hoſe)
               Might thinke I would the buttockes iniurie.
            
            
               Thus for the matter of my dreame ynough,
               To him or her that might thereof miſthinke:
               
                  
                     •
                  ow for the forme therof is very rough,
               I may not that defend with pen nor Inke.
            
            
               But as in the firſt part of this iourney,
               When firſt wée entred into this matter:
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   tolde them I was but an atturney,
               What néeded me to bragg or els to clatter.
            
            
               
               And of that order (I am ſure) the worſt,
               I ſay for knowledge in this action:
               For ſure in all my life it was the furſt,
               Not onely whereof I had the direction.
            
            
               But whereof I had ben at the paſſage,
               So that I had but ſmall experience:
               To bene the guide of ſuch a caryage,
               and hauing there alſo no preſidence.
            
            
               And as for my learning and my ſtudie,
               Hath bene but ſmal though ſomwhat I haue red:
               I wrote neuer day with prothonotory,
               And therefore was but ſmally furniſhed.
            
            
               Therefore beſéech I ſuch as be learned,
               Into whoſe hands this work may chaūce to come
               Barreſters or how ſo ye ben termed,
               To iudgen of it after your wiſedome.
            
            
               For that I geue the plentife no collor,
               Nor for ſuch matters do obſerue decorum:
               With vs was neither dyer nor Fuller,
               And (as I ſaid) my ſelfe had nihil horum.
            
            
               Therefore no collours there they gat of me,
               Saue ſuch as they thēſelues with them brought,
               which (as me thought) were but to great plentie,
               And that to litle purpoſe as me thought.
            
            
               
               If I haue pleaded further in the right,
               In action which is but poſſeſſory:
               Then by the nature of thée write I might,
               I could not therein be peremptory.
            
            
               But that ech partie would haue his reaſon,
               To proue their iſſue which was generall:
               Is ye haue hard, nul tort nul diſſeaſon,
               And weyuen would no point for them might fal▪
               
            
            
               Wherfore my maſters you that in pleading,
               And in the learned points thereof haue ſkill:
               Worthie of weightie matter to haue leading,
               Beare with him that ground neuer in your mill,
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                  e in your large corne fieldes hath harueſted,
               The ſheaues of that right noble Science:
               But here and there as ye haue ſcattered,
               Hath gleaned after you without offence.
            
            
               And did in this matter for his talent,
               Which is as much as he could do therein:
               As he to whom was but one peny lent,
               Yet was not vſing of it holden ſinne.
            
            
               And ſo Chriſt himſelfe hath ſaid in parable,
               Wherefore I truſt ye will accompt no wourſe:
               Of him that would do good as he is able,
               Then him that gaue all that was in his purſe.
            
            
               
               As whilom did the widow with her myte,
               Your gentle iudgement and your curteſie:
               I pray the author of all goodnes quite.
               To whom be laud and praiſe eternally.
            
            
               
                  printer's or publisher's device
               
            
            
               Eccleſiaſticus. Cap. x.
               The beginning of mans pryde is to fall away from
God, and why his hart is gone from his make
for pride is the originall of all ſinne.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ A commendation of lowlyneſſe
for her conſolation.
            
               TO ſhew the value price and worthines,
               And truely to deſcribe humilitie:
               (Which is in Engliſhe called lowlynes)
               So liuely as to ſay, loe this is ſhee.
            
            
               Although it paſſe my learning and my ſkill,
               Yet is my labour to her ſuch a debt:
               Of right ſo due that as I can I will,
               To quiten her my diligence beſet.
            
            
               And tell her praiſe as nere as I can geſſe,
               Her nature her effect and qualitie:
               Although for want of cunning I them leſſe,
               So faire vnable her to beautifie.
            
            
               A worke for him that learned were and wiſe,
               And had of collors and of Rethoricke:
               As doth belong to ſuch an enterpriſe,
               Or elſe that coulde of Science poeticke.
            
            
               With whō though mine acquaintance be but ſmall,
               Such as I haue (if any thing as be)
               She doth command hath done and euer ſhall,
               Winne I thereby or loſe nought recketh me.
            
            
               
               Then duely of this vertue to diſcource,
               In order Shewing what ſhe is and whence,
               And of what vertues origin and ſource,
               I purpoſe aſking (Lord) thine aſſiſtence.
            
            
               And ſéeking firſt from whence ſhe hath her name,
               Of earth I finde doth come humilitie:
               Then ought ſhe be reſemblant to the ſame,
               Now is the earth the loweſt in degrée.
            
            
               I meane of euery other element,
               Which round about her ben encompaſſed:
               Yet with that place doth hold her well content,
               Sith he that all might hath ſo ordered.
            
            
               Who though he gaue to her the loweſt ſeat,
               Yet we that dwell vpon her daily ſée:
               In how great kindnes he doth her intreat,
               And vs his creatures that in her bée.
            
            
               For there nys element ſo high ne fall,
               That doth not ſerue her by commandement,
               The Sunne his beames vpon her muſt let fall,
               And cloudes their fatnes and their noriſhment,
            
            
               Hence for my matter gather I this proofe,
               That as the earth contented is to dwell:
               In baſe eſtate and yet for her behoofe,
               Prouided is and furniſhed ſo well.
            
            
               
               Whereas if otherwiſe ſhe would becall,
               Heauē the Moone the Starres, or elſe, ye Sunne:
               I doubt not but that worſe would her befall,
               Wiſely therfore ſhe leaueth it vndonne.
            
            
               And holdeth to the place where ſhe was ſet,
               Ne with the planets ſéeketh to compare:
               But from them doth her neceſſaries fet,
               Which they to yelden her contented are.
            
            
               That by the ſame example we are taught,
               which ben her children of her body borne:
               Conſidered that we be come of naught,
               Of baſe and lowe degree to thinke no ſcorne.
            
            
               Which is the thing I call humilitie.
               And is a vertue déere and precious:
               And hath the promiſe of eternitie,
               And in this life of bleſſings meruellous.
            
            
               In earth begetteth peace and plentie,
               Two things now wiſhed for of all mankind,
               By their contraries I may well conclude,
               Who maken heauy hart and wofull mind.
            
            
               To proue the firſt which is that lowlines.
               Begetteth peace▪ It is as euident:
               As it is plaine that pride doth nothing leſſe,
               For proofe wherof there neede none argument.
            
            
               
               But yf that matter wyll you not ſuffice,
               And that ye wyll demaund aucthoritie:
               Reade bookes that of ſuch matter doon deuiſe,
               In holy or in prophane hiſtorie.
            
            
               If ye can finde that there was trueth or loue,
               Or vnitie of hart in houſe or towne:
               Where euery Iauell needes would be aboue,
               And held his halpeny to be a crowne.
            
            
               Marke (I ſay) yf ye haue ſéene charitie,
               And louing kindneſſe in any nacion:
               Suffering eche others aduerſitie,
               Which is the thing we call compaſſion.
            
            
               Marke well theſe perſons and their gouernaunce▪
               
               And ye ſhall finde on perill of my lyfe:
               They béen ſuch as doon not them ſelues aduaunce,
               Ne wyll for litle matter mouen ſtryfe.
            
            
               As doon the proud, who therof thinke diſdayne,
               I meane to borowe any euyl woord:
               That they ne pay it treble home agayne,
               So largely any good they nold affoord.
            
            
               Then ryſeth quarell vp goe the fiſtes and battes,
               And I as good as thou, and thou as I:
               Out gon ſub penes, out flaien latitat
                     •
                  es,
               Who may him rule, who may hun pacifye.
            
            
               
               Then warrants of the peace, and good a bearing,
               And deepe othes ſworne of matters daungerous:
               For feare of méeting with a pickled hearing,
               And mountaynes made of matters fryuolous,
            
            
               For councell he ne wanteth of his ſort,
               That wyll him tell his cauſe is very good:
               And with ſuch words his folly wyll ſupport,
               Then muſt they goe to let a hoggeſhed blood.
            
            
               Or els a barrell of ſtrong ale or béere,
               Whereas betwéene the goblet and the wall:
               His aduerſarie ſhall abie full déere,
               And caſten how the matter wyll befall.
            
            
               Of learned lawyer ſéeketh he no ſkill,
               Him néedeth not, for why he hath at hand:
               A broker that ſhall teache him lawe his fill,
               And ſhew him fully how his caſe dooth ſtand.
            
            
               Though be ne ſtudied in his lyfe a day,
               Yet through his brocage and his great practiſe:
               Beareth him ſelfe ſo, that he dareth ſay,
               The lawe ſhal end right as he dooth deuiſe.
            
            
               And ſayth, he hath to muche abuſed you,
               And thus and thus he pleadeth all the caſe:
               Telleth what action muſt be brought, and how,
               All for a matter dée
                     •
                   of quater aſe,
            
            
               
               They neuer wyll geue councell to ſubmit,
               That were humilitie, that were to vyle:
               Nor to our eſtimation dooth ſitt,
               Vntyl our purſe haue had the lax a whyle.
            
            
               And then our neighbours may our matter end,
               Though woorſe then vs was offered before:
               And reaſon good we may no longer ſpend,
               Thus many a wylfull man his thrift hath lore.
            
            
               And for it hath béen laughed well to ſcorne,
               By flatterers that han vpon him fed:
               And filled their hoodes with good ſtrong ale in corne,
               For which his purſe full hartily hath bled.
            
            
               This would not chaunce ſo oft yf lowlynes,
               Were halfe eſtéemed as ſhe ought to be:
               Nor ſuch extremities ſought of redreſſe,
               For with diſcreſion procedeth ſhe.
            
            
               And oft with ſufferaunce dooth ouercome,
               Leauing reuenge to hym that wyl and ſhall:
               Reuenge the wrongs that to thée iuſt are doone,
               And bring full lowe their Cedars high and fall.
            
            
               And ſo much for my proofe that lowlineſſe,
               Begetteth concord, and dooth nouriſhe peace:
               Which twayne who is ſo lewde but wyll confeſſe,
               They béen the cauſe of wealth & of encreaſe.
            
            
               
               And are of Towne and Countrey ſuch defence,
               As is no Bulwarke, ne Municion:
               Agaynſt the foe to maken reſiſtence,
               As hath béen proued yeeres and dayes agon.
            
            
               For God who may not lye hath promiſed,
               Where brethren dwell togeather as in loue:
               With lyfe and bleſſinges to be cheriſhed,
               They may not faile, & that from heauen aboue.
            
            
               To proue this matter of it ſelfe ſo plaine,
               Me needeth bring no more aucthoritie:
               Ne what the fathers of ſuch matters ſayen,
               Experience doth it ſo ratifye:
            
            
               Wherefore to turne agayne to lowlines,
               The matter of my woorke, and for whoſe ſake:
               To trauell in ſo great a buſines,
               So hygh and woorthy I haue vndertake.
            
            
               I ſay ſhe hath ſuch multiplicitie,
               Of fauour and of grace eſpeciall:
               That I dare call her of humanitie,
               The note, the proofe, and iudgement principall.
            
            
               Whereby a man doth differ from a beaſt,
               For one hath wylful inclination:
               And reaſon none of déede, ne of beheaſt,
               But violence of ſenſe and paſſion.
            
            
               
               Of whom God by his prophete Dauid ſayeth,
               Be not (ſayth he) lyke vnto Horſe or Mule:
               That more his wyl, then any reaſon wayeth,
               And muſt with bitte and brydle liue in rule.
            
            
               Whereas the ſoule of man is reaſonable,
               And of his luſt and wyll hath gouernaunce:
               But yf he abuſe that gyft ineſtimable,
               Which to the lowly hart dooth ſeeldome chaunce.
            
            
               For once he ſéemeth ſmall in his owne eyes,
               Of godly minde a mighty argument:
               And of a man whom litle may ſuffiſe,
               Both woorthy of great prayſe in myne entent.
            
            
               For be it much or lit that be poſſeſſeth,
               Of land or fee, of ſiluer or of golde:
               His hart encreaſeth not thereby, ne leſſeth,
               As edoon theſe 
                     •
                  ooles, for they han gotten molde.
            
            
               What ſome by legacie, ſome by diſcent,
               Bytitle auuceſtrel and cooſinage:
               Some, for in all their lyfe no trueth they ment,
               But vſure bribring, and ſuch foule outrage.
            
            
               And ſo haue filled cupbord, cheſt, and coffer,
               For which hem thinketh they ſhould been aboue:
               And that ech wyght to them ſhould dowke & proffer,
               All for theyr wealth, and nothing for their loue.
            
            
               
               For loue dooth nothing for their purpoſe make,
               That ſéeken worldly pompe and maintenaunce:
               Not aſkyng queſtion for conſcience ſake,
               In bargayne, purchaſe, or in cheuiſaunce.
            
            
               Of word, of yard, of meaſure, ne of weight,
               Of thirtie for a hundred by the yeere:
               Not plainely tooke, but cloſely and by ſleight,
               Aſke of the Brokers howe, and ye ſhall heare.
            
            
               Yet for they breake no houſe by violence,
               Nor by the high wayes in await doo lye:
               But robbe at home withouten reſiſtence,
               No man agaynſt them dare make hue and cry.
            
            
               But yf the godly preacher lyght thereon,
               Who for his words are ſpoken vnto all:
               Tuſhe good ynough ſay they be named non,
               And ſo from euill vnto woorſe they fall.
            
            
               For theſe are ſtatutes made and ordinaunce,
               To bridle their vnſaciableneſſe:
               That make the fatherleſſe and wydow daunce,
               With hungry bellies through their curſedneſſe.
            
            
               Not for the other ſafely dare I ſay,
               Who ſtandeth of his God in ſuch an awe:
               And by his word ſo ordereth his way.
               That he is to him ſelfe a perfect lawe.
            
            
               
               Thinketh of God, and that before his eyes,
               He goeth, and that to him there is no night:
               Wayeth alſo that what ſo men deuiſe,
               How ſo they collouren their deedes with ſlight.
            
            
               They may not him deceiue ne bleare his eye,
               As they can do to men by diuerſe wayes:
               Auoyding lawes their paine and penaltie,
               Yea and of wiſedome thereby get the praiſe.
            
            
               If all theſe things come of humilitie,
               Why may I not conclude vpon her then:
               And ſay no man can praiſe her worthely,
               Ne ſhew what good ſhe doth the ſonnes of men.
            
            
               But for my fynall proofe this will I ſay,
               That read the bookes of kings and ye ſhall finde:
               How God accepted lowlines alway.
               And made the proud and hautie come behinde.
            
            
               And them deſpiſed though with ſacrifice,
               And many a ceremony they him ſought:
               Which (as appéereth well) he did diſpiſe,
               For that ſo well they of them ſelues thought
            
            
               Ye faſt ſaith he to ſmyten with your fiſt,
               And to your debters done oppreſſion:
               Your barts to meeke and humble ye reſiſt,
               Yet ſhame ye not to make profeſſion.
            
            
               
               Of ſacrifice and of religion,
               With ſolempne outward ceremony:
               Hypocriſie and meere deriſion,
               Where in the hart is not humility.
            
            
               Shortly the humble, lowe, and contrite hart,
               Sayth Dauid, is to God moſt acceptable:
               That wyll I offer (ſayth be) for my part,
               And Bullockes of my lippes lay on thy table.
            
            
               Wherein almighty God vs graunt that we,
               By his example, and a number mo:
               Enforſen vs, ſuch as he was to be,
               Encreas and bleſſe all them that wyſhen ſo.
            
            
               That eche man ſeeking others, not his owne,
               In pacience, and longanimitie:
               Of lyfe may make his callyng to be knowen,
               And wynne the weake, to prayſen God thereby.
            
            
               Through ſtedfaſtneſſe and trueth in woord & déede,
               Abhorring filthy gayne, and all exceſſe:
               Supportyng eche another in his néede,
               Accompting godly liuing great richeſſe.
            
            
               Shortly ſubduing luſt and lewde deſyre,
               Of ſport or ſpeeche, and fleſhes foule delite:
               May ſo put out of wickedneſſe the fyre,
               And growe in fruites and graces of the ſpirite.
            
            
               
               And thus much of this vertue haue I ſaid,
               Of duetie bound and eke moſt willingly:
               The rather for pride hath her ſore affraid:
               And boſteth he will putten out her eye▪
               
            
            
               Which God of his pure grace ſheild and defend,
               And bleſſe his people and inheritance:
               To him be laud and praiſe world without end,
               And of all creatures obeyſſance.
            
            
               
                  printer's or publisher's device
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Booke to the Reader.
            
               
                  
                     •
                  F, gentle Reader, thou haue found in me,
               Thing which thy ſtomake hardly can diſgeſt,
               Here is diſcribed an Epythyme,
               
                  
                     •
                  arme it and lappe it cloſe vnto thy breſt,
            
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   was compounded with great diligence,
               Of Symples by an Apothecary,
               
                  
                     ••…
                  th truſtie and ſkilfull in that Science,
               And from theſe iiii. verſes doth not vary.
            
         
         
            The Epythyme.
            
               
                  •
               ho purpoſeth to liuen vertuouſe,
            In fauour of our God, let him take kéepe,
            
               
                  •
               hat pride none office beare within his houſe,
            For where he doth vertue is layde to ſleepe.
         
         
            
            A Prayer to almightie God.
            
               LOrd God through whoſe eternall ordinance,
               Decréed is and ſet downe by ſtatute:
               That human life ſhall ſtand of ſuſtenance,
               And muſt for want thereof be reſolute.
            
            
               Into the matter whereout he was take,
               Which was the earth and therfore haſt him giue,
               In token of thy loue and for his ſake,
               All neceſſary things wheron to liue.
            
            
               Both for his pleaſure and neceſſitie,
               To number them and make diuiſion:
               The firſt I may not for infinitie,
               But to the laſt belongen thrée and one.
            
            
               Which are apparel, meat, and drinke and ſléepe,
               Whereof the laſt thrée ben ſo neceſſary:
               That who ſo lacketh them no life may kéepe,
               The fourth to hide our ſhame thou will we cary.
            
            
               Theſe for our life we holden ſuffiſaunt,
               For theſe we make ſhift and prouiſion:
               Forgetfull of the fourth and ignoraunt,
               Which yet is chiefe of all and liefe allone.
            
            
               Thy word (O Lord) by whom all theſe are led,
               And through thée which they yelden noriſhment:
               For elſe man liueth not onely by bred,
               By meat or drinke or other accident.
            
            
               
               Nor yet by ſléepe to nature ſo friendable,
               Though of all theſe we taken what we will:
               Yea rather for wée béen vnmeaſurable,
               And vſe them not for néede but to fulfill.
            
            
               A foule delite and priden vs therein,
               They been our ſnares and haſten our decay:
               Thy iuſt reward (O Lord) allas for ſinne,
               When we by them are led forth of thy way.
            
            
               Graunt vs therfore (O Lord) that we ſo vſe,
               Thy Creatures as may ſtand with thy will,
               That for their ſakes we do not thee refuſe,
               Nor turne thy giftes and goodnes to our ill.
            
            
               But that aboue all other things we thirſt,
               Thy kingdome and of it the righteouſnes,
               Which thou haſt bidden vs to ſéeken firſt,
               So ſhall the reſt not hurt vs through exceſſe.
            
            
               In this life nor yet in the life to come,
               Which graunt vs Lord for Ieſus Chriſtes ſake:
               And when in earth our part is playd and done,
               Our ſoules and bodies to thy mercy take.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   