
      
         
            
            
               
THE True Copy of tvvo Letters, with their ſeuerall Anſweres, contayning the late Apostaſie of the Earle of Lauall, after his returne from Italy.
            Wherein the principall poynts in controuerſie with the Papiſts, are learnedly and fully confuted, By D. TILENVS.
            Faythfully tranſlated by D. D. S.
            LONDON, Printed by Simon Stafford, for Nathanael Butter, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Paules Churchyard, neere S. Auſtens Gate. 1605.
         
         
            
            
            To the moſt Chriſtian and mighty Monarch, James, by the grace of God, King of great Brittayne, Fraunce and Ireland, Defender of the true, ancient, and Catholike Fayth.
            
               MOſt mighty and renowmed King, behold, I offer to your Maieſty theſe vnexpected and vntimeous letters, wherein the fine and pure gold of Saba, is mingled with the olde and corrupt droſſe of Egypt, to be tryde by the diuine touchſtone of your ſacred wiſdome, perſwading myſelfe, that the reading of them ſhal not be ſo picaſant to your Maieſties eares, as the diſcontentment, in beholding the ſudden fall, and miſerable Apoſtaſie of ſo great a perſonage, and of my knowledge, ſo greatly deuoted to your Maieſties ſeruice: beſides that great hope and expectation, which was had throughout all France of him, to be (one day) a helpe and comfort to Chriſts true Church there. I may here very well compare him to the folly of the Lark, which, while it playes with the feather, and ſtoopeth, is caught in the Fowlers net: ſo he, dallying in his youth & prime of yeres,

being deceyued by the beautifull feathers & glaſſes of pleaſant Italy, was caught by the charming intiſemēts of thoſe Antichriſtian Vipers, with whoſe venome being once ſtung, hard was it to find ſuch medicine, for the cure of ſo dāgerous a diſcaſe: not doubting in this mean time, but as your Maieſty would be glad to heare of his healing and riſing againe to the imbracing of the truth, from whence he fell: ſo likewiſe on the other part, I am fully perſwaded, that your Maieſties wonted care ſhall continue in this your newe Monarchy, that no perſon of any quality and marke hereafter, ſhall bee licenced to trauell, eſpecially to Spaine & Italy (places moſt dangerous for practiſing of treaſons, & betraying of their own ſoules; yea, the liues of their owne Kings and countries) but with ſuch a ſtrict caueat, that if they continue not conſtant in the profeſsion of the truth, wherin they haue bin taught, that at their returne, They ſhal expect the rigor of your lawes, to be executed againſt them more ſeuerely then heretofore haue bin, leſt by their ouerſight and daily increaſe, they may not onely indanger Chriſtes Church in your dominiōs, but alſo your Maieſties perſon & ſtate, which God forbid ſhould euer come to paſſe in this our age, or in any other following. I craue humble pardon, that remēbers other mens matters

to your Maieſty, in forgetting my ſelf; for charity ſhould begin at her ſelfe, praying in all ſubmiſsion, that this ſmall mite of mine may be receyued with that accuſtomed fauour (which ſometime I inioyed more liberally,) as your Maieſty vſeth to accept the rich treaſures of others dayly offered to your Maieſty, and this to bee but the earneſt of a better worke to follow, and a remembrance of my dutifull affection, humbly ſubmitting my ſelfe, and this my rude Tranſlation, to the royal & moſt learned cenſure of your Maieſty, who can far better iudge therof, then I haue deliuered it. I make an end, beſeeching the Almighty King of Kings, long to preſerue your Maieſties life, & to proſper all your good actions and godly enterpriſes, to his glory, to the comfort and good of the Church and Common-wealth.
            
               Your Maieſties moſt humble and loyall Seruant,
D. D. S.
            
         
         
            
            The Tranſlator
            NO man (Chriſtian Reader) can ſerue two maſters, ſaith our Sauiour Chriſt; for the cō
               fort that is of God is ſweet and delectable: but this is not for al men, but for thoſe only, which deſpiſe the vanities of this world. It is impoſſible to taſte of God and his pleaſures, & to loue diſordinately the things of this life. All men would inioy gladly the ſweet conuerſatiō of our Lord; but few there be that will forgoe their owne worldly deſires, and willingly deſpiſe their earthly contentmēts: they deſire greatly to haue the inward comfort of the ſoule; but withall, they deſire to ſatisfy their own extraordinary luſts and appetites. This may well appeare in the Apoſtaſy of this Noble man, very godly & carefully broght vp in his tender yeeres in the true Religion, who caſting off all true feare of God, loue of true Religion, and the great honour & commendations that his houſe & predeceſſors had, for profeſſing & maintaining the ſame againſt the enemies therof, ſuffering himſelfe in the prime of his yeres, with pride and preiudice, two of his chiefe guides into Italy, to be bereft of that precious & ineſtimable pearle of Chriſts verity: for pride inſinuating her ſelfe, crept into his ſoule (a moſt dangerous gheſt) & taking once poſſeſsion, is very hard to be expelled againe. Preiudice on the other part, ſo great an enemy to the

truth, that it makes the mind vncapable of it; for if in his heart he had laid a ſure groūd, all his enemies had not ſhaken it, much leſſe ouer thrown his Religion. Ye ſee, be loued, what it is to ſerue two maſters, as he would haue done. I compare him vnto thoſe, who kindles a fire vnder greene wood, and leaues it ſo ſoone as it begins to flame, leauing off a good beginning, for want of ſeconding it with a ſuteable proceeding: but rather lazily & cowardly being ouercome with the pleaſures of the coūtry, and the curioſity of his young and vayne conceits, forgetting the ſeruice of God, wherin he had liued before, betook him to the ſeruice of Antichriſt, & with-drew himſelfe, as with a diſcontented mind, from the company of his chiefe Gouernour, both graue, wiſe, and godly, giuing himſelfe ouer to the company of thoſe deuouring Serpents, who neuer left him, vntil he was broght into the endleſſe Laborinth of their ſuperſtitious Idolatry, & made his ſoule drunk with the new wine of the cup of the Beaſt. I beſeech you therefore, all that loue your owne ſaluation, to take here your example, and eſchue the company of the vngodly & wicked, but eſpecially ſuch, as in the habits of ſimple Lambs, come ſecretly as Wolues, to infect and deuoure your ſoules, vnder the pretence of holineſſe and deuotion: and ſo I bid you farewell.
         
         
            
            
               The Tranſlator to D. Tilenus, his ancient acquaintance, the Authour hereof.
            
               
                  THou true TILENVS to thy Lord LAVALL,
               
               And faithfull Teacher of his tender yeeres,
               Thy learning great, and pietie appeares,
               By diuine anſweres to repaire his fall:
               Thy truth doth ſhine, his vntruth to deface.
               Thy heauenly dewe diſtilleth from aboue,
               To heale his ſoule, whom thou ſo deare didſt loue,
               And leadeth him the way to ſauing grace:
               But if ſo be thy counſell hee neglect,
               Yet thouſand eyes ſhall read thy leaues and lindes,
               And ſhall be ſcanned by a thouſand mindes,
               With endleſſe praiſe thy Trophees to erect:
               Where your great fame, and his diſgrace ſhall ſtand,
               Inrol'd fer euer with a Brittaynes hand.
               
                  D. D. S.
               
            
         
         
            
            The Aduertiſement of the Authour to the Chriſtian Reader.
            
            
               CVrioſity and pleaſure are two dangerous diſeaſes, and euery one apart, is ſtrong ynough to ouercome his patient: how much more, while being both together, they conioyne to aſſayle him, as it were, agreeing both by the body and the ſoule; the one ingendring himſelfe within the ſpirit, the other within the fleſh, each of them conſuming and deſtroying the parts that breed it; euen as the Worme deſtroyeth the Apple, the Viper, her mother: They ſymbolize in many things, and as two ſiſter-like twinnes, they attyre thēſelues with one ſelfe ſame habit; the definition of the one, not much diſagreeing frō the nature of the other: So that to this end an ancient Father ſayd, That Adultery was nothing elſe, but a curioſity of an other mans pleaſure; the one alienating the ſpirit of the patient from the knowledge of ſaluation, and cauſing him to take appetite to thoſe things, wherof the ignorance is wiſdome, and the practice damnable, maketh him the diſciple of the father of lyes, ſubiect to the Prince of darkneſſe, the firſt inuenter of thoſe myſteries of hell: the other changeth his body, which ought to be the member of Ieſus Chriſt, the temple of the holy Ghoſt, into the member of an harlot, and habitation of vncleane ſpirits: both of them be bad, very fit to corrupt youth, to ſeduce it to the ſtewes of Antichriſt, where there is ſomewhat to pleaſe both thoſe intiſing humours: for what doth more reſemble the curioſity of Magicke, then the charmes of hallowed Agnus Dei, of the Tranſſubſtantiation? to the characters of Soccrers, then the marks of the beaſt, deciphered in the book of Reuelation? A great part of this deuilliſh Art bewrayeth itſelfe by auricular confeſsion, imitating the forme of interrogatories, regiſtred in the decrees of Buchart, Biſhop of Lib. 9. cap. 5
                     •
                  . Wormes. As touching the pleaſure of the fleſh, where may a man find the exerciſe more free, the exceſſe more enormous, then within the great Babylon, where the bodily luſt hath no leſſe ſway, then the ſpiritual: Where haue bin inuented theſe

ſacred Canons, which do not only with the Council of Toledo, Diſt. 3. C. 4. Is qui non habet Cauſ. 12. q. 1. c. dilectiſſionis. permit concubines, but alſo commaund and ordaine the community of wiues with Plato, and of goods with the Anabaptiſts? Behold theſe two rocks, which, as wel as ambition & couetouſnes, ouerwhelme the faith of many by lamentable ſhipwrack. This is the courſe, wherin lately the Earle of Laual ouerthrew himſelfe, to the great griefe of thoſe, who hoped hee would one day ſucceede to the piety and vertue of his predeceſſors: but theſe qualities are gifts perſonall, not hereditary, as the name & temporall goods. After that he had languiſhed a long time in theſe diſeaſes, poſſeſsing both his ſpirit & his fleſh, there was alſo marked in him diuers ſymptomes and ſignes of an euil ſucceſſe; and among other things, was perceiued a fact direct cōtrary to that which S. Luke deſcribes: for hauing paſt to change the ayre in Italy, a country which is not thoght very good for thoſe perſons that be moſt Act. 19. 19. wholſome and whole, he did not refuſe all kind of pleaſures for his body; & beſides, made prouiſion of mortall receits for his ſoule, buying at a high rate, writings, like to thoſe, which the diſciples of the Apoſtles caſt into the fire, notwithſtāding they were of great value, ſo ſoone as they did imbrace the chriſtiā faith at Epheſus: by which purchaſe, he declared very well, to be more diſpoſed to take place in the Temple of the great Diana of the Papiſts, thē to haue preſerued that wherwith it pleaſed God to haue honored him in his true Church, who condēneth thoſe deteſtable curioſities: and in the end, the Apoſtem beginning to grow & gorge forth the venome contained in theſe his two letters, in which he propoūdeth diuers queſtions, not ſo much as to receiue light of his doubts, wherin ſuch diſeaſes had tane away both his deſire & vnderſtāding: but becauſe after a iuſt refuſall of a verbal conferēce made vnto his vniuſt demaūds, being addreſſed to thoſe who vnderſtood that reſolutiō which he had already taken, he had need thē of ſome other mask to end the Cataſtrophe of his Tragedy, inſtead of extreme vnction, & funerall preparations of his religiō dead in his ſoule long time before, diſſembling in the mean time this ſpiritual death toward theſe, who did their indeuour for his preſeruatiō, as appeares in matters of eſtate, who cōceale, for certaine dayes, the death of their great Princes:

but ſeeing he could not ſo wel coūterfet the voyce of Iacob, but that the hands of Eſau did diſcouer him: neither was he able himſelf to ſupport any longer the peſtilēt ſmel which his neutrality did breathe forth amōg the liuing & the dead, betwixt the preaching of the Goſpel, & the Idolatrous maſſe, but that he was forced to diſcouer his maske.
            
               And hauing trāſported himſelfe to the Couent of the Capucians in Paris, he burted ſolemnly his religion, accōpanied with many exorciſmes, abiurations, confeſsions, pentiencies, and ſuch ceremonies: which did ſerue him no leſſe to his obſequ
                  •
               es, thē did the deſperate painting & attiRes to Ieſabel, which ſhe did take in the inſtāt houre ſhe was to be caſt Forth of the window to break her neck. They had great deſire to adorne the lamentable pompe of the poore young Earle, by ſome pray, which they thought to haue caught on our profeſſors: and to this effect, after the refuſall of the verball conference which he demanded, the Ieſuits had perſwaded him to aduiſe in that ſame inſtant vpon the ſaid doubts, with diuers perſons in diuers places, hoping that in diuerſity of ſtile, they might incoūter certain differēces of beleeuing in thoſe that ſhould anſwer: but not finding one iuſt ſubiect on our part, to fal in any ſuch inconuenience, but rather to alienate him frō the wickednes of the corrupters of his youth: We ſuppoſed nothing ſhould diuert vs frō putting to light, the obiections made on the one part, & the anſwers giuen on the other ſide; to the end, that cōFerring the one with the other, euery one who hath eyes to ſee, may vnderſtād, that thoſe which wil not know that which is, ſhould imagine to thēſelues, to ſee that which they ſee not; which be the two kinds of blindnes, wherwith God by his iuſt iudgement doth puniſh thoſe that forſake the ſpirit for the fleſh, the truth for vanity; the light for darknes, the Sauiour of the world, for the ſon of perdition: neuertheleſſe, we hope, God willing, that thoſe, who haue not much edified Chriſts Church by their life, ſhall farre leſſe ruine the ſame by their death, ſeeing that their voluntary ſeparation from our cōmunion, doth no other thing then eaſe vs frō the neceſſary trouble of cutting thē off frō our ſociety; no more then the wind, which driueth away the chaffe in the ayre, eaſing thē which in the meane time are about to clenſe the floore.
            Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            The firſt letter of the Earle of Lauall, to his maſter D. Telenus.
            
            
               
                  SIR, I am to render you exceeding great thanks, for the receiuing in ſo good part, the newes of my returne: but if any other hath noted the contrary in you, that hath bin againſt my intention & meaning, who haue nothing in more reſpect, then to ſerue you, and not in any ſort to offend you. Theſe faire inſtructions which pleaſed you to giue me, haue brought into me a great ioy and contentment, imagining with my ſelfe, that they haue proceeded frō a perſon of ſuch learning, as you be; and that beare mee ſuch good will, as to loue me: the one, knowne to the whole world, the other beleeued of me with a great ſatiſfaction. But this diſcourſe, which it hath pleaſed you to propound, touching the manifeſt difference of 2. Religions, hath moued in me a deſire to learne more of you, who hath left in me ſuch a taſte, that I deſire rather to make the demaunds of an ignorant, then to be made wiſe in any thing by your anſwere. I will rather intreat you to inſtruct me in the controuerſies, then to ſtrengthen mee in my beleefe. And firſt, to ſhew me, if the viſible Church hath remained any ſpace of time in her purity, and how long? or if ſhe hath euerſo remained; or if ſhe hath had only that quality of purity ſince Caluins time? Secondly, if ye hold for conſtant and firme, the heads of Religion, that were debated & reſolued vpon, in the ſoure firſt generall Councils? Thirdly, if the calling or ſending be neceſſary to Miniſters, and of whom had Caluin it? Fourthly, if the ſacred Scriptures interpret

them, then euery one is capable for the vnderſtanding thereof. Fiftly, all the Hereſies that haue bene confuted, doe wee not hold them iuſtly and well ouerthrowne? Sixtly, if we receiue the Fathers as witneſſes only of matters of their time, and as Hiſtoriographers, or not? Seuenthly, if the inuocation of Saints be euil, becauſe it ſteales away the honour, which is due vnto God: or if it be ſuperfluous and to no purpoſe, becauſe they vnderſtand vs not? Eyghtly, if all bodies bee circumſcribed or not? I pray you now, not to anſwere ſo ſubtilly, that I cannot vnderſtand you, leſt perhaps, you may diſtruſt, that ſome other, and not my ſelf haue made them: as you may iudge, that the order and the ſtile cannot proceed but from ſuch an ignorant perſon as I: ſo alſo, the ſubiect and matter is conceyued in my ſpirit, by writing of that, to which, for the moſt part, there is need of no other anſwere, but your nay. I craue your pardon for diſturbing you from your graue and waighty affayres, to learne me the A. B. C. and am, and ſhall be more then any perſon,
                  
                     Your moſt affectionate and bound diſciple, to ſerue you,
LAVALL.
                  
               
            
         
         
            D. Telenus Anſwere to the Earle of Laualls firſt Letter.
            
               
                  SIR, I prayſe God with my whole heart, that in the end he hath put in your mind, this iuſt & right reſolutiō, as to keep one eare for the truth, the which

being in this world, as in a ſtrange & for raine country, or as it were impriſoned by the father of lyes, incounters more enemies that accuſe her, then of aduocates that defend her. I know her accuſatiōs by thoſe queſtions, which it hath pleaſed you to demaund of me: your modeſty requires, that I receiue them, as from the part of an ignorant: but it is a long time ſince I learned, that the moſt profound Doctors of Sorbon could not bring forth more better, nor more beautifull. Neuertheles, I reioyce to behold you to take on the quality of a diſciple, that binds your conſcience to delay all reuolting at leaſt, vntill that time, that ſure knowledge ſhall teach you both the reaſon & the groūd therof: but I beſeech you to pardon me, if my anſwers ſurpaſſe a little the limits of yea and nay, which your letter hath preſcribed me, conſidering, that there requireth a little more time to draw a ſtone out of a pit, then in caſting of it in; and that the center & the circumference of an anſwer, well made, is not only ſo much the wil of him that makes, the demaund, but principally the need he hath to know & vnderſtand it. Alſo I perſwade my ſelf, that ye vnderſtand not the name of diſciple after the maner of the Pithagoreans, that alledge for all reaſons & anſwers, the yea and the nay of their maſter: a ſtyle, which for the preſent is not fitting but to the diſciples of the Pope, of whom only ſelfewil holds the place of all reaſon & authority. And although you deſire to be rather inſtructed in the controuerſies, then fortified in your beleefe: and that you perceyuing ſo clearely, that ſuch anſwers, vpon doubtfull and intricate queſtions, ſhould ſerue meerely all, eyther for the one, or for the other, and would increaſe in you, rather the number of your

doubts, then lighten the darkneſſe of your ignorance, by the light of that ſame knowledge, which conſiſteth not in the ſimple affirmation or negation, but in ſolide and neceſſary demonſtration. Such was the opinion of S. Auſten prayſing Nebridius, which hated greatly a ſhort anſwere to a great queſtion, iudging him that knew not how many things might and ought therevpon bee ſpoken, was not worthy to haue propounded them. And ſince that the almighty God would not permit that I ſhould remayne neere your perſon, vntill that time, that your age ſhould bee more capable of more exact inſtructions: I thought, notwithſtanding my farre abſence, I was bound to repayre that breach, that in taking vpon you the title of a diſciple in your letter, you haue honored me in that, which ſometime I inioyed: and hauing not ſince changed any thing, except my dwelling, and not my affections to continue my ſeruice towards you, I ſhould bee thought vnworthy of your good will and kindnes, if I ſhould content mee, after the maner of Trumpets, to haue giuen you courage by my former letter, without bringing now the helpe and ſuccour, which you craue againſt the aſſaults of your doubts.
                  The firſt Queſtion, or rather doubt, which you demaund of mee, is this, If the Church viſible hath remayned any certayne time in her purity, and how long? Or if ſhe hath remained continually? Or whether ſhee hath this purity ſince Caluins time?
                  
                  To them then who aſſault you, and that make no other Buckler but of the Fathers, they ſhall ſuffer me to anſwere to this queſtion by the mouth of Euſebius, or by Egyſippus, who is more ancient then Euſebius;
                     
and very neere to the age of the Apoſtles themſelues, who ſayes in his Hiſtory eccleſiaſtical, that the Church hath remayned virgin-pure, chaſte, and whole, ſo long as the Apoſtles did liue; and after the generation of thoſe, who had heard that heauenly wiſedome with their owne eares, then errour entred, and tooke poſſeſſion within the Church: but to others that deſire inſtruction, there is required a more particular anſwere, leſt they ſhould thinke, that wee deſire rather to cut the knots, then to looſe them: I ſay then, that this purity is to be conſidered, either in regard of the doctrine, or good life; and that both the one and the other is in the Church, according to the condition and meaſure, which is aſſigned to her, during the ſpace of her reſidence heere on the earth: 2. Cor. 11. in the which eſtate, as touching her head, who is Ieſus Chriſt, ſhe is euer pure; but not altogether pure in herſelfe: for ſeeing euery member of the ſame is ſubiect to fayle, as well in doctrine, as in life, and that wee knowe her heere but in part; the body which is compoſed of theſe members, cannot bee Epheſ. 4. 7. wholy pure and perfit: and to conſider the body of the Church, without her members particular, whereof ſhee is compound, were as much, as to tranſforme her into an Idea Platonica, only the Prophets and Apoſtles, by a vocation, and ſpeciall prerogatiue, and by an aſſiſtance and helpe immediate & extraordinary of the holy Spirit, were exempt and free of all errour in the doctrine, the which in this reſpect, and by good reaſon, is the true and onely rule of all purity: and according as the Church drawes either neere, or is far diſtant, the meaſure of her purity increaſeth or decreaſeth: and

when ſhe is called pure, that is, either in reſpect of her head, or in regard of a part thereof, which is receyued in the heauens, which they call the Church Triumphant; or, rather in regard of the end ſhee aymes at in this world; euen ſo, as they call a houſe, an edifice, which is but yet in building, and before it be complete and ended. And like as the purity of the Church is ſubiect to alteration; euen ſo is her forme or externall behauiour, in reſpect whereof, they call it viſible: for although ſhe remayne euer viſible in her ſelfe, yet ſo is it, that ſhe is not alwayes viſible to others, eſpecially to thoſe that haue not the eyes which be requiſite for the ſeeing of her; as the Sunne it ſelfe is not to be ſeene by Heb. 18. 38. Apoc. 12. 14. Math. 2. 13. a blind man: and the Almighty, for the preſeruing of her from her perſecutors, retyred her ſometimes to the wilderneſſe, to ſecret caues and dennes, euen as he did withdraw his Sonne Chriſt Ieſus into Egypt, to preſerue him from the rage of Herode: And then ſhee became inuiſible, but not to God, neyther to herſelfe, but only to the eyes and iudgement of the blind world. I ſay then, that the Church militant hath euer retained that meaſure of purity, which the holy Ghoſt hath communicated to her, not only ſince Caluins time, but the Apoſtles dayes, euen to vs preſent this day: As alſo the ſayd meaſure was much different & diuers in ſundry times & places, the which vndoubtedly did moue the ancient Fathers, to compare the Church vnto the Moone, which ſheweth her ſelfe ſometimes of more, otherwhiles of leſſe light, as it were eclipſed, and hides herſelfe altogether, as it were, from the world, without danger notwithſtanding all this, either to be loſt or ſcattered, as well appeared in the Church of Iſrael, in the

time of Ely the Prophet, where there was a Church of ſeuen thouſand, that did not bow their knees to Baal, which was not perceiued there externally. If your pretended teachers ſhall not graunt vnto me, that which heretofore is alledged, I ſhall cauſe them, by the authority of Bellarmine, to deny the purity of their owne Romane Church, and after this maner I will proue it: The Church that may altogether bee compounded of vnfaithfull perſons, wicked and reprobates, can haue, neither puritie in her faith, nor in her life.
                  
                  But ſo it is, that the church ſo deſcribed by Bellarmine, may be wholy compoſed of ſuch people: therfore ſhe can haue no kind of purity. The Aſſumption is proued and made cleare in his booke of the Church, in the laſt Bellar. li. 3. cap. 2. de eccl. Paragraph, where Bellarmine ſaith, that is the definitiō of the Church, according to the which, ſome be of the body, & not of the ſoule thereof, hauing no internall vertue, and being as it were, the haire, the nayles, and corrupt humours of the body of man: and of ſuch ſort be the Infidels, wicked and reprobates, as Bellarmine himſelf expreſſeth them, who may make external profeſſiō of faith, cōmunicate to the Sacraments, & ſubiect thē
                     ſelues to the Pope, which be the 3. eſſentiall conditiōs and only neceſſaries according to this Cardinall, for to be in the Church. By the ſame Authour, I will argue againe after another maner.
                  That which may be deſtitute of fayth, hope and charity, cannot remaine in purity, yea, rather may loſe all.
                  But the church according to Bellarmine, may be voyd of al thoſe qualities: therfore ſhe may loſe al her purity.
                  But if any ſhall reply, that Bellarmine adioynes, that the ſayd vertues are to bee found neuertheleſſe in the

Church. I aske, whether they be of the eſſence of the Church, or not? If the firſt, wherfore ſayes he in his definition, that they be not neceſſary? But if the ſecond, how can a Church without faith, hope and charity, bee thought pure?
                  Learne then (ſir) by theſe two arguments, as by two marks, or rather enſignes, the purity of the place, where thoſe people would lodge you: neuertheles, this is that Annal. tom. 6. an. 484. §. 4. & tom. 7 an. 530. §. 5. Church which Cardinall Baronius maintaynes and defends to haue neither ſpot nor blemiſh.
                  Wheras ye write & deſire, that the time may be ſhewed and marked, in the which errours and vncleannes haue entred into the Church of Rome: ſurely, this diſcourſe would prolong too much my letter, which you deſire me to make ſhort, & would importune more by her prolixity, then it ſhould inſtruct you by her vtility, more proper to a hiſtory then to doctrine. Is it inough, that a poore Hydropique ſhould beleeue to be ſicke, & to haue need of phiſike, when he is ſo ſwolne, that he is almoſt in danger to burſt, although none can preciſely mark & ſhew him the houre when as his liuer began to be conſumed? Surely, while as the fire is in the houſe, the water within the ſhip, the enemies within the town, the Wolfe within the fold, thoſe that hope to preuent the danger, or rather to preſerue them be more aduiſed and circūſpect, then thoſe that wil beleeue nothing, vnleſſe they ſhew them at what time, & how that is come to paſſe, and who buſies thēſelues in ſearching the cauſes & the beginnings. we know, that already in the daies of the Apoſtles, the myſtery of iniquity began to work 2. Theſ. 27. Acts. 20. 2
                           •
                        
                      it ſelfe, which S. Paul foretold, that after his departure, there ſhould enter rauenous wolues among the flocks; & in that night, after the husbandman had ſowne the

good ſeed, behold, the enemy alſo did ſow the Tares. Mat. 13. 25. Sur. tom. 1. die 8. Ian. Bar. Tom. 9. Anno. 805. §. 3.
                  
                  The Antichriſt was not begotten in one day. This Beare was not ſo ſoone licked, and put in form, as he of whom ſpeaks Surius & the Cardinall Baronius, who of a wilde beaſt, became a reaſonable creature, made himſelf alſo Frier in that ſame inſtant, after he had proſtrated himſelfe before the relikes of a certaine Lady, and hauing beſide entertayned the Nunnes of the Couent. The Romance Beare ought to be ſome other thing beſide, then a ſimple ſhorne Munke.
                  Your ſecond demaund is touching the 4. firſt general 2 Councils, to wit, If we hold for certaine, that which was there treated and reſolued? I anſwer, that thoſe points cō
                     cerne either the doctrine, or policy of the Church: thoſe then be collected in the Symboles, compoſed in the ſaid Councils, and wee hold them for true, ſo farre as they are agreeing to the holy Scriptures. In this here we will vſe the liberty which Bellarmine takes, after the maner of Pope Gelaſus, ſaying, That in the Councill of Conc. Chal. de Laicis cap. 20. Praef. in lib. de Pontif. Calcedon, there is ſomething good, & ſomething euil, and that wee may receiue the one, & refuſe the other: and in another place he diſpenſeth with himſelfe, to reproue in the ſame maner the Council of Conſtantinople, for hauing attempted ſomewhat, that did not pleaſe the Church of Rome. Behold then, how he handles theſe two of the firſt 4. generall Councils: for the reſt iudge, if ye pleaſe, which is moſt reaſonable, to ſubmit themſelues to the Coūcils, becauſe the Pope doth approue them, who maintaines himſelfe to be aboue thē; or becauſe the Councils haue ſubmitted themſelues to the word of GOD; the one, which is taught in the Church of Rome; the other, in our Church.
                  
                     
The third queſtion is, Concerning the ſending of the Miniſters, 3 if it be neceſſarie for them, and of whom Caluin had it? I anſwer, that it is neceſſary; and that Caluin had it of the Church of Geneua, & of Farel his predeceſſor, who had alſo his of the people of Geneua, who had right and authority to inſtitute & depoſe Miniſters: for ſo declareth S. Ciprian, ſaying, that the people obeying to the Lib. 1. Epiſt. 4. commaundements of God, ſhould ſeparate themſelues from a wicked guide, and not to meddle with the ſacrifices of any ſacrilegious Prieſt, cōſidering that the ſaid people haue chiefe authority to make choyce of worthy perſons, & to reiect the vnworthy. This was ſo practiſed by the people of Geneua, and in diuers other parts of Europe, where in theſe latter times they did forſake thoſe ſacrilegious Prieſts, and ſacrifices of the Pope, for to eſtabliſh faithful Miniſters & proclaimers of the goſpel. And to be ſhort, the reformed Churches had their calling & ſending, partly from God, and partly frō their people, and partly from the Church of Rome: from God, as the chiefe cauſe; from the people, as by lawful inſtrument. frō the Church of Rome, as by a corrupt inſtrument. God gaue the eſſence, and the forme interiour to this ſending: the reformed Church gaue the teſtimonies & approbations, and the exteriour forme: the Church of Rome hath added thereto, abuſes and corruptions, which our ſucceeding Miniſters haue renounced.
                  The fourth queſtion is touching the interpretation 4 and vnderſtanding of the Scriptures, to wit, If euery one be capable of the vnderſtanding of it, interpreting it by it ſelfe?
                  
                  I anſwere, that if by this capacity, ye meane a natural faculty of man, & by the vnderſtanding, a knowledge

to ſaluation: ſo far off is it that euery one is capable to the vnderſtāding therof, or to purchaſe this intelligence by his ſtudy & trauels: but rather herein all be naturally blind and fooliſh; and it is neceſſarily requiſit, that which our Sauiour Chriſt did to his Apoſtles, opening their vnderſtandings to conceaue the Scriptures, ſhould be done to all them, which deſire to vnderſtand them wholſomely: for as the bodily light cannot be receiued, but by eyes corporall, that be open; euen ſo, the ſpiritual light of the Scriptures cannot be ſeene, but by the ſpiritual eyes of faith, which God opens to his own elect, in giuing them ſo much thereof, as is neceſſary for them to ſaluation: in doing whereof, he works oftentimes by degrees, as he did with the blind man, ſpoken of in the Goſpel, whom he lightned by little. Whoſoeuer Mark. 8. 24. be the meaneſt of the world, vnderſtand theſe paſſages, which defend the bowing downe before Images: who commaund to giue the cuppe of the Lord to all: which beare alſo, that this is the docttine of deuils, for to forbid mariage, and the vſe of certain meats, &c. The Goſpel is not hid but to thoſe who periſh, and whom the God of this world hath blinded. This 2. Cor. 4. 5. ſayes S. Paul.
                  
                  The fift demaund is, touching the confuting of hereſies, to wit, If that we hold them not for well and iuſtly 
                     5 Orat. 2. in Arrianos. 2. Tom. 3. 6. 
                     confuted. I anſwere, that theſe hereſies refuted by the word of God, or as S. Athanaſius ſaith, ſtoned by arguments taken out of the holy Scripture, are well & iuſtly conuinced: for this is one of the vſes, wherefore it was giuen by heauenly inſpiration; neither hold we that for refuted or ouercome, which is onely done by the witneſſes of man, and by the authority of the Pope, who

doth not condemne hereſies, but in ſeeming to bee an enemy to them, to the end the better he may eſtabliſh his owne: as did Zophyrus, that by ſuch ſlights wonne Babylon. The moſt ordinary and common argument of the Pope, for to refute hereſies, is by the fagot, & the hand of the hangman, according to the Logick of the Inquiſition of Spayne, and the practiſe of the Ieſuites, their Apoſtles in the New found world, againſt the poore Pagans; notwithſtanding that the ſcholaſticke diuines maintaine, that the Infideis ought not in any The 21. 9 O art. 8. caſe to beforced to receiue the faith; yea, not after ye haue ouercome them in warre, and made them ſlaues. But in this there appeares to vs yet one of the conformities of the pretended Vicar of Ieſus Chriſt, with his maſter the cōmiſſion which the one giues to his Apoſtles, beares this; Go ye, teach all nations, &c. That which Mat. 28. the other giues to his, is, Go kill, maſſacre, poyſon all people, who will not obey me.
                  
                  Now followes the ſixt queſtion, Of the authority of 
                     6 
                     the Fathers. The opinion of the Church of Rome is diuers vpon this poynt. There be that hold, that all the writings of the Fathers be true and authenticke, and it behoueth to maintayne all their opinions to be true, euen D
                           •
                        ft 9. C. uoli meis. to the laſt iote. This is it which the gloſſe ſayes vp on the decree authenticke in the Church of Rome, without teaching of vs, how we may obſerue this ordinance, when the opinions of the Fathers bee contrary one to another. The more modeſt & beſt aduiſed ſaies, they ſhould be eſteemed for Hiſtorians, and witneſſes of matters of their time. We ſay, that in regard of the queſtions of right, that bee in controuerſy, the Fathers 1 Cor. 13 9. haue bene, and ſhould be eſteemed for diſciples of the trueth, and not for Maſters, knowing in a part,

and propheſying in a part, and that they haue not comprehended the whole trueth, but only according to the meaſure of the grace of Ieſus Chriſt: we eſteem them for Inſtruments of God, where they haue ſpoken the Ephe. 4. 7. truth; but where they haue a little erred, in going out of the right way, we ceaſe not neuertheleſſe to hold them for the children of God, beleeuing that the heauenly Father hath couered their infirmities: neither doe wee deſpiſe the faire harueſt of learning, that aboundeth in their writings, for certain cares of cockle, which are mingled with them: but we do hate thoſe, who gather nothing but the Cockle and their errors, who defile and corrupt, as much as they may, by their Index expurgatorius, the good grayne, which is there, who preferre their Briers to their Roſes, and in ſtead of concealing their owne ſhame, kiſſed it, and cauſed it to be reuerenced by the people. As for their teſtimonies in queſtiōs concerning the matter of fact, we accept them in things of their times, & that be of their knowledge, eſpecially when it is well grounded and aſſured: for it ſhalbe proued, that they haue miſtaken thēſelues both in the one and in the other; and there is none, except the Prophets and the Apoſtles, to whom, by a ſpeciall prerogatiue, pertaineth the condition of witneſſe without reproof, Luk. 24. 48. Act. 1. 8 and free of exception. Otherwiſe, the writings of the Fathers, at leaſt, thoſe who write the Hiſtory of their times, ſhould be equal to the Canonicall Scriptures. I report me herein to the teſtimony of that great Cardinall Annal. tom. 1. an. 34. An. 39. §. 22. 
                     Baronius, hauing ſpoken in one place, that the Catholike Church falles not at all times, nor in al things: yea, the holyeſt Fathers thēſelues ſay in another place, that the Acts of the Apoſtles written by S. Luke, merit

more faith, then any authority of the Ancients; and in another place, that which the moſt true & ſincereſt writers haue reported of the Apoſtles, hath not remained in her owne integrity, without corruption.
                  As touching The Inuocation of Saints, your ſeuenth queſtion: I anſwere, It ſhould bee reiected in regard of both the two reaſons alledged by your ſelfe; to wit, as well, becauſe it is ſacriledge againſt God, as alſo, vnprofitable for vs: for to ſee, heare, vnderſtand, receiue, & to heare the requeſts of all apart, al at one time, and in all times; this is a propriety belonging onely to God, and his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt, from whom they ſteale his honor, & make the Saints to vſurpe his office, when one S. Iames, another S. Clowd, is called vpon in one ſame time, in a thouſand places, from the Eaſt to the Weſt, of a million of perſons, for thouſand and thouſands of diuers things: alſo, when they beleeue that the Saints can vnderſtand, & are ſufficient to ſatiſfie & content euery one. And by this you may perceiue the abuſes of the Ieſuites, who perſwade you, ſeeing it is permitted to aske the help of the liuing, that it cannot bee prohibited to call vpon the dead alſo, of whome wee haue as little certainty that they can heare vs, as of commaundement that we ſhould reclayme them.
                  Your laſt queſtion, is, Of the circumſcription of the body. To which I anſwere, that euery true body is circumſcribed; and to be a body and not to be circumſcribed, that is to ſay, limitted and bounded, imports contradiction: for if the dimenſions be eſſentials to a body; and if it be neceſſary, that the dimenſions be terminable, which was neuer yet denyed, it followes then of neceſſity, that it is bounded and circumſcribed: and if

this neceſſity accompanieth all bodies in generall, how much more, a humane body, or body of man, which is not Mathematicall, neither compoſed only of matter and of forme; but which is organick, compoſed of vnlike parts & of diuers kinds? of which then followes, that thoſe that take from him the circumſcriptiō, to the end, to lodge him in one time & inſtāt in diners places: and inſted to amplify the power of God, deſtroyes therby both his verity & wiſdome, his might and his Godhead altogether: His verity, in ſo much as hee ſhould haue in him, yea & no: if that he might ſay of one ſelfe ſame body, that he is circumſcribed, & not circumſcribed; one, and none; organick, and not organick: His wiſedome, becauſe there would be diſorder and confuſion in his works: his power, becauſe it ſhould haue imperfection, to wit, a humane body, not hauing that, Didy. de Spirit. S. Virgil. cont. Sabel. &c. which made her to be ſo. To conclude his Godhead, becauſe the creature finite ſhould be equal to the Creator, who is only infinite; by the which argument, the Ancients foreſaw the Deity of the holy Ghoſt: but if they will ſay, that the place is not of the eſſence of the body, & conſequently, that the one may be without the other: it muſt be demaunded, if the time is not as well out of the eſſence of the body, as a body may bee then without time? Conclude ſo, ſhould not this be without time & without ſence: if they reply again, that the heauen, although a true body, yet it is not contayned by any place, that inuirons it without. The anſwere is, that for all that it is not exēpt of circumſcription, being circūſcribed by the limits of her proper greatnes, & forme inſeparable frō it: and euen ſo, the bodies of the faithfull, that while they ſhalbe tranſported aboue the heauens,

which we ſee ſhal not be without their circūſcriptions, although it be that an other body compaſſe them bout, as the ayre doth vs below, or that it be that nothing compaſſe vs. I beleeue ye haue oftentimes heard this ſentence of S. Auſten, Take away the roome from a body, 
                     Auguſt. ad Dard. 
                     and there ſhalbe then no part at all in them. We ſay with the ſaid Father, that this circumſcription agreeth with the body of our Lord, who is aboue clothed with heauenly glory, yet not ſpoyled of his humane nature; neither can we read without horzor, that which the Pope commaunds to be beleeued in this poynt, to wit, That 
                     De conſocrat. diſt. 2. C. ego Bereng. 
                     he is handled by the hands of the Prieſts, torne and broken by the teeth of the faithful, ſenſually and carnally: Termes and ſpeeches according to the Romane Church, muſt be taken precizely: for as Bellarmine teacheth vs, there is no Bellar. de Imag. l. 2 cap. 22. forme in ſpeaking in the matter of faith more exact, thē that which they vſe, who abiure an hereſy: wherof followes, that this maner of ſpeaking by Pope Nicholas to Berengare, for the abiuring of his pretended Hereſy, admits not the gloſſe adioyned to the margent; that is to ſay, whoſoeuer ſhould take theſe tearmes by the meaning of the letter, ſhould fall in hereſie, worſe then that of Barengarius. But what is this? ſayes not your pretended teachers, with a high & cleare voyce, That the glorious bodie of our Lord may be eatē by a mouſe, deuoured by a dog. Then behold, I pray you, how they circumſcribe it, inuironing & bounding it in the intrailes of a filthie beaſt, which is the place and the lodging, which theſe honeſt Harbengers aſsigne vnto him. Behold, there is the faire Hellen of their doctrine, with whom they would make you inamored; ſhall you then receiue for principles of fayth, the barking of ſuch Cerbres?
                  
                     
You haue here my anſwers vnto your 8. demaunds, which you ſhall find more cleare then ſubtil, more gentle then ingenious, more neceſſary then tedious: and if the deſire of learning be as wel grauen in your heart, as it is repreſented in your letter, as a charitable Chriſtian, I wil beleeue you, not withſtanding the aſſurance of your friends & ſeruants, who in all parts publiſh & lament your reuolt wholly reſolued on. I ſhallbe very glad, that this written anſwere to your letter, may be communicated to thoſe, whom ye eſteem moſt capable for the examination thereof. I am not ignorant of their ordinary replies. Alſo I know for the ouerthrowing of them, it ſhal ſuffice to apply therunto, the concluſions, which may be drawne from the principals, ſet downe by me: and to do them a little, & a little by degrees, it would exceed the bounds of a letter, and your owne ordinance and deſire: but if there reſts yet any doubt on theſe poynts, or others; & that the aſſurance which ye haue of my particular affection to your ſeruice, and to your ſaluation, may make you deſire the true light, rather by my pen, thē by the mouth of ſome other more neere vnto you: I ſhall eſteem it for ſingular great honour, the commaundement which it ſhall pleaſe you to giue me: for to God it is not acceptable, that I ſhould eſteeme that voyage of Rome, or the aire of the Court, or the vayne hope of I wot not what, to haue ſo changed that naturall inclination, which I was wont in ſome other time heretofore to marke in you, that ye would enter into into a new Religiō, trauerſing amids theſe miſts of vncertain doubts & irreſolutions, without any aſſurance in your ſpirit, of any receiued knowledge, with theſe remorſes of conſcience in your

heart, with a brain ful of doubts, which you ſay, to haue growne in you, euen while ye were writing vnto me. Herein you would reſemble the ſunne in March, which remoues the humours, without bringing force to reſolue them: or to do as thoſe, whom curioſity makes to taſte of a drug vnknowne, the effect whereof cannot be knowne but by their death. No, no, I cannot beleeue it; I know what a poore Pagan hath heretofore taught Cic 1. Off. you, that it behooueth neuer to vndertake any thing, which is doubted to be iuſt, becauſe that Iuſtice ſhines of her ſelfe by the contrary; all doubts ſhew that therin is euill: how much leſſe then, thoſe that haue bene learned in a better ſchoole, that whatſoeuer is done without Rom. 14. 13. fayth, is ſinne? and would they reſolue themſelues without this certainty to alteration, where they goe either to life, or to death eternall, if they haue any remainder, I wil not ſay of godlines and Religion, but of honor & courage? And heereupon I pray the Father of light, who illuminates the blynd, who, whē he pleaſeth, Ioh. 11. 29. Mat. 13. 46. rayſes the dead, although they were dead foure dayes, to open your eyes, to diſcerne well that Pearle, which they would bereaue you of, with the falſe and counterfeit droſſe which they offer to you in exchāge, to open and perce your eares, that you might diſcerne the voyce of the Shepherd, from the howling of the Wolfe, and to touch your heart, for to arreſt and ſtay you rather with his Sonne, who hath giuen his life for you, than to the ſonne of perdition, who hath purſued the corporall death of your Predeceſſours, and now agayne conſpireth and lyeth in wayte, by all the ſubtill practiſes and deuices hee can, for the ſpirituall death of your ſoule.
                  
                     
Surely, this is our honour and profit, and not that of Gods, when as he ſpeaketh to vs, our ſhame & damage, not his, when as we diſdaine to heare him, he can better paſſe our ſhame, then we can his grace. But aduiſe we ourſelues, leſt our cōtempt of his mercy kindle the iuſt wrath of his anger making himſelfe to be felt, by afflicting thoſe, who in his ſpeaking to them, reiected him. I cannot thinke without amazing (ſayth the Prophet Dauid) 
                     Pſa. 119 
                     of the righteous iudgemēt, which thou ſhalt cauſe, & the great feare, wherewith all my bodie trembles as it were. Theſe be the verſes which your father (now departed) of good memory, had oftentimes in his mouth, whē as he heard ſpeaking of ſuch reuolting from the Religion, as maſter Merlin your late maſter told me. God graunt, that the remembrance of his death may helpe your life, in following that ſame verſe, which this Pſalme recommendeth to vs. I beſeech you excuſe my boldneſſe, and lay the reaſon on your owne goodnes, who hath giuen it to him, who fearing leſt abuſing of it in a danger ſo perilous, ſhould be conſtrued a kind of treaſon, not only by your faithfull ſeruants, and true friends, but alſo by your ſelf one day, when the truth, now ſmoothered in your ſpirit by the deceiuings of Sophiſters, ſhall rayſe it ſelfe, and according to his nature, ſhall obtayne to ſwim aboue falſhood & vntruth. This ſhall be at that time, when as appealing from your ſelfe, to your ſelfe, I remit & promiſe to my ſelfe, the right vnderſtanding of the publike cauſe, with an acknowledgement of my particular zeale, and ſo haue bene, and with a will to remayne
                  
                     Your most humble; and moſt faithfull ſeruant,
D. TILENVS.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            The ſecond letter of the Earle of Lauall, to his maſter D. Tilenus.
            
            
               
                  SIR, I thinke my ſelfe very much bound to you, in that you haue taken the paynes and the care, to anſwere to the poynts, wherein I craued ſome light. You ſay to the firſt, which is of the purity of the church, that incontinent after the death of the Apoſtles, that it was corrupted: And Caluin referres himſelfe to the Cal. lib. 4 ſect. 3. ancient Church of S. Baſil, S. Ambroſe, S. Chriſoſtome, and S. Austen. This is in his booke of Inſtitutions, and Lord Du Pleſſis affirmes the firſt eyght hundred yeres, who was the firſt that gaue mee the occaſion, to read the Hiſtory of that age. In another poynt, touching the ſending of the Miniſters, you ſay that Farrel had it frō the people: it behoueth then, that eyther the people there were Catholiks, or that they were inſtructed in the religion by ſome Doctor; & by conſequence it is neceſſary, that a Doctor of the Religion proceeded the people of the Religion, & ſo without any ſending or calling vnles it was extraordinary, or elſe from the Church of Rome. You alledge a paſſage of S. Ciprian, who ſayes, the people obedient to Gods Commaundement, ſhould ſeperate thēſelues from a wicked guide, & not to meddle with a ſacrilegious Prieſt. If ye receiue after that meaning, where he ſaies that the people may diſcharge their guide, that is to ſay, a Paſtor: wherefore alſo receiue ye him not in that which he ſaies, that the Prieſt ſacrifices, & that ſhewes at leaſt, that this was holdē certayn in thoſe dayes. Finally, for what defect or errour was it of the reformed Church, that it behooueth,

that her paſtors ſhould haue their ſending (as you ſay) in a part from the Church of Rome, as from an inſtrument corrupt? This is to do, as the Church of the Huſſeits in Germany, whereof all the Doctors for the moſt part, had their order of Prieſthood from the Church of Rome, fayning to be thereof, at the leaſt, as I heard it, of the greateſt part of their owne country people: but whether that bee or not, it imports not much. Beſide this, I demaund you, the way of ſaluation being in all ages open, and our Sauiour Chriſt hauing ſuffered for al them, who ſhould apply vnto themſelues the merit of his death, what doctrine, I pray ye, held they that were the faithfull, three or foure hundred yeres ſince? And if you had beene in that time there, in what Veſſell had you put your ſelfe, to haue arriued to the port of ſafety? Touching the Teſtimony of the Fathers, you ſay, you accept of them, vpon the queſtions of the fact of the things done in their time. Saint Austin ſayth, that he cauſed the Maſſe to be celebrated. This is a queſtion of fact, and a thing done in his time.
                  I abuſe your patience, in detayning you ſo long, to read nothing that is worth your paynes, and I demaūd you no farther, but to aſſure you, that I am more then any perſon
                  
                     Your moſt affectionate and bound Diſciple to doe you ſeruice,
LAVALL.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            The ſecond anſwere, of the ſecond letter, written by Telenus to the Earle of Lauall.
            
               
                  SIr, I perceiue by that which it pleaſed you to write to me by the Gentleman coming to this place, that with my anſwere vpon your honeſt demaundes, yee are ſatiſfied with that which I haue ſpoken cōcerning fiue of them, to wit, 1
                     Of the authoritie of the foure generall Councells: the interpretation of the holie Scriptures: 2the the refutation of Hereſies. 3The inuocation of Saintes, 4the circumſcription of Bodies: 
                     5The doubtes which remaine, be concerning theſe three, 1
                     Of the puritie of the Church. 2The ſending of the miniſtrie. 3Of the authoritie of the Fatherst. Touching the firſt, yee pretend contradiction, as appeareth in that which I haue ſpoken, that the purity of the Church did not continue, but for the time of the Apoſtles, and whereas Caluin enlargeth it to continue three hundreth, and Lord du Pleſsis to eight hundreth yeeres. I anſwere, if ſo be that ye conſider rightly of my letter: ye ſhall finde it is not I that pronounce the ſentence, but Egeſippus and after him, Euſebius and Nicephorus: and that my intention is to put that ſentence in your hands, only to cloſe the mouths of thoſe who eſtourdiſſis & deaffes you with their ſturre of the Fathers: But for the chief poinct of the queſtion, & for your inſtruction, I haue anſwered, altogether otherwiſe, and largelie enough, to the which ye replie nothing at all, the ſubſtance of my anſwere is, that the Church militant hath retained euen to our time without interruption, the meaſure of puritie which the holie Ghoſt hath giuen her: But to haue reſerued this

pureneſſe, it followeth not, that ſhe hath conſerued nothing which is not pure: or that the inuentions of men, or the ordinances of the Popes doe make parte of the puritie, no more thē 
                     Hydropſie makes part of the health of a mans bodie, although it be therein contained and incloſed. Euen as the health of mannes bodie conſiſteth not in a poinct indiuiſible, alſo neither maketh the puritie of the myſticall bodie of the Churche militante, and compaſſed with her infirmities, as well the faith as in the life; & as they call a man whole, who neuertheles is not without ſome euill humours in his bodie, comparing him to a ſicke patient, faſt tyed to the bed, and conſumed with the pocks. So doe wee call the Church, that was nereſt to the Apoſtles pure, in regard of the ages following, in the which the myſterie of iniquitie was conuerted in the miniſtrie, or rather into the kingdome of wickednes and Idolatrie, the one and the other is a noyſome humour in the bodie of the Churche, but the one is in ſecret, and the other in publike, the one in ſeede, and the other ſpringing vp, the one in the parts indifferents, the other in the noble partes: the one a ſcabbe, the other a ſpreading cancre, the one proceeding for lacke of knowledge, in thoſe who were come from heathē cuſtome, the other in lacke of conſcience in them, who would from Chriſtianiſme, bring vs to Paganiſme, Epicuriſme and Atheiſme.
                  Touching that which I haue anſwered to your demaund, concerning the calling of the miniſterie, and eſpecially of Farrell, who had it of the people, ſufficientlie authorized to geue him the ſame, according to the teſtimonie of S. Cyprian. You anſwere two things Firſt, that it is neceſſary that a Doctour of the religion 1
                     
go before a people of the religion, for to teache them. 2. the ſecond that by the teſtimonie which I alledge, forth of the ſaid Father, it apeareth, that in thoſe times the Prieſts ſacrificed. To the firſt poinct I anſwere fower things. Firſt that in which you ſay that it ought to be done, it is done when the order is in his entier: But that in a generall diſorder and confuſion, ſuch as was the Popiſh in the time of the reformation, all the formalities of order, ſhould no more be required, then they may be obſerued.
                  Secondly that the Doctors ſent by God ought not 2 at all times to acknowledge the cornet cappes, the forket mi
                        •
                     res, neither their triple crowns. And that thoſe that firſt reuealed the byrth of Ieſus Chriſt, was neyther
                        •
                     Prieſt of the law, neither paſtors of the Churche, but Paſtors and ſhepheards of the field: So the Hereticks Origeniſts were diſcouered, and refuted by a woman, while as the Pope of Rome, the pretended head Tom. 5. an. 399. ſ. 19. 20. of the Churche was ſleeping as Baronius him ſelf confeſſeth: God ſeruing himſelf ſomtimes of inſtruments very contemptible to effect his work, in confounding his enemies, by the goade of an oxe, in the hād of Samgar, by an hammer in the hand of Iahell: by the chaftblade of an aſſe in the hand of Sampſon, by a ſtone, in the hand of Dauid, againſt Golyah.
                  
                  Thirdly, ſuch like proceedings hath bene before times approoued, euen before the deſtruction of order, 3 Theodor. lib. 16. 23. & 24. to wit in Edeſius & Frumentius, preaching the Euangile to the Indians, without being ſent or called: alſo in a poore woman a ſlaue, who planted the ſame in the kingdome of the Iberians.
                  
                  Fourthly, that by the propre confeſſiion of diuers 4 and many Doctors of the Romaine Church, yea euen

Cardinalls, diſorder was verie great and extreame in the ſaid Church, and that ſhee had neede of reformation, as well in the head as in the members, as well in the Faith as in the maners. Beholde in the Frier Onuphrius this notable apothegme of Pope Adrian 4. repeated & confirmed by the pope Marcell. That ther is Oauph. In vita marcil: lib. 2. non video q̄uōmodo quolocum hunc altiſsimūtonent ſlu
                           •
                        ri poſſunt. I ſee not how thoſe which hold this high place can be ſafe. no meane to be Pope, & to work his ſaluation: ſhall we beleeue that he who cannot make his owne, hath anie care of ours, and of that of the whole Church.
                  As touching that where ye ſay that it is a great fault to the reformed Church that it behooueth that hir Paſtors had her ſending in a parte from the Churche of Rome, as from a corrupt inſtrument: I anſwere, that my letter beareth not, that it is neceſſary of right; but that this was found wanting in our firſt paſtors: this was not any want, but to acknowledge the fault to amend it, our chiefe perfection conſiſting to acknowledge & to correct our imperfectiōs, ſeing we be neither Anabaptiſts who acknowledge not the Churche, where there is a great & notable want in maners, neither Papiſt, who maintaineth that their Church cannot erre in the faith, an error, or rather a receptacle, couertour & goulf of al the errors of the world, which carry away with it not only the feeling of the diſeaſe, but alſo the hope of their healing. He that furniſhed to you this point, ſhould conſider, that in throwing it againſt the Church reformed, he might verie well retorqueted againſt the Romane church, in the which we finde the Popes thēſelues to haue bene made by inſtrumēts very corrupt: & among others the Pope Simmachus was cōfirmed by King Theodorick who was an Arrian, Theod. le. ior. lib. 3. leauing to ſpeake of thoſe that were rather monſters then Byſhops or men, hath giuen the ſending or calling

to the whole race of their Hierarchie. And as cō
                     cerning the feminine Papeſſe Iane, ye haue learned in your voyage that in Rome, they holde not the whores there for corrupt inſtruments, & by the teſtimony of Cardinal Bellarmine, the magiſtrates ſin not, in aſſignīg Bell. de a miſſ. in grat. & ſtatum pro 2. 18. Beron, tom. 9. Ang. 26. & verſe 54. to them to haue a quarter within the Cittie, for theyr dwelling, albeit he knowe perfectly that they would abuſe it to an euill purpoſe.
                  The Clergie of the holy citie, not being ſo ſuperſtitious as were they of Grece, in the time of Theodorus Studites, who ſaid that it was a dāgerous thing for the ſoul of a Frier to haue but one beaſt of the feminine kinde.
                  And to the ſecond point of your Reply, I ſay, that wee avowe that there was ſacrifices in the time of S. Cyprian & that there ſhall be ſacrifices to the conſummation of the world. But yet that concludes no thing for the Sacrifice of the Maſſe, pretended reall, propitiatorie for the liuing and for the dead, for their ſinnes paines, and ſatisfactions: good to coniure ſtormes, to heale diſeaſes, to winne Battels, to purge the great crimes to draw the ſoules out of purgatorie, to finde things loſt, &c. The word ſacrifice is taken ſometime for the whole office and diuine ſeruice: Saint Paul ſaith, that he ſacrificed the Goſpel. And he called Rom. 15. Philips 3. ſacrifice the faith of the faithfull, alſo their prayers to God, their almes for the poore, their collecting for the Miniſterie, the offerings that were made to the holie aſſemblies, and from whence they tooke the Euchariſte, was called Sacrifices: & this is one of the occaſions, for the which the name was attributed to the holy Supper. The ſame anſwere may ſerue to your laſt Reply. As touching that which I ſpake of the teſtimonie of the Fathers: whereon you conclude,

ſeing that I accept then on the queſtiōs of fact in matters of their time, I ought thē accept the Maſſe, which S. Auguſt. witneſſeth to haue cauſed to be celebrated in his time, I ſay that the ſame equiuocation which is in the word of ſacrifice, is in the word of Meſſe: albeit the vſage of this heere, is farre more new in the Chriſtian Church, then that was of theirs. In diuers Fathers, it is not found at all, & onely but touched in S. Augustine, & that but in a writtē work which the moſt learned holdeth to be counterfeit: & that alwayes in a farre different ſignification than it is taken for nowe adayes. I counſell you to take it into that ſame ſence which S. Auguſtine doth, by the proper confeſſion of of Bellarmine, (that is) Promiſsione for one diſmiſſing, and that you giue one fare well to the Maſſe, which is called in Lattine, Miſſam facere miſſam.
                  
                  
                     Touching that newe queſtion, which you make in your letter: to wit, ſeeing that the way to ſaluation hath beene open in all Ages: to all thoſe who will apply vnto them the mirrit of the death of our Lord. What doctrine (I pray you) profeſſed they who were of the chooſen number, three or foure hundred yeeres ſince: and if I had beene in thoſe dayes, in what veſſell ſhould I haue caſt mee into, for comming to the port of ſaluation.
                  
                  
                     I anſwere that the great Doctor of the Elect in all Ages, is the holy Spirit: for they are taught of God, Iohn 6. ver. 11. as witneſſed Ieſus Christ: and all their doctrine in all times is that of the olde and newe Teſtament: which neither Sathan, neither his Vicar the Antichriſt, could euer deſtroy.
                  Of this doctrine, God hath alwaies reuealed as much as was neceſſary for thē to ſaluatiō; whether they did read by themſelues, or that they vnderſtood it by others:

you haue an notable example in the Hiſtorie of S. Barnard, who being a little while before the time which you ſet downe perceiuing the corruptions of In the life of S. Barnard neere the mids therof. his time, at the very houre of his death (rempted by Sathan) he clenſed himſelfe of that filthineſſe, confeſſing that he could not obtaine ſaluation by his merits, (which was the doctrine publiquely taught in the Schooles at that time) neither pretending it but by grace: declaring that our Sauiour poſſeſſeth it by a a double right, by the inheritage of the Father: and by the merit of his Paſſion, and that contenting himſelfe with the one, he gaue him the other, if you deſire a more particular clearing of this queſtion; ſee the Book of the Cathologue of the witneſſes of the troth, and you ſhall finde that there hath beene no age ſo darke, wherin the troth hath not ſpread ſome beames amids the ſmoakes which ariſe out of the bottomles pit of Rome: And if God had giuen me life in thoſe times, I beleeue aſſuredly, that he would haue giuen me the grace, either to abſtaine from this Papiſticall poyſon; or to vomite it vp in time, preſeruing me frō this infection: as hee preſerued his children from the fire of the Babylonian Furnace. In briefe, I would haue done that, which afterwards I did in Spaine, and at Rome, and that which I wiſh you had performed in the ſame place, by the example of ſome of your followers, making their prayers, and exerciſes of godlineſſe in priuate, without defiling themſelues with idolatrie, which is committed in publique: & to goe out of this Babylon in heart, though they found them as touching the body, there engaged. The totall ſumme is: to ſaile in the ſea of this world which is viſible, and materiall is required a ſhip viſible and materiall:

but to arriue at the hauen of ſaluation, as this port is ſpirituall, & in no wiſe of this world: ſo many enter there without materiall and viſible veſſell: that is, without being locally, and corporally in any certaine materiall Temple, or viſible Church. And this I maintaine is happened to many, during this great and generall reuolt, vnder the tyrannie of Antichriſt, foretold in the Scripture; which like a long and furious tempeſt hath rent and ſtrangely diſfigured the ſhip of the viſible Church, by the wines and waues of humaine inuentions which haue made many both Pilots, and paſſengers, for to looſe the Loadſtarre of Gods ordinances.
                  But ſuffer mee I (pray you) Sir, to aske you, to what port, or hauen you pretend to attaine in this ſhip of neutralitie, in which you ſtay ſo long in the roade, betweene the two barques of Preaching, & the Maſſe, And if he, who iudgeth men ſuch as he findeth them, calling you vnexpectly to appeare before his throne, finde you thus diſpoſed, what ſentence would you hope from his mouth. I beſeech him with al my heart, to cauſe you to thinke vpon it, and ſo to prepare and direct you, rather by change of life, then Religion. In the meane time, I reſt:
                  
                     SIR, 
                     Your moſt humble and affectionate Seruitour:
D. TILENVS.
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   