
      
         
            
            A briefe and pleasant
discourse of duties
in Mariage, called
the Flower of Friendshippe.
            Imprinted at
London by Henrie
Denham, dwelling in Pater
noster Rowe, at the
Signe of the
Starre.
Anno. 1571.
            Cum Priuilegio.
            
               
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶To the Noble and most
Uertuous Princesse Elizabeth,
by the grace of God,
of Englande, Fraunce, and Irelande
Que
                  •
               ne, de
                  •
               ender of the
Fayth. &c. Be long 
                  •
               y
                  •
               e. quiet
raig
                  ••
                and per
                  •••
               
health.
            
               WHEN I CONsider,
most noble
Queene & Soueraigne that within
your Maiesties
sacred brest, wisedome,
adourned
with Noble vertues,
is only harbored. From whence as
from a pure Fountaine, doth flow, the
deedes of a Noble hart, waying therewithall
your Maiesties highe dignitie,
and the lownesse of my estate, with my
simple skill: I stoode as one dismayde,
not daring to aduenture to put thys
my base style to the hearing eyther of
your maiesties reuerent eares, or to the

iudgement of your skilfull eyes: so
well otherwise, with the learned labors
of more excellent authors satisfied. Yet
daylye perceyuing the clemencie of
your highnesse most noble minde conioyned
with so high an estate of Soueraignetie,
and noting your princ
                  •
                lye
curtesie, and as it were, a heauenly humilitie
matched with the great knowledge,
graffed in the roote of your maiesties
royall hart, I was by this, though
before discouraged, boldened to presume
so farre, as humblye to offer this
my simple present vnto your Highnesse,
expressing my good wyll, which
of my fruitlesse Garden, and barren
soyle haue founde oute this fragrant
Flower of Friendship crauing the only
accepting of the same, no otherwyse,
than that Noble Alexander of Macedon,
               Alexander
who greatly estemed the poore Poëme
giuen him by the philosopher Pirrho,
or Antoninus the Emperor,Antoninus. that cōsidering
the giuers good will, highly regarded
a fewe simple Meters offered vnto
him. Wherfore, redoubted Soueraigne

               
                  •
                noble Alexander, my hope is, for that
in the person of your Maiestie, are assembled
the rare vertues, not onely of
those Princes, but of many others, you
will amongest the Noble presentes of
more higher estate, receyue these fewe
simple lines, as from him that continuallye
prayeth for the long
and prosperous continuance
of your Maiesties
happye
raigne.
            
               Your Maiesties most humble
Subiect, Edmonde
Tilnay.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶A briefe and pleasaunt
discourse of duties in
Mariage.
            
               
                  WHAT TIME
that Flora had
clothed the 
                  •
               arth
and braunchesse
of the new springing
trées, with
leaues of liuelye
grene and being
as it were in the
prime of his delightes,
had garnished the pleasant fields
a newe with fragrant flowers, early on a
morning when Phoebus also had spreade
abrode his blisfull rayes, and comfortable
beames, I with a friende of mine, called
Maister Pedro di luxan, deuised how to
enioye some part▪ of that delightfull season,
and in the ende concluded to walke,
and range abrode in the fieldes, and pleasant
Groues, where we were not onelye
pertakers with y• swéete recording birdes,
in the woonderfull workes of the almightie:

but were thereby also occasioned, to
glorifie the Creator thereof. Thus consuming
the time, tyll it was néere Noone,
and when the Sunne began to waxe somwhat
warme, we determined to go from
thence, vnto a worthy Ladies house thereby
called the Lady Iulia, where we might
rest vs the heate of the day, and as it chaū
               ced,
we came in very good time. For euen
as we entred the Ladies house, they had
newly washed, & were ready to sit downe
to dinner, where we founde a ioyfull companie
assembled togithers, both Ladies,
and Gentlemen, amongst the which, was
Madame Iulias daughter, called the Lady
Isabella a very faire gentle womā. There
was also y• Lady Aloisa with many other
Ladies, and their lincked Mates, beside
M. Lodouic Viues, and an olde Gentleman
called M. Erasmus, of whome after
we had taken acquaintance, and vsed such
courtesie as the time, & place required, we
sate all downe orderly to dinner, where
there was such exceding chéere, such pleasaunt
talke, such melodie, and such swéete
chéering of y• Ladies, that it was a worlde

to sée how mery we were. And being thus
in our pleasures, y• Lady Iulia deuised wt 
the company in what pastimes we should
spende the after noone. Some lyked well
of carding, and dicing, some of dauncing,
and other some of Chestes, al which were
condemned by the most parte, who alleaged
that those Pastimes were not aunswerable
to the tyme of the yeare, but
more méete for Christmas: and therefore
such game were fittest, that might be vsed
abroade in the fields, as bowling, shooting
and such other like. But M. Pedro nothing
at all lyking of such deuises, wherein the
Ladies should be left out, said y• he wel remembred
how Boccace & Countie Baltizar
with others recoūted many porper deuises
for exercise, both pleasant, & profitable,
which quoth he, were vsed in y• courts
of Italie, and some much like to them, are
practised at this day in the English court,
wherein is not onely delectable, but pleasure
ioyned wyth profite, and exercyse of
the witte. With that all the whole assemblie,
both Ladies, and Gentlemen, desired
him, for that they were vnskilfull in those

deuises, he woulde put some one of them
in 
                  〈◊〉
               , which he best lyked off, and they all
woulde be obedient to his determination.
At the first he vtterly refused it, but in the
ende at their often intreaties,Maister Pedro 
                     〈◊〉
                   the pastime. he aunswered,
that he would doe his diligence. So in
haste the table was taken awaye, and the
companye hauing washed, the Ladyes
wythdrewe them for a whyle into their
Chambers, at whose returne we went al
into the Garden, a place marueylous delectable
(wherein was a passing faire arbour,The description of the Arbor.
at the entrance wherof, on eche side
sprong vppe two pleasaunt trées, whose
gréene leaues much delighted our eyes,
and were supported wyth two statelye
Pillers, curiously painted with diuers deuises.
All the whole arbour aboue ouer
our heades, and on eche side was powdred
with sundrie flowers, and wreathed about
with the swéete Bryer or Eglantine, betweene
the braunches whereof the chéerefull
Sunne layde in his beames, here and
there, so that the heate did not molest vs,
n
                  ••
               ther did the Sunne want to chéere vs.

                  〈◊〉
                shall I saye? It might be called a

terrestrial paradise. And when the whole
companie were orderly marshalled by M.
Pedro on the benches, which were trimly
set with Camamile, and Das
                  ••
               s, he gathered
from the top of the Arbour, thrée,
or foure braunches of Roses w
                  ••
               h their
greene leaues, whereof he wreathed a
Garlande, and demaunded of the whole
company, if they woulde consent to his election,
and obey whome so
                  •••
               r 
                  〈◊〉
                dyd
choose for their Soueraigne, whereto they
all aunswered that they woulde. And then
turning towardes the Lady Iulia,
               The Ladie Iulia chos
                     •
                  n Soueraigne. sayde
that he in the name of them all, for sundrye
respects presented vnto hir, that garland,
and therewith the soueraigntie ouer
them for that day. And when he bad set y•
same vpon hir head, said that whereas they
had willed him to deuise their pastime, he
thought it best, the company being so apt
for that purpose, they should by course eyther
rehearse some pleasaunt stories, or debate
vpon some such matter as the Ladie
Iulia their soueraigne should commaund.
And my opinion is, quoth he, forasmuch

                  〈◊〉
                euery thing sheweth nowe a certayne

naturall amitie amongst themselues, yea
the trées,Plinie. sayth Plinie, hath a naturall
instinct of friendship, the swéete flowers,
the pleasaunt herbes, declares the same
also, that we intreate somewhat of friendship,
and bycause no friendship, or amitie
is, or ought to be more déere, and surer,
than the loue of man and wife, let this
treatise be thereof, wherein I woulde the
duetie of the married man to be described.
For the knowledge of duetie is the maintenaunce
of friendship. All the company
commended Maister Pedro for his pleasant
deuise, & the Lady Iulia standing vp
said, that forsomuch, as the souer aigntie,
thought not wyth hir wyll, was committed
vnto hir with consent of them all, and
due obedience promised, I like well quoth
shée, of thys which Maister Pedro hath
alreadie deuised, touching friendship, and
duetie of the maried man. Wherefore by
the same authoritie, which I haue receyued,
I commaunde you Sir, and turned
hir towardes Maister Pedro, to performe
this charge, which you haue deuised of the
maried man, not for that I thinke you to

be a better husbande,Maister Pedro is commaunded to describe the maried m
                     •
                  
                that any of the reast
here. But bicause we being yet wholy ignoraunt
in this kinde of pastymes, you
may as the principall author thereof, instruct
vs in the whole circumstance: and
agayne, being so well languaged, as you
are, we shall haue good sporte, to heare
you interlarde our Countrie spéeche with
some Spanish trickes. As I doe, quoth
Maister Pedro, vtterly denie to be the author
of these pastimes, which haue long ago
bene else where practised: so might I
right well excuse my selfe, both for want
of skill, and also of good vtteraunce. But
for that I haue in the name of all the rest,
promised obedience vnto your L, I wyll
not be the first that shall disobey. Wherefore
worthie Ladies, and Gentle women,
quoth he, if I doubted of your friendlye
iudgement, and beneuolence, I woulde
craue it at the beginning, but bicause your
good hearts and noble natures,Maister Pedro beginneth this Flower of Friendship. haue bene
by proofe sufficientlye tryed of me, letting
that passe, I will goe briefly to my charge
the Flower of Friendship, wherein I
will first declare vnto you, the vertues of

the matrimoniall estate, which, (setting
virgmitie aside,The commend
                     •
                  tion of mariage. as the purest estate, is
both holy and most necessary. It is not vnknowne
vnto vs Christians, howe God
the Creator of all thinges, made of the rib
of Adam his welbeloued Eua, as an helper,
whō 
               Adam called bone of my bones,
and flesh of my flesh,Gene
                     ••
                  s. 2. so that the almightie
instituted this holye ordinaunce of matrimonie
in the bliss
                  •
               full place of Paradice,
when man was in his chiefest perfection:
and therefore, if antiquitie may giue any
worthynesse, what is more auncient than
this honorable estate, which God himselfe
the founder of all ordayned and consecrated?
What is more honorable, and praise
worthie, than this, that Christ wyth his
mother in Canaan did not onely with his
presence make honorable, but also wyth
miracles did sanctifie the same? What is
more iust, than to render that to our posteritie,
which we of our predecessors haue
before rec
                  •
               yued? What thing is more inhumaine,
than for man to contemne that
as prophane, which the eternall hath halowed,
and nature hir selfe bewtified? christ

our Lorde commaundeth that man shall
forsake Father and Mother, and cleaue to
his welbeloued spouse, and what is more
holy, than loue towardes parents, which
GOD in the commaundements hath rewarded
with the longnesse of lyfe, yet matrimony
is preserred before y• same, what
is then more necessarie than Matrimony
which containeth the felicity of mans life,
the Flower of Friendship, y• preseruation
of Realnies, the glorie of Princes, & that
which is most of all, it causeth immortalitie.
I might here alleage a nūber of authorities
in the commendation of mariage
aswell of auncient Doctors and Fathers,
as also worthie Philosophers, and graue
learned men. But bycause you doubt not
therin, and the state doth sufficiently commende
it selfe, I let them passe, and will
before I procéede any further,The rites of diuers nati
                     •
                  ns in marying. shew you y•
rytes of diuers Nations, in celebrating
this misterie, whereof as some will make
you to laugh so other some are to be noted.
As for the christian orders they are not vnknowne
vnto you.The Romaines. Amongst the auncient
Romaines, as Cicero recordeth, were

two kindes of mariages, wherby they had
also two sortes of wyues, the one more ordinarye,
whom they called Matrons, the
other were called houswyfes, which were
married by conioyning of handes, almost
like vnto vs. These dyd they estéeme as
their daughters, and had like enheritance
of their landes, who bare the rule of their
houses, and therefore called houswyfes.
But no excesse of y• husband might be permitted
vnto them. For on the Matrons
began they their children.The Babilonians. The Babilonians
maried their maides without dowries
in this maner. All their maids, which
were to be married, were assembled in a
place appoynted, and placed orderlye the
fayrest first, then the meaner sort, and last
the fowlest. The fayrest was gyuen vnto
him that would giue most money to marrie
with hir, still paying according to their
bewtie, more or lesse, till they came to the
fowlest, & to them, that woulde mary any
of those, was gyuen parte of the money,
that was taken for the fayrer sort, paying
according to the rate, as they excéeded in
foulenesse. The like maner also, was vsed

amongst the auncient Venetians,
               The Venetians. as sayeth
Sabellicus, an vnhappye custome
was it, quoth the Lady Iulia, & likely that
the Flower of Friendship was but weak
lye rooted betwéene them of so slender acquaintance:
But I pray you tell vs, how
the indifferent sorte were maried, that
were neyther foule, nor fayre, but louely
browne. Mary quoth he, for such amongst
the Venetians there was no money either
gyuen, or taken, but were maryed for
naught. And so perchaunce, quoth a mery
gentleman, that stoode by, called maister
Gualter of Cawne, were some of the fairest,
as they be sometimes nowe a dayes.
I haue also redde, quoth Maister Pedro,
that in Fraunce,The French men. the Maydens did choose
their husbandes in this sorte. The parents
calldd a number of young men to a banket
whō they thought fittest, & him, to whome
the Mayde gaue first water, by that signe
she chose for hir husband. In Mauritania,
               The Mauritanians.
as sayeth Diodorus Siculus, there was
such store of women, y• euery man might
haue fiue wyfes, and no lesse than thrée,
which also after y• death of their husbands

within one moneth eyther willinglye buried
themselues wyth him, or were perforce
executed by the lawe. In the Isles of
Canaria,
               In the Isles of Canaria. there were contrariwise so many
men, and so fewe women, that euerye
wife might haue seauen husbands, & could
not take lesse than fiue. But I trust, quoth
the Lady Aloisa, that those men were not
so kinde harted, as to be buried with their
wyues, as the woman in that other countrie
were with their husbandes. I thinke
not quoth Mayster Pedro, and I doubt
whether those women of Mauritania,
coulde not haue béene contented to haue
taried behinde their husbandes, had there
béene no lawe to haue compelled them.
Tush quoth the Lady Iulia, this is farre
frō your matter. What appertaineth this
to the Flower of Friendship? lady quoth
he, I am not yet come to my purpose. But
one word more, and I will to my charge.
The Chaldeans,
               The Chaldeans. that honored the fire for
their God, had an easie custome: for when
they minded to marrie, the Priest kindled
the fire in the good mans house, and both
the parties touching it, were assured togither,

and when any of them mislyked,
one of them quenched the fire, and so were
they as frée, as euer they were before. In
another Countrie the Priest of their Idols
enioyed the first nightes pleasures of
the Bride,The Scots. as in Scotland the Lorde of
the Soyle, hath the first fruites of all the
Uirgins, wythin his Lordeship. A number
of such lyke customes I coulde recite,
but I may not spende longer time in those
trifles,What equalitie is in mariage. & the Ladie Iulia desireth to heare
of our friendly Flower, whereto nowe I
returne, and saye, that equalitie is principally
to be considered in this matrimoniall
amytie, as well of yeares, as of the
giftes of nature and fortune.Pitachus Myteleneus. For equalnesse
herein maketh friendlynesse Pytachus
Myteleneus one of the seauen sages
of Greece, being demaunded of a yong
man, whome he should take to wyfe, aunswered,
go and learne of the children, that
play togither, and they will informe thée.
For they had agame among them, wherin
they often repeated, take to thee thy
peere. Marry not a superiour, sayth Plutarch.
               Plutarch.
For in so doing, in stéede of kinsefolkes,

thou shalt get thée maysters, in
whose awe thou must stande, and a riche
womā, that marieth a poore man, seldome,
or neuer, shake off y• pride from hir shoulders.
Yea,Menander. 
               Menander sayth, that such a
man hath gotten in stéede of a wyfe a husband,
and she of him a wyfe, a straunge alteration,
a wonderfnll metamorphosis.
But Licurgus the law maker well considered
that,Licurgus. when he ordained that women
shoulde be married without dowries, so
that then they had nothing to be prowde
off, saue onely their vertues, which ought
to be accounted y• chiefest dowrie. For that
which is more excellent, is to be preferred
before things of lower valour. Why then
for lack of substance, shall a vertuous wife
be repelled,Alexander▪
                or for want of wealth, wisedome
be reiected? Alexander, the great
Monarch of the whole worlde, shewed his
noble courage in nothing more, than in
that hée reiecting the riche Barbarian
Quéenes, vouchsafed to match with Barcina,
daughter of Arbaces, a poore gentleman,
but of noble parentage, wherein
not riches, but nobilitie adorned with vertues

preuayled. Well quoth the Ladie
Iulia, I pray you what is he now a dayes
that had not rather marie a woman ful of
money, wanting vertue & grace, than that
hauing vertues, lacketh money. For my
parte, it well lyketh me that equalitie, as
you say, be obserued, seing equalnesse causeth
friendlynesse. But I vnderstande not
this kinde of equalitie, wherein you séeme
to allow the greatest inequalitie yt can be.
For Alexander being Lorde of the whole
worlde coulde finde no equall match, in
respect of his greatnesse. Much lesse Barcina
that was so farre his inferiour, both
in parentage, and substance. Not so farre
his inferiour, quoth Maister Pedro, for
the great vertues which abounded in Barcina,
and as I sayde before, the onely rychesse
to be required in a woman, was in
al respects comparable to the great greatnesse
of Alexander the great, neyther did
she want sufficient parentage, & though
not a conquerour of the worlde, yet well
knowne to be procéeded from the conquerours
own linage, so that a vertuous woman
being wise, and of good lynage, wanteth

no equalitie on hir parte to counterpeyse
the greatest ryches or treasure, that
any man can haue. For where vertue aboundeth,
all good things doe flowe. And
to conclude, I say that great regard ought
the man to haue in his choyse, that he may
leaue hys childe parentage, which being
ioyned to vertues, maketh men perfite.
Now for y• equalitie in age, I say cōfisteth
likewise in the equalitie of yeares, but
not so much as the Philosophers, in times
past affirmed. For Aristotle by his reasons,
woulde haue the man to be twentie
yeares elder than his wife, bycause they
might leaue off procreation at one tyme.
Hesiodus the Gréeke Poet, & Xenophon
the philosopher woulde haue the woman
fourtene, and the man thirtie yeares olde,
so that there shoulde be sixtéene yeares betwéene
them, bicause in that time, the man
shoulde be best able to rule his housholde,
and the woman taken from euill occasions.
Licurgus lawe was amongest the
Lacedemonians,
               Licurgus. that the man shoulde
not marry, before thirtie and seauen yeres
of age, and women at eightene. What

maner of equalitie is this, quoth the Lady
Isabella, I woulde neuer marry, rather
than to take such olde crusts, whose wiues
are more occupied in playstering, than in
enioying any good conuersation. You say
truth, quoth Maister Pedro, neyther doe
I allowe it, yet may I not condemne the
auncient philosophers. For in those daies
men liued longer, and their natures were
much stronger. Therfore by likelyhoode it
was at that time more tollerable. But my
opinion is, that they differ not aboue foure
or fiue yeares. After this match made, and
equalities considered, next foloweth, to
loue, & to lyke well: For perfite loue knitteth
louinge heartes,What loue in mariage shoulde be. in an in insoluble
knot of amitie. Loue indifferent serueth
not, loue fayned prospereth not. Wherefore
it must be true, and perfite loue, that
maketh the Flower of Friendship betwéene
man and wyfe freshlye to spring.
This loue must growe by little and little,
and that it may be durable, must by degrées
take roote in the hart. For hasty loue
is soone gone. And some haue loued in post
hast, that afterwards haue repented them

at leysure. Wée all séeke the fayrest, the
richest, and noblest. But vertues are laide
aside, and naught accounted off, we seeke
so feede our eyes, and not to content our
eares. Why? quoth Maister Gualter, shal
a man choose his wyfe with his eares. To
choose with our eares, quoth Maister Pedro,
is to inquire of hir vertues, & vyces
by reporte whereof you shall vnderstande
hir conditions, and qualities, good, & badde.
As for that, quoth Gualter, it booteth not.
For the best of them all hane their faults.
And if she be vertuous, shée wyll looke to
be so honored, that hir husbande shall haue
the more a do to please hir. And I remember,
that a wyse man, I knowe not hys
name, being enquired of a friende of his,
with whom he shoulde marry, aunswered
that hée hadde béene married foure sundry
times, first with a faire woman, who was
so prowde of hir beautie, that he was faine
to please and content hir, least she shoulde
dishonour him, the seconde verye riche,
whose substance made hir so statelye, that
he was forced lyke a slaue to obey hir, the
thirde was so vertuous, that he was glad

to honor, and reuerence hir, to kéepe hir
still in hir vertuous goodnesse, the last was
of good lynage, which so exalted hir stomacke,
that shée made him hir bondman.
Nowe choose, quoth hée, which of these
foure thou canst best content thy selfe. You
haue made a fayre reason quoth the Lady
Aloisa, I neuer knewe that you were so
déepelye learned before and all the Ladies
woulde haue driuen Maister Gualter out
of the Arbor▪ But father Erasmus sayde
that he remembred the lyke thinge of Anaxagoras,
and therefore hée was not to
be blamed, bycause he did but repete the
wordes of a Philosopher. What then,
quoth Maister Pedro, it is no parte of
my charge to disprayse women, but to
speake the best of them, and to plant the
Flower of Friendship betwéene them,
and their husbands. Wherfore, let loue be
rooted déepely in the mans heart towardes
the woman: Let the person be sought, not
hir substaunce, craue hir vertues, not hir
riches, then shall there be a ioyfull beginning,
and a blessed continuance in amity,
by which all things shall prosper, & come

to happie ende. Beware of hatred, be circumspect
in loue, which of them first taketh
place, doth abide during lyfe. And
loue grounded remaineth for euer, which
being once gone, al other goodnesse foloweth
for companye.The man must beware in chyding when he is newly maried. Therefore to confirme
this loue y• married man must as much as
he can, alwayes abstaine from brawling,
lowring and grudging, especiallye, when
he is newly married. For if the wyfe first
conceyue hate, she will neuer receyue loue
againe. The husband then must be mery,
and pleasaunt with his wyfe, to make hir
the more in loue wyth him at the beginning,
so that if afterwardes they chaunce
to fall at square, it shall ryse but of a sodayne
anger, which will be gone againe
as soone, and not of anye olde conceyued
malice. There be manye men that boast
much, how they be serued, and feared, like
Bugges, of their wyues, but they marueylously
deceyue themselues. For much
better were it, if they were better beloued
and lesse feared. For whome the wyfe hateth,
in feare she serueth, but whome shée
loueth, shée gladly cherisheth. It is good

reason, that all women doe labor to stande
in the good grace of their husbandes, but
much more ought wée men to foresée, that
we fall not into the hatred of our wyfes.
For if she once fasten hir eyes on another
he shall enioy hir in dispite of hir husbands
beard. In this long and troublesome iourney
of matrimonye, the wise man maye
not be contented onely with the Spouses
virginitie,The maried man steale away his wyues priuate will. but by little and lyttle must
gently procure that he maye also steale away
hir priuat will, and appetite, so that
of two bodies there may be made one onelye
heart, which shée will soone doe, if loue
raygne in hir, and without this agréeable
concorde, matrimonie hath but small pleasure,
or none at all, and the man, that is
not lyked, and loued of his mate, holdeth
his lyfe in continuall perill, his goodes in
great ieoperdie, his good name in suspect,
and his whole house in vtter perdition. I
will recite two, or thrée examples of those
that loued their wyues well,Such as loued well their wiues. Adam. and then I
will procéede. The first that loued hys
wyfe, was our father Adam, who being
set in Paradice, and forbidden on paine of

death, one onelye trée in the Garden, to
consent and please Eua his wyfe, did notwithstanding
eate of it, and dyed. Darius
the great King,Darius. being ouercome by Alexander,
in all things shewed himselfe stout
and inuincible, till he vnderstoode that his
wyfe was taken prisoner, who then poured
oute of his teares aboundantly, as lamenting
for that which he more estéemed
than his lyfe,Tiberius Gracchus. or estimation. Valerius
Maximus saith, that Tiberius Gracchus
finding two Serpents in his bed, sent for
the soothsayers to knowe what y• straunge
chaunce ment, and signified, which aunswered,
that if he killed the male serpent,
bée shoulde dye before his wyfe, but if the
female were first slayne, his wyfe shoulde
die before him. He bearing entire loue towardes
his wyfe, gaue his owne death to
prolong hir life, and killed presently the
Male serpent. There be, quoth the Ladie
Iulia, fewe such 
                  ••
               sbandes in these our
dayes, or rather none at all. That is the
matter quoth Maister Gualter, that your
Ladiship is so a fearde to marry, but yet to
tell the truth, and shame the Deuill, there

be mo suche husbandes, than lyke wyfes
if it were well tryed. This 
                  〈◊〉
                foole,
quoth Madame Aloisa, woulde be well
beaten, and banished our companie. For
he is still pratling against women, and
interrupt
                  •
               th our pastime. No, no, quoth
Maister Pedro, hée increaseth our sporte,
and therefore we cannot well want him.
But I will shewe you one example more
of later yeares, bycause the Ladye Iulia
sayeth that none nowe a dayes doe loue
their wyfes so well. Baptista Fulgosa recounteth
of a certayne poore man,Baptista Fulgosa. and hys
wyfe, that were seeking for their sustenance
vpon the Sea side. The woman being
taken awaye, by certaine Rouers, hir
husbande swam in the Sea after hir, desiring
the Pirates to take him also, saying,
that he had rather be with his wife in captiu
                  •
               tie,
than lacking hir, to liue at lybertie,
whereat the Pirates marueiling, receyued
them both into their Shippe, and
declaring the whole aduenture, presented
them to the King of Lunis, who vnderstanding
the case, gaue them great commendation,
and not onely set them at lybertie,

but also sente them home wyth
great rewarde.
            This maye satisfie to make you vnderstand,
that men doe sometimes loue their
wyues, & hereby may you also sée of what
force the true matrimoniall loue is, wheron
let the maried man fasten, and ground
all the rest of his doings, and so shall t
                  •
               ys
friendly Flower be planted in a fertile
soyle. And as there be certayne sweete
herbes, that are great nourishers of this
Flower:
               Weedes that will ouergrow the friendly Flower. so there be certayne poysoned
wéedes, that will ouergrowe it, and in
the ende vtterly destroye it, if they be not
wéeded out by the roote, whereof the first
and chiefest is adulterie. For what godlynesse
can raygne in that house,Adultery. where
harlots beare the rule, whose fruits Salomon
doth greatly describe. For if the husband
please the wicked woman, he must
of force displease hys owne wyfe being
godlye, and that iniurie a good woman
cannot with anye pacience support. At
what time the married man determineth
to kéepe a harlot, euen the same houre,
doth he set fire to his honestie, destruction

to his house, and losse of all, that euer he
hath. An honest woman wyll suffer a
thousand discommodities in hir husband,
so that she be assured, that he is contented
with hir, and loueth hir only. What greater
crueltie can a man shew vnto his wife,
than to kéepe all his raylings, brawlings,
and chidings for hir, and another to enioy
all his (good) conuersation, and pleasures.
I doubte which of them hath the greater
hart, either he in doing it, or she in suffring
it. Can there be any greater disorder, than
for the husbande to be merie abrode, and
lowre at home, to take from hys wyfe,
and gyue to his harlots, to want for his
childrē, and to suffice for his bawdes. The
fayth that the woman oweth to hir husbande,
the like 
                  ••
               fidelitie ought the man to
repaye vnto his wyfe, and though the ciuill
lawe gyueth man the superioritie ouer
his wife, that is not to offende, or dispraise
hir, but in misdoing louingly to reforme
hir. Therefore the abhorring of adulterie
increaseth amitie betwene man, and wife,
and the chiefest way to ground the Flower
of Friendship in matrimonie is, first to

roote out the poyson of adulterie. The seco
                  •
               de
wéede that is to be ex
                  •
               irped is gamnin
                  •
               ,G
                     •••
                  ing.
which though the woman can with
more pacience suffer, than this others: yet
for his owne sake, let him forbeare it. For
what wisedome is it, that a man at one
chance of the Dice, hasardeth as much, as
the toyle of his whole lyfe hath gottten,
and scrapte togither, and small commoditie
the gamester reapeth thereby, when he
hath best hap, if all his cardes be tolde. For
suppose hée wynne, yet is there such cursing,
such lying, such brawling, chyding,
and swearing, that the Deuill laugheth,
them all to scorne. If he lose, he fretteth,
and fumeth so, that beside the losse of
his thrift, he hazardeth both body & soule,
with cursing, and blaspheming. Then if
he eyther wynne, or lose, yée sée these his
gaines and commodities. I condemne not
honest playing for recreatiō at times conuenient
for some small matter, as the persons
habilitie is. But what a monstrous
thing is it, to consume whole dayes, yea,
whole daies and nights in gaming, swearing
and foreswearing. For it hapneth often,

a daily gamester, a common blasphemer.
Wherefore it were no great hinderance
to the common wealth, if such kinde
of persons were vtterly banished.Riotousnesse and dronkēnesse. The
third pestiferous wéed is banqueting, and
riotousnesse. For dronkennesse, whiche
commonly haunteth the ryotous persons,
besides that, it wa
                  •
               teth thy thrifte, consumeth
thy friends, and corrupteth thy body
doth also transforme thée from a reasonable
creture,Socrates. to abrute beast. Socrates compareth
the witte, that is ouercome wyth
Wyne, vnto a horse that casteth his Maister.
What greater reproch can there be to
a man, than to be called a common dronkarde,
which is as much to say, as a man
depriued of all vertues. I could recite many
examples, what discommodities haue
chaunced to woorthye men by this vice, if
the tyme woulde suffer mée. You haue yet
day inough, quoth the Lady Iulia. Wherfore
we praye you shewe vs some of those
examples for our instruction. I am content,
quoth Maister Pedro, and séeing you
are so willing to heare, I will declare first
somewhat of wyne, which by abuse nourished

dronkennesse, and by vse is the best
liquor of all others.Anacharsis 
               Anacharsis the Philosopher
sayde, that the Uyne bare thrée
kindes of grapes, the first of pleasure, the
seconde of drunkennesse, and the thirde of
sorrowe, so that passing the first, which is
to drinke it temperately, and delayed, the
other two are naught.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               Noe was the first
that inuented Wyne, thoughe some attribute
the same to Ycanus, and some to
Dionysius. The first that delayed wine,
was Fylona,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                borne in Candia, and being
so dronke temperately, it quickeneth the
wit, it increaseth the strength, it chéereth
the harte, it taketh away cares, it causeth
colour in the face, it strengtheneth the
sin
                  •
               wes, it helpeth the sight, it fortifieth
the stomacke, it prouoketh vrine, it taketh
away sorrowes, and to conclude with S.
Paule writing to Timothe,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                being sicke in
his stomacke, counsayleth him to drinke a
little wine. But as many discommodities
hath it also, 
                  〈◊〉
                it be abused, as breeding the
gow
                  •
               e, causing the dropsie, decaying womens
beauty, and making them barraine,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
wyth many other much worse. Licurgus
               
the Lacedemonian lawmaker, commaū
               ded,
that no man before .xviij. yeares of
age, shoulde drinke any wyne, and from
thence to fortie he gaue leaue to drynke a
verye little, and much delayed, and from
fortie vpwardes somewhat more, and
lesse delayed.Noe the first drunkarde. As Noe was the firste inuenter
of wyne: so was hée first dronken,
who was therefore laught to scorne of his
owne sonnes. Lot
               Lot. in his drunkennesse lay
with his owne daughters. Alexander
               Alexander the
greate was so spotted wyth this vice, that
alwayes in hys dronkennesse, he woulde
kyll his déerest friends, and in the ende being
dronke, was poysoned himselfe. Marcus
Antonius,
               Marcus. Antonius. an inuincible Romain captayne,
being once ouercome with Wyne,
gaue himselfe to the pleasure of Cleopatra,
and was slayne by Octauius Caesar.
Anac
                     •
                  eon
               Anac
                     •
                  eon. the Poet was so great a bibber
of wyne, that he was choked with ye huske
of a grape. Loe, here you sée the vnhappie
ende of those that passe the golden meane,
and cleaue to the excesse. If the married
man doe weede out these thre daungerous
wéedes by the roote, no doubt this Flower
               
will prosper passing well, and yéeld yerely
double increase. And as I sayd before, the
better to nourishe, and maintaine thys
Flower,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                there are certaine delicate herbes
that must of force be cherished, which bée
these. First to be aduised in spéeche, courteous,
and gentle in conuersation, trusty
and secret in that, wherein he is trusted,
wise in giuing counsayle, carefull in prouiding
for his house, dyligent in looking to
that which is his, suffer able in the importunities
of his wife, daungerous, and circumspect
in matters touching his honesty
and ieolous in the education of his Chyldren.
These be excellent herbes, quoth the
Lady Aloisa, and rarely founde all in one
garden. Wherefore we pray you teach vs
how we may plant, and conserue them.
            That appertayneth not to my charge,
quoth Mayster Pedro, and if it dyd, yet
want of skill, and shortnesse of time would
not permit me. But I will instruct you in
their qualities, which being well considered,
wyll proueke the wyse man to séeke
after th
                  •
               m. In doing whereof, as I shall
sufficiently discharge my duetie towardes

the Lady Iulia, concerning hir commaū
               demēt.
So I trust to deserue great thanks
of al these Ladies. The first delicate herbe 
that the married man must plante for the
preseruation of his frendly Flower,
               Aduised in speach. is to
be aduised in spéeche. For the man that
without discretion speaketh more hast
                  •
               l
                  •
               e
than wisely, for the most parte falleth into
errors, much bablyng, declareth a foolishe
heade: and a silent person is the exampler
of wisedome. First expende with thy selfe,
what thou wylte speake, and ponder thy
meanyng well. Then note to whome,
where, & when thou speakest. The tongue
that runneth before the witte, commonlye
bréedeth hys Maisters woe. The Philosophers
in their scholes, neuer taught a man
to speake, but first learned h
                  •
               m to holde
his peace. Salomon saith,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                that much talke
cannot be without offence, and he that 
                  〈◊〉
               
refrayne hys tongue is wyse. Two 
                  〈◊〉
               
               Socrates allowed, that shoulde 
                  〈◊〉
               
one to speake, when he 
                  〈…〉
                matter
very well, and when necess
                  ••
               e 
                  〈◊〉
               
him. Xenoph
                     •
                  n sayeth,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                that nature
gaue vs two eares, and but one mouthe,

to the intent we shoulde heare more than
we ought to speake. The second herbe is to 
be courteous,Courtise in conuersatiō. and gentle in conuers
                  •••
               on.
For ye sée, that fierce, and hurtfull beasts,
as the Lion, the Serpent, with such lyke,
bée abhorred of vs for their cruell curstnesse,
when the tractable beastes, as the
spa
                  •
               u
                  •
               ll, and the grayhound, with others,
haue not onelye place in our houses, but
we haue sometyme more care to nourishe
them vp, than a Christian creature. The
married man then must not be rigorous
towarde his wyfe. For there will discorde
growe by hir inwarde hate, and neuer
shall they haue ioy, or peace, if the woman
cannot refrayne hir tongue, nor the man
suffer. If he want discretion, and she pacience,
it will rather appéere the mansion
of fooles, than a house of y• wise. For at the
last, except one of them yéelde vp in tyme,
they wyll fall to raging, & so consequently
to blowes. Women for the most part, are

                  •
               roward of complexion, and tender of condition,
whereto y• wise husband must haue
great regarde, and if he once repr
                  •
               hende
them sharpelye, he must a hundreth folde

exhorte them louingly. There are manye
occasions, that causeth variance betweene
man and wyfe, as for their children, seruants,
apparell, and other such housholde
matters. In which the good maried man
must shewe his wysedome, eyther in turning
it to sporte, & dissembling the cause,
or aunswering not at all. If so bee he cannot
suppresse his anger, let hym then goe
and disgest it abroade. For the ende of indignation,
is to be ashamed of our selues.
And as in a miste a man appéereth greater
than in a fayre day, sayeth Diogenes:
               Di
                     •
                  genes▪
               
so appeareth hys vy
                  ••
               s more in hys anger,
and rage, than when he is pacient.
The thirde is to be secrete, and trusty in 
that, wherin he is trusted.To be s
                     •
                  cre
                     •
                  
                One of the vertues
most estéemed in tymes past was secrecie,
whereby the wisedome of a man
was perfitely discerned. He is diserate
that kéepeth well hys secretes, sayeth Socrates.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
But he is not wise that dis
                  ••
               uereth
them.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . The good Cato repented him but of
thrée things that he did during all his lyfe.
First, for disclosing a secrete to a woman,
the seconde, for sayling by sea, when hee

might haue gone by land, and the last, for
consuming one whole day, without doyng
some profitable déede. A marueylous example
of secrecie,Anaxagoras. was shewed in Anaxagoras,
who wyth other conspired to kyll
a tyraunt, and being betrayed, and by the
tyraunt put to most cruell tormentes, not
sufferable, bit off his owne tongue, bicause
he woulde not discouer that, which he promised
to kéepe secret. The lyke is reported
of a woman in Athens, bicause she would
not bewraye a conspiracie, wherein hir
husbande was a parte. It is happie, quoth
the Ladie Aloisa, that some women haue
bene secrete in tymes past. For you men
say now a daies, that women can kepe no
counsayle. Sée I pray you, quoth Maister
Gualter, how soone this Lady had gotten
holde of that sentence, whiche so little serueth
hir purpose. For I trust it was an
easy mater for that woman to kepe silence
when shée wanted hir tongue. Whereto
the Ladies woulde haue replied, but Ma
                  •
               
               ster
Pedro interrupted them, and sayde,
that hée dyd not condemne, althoug he the
most parte were not tongue tyed, and so

there be, quoth he, some men that be open
ynough. But I would haue thys married
man to embrace secrecie as a vertue, and
thynke it is a great shame not to be so secret
as a woman. The fourth, is to be wise 
in giuyng counsayle,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                which is not euerye
mans office, but such as be of good yeares,
that haue séene, and heard much. Counsel
                  •
               lers
must bewise, lerned, vertuous, of good
iudgement, & without affection.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               
                  〈…〉
               
               
The office of the husbande is to bryng in
necessaries: of the wife, well to kepe them.
The office of the husband is, to go abroad
in matters of profite: of the wyfe, to tarye
at home, and sée all be well there. The office
of the husbande is, to prouide money,
of the wife, not wastfully to spend it. The
office of the husbande is, to deale, and bargaine
with all men, of the wife, to meddle
or make wyth no man. The office of the
husband is, to giue, of the wyfe, to keepe.
The office of the husbande is, to apparell
him as he can, of the wyfe, to goe as shée
ought. The office of the husband is, to bée
Lorde of all, of the wyfe, to giue accounte
of all, and finally I saye, that the office of
the husbande is, to mainetayne well hys
liuelyhoode, and the office of the woman
is, to gouerne well the housholde. And as
the man may not deny his wyfe thinges,
that muste be graunted of necessitie: so
he ought not to graunt hir thinges of prodigalitie,
& superfluous. For as great disorder
is it to graunte the one, as to denye
the other. The sixte is, that the married
man accompany no defamed persons, and

in any case that he harbour them not. For 
many men blame their wyues for yll life,To accompa
                     •
                  y no def
                     •••
                  d p
                     •
                  rs
                     •
                  ns.
when they themselues are the causers
therof, for maintaining such companions,
whereby he himself doth hardly escape infam
                  •
               e,
and these good fellowes doe seeke to
créepe into greatest friendlshippe with the
husband, to the intent they may haue 
                  •••
               
               ter
oportunitie with hys wyfe. Yet maye
he vse his tried friende or n
                  ••
               re kinsman
familiarly, as well in his owne house, as
else where, 
                  •
               auyng alwayes regarde to
the olde sa
                  •
               ing, that a man may sh
                  •
               w 
                  〈◊〉
               
wyfe, and his sword to his friende, but not
to farre to trust them. For if therby gr
                  •
               w
vnto him any infamie, let hym not blame
his wyfe, but hys owne negligence. The
seuenth herbe of marue
                  •
               lous vertue is,
to be sufferable in the i
                  •
               portunities of his
wyfe,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                sometimes dissemblyng, and in t
                  •
               ifling
matters consentyng vnto 
                  •
               ir. For if
all thinges that women craue, shoulde be
graunted, all thinges that they finde fault
withall, shoulde be amended, & all thinges
that they are agrieued with, should be redressed,
Sampsons strength, the patience

of Iob, and the wysedome of Salomon
were all to little. For some men, whose
misshaps are to be lamented, are matched
with such sainctes, that deuise naught else,
but howe to vexe, and molest their husbands.Socrates.
               Socrates pittied thrée sorts of men.
The first was, a good man in the handes
of a curst shrewe, the seconde a wise man,
vnder the gouernaunce of a foole, and the
last was a liberall man in subiection to a
couetous caytife. I thanke you for this,
quoth Mai
                  •
               ter Gualter, this is the truest
tale you tolde to daye, and hitherto, you
haue but flattered these Ladies. Not so,
quoth master Pedro. For I spake nothing
heretofore but the truth, neyther speake I
this nowe generally agaynst all women.
For that were slaunderous vnto them. I
do but touch some shrewde wyues. Tush,
quoth maister Gualter, they be shrewes
all, and if you giue the simplest of them
leaue to daye to treade vpon your f
                  ••
               te, to
mo
                  •
               row she will treade vpon thy head. Be
not angrye, I praye you, quoth Maister
Pedro. For I giue no such leaue, but I say
that for quietnesse sake, & for the increase

of amitie, the maried man must sometime
dissemble, and in this case ought to consider,
that if his wife be foolish, it little helpeth
to aunswere hir, and lesse profiteth to
reforme hir, but if she be wyse, one worde
will suffice. For it is a certaine rule, that
if a woman will not be still with one word
of hir husbande, she will not be quiet with
as manye wordes as euer the wysemen
did write, nor with so many stripes, as a
man is able to gyue hir. The wyse husbande
therefore I say, and affirme, must,
to preserue this pleasaunt Flower, deale
with his wyfe, rather by subtilitie, than by
crueltie. The eyght is to be circumspect in 
matters that concerne his honestie,
                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                and
not to be ieolous of his wyfe. The Stoike
Philosophers saye, that ielousie is a certayne
care of mans mynde, least another
shoulde possesse the thing, which he alone
woulde enioye. There is no greater torment,
than the vexation of a iealous mind
which euen as the moth fretteth the cloth,
doth consume the hart, that is vexed therewith.
Two kinde of persons are commonlye

                  •
               ore sicke in this disease, eyther those

that are euill themselues, or they that in
their youth haue gone astraye, supposing
that as other mens wyues haue done towardes
them, so will theirs doe towardes
others, which is vanitie to thynke, more
follye to suspecte, and greatest foolishnesse
to speake of. For as some lewde women be
dissolute: so likewise women there be, honest,
and very circumspect. If the wise be
to be suspected, let the man worke as secretly
and closely as he can, to reprehend
hir, yet all peraduenture will not aduaile.
For, trust me, no wisdome, no craft, no science,
no strength, no subtiltie, yea, no pacience
sufficeth to enforce a woman, to be
true to hir husbande, if she otherwise determine.
Therefore to conclude to be ieolous,
eyther néedeth not, or booteth not.
The ninth, and laste herbe, is to be carefull 
in the education of hys children. For
much better were they vnborne than vntaught.To be carefull in education of his children.
               Diogenes being enquired what
were best for a man to doe to be in fauour
of the Gods, and beloued of the people, answered,
that to be in the credit with the people
and fauourd of the Gods, a man ought to

do thrée things, the first to reuerence, and
honor much the Gods, then to bryng vppe
hys children in due correction, and last to
be thankefull to his benefactors. What a
               
                  •
               aileth
riches, possessions, to be fortunate,
to haue thy wyfe wyth chylde safely delyuered,
& thy childe well nourished, if afterwardes
by ill trayning, & for want of education
he become vicious? The monarch
of Macedon Philippes Sonne,Alexander being asked
why he honoured more hys mayster,
than his father, said, that his maister gaue
him lyfe euerlastyng, and his Father lyfe
but for a time. There came once before the
wyse Solon a Father with his sonne, one
accusing the other, the father complayned
of the disobedience of his Sonne, and the
sonne accused the father of his ill bringing
vppe, which was the cause of his disobedience,Solon▪
               
               Solon well considering the case, determined
that bicause the Father had not
brought vp his sonne in due correction, hée
should therefore after his death, be depri
               
                  •
               ed
of his sepulchre, which was very rigorous
in those dayes, and the sonne for hys
disobedience was disherited. I assure you,

quoth Maister Lodouic, that same was
an excellent iudgement of the wise Solon,
and if it were put in vre at these dayes,
there would be many fathers to lye without
graues, and as many sonnes put from
their inheritance. The more pittie, quoth
maister Pedro, and I thoughte to haue
sayde more therein. But the sunne is so
much declined, that it is more than tyme
to vnburden these Ladies of this tedious
talke, and I feare me, I haue alreadye
troubled them to long. Not so, quoth the
Ladye 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . For sooner should we wante
the day light, than good will to heare you;
though the day were so long againe. You
s
                  •
               y your pleasure, quoth Maister Pedro,
               
                  •
               ut nowe to knit vp this Flower of matrimoniall
amitie, and friendshippe, touching
the office of the man, I saye, that he
must aboue all thynges haue the feare of
God before hys eyes, which with the rest
well considered, and put in execution, no
doubt he shall enioye the fragrant sauour
thereof. Then rose vp the Ladye Iulia,
with the whole cōpany, giuing my friend
m
                  •
               yster Pedro greate thankes, wishyng

that there were many such husbands, and
therewith she tooke the garlande from hir
head, and sayd, turning hir towards mayster
Pedro, that she would surrender vnto
him agayne the authoritie which shee of
him receyued wyth that charge, that he
shoulde the next daye bestowe it on some
other in that place. For I shall not bée in
quiet, quoth shée, till I haue hearde the
married woman prescribed in lyke sorte,
as you haue done the maried man, neyther
can this Flower well prosper, or bée
perfite, except the woman also put to hir
helping hande. Whereto mayster Pedro
aunswered, that in the woman was to be
required great helpe for the preseruation
of this friendlye Flower. Yet will I not,
quoth hee, take the authoritie from you.
But if you list to departe wyth it to some
other, you shall your selfe to morrowe resigne
it to whome it pleaseth you, and in
the meane time he willed hir to leaue the
garlande, and hir authoritie in the place,
where shée receyued it, which she did, and
then went we out of that most pleasaunt
arbour into the Garden, where we tooke

our leaue of the Ladies and gentlemen,
who were very loth to haue left our company.
But maister Pedro had so apointed,
that we coulde not tary. Therfore promising
to come againe the next day, we went
home the same daye wée came in the morning,
where the Nightingale saluted
vs with such swéete melodie, that
wée were at the ende of
our iourney before
wée were
ware.
         
         
            
            ¶The office, or duetie of
the married woman, for the preseruation,
and continaunce,
of this Flower of
Friendship▪
            
            
               
                  TThe next morning came
there two, or thrée straungers
to Mayster Pedro,
which letted vs of our mornings
walke, notwithstanding
we sent worde to the Lady Iulia, that
in the after noone, we determyned according
to our promyse, to méete hir in the
garden. So after our dinner was finished
and the guestes departed, wée prepared
readye our horses, partly for that the weather
was somewhat to hote to traueyle

                  •
               n foote, and partly for the more spéede.
            But for all our haste, the companye was
assembled before we came, and merily sate
togithers, gyuing eare to the pleasaunt
harmonie, and melodie, that was made
by the musitions, to whome after our reuerence
accordingly done, we drewe nere,
and tooke our places in the Arbor, where
as the euening before, the Ladye Iulia
               
had left hir authoritie. And euery one orderly
se
                  •
               , shée toke the garland of hir soueraignt
                  ••
               ,
and standing vp sayde. That the
authoritie which she had receyued the day
before of mayster Pedro, she purposed to
gyue to some other, least in vsurping a
continuance therein, she might doe iniurie
to the r
                  •
               a
                  •
               t of the company and so curteously
comming to the Ladie Aloisa,
               The Ladie Aloia chosen soueraigne. she
set the garlande of principalitie vppon hir
heade, with election confirmed, by assent
of vs all, wyth the promyse of due obeysance.
The Lady Iulia sat downe soberly
in hir place againe, and the Ladye Aloisa
standing vp, declared howe much against
hir wyll shée tooke that authoritie, and soueraigntie
vpon hir: notwithstanding for
as much as the Lady Iulia by the free consent
of the rest, had elected hir, she neither
would vncurtesly, nor might she honestly,
contemne or reiect it,Th
                     •
                   Ladiee Iulia comm
                     •
                  unded to d
                     •
                  scribe the married w
                     •
                  man. by the vertue wherof,
quoth she, I will that the Ladye Iulia
doe briefly (for that the day is farre past)
describe vnto vs, the office, and duetie of
the married woman, in lyke sort as mayster
Pedro hath done for the mans behalfe

and therein to shew in what sort she must
applie hir selfe, to maintaine this Flower
of Friendship, betweene hir husband and
hir. When the Lady Iulia heard this, she
began a little to chaunge hir colour, and
standing in doubt what she shoulde doe,
much disschabling hir selfe, but in the ende
after hir pawse a whyle, I rather ch
                  ••
               se
quoth she, to hazarde the iudgement of ignoraunce,
by my vnskilfull tale, than to be
condemned of disobedience by vngentle
resistance. For disobedience is a fault in
all persons, but the greatest vyce in a woman.
And nowe,The Lady Iulia beginneth the married woman, and agreeeth with maister Pedro in diuers p
                     •
                  ynts. in hope of pardon, if my
vnlearned speache be not aunswerable to
your expectations, of this married wyfe
this is my opinion. In diuers poyntes I
agrée with Mayster Pedro, which are as
well necessarie in the woman, as requisite
in the man. For if in suppressing of the
thrée foresaid wéedes, the chiefest enimies
to the Flower of Friendship, the man
must be careful: much more ought the woman
to trauaile, that they doe not spring
in hir, and also the great regard in choise
with others: wherein bycause mayster

               Pedro hath already satisfied you, I maye
be vnburdened of that traueyle. For if the
man ought to be circumspect in the electing
of his wyfe, what shall the siely women
doe, being so often deceyued by you
men? Therfore must she with great care
consider, and be well assured of the mans
honest conuersation, of his maners, and
affections, and specially what loue he beareth.
For the venom of loue blyndeth the
eyes, and so bewitcheth the senses of vs
poore women, that as we can foresée nothing,Loue blindeth the eyes, and bewitcheth the senses of women.
so are we perswaded, that all the
vices of the beloued are rare, and excellent
vertues, and the thing most sower, to be
verye swéete, and delicate: for the aduoyding
of which, the woman can not be to
inquisitiue. I meane not of the mannes
welth and substaunce, but of his vertues,
which be the true ryches, and remayneth
for euer. With which thing mooued, Themistocles
               Themistocles.
being demaunded whether he
had rather marrie his daughter to a riche
man vicious, or to a poore man vertuous,
worthily aunswered, that he woulde soner

                  •
               hoose a man without money, that money

without a man. Also I dissent not from
Mayster Pedro, in his equalitie of match.
And after such hir choyse,The happinesse of mariage consisteth in a chast wife. let hir endeuour
to encrease a perfection of loue, and aboue
all imbrace chastitie. For the happinesse of
matrimonie, doth consist in a chaste matrone,
so that if such a woman bée conioyned
in true and vnfayned loue, to hir
beloued spouse, no doubt their lyues shall
be stable, easie, swéete, ioyfull and happy.
But loue taken awaye, in stéede of most
swéete pleasauntnesse, is placed a bitter
vnsauerie, and an intollerable estate. The
first thing therefore, which the maried
w
                  •
               man must labour to intende, the first
thing which shee must with all hir force,
applie hir whole minde vnto, and the first
thing which she must hartilye put in execution,
is to lyke, and loue well.The woman must lyke and loue well hir husband. For reason
doth bynde vs, to loue them, wyth
whome we must eate, and drinke, whome
we must only accompany, of whose ioyes,
and sorrowes, wealth, and woe, wée must
be partakers, for whome also wée forsake
parents, friendes, and all, leauing onelye
to them, for no shorter time, than during

lyfe. And albeit they be cancred of nature,
yll in conuersation, worse in condition,
base of linage, deformed of personage, and
vnaduised in worde and déede: yet being
our chosen husbands, we may not, nor can
we forgo them, or chaūge with our neighbours,
as dyd sometyme the Parthians,
but séeke gently to redresse them,The Parthians exchaunged wiu
                     •
                  s with their neighbours. indeuor
to please them, and labour to loue them.
To whome we haue wholy gyuen our bodies,
our goodes, our lyues, and lybertie.
But it often falleth out that discord groweth
betwéene man and wyfe, by the ignoraunce
of one the others nature, and for
this cause we are bounde to learne, and obserue
them, and let not the womā to hastilye
perswade hir selfe, in ymagining that
hir husbande liketh and loueth hir intirely
and sheweth hir a good countenaunce. For
in that moment, when he shall perceyue
that she loueth him not hartely, euen then
will he abhorre hir vtterly. For as to season
vnsauery meates, pleasant saw
                  •
               es be
prepared: so to gyue a good release to the
foode of maryage, it must be tempered
with true loue. For loue gyueth to harde

things an easinesse, to tedious thinges a
pleasauntnesse,True loue the sauce of ma
                     •
                  iage. a beginning with facility,
and ending in felycitie. Then spake the
Ladye Isabella, and sayde, that it was not
possible for a woman to loue that husband,
the which delyteth more in another. It is
sure quoth the Lady Iulia, a harde matter
for a vertuous wyfe to liue wyth a vicious
husbande. For an honest woman to
loue a dissolute man, or a wyse spouse to
accept a foolishe mate. Yet notwithstanding,
howe much more the husbande bée
euill, and out of order, so much more is it
the womans prayse, if she loue him. And
you men, as vntractable as you be, yet is
it not possible, if your wyues doe louingly
imbrace you, though you cannot inforce
your euill inclinations to repaye loue for
loue againe, yet can yee not well hate
them,Examples of such as loued well their husbandes. which is no small matter. I coulde
recite diuers worthy examples as well of
Romaine, as Grecian Ladies, that haue
so intirelye affected their lincked mates,
that not only haue they indangered themselues
in great perilles for their sakes, but
haue also willinglye spent their bloude to

die with them. Plutrach reporteth, howe
that 
                  •
               he Lacedemonians, waging battayle
against the Mimians,
               A w
                     •
                  rthy example 
                     •
                  f the Mimian Ladies. and by conquest
getting the vpper hand, tooke a number
of them captiues, which they imprisoned,
intending shortlye after to put them
to a cruell death. The louing Wyues of
those men, when they vnderstood the wofull
hap of their infortunate husbandes,
came to the prisons, where they were, and
wyth sorowfull teares and playntes, entreated
the Iarlors that they might haue
recourse to speake with y• prisoners, which
thing after long and tedious sute, obtayned,
they entred in, and after most louing
imbracings, and lamentable bewaylings,
these wyues tooke on them their husbands
apparell, fending them out in their womanly
attire, with their faces couered, as
the guise of the countrie was, who being
taken for women, were let passe, and so
escaped, leauing their wyues in prison to
dye the death, at the appoynted tyme for
their sakes. When the day of execution
was come, and the matter fully knowne,
the Lacedemonians stoode in admiration

and gaue these faithfull harts high prayse,
and pardoning both them, and their husbandes,
sent them l
                  •
               me with great rewardes,
to the incouragement o
                  •
                others,
to treade the like steps of hon
                  •
               st loue. Panthea,
               Panthea.
when she hard that hir husband was
slayne in battayle, ranne fortl w
                  •
               th wyth
a mourning heart to the doolefull place
where he lay, whom after she had b
                  ••
               ayled
hir fill, and had bathed hir s
                  •
               l
                  •
               e in 
                  •
               is
bloude, tooke that same vnhappye launce,
wherewith he was slayne, and gored 
                  •
               ir
selfe to the heart. The lyke is reported of
Porcia, Brutus wife.Porcia. 
               Martiall also writeth,
how that Alcesta, the wyfe of King
Admetes,
               If Alcest
                     •
                   be deade, good Ladie reuiue hir not againe. vnderstanding by the Oracle
of Apollo, that hir husbandes grieuous
disease, wherewith hée was sore pained,
coulde not be cured, but by the bloude of
a deare friend, killed hir selfe saying, that
Admetes had not a dearer friend than she
was, which thing when the king heard, he
finished his lyfe, wyth the like death, supposing
it more better to couple themselues
togyther by one ende, than seperated, in
teares to bewayle the lack of so true harted,

and louing spouse. In lyke maner,
Paulina
               Paulina. the wyfe of Seneca, when shée
had intelligence that hir husbande by the
commaundement of Nero had by cutting
of his veynes bledde himselfe to death, did
also cut hir owne veynes, to accompanye
hir good husbande in the lyke ende, had
not Nero preuenting hir purpose, caused
hir veynes to be stopped vp againe.
            What shall I speake worthily of Triara,
               Triara.
the swéete spouse of Lucius Vitellus, who
so intirely loued hir husbande, that she accompanied
him in the warres being a woman,
aduenturing daungers with a manlye
courage, ryding alwayes next hir beloued
mate, to garde him, and to be partaker
of his chaunces, good or bad. Did not
Iulia,
               Iulia. 
               Pompeius wife, erpresse the signe
of a most louing hart, who when she sawe
hir husbandes coate brought into the City
all imbrued with gory bloud, fell into a sodaine
sound, scriching most ruthfully, and
bitterlye crying: O Pompei, Pompei,
farewell. And being with childe, brought
forth in extréeme pangues hir vntimelye
fruite, which immediatly with the mother,

yéelded vp y• gasping breath, whose deaths
were bewayled with many teares. Plinie
the yonger, in an Epistle writeth of a fishers
wife that finding no meanes to cure
an intollerable disease of hir husbandes,A notabl
                     •
                   example▪ of a fishers wife. &
sore lamenting his paines, that dayly increased,
perswaded him, that one of them
shoulde slay the other, and in the ende concluded,
that they both assended to the top
of a high rocke, which hung ouer the sea,
and being both cowpled togither, threwe
themselues downe, and were drowned. I
coulde occupie you, quoth the Ladye Iulia
till to morrow this time, with like stories,
of worthy women. But these may suffice,
to shewe the loue of the wife to hir husbād,
and to let you vnderstande also, Mayster
Gualter, that there hath béene alwaies
women as louing as men. No doubt Madam
quoth he, ye loue passingly, when ye
doe loue, and ye hate as extréemely, when
ye doe hate. Wherefore it were a goodly
matter if you coulde bring your married
women vnto a meane. Not so, quoth the
Lady Iulia, I will haue no meane in loue.No mea
                     ••
                   in loue.
And when the woman hath thus grounded

the perfite rootes of loue, and planted
this Friendly Flower, in a faithfull hart,
she must be as curious as Maister Pedros
good husbande in preseruing it against all
tempe
                  ••••
               ous stormes, and from all venymous
w
                  •
               e
                  •
               es. The greatest helpe whereto
is shamefastnesse, which is of such power,
and vertue, that it suffyceth alone
to defende it against all weathers.Shamefastnesse. And if
so be that there were but one onely vertue
in a woman, it might well be shamefastnesse.
For as in a creature voyd of shame
there is nothing founde worthye of commendation:The shamelesse creature is voyde of all vertues. so in the Woman indued
with that vertue, is not any thing worthy
of reprehension, & there is the roote of godlines,
where springeth y• branch of shamefastnes,
which is the only defence that nature
hath giuē to women, to k
                  •
               epe their repetatiō,
to preserue their chastity, to maintaine
their honor, & to aduance their praise.
How farre ther
                  •
               ore are ye men ouersene,
when you onely inquire of their beautie,
substance, and parentage, leauing vertue
beside, & that most excellent gift of shamefastnesse,
which is the chiefest dowrye, the

greatest inheritaunce, and the precious
Iewell that a woman can bring wyth hir.
There is another great mainteyner of
this Flower, & that is the goodlye grace of
obedience.Obedience. For reasō it is that we obey our
Husbands. God commaundeth it, and we
are bounde so to doe. I knowe not quoth
the Lady Isabella what we are bounde to
doe, but as méete is it, that the husband, obey
the wife, as the wife the husband, or at
the least, that there be no superioritie betwéene
them, as the auncient philosophers
haue defended. For women haue soules as
wel as men, they haue wit as wel as men,
and more apt for procreation of children,
than men. What reason is it then, that
they should be bounde, whom nature hath
made frée? Naye,The Achaians. among the Achaians,
women had such soueraigntie, that whatsoeuer
they commaunded, their husbands
obeyed. Yea Plutarch saith, that the man
swept the house, drest the meate, and did al
other necessaries, where the woman gouerning
the house, and kéeping the money
aunswered all matters, and which worse
was, they corrected them at their discretiō
               
What did shée, quoth Mayster Gualter,
& might she beate him too? Mary lo, Here
is the matter, that some of our Dames in
this Countrie take so much vppon them.
They think belike that they be in Achaia
But sure if I had bene amongst those women:
you would haue done, quoth the Ladie
Isabella, as they did. For Dogs barke
boldly at their owne maisters doore. Beléeue
not daughter, quoth the Lady Iulia
neither those ignorant Philosophers, nor
these fonde customes. For contrary also to
this, the Parthians & Thracians
               Parthians and thracians. accounted
not of their wiues, more than of slaues
so that after they had borne them a dosen
children or more, they solde the mothers at
the▪ common markets or e
                  •
               chaunged them
for yonger. Fie vppon that law, quoth the
Lady Isabella. But what saye you to the
custome which Dionysius Alicarnasseus
writeth of the Numidians and Lydians,
               The Numidians & Lydians.
where the women commaunded wythin
doores, and the men without. Yea marry
quoth the Ladye Aloisa, that was a iust
law, where the commaunding was equal.
Not so quoth the Lady Iulia. For though

it 
                  ••
               re better than the other two: yet not

                  •
               ollerable amongest vs, neyther was the
soueraigntie so equallye deuided, as you
think. For if the woman kepe alwaies hir
house, as duetie is, the man standeth euer
at hir cōmaundement. For as long as she
is within, though he commaund hir without,
this lawe byndeth hir not to obey.
Wherfore in my opinion al those Barbarian
customes are to be disanulled, & contemned
of Christians. Ye say well, Madam,
quoth M. Erasmus. For in dede both

                  •••
               ine, & humaine lawes, in our religion
giueth the man absolute authoritie,The man both by reason, and law, hath the soueraigne
                     •
                  y ouer his wy
                     •
                  e. ouer
the woman in all places. And, quoth the
Lady Iulia, as I sayd before, reason doth
confirm the same, the man being as he is,
most apt for the soueraigntie beyng in gouernment,
not onely skill and experience
to be required, but also capacite to comprehend,
wisedom to vnderstand, strength to
execute, solicitude to prosecute, pacience to
suffer, meanes to sustayne, and aboue all,
a great courage to accomplishe, all which
are commonly in a man, but in a woman
verye rare: Then what blame deserue

those men that doe permit their wy
                  •••
                to
rul
                  •
                all, and suffer themselues to be commaunded
for company. A hard aduenture
quoth Mayster Gualter,
               A harde aduerture happeneth to him that is matched with a shrewe. hapneth to that
man, which is matched with a maisterly
shrew. For she being once past shame not
onely blabbeth out all that shée knoweth,
but thundreth out that also, which hir
mad heade conceyueth, or hir fantasticall
braine dreameth of, and yet will she maintaine,
that she is neuer angry, or speaketh
without great cause. There bée quoth the
Ladie Iulia some such women, but I doe
vtterly condemne them. For this married
woman, whom I haue taken vpon me t
                  •
               
describe,The woman must be obedient to hir husband must of duty be vnto hir husband
in all things obedient, and therefore if he
sometimes mooued do chaunce to chide hir
she must forbeare: in doing whereof hée
shal neither eate y• more at his dinner, nor
shée haue the lesse appetite to hir Supper.
The wise woman must consider, that hi
                  •
               
husbande chydeth, eyther without reason
or hath good cause. If reason mooue him,
then of dutie she is bound to obey, if otherwise,
it is hir part to dissemble the matter.

For in nothing can a wyfe shewe a greater
wysedome, than in dissembling with
an importunate husbande. Hir honest ye
hir good nature, and hir prayse is shewed
in nothing more, than in tollerating of an
vndiscreate man, and to conclude, as the
woman ought not to commaund the man
but to be alwaies obedient: so ought he not
to suffer himself to be commaunded of his
wife. Seneca in his tragedies of this matter
sheweth a notable example. In the
warres of Mithridates & the Romaines,
               A notable example.
all the souldiours in Rome were cōmaunded
to be in redinesse, to attend vpon Silla
the Consull. This edict being published,
the officers came to an olde knights house
to will him to prepare hymselfe. But his
wife withstood them and said, that he was
not at home, & that he shoulde not go. For
quoth she, though perchaunce he were able,
yet being an olde Souldiour, and exempted
from the warres, I will not giue
him leaue. Whereat the officers being
astonied, enformed the Senate thereof,
who forthwith banished the olde Knight,
for suffering himselfe to be commaunded

by his wyfe, and hir they kepte in prison
during his exile for presumption. The maried
woman, must be also verye carefull,
and circumspect of hir good name. For a
good name is the flower of estimation,The good name of a woman is very delicate. and
the pearle of credite, which is so delicate a
thing in a woman, that she must not only
be good, but likewise must appeare so. For
you men are naturally so malicious, that
you wil iudge aswel of that you suspect, as
of that which you sée. The chefest way for
a woman to preserue and maintayne this
good fame,The good married womā must be resident in hir owne house. is to be resident in hir owne
house. For an honest woman in sobernes,
kéeping well hir house, gayneth thereby
great reputation, and if she be euill, it driueth
away many euil occasions, and stoppeth
the mouthes of the people. In keping
at home, all thinges shall be better gouerned,
hir husbandes hart better chéered, all
euil suspicions depelled, angers aduoided,
expences diminished, and the great excesse
of apparell not required, wherein we are
commonly so curious, that otherwise being
naturally great sauers, onely therein
are we as great wasters, which thing is

aduoyded by the wyues honest kéeping at
home.Women are great wasters in apparell. I cannot but maruayle, how a woman
of estimatiō can delite in gaddyng abrode,
to be a gossiper, hauing at home hir
husband to conferre with, hir childrē to instruct,
hir family to looke vnto, hir kindred
to please, and the euill tongues to appease.
Seneca saith that his aunt for sixtene yeares
space, whiles hir husbande was in Egypt,
neuer went out of hir owne house.
Faunus Kyng of the Aborigines, had a
wyfe named Fauna,
               Fauna. who after shée was
maried, would neuer looke vpon any man
sauing hir husband, in doing wherof, she
gate such reputation, y• after hir death she
was honoured for a Goddesse. Licurgus
commaunded that no woman at any time
shoulde goe oute of hir house, sauyng at
certain festiuall dayes appointed. For the
maried woman, saith he, hath nothing els
to doe, but eyther in the temple to pray to
the Gods, or at home to instructe hir children.
My meaning is not in reciting the so
examples, to haue the maried wife continually
lockt vp, as a cloystered Nunne, or
Ancres, but to consider hereby, what respect

she must haue in going abroade, and
what a vertue it is to kéepe well hir house.
Lucretia
               Lucretia. the famous Romaine Ladye,
obtayning not so great prayse in excelling
others in beautie and parentage, as shée
did in being founde at home a spinning,
and carding with hir Maydens, whereas
the other Romaine Matrones, were roming
abrode in feasting, and banqueting,
when their husbands came from the wars
to vi
                  ••
               te them. As the wyfe must be thus
wary in going abroade:The woman must auoyd suspicious companies. so must she be as
carefull what is done at home, on hir part
not to sit ydlely, nor to permit any one suspiciously
to come vnto hir, espeacially hir
husband being not at home. Plutarch telleth
of a custome among the Numidians,
               The Numidians.
that their husbandes being abroade, the
wiues kept alwaies their doores shut, and
there was a lawe inuiolable, that who so
euer knockt at such a doore so shut, shoulde
therefore lose his hande. To be briefe, not
onely in chastitie of bodye, but in honesty
of behauiour, and talke, doth the womans
honour, and good name consist, and is
also mayntayned. These be on the womans

behalfe, the greatest nourishers, of
this matrimoniall Flower, wherewyth
being adorned, she shall please God, content
hir husbande, and get honour of all
persons, without which all trym attyre,
all outwarde payntings, and garnishings
are nothing. For what auayleth it a man
to haue his wife of excellent bewtie, great
possessions, good parentage and wel friended,
if therwithal she be shamelesse, prowd
curst, and dissolute. Also for the perfiting
of this married woman, certaine outward
qualities are to be required, as to looke
well to hir huswifery,The maried woman must be skilfull in huswifery. and not onely to see
that all be done, but that all be well done,
to the contentation of hir husbande, euen
in thinges of least importaunce, and to
occupie hir selfe accordinglye,The woman must not be ydle. not to sit alwayes
ydle, but to spende hir time in some
profitable exercise, as with hir néedle, and
rocke, or such other lyk
                  •
               , which in times
past, haue béene in great reputation amongest
the greatest Ladies,Salomon. so that Salomon
commending a good woman, saith
that she sought woole and flaxe, & wrought
by the counsayle of hir handes. It is also

a great want in a woman, if she be vnskilfull
in dressing of meate.Cookerie. For it is the chiefest
poynt of a huswyfe to cherish hir husbande,
who being sicke, will haue the best
appetite to the meate of hys wyues dressing,
and if she then cherishe him well, he
will loue hir the better euer after.
            
               Stratomacha y• wife of king Deiotarus,
               Stratomacha.
whensoeuer he fell sick, was his cooke, his
phisition, and his chirurgion, which worthye
qualities so estéemed of such a noble
Quéene, why should not the married woman
labor to haue them, seing that thereby
she shal enlarge y• 
               Flower of Friendship
betwene hir & hir husbād, whose face
must be hir dayly looking glasse,The face of the husbād, the looking glasse of the wyfe. wherein
she ought to be alwais prying, to sée when
he is mery, when sad, when content, and
when discontent, wherto she must alwais
frame hir own countenance. Why, quoth
the Lady Isabell, what if he bee mad, or
drunke, must we then shew the like countenance?
If you perceiue him in such case,
quoth the Ladye Iulia, speake him fayre,
and flatter hym, tyll you get hym to bed,
and there reprehende him louingly, with

kissing and embracyng, that he may perceyue
it to come of pure loue, more than
of malice, for better were it to conuerte
him louingly in gentlenesse, than to controle
him frowardly in shrewdnesse. It is
most true, quoth M. Pedro. For in thys
poynt, we are not much vnlyke to wylde
and sauage beasts, as the Lion, or the Unicorne,
which by force cannot be tamed,
but by humilitie,Men must be reformed by gentlenesse. and gentle meanes, so
that who will reclayme vs, must auoyde
all contrarying, and vexation of mynde,
whereof I could tell you a prety story that
of late yeres happened to a gentlewomā,
that by suche gentle wyles reclaymed hir
husband, being farre gone, but I shoulde
iniurie the Lady Iulia, to intermeddle so
farre in hir charge. Not so, quoth she, but
you shall greatlye pleasure me therein,
wherfore I pray you let vs heare it.Maister Pedro telleth a pretie tale, howe a woman reclaymed hir husbande. Ther
was, quoth he, a Gentleman of good callyng,
that greatly delighted in huntyng,
who on a daye, néere to a little village encountred
with a poore Wydowes daughter,
a simple wench, but somwhat snowte
fayre, whose gaye eyes, had so intrapped

thys iolye hunter, that vnder the colour
thereof, he oftentimes resorted vnto hir
and laye diuers nightes out of his owne
house. When his wife, being both fayre,
wyse, and vertuous, vnderstoode thereof,
as well by hys demeanour, as by other
coniectures, lyke a wyse woman she dyssembled
the matter, and kept it secret to
hir selfe, not altering eyther countenance
or condicions towardes him, but on a
time, when she was assured, that he was
gone another waye, hyed hir to the house,
where she learned of the yong woman the
whole circumstaunce, feyning hir selfe to
be his sister, and when she had vewed the
chambers, and bedding, wherein he lay,
which was verye homelye, she returned
home againe & trussed vp a good bed, well
furnished, and hangings, with other necessaries,
which as secretly as she could,
conuayde thither, desiring both the olde
woman, and hir daughter to be good to hir
brother, and sée that he wanted nothing.
The next day, came this gentlemā home
and according to his custome went a hunting
to his old haunt, where he seing this

newe furniture, marueyled much thereat
and inquired what the matter ment. The
olde mother aunswered, that a sister of his
had béene there, and willing them to cherysh
him well, gaue them besides, certayne
money. The gentleman vnderstanding
then how the world went, and knowing
it to be hys Wyfes doing, returned
foorthwith home, and demaunded of hir
the truth, and what she ment thereby,
who denied it not. The cause why, quoth
shée, I sent such furniture thither, was
bicause I vnderstanding howe daintilye
you were accustomed to lie at home, doubted
you might by such harde entertaynement
haue gotten some harme. He should
quoth the Lady Aloisa haue had a bed of
nettles, or thornes, had it bene to me. For
sure I woulde not haue bene the cherisher
of my husband in his vnthriftinesse. And
so should you haue made him worse, quoth
maister Pedro. But it happened much
better to this gentle woman. For he being
ouercome by hir vertue, liued cōtent wyth
hir euer after. This storie, quoth the Ladye
Iulia, hath well holpen me forwarde

for the which I thanke Maister Pedro, &
now to continue my purpose, I saye that
very circumspect and warie must the woman
be in reprehendyng of hir husbande
in such great matters. For in thinges of
small importance, the best wil be for hir to
dissemble, noting diligently the tyme, the
place, and the maner in doyng. The best
tyme is, when anger, and malincholye
raigneth not, and in any case, let no person
be in place to heare hir. For it is a
wyse mans griefe, to beare the open reproofe
of his wyfe. The best place is, as I
sayde, when they are both in bed, a place
appointed for reconcilements, and renuing
of loue and friendship, let your words
not be spitefull, but louing, kinde, gentle,
mery and pleasaunt. For though the woman
euery where, ought to be mery with
hir mate: yet muste she chieflye in bed,
thereby to shewe what loue she beareth
hym, where she may lawfullye poure out
into his bosome all the thoughtes, and secrets
of hir louing hart. But now to conclude,
and knit vp the married womans
office in mainteyning and conseruing this

               Flower of Friendship, in holye Matrimonie,
she must being of hir selfe weake,
and vnable besides of hir owne diligence,The maried womā must put hir trust in God.
put hir whole trust in the first, and principall
a
                  •
               thor thereof, whome if she serue
faythfullye, will no doubte, make thys
Flower to spryng vp in hir aboundantly.
For daylye we maye sée a foule deformed
woman, that truely seareth, and serueth
God, so well beloued of hir husbande, as if
she were the fayrest of beawtie in a countrey,
and women voyde of Gods fauour,
and grace, what qualities soeuer they
haue besides, seldome, or neuer enioye
they the happy estate of Matrimony, nor
shall they euer attayne to the swéete, and
perfite smell of thys moste delectable
Flower of spousall amitie, and friendship.
I thinke verily, quoth maister Pedro, if
eyther Medea, or Circe coulde haue obtained
this Flower, as cunning inchaunters
as they were, to haue tempered their
charmes withall, Circes had not so soone
lost hir Vlysses, nor Medea 
               
                  •
               orgone hir
welbeloued Iason. Herewith the whole
assembly rising vp, gaue the Ladye Iulia
               
hir deserued prayse, and thankes, and the
Lady Aloisa laying aside hir soueraignetie,
went all out into the Garden, where
wée roming about the pleasant allies, discoursed
a newe of that which had béene
sayde, both by the Lady Iulia and of maister
Pedro, which was very well borne away.
But the Lady Isabella, who in thys
seconde debating fell to my lot, at our departing
required me for hir sake, to penne
the whole discourse of this flagrāt Flower
For quoth she, your quiet silēce both these
dayes assureth mée, that you haue well
considered thereof, and therwyth the rest
of the Ladies ioined with hir, at whose importunate
request, wyth the helpe of
my friende Maister Pedro, and
others I haue aduentured
to publishe this Discourse.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   