
      
         
            
            
                ¶ A Maruelous tydynges both Wonders Old and New The Deuyll is endited yf many mens wordes be tru.
            
               
                  IN all Chriſtendom, Chriſtes Godſpell now is rad
               Of man, womā, and chyld, it maketh their harts glad
               Whiche with ſhamefull ſyns, before were full ſad
               O wounders good tydynges, yf all ſayinges be tru.
               ¶ It is rad ſo oft, and with ſoch diligence
               That no text is wreſted, thorow raiſche negligence
               Playn declaracions, help moche to the true ſenſe
               We all haue cauſe to reioyſe, yf theſe tydyngs be tru.
               
                  ❧ Now after Chriſtes rule, all folk do lead theyr lyfe
               They abhor all chydyng, braulyng, fyghtyng, and ſtryfe
               Grete feruent charytie is betwyne man and wyfe
               No worſe wordes then hony comb, ſweet hart of gold, moſt tru.
               ¶ One neybur reſorteth fryndly to an other
               As though all were kynſfolk, lyke brother and brother.
               Greter loue was neuer betwyne chyld and mother
               This world is no world, yf all tydynges be tru.
               
                  ❧ It is rather lyke Heuyn, or pleaſaunt Paradyſe
               The folk be lyke Angels, diſcrete, ſober, and wyſe
               If one fall through fraylty, he repentyng more then twyſe
               Ryſeth ſtyll a new man, a good Chriſtian and tru.
               ¶ Folk faſt, pray, and ſerue God, not Hipocritically
               (Only to be ſeen of men, for folyſh vayn glory)
               But from the very hart, the Lord God to gloryfy
               Deſpyſyng fond fantaſyes, as falſe thynges, and not tru.
               ¶ Euery body now, in ſomtrade of lyuyng
               Doth labour for his foode, with trauell or ſwetyng
               Som dyggyng, ſom ſpynuyng, ſom wrytyng, ſom redyng
               Som geuyng good counſell, lyke honeſt folk and tru.
               ☞ They knowe that they muſt make, a rekenyng to God
               Of theyr diſpenſacion, they feere gretely Gods rod
               The ryche do helpe the poore, with roſt meat or with ſod
               None lye ſtaruyng in Streets, yf all mens tonges be tr
                     •…
                  
               
               ¶ Great ryche men be afrayd, leaſt they dye ſodaynly
               Leaſt theyre goods (after them) be ſpent in foolery
               Leaſt God wyll call them fooles, therfore liberally
               They ſpend moche in theyr lyfe, vpon poore folk and tru.
               
                  ❧ They be redy alſo, ſomwhat to pryſons to ſend
               If any through frayltie, chaunſe folyſhly to offend
               But now Priſons be empty, the world doth ſo amende
               There be but .iiii. ſcore and ten in kynges benche, it was tru▪
               
               ¶ Of them that be in pryſon, ſom be tyed with clogges
               Som gnaw broun cruſtes of bred, ſō burniſh boones lyke doggs
               Som wyſh to fyll theyr gut
                     •
                  s, with catts, ratts, myſe, or froggs
               Specyally this deere yere: Now (they ſay) they wyll be tru.
               ☞ How many be in Ludgate, and Neugate I can not tel
               But they that be abrode, be afrayd, I truſt well
               And fall to wourk luſtely, thorow theyr exampell
               They abhorre Clinkerum: They ſay they wyll be tru.
               ¶ A man may goo now, ouer fyns bery fy
                     •…
                  de
               Without ſweard and buckler, without ſpeare or ſhylde
               With an houndred poundes: as ſafe as with a nylde
               In a myſty mornyng, and by nyght, yf tales be tru.
               
                  ✚ All England and Spayn, all Scotland, and Germany
               All Fraunce and Ireland, all Denmark and Hungary
               Be purged ſo (I truſt) from vice and Idolatry
               That the Turk doth beghyn to thynk the Godſpele tru.
               
                  ❧ The Saracens and Iewes (I truſt) do now conuert
               Moued with Godlynes that is in Chriſtians harte
               They fere leaſt Chryſts ſcourge wyll make theyr bones to ſmart
               I truſt they receyue baptyme, and belyue the Godſpell is tru.
               ¶ They hire it ſo diſcuſſed by calculacyon
               That Doomes day is at hand, yf mens ſpeculacion
               In Aſtronomye be tru, the worldes tranſformacyon
               Wylbe within .x. yeres, ſtraunge newes yf it be tru.
               
                  ❧ I (one of .xl. yeres) thought to prouyde for age
               Houſe for one and twenty yere, or ſom fat perſonage
               Som prebend, deanery, or ſom vicarage
               But now I pas not moche, yf Aſtronomers be tru.
               ¶ Yea whither Aſtronomers, be true eyther no
               Or that generall iugement be commyng to or fro
               This one thyng I kno ſure, that I ſhall hence go.
               I kno nor day, nor ooure: Nothyng is more tru.
               
                  ❧ And douteles, yf all men, wolde be of my mynde
               We wold ſom better way, for to lyue here out fynde
               Men ſhulde be ſet awurk, onleſſe they were ſtark blynd
               Yea blynde ſhuld do ſomwhat, to kepe themſelfe tru.
               ¶ Helthy folke lackyng wourk, ſhuld reſorte to a place
               With theyr tooles and inſtrumētes (as ſom vſe to ſhew their face)
               Then ſet awourk, or fed, (of mens fauour and grace).
               With ſom comon purſe, to kepe themſelfs tru
               
                  ❧ So that it ſhuld be a ſtraunge thyng for to ſee
               Any theft or murder, euer committed to be
               As (thankes be to God) folk burne ſo in charytie
               That no knauery raigneth, yf all mens wordes be tru.
               ¶ The Deuyll hath ben a knaue, and hath kylde many men
               Yea both ſoule and body, moe perchaunſe then ten
               Now he is endyted, as witneſſeth my pen
               His Queſt is empayneld, he is founde falſe, not tru.
            
            
               ☞ Here folowe the names of the .xii. men that goo vpon the Deuyll.
               
                  ¶ Gen.  iii. i. Paralip. xxi. Iob. i. ii. Sapien. ii.
                  Chriſt in Math. xiii. and in Luke. viii. Math. iiii.
                  Mar. i. Luke. xxii. Ioan. xiii. and. i. Ioan. iii.
                  Paull to the Epheſians. vi. i. Pet. v. Iacob. iiii.
                  
                     ❧ It wylbe hard to kyll, ſuche an immortall knaue
                  He recoueryth ſo oft, though a ſtronge hooſte we haue
                  Call in Turkes and Saracens, that they alſo may be ſaue
                        •
                     
                  
                  Through Gods help, we may breke Satans hed, It is tru▪
                  
                  ¶ To breke Satans hed, of all wayes this is one
                  With the buckler of fayth, to reſyſt ſuggeſtion
                  And ſtrongly to belyue, that Chriſtes paſſion
                  Chriſtes wordes and myrakels, all be moſt ſurely tru▪
                  
                  
                     ❧ All Chriſtian Kyngs, do now theyr wittes bende
                  Theyr letters in print to the Turkes for to ſende
                  With many new teſtamentes, theyr blynd lyfe to am
                        •
                     n
                        •…
                     
                  
                  For fere of hell fyre, I truſt it wylbe tru.
                  ¶ When Satan the Deuyll, ſeeth ſuch a great hooſt
                  Suche a ſort of chriſtians, to dimtniſh his booſt
                  He muſt nedes be compelld, to graunt his great ſtrenght 
                        •
                     o
                        •…
                     
                  
                  When his pate is broken, God graunte this may be tru.
                  
                     ❧ Then the golden world, I truſt wyll com agayn
                  That folk may lyue eaſyly, without any great payn
                  Many egges for a peny, at London I wolde ſe fayn
                  Fleſche and fiſche better chepe, I truſt it wylbe tru.
                  ¶ All other thynges good chepe, I truſt to ſe er I dye
                  Coynes, meaſures, and weyghtes, in good vniformiti
                        •
                     
                  
                  Thorow all the world, I truſt to ſe ſchortely
                  Onles that diuerſitie doth more good, it be tru:
                  
                     ❧ Ientyll reder, farewell: Thou knoeſt part of my mynd
                  There lye in my harte, many ſuch thynges behynde
                  Whiche towards the brekyng, of Satans hed I fynde
                  That all may be mery, and wyſe in Chriſt: It is tru.
               
               ¶ Io. x. 
                  
                     〈◊◊〉
                   habeo / que non ſunt ex hoc on
                     ••
                   / 
                     •
                  las quoq oportet 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   vocem 
                     〈◊〉
                   audient, et fiet 
                     〈◊〉
                   o
                     •
                  ile / et vnus paſtoe,
               ¶ Io, xii. 
                  
                     •
                  unc 
                     〈◊…〉
                   eſt mundi huios. Nunc princeps mundi huius 
                     ••
                  icietu
                     •
                   for
                     ••
                  . Et ego 
                     〈◊◊◊…〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  etra / 
                     〈◊〉
                   trah
                     •••…
                   ad 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Hoc autem dicebat ſignificans, que 
                     〈◊◊…〉
                  .
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Printed by Cornel
                  •
               s Woltrop dwellyng at ſaynt Antonies
         
      
   