
      
         
            
            
            A TREATISE OF LIBERTIE FROM IVDAISME, OR An Acknowledgement of true Chriſtian LIBERTIE, indited and publiſhed By IOHN TRASKE: Of late ſtumbling, now happily running againe in the Race of Chriſtianitie.
            
               ISID. in MAT. 11. 29.
               Quid iugo Chriſti ſuauius? quid onere leuius? à ſcelere abſtinere, bonum velle, omnes amare, nullum odiſſe, aeterna conſequi, praeſentibus non capi, nolle inferre alteri, quod ſibi perpeti ſit moleſtum?
            
            LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby, for N. Butter, and are to be ſold at his ſhop, at the ſigne of the pyde Bull, neere S. Auſtens gate. 1620.
         
         
            
            
            TO MY HOLY AND TENDER MOTHER, THE CHVRCH OF ENGLAND, ALL INCREASE OF Peace, Proſperitie, and holy Vigilancy, vnto the glorious appearing of IESVS CHRIST.
            
            
               To whome
            
            
               ON Earth, rather then to you, (bleſſed & bleſſing Mother) ſhould I direct my Supplications, Deprecations, and my Thankes? Seeing by Gods grace and your prudent patience amidſt ſo many ſore tryals, I haue yet a breathing time left; & may for a while ſit downe, contemplate and admire: O the vnſpeakeable loue of God, in reducing me into

neſſe of my pollutions, made mee both afraid and aſhamed to point at mine owne deformities. Incumbred I was with many thoughts how to diſcouer my minds change; & how to walke for the time to come, and yet after a few daies, I could not but diſcloſe it: It was within me like a fire in my bones, I was weary with forbearing and could not ſtay, and I reſolued that it was both my duty and ſafetie to addreſſe my ſelfe to thoſe whoſe lips preſerue knowledge, and hands authoritie. If a Leaper was to ſhew himſelfe to the Prieſt, and ſuch as were full of vncured Blaines and Sores, to ſhew themſelues to the High Prieſt: why ſhould I bee afraid to preſent my ſelfe in my Scars to the Guides and Gouernours of this Church, for the glorifying of that grace which purged my Corruptions, and healed my Sores? I therfore forthwith addreſſed mee to the moſt Reuerend Father of this renowmed Church, by him imploring reconciliation to my iuſtly offended Mother: And ſince, how open hath her boſome beene to her returning ſonne, how ioyfully hath ſhee receiued, readily inſtructed, and willingly reſtored me to my ſacred Office againe: and how bleſſedly haue ſome beene reduced by my weake helpe into the the way of peace: from which they had ſwerued with me, (though not all by me) I am not able to expreſſe with Pen. Neither ſhall I ceaſe to vſe all my induſtrie to bring again all that haue ſtraied by my word or example, as by my Mothers leaue I ſhall bee authorized ſo to doe: ſeeing through Gods Mercie they are not manie, and thoſe that are, no way dangerous, being ſuch as haue little force to perſwade any, and the moſt ſuch as imbraced

thoſe things, without my aduice, and ſome contrarie to my iudgement at that time: and as I haue publiquely by preaching againe proclaimed my true change, ſo ſhall I priuately by practiſe confirme it to all with whom I ſhall conuerſe (by Gods grace) vnto my liues end.
            And who am I, that I ſhould be any more troubleſome to ſo indulgent and gracious a Mother? No verily, I ſhal neuer forget her mercie, wiſdome, bountie, and meekeneſſe towards one ſo farre gone, though I ſhould participate no more of her loue: And I am the more bold to diſcloſe my whole heart vnto her, becauſe ſhe knowes that greater, more eminent, learned, and glorious members, haue had their foule ſlips. And though I for beare to name any, leſt ſome ſhould think I doe parallel my ſelfe with them: nor had we any to name either vnder the Law or Goſpel, as examples to induce vs to be willing to acknowledge own our deformities; for the magnifying Gods Mercie, edifying his Church, and humbling our ſelues: yet we cannot but know, that there is nothing ſo couered that ſhall not be reueiled, nor hidden that ſhall not be knowne. Neither ſhall hidden things of darkeneſſe, lurke alwaies in ſecret. The Lord will come, and all mens ſinnes ſhall be layed open: ſuch as goe not before to iudgement to their ſauing, they muſt follow after to their eternall torment. Neither can I conceiue, that in this light, and loue of the Goſpel, in the middeſt of true Iſraelites, in whom is no guile; eſpecially in the knowledge of my tender Mother, any derider ſhall be ſuffered to diſport himſelfe with the nakedneſſe not of a father,

but a failing brother: or any ſcoffing Iſmaclite, to mocke at Iſaacs minoritie, or any vncharitable inconſiderate brother, to vpbraid with what hath beene formerly done; much leſſe, any Idolatrous Rabſakeh, to raile on the leaſt ſeruant of God. But that on any ſuch iuſt occaſion giuen, it ſhal be lawful for ſuch as haue an heart to the combate, to enter the liſts againe, in the ſpirit of Meekeneſſe, though onely with a ſling, and ſuch ſmooth ſtones as may be choſen in our holy riuer of life. And in the confidence of this later, with the excitement of thoſe former motiues, I am incouraged to penne what is done, concerning the Chriſtian Libertie I doe now vnderſtand. And though I am yet farre ſhort of what my moſt iudicious Mother may expect for my large time; yet well knowing, that ſhe is ſo like our Lord of glorie, that ſhe hath learned long ſince, to accept of weak works, where ſhe perceiues willing mindes, according to what her children haue, and not according to what they haue not: I now reſt, and am reſolued to reremaine, though of late ſeemingly departed for a ſeaſon, yet ſincerely returned for euer,
            
               And at this time, thy dutifull and obedient ſonne,
                  IOHN TRASKE.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
            
               Courteous READER,
            
            
               IF I may not queſtion thy Chriſtianitie, then, I hope, not ſuſpect thy charitie, in the view of this ſhort Treatiſe. And though it bee ſomewhat confuſed, yet better is a tattered habite, where the body is ſound, and the heart ſincere, then gorgeous and well ſet attire on a falſe heart, and rotten carkaſſe. And what euer this booke may ſeeme to portend, yet I aime at nothing but mine owne diſcharge of dutie, in the free acknowledgement of all my failings. I meddle not with the inſtruction of any, but the helpe of ſuch as haue beene hurt by mee; and that all may know that I haue done with Iudaiſme. Helpe mee, therefore, as I ſhould helpe thee, againſt ſecret ſlanders, and willing mistakings of ſome maleuolent ones: And tell them that with me, that Pentameter is ſo true:

                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
               
               
                  Euerie forced buſineſſe is grieuous,
               
That I ſhould neuer haue done ought by costraint: Yea, I know certainly, that Nemo inuitus bene agit, etiamſi bonum eſt, quod facit, No man vnwillingly doth any

thing well, though that which he doth he verie good. It is almoſt a whole yeare ſince God graciouſly relieued mee in ſo great a ſtraite. And though ſome pennes haue runne (as I ſince perceiue) and tongues beene exerciſed, in wounding mee cauſeleſly in other things; yet God is ſufficient to take iust reuenge, if my obedience were once fulfilled: Which vengeance, God auert, if it be his will, by giuing them hearts to raze out ſome vntruths out of their more then ſatyricall Inuectiues, and forbeare reproches for time to come. And deſiring thy patience to reade the whole ouer, paſsing by the quotations in reading, though not in trying the truth of them all: I reſt,
            
               Thy brother,
that prayeth for thee,
IOH: TRA.
               May 5. 1620.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A TREATISE OF LIBERTIE: Againſt Judaiſme.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               The Authors preparation of himſelfe to write, and helpe to ſome others, to read profitably, what followeth in this Booke.
               
                  AMongſt the manifold fruits of the holy Spirit, there is one, which is often read, freely acknowledged, much commended, yet leaſt practiſed by the moſt, that ſhould be the greateſt proficients

in Chriſts Schoole: and it is Meekeneſſe, which is expreſly required of all; whether Inſtructors, or inſtructed; in authoritie, or vnder gouernement; Paſtors, or people; men, or women; and hath beene euer of great price with God, in the time of the Law: as it is now much ſet by, and highly valued, in the Goſpels peace. As beneficiall it is, as any other grace, attended with as many pretious promiſes: as manifeſt a ſigne of the truth of Gods grace, as may be had. So that, though a Lyons boldneſſe, a Serpents wiſdome, a Doues ſimplicitie, or rather innocencie, be true badges of ſound Chriſtianitie; yet it may be ſaid, and that truly, that a Lambe-like meekeneſſe ſurmounts them all. Neither is it left to euerie mans choyce, to be meeke, or no; but the man of God is inioyned it, and to all other men it is commanded, in plain words; as to Timothie, Thou, O man of God, flie theſe things, (namely doting about queſtions, ſtrife of words, peruerſe diſputings, the loue of money,) and follow after righteouſneſſe, godlineſſe, faith, loue, patience, and meekeneſſe: 1. Tim. 6. 11. And, The ſeruant of God muſt not ſtriue, but be gentle to all men, apt to teach, patient, in meekneſſe inſtructing thoſe that oppoſe themſelues, if God, peraduenture will giue them repentance, to the acknowledging of the truth: 2. Tim. 2. 24▪ 25. And to Titus, the firſt Biſhop of that Church of the Cretians, he ſaith, Put them in mind, to be ſubiect to principalities, and authorities, to obey Magistrates, to be readie to euerie good worke, to ſpeake euill of no man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, ſhewing all meekeneſſe to all men: Tit. 3. 1, 2. So that ſuch as ſet light by this duetie, are no better then Rebells againſt

God, and what euer pretence they may haue, Rebellion is written in all their fore-heads. Beſides, Chriſt himſelfe hath pronounced them bleſſed, Math. 5. 5. They ſhall inherit the earth: when ianglers, and ſuch as are contentious, and full of ſtrife, ſhall be authors of their owne woe, and plunge themſelues into much miſerie, and be an occaſion of rooting themſelues out of their habitations, meeke ones ſhall peaceably poſſeſſe the places where God hath graciouſly planted them: ſo ſaith the Pſalmiſt; Yet a little while, and the wicked ſhall not be; thou ſhalt diligently conſider his place, and it ſhall not be. But the meeke ſhall inherite the earth, and delight themſelues in aboundance of peace, Pſal. 37. 10, 11. Neither ſhall meeke ones erre in iudgement, but they ſhall be taught Gods way, Pſal. 25. 9. Yea ſuch is the excellencie of their condition, that Gods Kingdome is their vndoubted poſſeſſion, ſeeing against them, there is no Law; Gal. 5. 23. And it is an euident note of election; Col. 3. 12. And a notable helpe, to make Gods Word a ſauing Word, to ſuch as heare it, Iam 1. 21. And; a meeke and quiet ſpirit, God highly prizeth, 1. Pet. 3. 4. Meeke ones, of all others, haue a poſſibility of being hidden in the day of the Lords wrath, Zephan. 2. 2, 3. Who then is he, or where is he, that will be ſlacke at all in labouring to be as meeke as a Lambe, in all his conuerſation? And that ſuch as are deſirous, may attain it, the bleſſed Spirit, hath left directions how ſuch may be holpen thereunto. As firſt, by the due and ſerious view, of what we our ſelues haue beene, and at left our pronenes to the ſame or like euils with which others are, or haue beene intangled, and ouercome.

So Paul, willing Titus to teach his Diſciples, to ſhew all Meekeneſſe to all men, vſeth this as a reaſon or motiue thereto: We our ſelues alſo were vnwiſe, diſobedient, deceiued, ſeruing diuers luſts, and pleaſures, liuing in malice and enuie, hatefull, and hating one another, Tit. 3. 3. As if he ſhould haue ſaid, Why ſhould we behaue vs angerly, or proceed bitterly, or diſdainfully againſt any, ſeeing none are ſo odious, but we haue beene as vile as they? They be fooliſh, and haue not wee beene vnwiſe? they rebellious, and we were diſobedient: they deceiued and intangled with errours, and we once knew not the way of peace: they ſerue luſts and pleaſures, and wee haue beene as baſe ſlaues to our owne deſires: they are now malicious, and we haue liued in malice and enuie: they deſerue contempt, and we haue been worthie of all manner of hatred. Moreouer, if we conſider, that which may yet befall our ſelues, ſeeing we ſtand not by any power or ſtrength of our owne, this will much auaile vs, to worke in vs, Meekeneſſe: Not onely to open prophane, and ſuch as are not yet called, but to failing brethren, eſpecially as haue beene ouertaken by ſome ſubtile and ſtrong temptations: that they may bee reſtored againe to their former ſtanding, and that in the Spirit of Meekeneſſe, Gal. 6. 1. If ſpirituall men did but weigh this, duely, there would not be ſo bitter inueighing againſt others, in the ſtate of lapſe, much leſſe in the caſe of recouerie; when men are knowne to acknowledge willingly all their failings; or haue in them a good forwardneſſe to confeſſe, and forſake them, as they daily perceiue them to be faults indeed. And if we ſet before our

eyes examples, it may helpe much thereto: Seeing it is left as Moſes chiefe praiſe, that he was a verie meeke man, aboue all the men that were on the face of the earth, Numb. 12. 3. And our Lord propoſeth his owne example, in this aboue all other things, where he ſaith, Learne of mee, for I am meeke, and lowly in heart; and addeth a promiſe vnto it, You ſhall finde reſt to your ſoules, Matth. 11. 29. And if theſe helpe not, pray for it earneſtly, as Zephany willeth, where he ſaith: Seek the Lord, ye meek of the earth, ſeeke righteouſneſſe, ſeeke meekneſſe. Zeph. 2. 3. So that to ſhut vp all, This Meekneſſe is an excellent ornament to all, and the proper liuery of Gods Elect, whereby they may bee diſcerned from ſuch as are filled with gall, and wormewood. By this, the penne that is truely guided, is kept from dropping downe any poyſon of bitterneſſe, to grieue any; from all proud ſcorning of failing brethen; and by it men are holpen to reade things written, with ſuch reſpect, as if they had been written with their owne pen: yea, to doe to all men as they would be done vnto, and to forbeare to doe ought to any, which they would be loath ſhould bee done to themſelues: And thus much, for ſome preparation, to that which followeth, concerning the truth of that Libertie, which true Chriſtians doe all enioy.
            
            
               
               CHAP. II.
               A ſmall taſte of true Chriſtian Libertie.
               GReat was the Liberty, thoſe Senators (in conceit) vaunted of, at the wound of that beaſt, which yet liued, though mortally wounded, by Chereas Sword: ſo that Liberty, and onely Liberty, is the Souldiers watch word. But how great! glorious! coſtly! and certaine this Libertie is! no heart can conceiue, nor tongue expreſſe, much leſſe any Pen deſcribe, the glory, and admirable excellency it doth containe. This true Chriſtian Liberty, this ſonnelike freedome, is that, which God himſelfe hath beſtowed, Chriſt Ieſus purchaſed, and the holy Spirit declared to ſuch as truly beleeue; and ſuch Libertie it is, that if the giuer bee reſpected? it muſt bee greatly eſteemed: the coſt bee valued? it muſt bee highly prized, or the commoditie thereof weighed? it cannot but bee earneſtly deſired, and zealouſly defended, againſt all, that in any wiſe would limit, ſuch boundleſſe loue.
               Wherefore, ſeeing, God the Father, hath beſtowed, Gal. 4. 4, 5, 6. God the Sonne, purchaſed it, at the price of his owne bloud: Iohn 8. 36. Act. 20. 28. 1. Pet. 1. 17, 18. God the Holy Ghoſt declared it to all, in whom he alſo vouch ſafeth to dwell, 2. Cor. 3. 17 and ſeeing I am one of them that profeſſe ſuch freedome, and haue teſtified before many witneſſes, that I doe now vnderſtand more cleerely, the myſtery thereof: I ſhall in a few words labour to expreſſe it to all that are indued, but with the leaſt beginnings of the ſame free ſpirit, Pſal. 51. 11, 12.
               
                  
That a Liberty there is, if any were ſo impudent, as to deny; yet can none bee ſo ignorant, as not to conceiue, that ſuch a thing muſt of neceſſitie be confeſſed, ſeeing it is ſo often mentioned, and a Law for it declared, to all that vnderſtand. Iames 1. 25. But all the ſtrife is what Libertie it is? and who they are, who may be truly ſaid, to enioy ſuch freedome? For anſwere to both; it is affirmed, that this Libertie is a freedome from the Law, from Sinne, and ſo from Hell, and all feare of condemnation: from ſinnes accuſation; the Lawes condemnation: and Hels anguiſh and that eternall ſeparation, from Gods comfortable preſence for euermore: We are diuorced from the fleſh, and ſo free from it, yea dead thereto, and ſo at liberty from the Law, as it is written, The Law hath dominion ouer a man, as long as hee liueth; for the woman which hath an Husband, is bound by the Law, to her Husband: ſo long as hee liueth; but if the Husband be dead, ſhee is looſed from the Law of the Husband: ſo then if while her Husband liueth, ſhee be marryed to another man, ſhee ſhall be called an Adultereſſe; but if her Husband bee dead, ſhee is then free from that Law; ſo that ſhe is no Adultereſſe, though ſhe bee marryed to another man Wherefore, my Brethren, ye are alſo become dead, to the Law, by the bodie of Christ, that ye ſhould bee marryed to another, euen to him who is rayſed from the dead, that wee ſhould bring forth fruit vnto God: Rom. 7. 1, 2, 3, 4. By this ſimilitude is our Diuorce exemplified, yea, our freedome from the Law, by the death of Chriſt; and our death in Chriſt, is moſt plaine to all that doe vnderſtand. And leſt any one ſhould yet doubt, and not

reſt fully ſatisfied, the Apoſtle a little after doth inſtance in himſelfe, and ſaith thus, I was aliue without the Law once; but when the Commandement came, ſin reuiued, and I dyed; and the Commandement which was vnto life, I found to be vnto death, Verſe 9. 10. and then hauing put a manifeſt difference betweene his fleſh and his faith: his inward and outward man hee concludes with an exclamation thus: O wretched man that I am! who ſhall deliuer me from this bodie of death? And in another place, hee ſaith, I through the Law am dead to the Law, that I might liue vnto GOD, I am crucified with Chriſt: Neuertheleſſe I liue, yet not I, but Chriſt liueth in me, Gal. 2. 19, 20. What can be more plaine then this? that being thus baptized into Chriſts death wee are free from the Law: and it hath no more ſuch authority to condemnation, ouer vs at all. By this alſo are wee dead to ſinne, Rom. 6. 1, 2. That is, as obey we cannot, ſo diſobey we doe not; and ſo hath Hell, nor Deuill, no more to doe againſt vs. If ſinne would ſtand vp to accuſe, God himſelfe hath diſcharged vs: by himſelfe wee are eſteemed iuſt: If the Law would iudge or condemne, Chriſt himſelfe hath dyed, to yeeld it the due, and is riſen againe, being ſet downe at Gods right hand to make iuterceſsion for vs. If trouble, yea the powers of Hell it ſelfe, would indeuour to ſeparate vs from the loue of God; it cannot, they can neuer preuaile, Rom. 8. So that a Libertie here is, but none to the fleſh, Gal. 5. 13. None to ſinne, 2. Pet. 2. 18 19. No cloke for malice, 1. Pet. 2. 16. But a libertie to Righteouſneſſe and Holineſſe, Luke▪
                   1. 74, 75. yea, to runne the way of Gods Commandements, Pſal. 119. 32.

As it may ſtand with faith in Ieſus Chriſt, Reu. 12. 17.
               But for that Libertie from ſinnes power is granted, and freedome from Hell defended, or at leaſt deſired, by all; and willingly acknowledged by men of ſound iudgement, to all beleeuers: therefore it is Libertie from the Law, which is here to be proued, to ſuch as are willing to know the ſame: we are ſet free from the whole Law which ſaith, Curſed is euery one which continueth not in all things, which are written in the Booke of the Law, to doe them: Gal. 3. 19. Free we are from that ſeruice, in the oldneſſe of the Letter, Rom. 7. 6. Free from that forme, which was written in ſtony Tables: and preſented to thoſe naturall Iſraelites, in Moſes hand, 2. Cor. 3. And Christ is the Lawes end, for rightouſneſſe to all that beleeue, Rom. 10. 4. Free we are from all puniſhment which the Law exacteth, for time paſt; and from all rigorous and ſtrict performance, of euery part thereof for time to come. The ſame mans nature, yea, fleſh and bloud which tranſgreſſed, and is obliged to ſuch formall obedience, and exact ſeruice, hath now ſatisfied, and borne the fury due to that tranſgreſſion, Heb. 2. 14, 15, 16. And wee by faith in him haue yeelded obedience, and all ſatisfaction: and are ſo accepted as obedient, Rom. 4. 7, 21. Our Libertie from ſinne being nothing elſe but an effect of this freedome from the Law, though that from ſinne bee firſt knowne, ere this from the Law can be perceiued, Rom. 6. 14. For where no Law is, there is no tranſgreſsion, Rom. 4. 15. And whoſoeeuer is not free from the Lawes rigour, muſt needes be ſubiect to ſinnes tyranny. Free then we are from the Law, as it is wraths Miniſter, as it can doe vs no

good, as it is weake through the fleſh, Rom. 8. 4. Neither doth it at all auaile vs to iuſtification: though for obedience it ſtill ſerueth to curbe our old man: and to quicken the new man: though the fleſh bee now become ſo contrarie to it, as it is not nor can euer bee ſubiect thereto, Rom. 8. 7. And Chriſt in vs, doth the will of God for vs, in truth; and without vs hath ſatisfied Gods wrath for vs, and alſo performed that formall obedience, which God requireth: ſo that within and without, all our perfection is nothing elſe but the perfection of Chriſt himſelfe. If then wee are free from the morall Law, in reſpect of Iuſtification, how much more from that Law of Commandements, contayned in Ordinances? Epheſ. 2. 15. called alſo the hand-writing of Ordinances, Col. 2. 14. which was againſt vs, and contrarie to vs, being a middle wall of partition: to keepe vs that are Gentiles, in the fleſh, from any fellowſhip with Iſraels Common-wealth, and from all participation, in their glorious priuiledges: Epheſ. 2. 14. The bond-woman, that Law: and her Sonne, the fleſh, is now caſt out and quite expelled by true Beleeuers: and the free-woman, the Promiſe: with her Sonne the Spirit: is onely to bee reſpected, for that the inheritance is now by promiſe. The Law as Hagar, was added after the promiſe was made. And as Abraham after the Promiſe, that he ſhould haue a Sonne, tooke Hagar, Gen. 16. and of her begat Iſmael, who was not the Seed who muſt inherit; ſo alſo long after the free Promiſe of Saluation made to Mankinde, through Chriſt alone, and that onely by Faith in him: Abrahams Seed tooke the Law, and by the

works thereof ſought to inherit, but found the Law not it, by which any inheritance could bee obtayned.
               From all this learne we, not to burden our ſelues, beyond our power, nor to hold fellowſhip with one that is mightier, and richer then our ſelues, for that the Earthen Pot and the Kettle agree not together; nor our outward man the fleſh, with the ſpirituall Law: and for vs in the point of Iuſtification, to ſeeke to bring our old man the Lawes obedience, is to bring droſſe to fire: to put a weake Infant, or a liueleſſe Carrion, to the Combate with a mightie Giant: yea, to bring the Lawes workes, to the corrupt mans practice: is to ſet a new piece in an old Garment; to put new Wine into old Bottels: neither can ſuch an earthen Pot as is our olde man, and the Kettle, the Law, bee ſmitten one againſt another, without the Pots danger: for as the euent of theſe, would bee the greater rent of the garment, ſo fondly patched; the burſting of the Bottels ſo ignorantly filled; and the daſhing of the earthen Pot in pieces: ſo all that euer indeuour, to yeeld that Law-obedience, as to ſeeke to be righteous therby, with this dead body, though a delight they may haue in the inward man: and a deſire, and indeuour ſo to doe, with the outward man: yet the good, they would, they ſhall neuer perfectly effect, and the euill they would not, that ſhall they performe, Rom. 7. This was that made Paul cry out, for our example to bee deliuered, or ſet free from ſo dead a bodie. And concludes alſo that from it hee is freed by CHRISTS owne death: God hath deliuered him from his dead bodie,

by Ieſus Chriſt, and ſo from the Law, & from ſin, and conſequently from Hell; and this is that Liberty of which we are poſſeſſors; & of this, & onely this it may be ſaid, If the Sonne hath made you free, you ſhall bee free indeed. If then the fleſh be crucified, the Law is ſatisfied: If the fleſh haue obeyed, the Law is fulfilled: And this is done, euen in our owne whole nature, and that as it is ſaid by Ieſus Chriſt wee liue, now no more the life of the fleſh: For that all ſuch, as ſo liue, are all their life time ſubiect to bondage, and in feare of death and damnation. And yet that this Libertie, may the better appeare, we may conſider in the next place, the perſons ſet free.
               And they are all ſuch, as are borne, not of bloud, nor of the will of the fleſh: nor yet of the will of man, but of GOD: Iohn 1. 12. For that which is borne of the fleſh, is fleſh: Iohn 3. 6. And fleſh and bloud, can neuer enter the Kingdome of GOD, neither may corruption, inherit incorruption, 1. Cor. 15. 50. And wee haue learned, that all fleſh is as graſſe, and all the glorie of man, as the flower of graſſe; the graſſe must wither, and the flower fall away, but the Word of the Lord indureth for euer, Iſa. 40. 1. Pet. 1. 24, 25. And wee are borne againe, not of corruptible ſeed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of GOD which liueth, and abideth for euer. So that the free men, and ſuch as are ſet at Libertie, are not ſuch as are borne of men, but thoſe that are borne of God; they onely know this Libertie, and are truely acquainted with the priuiledges thereof; they are ſuch, as doe now finde in them, the power of the Spirit of Life: they doe mind heauenly, and ſpirituall things: are quickened, in their

dead bodies. Col. 2. 13. in part to yeeld true, and ſound obedience, to the ſpirituall Law: They haue the Spirit of the Sonne inabling them with boldneſſe, to call God Father; and the ſame Spirit witneſſeth to their ſpirits, that they are the children of GOD; Rom. 8. 15, 16. They can deny themſelues, groaning in themſelues to be ſet free in body, as they are in ſpirit, from the bondage of corruption, and yet can wait patiently, for that full Redemption: they haue the ſpirit of Prayer, and Prayſe, and are conformable, in a great meaſure, to Chriſt himſelfe. Theſe are called to Liberty, and entred into the glorious Liberty, of the ſonnes of GOD, Rom. 8. 21. Neither are ſuch free men, Lawleſſe, or at all fruitleſſe: for as ſinne, that is, ſerue ſinne, they can neuer, as they haue formerly done: Rom. 6. 1. Iohn 3. 9. So are they exerciſed in the ſpirits fruites, and in them they abound: Loue, Ioy, Peace, Long-ſuffering, Gentleneſſe, Goodnes, Faith, Meekneſſe, Temperance, they can now declare. Gal. 5. 22, 23. Theſe enuy not, vaunt not themſelues, are not puffed vp, behaue not themſelues vnſeemly; ſeeke not their owne; are not eaſily prouoked; thinke no euill; reioyce not ininiquitie, but reioyce in the Truth; beare all things, beleeue all things, hope all things, and indure all things. And if this be lawleſſeneſſe, ſuch lawleſſe perſons are wee become: yet are we ſure, that ſuch are not without Law to God, but in the Law to Chriſt: It is the royall and perfect Law of Libertie, which theſe haue attayned, and in it they walke. That is their mirror, and continuall glaſſe, in which they behold themſelues, day by day. Moſes glory is now no glory to them: Nor Moſes face

doe they any longer looke after: It is the glorie of Chriſt Ieſus which they admire, and on his moſt glorious face, they are bold to gaze, and thus are they changed, from glorie to glorie, 2. Cor. 3. 18. haue receiued grace, for grace. Iohn 1. 16. And are indeede procceded, from faith to faith: Rom. 1. 17. They haue the glory of Chriſt, for the glory of Moſes; the grace of the Truth, for the grace of the type: And are come from faith of conditionall Promiſes, to faith of free Promiſes: They are ſo farre from being obliged, to any Iudaicall Ceremonies, or Moſaicall Rites, that they are free from the burthen of the Ceremoniall as vtterly abrogated, and the Curſe of the Morall Law, for which Chriſt hath ſatisfied.
               Theſe then are thoſe free men, true inhabitants of our new Hieruſalem, Gal. 4. hauing that white Stone, with the new name, Reuel. 2. haue eaten of the tree of life, in the middest of Gods Paradiſe, verſ. 7. Haue on the wedding garment. Mat. 22. Liue by faith. Gal. 3. 11. Walke by faith. 2. Cor. 5. 7. Worke by faith, Iam. 2. 18. Are clothed with that fine white Linnen. Reuel. 19. Theſe doe declare the truth of their faith, by the power of their loue. Gal. 5. 6. Performe no workes of the Moſaicall Law, nor can performe them, but in the workes of faith theſe doe abound, Rom. 3. 28. So that albeit by the fleſh in forme, theſe doe no worke perfectly, yet by Loue in Truth they are fruitfull, and rich in good workes, they haue willing mindes, and their workes are accepted according to the truth of their affections which God onely can ſee: 2. Cor. 8. 12. Abrahams example makes it manifeſt: who being commanded to ſacrifice a ſonne, ſacrificed a

Ramme; and the Ramme was accepted, where a ſonne was exacted: Abraham offered his ſonne Iſaac but how? not by ſight, that was a Ramme; but by faith, that was a Sonne: Heb. 11. 17. And Iames expreſly names this as Abrahams worke, though by ſight, and ſence he did no ſuch worke at all. Iam. 2. 21 This is that great Myſtery of Godlineſſe, and herein lyes the ſound comfort of Chriſtians, that are ſo free from the worldly Rudiments and intollerable bondage of ſhaddowes and Ceremonies, as that for Iuſtification the exact fulfilling of the Morall Law is not now required at their hands: but if they conſent to the goodneſſe thereof, are willing to doe it, and reioyce therein; though the good which they would they can neuer perfectly effect, nor exactly performe, but the euill they would not is euer mixed ther with, yet is this will, this free conſent, this laſting and increaſing delight, cleared through Ieſus Chriſt, as if they had perfectly done what God requireth, Rom. 7. 2. Cor. 8. 12. And by this it is cleared that our Libertie is no carnall, but a ſpirituall: no ſeruile but a ſonlike, no ſhort or momentanie, but a laſting and eternall Libertie we doe defend. And as men do highly eſteeme ſmall things if they bee but fauours from great ones, and doe value things at the rate they coſt, or reioyce in them for the goodneſſe they haue or the benefits they bring: If Princes fauours bee ſo much eſteemed, and Souldiers skarres ſo charily kept, Diamonds of ſo great value, and Orientall Pearles, ſo much ſet by: At what rate ſhould this Libertie be valued? how dearely prized? how much deſired? and how valiantly defended, by all that

heare of the excellencie thereof, and are entred within the limits of the ſame? Let Libertines then, bee as preſumptuous, and lawleſſe, as they liſt: and Iewes as enuious, as they may: and falſe Chriſtians as careleſſe as they are, or as ſuperſtitious, as ſome are knowne: yet wee all, ſhould prize this Libertie, at farre more then our liues worth, much more then Wife, Lands, Friends, or whatſoeuer elſe might bee moſt deare vnto vs. And in this Libertie, let vs liue and dye, and for it, let vs conſtantly ſtand: and not be ſo fooliſh as to begin in the Spirit, and ſeeke perfection by the fleſh: to ſubiect our ſelues, to Iewiſh Fables, to ſtretch out our neckes to receiue that heauy yoke, to turne againe to that Priſon wherein the Iewes were ſhut vp: to thoſe weake and beggerly elements, and be bond-ſlaues to them, to goe againe to the Schoolemaſter, as if wee had not yet learned Chriſt. To leaue the contemplation of the preſent body for the emptie ſhaddowes: like mad men, to flie from the day light, to the twilight: Knowing now, that thoſe ſhaddowes were for the preſent, viua, but neuer (as the body) viuificantia; they were once quicke, but not quickening: But ſince that, they had a time, wherein they were moribunda, about to dye, after once Iohn Baptist appeared in his Miniſterie, Luke 16. 16. a time, in which they were mortua, when once the veile of the Temple was rent: at the death of our Lord Ieſus; Mat. 27. And albeit, they had alſo a time of ſolemne Buriall, wherein their Funerall Obſequies were diſpatched: as namely, while the Apoſtles tollerated Circumciſion, as appeareth by the circumciſing of Timothy, Ast. 16. 3. and the

vindicating of Libertie, from Circumciſion by refuſing to haue Titus circumciſed, Gal. 2. Yet now they are, long ſince become mortifera, deadly to all that turne backe againe vnto them, ſeeing they doe queſtion thereby the validitie of faith in Ieſus; and doe become debtors to the whole Law, and Chriſt is made of none effect, vnto them, they are fallen from grace. Gal. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. So that by this Libertie, and onely by this, haue we all the comfort we doe enioy. And whoſoeuer dare, either oppoſe it, or ſcorne it, or at all limit it in any fleſhly manner, as by forbearing of meates, or by legall obſeruation of dayes: they are they, who at leaſt ignorantly, doe ſcorne Gods loue, ſet light by Chriſts Merit, and doe ſet themſelues againſt the Truth of Gods grace, for which and in which, wee doe with comfort ſtand. And yet not withſtanding, the Law Morall ſtands firme, not aboliſhed, but eſtabliſhed by this doctrine, and of it we ſay, that hee that obſerueth the whole Law and faileth in one point, is guilty of all, lam. 2. 10. And except our righteouſneſſe doe exceed that of the Scribes and Phariſies, there is no entrance for vs into the Kingdome of God, Mat. 5. 20. But this exceeding righteouſneſſe, is not ours, but Chriſts; as is before ſhewed, for that allours, is as filthy rags, Iſay 64. 5. And who can bring a cleane thing out of filthineſſe? Iob 14. 4. And we haue learned, with holy Paul, to esteeme all other righteouſneſſe, but that of faith, as dung and loſſe, Phil. 3. This is the Righteouſneſſe of God by Faith vnto all, and vpon all that doe beleeue, Rom. 3. & 9. we ſeeke no promiſe, by the old, but by the new Couenant: not by the Law, but by Faith onely: the

Law Morall, is of force, but not fulfilled by the fleſh, but by Faith onely. So that by Chriſt wee doe fulfill both the Forme, and the Truth: the Letter, and Spirit: the olde and new Couenant. By Faith, wee are formally righteous, according to the Lawes exact rule: by Loue truly righteous, according to the Morall Truth of the ſame Law. So that by this the Morall Law is confeſſed to be ſtill holy, iuſt, and good, if lawfully vſed, 1. Tim. 1. 8, 9. It ſerues ſtill to conuince all men, of ſinne, and to bring them to Chriſt, for perfect obedience, and full ſatisfaction; yea, ſo farre are wee from granting the Laws aboliſhing, in part, or in whole; that we ſtill affirme God will bee euer iuſt, and tranſgreſſors ſhall neuer eſcape his terrible and powerfull hand. Neither ſhall this Law loſe its force in all ſorts of men, yea, in the godly themſelues, to weaken the old-man and to humble them daily, vntill it may bee triumphantly ſaid, O death! where is thy ſting? O Hell! where is thy victorie? The ſting of death is ſinne, and the ſtrength of ſinne is the Law: But thankes bee vnto God who hath giuen vs the Victory through our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, 1. Cor. 15 55, 56, 57. And this is that, by which all Enmitie is ſlaine, and Peace made: yea, all that beleeue, whether Iewes, or Greekes; Male or Female; bond or free; haue free acceſſe by one Spirit, to worſhip the Father, through the Sonnes mediation, and this Liberty is part of that Glorie, which the very Angels themſelues deſire to behold, 1. Pet. 1. 22.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               Anſweres to ſome Obiections, which ſeeme to be against this Libertie.
               HAuing now expounded, and teſtified, there are ſome Queſtions to bee examined, that doe concerne this Liberty; that all lets being remooued, the imbracing thereof, may be the more boldly perſwaded, to all that ſhall acknowledge ſo glorious a condition, and the contrarie appeare as it is an intollerable bondage, too heauie for any to vndergoe.
               
                  Obiect. And firſt, ſome ſay: If it bee ſo, that the Law Morall is ſtill of force, why then haue wee left off the Seuenth Day Sabbath, which that Law expreſly inioynes, our Lord obſerued, the Apoſtles were taught to keepe, and did obſerue after Chriſts death and Reſurrection?
               
                  Reſol. The anſwere is: That a Sabbath wee doe keepe, and a Seuenth Day wee doe ſtill obſerue vnto the Lord: yet not that Sabbath, not that Seuenth Day; ſo wee haue learned to obſerue no dayes, nor moneths, nor times, nor yeeres, as that Law inioyned, Gal. 4. 10. But wee haue learned to eſteeme all dayes alike, in reſpect of that Law, that olde Letters ſeruice, Rom. 14. 5. wee are not now ſo to ſerue God, Rom. 7. 6. A new ſpirituall ſeruice wee are to yeeld. And that a Sabbath Day, we doe ſtill acknowledge, it is by vertue of the Commandement it ſelfe, as farre as it is Morall; which ſaith, Remember that thou keepe holy the Sabbath Day, or remember the Sabbath Day to ſanctifie it, as the Lord thy God hath

commanded thee. Exod. 20. 8. Deut. 5. 12. But all the ſtrife is, what day it muſt be kept? ſeeing the ſeuenth from the creation was bleſſed to that end; and made holy for that purpoſe. And what God hath bleſſed, is bleſſed for euer, what he hath made holy, no man may pollute: He is not as man, that hee ſhould repeat; he hath ſpoken, and it cannot be reuerſed. This is granted, to be vndoubtedly true: but withall the end muſt be conſidered, why that day was inſtituted, vpon the ground of creation, to be alſo obſerued in that manner: And for this let vs heare the doctrine of the Lord of the Sabbath, where hee ſaith, That the Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath. Mat. 2. Matt. 12. If then man were not made for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath for man, God may alſo diſpoſe and change it for mans good, for whom it was made as well in the day it ſelfe, as the manner of keeping it.
               Neither may it be ſaid that the day remaineth any longer bleſſed and holy, then man for whom it was made, and whom it ſerueth, can receiue holineſſe and happineſſe thereby. Seeing man is not ſubiect to it, but it is ſubiect to man, by vertue of Chriſts Lordſhip, which as the Sonne of man he hath of the Sabbath. Mark. 2. 27, 28. And as it partly appeareth by ſome bodily labours which Chriſt himſelfe commanded ſome to doe in caſe of neceſſitie: as to take vp their beds, and goe to their houſes, which ſome held vtterly vnlawfull, at that time; and by that the Prieſts might without ſcandall, kill, and dreſſe, and offer the ſacrifices on that day. Mat: 12. And Children were alſo circumciſed, on that very

day. Iohn 5. 8. 9. Iohn 7. 22, 23. Now then as with the deſtruction of Iſraels common-wealth, the holy temple, which ſerued their vſe was deſtroyed, and the holineſſe vaniſhed: and Canaans bleſſedneſſe is alſo gone: as it ſtood diſtinguiſhed from other lands: And all mans holineſſe, and happineſſe naturall is now vaniſhed: the Iewes prerogatiue, aboue all other nations aboliſhed: So alſo the holineſſe, and bleſſedneſſe of that ſeuenth day, is vaniſhed, and quite done away, with the death and deſtruction of man himſelfe. Indeed had man to this day, retained, and continued in his firſt eſtate, that day had retained its firſt bleſſedneſſe, and continued its holineſſe ſtill: but as little comfort as man hath left in himſelfe at this day, of any holineſſe or bliſſe, by vertue of creation, ſo little benefit ſhall man find in that daies obſeruation, on that ground, and in that manner as it was inioyned. And in ſteed of bleſſedneſſe, and holineſſe, which he may for a while fondly expect, by obſeruing that day: he will ſoone find the great arerages of curſes, which he runs daily into, by that laws tranſgreſſion. So that if God at this day, did require that dayes obſeruation, in that manner no fleſh could ſtand with any comfort before his maieſtie. As for their Argument, à principio, from the beginning. Man himſelfe hath beene alſo from the beginning, yea mans creation is more ancient then that daies inſtitution: yet as that proues not mans bleſſedneſſe, now, by that his creation is ſo ancient, vnleſſe he ſeek it another way: ſo is that no ſound reaſon, to proue that day to bee now obſerued by man: ſeeing wee haue many probabilities, that it was neuer obſerued

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
reſurrection, Mat. 13. 34. Ioh. 16. 25. And it might parabolically denote, that they ſhould pray, that they might not be vtterly extirpate, and rooted out, as they muſt be, if ſurprized in the Winter, when they cannot flie farre; or on the Sabbath day when they were ſecure, and not willing to eſcape or take filght at all. For that if they be ſet vpon, when they were either vnwilling, or vnable to eſcape, they muſt then periſh, and be vtterly deſtroyed for euermore. The ſum then of that Prayer is, that God would lay no more vpon them then they were able to beare, but giue them an iſſue with the triall, Math. 6. 13. 1. Cor. 10. 13. As for the Apoſtles obſeruing that day, as the manner was, and according to that preſent cuſtome: It was that they might become all things to all men: that if it were poſſible they might win ſome, 1. Cor. 9. And for this cauſe was Paul a Philoſopher at Athens, a Iew at Hieruſalem, a Gentile at Antioch, he made vſe of all places, tooke aduantage of all aſſemblies, and neglected no fit times to publiſh the Goſpel, that, if it were poſſible, ſome might bee ſaued. And if of conſcience hee kept it, why find we not one word, in all his ſo large, fluent, and excellent Epiſtles, ſauouring that way? nor in that holy Hiſtorie of the Apoſtles acts, but many denoting that Sabbaths aboliſhing, and the practiſe of meeting on our Sabbatiſme or Lords day. And if that day were granted, & might by ſome few in our Church be obſerued, as it was inioyned, what an intollerable yoake, and heauie burthen were this for old folkes, and young children? How many queſtions would it breed about kindling fires? dreſſing

meate, and many other ſuch things? How ſhould ſome Nations bee vtterly excluded; who can neuer keepe it ſo by reaſon of the temper of their climate? And by this any face of a Church ſhall be vtterly denied theſe many hundred yeeres, the iudgements of our owne Martyrs queſtioned, and our owne preſent reformed, and glorious Churches quite excluded. Let one ſuch abſurditie be but granted, and a thouſand follow. But it is further affirmed by vs:
               That the reaſon or ground, the very Baſis or foundation of the Sabbaths obſeruation, is now changed, therefore the day is alſo changed. The reaſon of that Seuenth dayes reſt, was Gods owne reſt, from the worke of Creation, Exod. 20 9. 10. And the Apoſtle to the Hebrewes, vrgeth expreſly another certaine day of hearing: and preſſing the abſolute neceſſitie of mutuall exhortations, for the holding faſt of our confidence, Heb. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9. in the proſecuting of that argument, to the concluſion thereof, in the tenth Chapter where hee vehemently enforceth, the cleauing cloſe to holy aſſemblies, vpon the hazard of wilfull ſinning, and vtter departure from the faith, out of which there is no recouery, and for whom no Sacrifice is left, Heb. 10. 23, 24, 25, 26. By the way, in the fourth Chapter hee ſpeaketh of the vniuerſall Day of grace, by ſaying, To day, and on this day, telleth vs of a particular Day, of hearing that quicke and powerfull Word of God: ſo that as on that Day of the Law, there was a Day of hearing, that other Seuenth Day, Heb. 4. 4, 5. ſo on the Day of the Goſpell another Day, yet a certaine knowne Day, and one of the ſeuen ſtill remayneth

for hearing. The wordes are plaine, that hauing ſpoken of the reſt, into which by Faith we enter, Verſe 3. hee confirmeth this reſt, by a place out of the Pſalmes, As I haue ſworne in my wrath, if they ſhall enter into my reſt. The day on which this reſt was proclaimed, was inſtituted long before; for the works from which God reſted, and for which he ordayned that Day of reſt, were finiſhed from the foundations of the world. This is in the next Verſe confirmed by another Scripture proofe thus: For hee ſpake in a certaine place, of the Seuenth Day, on this wiſe: And God did reſt the Seuenth Day from all his worke, Gen. 2. 1, 2. And in this place, ſaith he againe, If they ſhall enter into my rest. Whereupon the Apoſtle inferreth, Seeing therefore it remayneth, that ſome must enter therein, and they to whom it was firſt preached, entred not in becauſe of vnbeliefe: Againe, hee limiteth a certaine Day, ſaying in DAVID, To day, after ſo long time, as it is ſaid, To day if you will heare his voyce, harden not your hearts. And by the way mentioning alſo Canaans reſt, which yet was not this reſt, hee vpon all this concludeth for a Sabbath daies obſeruation thus; There remaineth therefore a keeping of a Sabbath to the people of God, Heb. 4. 9. As if hee ſhould haue ſaid, in other words thus: Seeing it remayneth, that a reſt is ſtill for Gods people to enter, and that the olde Sabbaths reſt was not it, nor yet Canaans Land: but that at this day, the ſame reſt typed by both is offered to beleeuers: there is therefore alſo left a Sabbath Day to Gods people, that ſo this reſt may be preached vnto them, as it was to the Iewes in Moſes, and Dauids times. And this will bee cleare, if the proprietie of thoſe words bee but duly

weighed: Relinquitur itaque Sabbatiſmus: There remaineth therefore (not 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) a keeping of a Sabbath, (as in the margine of our laſt Tranſlation it is truly rendred) to the people of God. Not a reſt onely, but a Sabbatiſme alſo to heare of that reſt, haue Gods people left them at this day. The reaſon followeth that it cannot be meant of the ſeuenth before mentioned, Verſe 4. 5. where mention is made of Gods peculiar reſt; but of another day noted by another kinde of reſt, thus; For hee that is entred, (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) into his rest, hath ceaſed from his owne Workes, as God did (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) from his. So that the Apoſtles reaſon, Verſe 10. ſtands on theſe wordes. As God reſted from the workes of Creation, and inſtituted a Sabbath for his owne people, at that time, on the very day of his reſt: ſo alſo Chriſt hauing reſted from his owne workes, hath ordained a keeping of a Sabbath, on the day of his reſt for all Gods people. Chriſt Ieſus who paſſed into the Heauens had a day, wherein hee gaue ouer his workes, as God a day whereon hee ceaſed from his: If this day of Chriſts reſt, differ from that of Gods, why ſhould we not keep a different Sabbath? Chriſts peculiar Day of reſt from his owne proper workes, notes a peculiar Sabbath Day: The daies differing, the Sabbath may not be the ſame: ſo that two ſeuerall Sabbath Daies haue beene inſtituted by GOD and Chriſt: one now aboliſhed with the olde Couenant, the olde Letter, the olde Man: the other eſtabliſhed by the new Couenant, for the new ſeruice to the new Man: ſo that old things are paſſed away, and all things are become new, 2. Cor. 5. Two ſeuerall

Sabbath daies, daies of meeting, certaine knowne daies, offering to the Iewes then: and to vs now, one & the ſame reſt, the reſt of Faith, the true & vndoubted entrance into that euerlaſting reſt, which we ſhall enioy in Gods preſence for euer-more. So that to ſhut vp all of this place, I doe frame this argument. The firſt Sabbath is ended, and a new Sabbath ordained by Chriſt: But no new Sabbath can bee vnderſtood to bee ordained by Chriſt beſides his glorious Reſurrection Day: Therefore the olde Sabbath is now ended, and the Lords Reſurrection Day ſucceeded in place thereof. And the very Day of Chriſts reſt was that Reſurrection Day; then hee entred into his Glorie, Luke 24. 7. 26. that was the day of his exaltation: Epheſ. 1. 20. Then became he the head ſtone of the corner, Pſal. 118. 22. The head of the Church, Epheſ 1. 22. and 5. 23. Gaue gifts to men, Epheſ. 4. 8. as on a chiefe Feſtiuall Day, Nehem. 8. 12. Esth. 9. 22. prooued his Reſurrection, Luke 24. 39. preached his aſcenſion, Iohn 20. 17. Gaue the Holy Ghoſt, Iohn 20. 22▪ and authoritie to the Apostles, to binde and to looſe, to remit and retaine ſinnes: Verſe 23. Opened their vnderstandings, to vnderstand the holy Scriptures, Luke 24. 45. Powred out more abundantly the gifts of the Holy Ghoſt, Act. 2. 1, 2▪ 3, 4. Gaue Peter power to conuert ſo many thouſands, Verſe 37. 41. All were on that Day baptized, Verſe 41. The Church eſtabliſhed and manifeſtly diſtinguiſhed, Ver. 44. The Diſciples met on this day at breaking of Bread, Act. 20. 7. This Daies Feſtiuitie was inſtituted in the Churches of Corinth and Galatia, as appeares by the Almes appropriate thereto, 1. Cor. 16. 1, 2.

The Reuelation opened to Iohn in Patmos, Reuel. 1. 10. It was knowne to the ſeuen Churches of Aſia by its owne name, as a peculiar Day. Thus to the Law all daies are now alike: yet to the Lord a Day, yea, a Sabbath Day, one of the ſeuen is to bee obſerued: alike to the Law, for that to the Law we are all dead, and a dead man keepes all daies alike: yet wee who are raiſed againe from the dead, Epheſ. 5. 14. wee that liue no more the life of the fleſh, but by the power of the Spirit, not according to the fleſh, but to the Spirit; doe ſet apart weekly one day of ſeuen for the Lords Seruice: which very day, as is prooued, Paul writing to the Hebrewes, (according to his wont, endeuouring to ſpeake to their vnderſtanding) calleth a Sabbatiſme, Heb. 4. 9. And to the Gentiles, a day to the Lord, Rom. 14. 5, 6. And Iohn, expreſly the Lords Day, Reuel. 1. 10. This is then the Day which the Lord hath made: and if any be contentious for that other day with the Iewes, or deny any Sabbath Day, and ſo would leaue it as a bare Ordinance of man, with the Libertines; or haue both daies obſerued with the Ebionites: wee anſwere them all, Wee haue no ſuch custome, nor the Churches of God, 1. Cor. 11. 16.
               
                  Obiect. As for that Law of difference of things for food, Leuit. 11. Deut. 14. if any ſay ſuch a Law hath beene euer, and preciſely obſerued by Iſraels Common-wealth, while that Iewiſh Politie ſtood, and that all ſorts of tranſgreſſors are terribly threatned, and for it the Iſraelites were (chiefly) reiected.
               
                  Anſ. The anſwere is: It is true that a difference was put euen in Paradiſe; between things for food: and after mans expulſion therefrom, a difference held betweene

things for Sacrifice: and ſay for food: yet was that difference taken away, when Noah had free libertie to eate of euery moouing, liuing thing; as of the greene herbe before he had eaten, Gen. 9. 3. And albeit, after that againe, another limitation was made to one peculiar people, when God began to diſtinguiſh betweene the Nations, and choſe to himſelfe one peculiar Nation, to be his owne people, Leuit. 20. 24, 25. yet was that difference of wholeſome Creatures no longer continued, then all Mankind remained ſeuered by that partition wall, Epheſ. 2. 14. Acts 10. 28. But when once the fulneſſe of time was come, and by the bloud of Ieſus all things were reconciled, to God, Col. 1. 20. which were before in bondage, and ſeuered for mans tranſgreſſion, Rom. 8 20. 21. then God alſo declared to Peter by a Viſion, that ſuch obſeruations put no longer difference betweene men and men. But as hee himſelfe had mixed all ſorts of Creatures in one Sheet, and none of them might any more bee termed vncleane: ſeeing out of Heauen they came, and into Heauen were againe receiued, ſo Peter by that learned, to eſteeme no man from thenceforth vncleane, for any want of legall clenſing, or by reaſon of the practice of that Lawes tranſgreſſion, Act. 10. 11, 16, 28. And hath now taken out this Leſſon, That it is Faith in Christ Ieſus, that is, required of euery man, for his acceptance with God, Heb. 11. 6. For ſo Peter after confeſſeth, in the face of a Councell, that God put no difference betweene himſelfe and the Gentiles, after their hearts were purified by faith, Act. 15. 9. And by this it may appeare, that this Law ceaſed, and had its period, by that Cornelius
                  
a Gentile, and not obſeruing the Law, but onely exerciſed in thoſe powerfull Duties of Faſting, Prayer, and Almes-deeds; was by Faith accepted, as well as Peter, who till that time not onely beleeued as now Cornelius did, but alſo was able with boldneſſe to proteſt before God, that no common or vncleane thing had euer entred into his mouth: ſo the Churches of Iudea, were all zealous of the Law, Act. 21. The Churches of the Gentiles, obſerued no ſuch things, Gal. 2. And theſe accepted, and as famous Churches as any of thoſe: and Paul ſpeaking expreſly of daies, and meates legall, concludes thus, I know and am perſwaded by the Lord Ieſus, that there is nothing common or vncleane of it ſelfe, Rom. 14. 14. That is, if mens hearts bee purified by Faith, Titus 1. 15, 16. Then all things are pure to them. That is, all ſuch things as that Law made vncleane for food: Thoſe things which ſome through weakeneſſe (giuing heed to Iewiſh Fables) eſteemed vncleane. As for that threat to the Gentiles, which ſeemes ſo terrible, to ſuch as vnderſtand it not aright, it is nothing elſe but a powerfull application of the Prophets ſpeech, to the preſent hypocriticall Iewes, who ſtood ſo much on their Prerogatiues and Priuiledges, and their ſegregation from other Nations, and yet by their ſecret abominable practiſes, did breake downe that partition wall with which for the preſent, they were ſeuered from others, by doing the ſame things, or as vile, which they ſo much abhorred in the Gentiles practiſe. To them the Prophet ſaith in effect, that when the Gentiles Church ſhall be come in, and all promiſes accompliſhed, euen to that nation, and

people of the Iewes, that then ſhall follow a day of vengeance: wherein God ſhall come with fire, and ſword, in terrible indignation, againſt all that haue abuſed his long ſuffering and patience, whether Iews or Gentiles; and at that day thoſe preſent hypocrites to whom he then ſpake, ſhall ſhare in torments with the whole world of damned men, Iſa. 66. 12, 13, 16, 17. Neither is it any prophecie at all of any caters of Swines fleſh, at this day, but at that time; for ſo ſpeaketh the Text in the preſent tenſe Sanctifican
                     
                        ••
                     s, or Qui ſanctificant, They that doe ſanctifie themſelues: and not in the future tenſe, they that ſhall.
               And if any ſay, we are commanded to touch no vncleane thing at this day: Let the occaſion of that precept be but duely conſidered, and it is cleare that there is onely meant the pollutions of Idols, and the vncleaneneſſe of vnbeliefe, 2. Cor. 6. 17. Tit. 1. 15, 16. And whereas ſome may vrge the words following, where the filthineſſe of fleſh and ſpirit is mentioned, 2. Cor. 7. 1. Let them withall conſider the reaſon of ſuch cleanſing: Namely, the ſpirituall perfecting of holineſſe in the feare of the Lord; and by that this will appeare to be no legall vncleanneſſe, eſpecially of things for food: for then a legall cleanſing ſhould be inioyned, but ſuch as reade that chapter thorowout, ſhall find it to be the filthineſſe of the whole old man; from which we are to be purged by true repentance, as appeareth plainely in the ſame place: for as our perfection is wrought by degrees, and not all at once, ſo are we purged and cleanſed by degrees, and not all at once, as the fleſh may be by any legall cleanſing: ſo that ſuch as haue learned to

put a difference betweene the old, and new man, they alſo know the diuerſitie of feeding them: the outward man, by the mouth, Math. 15. the inward man, by the eare, Iſai, 55. 2, 3, 4. And ſuch doe as well know, that whatſoeuer goeth in at the mouth for food, defileth not the man, Mar. 7. For that it commeth forth from the heart, which defileth a man. And leſt any ſhould ſay, that the heart luſting after vnlawfull things, the man is defiled, though they be neuer eaten, or touched: Let it be granted, and as long as the Law was of force, it muſt needs be ſo; but now all things ſold, or vſed for food, are become lawfull, as the Apoſtle witneſſeth, where hauing ſpoken expreſly of eating, and of things offered to Idols, hee alſo immediately concludes, that all things, and ſo euen thoſe things were lawfull for him, and aduiſeth the Corinthians, and vs in them▪ not to make ſcruple to buy, whatſoeuer was ſold in the Shambles, and to eat whatſoeuer thing was ſet before them, at an vnbeleeuers Table; without aſking any queſtion for conſcience ſake, 1. Cor. 10. So that all things being now lawfull, the heart cannot luſt after an vnlawfull meat: And the heart muſt be eſtabliſhed with grace, and not with meats, Heb. 13. And let it bee granted, that for this principally the Iewes were caſt off, and ſcattered amongſt other people, was it not iuſt with God to caſt them off who brake downe the wall of partition, by which God had ſeuered them for that preſent time, if they would pull vp the hedge themſelues, with which they were inuironed, and were plagued for it? what

is that to vs, that were neuer, nor are not now paled in at all in that manner? Leuit. 20. 24, 25. nor limited by any ſuch fleſhly bounds?
               Let vs not then admit any ſuch impoſſible burthen, which though wee of this Nation might bee able to beare, yet farre be it, that ſuch neighbour-Countries ſhould be excluded, who abound not in ſuch plentie as we doe, nor can poſſibly obſerue it, at any time. And by this Doctrine, we ſhall call in queſtion all Churches theſe many hundred yeares, all Hiſtories will proue maimed, and many falſe, yea the Apoſtle Paul, cannot eſcape our cenſure, nor his Epiſtles be eſteemed ſound: The Hiſtorie of the Apoſtles acts, altogether defectiue, ſeeing it mentioneth ſo many famous Churches, and not a word of any ſtir or tumult for ſuch a legall reformation, nor any mention of ſuch Iewiſh cleanſing. And it is no wonder, that the Arch-enemie of our ſoules hath layed about him to haue this Doctrine broached, 1. Tim. 4. 3. and had ſomewhat preuailed; ſeeing it is the onely readie way to ſet Gods people at oddes and continuall iarres, to comber them with daily and needleſſe ſcruples wherein he delighteth. But wee haue learned better things, bleſſed be our great and good God: and we are able to conclude, that, If that Law of vncleane meates be ſtill of force: then ſome man, or ſome thing were now to be held vncleane by that Law: But no man, Act. 10. 28: nor any thing, Rom. 14. 14. is now to be held vncleane by that Law. Therefore that Law of vncleane meats is not now of force: And we ſay further, that Such

as are buried and riſen with Chriſt, are no longer ſubiect to the hand-writing of ordinances, Col. 2. 14. But all beleeuers are buried and riſen againe with Chriſt. Therefore not ſubiect to the hand-writing of ordinances, of which, difference of meats and days is a part, Col. 2. 16. Or, ſuch as are free from the hand-writing of ordinances, may not be cenſured for eating things forbidden by that Law, Col. 2. 14, 15, 16. But all that truely beleeue, are free from that hand-writing. Therefore they are not to be cenſured for eating things forbidden by Moſes law. And as for choice, we know that if of neceſſitie we muſt at firſt truſt tradition, bee guided by our parents and elders, to know what bookes to make choyce of, who be our owne parents and Princes? and which is the beſt tranſlation, and that it is neareſt to the originall languages? whether we be baptized or no? Then may we be alſo directed by them in the choyce of our food, till we our ſelues are able to diſcerne what is moſt agreeable, yeeldeth beſt nouriſhment, and is moſt expedient for our own bodies. Our Lord Chriſt hath ſo ſaid euen of euill parents, that they know to giue their children good things, Matth. 7. Luk. 11. And holy Paul hath taught vs to receiue meat of vnbeleeuers; and we know, that nothing which men vſually eat, is to be refuſed for conſcience ſake. So that Infidels be not hardened, nor ſuch as are truely weake and not obſtinate, offended thereby. If then our hearts be cleane, all is cleane: If that be impure, there is nothing cleane, nor will any legall puritie bee ought auaileable. Let vs all then, bee ſure to

cleanſe the inſide first, let that be truely purified, and then are we ſafe, and ſhall ſo remaine. If our hearts accuſe vs not, we ſhall haue increaſed boldneſſe before God: and if he be for vs, who can hurt vs? But if our hearts accuſe vs, God is greater then our hearts, and knoweth all things: and Bleſſed is the man that condemneth not himſelfe in that which he alloweth, Rom. 14. 22.
               The Doctrine now being cleare: if any haue ſtumbled by my word or example, let me perſwade them eſpecially to embrace the ſame, and not any longer to be yoaked with that heauie yoake. And let mee intreat them, for their owne ſoules ſake, that though erred they haue with me and others, yet heretickes they ſhun to be. Seeing an hereticke is in a deſperate condition, if truely an hereticke, in the moſt ſtrickt ſenſe: for that ſuch an one is he, who hauing choſen an opinion to himſelfe, and is ſo clearely conuicted by the holy Scriptures, that he is damned of his owne conſcience, yet through pride of heart, chuſeth rather to be reiected, and to forſake the fellowſhip of the Church, then to forſake that Errour which he hath defended, Tit. 3. 9, 10.
               If then thy ſtate be not yet ſo deſperate but that thou canſt plead ignorance before God of any ſuch due conuiction; beware now of ſelfe-loue and deſire of ſingularity, leane not ouer much to thine owne iudgement, ſhew thy true humilitie, by eſteeming others better then thy ſelfe: Withſtand not Gods grace, oppoſe him not any longer: be not like the deafe Adder, which ſtoppeth her eares, and will not

bee charmed: Deſpiſe not thy mother the holy Church, in which thou haſt receiued all the good thou haſt, if any at all. Conſider, how ſhe gaue thee entertainement, at firſt by Baptiſme: hath ſince that called thee by the voice of her Teachers, & powerfull miniſters of the Word, and Sacraments; doth daily ſtretch out her hand to afford the bread of life, and water of life; offers thee the holy Scriptures, with their true interpretation, and doth now wait for thy returne to her vnitie, with many a grieuous groane, and ſalt teare: being readie euerie moment to receiue thee in the lap of her mercie, and to dandle thee on the knees of her loue: Bee not then the Author of thine owne woe: plunge thee not wilfully into needleſſe miſerie. Blame not thy Miſtreſſe for giuing thee ſome correction for thy pride: Heare the Angel ſpeaking to thee in Hagars perſon, Whence cameſt thou? And whither wilt thou goe? Returne to thy Miſtreſſe, and humble thy ſelfe vnder her hands, Gen. 16. 8, 9. How long, I ſay, wilt thou loue ſimplicitie, take thy pleaſure in ſcorning, & hate ſound knowledge? And vnleſſe thou canſt proue, that thy calling is extraordinarie, and that by the ceaſing of all ordinarie ſending and calling; and canſt cleare it, either to be of God himſelfe, or of ſome extraordinarie perſon; or by extraordinarie motion of Gods holy Spirit, as Moſes, Aaron, and Phineas: and canſt confirme it, by that thou teacheth no other doctrine, then what hath beene taught by former holy men: by that thy life is beyond all other mens, in the glorie of an humble,

meeke, bold, patient, quiet, and diſcreet conuerſation: by the furniture of admirable guifts, beyond all of that time without any exception; and by the manifeſt attendance of Gods immediate power, in thy protection and aide; as Ieremie, Iohn Baptiſt, Paul; and all extraordinarie men. If not, I doe teſtifie vnto thee, that thou ſhalt rue thy obſtinacie, and bewaile thy ſtubbornneſſe, here, to Gods glorie, in thy bleſſed change; or elſe be ruined by thy folly, and howle for euermore, without any remedie. Then ſhalt thou ſay, in the anguiſh of thy ſoule, and bitterneſſe of thy Spirit, How haue I hated inſtruction, and my heart deſpiſed reproofe, and haue not obeyed the voyce of my teachers, nor inclined mine eare to them that inſtructed mee! Suſpect thy ſelfe then in time, while it is yet called to day, & feare thine eſtate, in reſpect of thy being alone. Thou knoweſt the Prouerbe, Woe to him that is alone when he falleth, for he hath not another to helpe him vp. Firſt, thou ſeparateſt, and then thou ſalleſt, and who ſhall thenceforth lend thee his hand? Conſider that the holy Scriptures, are not left to euerie priuate mans interpretation, 2. Pet. 1. But when the ſame holy Spirit interprets them, by whoſe holy motion they were firſt ſpoken, and penned; men indued with the ſame holy Spirit, ſhall not oppoſe that interpretation. Doſt thou thinke, that thou onely, and ſuch as thou art, haue the Spirit of God? I hope thou art not ſo abſurd; and if others haue the ſame Spirit of God, why doe they not aſſent at all vnto you? And let mee mind thee of that Euangelicall proclamation

of the Church her peace, through the true knowledge of God: ſo that the Wolfe, the Lambe, the Leopard, the Kid, the Calfe, the yong Lion and the fatling ſhall dwell and lye downe together, and a little child ſhall lead them, Iſa. 11. And the Church Officers ſhall be Peace, and her exactors Righteouſneſſe, Iſa. 60. yea, and Peace ſhall be extended to her like a Riuer, Iſa. 66. The perfect worke of Righteouſneſſe ſhall be Peace, Iſa. 32. and Righteouſneſſe and Peace are inſeparable companions.
               And let me wiſh Mercy and Peace to all the Iſrael of God: and aduiſe you all to liue in peace, and if it be poſſible as much as in you lyeth, liue peaceably with all men, Rom. 12. that the God of loue and peace may bee with vs and abide with vs for euermore. And let me ſay to all that liue yet in the boſome of Gods Church: We are Brethren, why ſhould there be any ſtrife amongst vs? What is the reaſon we are ſo deuided in affection? why doe we bite and deuoure one another? why are there any inclinations to Sects and Schiſmes, Diuiſions and Tumults, and ſo great Wrath? Is not Ignorance the cauſe of all? Whence is Contention but from Pride? and where reſteth Pride but in the boſome of Fooles? As then we deſire to approue our ſelues wiſe and well inſtructed in the wayes of peace, Let vs ſubmit one to another in the feare of God, according to that decent order and comelineſſe in which wee are ſet. Let vs in giuing honour preferre one another; let vs firſt make ſure at home, caſt the beames out of our owne eyes, proue our ſelues to be in the Faith. This being done,

we ſhall ſoone take notice where it is effected, and ſo come to the true knowledge, and due acknowledgement of the Church whoſe worke we are. No member would then exalt it ſelfe againſt the bodie, but rather ſhew it ſelfe to bee of God, who is not the author of confuſion but peace.
               And for my part I haue reſolued, for time to come, to leaue Kingdomes to the guidance of Kings themſelues, and Churches to the gouernment of Chiefe Church-men: And I know that in indifferent things, there is ſuch a thing, as Mos populi Dei, to be regarded. The Church her cuſtome was of ſome credit in Pauls time, 1. Cor. 11. 16. And I acknowledge that in doubtful things, controuerted in the Church; totum eſt parte maius: Vniuerſality may beare it, when onely bare Conſequences are vrged, that may bee paralleld with like Conſequences by the greater part. And I ſay, that Turpis pars omnis toti non congrua: That part is deformed which agrees not with the whole: and in all things not to bee decided by euident Scriptures.
               I doe alſo ſay (with thoſe Fathers of the firſt Nicene Councell, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Mos antiquus obtineat) Let old Cuſtomes carrie it. And if any ſay I doe hereby vilifie my ſelfe: I anſwer, I will be yet more vile, if humble ſubmiſſion to my holy Mothers Authoritie, be to be eſteemed baſeneſſe. And I doe heartily deſire all that beare good will to Sion, to pray feruently for mee: that as I am now happily returned to the vnitie of Gods Church: ſo I may continue ſtedfaſtly, in the valiant, and conſtant defence

of the peace thereof, that ſo my laſt fruits may be more then the firſt, and my laſt workes better then the firſt; that if euer I ſuffer againe, (as I am moſt readie) it may bee for the Church, and not in the leaſt ſhew againſt it; and for no trifles, but for the Truth and power of Godlineſſe. And that as I haue beene ſtout for Moſes, and Chriſt together: ſo I may bee as reſolute for Chriſt alone. That I may neuer ſeparate what God hath ioyned, nor ioyne what he hath ſeuered. And the ſame doe I wiſh to all my Countrimen, that all quarrels may bee ended, for ſuch outward things, as are not of the eſſence of true Religion; and that all our ſtrife may bee to out-ſtrip one another, in the power of ſound Loue: that being alreadie fellowes of one Family, ſonnes of one Father, children of one Mother, liuely ſtones of one buildings, branches of one Vine, Sheep of one Fold, members of one body, yea, one bodie and one ſpirit; ſo wee may diſcouer the truth of this by remaining of one minde, and the ſame iudgement: and the rather becauſe we liue in the laſt times wherein the day haſteneth, and is euen at hand, wherein we ſhall be all tryed: whether wee be Gold or Droſſe? Wheate or Chaffe? precious Stones or Stubble? Now neuer did God riſe earlier to ſend his Seruants vnto vs, then hee doth at this day: Let vs all ſtriue to make a right vſe of this precious time, while it is yet called to day.
               
               Let all clenſe themſelues from all manner of troubleſome and contentious thoughts, that we may declare our ſelues to bee at true peace with God, with

all his people, and to keepe a true Sabbath within vs. That the God of peace may dwell in our Tabernacles, and the Graces of his Spirit not bee quenched in vs: which God grant vnto vs all, euen for Ieſus CHRISTS ſake: To whom with the bleſſed Spirit, bee aſcribed all Glory, Honour, Dominion, Power, Maieſtie, and heartie Thanſgiuing, now and for euermore. Amen.
               
               
                  
                     Non eſt graue cadere luctantem, ſed iacere deiectum: Non eſt pernicioſum in praelio vulnerari: ſed poſt vulnus acceptum deſperatione curandi medelam vulneri denegare. Saepe etiam athletas videmus poſt frequentes lapſus & deiectiones plurimas coronatos; militem ſcimus post multas fugas virum fortem fuiſſe, & viciſſe victores.
                  
               
               Gloriae cedant cuncta diuinae.
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   