
      
         
            
            
            THE
Houſe-holder:
OR,
Perfect MAN.
            Preached in three Sermons lately by
ED: TOPSELL, preacher at Saint
Buttolphs without Alderſgate.
            
            
               Prou. 27, 23, &c.
               Be diligent to know the eſtate of thy Flock,
and take heed to thy heards, &c.
            
            The Contents follow in the next leafe.
            Printed for Henry Rockyt, and are to be ſold at his
ſhop in the Poultry, vnder the
Diall. 1610.
         
         
            
               
               
               
                  ❧Contentes of the
firſt Sermon.
               1 DIfferences of men, becauſe few be good,
2. A perfect man, deſcribed by the text,
3. Wiſedome, needefull for all; eſpecially for
the teacher of other, 4. The way to attaine it. 5
Neglecters of the meanes, reprooued, 6. multitude
of fooles, and a remedy for them, 7. All
wants ſenſible, except the want of true Wiſedome,
8. odiouſneſſe of ſpirituall folly, by Doctrine,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
And by comparatiue examples, 19, 20. Exhortation
to wiſedom, and dehortation from folly.
            
            
               Contents of the ſecond Sermon.
               1 THE ſubiect of priuate wiſedome, 2. Diligence
deſcribed, 3. The neceſſity thereof,
4. The diligent ſhall beare rule, 5. And is
rewarded, 6. The praiſe of diligence, 7. Diſpraiſe
of negligence and ſloth, 8. Commodities of
diligence, amplified in mo rewards, 9. As Nobility

and acquiſition of honour, 10. comfort
to the diligent, and good preſidents to other, 11
Diſcommodities of negligence. 12 Education
to labour, & deſert of hire neceſſary for al men.
            
            
               Contents of the third Sermon.
               1 THE generall charge of Houſeholders, &
praiſe of knowledge. 2. Euery man ſhold
know his owne eſtate and affaires, 3. And not
onely belieue other, 4. Compariſon of Faith &
Knowledge. 5. Dignity of knowledge; eſpecially
Diuine. 6. Ignorance, cauſe of many euils,
7. Who, and what muſt bee knowne in Oeconomicks,
8. God and reaſon commaundeth it.
9. Honour of Houſehold, prouiſion and cares,
10. Yet with predominancy of ſpirituall things.
11. The Houſeholders Store-houſe neceſſary.
12. This ſtore muſt be giuen forth: commaunded
by God. 13. By Nature. 14. By Men. 15.
Exemplified in Beaſts and Creatures. 16. 17. yet
ſo, that we leaue rather then lacke. 18. It muſt
be ſpent on our Countrey. 19. 20. 21. 22. And
on Wiues, Children, Seruants, and Strangers.
            
         
         
            
            To the Right Honourable,
and right worthy
young Plants of Nobility, highly
borne, Diuinely educated,
and happily married, the Lord RICHARD
SACKVILL, Earle of
Dorſet, Baron of Buckhurſt, and the Lady
ANNE, his beloued wife, ſole
Daughter and heire to the renowned Lord,
GEORGE, late Earle of CVMBERLAND,
and the truly Religious Lady,
MARGARET, Counteſſe
Dowager of CVMBERLAND.
            
               
                  Great LORD and LADY,
            
            
               IT were vaine to excuſe
this enterprize, your
goodneſſe will not refuſe
it, it were folly to
commend it, your wiſdomes
might iuſtly explode
it. I will not ſay, I contriued and
compiled it for your ſakes, ſo ſhoulde I

ſeeme to begge your thanks, and depriue
my ſelfe of a vniuerſall benefite; for wee
that labour in the Church, muſt not bee
perſonall. Yet I will ſay, that I would not
divulge it to the world, but vnder the honor
of your names: And if it could adde
either Goodneſſe or greatneſſe to your Honours,
(as I hope Almighty God in time
will both) I would euery line had beene a
leafe, and euery page a volume, till both
your ſoules and ſelues could ſay with Salomon,
               Eccle. 2, 25
               who could eate or haſt to theſe things
more then we?
            
            You are nowe become other then you
were, and the graces of your Noble Natures
and education, begin to appeare to
the view of all that will beholde you: for
your great places haue mounted you on
the higheſt ſeates, whereby you cannot
bee ſecret though you woulde; for you
may not diſcend that Theater of Honor,
till you dye, Principibus regnare eſt viuere,
& non regnare est mori, Princes & Rulers,
their life is to be eminent, and when they
ceaſe to be eminent, they dye, and ceaſe
to liue. VVherefore you ſee (without
my Narration) the good and euil in great
perſonages will diſcloſe it ſelfe, ſo as all the
enemies ſhall not ſtaine their Vertues,

which will breake forth like the Sunne in
his heighth and heate; nor all the flatterers,
with their ſeuerall falſe colours, and
falſe praiſes, ſo enammell and gilte ouer
their vices,Conſcientiā malā laudātis preconiū non ſandt, nec bonam vulne rat conuitiū Aug. contra petil. but they will diſcouer themſelues,
and if they would not, yet an euill
conſcience is not cured with falſe praiſes,
nor a good one wounded by vniuſt reproaches.
            Your Hon: are greatly bleſſed by
Almighty God, & I am aſſured you will,
as you ought, euer acknowledge his
goodneſſe and greatneſſe, the Author of
yours: For you haue not forſaken your
Fathers houſes, with Abraham, Iacob, and
other, but you are both heires of your
Fathers houſes, and in their houſes, to
your mutuall glory, your coniunction
hath increaſed their honour for you acquired.
And that which hapneth to fewe,
is fallen vpon you, euen in your firſt and
yonger yeares, to be rich, and good, God
graunt it to continue, and (without blemiſh,
to the Noble Stemmes from which
you are deſcended) I will not ceaſe to
pray, that you may bee glad Parentes of
many children like your ſelues, and you,
and your Poſterity, be greater and better
then they, if it bee Gods good will and
pleaſure.
            
               
The firſt thing wherein your Hon:
muſt now ſhew your ſelues to the worlde,Your Lordſhipp ſhall finde them anciently diuided into Regra, ſatrapicia ciuilis & priuata, of which the ſecond, which is the Lordly Houſe, fitteth your Honour.
is your Houſhold gouernment. Houſhold
Gouernment, I ſay, the Parent & firſt beginner
of Common-wealthes, the Seminary
of Kingdoms, & Counſels; the diſcerner
of naturall wiſedome, the Architect
of honour, and Diſciplinarie ſchoole
of a wiſe, vertuous, and happy life: from
which Almighty God ſetcheth his Byſhops.
The Romaines, and beſt common-wealth-men,
fetched their Conſuls & Tribunes,
and many times Kings haue beene
choſen out of this ranke. The wiſe Salomon
is an Authour of this gouernment,
as you may reade in the ſucceeding diſcourſe.
Antoninus was made an Emperor,
out of this ſight, proofe, and hope,
who is commended for taking away all
wages from the ydle, and leauing nothing
to his Daughter,Iul. Capitolinus. but his priuat Patrimony.
Hermion, the fift King of Germanie,
who liued after the floud,Auenti. lib. 1. annal. Bocor. foure hundred
and eleuen yeares, much about Abrahams
time, is likewiſe remembred for his oeconomy.
VVhē he went abroad to fight, he
gaue diligent order for his Husbandry at
home. I could ſpeake of Eberhard a Duke
of VVittenberge, for this cauſe honoured

like a God. Of Galeacius, of Columella,
and of Cato the wiſe, who wrote heereof,
and is commended for this ſaying,Plutarch. 
               Non
deterior domus rector quam ciuitatis. A
Houſholder is not inferiour to the Gouernour
of a Citty, and he that is not wiſe
in Domeſticall matters, ſhall neuer bee
truſted in the Common-wealth.
            For theſe cauſes, when I came vnto
Hartfield, after ſeauenteen years abſence,
(the firſt Pulpit that euer I aſcended, and
the firſt place of my Miniſterial function)
I choſe to ſpeake heereof, how, and with
what ſucceſſe your Hon: haue hearde,
and I am not now bound to make relation
thereof, or trouble my ſelfe, againſt
raſh, ydle, falſe, and at the beſt, ignorant
cenſures; yet as euill Lawes gaue occaſion
to good manners, ſinnes to Sermons,
ſo hath contradiction to many good
Bookes, and therefore I reſolued firſt for
your Honours ſatisfaction, and in you for
a more vniuerſall commodity to all my
Countrey-men, to giue my Sermons a
publicke birth, through my further trauell,
praying your Hon: to be the witneſſes
of their Chriſtendome, that they
containe nothing but Chriſtian doctrine,
and let them be called, the Houſholder.
            
            
               
               Conueniunt rebus nomina ſaepe ſuis,
I truſt that either their Anceſtor (I mean
Salomons Text) who was a Preacher, from
which I haue lineally deriued them. Or
at the leaſt, ſome Aungell of God, may
giue me (with bleſſed Zachary) a ſufficient
warrant, to take Tables and write,
Their name is the Houſholder,
               Luke 1, 63 & ſo I hope
they ſhall grow in fauour with God, and
all good men.
            To conclude therefore, right Noble
and happy Earle and Counteſſe, you haue
already begun as much as I haue obſerued,
your Family, and Domeſticall affaires
are handled, not as though their
Gouernors were but twenty, yea rather,
ſixtie yeare olde. You haue done as well
for the time (I thinke by inſpiration) as
all the Diuines could haue aduiſed you,
Purging out the old leauen from the family
to you deſcended. Yet giue mee leaue
to ſay one thing, for the enemy of mankind
is cunning. VVhen Humericus purged
his Court from the Manichees (a peſtilent
kind of Haeretickes, which made
two Gods) in crept the Arrians, which
denied Chriſt to bee God: and thereof,
there was a viſion: Firſt, a holy man ſaw
a Church full of men, and preſently after

they were driuen foorth, bee ſaw it full of
Swine.Victor. de perſecv. vād. lib, 2. I compare not your Hon: to
Humericus (a wretched & Haeretical Vandall)
nor the iuſtly expelled Domeſticals
to ſuch mē, but only the prophane beaſts
which wil be any thing, or of any religiō,
for your Hon: fauour, and entertainment.
Theſe I compare to beaſts & ſwine,
liuing in eating & drinking,Swearers & drunkardes are no more tollerable in a family thē Arrians in a Church. and pleaſure,
whom I pray God to weede out, if any
ſuch be, or to keepe out of your Family,
them that by any preferment of friend or
ſo may be commended vnto you. I could
ſay more, but I will not trouble your patience
with theſe plain diſcourſes. I hope
that Ieſus who hath formed your Hon:
before you were, and now reformed you
ſince you were, wil make you not Cypreſſes
only, but Oliues & Vines, for his owne
glory, for the Church, for your Nation,
for your families, & for your owne ſoules
eſtate, which I intreate you to prefer before
all earthly honour and glory, and ſo
I reſt.
            
               At your Honours command,
EDVV. TOPSELL.
            
         
         
            
            
               To the right Noble and Honourable
Houſe-holders, feeders
of the Poore: ANTHONY BROVVNE,
Viſcount Mountacute, at
COWDREY. Sampſon Lennard, Eſquire,
at Hurſtmounſeaux. Thomas PELHAM, Eſquire,
at Halland. Richard Blunt, Eſquire,
at Dedſham. AND TO
all other wiſe, temperate,
prouident, and liberall
Houſe-keepers within the County
of Suſsex: EDWARD TOPSELL Parſon of Hartfield
and Preacher, wiſheth them continuance
of theyr HOSPITALITY, and
reward of theyr CHARITY
in the Worlde to
come.
            
            
               
               
                  My LORD,
               
               
                  SEe and reade how
impartiall wee are:
our Pennes are like
your houſe, open to
all that are to bee
praiſed, as that is open to all that are
to be relieued. If they want, you examine
not their Religion, for GOD
hath made you a feeder, and not a corrector;
the faults of a vicious man in
want, extenuate not the Charitie of
the liberall.Being a ſtrā ger in Midhurſt, in Auguſt this yeare, 1609 I hearde by one whome I beleeue, that at Cowdrey were fed daily & relieued, wel neere 200. of all ſortes. Your praiſes (without reſpect of Religion) are cōmendable before
vs al, for your charity aboundeth
aboue many: and I thinke (if fame be
no Lyer) aboue moſt of your ranke. I
neuer ſaw your Lordſhip, and knowe
you not, but by the Fame of your liberality,
which I was glad to heare,
for your owne ſake, for the poore, but
ſorry, you haue no mo fellowes or followers.
Truſt me, my Lord, I would

to God, you were ours, for why ſhould
the Christian-worke of ſuch a hande,
be loſt and vnrewarded, for the want
of true loue, or the loue of the truth?
Oh, that your Honor had miſſed your
inſtructors, and that your youth had
not ben corrupted as faſt as it increaſed:
that good Nature, and ſtudious
Deuotion, ſober minde, and Noble
birth, had bin to your country a greater
Ornament, and to your Familie
and Soule, afar more aſſured meanes
of the Heauen you deſire, then the
way you walke in. But I truſt, nay, we
all pray, with S. Auſtens mother, Ne
harr̄ lachrimarū filius pereat. You
are great & nobly born, diſcēded of a
Grand-father, in all things like your
ſelf, iuſt, tēperat, wiſe, liberal, merciful,
prouidēt, a louer of his coūtry, but
not of his Countries Religion. You are
his true heire, he did Auizare his religion,
you do the like in your religion
and charity. Well, God hath made you

happie, in that you are able to giue:
and I hope, that as one of your
eyes is opened, & ſeeth the obiect of
your mercie, and the true vſe of your
large Patrimony, ſo in time, he will
open the other, to ſee the infallible
obiect of a Chriſtian faith, for the poſſeſsion
of your farre greater Patrimony
in heauen.Lady Moūtacute daughter of the late fia. of Dorſet, &. Aunt to the now Earle. To this I am ſure,
your ſecond ſelfe, your noble, vertuous,
and truely ſanctified wife, ſaith
Amen, Amen. She is a true confeſſor,
ſhe hath kept her owne as well as
Queene Clotildis, the wife of Almaricus,
ſhee is moſt like her,Procop. de bell. Goth. lib 2. of all
Ladies aliue, though your Lordſhippe
be a farre more kinde husband,Vxorem euntem adſacra chriſtianorum, ſtercoribus pro
                     
                        •
                     ectis defoedari curauit, & verberibus cam immanitur, tractau
                        ••
                     t. then
that Heretique King, and therefore I
hope if you might with the Law, yet
your noble nature (for your own particular)
would not reſtraine her free
liberty to viſit the ſacred meetings of
the good Chriſtians. In 
                     •
                  onfidence

whereof, I will honour you both, and
euer pray that your Lordſhip may neuer
leaue off your charity, nor that
Noble Lady change her Religion, the
aſſured and vndoubted way to life
eternall. Farewell.
               
            
            
               
                  Maiſter LENNARD,
               
               
                  YOu are a Houſholder
by birth, for your aged
and moſt prouident
Father, was the
beſt that euer I knew,
except yourſelfe. You have truly performed
his laſt charge to you, which
was to doe the like. You haue done it
in two Counties, Kent hath miſſed
you, Seuenoke (the place of my birth
and education) hath wept for your abſence:
Suſſex hath found you, and
God prouided for you therein, the noble
Patrimony of the Dacres of the
South. So that now, I cannot decide,

whether your worthy father your noble
wife (being a Baroneſſe by birth,
and moſt louing to you) or your owne
diſpoſition, haue made you happieſt.
He bleſſed you as Iſaac did Iacob, ſhe
enriched you, and ennobled you, as
Acſah did Othniell. But your ſelfe
is beſt to your ſelfe, obeying Father,
honouring wife, feeding many, good
to all. Let your latter end be late, and
all your poſterity poſſeſſe the ſame
bleſsings, till the worlds end.
               And for your ſelfe, I will pray for
your reward, that if it bee Gods will
and pleaſure, you may haue ſuch rewarde
at one time or other, as had
Miltiades.
                  
                     Herod. lib. 6 They were Thracians, called Dolonci.
                   When the inhabitants of
Helleſponte Cherſoneſus, were
warned by the Oracle, that they ſhold
chuſe him for the Prince and reſtorer
of their Country, who did firſt of all
inuite them to his houſe after their
departure out of the Temple, vvho

paſsing by this Miltiades, and hee by
their apparrel knew them to be ſtrangers,
hee called to them, and offered
them entertainment in his houſe,
which they accepted, and the next day
they ſhewed him the Oracle, and intreated
him to go with them, & poſſeſſe
their Countries principality,
which thing hee did, and happily enioyed
many yeares, the reward of his
hoſpitality. Euen ſo, the Diuine Oracles,
I know, haue prouided for you, &
your poſterity (in Teſtimony that almighty
God loueth Hoſpitality) more
honour on earth,They ſhall be Barons of Dacres in the right of their Mother. and an incorruptible
kingdome in Heauen.
            
            
               
                  Maiſter PELHAM,
               
               
                  WHo may in all your
Country ſay better
then you?Pſalme 23. 
                  My ſhepheard
is the Lorde,
his rod & his ſtaffe

comfort me. My head he hath annointed
with Oyle, and my Cup
doth ouerflow. My table is decked
in the preſence of my foes, I dwell
by greene Paſtures, and ſtil waters.
You are ſeated in the Eagles neſt,
                     Gilbertus de Aquila, was the Lorde of Laughton. it
is a regal Bird: you (if I be not deceiued)
are deſcended of that race. Royall
thinges do therefore become you.
(Good Sir) let me not ſlatter you, the
fame and name of your Anteceſsours,
haue long ſounded in thoſe partes.
Honour of Armes commended your
Father and Vncle:Sir Nicholas Pelham. Sir William Pelham. Sir Iohn Pelham. Loue of his Countrey,
your Brother; Hoſpitality in
peace hath bin your honour, & I truſt
you haue not, nor will not giue ouer
to feed. Your Patrimony hath beene
by your thrift augmented, and there
is no cauſe why your mind ſhould not
euer taſt of her prime and moſt honoured
graces; mercy, liberality, and
hoſpitality. Theſe things brought me

firſt vnto you. And I confeſſe, as I
had heard ſo I foūd, neither want nor
waſt, neither an euil eye, nor a ſparing
hand: and in that time of your greateſt
expence on your poore Countreymen,
you increaſed moſt in fame and
wealth. I cannot forget that note of a
neighbour of yours,M. William Morley of Gliude. (the woorthieſt,
learnedſt, iuſteſt, & moſt ingeniouſly
affable Gentleman, that euer I knew
in all my courſes, to whoſe noble memory,
Iowe a better Sacrifice then
now I giue) that your houſe & hande
were open, whē your mouth was ſhut,
and other men had their mouths open,
when their houſes and handes were
ſhut. You haue ennobled your family,
by honorable alliance in marriage.M. Henrie Carey, ſon and heire to the Lorde Hunſdon. I
need not commend him, he honoureth
your family, and none that knoweth
him, but honoureth him, beeing a louer
of the meanes of Honour, Learning,
and Armes; without which, no

man is Noble or woorthy of Honour.
It is the baſeſt and vnworthieſt mark
of a Gentleman, to care for nothing,
nor to dignifie his houſe, but by purchaſes,
gallant. Sutes, Rapiers, and
Spurs, gaming and playing ſcores and
hundreds, and neuer to doe any part
of Honour, whereof he boaſleth. A
man may ſay vnto them, as Herodes
Atticus did to Bradeas, his Wiues
Brother, when hee had praiſed his
race and deſcent, and yet beeing vnwoorthy
himſelfe,Coelius. Eraſmus. 
                  Tu equidem in
aſtragalis nobilitatem geſtas. They
haue no Honour, but in olde bones.
I will pray that your Sonne may
Patrizare,M. T. P. and that (if Heauen reſiſt
not) you may liue to ſee him
moſt happie, for you will make
him Rich. And I will end, as Stratonicus
ſayde of his Hoaſt, vvho
receyued him kindly, and welcommed
him moſt heartily, although

he knew him not, and after him, two
or three in the ſame curteous maner.
Diſcedamus ò puer, nam inuenimus
pro columba, palumbum, &
pro hoſpite pandocheum. Let vs
bee gone and depart, for inſteade of a
Doue, we haue founde a Ring-Doue,
and where we thought to find a ſpeciall
fauour, to bee receiued alone, wee
finde a Houſe-keeper that entertaineth
all.
            
            
               
                  Maiſter BLOVNT,
               
               
                  YOu are my lateſt acquaintance,
& therefore with
you I muſt conclude, not
as the leaſt, but as the
vpper moſt in my hart, and if I would
praiſe you for houskeeping, you might
giue me leaue to ſay as much of you as
of the reſidue, and in your proportion
equall to the beſt. For with the Centurion,
you haue euer loued our Nation,

I meane the Preaohers: & vnto
your commendation do al the Prophets,
and Children of the Prophets,
giue Teſtimony. You and your nobly
borne & minded wife,Miſtris Blount was daughter to the Lorde La-ware. neuer refuſed
him, that came vnto you in the name
of a Prophet. Wherefore faint not, but
expect a Prophets reward; a prophets
rewarde, what is that? Nothing in
earth but an empty Cup, Heathy and
Barren Land? God forbidde: ſo the
world rewardeth vs, and woulde admit
vs but one foote before the Begger
(viz.) we muſt ſtand in the Porch,
& the begger without the doore, but
a Prophets reward is to be partaker of
all the good & labors of the Prophets.
For the louers of goodneſſe are reſpected
(before God) with the Preachers.
But eſpecially, the reward of the olde
Prophets, was the aſſured performāce
of al that they had foretolde of Ieſus
Chriſt, and thereof they are not now

aſhamed; no more, nor no leſſe is the
aſſurāce of thoſe things, which you belieue
& hope, for they that truſt in the
Lord, ſhal not be aſhamed. Theſe lines
(I mean the ſucceeding Booke) were
written in Dedſham houſe, & how
vnthankful ſhould they be, if they did
not leaue a long laſting Monnument
vpon that Houſholder, vnder whoſe
roofe they had their firſt being in letters.
Beleeue me Sir, I was neuer better
pleaſed, nor had more cauſe of cō
                  tent
then in your houſe. Where beſides
Leuies large feaſt, we had Chriſt at
the table euery day, I meane the holy
ſcriptures, we wanted nothing fit for
Chriſtians, or fitting vs for heauē, only
the prime part of your family, your
owne worthy ſelfe was abſent, & the
hope of your name,M. W. B. your ſon: Oh, that
you had more of ſuch hope, ſo you had
more inheritances for thē: and for the
reſidue of your hapy iſſue, you are bleſſed

in them al, & they for a father &
a mother, are as happy as euer were
any of their bloud, & yet by father &
mother nobly diſcended. Now muſt I
your lateſt Oratour, and as it were, a
child of yeſterday, bleſſe you all in the
name of al my brethren the Prophets,
your ancient & wel reſpected gheſts,
to whō with the Sumanite you haue
giuē lodging and light, with the Sarepthian
widdow, Oile & Meal, with
Lazarus, Mary and Martha, meate
drink, entertainment & obediēce, &
with Oneſiphorus ſought them out,
being not aſhamed of their chains. So
as Candala Q. of Panonia, & neece
to Lewis the 12. of France, ſaid to the
Venetians, for her royall entertainmēt,
that ſhe neuer knew her ſelfe to
be Queene, til ſhe came to their teritory:
ſo may the Preachers ſay, they
know not themſelues to bee Chriſtes
Miniſters, til they come to your houſe.

                  The Lorde ſhewe mercy to this
houſe,
                  Luke 10, 5. 
                  and the peace of Chriſt
(which the Apoſtles preached) and
the ſonne of peace reſt in it to the
worlds end. So be it.
               
               FInally vnto al other Noble, worthy,
& Worſhipfull Houſholders,
I preſent this Treatiſe, for you
(like the Sheepe of Chriſt) are euerie
way profitable. Who keepeth the Fatherleſſe?
the Houſekeeper. Who relieueth
the Widdow? the Houſholder.
Who traineth vp children & ſeruants
in the feare of God, and ſeruice of the
Commonwealth, and common good?
the Houſholder. Who noriſheth Arts,
Learning, and them that ſerue at the
Altar? but the Houſholder that payeth
Tythes. Who maintaineth the
world, and defendeth the Countrey?
the Houſholder; who hauing a poſterity,
loueth it thrice ſo well as the

barren, & mariage-hating Inmate.
Who is a monſter among men? hated,
of God, diſdained of the angels, ſhame
of his Parents, & burden to his countrey,
but he that liueth, by whom no
other liueth; that is, no Houſholder,
and yet rich enough: no liker a Chriſtian,
then an Ape is like a man, whoſe
fleſh is not good for meat, as a ſheepes,
nor his back for burthen, as the horſe
and Aſſe, nor skins for warmth and
Ornament, as the Conies, Squirrels,
and Martins, nor good to keep a houſe
as a Bandogge. Simia quam ſimilis,
turpiſſima beſtia nobis.
               
               You renowned Houſholders, that
loue this kind of life, purge out of your
families, the Drones which eate and
conſume that whereuppon the Bees
ſhould liue; ô drunkenneſſe, the horror
of Religion, the conſumer of youth
and ſtrength, the deuourer of al goodneſſe,
the bane of the Houſholder, can

no iudgment of God or man, dry thee
vp, but like Deucalions floude, thou
muſt ouerrun and ouerſlow all, except
two onely: the Temperate, and the
Religious? Stand vp ye worthies of
the time, finde a remedy for this euil,
or elſe your honor is in the duſt, in the
Kennell. For as when your beſt lande
is ouerſlowed, it yeeldeth nothing: ſo
if you ſuffer your families to be drenched
in this vice, rottenneſſe & barrenneſſe
will deuoure you all. It maketh
your families like Fennes, & the
ditches of Mariſh Land, wherein nothing
but Snakes and Serpentes, and
vgly Frogges doe ingender. It is the
pit of hell, as out of hell no man can
come againe; ſo out of drunkenneſſe
are none recouered.Aug. ſer. de ehrlet. cauēd Your Dogs and
Beaſts are better then your drunken
Children and ſeruants. For ſaith S.
Chriſoſtom,
                  Hom. 1. 
                  Ebrioſus eſt voluntarius
daemon, ruinae excuſatione carens,

et comune generis noſtri opprobrium.
A drunkard is a willfull
Deuill, the ſhame of mankinde, and
one that cannot be excuſed in his deſtruction.
Neuer ſhall drunkard come
to heauen, for as when the Shippe is
ſunke after a Tempeſt, the wares and
lading are quickely waſhed out, but
the barke is filled with ſand and water,
ſo as all the ſtrength of man cannot
weigh it vp againe, nor the beſt
Nauigator, and ſailes make it ſayle
againe: no more when a man is once
ſunke in drunkenneſſe (and ſinke hee
ſhall, for the Deuil wil not leaue him,
till with the Swine in the Goſpell, he
drown thē:) al the perſwaſions of God
& man cannot ſet him vpright again
in the Sea of this worlde. For like to
Bonoſus the drunkē Emp. Nati ſunt
vt bibant, non vt viuant, they are
borne to drink and not to liue. It hath
bin lawfull to put away a mans wife

for drunkenneſſe among ſome Nations:
but it is needfull that drunkards
be excluded mens company, & with
Nabuchadnezzar liue among beaſts
(who are neuer drunke) til they haue
learned this abſtinence from them.
And belieue me, if you nouriſh drunkards,
your families ſhall neuer want
woe. From which, the Lorde deliuer
you, and from Drunkards the Lorde
deliuer vs. And ſo I end for your Liberality,
and Hoſpitality, with the
Praier of Nehemiah,
                  Cap. 5, v. vlt▪
                   
                  Lord remember
theſe Houſekeepers in goodneſſe,
according to all that they
haue done to this people. September,
1609.
            
            
               Your Honours, worſhips, and
al that wil beleeue my report,
EDVVARD TOPSELL.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶The Houſholder.
            
               Prou. 27. 23 &c.
               
                  Be diligent to know the eſtate of thy flocke,
and take heed to thy heards.
                  24 For riches remaine not alway, And is the
Crowne from generation to generation?
                  25 The Hay diſcouereth it felfe, & the graſſe
appeareth, and the hearbs of the Mountaine are
to be gathered.
                  26 The Lambes are for they cloathing, and
the male Goats a price of the field.
                  27 And let the milke of thy Goats be ſufficient
for the food of thy family, and for the ſuſtenance
of thy Maidens.
               
            
            
               WHatſoeuer is Life
(according to mans
weake vnderſtanding)
muſt either be
vegetatiue or growing,

as in Plantes; Senſitiue, ye
                  •
               
without motion, as in the Oyſter
and ſuch like; Sence and motion,
as in all Beaſtes, Fiſhes, & Fowles;
and laſtly, Reaſon, as in Aungelles
and Men. Now, almighty God
hath giuen vnto Man all theſe:
Growth, with the Plantes; Sence
and motion with the Beaſtes; Grauity
of ſubſtance with al corporeal
things; Spirituality & reaſon with
the Aungels: that whereas his diuine
Maieſty is theIoh. 11. 25 
               Life and the
Fountaine from whence iſſueth all
other life, it may moſt aptly agree
with vs, not onely that we liue, but
that we more then liue, andAct. 17. 28 
               that
in him we liue, & moue, and haue our
being. And verily, ſeeing we participate
in the variety and diſſimilitude
of ſo many creatures, it is no
maruell, although the faces, and
inclinations of ſo many men, bee

alſo ſo various, diuers, and eſtranged
one frō another: for our minds
are as many as our perſons, and
our ſences more then our heades,
and yet in al theſe, man taking this,
of the Fiſh and Beaſt, that, of the
Tree and Mettall, may be compared
vnto the Beaſt and Money that
perriſheth,
               Pſal. 49, 20. Acts 8, 20. 
               ô vtinam periret tantum
pecunia (ſaith S. Bernard of Symon
Magus) ſed pecunia tecum: Would
God the Money or Beaſtes might
periſh alone, but that cannot bee;
for we hauing deſtroyed them, and
they hauing infected vs, we periſh
together with them (like the Philiſtims
and their banquetting houſe,Iudg. 17, 30
or Sodom and their fruitful plaine.)
But I knowe not whence it commeth,
that there liue ſcarce ſo many
kinds of Wormes, Beaſts, and
Fowles, as there be kinds of men,
that dye to God, and periſh euerlaſtingly,

for more periſh, then liue
for euer. Many are the perſons &
faces of men, but not ſo different
one from the other, as are the
mindes and inclinations of men;
which intruth onely make Men;
inſomuch, conſidering the defects
heerein, it is a rare, difficult, and almoſt
impoſſible thing, to finde a
man: For in KingPſal. 14. 3. 
               Dauids time,
Pſal. 14. there was not one, no
not one, and yet for ſtrength thirty
and one Worthies,2. Sam. 23. beſides Prophets
and Prieſts. But in Salomons
time, there was ſome increaſe, or
rather one increaſe, or to ſpeake
more properly, an increaſe of one,
Among a thouſand men I haue found
one;
               Ecc. 7. 30 one God in Heauen, one Sun
in the Firmament, one Phoenix among
Birdes, one perfect man among
all.
            2 There be foure things whereby

a man is declared a perfect man:
Firſt, Wiſedome, whereby he teacheth
himſelfe and others. Secondly,
Gouernment, whereby hee ruleth
himſelfe and others. Thirdly,
Frugality and Labour, whereby
he prouideth for himſelf & others.
Fourthly, Liberality, and Mercie,
whereby hee feedeth himſelfe and
others: All theſe make a perfect
man, and without them, our perfection
is imperfection and lameneſſe:
And all theſe were in Salomon,
a Type of the mirrour of perfection,
Ieſus Chriſt. Firſt, he was
wiſer then all his predeceſſors, and
taught himſelfe and others, as appeareth
by his writinges: Secondly,
he was of excellent gouernmēt,
for he was the King of peace, or a
peaceable King. Thirdly, his frugality,
in laying vp graine, feeding
and breeding of Cattle, and building

of houſes, for himſelfe and other,
was great, yea he made gold
and Siluer like ſtones in Ieruſalem
Fourthly,1 Reg. 10, 27. and laſtly, he was libera
                  •
               
and mercifull, for hee was the firſt
that obſerued, as riches increaſe
ſo are they increaſed that eat them
for his ſeruants were many thouſands,
and at one Sacrifice. 2. Chro
8, 9. he offered a thouſand Cattle
Out of this practiſe of Salomon, h
                  •
               
deliuereth all theſe in my Text vnto
other, firſt expreſſed in his own
perſon. Firſt, his Wiſedome, whil
                  •
               
he aduiſeth, Be diligent to know th
                     •
                  
ſtate of thy flocke, &c. Secondly, h
                  ••
               
Gouernment, while he ſaith, Th
                     •
                  
riches indure not alway, nor th
                     •
                  
Crowne from generation to gener
                     •
                  
                  tion;
intimating hee had taſted 
                  〈◊〉
               
Crowne and riches. Thirdly, h
                  ••
               
Frugality and Labour, The hay di
                     •
                  
                  couereth
it ſelfe, and the graſſe appeareth,

and the hearbes of the mountaines
are to be gathered: Namely,
for the vſe and fodder of men and
Beaſts: and becauſe money & garments
are alſo the beauty and ſpirit
of a family, eſpecially if they bee
well gotten; hee teacheth how to
obtaine them, while he ſaith, The
Lambes are for thy cloathing, and the
Goats a price of the fielde, (Viz.) to
get by ſale and exchange of them,
Money, for other commodities.
Laſtly, his liberality and mercy, in
houſe-keeping, and let the milke of
thy Goats be ſufficient for the foode of
thy family, and the ſuſtenance of thy
Maides.
            
            The firſt thing is Wiſedome,
obſerued in Salomon by Collection,
becauſe out of the fulneſſe of
his Wiſedome, he giueth Counſell
for other: a note, which I heere
note, not out of one word onely of

my Text, but out of all of them togither,
and I truſt not out of order,
or curioſity of nicety, but naturally,
as the ſcope of my Text giueth
me occaſion, conſidering my Preface▪
and therefore I will ſpeake of
it at this time in my viſitation of
this place, after many yeares abſence,
that although you neede it
not in regarde of your continued
inſtruction, yet I will endeauour
(that I may be remembred when I
am gone) to helpe forwarde your
Faith and Wiſedome both together,
wherein the boundes that I
will walk, ſhall be Truth; my matter,
Plainneſſe; and my Method,
Brevity.
            3 Salomon is therefore wiſe, becauſe
he teacheth and giueth Counſel of
all thinges, from the Court and
Crowne, to the Cart; from the
Maiſter to the Seruant, from the

Cofer full of Golde, to the Barne
full of Hay; from the Family full of
Men and Maid-ſeruantes, to the
Field and Commons, ſtored with
Cattle and Flockes: him and his
Wiſedome, let vs not onely admire,
but imitate: for they do not
onely win the Game, which ſtrike
the white marke, but alſo they that
ſhoot neere the pin: and wee alſo
ſhall win by endeauour (although
we miſſe and faile to hit aright) if
we ſtriue to draw nere in aſſurance
of Faith.Heb. 20. 22▪
                Bee wiſe therefore that
you may be men (Chriſt ſaith) As
Serpents,
               Mat. 10, 16 I ſay as Salomon, to teach
your ſelues and other, for Serpents
are wiſe in daunger, vnto which
our Sauiour alludeth, That we
ſhould be wiſe in & againſt perſecutiō,
but the ſtormes of tirany are
paſt, & the bands of danger to our
profeſsion are broken, The ſnare is

broken, and wee are deliuered. Bee
therefore wiſe as Salomon, in the
Port, in the Harbor, in your peace,
in your proſperity. Euery man taketh
himſelfe to be wiſe, and therefore
euery man (as a Phyſitian) giueth
Counſell to other when he is
well, and is not able to heale or aduiſe
himſelfe in euill. The higheſt
piece and part of Wiſedome is, to
Counſell our ſelues, not others.
Salomon neuer failed in teaching others,
for that is eaſie, but in teaching
himſelfe, and diſtinguiſhing
Vice and Vertue aſſunder, when it
came to practiſe, there hee failed.
Salomon hath many diſciples in his
defection, not in his perfection,
for they are prouided for all but
themſelues.
            He therefore that will bee wiſe,
and giue Counſell to other, whether
to King and Superiour, or to

Seruant and Inferiour, let him firſt
informe himſelfe, for the wiſe man
is a worthy and excellent Maiſter,
alſo a dexterious, and induſtrious
Scholler: How can he teach other
that teacheth not himſelfe? And
there is no greater foole in the
world, then he which is not prouided
for his laſt day, for his farewell
to the world, and laſt eſtate. His
ſoule is his chiefeſt care, his greateſt
price, his honourable charge, and
his endleſſe hope; he which is wiſe
for his ſoule, cannot bee a foole in
other things, although hee knowe
them not, for they belong not vnto
him as the eſſential Office of his
life, but accidentally, and at pleaſure,
to know or not to know them.
For this cauſe, or for the ſouls ſake,
the wiſeman inricheth his mind, by
all that euer hee heareth, ſeeth, or
that commeth vnder ſence or fanſie,

by obſeruing things preſent, by
recording and calling to minde
things paſt and abſent, by foreſeeing
the ends and euents of thinges
to come; whereby diligence maketh
him like a Prophet for another
life, for another world. Wiſedome
maketh him giue precepts of
life, by comparing things paſſed,
with things preſent, & iudgement
ſo preuenteth future dangers, that
hee is neuer at a loſſe, euen for the
things he miſſeth, but he is ſtill the
wiſer by defaults and defectes, and
like a wiſe and artificiall Arithmetician,
by a falſe number findeth a
true, and by a wrong way diſcouereth
the right. His eyes are like
man and wife, or like Dauids hoaſt,
ſome went to fight againſt the enemie,
and ſome ſtayed to keepe the
ſtuffe and carriage: no more doe
they wander, both from home together,

one ſtill keepeth houſe, as
one Pigeon ſtill ſitteth on the Egs.
So the food wherewithall it is ſped
abroad, is not decrely bought by
the death and daunger of the yong
ones at home. If hee buy wit, hee
maketh much of it; to keepe it, to
value it, to occupy it, that hee may
haue the Treaſure of knowledge,
his Counſels the infallible Oracles
of certainty, though no medler, yet
ſeeing into euery mans buſineſſe,
and yet beſt experienced in his
owne. For he knoweth, He that is
wiſe ſhall ſhine as the brightneſſe of
the Firmament,
               Dan. 12. 3. 
               and he that turneth
many vnto righteouſneſſe, as the
Stars for euermore. Heere is wiſedome;
namely, to ſhine, and heere
is the fruite of Wiſedome, to conuert
others, and I may ſay of ſuch
a man, as it is in the Pſalme, Who is
wiſe that hee may obſerue theſe
               Pſa. 107. 43
               
               things, for he ſhall vnderſtand the louing
kindneſſe of the Lord. O happy
man, which is ſuch an obſeruer!
more happy, then by obſeruing
times of ſowing, and ſeaſon of reaping;
yea, then Rules of policie,
Precepts of Art, courſe of the skies,
Lord or Lady, Maiſter or Miſtris:
yet moſt happy, becauſe hee ſhall
ſee, heare, and knowe, the louing
kindneſſe of the Lord. Heere is the
end of Wiſedome, to inioy his louing
kindneſſe, to know his wil, to
haue his Wages, to worke in his
Vineyard, to receiue his penny, to
keepe his Sheepe, to inioy his Rachell,
to heare his word, to poſſeſſe
his promiſes, to liue in his feare, &
to die in his fauour.
            4. Now, for the attaining of this
Wiſedome, to counſell and teach
our ſelues and others, wee muſt (as
the Husbandman) carrie our ſeede

abroade, out of the Barne into the
field, and as he for his increaſe, doeth
(as it were) craue helpe of the
Earth, of the Oxe, of the Plough,
of the Sunne, of the Raine; yea, of
the Marle and compaſſe, thinges
ſtraunge to the ſeede: ſo muſt wee
ſeeke this wiſedome abroad out of
our ſelues, in holy & diuine books,
as in a fielde; crauing helpe of the
laborious & diligent Paſtor, of the
aſſiduous and daily reading, and
Prayer; of the powerfull illumination
of the Holy-ghoſt, and of the
hopeful euent, ſucceſſe, and perpetuity
of our diligence. For our way
to heauen is by compaſſe, as the Iſraelites
came into Canaan out of Egipt,
and the Lord doth exerciſe vs
by windings and turnings, and going
out of the nigheſt way, to humble
vs; for he could bring vs a nearer
way to heauen, to teach vs to

value & prize our calling at a higher
eſtimate and rate: for if the heathen
coulde obſerue, that earthly
knowledge was ſolde for ſweat,
much more woorth is Heauenly
wiſedome, euen water and bloud,
which our Sauiour indured for our
ſakes, before we could bee conuerted.
Turne therefore your eyes to
all things, to gather this wiſedom,
not onely to Heauen, but to Earth,
to Men, to Beaſts, to hel, to ſeas, to
all. For a Heauenly knowledge of
earthly thinges, will helpe to Heauen,
and an earthly knowledge of
heauenly things, will ſend to hell.
He that will firſt ſee the Sun when
it ariſeth, muſt not (like common
fooles) ſet his face to the Eaſt, expecting
her body, but contrary, let
him ſaſten or rowle his eies Weſtward,
vpon the toppes of hils and
Trees, where hee ſhall ſee her ſhining,

before her ſelfe; and that is
as much light, comfort, and aſſurance,
as if he ſawe her ſelfe; euen
ſo, if wee turne our eyes from the
inſcrutable, and vnſearchable Maieſty
of the eternall Trinity, & look
vppon the radiant beames thereof,
ſhining vppon the creatures, wee
ſhal ſooner ſee, both the beginning
and ending of our wiſedome, then
by dazling our weake ſight and
iudgement, againſt the impenetrable
body of his infinite goodneſſe,
which yet in due time we ſhall behold,
if in the meane ſeaſon we remaine
contented and ſtudious, in
his word, workes, and creatures.
Saint Baſil to ſtirre vp the Chriſtians
of his time,De gentib. ſcriptor. vnto an earneſt and
laborious ſearching after this Diuine
Wiſedome, by familiar compariſons ſheweth, that euen in nature
it ſhineth, and in the works or

writings of men, we muſt alſo look
for the ſame. For (ſaith he) euen as
Dyers in their tincture of Purple,
firſt ſet a Gloſſe by ſome flowers,
or other Artificiall inuention vpon
their wooll, and then after it hath
bin well dipped, and as it were ſtained
and altred by that firſt colour,
(which yet is not the ſame wherewithall,
and whereinto it is to bee
changed) then they caſt into it the
Purple or Scarlet, which doeth
worke the more eaſily and effectually
vpon the ſubſtance to be changed
and died; euen ſo, they which
will ſeeke and find this perfect purple
and Scarlet of diuine wiſedom,
muſt firſt ſeeke it in the tincture of
Nature, of humane Inuentions, &
Principles of reaſon, that thereby
the Diuine Oracles, may more eaſily
bring them to a perfect conformity
with Ieſus Chriſt, their Heauenly

Wiſedome. And whereas
it might bee obiected, that it is ſuperſluous
to ſeeke for theſe things,
which wee muſt forſake, becauſe
they cannot continue, when the
better is come, euen as Iohn Baptiſt
giueth place to Chriſt, and the
ſhadowes of the Law, to the ſubſtance
of the Goſpell: The ſaid Father
anſwereth it by another compariſon,
that although the fruit be
the end of the Tree, without which
it were good for nothing but burning,
yet Eſt aliqua gloria frondium,
there is ſome glory and comely vſe
of the very leaues, which ſhew the
life of the Tree, before the fruite
buddeth, and alſo couereth the fruit
in the tenderneſſe thereof, againſt
the violence of ſtorme & tempeſt:
euen ſo, humaine Learning, although
it (faile like the leaues that
fall) hath glory and comelineſſe

in it, and giueth much helpe, Honour
and Grace to this Deuine
wiſedome.
            5 Where firſt of all, I cannot
but taxe and reprooue them, who
hauing wit, youth, time, health, &
other helpes, for their better and
more eaſie accompliſhment of this
excellent quality (if I may ſo terme
it) of Wiſedome, yet ſit downe and
ſpend out their miſerable dayes in
vaine pleaſures, which coſt them
more deare, and moſt of all in the
end. I reade of a certaine Abbot,
who buſying himſelfe in building,
and other worldly occupations,
was reprooued by his foole in this
manner: ô ſtulte quid facis, quid te
in huiuſmodi negotijs, &c. O foole
(ſaid he) what dooſt thou? Why
art thou ſo troubled with theſe laborious
affaires? Sit ſtill foole, ſit
ſtill, with thy good cheere in thy

Parlour, and thy Whoore in thy
Bed-chamber, and Sie ſeruias Deo
quiete, and ſo ſerue God in quietneſſe.
This foole, hath the moſt
part of voluptuous perſons to follow
his Counſell; for beſides their
bellies and their luſts, they haue no
ſtudy, care, or trauaile (and that
which is worſt of all) they liue in
an outward ſeruice of God, without
remorſe of conſcience for their
vanity, and thinke they ſerue God
very ſufficiently & quietly; whereas
God calleth to them euerie day,
in that renewed reproofe of the
wicked man in the Parable, who
Bid his ſoule take his eaſe, Thou foole
this night God will fetch away thy
ſoule from thee. You fooles, which
though neuor ſo Nobly borne and
bred, nor neuer ſo richly prouided
for, with Lands, liuely-hood, and
reuenewes, what meane you to

ſpend that moſt precious time, and
waſt the means of youth, in Hauks,
Hounds, Edifices, Buildings, Horſes,
Banquettinges, and ſuch like;
yea, euen in labours, and toyling
at Cart and Plough, Shop or Sea,
without reſpect of heauen, or heauenly
wiſedome, becauſe you want
nothing: I tel you, this yeare, this
month, this weeke, this day, or peraduenture
this night they wil fetch
away your ſoule from you, oh then
one drop or dramme of heauenly
Grace and Wiſedome, is worth a
whole worlde of honour, wealth,
eaſe, and pleaſure, wherein you
haue wallowed, and deſtroied your
ſelues.
            6 But ſeeing this worlde is full
of Fooles, which do not only come
ſhort of Salomon, but plainely reproue
him, and ſuch as vrge his example,
I meane our Theologicall
               
fooles; Fooles in Diuinity, who
like the Iewes to whome Caiaphas
propheſied, vnderſtand nothing,
and like the rabble in the Actes,
know not wherfore they are come
together, no not in their very Sacred
and holieſt aſſemblies; I tell
you the hoaſt of theſe Fooles are ſo
great, that one wiſe man cannot
direct them, and you had neede to
pray, that as the generation of
Fooles, (are in Diuine matters many)
ſo the ſeed of the righteous (to
conduct) might alſo be many.
There want labourers in this harueſt,
O Lord ſend them foorth, to
turne the diſobedient to the vviſedome
of the iuſt. They haue a ſtorie
in Denmarke, that one Craca a
Queene of that Countrey, hauing
three ſonnes, whome in her naturall
affection ſhe much loued, and
deſired to promote: and eſpecially

one amongſt the reſt, named Ericus.
She being giuen to Magicke,
made by the confection of three
Serpents, a ſtrange meſſe of Broth,
whereof none of her ſonnes would
taſt, ſaue onely this Ericus, who
eating thereof, his Mother procured
him the Kingdom, and he was
afterward called Ericus diſertus;
that is, Ericus the Wiſe. We cannot,
I cannot make any ſuch confection
for you, there are many
ſicke for this broth, but what need
we go to the Deuill for a Medicine
to procure Wiſedome? There is
Balme in Gilead, there is a Phyſitian
in Iſrael, there is a Prophet in
Iudah, there are meanes ſufficient
in the Lords holy word, or elſe Salomon
would neuer haue ſaide. Let
him that is ſimple & deſtitute of vnderſtanding,
come and eate of my
meate,
               Prou. 9, 4. 
               and drinke of my Wine that

I haue drawne. Euery man is become
ſo wiſe in the Lords matters
that he can teach others, but when
death and danger commeth vpon
him, euen then his reſolution (like
Ice and Snow) melteth away, and
hee is then to ſeeke of his ſoules eſtate.
Alas, muſt fooles become
teachers of the wiſe? Or guides of
as very Ingrams as themſelues?
Or ſhall the horſe teach the rider?
The Oxe the Husband-man to
Plough? Or the Sowe the good
wife to ſpinne? No verily, this is
exorbitant; euen ſo is it for Maſters
and Parents, and aged Perſons,
who wil be guiding their Seruants,
Children or youngers, & yet haue
neuer learned Salomons concluſion
and end of all thinges,Eccl. 12, 13 
               Feare God,
and keepe his Commaundement, for
that ſhall bring a man peace at the
laſt.
            
            
               
7 Thus haue I diſcourced of
Wiſedom, and the benefits thereof,
whereunto I will adde but this
one complaint, that all wants and
defects bee ſenſible, and their preſence
dolefull to them that feele
them, onely the want of heauenly
wiſedome is not perceiued, is not
lamented. If a mans Land, or poſſeſſion,
or leafe bee in any danger,
preſently he repaireth to a Lawier,
to declare his caſe, either of offence
or defence, to ſecure his owne: &
worthily, for wherefore was Law
made? Or how ſhall Iuſtice be honoured,
except the eſtates of men
in the differences and controuerſies
of the world, may bee thereby
eſtabliſhed? If the bodie bee any
waies heauy or diſtempered, we inſtantly
poſt for a Phyſitian, to the
end, that Maladies preuented in
time, may more eaſily be auoided,

and health preſerued; and we doe
wel herein, for God hath not made
vs for ſicknes, but for health, and he
which placed vs in a Paradice, did
ſignifie thereby, that wee coulde
not brook a Deſart, & what Paradice
haue wee now left, except our
health? Or what Deſart is ſo intollerable
as ſickneſſe? Wherein many
are forſaken of their friends, and
forget their deareſt ſelfe. Nay, if our
Horſe or Oxe be but a little ill, and
forſake their meate, wee ſend for a
Leach, to the end that it may bee
holpen: but if our ſoule, ſicke of
ſinne and folly, forſake the wholeſome
food thereof, tarry at home,
forbeare the church and Sermons,
deſpiſe grace and Heauenly wiſedome,
we are ſo wiſe in our owne
conceites, that feeling no ſmart or
paine, we care not to be cured, but
like mad men, breake our bandes,

and ſet light by our beſt Phiſitians,
ô therefore, I pray God open our
eyes, that our ſouls be not in worſe
caſe then our Oxen and Aſſes! they
fall and are ſicke, and find ſome to
helpe them vp, and eaſe them; we
fall and are ſicke, and finde none to
helpe vs vp, but like wanton Children,
wee lie ſtill, and cry againſt
them that would relieue vs. This is
folly, this is an euill to be abandoned,
and whoſoeuer is but a meane
Chriſtian, as he bleſſeth the hande
that feedeth him with bread, ſo let
him bleſſe the hand that feedeth
him with knowledge.
            8 But for the more deteſtation
of ſpirituall folly, giue mee leaue
to argue againſt it, and diſproue it
to your conſciences, that this ruſticke
ſottiſhneſſe and ſoliditie, or
fooliſh ſimplicity in Diuine affaires
which concerne the ſoule, may bee

abandoned; for ſurely ſuch an one
is Salomons foole: and if our Sauiour
Chriſt ſay that he is daunger of
Hell fire, which ſaith, thou foole, how
much more is he worthy and likely
to go to hell, that is a foole, then
he that calleth a foole. For certainly,
if the wrong to bee ſo tearmed,
when one is not, be ſo inexpiable,
as that it holdeth the ſlaunderer
in daunger of eternall torment,
what is not he worthy of, that maketh
himſelfe ſo? It is but the action
on of the caſe to be ſo named, but
to be ſo, is reall; and therefore ſuffereth
& yeeldeth greater damage.
Hearken therefore vnto me, and I
will ſet before you a rowe of fooles
recorded in aſſured ſtories, whom
euery man in the Letter derideth,
and loueth in the figure; that is,
miſliketh and ſcorneth this folly in
other, but loueth in himſelfe.
            
               
9 Who is more odious in ſcripture
then Eſau,
               Gen. 25, 32, 33. who to ſatisfie his
preſent hunger (after his hunting
pleaſure) ſold his owne Birth-right
for a meſſe of pottage; this ſhall be
our firſt foole, whom all know, and
none pitty; for if an action demonſtrate
a foole, ſurely hee deſerueth
one of the firſt places. This man
God hated, euen for this action,
and who dare loue him? there was
neuer yet any that ſhewed him any
pitty, no not his Father, nor Rebecca
his Mother, and him therefore
do all other hate. But tell me, why
is hee alone thus hated for ſelling
an earthly Patrimony for ſo ſmall a
price? When as there bee many
moe among vs, which ſell Heauen
for leſſe. So do al the prophane, impatient
of pouerty, willing to giue
themſelues to the Diuel for riches,
and not onely out of any want, as

               Eſau had, but out of pride, that being
Seruingmen & Yeomen, they
might bee Gentlemen; of Gentlemen
they might bee Knightes; of
Knights they might be Lordes; of
Lords they might be Kings; out of
ambitious thoghts, they are tranſported
beyond thoſe wayes which
the Angelles watch, whereby they
take the Diuell at his word, and for
leſſe then the worlde (which the
Sonne of God refuſed) they fall
down and worſhip him; no want,
or hunger, or paine cauſing them,
but onely licentious libertie, and
wantō cares, forcing them forward
to fulfill their temptations, which
being acted, they receiue not one
halfe ſo much good by this ſinne,
as Eſau did by his pottage.
            10 We will leaue Eſau and the
folly of the prophane, who contrarie
to the wiſedome of Salomon,

Deuoure holy things, and ſo we will
come to a ſecond foole, and that
was a couetous foole, Nabal
When Dauid and his men had
done him fauours in the wilde and
wide fields, at laſt, he ſent vnto him
for a recompence, and yet it was
not a demand of any deſert, but an
intreaty for ſom neceſſary victuals
for himſelfe and his troope; which
thing the foole did not onely deny,
but to his perrill, and the perrill of
all his family, reproached Dauid
and his followers, for Runnagates.
And if his wife had not been wiſer
then himſelfe, it had not failed, but
that their blood had all beene that
day ſhed vpon the ground. Heere
was his folly, that would ſtand for a
little, to endaunger all; to ſaue one
horſe-load of Raiſins, & Bread, and
Wine, woulde bring himſelfe in
hazard to looſe the whole ſtore in

his Barne, in his houſe, in his ſeller,
beſides the life of himſelfe, and his
Family. This foole wee alſo hate
& deride, who was ſo penny-wiſe,
and ſo pound-fooliſh. But are not
many of Nabals haters, Nabals followers?
Many of his Scorners, his
Diſciples? Yes verily, for the very
ſame men, to ſaue their wealth together,
deny not onely to Dauid;
that is, to men in want, that which
ſhould bee the fruite and worke of
mercy, but vnto the Church, the
Lords Miniſters, their poore and
iuſt deſerued portions, penſions, &
Tythes; whereby their priuate cofers
(being not ſanctifyed vnto holyvſes)
are for a while ſtuffed with
the poore Church-mens liuinges,
(like Bladders with wind) and then
commeth the Lord with one little
pricke, and letteth all the whole
ſtore fly away from their poſterity.
            
               
A Reuerend Byſhop in our nation,Doctor Babington L. Byſhop of Worceſter vppon Exodus.
hath left recorded in writing,
this Hiſtory; that a certaine Gentleman,
offered to the Parſon for
his Tith-wooll, a fleece or two,
whereas in truth his due was to pay
more: the Parſon (beeing a Layman)
brought the Tyth-wooll to
the Church, and ſhewed it to the
Neighbours, deſiring them to witneſſe,
by the view of that Fleece,
whether hee had iuſtly Tythed his
Wooll or no: which all that ſaw,
witneſſed that hee had very falſely
dealt therein; then the Parſon refuſed
to take it: whereat the Gentleman
grewe furious, ſeeing himſelfe
ſo iuſtly ſhamed before all the
Neighbours, and in his rage, ſwore
or vowed, that hee woulde neuer
giue him one lock more, although
it coſt him neuer ſo deare. Thus he
reſted, and the Parſon alſo forbare

his farther vexation; but almighty
God did not forget this falſe & furious
Gentleman, for hee ſent a
conſumption into his wealth, and
brought him in ſhort time to ſuch
pouerty, that hee was content to
take Dole or Almes amongeſt the
poore people, which were relieued
at the Funerall of the ſaide Parſon.
Remember this I beſeech you, and
neuer forget this folly, neither
grow rich by vnmercifulneſſe or
falſhoode: for what you thinke to
ſaue in the Acre, you ſhall looſe in
the Field, or what you gaine in the
yard, ſhall be again taken from you
in the whole piece; remembring
alway the Countrey Prouerb, Couetouſneſſe
bringeth nothing home.
And ſo we take our leaue of Nabal.
            
            11 In the next place commeth
the proud foole Rehoboam, (ſauing
the honour due vnto Kings) ſo we

will be bold to ſtile him, although
he were King Salomons ſonne. His
folly was, that when people came
vnto him, and deſired a releaſe of
his Fathers impoſitions (which
thing the Elders of Iſrael perſwaded
him vnto) by one proude and
ſcornefull aunſwere, following the
Counſell of his young Minions &
Play-fellowes, he loſt ten Tribes;
that is, ten partes of Dauids Kingdome
at once, and left himſelfe only
but two. Heere is a foole indeed,
for it is impoſſible for a proud man
to bee wiſe, and Princes cannot
hold their Subiectes ſo faſt tyed in
allegiance vnto them with bloude
and terrour, as they may doe with
compaſſion & blandiſhing words;
Curteſie being a great Iewell in a
Princes crowne; Compaſsion the
handle, Iuſtice the edge, and Mercie
the point of a Kings ſword. But

dyed Rehoboam childleſſe? & hath
he no ſuruiuors in his State? I will
not meddle with kings, nor Lords,
or great perſons, but let vs come to
our ſelues, and ſuch as are our equals.
Auſten the Monke, (whom
the Papiſtes call the Engliſh-mens
Apoſtle) loſt all the Brittiſh Monks
by his pride:Beda. ſo wee, like Auſten,
looſe our Friends, our Seruantes,
our Neighbors harts, by our Lordlike
and proud behauiour; we care
not whom we deuoure, vpon whō
we tread, ſo we may riſe; ſome by
ſlaunders, ſome by fury, ſome by
folly and truth not to be reuealed,
fill the worlde with contentions,
rending the Wife from the Huſband,
the Husband from the wife;
the Father from the Sonne, the
Sonne from the Father; the Lorde
and Maiſter from the Seruant, and
the Seruant from the Lorde and

Maiſter, the Land-lorde from the
Tenant, and the Tenant from the
Landlord: that there is not ſo
much loue and good wil left in the
Countrey, as was betwixt Balaam
& his Aſſe, when he did beat him.
I wil ſpeake plainly; Some like Rehoboam
ſpeak proudly; others (like
the rebellious Iſraelites) take it as
peeuiſhly, they will haue as little
charity in their eares, as other haue
in their tongues, a word & a blow,
friendſhip is no heauier then a feather,
which euery blaſt of wind toſſeth
too and fro. The loſſe of ſixepence
will cauſe a ſute, the gaine
of a ſhilling will make a Traitour,
and they are more ready to follow
a Crowne of Gold, then an Angel
of Heauen All their varniſhing is
outward; they are like Gyants pictures,
terrifying the beholders, and
if they haue not power to be cruell

inough in their owne perſons, of
their owne eſtate, then they flye to
the mightier, and incenſe them, abuſing
good Natures by falſe tales,
and force them, inſtead of milke, to
draw blood from their Inferiours,
& ſo they make themſelues fooles,
for they liue without credite, and
die without pitty; ſauing, It is pitty
they die no ſooner.
            12 Yet behold more fooles then
theſe: And now, wee bring in the
man in the Goſpel, who in preſumption
of long life, deſtroied his
Barnes, and builded greater, and
bad his ſoule take his eaſe, eat drink,
and take paſtime,
               Luk. 12, 20 
               for it had much
goods laide vppe for many yeares: Ah
foole (ſaide God) this night they wil
fetch away thy ſoule from thee. And
worthily and rightly is he a Foole,
whom God calleth a foole, for his
iudgement cannot be deceiued, his

inſight into mans heart is ſo perfect,
that it cannot erre: for he hath
anatomized and dissected more;
then all the Phyſitians that euer
haue beene. But who doth ſo now
adaies? Who blesseth himſelfe in
his riches? Seeketh them, but to
ſpend them; ſpendeth them, but
on himſelfe; keepeth, but for his
pleaſure; and maketh account to
liue many yeares? I will tell you
who: he that wil not giue, becauſe
he cannot tell what hee ſhall want
before hee die: For, although Almighty
God haue dealt neuer ſo liberally
with him, giuing many
houſes, and much money, that was
borne to none; the ſixt part whereof,
could haue ſatisfied him, before
he had it; now he will not truſt his
bounty any more, but out of his
owne prouident wretchedneſſe, be
vnmercifull to other, for feare of

want, while they wallow in all ſurfet
and abundance. Againe, they
are ſuch fooles, who neuer ceaſe
trauailing and labouring, all for
their liuing, as if they had at the
leaſt a leaſe of a thouſand years for
their life, dealing with their ſoules,
as Hackney men with their horſes,
giuing them no reſt till they bee
dead; And then, ſuch ſoules cannot
reſt, becauſe if their bodies
giue them ſo little reſt while they
bee in them, (who yet haue great
occaſion to honour them) the deuils,
into whoſe power the ſoules
of ſuch men doe paſſe, will ſhewe
them much leſſe fauour, hauing no
other ioy, but to afflict & torment
the ſoules that themſelues haue beguiled:
For if the old Birde be vnkinde
to her young one, it muſt
look for leſſe fauour in the Tallant
of the Haukes. Therefore, neuer

gather or keepe, in hope of long
life (but onely to obey Gods commandement,
who biddeth thee labour)
for as the ſhaddow runneth
from him that followeth it, ſo doth
long life from him that hopeth after
it. Life (ſaith Ioh) is giuen to him
that deſireth to dye. And ſo we leaue
theſe fools, praying God for them,
that they may learne to unmber
their dayes, and apply their hearts to
Wiſedome.
            
            13 We read of another generation
of Spirituall fooles in the
Goſpel (called Phariſees) and them
our Sauiour called Fooles;Mat. 15, 23 
               Blinde,
and leaders of the blind, becauſe they
were in nothing ſo wiſe, as to beguile
themſelues, and by obſeruation
of their owne Traditions, they
made the Law of God of no effect,
auoyding (by corrupt and Haereticall
Gloſſes) the plaineſt Text of

Gods holy word, ſuch as our Sauiour
in thoſe two Chapters alledgeth:
how wiſe alſo, are many ruſ
ſet and Ruſticke perſous, to auoide
euery one of Gods Lawes, hauing
knowledge in nothing but to defend
their ſins. Tell them of ſwearing,
they ſay, the Law reſpecteth
iudgement; Of the Sabaoth, they
ſay, play is not forbidden, but labour;
Of coueting houſe & land,
they ſay, to deſire to buy, is not to
couet; and ſo they condemn God,
and iuſtifie Ahab. Sometime they
alledge, that the Goſpell is for the
Church of Rome; ſometime, the
Browniſts at Amſterdam: ſomtime,
they ſnatch at Gods mercy, when
their owne ſinnes are taxed, & refuſe
his luſtice; ſometime againe,
Gods iuſtice, when they woulde
haue their enemies plagued, and
diſclaime mercie. Thus, they dare

not deny the Scriptures, yet they
will not confeſſe them, but in their
owne ſence. They make no reckoning
of Prayer, except in the
Church, and there they are ſuperſtitious,
and a Holy day is more
then a Saboth: If they be inclined
to ſuperſtitious faſting, they haue
Text for that: If to prophane eating
and drinking, they haue another
for that. The pride of womens
Garments, in Eſay and S. Peter, was
il in thoſe times, but now (they ſay)
it is good, (ſo the holy Ghoſt was
blinde, and ſaw not what ſhoulde
ſuite with our times.) The deceitfulneſſe
of Merchants, and oppreſſion
of rich men, ſpoken againſt by
Eſay, Ezechiel, and Michah, was for
the Tyrians and the Iewes, but all
our honeſt Merchants are exempted,
if once we haue deliuered our
wares, and receiued our mony and

ſecurity; and to conclude, twenty
deceits in Wares, in writinges, in
words, are a farre leſſe ſinne, then
to miſſe paiment of a little money
at the day, although it come on the
Morrowe. But I will leaue theſe
Fooles, Which ſtraine at Gnats, and
ſwallow Camels, praying God, that
his word may be our Wiſedome,
and our minds be ſubiect to his direction.
            14 Now we wil leaue the ſcriptures,
and deſcend to the humaine
Chroniclers of Fooles; and firſt,
we wil ſhew you the ſtories of ſuch
follies, as haue beene more generall,
and then them that were more
ſpeciall, and by Gods aſsiſtaunce,
apply both to our purpoſe: and let
my plainneſſe be excuſed, becauſe
I deſire to bee remembred, and to
profit.
            We read of a certaine people,

(called Atlantes) who dwelling
neare the burning line,Herod. lib. 4 Stobaeus ſer. 42. vocat eas Apharants. are euerie
day ſcorched by the Sunnes heat,
vnto whom it is a Cuſtomary Religion,
that ſo long as they feele and
ſee the Sunne, euen all the day long
they do nothing els, but with hand
and mouth, curſe and blaſpheme it
for ſo afflicting them with heat, being
angry (iniuſtly) with that glorious
light, that comforreth all liuing
creatures, becauſe in their
owne particular, it giueth them offence.
Theſe are worthy to bee accurſed
themſelues, who for to doe
them a pleaſure, either would haue
the Sunne to remooue from her
place, or to leaue ſhining. Can
there be in worldly affaires a greater
folly? Haue they no wit, to remooue
their habitations and ſeeke
ſome other Cires and places of abode?
But to continue in a fruiteleſſe

& bootleſſe blaſphemy from
age to age, againſt the high Maieſtie
of God, and his moſt glorious
creature of this viſible world? wel,
they are Blackamoores, and their bodies
are not ſo blacke without, as
this folly maketh their ſoules black
within. So are theſe in ſtory, but
how are they reſembled in figure?
Marry againſt thoſe Wretches I
muſt apply it, who for their owne
particular, would remoue the goſpell,
the health of vs all; the Magiſtrate,
the peace of vs all; & Learniing,
the light of vs all: becauſe
for the goſpell, they ſay other Nations
diſgrace them, and perſecure
them; by the Magiſtrate, they are
ſometime puniſhed, and forced to
right againſt their will: by Learning,
they are ouertopped in Vertue
and honour; Therefore they
are weary of the Goſpel, as the Girſites
               
were of Chriſt; they raile on
the Magiſtrate, becauſe they may
not be protected in their wrong;
and they would pul downe Learning,
Colledges, Byſhopprickes,
Cathedralles, and all Eccleſiaſtical
dignities, that they may raigne
alone, and be the onely Lordes of
Vertue and Vice, leauing no better
men in the ſtate, then Merchants,
Faulkners, Hunters, Riders, and
poore Carters and Seruing-men,
to do their baſe Offices.
            Theſe are verier Fooles then the
Atlantes, for beſide their vaine opinions,
neither Church, nor Magiſtrate,
nor Learning, doeth them
any harme, but much good: and
whereas, the Moores curſe that
which burneth them, & ſcorcheth
them to blackneſſe, theſe wretches
finde fault with thoſe that warme
them, and waſh them to whitenes.

Whenſoeuer therefore, you heare
any open their mouths againſt any
of theſe, then remember this ſtory,
and knowe, that no pretext of reaſon
can excuſe them, either from
madneſſe or ſolly: For we may not
buy our Grace with other nations,
(if we be diſgraced) with the loſſe
of the Goſpell; neither will we ſuffer
our Rulers to be deſpiſed for the
pleaſure and partiality of Malefactious
offendors; nor ſo much as
draw the Curtain vpon Learning,
for the tender eyes of any ignorant
vaine men whatſoeuer; And ſo
Lord, If theſe men curſe, yet bleſſe
thou our church, our King, our State,
our Learning, our People, for euermore.
            
            15 Giue mee leaue yet to leade
you along in the ſpirit,Sab. lib. 4. cap. 9. as God did
Ezechiell,
               Gel. lib. 6. cap. 11. and as he ſaid to him, Behold
more abhominations;
               Herod. lib. 4 ſo I to

you, Behold more fooles. We read
of a ſtrange kind of fooliſh people,
called, Pſylli, in Affrica, who were
of a very low ſtature of bodie, but
of a much lower and meaner wit
and conceipt. For they, hauing a
Citty much annoyed by the South-winde,
vpon a ſeaſon, eſpying their
opportunity, in a calme and peaceable
weather, armed themſelues to
go out into the ſandy Sea, or wilderneſſe
of ſand, to ſeeke this their
enemy, the South-winde, and to bid
it battell, hoping vtterly to vanquiſh
it, ſo as it might neuer more
blow vpon them: while they ranged
too and fro, to ſeeke this their
aduerſary, ſuddainely the Windes
aroſe, and ſo toſſed the ſand vppon
them, that in a ſhort ſpace they
were all ſwallowed vp therewith.
Theſe are worthily punniſhed for
their folly (will euery man ſay) for

what can a ſharp ſword do againſt
the cold winde? No more, then to
caſt ſtones; and what ſimplicitie
were it to thinke, that the Winde
were a liuing creature, and had eyther
bloud or ſpirit to looſe? Or if
it had, that mortal men could meet
or match it? Well, out of theſe
ſands which drowned theſe Pſylli
people, are aroſe a generation, almoſt
as fooliſh as they; Namely,
thoſe which think by carnal means
to ouercome Spirituall daungers.
For, if the ſoule haue no affinitie
with Golde, the one being a Corporeall,
the other a Spirituall ſubſtance,
what is there in Magical inchauntment,
as a Fiſhes Liuer, to
driue away a Deuill? And Gold to
ſatisfie for mens ſinnes? the griefe
of Conſcience, cannot be cured by
Muſicke, nor carnal Precepts ouerthrow
our Spirituall foe. Your ſpirituall

daungers are greateſt, therefore
truſt in the Lord, who is a ſpirit,
and therefore fitteſt to diſpel &
conquer them; but as for King, or
Man, or Horſe, or Speare, or Spel,
or Medicine, they cannot help the
ſoule againſt the Lordes wrath. It
is beſt to yeild our bodies to Spirituall
blaſtes, and let the minde bee
compaſſed about with him, whom
Winde and Seas obey. Honeſty
externall, is a neceſſarie Armour
againſt the malice of man, yet our
Spirituall foe wil not feare it, vnleſſe
it be accompanied with Prayer
and Spirituall Weapons alſo.
            16 Thus haue I ſhewed you the
more generall Fooles, now I will
proceede againſt the more particular
and ſpeciall. And in the firſt
place I will ranke the Hypocrite,
which taketh but the vaile or garment
of Religion; letting goe the

pithe and Marrow thereof. I may
wel compare him to that Aſinus
Cumanus,
               Herod. lib. 1 Eraſmus. Aſſe of Cuma. An Aſſe
finding a Lyons skin, to the end to
make himſelfe more terrible to the
fooliſh Citizens, put himſelf thereinto,
and then ietted fearefully vp
and downe in the ſame, to the terrour
of as many of that Cittie as
ſaw him, euery one thinking him
(indeede to be a Lyon: and when
he had helde them a good time in
that dreadful opinion, at laſt, a
ſtranger came that way, who hearing
the general bruite of this
ſtrange Beaſt, was deſirous to ſee
him, and at the very firſt, beholding
his eares, knew him to bee an Aſſe
in a Lyons skin, and went boldly
to him, & before al the multitude
plucked off the Lyons skin, and ſo
diſcouered the Aſſes practiſe. This
(I know) doth very wel ſuite with

an Hypocrite, firſt becauſe no wiſe
man will be a counterfaite, but only
ſom ſhalow-witted perſon, therfore
fitly reſembled to an aſſe, apt
to bear both Gods wrath & Mans:
Gods, becauſe hee diſliketh him
that is not ſo good as he ſeemeth:
Mans, becauſe men of this worlde
hate him, that ſeemes to bee good,
although he be not. Now, the Lyons
skinne ſignifieth Chriſt, for he
is the Lyon of the Tribe of Iuda, in
whoſe garments wee are bleſſed of
God, as Iacob was of Iſaac, in the
garmentes of his elder Brother.
How glad are ſome men, if for a
ſeaſon they can counterfait godlineſſe,
(for that is both our Sauiors
coate and skinne) and then they
beguile ſimple people that ſuſpect
no fraude, for they will pray, read,
heare, giue, praiſe Vertue, diſpraiſe
Vice, and what not? So as they

may get an eſtimation of piety, to
couer their more odious and ſecret
practiſes. But GOD ſhall ſend a
man, a ſtranger, of more skill and
Wiſedome, to plucke the skin ouer
theſe Hypocrites eares, that all the
worlde may know and deride this
folly, & that they themſelues may
likewiſe vnderſtande, that diſſembled
Religion and Piety ſhall haue
her ſhame in this world, and in the
world to come.
            17 Worldly men are alſo very
much troubled with Ignorance, &
want of experience in diuine matters,
(I meane matters of Conſcience)
whereof one Callicon (a notable
foole) may giue them a taſte,Euſtathius ſuper odyſſ.
and in his action apt to be derided,
they may take a view of their own
faces. This ſilly fellow being ſleepy,
and wanting a Pillow or Bolſter
to beare vp his head, layed vnneath

it a Veſſell of glaſſe, which
being very hard, and not tollerable
to his tender head-peece, hee remembred
that he had hearde that
Feathers make Pillowes ſoft; whervppon
he went and filled it full of
Feathers, and ſo lay downe vpon
it againe, but with no more eaſe
then before. And ſurely (no maruaile)
for except the out-ſide were
apt to yeeld vpon any preſſure, in
vaine was it ſtuffed with any ſofte
matter. You laugh that hear this, &
who can forbeare to deride ſuch a
folly vpon ſo litle harme. But turne
to your-ſelues (I beſeech you) and
tell me, Who hath the iudgement
to procure quiet ſleepe to his ſoule
when it is weary? Firſt, out of Nature,
we know that it wanteth reſt,
and out of that knowledge wee labour
to prouide it: but what doe
wee reſt our ſoules heade vppon?

Namely, a harde brittle ſhining
heape of ſome worldly pelfe, vpon
which our ſoule can take no more
reſt, then the fooles head vpon the
glaſſe, (for as the Lyon delighteth
not in ſtraw, nor the Horſe in fleſh,
no more doth the ſoule in wealth
of Gold and Siluer.) Then we hear
of another reſt more ſoft then
glaſſe, which is learned or gathered
from the Fowles of Heauen, I
meane the Saints, which bring vnto
vs the holy worde of God, that
we prouide, and miſplace it in the
the former brittle harde Veſſell of
worldly heapes, and ſo thinke to
ſleepe more eaſily vpon our former
Pillowe, by reaſon of the new inward
ſtuffing, but all in vaine, for if
the bottle be all hard and faſt ſtopped,
we may ſuck the skin off from
our lips, before we draw the Wine
through. Put not new Wine into

old Veſſels, then ſaith our Sauiour,
it will be loſt, and put the ſoft Feathers
of Diuine promiſes into the
hard pots of carnall mindes, and
there ſhall be no more reſt then before.
But change the mind, according
to that ſaying; Bee ye renewed
in your minde, and then the ſoftnes,
ſweetneſſe, goodneſſe, and quietneſſe,
of heauenly promiſes, more
waighty then Feathers ſhall yeelde
eternal reſt to our ſoules.
            18 I wil omit to ſpeak of vaine
feare, which taketh away the wit
of man, the feares of the wicked,
which are cauſeleſſe and eaſeleſſe:
declared in the folly of Phanax the
Graecian, who euer feared the fal of
the Moone, and did often in a fooliſh
Prophetically pitty,Plutarchus. lament the
deſtruction of the Ethiopians, vpon
whom he thought of neceſſity the
Moone muſt fal; but let men feare

their falling into ſinne, and with ſin
into hell, more then the fall of the
Moone vpon the earth, or a deere
yeare, cold Winter, or wet Summer.
Againe, I might ſpeak againſt
that careleſſe ſottiſhneſſe, and wilfull
ignoraunce of thoſe thinges,
which they daily hear and ſee; like
to one Amphiſtides,
               Suidas. which woulde
neuer learne to tell aboue fiue, or
to know whether his father or mother
bore him in her wombe: ſuch
ſurely are thoſe, who wil not buſie
themſelues with Diuine numbers,
and know not certainly God to be
their Father, or the Church to bee
their Mother.
            I will alſo omit, to diſcourſe againſt
the folly of prophaneſſe in
the ſoules fits, wherein carnall perſons
hauing beene ſtung in their
conſciences, by ſome guilt of ſinne
preſented to their memory, by

ſome Text of Scripture, or other
perſon guilty and priuy to their offence:
they caſt offal care of diuine
ſayings and iudgement; yea, peraduenture
make away the perſon
guilty to their crimes, that he may
neuer ſtand vp in iudgment againſt
them. Theſe men are reſembled
vnto vs in that foole, who beeing
in his bed grieuouſly bitten with
fleas, did put out the Candle, to the
end they might not ſee him,Gilbert. li. 1 Narrac. but his
foole-ſhip was deceiued, as afterward
he found, when hee wanted
light to take them out of his bed.
Euen ſo, they which thinke to procure
reſt to their ſecret bytings, by
killing the Witneſſes of their
crimes, or extinguiſhing in them
the little care they had of godlineſſe,
ſhal be deceiued; for not only
they ſhall haue more plague, but
alſo want helpe and light to recouer

a remedy when they woulde
haue it.
            19 I will conclude all, with
another ſtory,Idē lib. eod. againſt the prepoſterous
folly of worldly men, who
firſt labour for earthly, and then
for heauenly things. I do read of
a Noble mans foole, whoſe labour
was to bring in woode to the Kitchin:
when hee came to the pyle,
hee would alway draw out vnderneath,
vpon which the whole pyle
lyeth, and let the vppermoſt alone,
(which had beene more ready) ſaying,
that hee would do the hardeſt
labour firſt, and then the eaſieſt afterward.
And by no means could
he be diſſwaded from this courſe,
but would ſpend more time in pulling
out a ſticke, then hee ſhoulde
haue done in carrying in an armefull.
So are the Children of this
world, they take the moſt and firſt

paines for inferiour thinges which
lye vndermoſt, and let the ſuperiour
and heauenly thinges, (more
eaſie to willing mindes, which yet
preſſe and keep downe the worldly
things) to be laſt and leaſt regarded.
I referre my ſelfe to your conſciences,
whether I ſpeak not true;
if true, whether you or he are more
fooliſh. Two parts there are in this
Spirituall folly; the firſt, that men
by giuing their firſt labours to the
world, which is vndermoſt, like the
foundation of a Wood-pile, looſe
much time, & the world, or wordly
bleſſings, come more hardly vnto
them. For I muſt euer reſt in my
ſweet Sauiours ſaying,Mat. 6, 33. 
               Seeke firſt
the Kingdome of God, and the righteouſneſſe
thereof, and all other things
ſhall be caſt vpon you. And heauie
things come more eaſily downeward
then vpward; therefore the

Prophet telleth vs,
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               God remembreth
the Heauens the Heauens the Clouds
the Clouds the Earth, and the Earth
the people. So al bleſſings muſt firſt
be ſought for in heauen, and then
(as Agar) we ſhal haue an Angell
to direct vs to the Fountain of water
on the earth.
            Secondly, another part of this
folly is, that we cannot be perſwaded
with this foole, but that Heauenly
thinges are more eaſily accompliſhed
of all ſorts, then earthly:
and therefore he which is ſeuen
yeares apprentice to a Trade, and
all little enough; yet an houre in a
Church at a Sermon, is loſſe of
time in Heauenly matters, they
may do it much ſooner. So one of
you, which liueth fifty, ſixtie, or
ſeauenty yeares, and al that time
laboureth in, and for the Worlde,
thinketh it enough for heauen, to

haue a Miniſter, and a few Prayers
an houre or two before his death.
Theſe are our cares, and our Articles,
upon theſe we paſſe our time,
and venture our ſoules. But (ô
Fooles) How long will you delight in
fooliſhneſſe, and hate Wiſedome! Bee
wiſe as Serpentes,
               Eſay. 30. 1 
               bee innocent as
Doues. If you be onely wiſe for this
world, God wil deſtroy you. None
came to the birth of Chriſt on
earth, but the wiſe men in the Eaſt.
There were more men in the Eaſt,
but none of them looked vppe to
heauen but theſe. It is better, you
ſee, to ſtudy on the Starres, then
the earth, thereby wee are at leaſt
admoniſhed, to lift vp our heads,
and looke for Chriſt in heauen, as
thoſe wiſe men did heare on earth.
We ſhal finde him, wee ſhall ſee
him,Heb. 9, 28 for vnto them that Looke for
him, hee will appeare the ſecond time

to ſaluation.
            
            You are all the children of wiſedome,
you muſt iuſtifie her, hearken
to her complaint, Can your
hearts forbeare rending and yearning
to heare her cry ſo earneſtly,
ô Fooles, how long will ye loue fooliſhneſſe,
and ſcorners delight in ſcorning!
               Prou. 1, 22.
               Be you turned at my Correction,
I will poure out my minde vnto
you, and make you to vnderſtand my
wordes. Feare not the loſſe of any
thing, the lacke of that you haue
ſhe hath prouided, all, both houſe,
harbour, meate, Wine, onely ſhe
wanteth you, you ſhe calleth. Wiſedome
hath builded her houſe,
               Prou. 9, 12. 
               ſhe hath
hewen out her ſeauen Pillars. Shee
hath killed her fatlinges, drawne her
Wine, and made ready her Table. She
hath ſent foorth her Maides (Viz:)
the Preachers, crying in the high
places (out of the Pulpits) and ſaying;

He that is ſimple and deſtitute of
vnderſtanding, let him come, let him
come and eate of my meate which I
haue prepared, and drinke of my wine
which I haue drawne. For ſake your
way ô ye fooliſh, and you ſhall liue, and
walke in the way of vnderſtanding.
            
            20 So cryeth Wiſedome, and
let all her children and friends followe
her; yea, not onely them to
whom Dauid ſaith; Bee you wiſe, ô
kings,
               Pſal. 2, 10. 
               he you learned you that be Iudges
of the earth. But euery Maiſter,
euery Gentleman, euery Cittizen,
euery husbandman, euery Tradeſman,
euery Labourer, euery Man
and Maid-ſeruant, euery Olde and
young man. Receiue inſtruction &
not Siluer, & knowledge rather then
Gold.
               Prou. 8, 10. 
               Wiſedome is more worth then
precious Stones, and all pleaſures are
not to be compared to her. Striue to
gaine the time you haue loſt, Striue

(I ſay) that you may bee reſcribed
in the number of the wiſe Virgins,
and taken out of the number of the
fooliſh. We read of one Mycernius,
that one tolde him, (take what
courſe he could) he ſhould liue but
ſixe yeares. The Prince (for ſo he
was) amazed heereat, plucked vp
his ſpirits and ſaide, hee would liue
twelue yeares, for he knew how to
make twelue of ſixe, and this was
his courſe: hee bad all ſleepe farewel,
and prouided ſuch abundance
of lights, that whitherſoere he wēt,
or whereſoeuer hee was, it was alway
as light as day, & ſo he thoght
he liued twelue yeeres, becauſe he
waked in light, when others ſleepe
in darkeneſſe, which is a kinde of
death, one halfe of our life beeing
alway cut off or ſpent in ſleepe. Oh
that we had ſo much wit and power
to double our dayes we haue to

liue, and that the lightes of wiſedome
might neuer be quenched in
our preſence, but ſhine about vs,
and in vs whether ſoeuer wee goe,
ſo ſhall our day excell Ioſuahs day,
and we walke in the day wherein no
man ſtumbleth. Beloued, While you
haue the light, walke in the light, and
the God of lights and peace fil you ful,
& bring euery one of you out of darkneſſe,
and the ſhadow of death, into
the light of Grace and Glory,
guiding your feet into the
way of peace, Amen.
            
         
         
            
            The ſecond Sermon.
            
               THus did I diſcourſe
of Wiſedome and
the wiſe man in my
firſt Sermon, which
was a neceſſary circumſtance
in my Text, giuing precepts
to all. Now it followeth, that
we handle his wordes, and looke
into the Marrow of his prouerbiall
Doctrine, wherein hee firſt inſtructeth,
Be diligent, and take heed.
Secondly, he directeth, to thy flock,
to thy heards, that is; to al thy ſtate,

calling, dealing; priuate, common,
euery where. Or by the Flock you
may vnderſtand our goods encloſed
within houſe or hedge, by the
Heard, thoſe things that are more
common and wilde abroad, for the
wealth of thoſe times conſiſted in
Flockes and Heards. This his inſtruction
hee inlargeth by reaſon.
Secondly by parts. Thirdly, by vſe.
Firſt, the reaſon, why wee muſt
looke to our goodes and charge is
one, and that a mighty and waighty
one. For riches endure not alway,
nor the Crowne of Kinges to all their
generations. Secondly, the partes
of the charge, are the ſeuerall poſſeſsions.
Firſt, the Hay, that muſt
bee mowed. Secondly, the Graſſe,
that muſt bee eaten by Cattle, and
not troden vnder foote. Thirdly,
the hearbes of the Mountaine, they
muſt bee gathered; that is, Graine

and Corne of the Mountaines for
Meate, Medicine, and Ornament.
Fourthly, the Lambes, they muſt be
ſhorne or clipped, that out of their
fleeces we may fetch garments and
cloathing. Fiftly, the Goates, that
they may be ſold, and bring in money
for other vſes externall, for the
ſaying is wiſe and true in Columella.
Oportet patrem familias eſse vendacem
non emacem, The houſholder
muſt ſell, and not buy, if he wil
bee rich. Laſtly, the vſes of his inſtruction,
and all theſe partes of
wealth, Verſe 27. which is for the
keeping of a good houſe, when he
ſaith, And let the Milke of thy Goats
be ſufficient for the food of thy family
and the ſuſtenance of thy maids That
is, feede thy ſeruants, but not delicately,
for ſo hee will proue thy equall,
if not thy Maiſter, yet ſufficiently,
and that out of thine owne

ſtore, buy nothing for him, neither
for thy Maidens, but that they may
better looke to thy Goats and Cattle,
let them liue vpon their Milke,
that ſo they may learne by thy example
to be alike thrifty in time to
come: but if once they finde thee
looſe, & giue them boord-wages,
they wil be negligent in their charges,
and bring ruine to thy eſtate.
            2. [Be diligent.] That is, as if
Solomon had ſaide, in all the wayes
of thy life, be laborious and painefull;
whatſoeuer paſſeth through
thy hands, do it not by halues, and
ſlightly, but let it ſtill beare the
ſtampe of thy diligence, And if
there bee any thing to bee done,
which is not fit for thy place, or
paſsing thy skil, yet let thy eyes behold
the doing thereof; It is a vertue
(and no ſhame) to be preſent at
all thy affaires. Diligence is the

Mother, and negligence the Stepmother
of humaine life. By diligence
they are hatched and increaſed,
by negligence they are deſtroied
and diminiſhed. If we look vp
to Diuine and Heauenly thinges,
diligence is exemplified,Mat. 18, 10 
               For the
Angels ſtand alway before God; if to
the Precepts of the Law and word
of God:Deut 6, 7. 
               Thou ſhalt keepe diligently
the Precepts, Commandements, and
Teſtimonies of the Lorde thy God. If
a caſe come into Iudgement (becauſe
the Iudge hath but one power
to do a thing once onely, whether
good or ill) and becauſe euery
ſentence of a Iudge, is the ſentence
of God, therefore it muſt alſo bee
done with diligent inquiſition.
When a leprous man was broght
before the Prieſts,Deut 17, 4. the Lord commaunded
diligent inquiry firſt to
be made, and then euery man was

bound to reſt in the opinion of the
Prieſt.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ 58▪
                When the poore woman
in the Goſpell had loſt her Groate,
She lighteth her Candle ſweepeth hir
houſe, and ſearcheth diligently euery
Corner. Without dilligence
we can do nothing. The difficulty
and hardneſſe of euery worke is
made eaſie & foftned by diligence:
Prudence without Iuſtice is naught
worth, Iuſtice without Prudence is
worth as little▪ Knowledge, without
Diligence, is of ſmall vſe, Diligence
with Knowledge is worth
very much. The life of man is like
an Iron, which vſe maketh bright,
and reſt maketh ruſty: like a Water,
which ſtanding, is quickly corrupted,
but running, remaineth
ſweete and cleare, like the Pulſe,
which beating, ſheweth life, but
ceaſing, bringeth death. Therefore
out of Salomons precept I will amplifie

this point three waies. Firſt, I
wil ſhew the neceſsity of Diligence.
Secondly, the commendation of
it. Thirdly, the Commodity
thereof.
            3 Touching the neceſsity of diligence,
it was the ordinaunce of
God to ſubiect vs all to labour, to
diligent labour; yea, euen to ſweat,
immediately after our firſt parents
fall, and I verily thinke, had they
neuer fallen, yet without diligence
they could not haue liued, the neceſsity
of all earthly and humaine
affaires requiring the ſame. For by
dulneſſe, ſluggiſhneſſe, and ydleneſſe,
our buſineſſe, our liues labour
is intermitted, omitted, and
deſtroyed; neither the worke of
God or man, without vſe, exercitation
and diligence can long ſtand.
Al is a Talent, & euery talent muſt
bee vſed (not digged into the

ground) which cannot be without
diligence. Thrugh want of exerciſe,
the Armes of Hercules, of the ſtrongeſt,
are dulled in the bodye, and
the pureſt and ſharpeſt wittes are
blunted in the minde. We ſee that
the Land miſsing his Tillage, yeeldeth
ſmaller and worſer increaſe, &
that which is often turned, compaſſed,
and Ploughed, is the ſurer
ground to the Husbandmans content.
The Merchant, which by continued
diligence, often cutteth the
Seas, is much richer then hee that
ſitteth at home, and doth little or
nothing, after one venture or two.
The Iron, of round is not made flat
with one ſtroke of the Smith, but
by often doubling, & redoubling
the ſame. The Colt cannot bee tamed
& fitted for the ſadle, by once
backing and bitting, but by being
euery day in the hand of the rider.

When Lot went out of Sodome, he
muſt doe it with diligence, for hee
muſt be in Zoar, before the Sunne
riſing, and he nor they in his company
muſt be ſo ydle or careleſſe, as
once to looke backward, and ſo by
diligence he and his Daughters eſcaped
the fire and Brimſtone. By
diligence alſo, we eſcape Hel. Iacob
by his diligent ſeruice obtained Rahell,
the Starre in his eyes, the Iewell
of his heart. By diligent and valiaunt
aduenture, did Dauid bring
the 200. foreskins of the Philiſtims,
and wan the Kings Daughter. By
diligence, and not without dilligence
were the fiue Talents made
ten; and he which had ſo diligently
made and multiplied them, was
alſo made the Ruler of ten Citties.
I can neuer ſay enough of the neceſſity
heereof, but this I will ſay,
without diligence the ſinnes and

filth of our liues are increaſed, & by
diligēce are they euacuated; for the
ſea by ebbing & flowing, by fluxe,
& reflux, by reſtleſſe laboring and
working, is not corrupted, by al the
riuers, carkaſſes, and carrions in the
world, but ſtil it worketh them out;
ſo as it is without infection. Wars
nor peace, omit or intermit diligence,
for in war it cōſerueth from
enimy, it helpeth to victory; in
peace it conſerueth from corruption
of manners, and bringeth in
plenty of honour and all things.
            4 We read that the Mileſians hauing
bin in long ciuill wars among
thēſelues, ſo as their forts & houſes
were ruined, their catle diminiſhed
by daily rapines, their grain conſumed
& burned, and the Land waſted,
& al for the principality thereof.
To helpe & redreſſe this miſery,
the contending claimers pittying

the ſtate of their Country, grew to
a parley, & laid down their ſwords
of Hoſtility, and condiſcended to
referre their cauſe to the Pareyans
their next Neighbours, and ſo vnder
their common Seale, ſent by
Ambaſſage their cau
                  •
               e, quarrell,
requeſt, and ſubmiſſion, to their
cenſure and arbitrement. The Pareyans
accepted the determination
of this buſineſſe, & hauing receiued
a more ample reference from the
heades of the ſeuerall factions, to
beſtow the kingdome or principalitie
vpon whomſoeuer them pleaſed
within the Territory, they
came to Miletum, and hearde all
parties, Pro & con, what coulde be
ſaide for euerie mans Title. At laſt,
walking abroad, they ſaw the deſolations
of the whole Iſland, and
no man minding ſo much as the
Tillage, to procure common food,

except one Husbandman, which
then had ſowed his land, notwithſtanding
the fury of the ſedition.
This man they called, and before al
the claimers, they proclaimed him
K. as the worthieſt member of his
Countrey, prouiding for himſelfe,
and the common benefit of other,
when all in a deſperate ydleneſſe
gaue themſelues to ſowing & ſpilling
of blood, he in a diligent hand
of prouidence, attended the ſowing
of Corne and graine, for the filling
of his Countrey with ſtore againe.
And ſo all vpon a little debate, yeilded
to him, and praiſed the Pareians
election. Euen ſo is it with the
diligent, their hand muſt bear rule,
as Iuſtinus of a diligent heard-Boy
became a diligent Souldier; of a
diligent Souldier, a great Cōmander;
of a Commander, the Emperour
of the worlde, and one of the
beſt.
            
               
5 Hearken therefore vnto me
my beloued, young men and Brethren,
be diligent, for they that are
not in the labours of men, are in
the labours of Deuils. When I
looke vp to heauen, I ſee, and find,
that without diligent Prayer, faſting,
reading, meditating, & godly
continued conuerſation to the end,
wee ſhall neuer come thither; Oh,
therefore bee diligent, it is for a
Crowne, it will quite the paines, it
will pay the labour richly. If I look
vpon the earth, the Husbandman
hath foure ſeaſons, which obſeruing,
he is rewarded with plentie,
and with neglecting, hee is cloathed
with Beggery. Bee diligent,
for God doth ſpeed the Plough. If
I looke on learning, and learned
men, I finde that diligence maketh
their nights ſhort, their daies long,
their dyet thin, their bread courſe,

cording to that of the Poet:

                  Mùlta tulit fecitque puer ſudauit & alſit
                  Abstinuit vino & venere qui pythia cantat.
               
            
            Many and many are the miſeries
of the Student; ſometimes
hee ſweateth; ſometimes, hee
freezeth; and the ſonges of his Diuine
Oracles make him forbeare
both drunkenneſſe and wantonneſſe.
Be diligent therefore, for ſo,
meane men haue attained Kingdomes;
Husband-men, riches;
Schollers, Dignities; and Merchantes,
Honours; and without
this diligence, God wil not beſtow
his bleſſing. And thus much for
the neceſsity of diligence.
            6 The ſecond thing I noted of
Diligence, is the praiſe and Commendation
thereof, for this alone
was neuer diſpraiſed. The Turkes
diſpraiſe Learning; ſome Temperaunce,
ſome Fortitude, ſome Iuſtice,

ſome Religion, but all commend
Diligence. Salomon is as
much cōmended for his diligence,
as for his wiſedome, and when he
ceaſed to be diligent, hee alſo ceaſed
to be wiſe; and when he renewed
his diligence, and forſooke his
pleaſures, then hee recouered his
wiſedome. Saint Paule inferiour
to no man, in praiſe, in deſert, hath
his Diuine partes commended by
his diligence; firſt, in that hee
neuer ceaſed warning al men night
and day, and ſerued the Lorde in
watching and Prayer: that he trauailed
two thouſand Miles, and in
all that iourney preached the Goſpell:
for theſe his many accidentes
in his labour, is (as hee deſerued)
commended of all:2. Pet. 3, 15. yea, S. Peter
tearmeth him his beloued Brother
Paule. Saint Chryſoſtom in Eccleſiaſticall
ſtory, is memorable for

many excellent partes in him, and
eſpecially for that in his baniſhmēt
hee preached diligently, and conuerted
many to Chriſt Ieſus. Hee
that tilleth the ground ſhall haue aboundance
(ſaith Salomon.) We
read of Furius Creſinus (a Roman)
who hauing euery yeare better
Corne then his Neighbours, they
called him into iudgement for the
ſame, alledging that by inchauntment
and witchcraft hee ſpedde ſo
well, and that by ſuch ſecret euill
meanes, hee drew away the fat of
other mens Lande into his owne.
The poore man appeared at the
day, and brought with him all his
Tooles of husbandry; waightye
Plow-ſhares, heauy Mattockes &
Spades, ful fed Oxen, all his yrons
much bigger and ſtronger then
other mens, and laſtly his Daughter,
a ſtrong and mightie young

woman, who was his helper in all
his Husbandry, & ſetting all theſe
before his accuſers and Iudges, cried
out in theſe wordes: Haec ſunt
Quirites veneficia mea. (ô Romans)
this Daughter, theſe Oxen, theſe
Tooles are the Inſtruments of my
Witchcraft, and beſides theſe, I
vſe none, and theſe I apply with
all diligence: whereat his Iudges
being mooued, abſolued him with
commendation. Thus we ſee, diligence
procureth aboundaunce in
time of want, and fauour in time
of iudgement: who can ſufficiently
expreſſe or admire her praiſes,
which maketh men ſo praiſe-worthy,
both in Court and Countrey.
When all Iewry were aſleepe at
our Sauiours birth, who had the
warning and notice thereof from
heauen, euen the very ſame night,
but the Shepheardes that kept their
               Luke 2. 8.
               
               flocke by night; commended for
nothing but for their diligence, to
them did the Angelles of Heauen
bring tydings of the Byrth of Chriſt
our Sauiour the ſonne of Dauid. Loe,
another Commendation of diligence,
and a greater cannot bee to
heare the Angels ſpeake, the heauenly
Souldiers ſing, and to ſee
before all earthly men (next to Ioſeph
and Mary) the moſt bleſſed
Babe that euer was. Diligence is
obſerued by the heauenly powers,
and rewarded with the happy viſion
of Ieſus Chriſt.
            7 Againe, the continual brand
of infamy and diſgrace, that is ſet
vpon the negligent and ſluggiſh, is
no meane praiſe of diligence and
induſtry, and therefore whereſoeuer
wee read of a ſluggard or ydle
perſon, euen in his greatneſſe he is
taxed for this. Eſau, who hauing

beene a hunting, came home hungry,
to ſatisfie his preſent hunger,
ſolde his Birth-right, in his negligence
ſaith S. Auſten, Malebat emere
quam quaerere cibum, hee had rather
ſet his Birth-right packing,
then tarry, or go ſeeke meate at an
eaſier rate, wh
                  •
               rfore he is branded
with the Title of very fewe: Eſau
Ihate. Claudius, after he was Emperour,
grew ſo careleſſe and ſluggiſh,
that he minded nothing, neither
what he ſaide, nor to whome,
nor among whom hee ſpake. Ptolomy
another careleſſe King of Egipt,
would play at Cheſſe ſitting
in Iudgement vppon mens liues,
whereby many times wrong iudgment
proceeded out of the Kinges
negligence, and the bloude of an
Innocent was ſhed, which all the
kings of the world, could not make
to liue againe, or giue a ſatisfaction.

               Theodoſius the younger was
wont to ſubſcribe to all Letters or
grauntes that were brought vnto
him: to draw him from this careleſneſſe,
his Siſter Palcheria deuiſed
an edict to be made, whereby hee
baniſhed his wife whom hee loued
moſt dearely. And then ſhe getting
the writing againe after the Emperour
had ſigned it, brought it vnto
him, blamed him, he denied it, ſhe
produced it, and the ſhame thereof
made him more diligent euer afterward.
Thus by negligence are al
other Vertues ſtained, becauſe diligence
giueth grace to all. Learne
(I beſeech you) to be diligent, and
not to breake off your diligence in
any point; and in all your actions,
ioyne labor and Prayer together:
Labour, without Prayer is a preſumption
againſt God; Prayer,
without Labour is a temptation of

God. Let Iudas Macchabeus witneſſe
this for me; before al his batels,
he euer prayed, except two,
one againſt Eupator, and then hee
was ouercome, and loſt the field;
the other, againſt Alcimus and Bacchides,
and then he loſt his life. Although
his praiſes were many, for
valour & fighting, yet his diligence
had not bin ſo fortunate, if he had
not ioyned his Prayers to his
ſword. Be faithfull and diligent in
ſmall thinges, ſo ſhall God make
you rulers ouer many, & he which
is negligent in the ſmalleſt, ſhal not
be truſted with greater. I cannot
forget, I will not conceale the worthy
ſaying of Bernard. Seruans doctrinam
rarò accuſabit fortunam, diligentiam
cum infortunia rarò ſociabis,
pigritiam rarò ſeparabis. That
is, He which keepeth good Doctrine,
ſhall ſildome accuſe fortune.

You ſhall not ſeldome ioyne diligence
& misfortune togither, you
ſhall as ſildom ſeperate misfortune
and ſluggiſhneſſe: and 
                  •
               o I ende
this ſecond part of the praiſes of
diligence.
            8 The third part I propounded
to my ſelfe, are the commodities
of diligence, which are many, and
therefore neither this place, nor
this time will not permit me to ſet
downe either all, or thoſe fewe, ſo
largely, which I wil heere deſcribe.
Firſt, Almighty God, allureth and
draweth on men in all kind of life,
by, and for the hope of reward and
profit. Noahs Arke, Moſes meſſage
to Pharaoh, Dauids fighting againſt
Goliah, our Sauiour Chriſts paſſion,
& our profeſſion, haue all their
ſeuerall rewards and promiſes annexed
to them, ſo hath diligence:
for it cannot be, that the ſame vertue

which bleſſeth mankind with
ſo many benefites, but that alſo it
ſhould receiue many commodities
for them. Firſt (Salomon ſaith) The
diligent hand ſhall beare rule; Verily,
there is none of vs all, but ſtill
retaine both an Image of honour,
and an aſpiring to Gouernement,
for God made not vs for ſeruile &
baſe ſlauery, but to beare rule ouer
the creatures of the world. By diligence
we haue already ſhewed how
many Emperours and Kings haue
beene aduanced from mean eſtate,
and now I will adde a fewe moe.
The Kings of Hungary were deriued
from Lechus the ſecond, who
was a Husbandman, and by a deuine
demonſtration, taken from
the Plough to bee the Virgin-Queenes
Husband; in rememberance
whereof, he cauſed his wodden
ſoles or ſhooes to be reſerued

in his Caſtle for all poſteritie to
remember, how, and in what ſort
he came firſt into the Court. All
the worlde knoweth that the Byſhoppricke
of Metz is one of the
greateſt of Chriſtendome, the Byſhop
being a Soueraigne, and a
Prince Elector, the ſeate which
Princes and great Lordes haue
ſought after for their ſonnes. We
read of one of their woorthieſt Biſhops
called
                  Centur x. In his Chappell, where none came but the Emperor, & himſelf, he cauſed to bee written, Villegeſe prioris fortunae eſto memor, & qui nunc ſes conſidera.
                
               Villegeſus, who was
but a Basket-makers ſonne, yet
would hee haue the Badges of his
Fathers occupation to remaine in
his Pallace, aſwell to make other
ſtudious, whereby they might
come to honor, as alſo to put him
in minde of his meane deſcent.
            9 The Graecians ſaide, Ponos
eucleias Pater, Labour was the
Father of Honour, for the bleſsing
of God doth ſo follow it, that many

moe are made honourable by
diligence, then by Birth, witneſſe
all the Romaines, who raiſed their
Commonwealth, and ſtoode not
vpon termes of blood (although it
be honourable) ſome of them were
fetched from the Plow, ſome from
other meane places; then Vertues
gaue Titles, nowe Titles ſell
Vertues. Cicero, Fabius, Quintius,
and other, Witneſſe theſe thinges.
When Demoſthenes was asked
how hee came to that excellent facility
of ſpeaking, ſo as hee led his
Auditory to what part he pleaſed,
being the glory of the Greekes, and
an honour to himſelfe, hee gaue
this aunſwere; that by ſpending
more Oyle then Wine, hee came
to that habit of perfect ſpeaking;
Meaning, that he was in his ſtudy,
writing and reading by his Lamp,
when other were at the Tauerne,

or in their banquettes eating and
drinking; ſoft beddes, and much
learning are hardly gotten together,
good cheere and painefull
diligence are ſildome matched together,
therefore as Lazarus his
ſorrowes went before his ioyes, &
Diues his ioyes before his ſorrowes,
ſo Humility and Labour go before
honour, and Honour abuſed and
taken before the time, is ſeconded
with ſhame, miſery, and (peraduenture)
hell.
            10 Againe, another commodity
wee receiue by labour and diligence,
is the comfort of a good
heart, when we muſt ſit downe in
age, and can worke no longer: for
the night of age commeth, when
we cannot worke, and therefore if
a good Conſcience bee any thing
vnto vs, and we know any thing of
our ſelues, then may we with Authority

reprooue the ydleneſſe of
other, and repeate (without boaſting)
with glory and praiſe our
owne practiſe: whereby poſterity
and the younger will admire vs,
and praiſe vs, and Noble Spirites,
(whereof there bee ſome in euerie
age) will by our example be prouoked
to do the like. But if wee remaine
in ydleneſſe and ſluggiſhneſſe,
what ariſeth in our mindes,
but filthy Luſts, impure thoughts,
abhominable actions, ſuch as wee
read were in the Sodomites. Be not
deceiued, a little cranny letteth the
winde into the houſe, and a little
leake ouer-turneth and drowneth
a great Ship; euen ſo, a little ydleneſſe
ſuffereth Sathans Wind and
Water, to enter into the ſoule to
the eternall perdition thereof.
            11 By all this we may ſee the
commodities of diligence, both as

it is in it owne Nature, and as it is
alſo in the contrary. And indeed,
wee may vrge this ſecond a little
further, to the ſhame of Drones,
ſluggards, and ydle perſons; God
doth worthily punniſh them, ſo as
they are not like to other mē, their
hands and faces ſpotted or ſtained
like the greene ſickneſſe, and their
bellies either blowne vp like Eglons
with fat, or (deſerued hunger following
them) lanke and flat downe
like the bladder that is pricked.
Nothing runneth in their minde
but the Torment of labour, from
that they poſt as faſt as Moſes from
his rod, when it was turned into a
Serpent, crying out againſt thoſe
that prouoke them, as the Deuils
againſt our Sauiour, Why art thou
come to torment vs before our time.
Yea, labour grieueth them ſo
much, as they watch late, becauſe

they will not put off their clothes,
and lye long in bed, becauſe they
are loath to take the paines to put
them on againe. The ſluggard (ſaith
Salomon) when he turneth himſelfe,
maketh a noyſe like a Cart-wheele:
Why? Becauſe he is not liquored
with the Oyle of labour and diligence,
he is euer murmuring and
complaining: In Summer, hee
complaines of long dayes, and trifleth
them away at the Market, or
at the Ale-houſe, or at other mens
ſhoppes, or ſleepeth after euery
Meale, or doth nothing but aske
for newes. He is at defiance with
his owne houſe and Lands, ſo long
as there is a meeting or aſſembly abroad,
either at Bowling, Shooting,
Drinking, or other vaine occaſions;
beeing happy in nothing
ſo much (to his owne conſcience)
as that ſuch company and occaſion

driueth his buſineſſe out of his
head. After meat, if pleaſure call
him not away, he goeth to ſleepe,
and if the Sabboth come, that hee
muſt bee forced to his Monthly
day, yet ſhall Prayers be firſt halfe
done, and the reſidue he paſſeth ouer
with deſires that they were ended,
and like a merry Souldier
whome I knew taken by the enemy,
and led from Tree to Tree to
be executed, was wont to ſay, that
when he had eſcaped one Tree, he
thought long till he had alſo eſcaped
another.
            12 Well, as riches and honour
are the end of labour & diligence,
ſo is pouerty the end of ydleneſſe,
and ſuch a pouerty as is leſſe aſhamed
to ſteale, then to begge, for
his inward guilt of vngodly liberty
taketh away from him the boldnes
to aske for Gods ſake, and biddeth

him be his owne Caruer, to want
nothing till he come to the Goale
among his fellowes. But woe bee
to them that bring not vppe their
Children to ſome honeſt and diligent
labour, they ſpoile them in
their youth, dooing them more
harme for want of ſeauen yeares
Apprentiſhip, then they doe them
good by an hundred pound a year
Land. For eaſe ſlayeth the fooliſh,
and the proſperity of fooles deſtroieth
them. Wo worth them alſo, that
get, and gaine, and take, and receiue
from other mens labors, not
giuing them good words for their
benefitts, nor euer opening their
mouth for their large allowances,
either in the Church, or at the Bar,
yea, both in the Church, and at
the Barre: ſometimes Demoſthenes
coynancy (not ſquinancy) ſtopping
their mouthes, as if their

throats were ſore: ſore indeede of
a Peſtilence neuer to bee cured.
Sometimes, poſſeſſed of a dumbe
and deafe deuill, whome they will
not ſuffer to be caſt out, leaſt their
Conſciences ſhould rend them at
his departure. Theſe are they
which giue vnto Phiſitians a groat,
vnto their Counſellers ſmoke, vnto
their Flatterers a pound, vnto
their Minions & Harlots a talent,
vnto Diuines and Preachers, a
halfepeny of cuſtome.
            To conclude, let vs all beware
of negligence, and not onely crie
out againſt it, as the ſouldiers did
of Warre in the time of Vitellius,
when one had in the warres ſlaine
his own Father, yet did euery man
continue the warres: and ſo while
we diſlike ydleneſſe, we nouriſh &
maintaine it; but let the Sonne of
God bee your example, not in his

Miracles, but in his labours, that
when death or he calleth for you,
it may find you working, or praying,
or Meditating, or hearing, or
Counſelling, or perſwading, or reſiſting
euill, or but ſaying this will
I do, if the Lord Ieſus giue me life
and leaue, that the fruites of your
labours, like the coat of Tabitha,
may remaine when you are
dead and gone.
         
         
            
            The third Sermon.
            
               YOu haue hearde in
the firſt Sermon, I
taught you to bee
wiſe; in the ſecond,
to be diligent; now
in the third, I muſt exhort you to
the Chriſtian care of your owne eſtates
and goodes; both in their
parts, and in their Vſes, as they are
compriſed in my Text. Firſt, for
your Cattle (for good men are
mercifull to their Beaſtes) prouide
for them Hay and Graſſe. Secondly,

for your ſelues, Corne, ſignified
by the hearbes of the Mountaine,
(for in Iſrael they ſow vpō mountaines)
and Mony out of the price
of the Goats. Thirdly, for your ſeruants,
meat, and Milke. And laſtly,
for you and them together, clothing,
out of the fleeces of your
flocke. And of all theſe Salomon
biddeth vs, Know their ſtates, and
take heed to them. Whether they
liue with vs more familiarly in the
houſe, or encloſure, or whether
they are more forraign and wilde,
ſignified vnder the name of heards.
In this knowledge there are many
ſweet flowers, may profitable trees
or Plantes, and many faire growing
ſeedes. For to ſpeake a little of
knowledge in generall; without
knowledge, wee neuer haue our
ſelues, nor Almighty God. All are
bound to know (except Children)

who cannot by their infancie of
yeares; and naturall fooles, who
cannot by priuation of naturall faculties.
The knowledge of God, is
both the cauſe of louing and inioying
him: for, How can wee loue
him whom wee know not? And
how can we haue him whome wee
loue not? The knowledge of God is
the beginning of Wiſdom, the knowledge
of our ſelues is the fulneſſe of
Charity. If we be ignorant of our
ſelues, that ignoraunce begetteth
Pride, if we be ignorant of God,
that ignorance draweth to Deſperation:
for if we know not God, we
cannot hope in him; if wee know
not our ſelues, we cannot be humble,
and then we cannot bee bleſſed.
By the knowledge of our ſelues
(ſaith Saint Bernard) wee Sowe in
teares, becauſe we feele and ſee to
our ſorrow, the defects of our Nature.

By the knowledge of God,
we reape in ioy; becauſe, we feele
and ſee, and heare, the plenty and
copiouſneſſe of his Redemption:
therefore let vs go forth and carrie
our ſeed weeping, that we may return
with our ſheaues ioying; and
both, for our knowledge, and for
our Humility, neither with the
Phariſies, let vs boaſt our ſelues aboue
others, nor with the baſe
multitude, be contented to bee like
others. For, in giuing Honor (ſaith
Saint Paule) go one before another;
that is, the rule of our Humility, to
wiſh with Martinus Turonenſis,
               Centur. 11. that
all our Vertues could bee concealed.1 cor. 14 31
And again, Couet the beſt gifts,
there is the rule of knowledge; the
beſt giftes are the greateſt knowledge,
and the greateſt knowledge,
(if it be ſanctified) maketh the beſt
men. Difference of knowledge,

maketh difference of men; and as
Dauids grace and knowledge preferred
him in the ſight of God and
Samuel before his Brethren (thogh
he were lower in ſtature, and they
taller and more perſonable men:)
euen ſo, God delighteth not in
mens legs, or ſtrength, but in their
heart and ſoules; The Angels are
pictured, not great, but full of
wings, and wee that are in the laſt
part and end of the world, & therefore
leſſe in our marriage bed, then
our Fathers in their Cradle, let vs
flye about the worlde, about our
calling, vppe to Heauen, with the
wings of heauenly knowledge.
            2 Salomon therefore commandeth,
to bee diligent to knowe our
Heards, & take heed to our flocks,
for they ſignifie but one thing.
Whereby hee meaneth, that wee
ſhould informe our ſelues, of al our

poſſeſſions, and not onely referre
their care to our Balyffes and Stewards,
who many times take more
paines to get our Liueries & Badges,
then to doe vs ſeruice and deſerts.
It is well obſerued, that Almighty
God hath giuen euery mā
a minde and a ſtate equall, one fit,
or at leaſt fitted for another, and
no man is ſo poore, but his eſtate,
is big enough to occupie his mind,
and ſet that on worke; for a little,
with righteouſneſſe, will keepe an
honeſt man in action. But if righteouſneſſe
be abſent, what is then
the condition of ſuch a perſon?
Namely, to buſie himſelfe in other
mens affaires, to talke of their liuings,
of their ſtocke, of their pedigrees,
of their ſonnes and daughters,
and ſeruants, and of the prizes
of Corne and Merchandize, as
if he had ten Characks at ſea, when

he hath neither Money to buy, nor
ware to ſell away. This man is neuer
a ſtranger, but at home; knoweth
euery man, but himſelfe;
ſummes vp all mens reckoninges,
but his owne; is eeuen with all accounts,
till he leaue himſelfe, euen
nothing. From the roote of this
vanity, ariſeth the ydle humour of
ſeeking after newes, in Italy, Spaine,
Fraunce, Turkey, Morocco, or the
Low-countries, and wanting good
matter, hee coyneth ſome of his
own; then he poſteth to one Lord
or Ladye, or other great perſon,
(but of meane intelligence) and
there hee venteth the winde in his
braine. Such is the nature of mans
minde (my beloued) as is the Nature
of good ground, if you Till &
Sowe it, will it not bring foorth
good fruits? But if you Till it not,
and let it alone vnoccupied, will it

not bring forth weedes or Graſſe?
Euen ſo, our mindes ſowed with
knowledge of good diſcipline, yeeldeth
a happy harueſt of honeſt faculties;
but let alone, and not filled
with ſome better matter, becommeth
ſtuffed with the wind of vain
humours, lying Tales, credulous
lies, and vnprofitable diſcourſe.
From hence alſo it commeth, that
men haue leiſure to ſowe debate,
by immagining faults, where none
are, and diſcouering imperfections
and follies of other men, which lying
hid in ſecret, were better buriand
forgotten, then remembred.
For what cōmeth of it, but ſhame
to our Countreymen, contentions
in the Law, troubling of the ſeates
of Iudgement, hatred and diuiſion
among honeſt families, exhauſting
of Treaſure, and ſetting the ſoule
either wide open (by malice) to

the deuill, or cloſed vp, by ſhaking
off grace and ſhame. This is the
fruite of them that are ignorant of
their owne eſtates, and yet be turbulent
diſcerners of other men; &
the beſt is, the world payeth them
well againe. For, if they haue as
many Maiſters, as they haue hearers,
euery one payeth him with
hatred, reuilings, and reproaches;
ſo as hee laboureth without fruite,
Sowing the winde, and reaping the
Whirle-wind, diſcouereth, without
thankes; ſpeaketh, without credit;
eateth, without welcome; liueth,
without reputation or loue; dieth,
without teares or pitty; ſauing, it
is pitty ſuch wretches treade vpon
Gods deare earth.
            2 But you (beloued) which
either heare this, or heare of this,
binde and buckle your ſelues to
knowledge, if it were poſsible, of

euery thing, Art, Trade, and Occupation;
but eſpecially, of your
eſtates, without which, a Chriſtian
is vnlike to God, and ſhameth his
profeſsion, which crediteth other
men, where onely he ſhoulde beleeue
himſelfe. You haue but two
things in your eſtate to looke into,
your ſoules, and your Temporalties:
do in the one as you do in the
other. I read of one Pomponianus
a Mantuan, that he was in ſecret accuſed
for denying the ſoule, and at
laſt (as all ſecret faults ſhall bee renealed)
it came into the light, and
hee was called into Iudgement for
it. His Iudges demanded of him,
whether hee did belieue hee had a
ſoule or no; hee anſwered Negatiuely,
hee did not: whereat his enemies
and accuſers reioyced, his
graue Iudges reproued him ſharply,
and gaue ſentence vppon him.

The Priſoner meruailed, and told
them they were too haſty, for (ſaid
he) do you belieue you haue ſouls?
Yea, ſaid they al, and accurſe them
that do not. But ſaid he, do you no
more then beleeue it: ſaide they,
that is ſufficient: then ſaith he, Non
credoſed ſcio. I do not only belieue
it as a thing abſent; but, I knowe I
haue a ſoule, and faith, giues place
to knowledge. So my beloued, do
not onely beleeue you haue Leaſes,
and Lands, and Friendes, and
Cattle, and goods, and Soules, but
know it: it is better to know, then
to beleeue it. Heauenly thinges I
muſt belieue, till I may know, but
earthly things I muſt know, or elſe
I cannot belieue. I will loue my
Seruaunt for his obedience, but I
will not belieue or truſt him for all
my ſtate. Know your ſelues to be
rich, and doe not onely beleeue it:

know your ſelues to be Chriſtians,
and do not onely beleeue it: know
your ſelues to be in the way to heauen,
for if you doe but belieue it,
you are deceiued: Knowe your
ſelues to haue Hope, Faith, and
Charity; report and opinion are
many times falſe. Faith is the beginning
of life eternal, knowledge
is the perfection and complement.
Faith goeth before, (as Grammar
before other Arts) or as the ſcholler
belieueth his Maſter, but knowledge
commeth after, and eyther
confuteth or confirmeth the Maiſters
precepts.
            4 There be cauſes, there be effects,
there be contraries to Faith,
all which knowne and diſcerned,
doe no onely confirme Faith, but
tranſport, and transforme it into
knowledge: and true faith will neuer
ceaſe, til it come to knowledge,

as true loue is not at quiet, till it
haue the ſeale of Mariage, becauſe
it traineth to experience, and experience
reſteth in knowing. The
triall of many thinges begetteth
Wiſedome, and Wiſedome the
better part of experience, maketh
triall of euill thinges (yet without
ſinne) and keepeth that which is
good. It was the fault of Hieron
his wife, that hauing neuer kiſſed
man (except her Husband) thoght
that euery mans breath did ſmel as
ill as her husbandes: whereby her
husband blamed her, and ſhee was
not thought careful inough of him.
Vntill, and vnleſſe we know what
difference is betwixt a Iewes faith,
a Turkes faith, an Anabaptiſts faith,
and a true Chriſtian faith: none at
all, in reſpect of the forme, but the
matter, the efficient, and the ende
of beleeuing, which is not diſcerned

without knowledge. I call the
forme of beleeuing, not the eſſence
of a true Faith, which is a worde
impropriated to Diuinity, but the
beeing of faith, in the mindes
Morrall and Naturall Vertues.
Wherefore out of a good doctrine
ariſeth a good faith; not on the cō
               trary,
and out of good Doctrine
and Faith, a ſound knowledge, defending,
maintaining, and perſwading
both.
            This is that knowledge, that Salomon
ſaith, is better then Golde and
Siluer, and is not therefore to bee
miſliked, becauſe it is not alway
honoured and had in reputation.
I haue ſeene (ſaith the Preacher) an
euil vnder the Sunne,
               Eccl. 9, 11. 
               The race is not
alway to the ſwift, the victory to the
ſtrong, nor breade to men of knowledge.
What then? God himſelfe
is not alway ſo reſpected as hee

ought, ſhall not wee therefore regard
him as much, as if al the world
did agnize him? Bread (then which
nothing is more needfull to mankinde)
yet is not alway reſpected
of wanton and full-fed Children;
ſhall the hungry therefore caſt it away?
God forbid, no more let honourable
Science and Knowledge
looſe her reputation, becauſe ſome
indiſcreete Fooles, haue ſet her in
the laſt, leaſt, and loweſt place.
            5 God himſelfe is a God of knowledge,
& next to God, men are the
Profeſſors and Students of knowledge,
for euen the Angels by the
church, are informed in the ſecrets
of our Redemption. A man without
knowledge, hath no God but
himſelf, no heauen but this world,
and in this (through ignoraunce,
of the world to come) they craue a
large improuement of their euill

daies, feeling no other loue, or hatred,
or feare, or care, or ſorrowe,
or wounds, or conſcience; For, as
men firſt ſinne, and do not care, by
a long & inueterate cuſtome, they
ſinne, and doe not knowe. From
hence men fall into a Reprobate
minde, hauing no good thing in
them, like Beaſtes they are guided
by appetite, like him that had a
thouſand Cookes, and a thouſand
Faulconers. Reaſon, which ſhould
rule, is made of the Ladye the
Hand-maide, and ſo the yſſue of
their minds is like Iſmael, a baſtard,
and a Bondage-generation; from
which ſildom commeth any good.
Religion, the Daughter of God &
the Church, and the firſt borne in
Paradice; yea, in Heauen, is clapped
vp into ſome ſtinking Dungeon,
thorough which, paſſeth the
ſincke of all our beaſtly pleaſures,

and that which ſhoulde haue the
higheſt, and the moſt honourable
room in our houſe of clay (too baſe
for ſuch a Gheſt) is thruſt behinde
the Stables of great Horſes, the
Mewes of Hawkes, the Porters
lodge, yea the Scullery of the moſt
ſeruile Offices, and where ſhe moſt
loueth to be (like the Haebrew ſeruant)
ſhee is boared thorough the
eare, and hath many wronges and
brands of diſgrace; ſtill a Seruant,
that ſhould bee a Commaunder.
Their rule to belieue is their ſence,
except they ſee (with Thomas) they
will neuer beleeue, and yet all the
ſences being filled, they are not ouercome,
ſo eaſie is it to ſhew the
reaſons of Diuinity, and ſo harde
to perſwade. In error, many (like
our late Apoſtataes) are firſt perſwaded,
and then inſtructed, but in
Religion and Faith, after ſo much

as ſence it selfe cryeth hoe, yet inſtruction
can worke no perſwaſion,
as though ſome Ephialtes ouerlay
their breaſts.
            6 From hence alſo it commeth,
that Adams ſinne is layed vppon
God, becauſe he ſuffered and permitted
it, therefore he decreed and
acted it: and whatſoeuer other euill
is committed in the worlde, he
muſt be made the Authour thereof:
ſo ſtrangely rangeth ignorance
and want of Knowledge, being not
able to diſcerne betwixt permiſsion
and action, betwixt the action,
and the euill, that like a Birde in a
net, the more it ſtriueth, the faſter
it is hampered, and the higher goeth
the ſin. Then Fortune or good
lucke is made their Goddeſſe, attributing
whatſoeuer they haue, eyther
to chaunce, or to themſelues;
with the wicked in the Prophet,

they Sacrifice to their net, or elſe to
their Armes, to their Horſes, to
their experience, to their wit: but
if ſucceſſe faile, and the yſſue aunſwere
not the expectation, then
they curſe themſelues, or open
their mouth againſt Heauen, or accuſe
Fortune, or peraduenture lay
load vpon the Deuil, and wel they
may, for they ride him to Hell, as
a Thiefe in a Cart to the gallowes.
The Prophet ſaith,Eſay 8, 21. 
               He which is afflicted,
ſhall run hether and thether,
and when he is angry, hee ſhall curſe
his Gods, and the Kings. They giue
ouer praying in ſuch caſes, Propter
hoc malum (ſaith Tully) or arem deos,
at hij renuntiarunt or ationibus meis.
For this euill I would pray to the
Gods, but they haue renounced al
my Prayers. That admired Tacitus
hath this blaſphemy. Numquam
maiores caedes Pop. Rom. &c. The

people of Rome neuer indured
more ſlaughter, whereby it was
prooued, that the Gods are not ſo
watchfull for our health and ſafegard,
as they bee for our punniſhment
and reuenge. That wiſe Liuy
alſo ſpeaking of a doleful ye are;
ſaith, that for Plagues, Famines,
and ſedition, neuer the like befell
them, and if (ſaide hee) forraigne
enemies had not beene wanting,
Vix ope deorum omnium ſuſtentata
foret Reſp. ſcarce all the Gods could
haue ſupported our eſtate or common
wealth. It is hard, yea almoſt
impoſsible, for men without the
knowledge of God, to ſtand in affliction
if it be not ſudden, but lingering.
Wicked men are worſt
in long ſorrowes,Iudg. 15. Dan. 10, 8 Reuel. 1, 17 and beſt in ſudden:
good men bee worſt in ſudden,
(as Manaoh, Daniel, and Saint
Iohn) and beſt in long miſeries, and

continued calamities. Titus another
Demy-God among the Heathen,
when hee ſaw that hee muſt
dye in his youth, (after he had bin
Emperor but two yeares) he cried
out againſt the heauens for their
ſmall regard of his life. Wicked &
ignorant men (if they haue any ſpirits)
are like Tygers, who hearing
a Drumme, bite and teare off their
own fleſh; ſo theſe in great terrors
and euils, are at their wittes ende.
When their Conſcience byteth
them, then they ſeeke out falſe remedies,
more hurtfull then aſſured
perils; Namely, the companie of
good fellowes, and Muſicall merrimentes,
as though ſin were ſent to
afflict them, to helpe the Tauerne,
Alchouſe or Minſtrell: but ſo alſo
they bewray their folly and want
of skill, for their laſt recourſe is vnto
GOD, when they haue tryed

all other meanes, and then they
neither ſpeed well, nor do well, becauſe
they doe it late, too late, beginning
at the wrong end, all is
out of courſe, and loſt; yea, with
their own wiues they commit fornication,
and poyſon themſelues
with their owne meate. There is
not one Vertue or grace of God,
which they cannot Nicke-name,
nor a fault ſo foule, which they wil
not blaunch ouer with ſome defence;
and if at any time it droppe
into them to heare a Sermon, it is
for the phraſe, or ſome ſiniſter reſpect,
goodneſſe being a ſtranger,
and ſcornefulneſſe an ordinarie
companion with them. They haue
learned nothing of God, but to
ſweare by him, and that raſhly,
falſely, and preſumptuouſly; for to
reprooue them (neuer ſo gently)
for the ſame, is to take a Kid from

a Beare, and a Lambe from a Lyon,
and a Wolfe by the eares. They
haue no care for their ſoules, no
more then for Beggers by the
High-way, whom they neither deſire
to heare, to remember, to releeue.
They loue none but themſelues,
and care not vppon whom
they treade, nor whome they diſgrace,
to bee a foundation to their
riſing. I would they loued themſelues
in the Nature of true loue,
for ſuch loue is like the Mothers
loue to her Childe, a loue to preſerue,
but their loue is like the hungry
mans loue to his meate, a loue
to conſume. To conclude, from
hence it commeth, that they neuer
thinke of death with patience and
feare it more then hell, becauſe
they are not ſo throughly perſwaded
of hell, as they be of death, and
in one word, I may deſcribe them

by the Pſalme, The wayes of GOD
they haue not knowne, and there is
no feare of God before their eyes.
            
            7 Thus, and this haue I ſpoken
of knowledge, as it is a vertue
Morrall, and Theological; now it is
varied in my Text, by theſe words,
And take heed to thy Heards, which
afterwarde are alſo deuided into
Hay, Corne, Cattell, and ſeruants,
that euery one of theſe may be preſerued
in Vſe, Office, Life. So our
Flockes and Heards are our Families,
our Cattell, our charges Paſtorall,
and Magiſteriall, kingdoms
to Kinges, Monarchies to Emperors,
Counties to Sheriffes, offices
to Officers, euery Seruant & maid
haue their Flockes, their Heards.
Hee that worketh by the day, or
that is hyred for a yeare, or is apprentice
till a Iubilee, whether hee
follow the Flockes and Ewes with

young, as Dauid did, or the Plowe
and Oxen as Eliſha did, or the wars
as Ioab and Abner did, or attend on
their Maiſter as the Centurions ſeruant
did, or on their Lady & Miſtris,
as the Maids of Eſther did, or
Fiſh in the Sea, as the ſonnes of
Zebedee, or walke on Meſſages on
the Land, as the Seruant of Abraham;
and to conclude, whether
they be ſet ouer all as Baliffes and
Stewards, or ouer the Hay, or ouer
the Corne, or ouer the Cattle, or
ouer the Men and Maid-ſeruants,
they haue their Flocks, & Heards,
and charges, which they muſt
know, and take heed vnto, for ſeruice
is no inheritance, and badges
of Lords and great men, are neyther
to maintaine vs, or defend vs
in ill. Theſe are the thinges that
make a man, that make him perfect,
in as perfect manner as may

bee, if they be found in the way of
righteouſneſſe, ſuch ſeruants ſhall
diuide the inheritance among brethren,
and men of this quality, ſhal
ſtand before Princes.
            8 There is nothing more commendable
in a man, then oftentimes
to viſit, view & review their
poſſeſſions, take ſpecial conſideration
of their meaneſt vtenſiles, ſo
ſhall they ſee how they are kept &
preſerued, which of them muſt be
altered, which nouriſhed, which
continued, which remoued, which
ſtandeth in the ſtable, and which is
fallen into the ditch. Our Cattell
are not free from our care on the
Sabbaoth day.Luke 14. 
               Which of you (ſaith
our Sauiour) ſhall haue an Oxe, or
an Aſſe, fall into the ditch on the Sabaoth
day, and ſhall not help him out.
And which of you doth not looſe his
Oxe or his Aſſe to water on the Sabbaoth

day. By which we ſee our bleſſed
Sauiour giue allowance to this
labour, ariſing both out of neceſsity
and mercy, which two onely caſes,
giue diſpenſation to ciuill and
baſe ſeruices on the Sabbaoth day,
which workes elſe were vnlawfull
and inſufferable in true Diuinitie.
Yea, in the Law wee are bounde,
not onely to regard our owne cattle,
but our Neighbours, yea, our
enemies, and to bring home his Oxe
or Aſſe that goeth aſtray,
               Exod. 23, 4 
               to reſtore
the pledge, to reſtore that wee find to
the true owner, (if we can come to
the knowledge of him.) Such care
hath almighty God of euery mans
particuler, as that they which follow
not this order, corrupt his ordinaunce,
alter his prouidence,
chaunge the Diuine property of
thoſe things they loſe negligently,
or retaine vniuſtly, and ſhall pay

moſt deerly for vſurpation of that,
which God in triall (not in right)
hath giuen into their handes. Againe,
if we often looke not to our
eſtates (I meane ſuch as are houſeholders)
how can we knowe what
to giue according to our proportion,
or what ſtore to keepe, after
our allowance? we may giue that
we cannot ſpare, and muſt go buy
elſe where, which is folly, we may
keep that we cannot ſpend, & that
is miſery and wretchedneſſe; our
Granaries ſhall be empty or fuſtie,
without our knowledge, our wardrobes
void of ſtore of Houſhold,
our Armouries without weapons,
our Sellers without drink or wine,
which il beſeemeth a Houſholder,
a Man, much leſſe a Chriſtian, to
whome God hath giuen ſtate and
liuing, and a family,1. Tim. 5, 8 for He (ſayth
S. Paule) that prouideth not thinges

honeſt before hande for his owne Family,
is worſe then an Infidell.
            
            9 The charge of this life, is food,
raiment, and friends; care firſt to
prouide theſe, then to vſe them.
Weee read that Ioſeph was ordained
and honoured of Almightie
GOD,Gen. 41. with the ſecond dignity in
the kingdome of Egipt, (after hee
was drawne out of priſon) for the
prouiſion of Corne and Victuall;
yea, for this his Father & Brethren
gaue reuerence vnto him. Loe, an
excellent dignity of houſ-keeping,
and prouidence for to feede them
whom the Lord hath ſent into the
Worlde, among whom are his
Church, that muſt not want when
the Lyons lacke and ſuffer hunger.
Euery Family hath its children, in
whoſe name, bloud, and eſtate, it
conſiſteth; their enlargement and
continuance ſtandeth vppon the

wiſe adminiſtration of Houſholde
affaires, as well to keep that which
is already gained, as to gaine that
which is deſired. Saint Paul would
not haue a Byſhop or Deacon to
be choſen, but by this Touch-ſtone
of experience, how they had ordered
and guided their Houſholdes;
for no man can euer ſerue or rule
well the Church of God, that hath
not well behaued himſelfe in the
Domeſticall and oeconomical life.
The wiſe Cato woulde haue the
Houſholder, Prouidere familiae inſtituta,
cibos & medicinam, to prouide
firſt for the maners, ſecondly,
for the maintenance; and laſtly,
for the Medicine of their Families
in the time of ſickneſſe. What
is meat and large allowance of fare
and dyet to our ſeruants, without
good and Diuine maners? What
are Diuine & good maners,1. Tim. 3. 4. without

maintenance? What are both
of them without health? And what
is it to liue in ſuch a family, where
neither God is feared, nor the labours
of good ſeruantes regarded
in time of ſickneſſe? Surely, let no
man truſt that Maiſter that forgetteth
ſeauen, or but one yeares ſeruice,
for one monethes ſickeneſſe.
A vile Nature or Prodigality, or
worſe, is the cauſe heereof. Be ſtudious
therefore of your families
good, and with Salomons Mother,
Seeke Wooll and Flaxe, and labour
cheerefully with the hands.
               Pro. 31, 13 
               Be like a
Merchants ſhip, to bring foode from
farre. Riſe early while it is Night,
giue your portion to the Houſholde,
and the ordinary to the Maides. Put
the hande to the Wheele, and your
Armes to the poore and needy. Conſider
Fields, and Carpets, & fine Linnen,
and Garments, and buy them, ſo

ſhall honour bee your cloathing, and

                     •
                  ou ſhall reioyce in your latter dayes.
But yet remember in all your labours,
that Almighty God be not
forgotten, for it is in vaine ſaith
Dauid,
               Pſal 127. 2. 
               to riſe early, & eat the bread
of carefulneſſe, going late to bed, except
the Lord giue reſt to his beloued.
You may with Eliſha Plow in the
field, and follow the Oxen, but if
Eliahs Mantle bee caſt vppon you,
you muſt forſake the Plough, and
follow the Prophets. Our ſermons
are like his Mantle, and they call
you to heauen, as that did Eliſha,
to be a Prophet. Matthew may ſit
in his Publicans Office, but if our
Sauiour call him away, Hee muſt
ariſe and follow him. Al Trades of
life are but Hand-maids to Religion,
therefore vaine are they which
forſake the Miſtreſſes, (which is
Godlineſſe) her Table and Parlour,

which is the Temple, for the Maidens
webs, and Worke-houſes of
leſſe value and eſtimation.
            10 How ſhall they bee able
to looke almighty God in the face,
which either feeling wealth comming
vpon them, or els in an ouercarefull
deſire, to bee rich, and accounted
laborious, forſake the
Churches and Altars of the Lord,
ſildome viſiting the holy Communion,
as a day-feaſt; ſildome comming
to the Church, as a Market,
wherein there is nothing gotten;
and as ſildome mumble vppe their
priuate Prayers, without Deuotion,
Vnderſtanding, or Diligence;
Oh, I ſay, what account ſhal
they giue vnto the Lorde, for this
drouſie & Lethargical negligence
in their ſoules caſes. Al their care
is for the ſhoo, none for the foote;
all for the Hat and Feather, none

for the head; all for the Badge on
the ſleeue, none for the Wages in
the purſe; all for the body, that body
and ſoule are both loſt. It is a
comely thing to ſee a ſhip rigged,
and with ſpread ſailes floating on
the Waters, obſeruing alſo, how
one is at the Sterne, another at the
top, and euery man in his place,
(the winds moouing withall) ſo it
will continue in order and ſayle
ſurely; but if either Pilot or Steerſman
bee wanting, or other Marriner,
the Winds wil ſoone rend the
ſayles, and the Shippe ſplit againſt
the rockes: euen ſo, it is a goodly
thing, and a royall, to ſee a Man
ſayling to heauen, hauing vnder,
him the earthly Waters, (though
inconſtant) aboue him the windes
of heauen: if hee want not in him,
Reaſon, vnderſtanding, Religion,
and Grace, which are the Mariners

that row and waft our ſoules to the
eternall kingdom. It is good therefore
to lay hold on this, and not to
forget that, For what ſhall it aduantage
a man, to win the whole world,
and looſe his owne ſoule.
            
            11. Now, I returne againe to
the carefull Houſholder, who muſt
looke to euery part of his poſſeſſion,
as it is in my text, Hay, graine,
Catle and Seruants; yea, although
he weare the Crowne. It was an
excellent ſaying of Alphonſus, a
King of Spaine: Principis inane nomen
niſi habet in aerario, the name
of a king or Prince is an idle thing,
if he haue not a Treaſury to maintain
it. The Crowne is maintained
by diligence, by the Plow, and the
Common-wealth flouriſheth vnder
the ſame. I will not, nor may
I meddle with Princes; but I ſay,
that the name of a Houſholder is

an ydle thing without a ſtorehouſe
more or leſſe, according to the
proportion of the family more or
leſſe. The kingdome of heauen is
likened to ſuch a ſtore-houſe, out
of which the Lordes Family is repleniſhed
with things new & old.Luke 12.
The Lorde hath his Apple Trees,Cant. 2, 5.
and Orchards, and Sellers, as hee
telleth his Church; to teach vs, that
ſtore is no ſore, but ſorrow commeth
by the default therof. When
God himſelfe made the world, he
made man laſt of all, hauing firſt
prouided all other things for him:
as the world roofed with the Heauens,
and floored with the greene
Graſſie earth, ſtored with all fruits,
inceſſantly and ſucceſſiuely growing
one after other. The Starres
being his lightes, the Creatures of
all ſorts being Seruantes and Tributaries
to him, the Angels of heauen

his aſſured friends, waiting on
his ſafety, & euery bird ſinging melody
to his proſperity; ſo did the
great houſholder prouide for man
euen before he was made; ſo hath
he continued his ſtore working hitherto,
And ſeede time, & harueſt,
cold and heat,
               Gen. 8, 22 
               Winter & ſummer, day
and night, hath not ceaſed, but ſhal remain
as long as the earth ſhal endure.
So muſt wiſe Houſholders prouide
aforehand, things honeſt; euen before
mariage, Meat and houſes, &
clothing, & before children, as the
mother doth the ſwadling cloaths.
That out of the heards he may with
Abraham fetch a Lambe or a Kid,
or an Oxe: out of the Paſtry with
Sara, fetch the Meale for the bread
of ſtrangers. It is not good to want
ſtore and prouiſion at hande, the
Veniſon is beſt in the Parke, and
the Cattle in our owne, and not

in others mens heards. Whē 
               Iſaac
would haue Veniſon, becauſe it ran
wilde, Eſau was long in taking it,
& ſo Iacob came in the meane time
with the tame Kid (a thing in ſtore,
and at hande) and got away the
bleſsing. Euen ſo, when neceſſaries
are then to bee ſought, when they
ſhould be vſed, it preuenteth both
the thankes, and the benefit, and
ſtore bringeth both: for Iacobs Veniſon
(though not true) had both
the bleſſing, and the thankes. Store
at hand, is like friendes at hande,
whereof Salomon ſaith, A friend at
hand, is better then a Brother a great
way off.
               Alex. ab Alex. The ancient Egiptians were
wōt to hang or paint at their doors
a Vulturs Wing, in token of their
Gentry. The Romans, the Spears,
Shields, Swords, and warlike weapons,
which their Anteceſſors had
gotten by their proweſſe: & theſe

things (though at the doores) yet
no man durſt remooue or make
away. Thus did they for their Honour,
let vs doe as much for our
houſes and Families, and let not
there bee among vs any that keepeth
not his parents Lands, goods,
Armes, Cattle, and Vertue, that
as we are known by their names,
ſo wee may bee by their Landes,
Honours, Proweſſe, Frugality, &
all other workes of Faith, Hope,
and Charity.
            12. Thus haue I briefly ſpoken
of the Houſholde care to get and
keepe. Now of the laſt part of the
Houſholder, or houſekeeping,
which is his mercy in ſpending, &
liberality in giuing foorth. That
which was firſt called his charge,
Flocke and Heards, he now calleth
his Family and Maidens, which muſt
be fedde and cloathed. Whereby,

is firſt to be noted, that all the
care we haue ſpoken of, is to giue,
to beſtow, to ſpend, to diſtribute,
and feed others. Hee which is the
Seruant of riches, doth keepe, and
get them like a Seruaunt, but hee
which is the Lorde and Maiſter of
them, doth giue and diſpoſe them
like a Maiſter; nothing proueth a
man ſo much the owner of his
wealth, as the vſe and beſtowing
of it; nothing ſheweth him ſo
much a baſe ſeruant of wealth and
riches, as the hoording vppe, and
keeping it cloſe from the ſight of
the world. Now, the ſeruant doth
keepe them, as Seruantes do their
Maiſters goods; and he which is a
Seruant of riches, is not a Seruant
of Ieſus Chriſt. Beware of this
wretched getting of goods to keep
them, & not to ſpend them: God,
Nature, Men, Beaſts, and all good

creatures, confute and denie this.
GOD, for he which is infinite in
wealth, giueth all in this worlde;
He eateth not of our Flockes or folds,
               Pſal. 50, 13
               or of Beaſts that run wild on the hils,
he therfore commandeth the earth
to feede man,Pſa. 145, 15 
               For hee openeth his
hand, & filleth al liuing things with
his bleſsing,
               Act. 20 35. hee ſaith, It is a more
bleſſed thing to giue, then to receiue.
He chargeth the rich in this world to
be ready to diſtribute.
               2 Tim. 6, 17 
               He threatneth
that the ruſt of the Golde and Siluer
layed vp,
               Iames 5, 3. 
               ſhall conſume and torment
the ſoules of them that hoarde.
               Luke 12, 15 Hee
telleth that no mans life ſtandeth in
the things it poſſeſſeth:
               Micah 6, 8. 
               Hee ſheweth
thee ô man what is good; Namely,
to do Iuſtice, and loue Mercie. And
to conclude, Him hee ſtiled a Foole,
which hauing plenty of Corne,
               Luke 12, 20 
               more
then his Barnes could hold, would rather
builde greater Barnes (to keepe

it) then giue away the ſuperfluous
ſurpluſage to the poore and needy,
ô Foole, this night they will fetch
away thy ſoule from thee, then whoſe
ſhall all theſe goods, and Bagges, and
Obligations bee? Surely, If you ſay
your Childrens; what comfort is
it to a Father in hell to remember
the intollerable Torments he there
indureth, for getting and keeping
that wealth vniuſtly, without ſhewing
pitty to other, which now his
Sonnes and Daughters reuell in
with all earthly pleaſures. I tel you
ſuch earthly pleaſures, haue a bitter
end; but ſuch Torments haue no
end: For although they aske but a
droppe of water,Ideo rogans diues non exauditur in tormentis quia rogantem pauparem non exaudiuit in terris. Aug. yet they are not
heard, becauſe they haue not heard
them that begged, or woulde haue
borrowed of them in need.
            13 Nature alſo is an enemie to
this wretchedneſſe, to this Couetouſneſſe,

ſhe loueth to multiply,
and to increaſe, if ſhe haue Milke
in her breaſtes, ſhee knoweth that
(like Riches it will rot) therefore
with it ſhe feedeth other. The trees
that are laden with fruit, bear them
but till they are ripe, and then if
they be not taken off, they let them
fall. How glad are the fields when
they are couered Laetis ſegetibus,
with ſmiling Graine, and yet they
haſten to the harueſt (as the Pigion
to her breeding) that being rid of
one crop, may be Plowed for another.
The ſheepe wearied with his
fleece, inuiteth by a panting neceſſity,
the Shepheard and Shearer
to take it off. The ſeede would bee
ſowne, the Gardens would be gathered,
the Sea would bee Fiſhed,
the Heauens keepe not their influence,
but ſend it downe among vs.
Why then ſhould men get goods

to keepe them, and yet Riches endure
not alway, nor the Crown from
generation to generation. Are they
not the ſonnes of Nature? Why
degenerate they? What Tygers
Milke haue they ſucked? What
Cockatrice hath hatched them,
who corrupteth all that ſhee toucheth?
Let Nature teach them (if
they will not learne of ſuch a Mother)
who as Boetius ſaith,De conſul. lib. 2. 
               Dat cuique
quod conuenit, & ne inter eunt,
laborat, giueth to euery thing, conuenient,
& laboureth that nothing
periſh: but theſe let their money
periſh, their woods rot, the moths
eate their garments, which might
be giuen away, and the Dogs and
Swine, that good meate which
would maintaine the children. The
wals haue their Gold layed vppon
dumbe pictures, and Heathen mens
ſhape are well cloathed by them,

and ſet forth in counterfaites, but
nothing commeth from them, for
the generall good, but (as it were)
by force of Armes.
            14 Men alſo, I meane the generall
and Vniuerſall inclination
of mankind, is againſt the keeping
of goods in priuate without ſome
vſe.Pet. Rauiſi. They keepe (ſaith one) for feare
of want, and yet they want the vſe
of that they keepe. Behold a iuſt
iudgement of God, vt ſemper indigeat,
qui ſemper timet indigentiam,
They alway want, which are alway
in feare of want. The two Perſian
Princes had two Titles giuen them
by their people, to ſignifie their
good and ill.Lonicerus. 
               Cyrus they called Patrem,
a Father, becauſe hee gaue
them riches, and layed vp, but for
their neceſſaries; and Darius, they
called Negotiator, a Merchant,
whoſe ſtudy is to gaine, or not to

lay out.Valer. lib. 3 
               Valerius. Auaritia indagatrix
lucrorum aiudiſsima vorago,
ne que habendo fructu foelix, ſed cupiditate
quaerendi, miſerrima. Couetouſneſſe,
the ſearcher out of gain,
is a moſt greedy gulfe or ſwallower,
in keeping it is not happie, but
in ſeeking, it is moſt miſerable.
            
               Tully ſaith,Tuſcul. 
               Illi morbo qui permanet
in venis, & inhaeret in viſceribus,
nec inueteratus euelli poteſt,
nomen eſt auaritia, That diſeaſe is
called Auarice, which runneth in
the ſecret vaines, and cleaueth to
the inward bowels, which if it bee
inueterate, can neuer bee pulled
forth. Pythagoras. Couetous men
which haue riches, and do not vſe
them, are like vnto Orphanes and
Wardes in their Nonage, which
alſo haue houſes and Landes, but
cannot diſpoſe them. Seneca ſaith,
Inopiae pauca deſunt,
               In. Prou. 
               auaritiae omnia.
               
Pouerty wanteth ſome things, but
Couetouſneſſe wanteth all things,
and therefore the rich man that
hath goods & doeth not vſe them,
doth neuer any thing well, except
in dying. So hee. Vnto all theſe, I
may adde the note of Innocentius.
               De cond. huma.
For Couetouſneſſe, Balaams Aſſe
hurt his Maiſters foote, and reproued
his rider. For Couetouſneſſe,
the people of Iſraell ſtoned Achan
in the valley of Achor, after he was
founde guilty of the Golden garment.
By Couetous Ahab, was
Nabaoth put to death for the Vineyard.
Gehazi got the leproſie thorough
Couetouſneſſe, when hee
abuſed Naaman in the Prophets
name. Iudas for Couetouſneſſe,
ſold his Maiſter and hanged himſelfe.
Ananias and Saphira belyed
their Charity, and keeping backe
their portion (for they had ſolde

their Land and kept their ſin) were
ſtroken dead by the Lord. Belieue
it, the mercifull man neuer dyed ill
death, the Couetous and parſimonious
neuer happy death. Therefore
away with this monſter, which
all men cry out againſt, and they
which loue it moſt, are aſhamed to
confeſſe it. Men are wont to deſire
wealth, pleaſures, and Honours:
of Wealth commeth euil things;
of Pleaſure, filthy thinges; of Honour
vain things. For riches breed
Couetouſneſſe and Auarice; Pleaſures
bring foorth Gluttonie and
wantonneſſe; Honour, noriſheth
Pride, and Vaine-glory, and I tell
you if you receiue not the witneſſe
of men, the witneſſe of God is
greater.
            15 Beaſts & all creatures hate
this parſimony, it is the royalty of
the Lyon to eate but once of his

prey, the reſidue hee leaueth to other,
and commeth not againe to
it. The Elephantes are for that
cauſe diſpraiſed, becauſe they hide
their teeth fallen off, that no man,
or other creature ſhould find them.
The Lizzarde, that knowing her
vrine to congeale into a precious
ſtone, couereth it in the ſand, that
it might not be diſcerned. Of what
brood are theſe wicked men, whō
no example of God, or Nature, or
Men, or Beaſt can mooue? They
are ſurely ſome Satyres, or ſtrange
Ethiopian brood, or peraduenture
ſent by ſome of the earthly ſpirits,
of whom the Coniurers ſay, They
keepe the Treaſures in the earth,
that no man may vſe them. Such
ſpirites are theſe, that is; Deuilles,
but in other ſhapes, that onely
keep goods from them, that would
vſe them better: let the world ſink

or ſwim, they get none from them,
and if God were mony they would
locke him vp, that none elſe might
enioy him. But they that haue this
worlds good, and ſee their Brother
periſh, how dwelleth the loue of God
in them? that is, there dwelleth no
loue of God in them, and ſo out of
God his loue I leaue them.
            16 But let mee not bee vnderſtood,
that I ſpeake againſt all keeping
and ſtoring vp of money, and
other things, as though it were vnlawfull
to poſſeſſe any more prouiſion
of meat, then for a meale; of
Money, then for a day; of Garments
then one, for one body, and
ſo of the reſidue. God forbid, for ſo
in time of neceſſity man ſhould be
vnprouided of helpe when hee
ſhold vſe it. God hath euer in ſtore.
There is no queſtion of Corne and
Cattle, but of Iewels, and money,

and ſuch like. Salomon in my text,
biddeth to look to the hee Goats, that
they may be a price of the fielde. Money
muſt be prouided againſt ſickneſſe,
ſute, enemies of our country,
and for all other neceſſities. Iacob
had money, which hee ſent by his
ſonnes into Egipt for Corne, the
firſt and ſecond time. Abraham had
Money, wherewith all hee bought
the field of Emor. The Church had
her ſtore, Acts 2. and 5. and therefore
let no man thinke it againſt
conſcience, to be alway prouided
againſt wants: wherein the rule of
Socrates was good (if it could bee
followed) that a mans Treaſure
ſhould neither be bigger nor leſſer
then his neceſsity. But becauſe that
cannot be knowne, it is good our
ſtore be more plentiful, ſo our charity
be neuer the leſſe. When Iphicrates
pitched his Tents in a little

open fielde, and then beganne to
trench and wall them, his General
asked why he did ſo, and what hee
feared? To whom hee anſwered,
ſuch a queſtion became not a commander,Plutarch.
               Ah undans cautela non nocet,
we can neuer bee enough ſecured
againſt future perilles. King Alexander
ſeeing one of his Souldiers
going to ſharpen his Dart whē
all other were going to fight, caſhiered
him, and caſt him out of
the Army; ſaying, Inutilis acie, qui
pararet arma tunc cum ijs vtendum.
               Plutarch.
Hee was vnwoorthy of his army,
who went then to prouide Armes,
when hee was to vſe them. Euen
like the fooliſh Virgins, which neither
tooke Oyle ſufficient, & when
they had ſpent their ſtore, gaue
themſelues to ſleepe, till it was too
late to prouide.
            17 Let vs therefore keepe our

honeſt ſtore: for thereby did Abigail
mollifie the angry and diſpleaſed
heart of Dauid, when hee came
againſt her husband Nabal: and if
the preſent ſhe brought him, had
not beene preſent and at hande, it
had not failed, but they all had perriſhed
before ſo much coulde haue
beene prouided. Our Cofers muſt
not be like the ſealed bags, which
Alexius left at Ancona, when hee
had compounded the warres with
the King of Almanes. For the Emperour
Comnenus his Maiſter, who
being to leaue Hoſtages of mony
with the Citizens,Nicetas. hee by his Maiſters
direction, ſecretly conueyed
away the Money, and lefte with
them the empty, yet ſealed trunkes
and Boxes, bidding them keepe
them ſafe, vntill they were by the
Emperor required. But this deceit
being diſcouered, fared ill with the

Emperor; euen ſo, pouertie will
not bee long hid, and then ſhame
or ſorrow will follow, vntil ruine,
or elſe ſome ſtrange and wofull laborious
recouery of our eſtate.
And ſo I will conclude, that ſeeing
the Lorde maketh both rich and
poore,
               Prou. 22, 2 let vs with care and Conſcience,
conſerue a Store-houſe of
well-gotten wealth, as we doe releeue
the well-deſeruing poore, for
both ſhal meet before the Lorde together.
            
            Now followeth a concluſion of
all, which ſtandeth in the amplifyed
diſtribution of the charge, who
they be that muſt be looked vnto,
who entertained and maintained,
who to be prouided for, and ſo an
end. Our Flockes and Heardes, Family
and Maydens, are many in the
figure, for I will allegorize them, as
well as handle them literally.
            
               
18 And in the firſt place, the
ſubiect of our Wiſedome, Gouernment,
Wealth, and Mercie,
ſeemeth to bee our Countrey, the
common parent of vs all, which
though it beare vs as the horſe doeth
the Rider, and as the oxen draweth
the Waine-man in his Cart,
yet muſt it be directed and defended
by vs. In it wee haue all our
ſhares and inheritances; of it, wee
receiue our liues and breath, and
therefore for it we ought to apply
our care and power. If wee forget
Ieruſalem (ſay the Iewes in Babilon)
then let my right hand forget her
cunning.Pſal. 137. 
               Ieruſalem was their countrey,
Babilon their place of exile &
baniſhment. Therefore ſweete is
the name of our Country, and better
is the ſmoake thereof, then the
fire of another, and the duſt thereof,
then the ſtones of a ſtrange nation.

               Nehemiah alſo,Neh. 1, 4. when hee
heard that his Countries repayre
was hindered, how did hee leaue
his place before the King, and layed
aſide his Courtly garments, put
on ſack-cloath, and liued in Prayer
and Faſting. Saint Auſten in his
old age, writing of his Countrey,
which then began to be ſpoiled by
the Arrian and Circumcellian ſouldiers,
and Vandals;
               Aug. ad Nectar. ſaith, Serio iam,
ac frigeſcentibus mēbris, feruet animus
deſiderio patriae, now in my old
age and coldneſſe of all my limbs;
yet my heart burneth for the deſire
of my Countrey. But wee are all
preſt, and ready to fight for our
Countrey, and to grace it with the
effuſion of our blood; true it is, &
no true Engliſh hart can do otherwiſe.
But what auaileth it to fight
for our Country againſt ſtrangers,
while wee betray it to the Lorde?

What if we be ready to go againſt
Turke and Pope, with the Armes
of fleſh and blood? while we haue
diſarmed our ſelues of Praier,
Faith, Hope, Honeſty, Temperaunce,
Humility, and will not ſo
much as put on the head-peece of
Saluation? But in ſteede thereof,
Blaſphemy and Swearing, Drunkenneſſe
and Voluptuouſneſſe,
Stealing and Deceiuing, till the
Lande mourne, and bee no more
able to beare vs. My heart bleedeth
to fore-thinke and ſee the ruine
and deſolation of ſo many faire
Houſes, goodly Townes, greene
Meddowes, and Corne-fields, for
the ſinne and wickedneſſe of them
that poſſeſſe them. God hath mo
wayes to deſtroy vs then by one,
then by the ſtraungers ſworde, againſt
which onely wee are prouided
(by the care and prouidence

of our Gouernors.) He can bring
a fire from Heauen, as hee did on
Sodom,
               Iſaiah 37. or he can ſweep away head
and taile by the Peſtilence, like vnto
the Army of Senacharih, whereof
(it conſiſting of almoſt two hundred
thouſand men) they died all
in one night,Iero. lib, 4. com. except ten men. And
Conſtantinople, Anno 760. was ſo
diſpeopled by a Peſtilence, that the
Emperor Copronymus, was faine to
fetch men from other Countreyes
to inhabite the houſes, leaſt they
ſhould fall down. Before the Danes
cōming into England, there were
aboue forty thouſand Churches,Ranulphus Polychr.
and in ſeauen battailes there were
perriſhed (well-nie) fiue hundred
thouſand perſons, & aboue twentie
thouſand Pariſhes & Churches
decayed. I omit to ſpeake of Famines
and other means of our deſtruction,
and I beſeech you all, to

loue their Countrey, and let not
their poſterity bee diſpoſſeſſed by
their crying ſinnes, for the Prophet
ſaith, A fruitfnl Land is made barren
for the ſinnes of them that dwell
therein.
            
            19 Your Wiues and Huſbandes
are alſo your flocke, theſe
muſt be taken heede vnto, for the
married are like the Palmes, they
are Males and Females, ſo they
muſt bee planted one beſide another;
yea, the Boughes of the male
muſt bee ſometimes wreathed and
put vpon the Female, or elſe it will
not proſper, but mourne and pine
away. So it is betwixt Man and
wife, there muſt be more then ſight
of each other, for they are bone of
each others bones, & Fleſh of each
others fleſh. Fleſh cut aſunder, looſeth
the vital powers and ſo dyeth,
but vnited, growes together again,

and ſo liueth. No Man, but hee
which is wiſe knoweth, what heede
to take or reſpect to bear to his Wife;
For Chriſt doth thereby decipher
his loue to his Church. So ought
a Man to loue his Wife as Christ loued
his Church,
               Ephe. 5, 25 
               who gaue himſelfe
for it. Euery one that is marryed
hath giuen away himſelfe. Sweet
are the bandes of Wedlocke, yet they
are bandes and muſt reſtraine vs:
Bonum eſt coniugium tamen à iugo
tractum:
               Ambr. Marriage is good, yet is
named from the yoake, according
to that, Be not vnequally yoked with
Infidels. They which are yoaked
haue no power but to draw, thoſe
which are marryed, haue no liberty
but to loue and looke to one another.
When Darius had loſt his
Kingdomes, and Credit, and Honour,
and Liberty, hee wept not
for all that: but when he heard tell

that his Wife was dead, then hee
wept bitterly. So neare and deare
are the minds of them that be vertuouſly
married, that they cannot
part without a thouſand ſorrowes.
They are to each other a true
Glaſſe, as is the face, ſo is it in the
Glaſſe; as is the Mans and Huſbandes,
ſo ſhould bee the honeſt
Wiues; as is the louing Wiues, ſo
ſhould bee the tender Husbandes.
To conclude, As the vine on the
houſe toppe,
               Pſal. 128, 3 
               ſo is the Wife; The vine
as it is of excellent vſe, ſo it is wonderfull
weake, and except the Gardiner
ſupport it, it will lye on the
Earth and bear nothing. The wife
muſt alſo be tendred & ſupported,
or elſe ſhe cannot yeeld the Wine
of comforte to make thee haue a
glad heart. In euery Mans charge
there are faultes to bee eſpied, no
Man caſteth away his flocke for

one ſickneſſe? No, if hee haue a
thouſand Sheepe, and nine hundred
fall foule, yet letteth the ſicke
go, & keepeth the reſidue. Wiues
haue their faults and frailty, and
men are not cleare: Vnicuique dedit
vitium natura creato. Wee are
all blameable one way or other,
therefore ſpare one another, forbear
one another, and let nothing
breake of loue: but that which diſſolueth
Matrimony, that is whoredome,
and the God of all loue ſhal
marry you both to Ieſus Chriſt.
            20 I proceed: Our Parents are
the flock and charge of vs that are
Children, and Children are the
charge of Parentes. For wee are
borne weaker & more feeble then
all Creatures, and had wee not
ſome body to receiue vs when we
come into the world, woe were it
with vs, wee might make a ſhort

and woefull ſtay or Tragedy, To
be borne, to weepe, to dye. Neither
our Parents or their Anteceſſours,
haue any thing which they tranſfuſe
not into their Children, their
honour, fame, goods, or ſtaines,
for their children they haue them,
and in deſpite of reluctance, they
will deſcend vppon them. But let
them nouriſh and cheriſh their
Children, and not their ſinnes, and
let them wiſely take away the rotten
from the ſound; I meane their
childrens vices from their perſons,
or elſe vice will ouercome Parents
and Children. Some make theyr
Children Ludentes Simias,
               Mowing Apes. Digging Pigges. other
Fodientes ſues, That is, Eyther
they bring them vp to nothing but
to play, as many of the rich, or elſe
they traine them to nothing but to
delue and digge the earth, as many
of the poore. Alas poore Children,

better vnborne, becauſe the
richer haue their pleaſures deforming
them, and the poorer theyr
labours depreſſing them, one of
them hauing no ſence of Heauen,
the other, no vnderſtanding but
of Earth, and both of them without
God to bee their Father, and
the Church to be their Mother.
            21 Our Parents are our charge
that are their Children, we ought
therefore to take heede vnto them:
               Gen. 27, 43
& for their ſakes to flye no labour.
At Rebeccaes command, Iacob (that
was neuer from his mothers wing)
fled to Padan-Aran, and what miſeries
did hee there endure for
twenty whole yeares, the Lorde
God hath related. If we haue any
glory and praiſe, let vs giue it to
our Parentes. When Antigonus
had wonne a victory, yet he would
attribute it to his Father. Amphionius
               
and Anapius, two Bretheren,
when they had ſaued themſelues
from the Citty Catanea, which was
all on fire, and remembered that
their olde Father was yet within,
they tooke hands, and forced thorough
the flames, and with difficulty
(yet with ſafty) brought away
their poore old Father. Oh, Happy
Father of ſuch Sonnes! Oh,
Happy Sonnes, to bee ſuch Men!
though you bee dead, yet will all
good Childeren remember you
while the world laſteth. Bee good
to your Parents, you young Men
& Maidens, for as you ſerue them,
ſhall you bee ſerued againe; if curteouſly,
your Children will do the
like; if diſobediently, yours wil alſo
pay the ſcore double and treble
vpon you.
            22 The Seruants are alſo the
charge and flocke of the Maiſter,

and the Maiſter of the Seruantes,
each muſt be carefull, the Seruant
of diligence, toward his Maiſter,
and the Mayſter, To take heede to
the heards of his Seruants. Seruants
are wilde, becauſe they haue been
wantonly bredde, therefore they
loue no diſcipline. But let your
loue to do them good appeare vnto
them, and then they will bee
more honeſt, and more tractable.
Great thinges haue beene done by
Seruants.Gen. 24. By a Seruant, Abraham
prouided a Wife for his Sonne
Iſaac. By a Seruant, and that a little
Maide-Seruant,2. Reg. 5, 3 
               Naaman was
brought from his Countrey to Iudea,
to the Prophet, and there cured
of his Leproſie, both of body
and mind. By a Seruant was Darius
brought to bee a King,Iuſtine. and the
kindneſſe of a Maiſter to his Seruant,
did ſaue his life, when all the

               Tirian Seruants did cut their maiſters
throats. Therefore doe good
to your ſeruants, giue them inſtruction,
and all good ſeruice will follow.
Deale not with them as Vintners
doe with their Veſſels, which
draw them till they be empty, and
then turne them out of doores. So
many worke out their Seruauntes
ſtrength, & then turn them out to
begge. Seruants, are ſo ſet on drunkenneſſe
and liberty, that no wages
can win them from that notorious
Vice, what will bee the ende
hereof. If Lords, and Gentlemen,
and Maiſters, alter not the Copy
of this licentious graunt, I ſee not
how our poore enuied Nation can
ſtand long, without more Enemies
then euer the old Saxons had,
or the late Netherlanders. In ſum
of all, breake of Prodigality, and
neyther you that be Mayſters, put

more on your ſhooes and Garters,
then many good Men on their
whole bodies, and let not your
delicate mouthes, buy your appetites
pleaſure to deare: neither suffer
the poore to drink more in one
houre, then they get in a day. You
all ſit with Rulers, follow the wiſe
mans counſell,Pro, 23, 2. 
               Put thy knife to thy
throat, if thou be a Man giuen to thy
appetite.
            
            Laſtly, although Salomon nameth
none in this Text, But the family
& the Maidens: yet he excludeth
not the ſtranger, for in the family
on the Sabbaoth day hee is
commanded to reſt, and he which
receiues him, is not to let him depart
on that day, as it is Exo. 20, 5.
And althogh it be not in the eſtate
of euery man to entertaine, yet is
it a duty to guide and direct ſuch
as are diſtreſſed to Houſes of hoſpitality.

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
And indeede in auncient
time, men were onely receiued to
houſe, & brought with them their
owne victuals, as you may ſee in
the ſtory of Iacobs Children in Egipt,
               Gen. 42. 43
and the Leuite and his wife in
the Citty of Iemini.
               Iud. 19, 16, and 20. Surely to bee
Hoſpitable is a part of Charity, &
one of the greateſt; wherefore the
Scripture ſaith;Heb. 13, 12 
               Let brotherly loue
continue, and bee not forgetfull to
lodge ſtraungers, for thereby ſome
haue entertained Angels in the likeneſſe
of men,
               Gen. 18, 19 alluding to Abraham
& Lot, to whom the Angels came
before the deſtruction of Sodome.
What is more horrible & diſcomfortable
to men, then to bee without
harbour and Houſe;Gen. 21, 19 and therfore
did Agar take it ſo grieuouſly
as ſhe mourned in deſperation, vntill
the Angell ſhewed her a Fountaine
where againe ſhe filled her bottle.
               
They which inhabit the deſerts
follow the footſteps of wilde
Aſſes vnto the Water-Springes,
which without them they ſhould
neuer find; and therefore loue and
make much of them. How much
more ſhould we loue to bring one
another to the places of our refreſhing,
and not ſhut vp our doores
againſt the Straunger, as Paradice
was againſt Adam: ſo as it ſhoulde
bee as equall or ready for Straungers
to dye there, as to dine there.
The Prieſtes and Scribes which
put our Sauiour to death, could
Buy with the Money of Iudas a place
or field to bury Strangers, but let vs
not prouide theyr Graues, rather
their Tables, whether they be ſicke
or ſound.
            When Dauid hadde loſt his
Wiues, and all his goods, by making
much of a Stranger, he came

to finde and recouer all againe. Euen
ſo, we cannot looſe by curteſie
and humanity to ſtrangers, For we
are all Strangers in this world. And
if the firſt Chriſtians had not receiued
the Preachers of their faith
(that were ſtraungers vnto them)
into their houſes,Luke 10. 
               their peace which
was the peace of Chriſt had not
light or reſted vpon them. Rahab
for lodging ſtraungers had her life
ſaued, and as many as ſhee would
receiue into her Family. We read
of the ancient inhabitants of Bretinum
in Romandiola, that they did
contend for the entertainement of
ſtrangers, and for that cauſe they
erected a Piller in their Market
place, into which euery one of the
Cittizens draue and faſtened a diſtinct
ring, and that euery ſtranger
that came to that Towne faſtened
his Horſe to one of thoſe rings, into

whoſe Houſe he was to bee receiued;Leaud. deſcr. Italiae.
which thing was ſo obſerued,
that incontinently with al alacrity
hee was entertained and lodged,
and the Cittizens tooke it for
a great fauor.Cran. lib. 4. The barbarous Vandals
had ſo much humanity in thē
towards ſtrangers, that they confiſcated
all his goodes, and gaue liberty
to ſet his Houſe on fire, that
had expelled or inciuilly handled
a ſtranger. I could be infinite, but
I muſt conclude. Iob ſaith; The
Stranger did not lodge in the ſtreete,
               Iob. 31, 32.
               I opened my doores, vnto him that
went by the way.
               Geneſis 2, 6 
               Abimelech hath
his commendation for lodging Abraham
a ſtraunger. So hath Iethro
for Moſes.
               Exod. 2. 
               Obadia that hid ſo many
Prophetes, and nouriſhed them,
euen foure hundred.In Abdiam Saint Hierom
ſaith of him, that for his mercy hee
receiued the giſt of Propheſie, and

was buried in Sebaſte, that is Samaria,
in the Graue wherin Eliſha was
after buried, and S. Iohn Baptiſt.
The widdow of Sarepta, a heathen
woman, the Sunamite, Martha, and
Lazarus, Zacheus, Simō
                the tanner.
Gatus, Oneſiphorus, and other had
neuer been ſpoken of but for their
Hoſpitality, and receiuing of ſtrangers.
Thereſore let not the good
Houſeholder forſake ſtrangers, for
the Lord loueth them, and goeth
with them: and if they be receiued
in the name of Chriſte, whether
they be good or ill, he wil pay their
reckoning. Learne therefore (ſaith
Saint Auſten) learne (ô Chriſtian)
without difference and reſpect of
perſons, to offer entertainement,
leaſt he whom thou ſhutteſt out of
doores be thy Lord and Sauiour.
For he ſaith; I haue been a ſtranger
and ye haue not lodged me. I tel you,

that he that laboureth for Chriſt,
and he that refreſheth him that laboureth,
ſhall bee both rewarded
before Ieſus Chriſt. To whom bee
all preſent and eternall glory.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            PAge 41. line 1. read he walloweth, P.
46. read Apharantes, P. 65 read Mycerninus,
P. 86. li. 5. read Pulcheria, P.
87. li. 20. read infortunio, P. 88. l. 1. dele
not. P. 90. li. 12. Villegiſus, ſo in the margent,
118. li. 15. read King, 132. li. 12.
read dry. 145. line 2. read auidiſsima.
            
            
         
      
   