
      
         
            
            
            THE REWARD OF RELIGION.
            Deliuered in ſundrie Lectures vpon the Booke of Ruth, wherein the godly may ſee their daily and outwarde tryals, with the preſence of God to aſsiſt them, and his mercies to recompence them: Verie profitable for this preſent time of dearth, wherein manye are moſt pittifully tormented with want; and alſo worthie to bee conſidered in this Golden age of the preaching of the word, when ſome vomit vp the loathſomnes therof, and others fall away to damnable ſecuritie.
            
               L v c. 12.32. 
               
                  Feare not little flocke, for it is your Fathers will to giue you a kingdome.
               
            
            
               Cyprian in the end of the 6. Epiſt. lib. 4.
               Dearely beloued brethren, let this bee rooted in your hearts, let this be the preparation of our weapons, let this bee your Meditation day and night, to ſet before your eyes, and conſider with minde and ſences, the puniſhments of the wicked, with the rewards and deſerts of the righteous: what penaltie he threatneth to them that denie him; and what glorie hee promiſeth to them which confeſſe him.
            
            Seene and allowed.
            LONDON, Printed by Iohn Windet, 1596.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT Honourable, vertuous and Chriſtian Lady, the Lady Margaret, Barronneſſe Dacres of the South, grace, mercie and peace, be multiplied, in this life preſent and eternall felicitie in the life to come.
            
               RIght Honourable Ladie: it is reported that the inhabitants of the mountaine Caſsius by Seleucia, at the third watch of the night doe behold the Globe of the Sunne: ſo that on the one ſide they ſee our accuſtomed darkeneſſe, couering the face of the whole earth; on the other ſide the gliſtering beames of the ſhining light,

diſplaying the ſhadow of the nightly darkenes. In my opinion this hill doth verie fitly reſemble the excellencie of the word of God, and the inhabitants thereof, the profeſſors of Religion: for long ſince the Sun of righteouſneſſe, the Sonne of God, departed from the ſight of the world; and declined like the Sunne of the firmament; hath left the vniuerſall Orbe of the whole earth in palpable darknes. Yet to vs liuing in this world, the beames of his brightneſſe, the light of his ſpirit, the power of his perſon, and the glorie of his godhead, is moſt euidently manifeſted, by the Scriptures and preaching of his holy word: ſo that there we behold infinite thouſands walking in darkeneſſe, and ſtanding on the left hand of God ready for damnation: but here wee ſee a few perſons, profeſſors of Religion, like the men of Caſsius, liuing in the ſight and preſence of our Sauiour, (whom they behold ſhining in the Scriptures) and ſtanding on the right hande waiting for ſaluation. For this cauſe, the voice of the eternall God ſoundeth ſo often vnto vs in the Scriptures, that wee were vnder the prince of darkeneſſe, that wee were darkned in our cogitation, that it was night, but now the day ſtarre from on high hath viſited vs, and therefore we muſt caſt away the deedes of darkneſſe, and put on the armour of light: and the

Scriptures euery where teſtifie, that the Church of God is in the toppe of the mountaines, meaning that the dignitie of our calling, as farre excelleth the fancies of the world, as the hils ariſe aboue the vallies of the earth. This is the infallible word of life: and all the writings of men, are but the Apes hereof▪: from hence they heard of their Golden ages, their feareful wonders, their ſtrange inuentions, and their incredible fictions which they haue broched concerning heauen and earth. When Ptolomeus Philadelphus king of Egypt, builded his famous Librarie, and had furniſhed it with al the writings of the heathen, hee alſo by Ambaſſadours to the high Prieſt in Iudah, obtained the olde Teſtament, and ſixe men of euery Tribe, to Tranſlate it out of Hebrewe into Greeke: then Demetrius Phalerius, one of the Schollers of Theophraſtus, certified the King, that among all the writings of their learned Philoſophers, they onely were Diuine, and the Caeleſtiall Oracles of the euerlaſting God. For their truth the ſecrete nature of euerie hart is forced to confeſſe; for their ſubſtance, it is altogether occupied on heauenly things; for their ſinceritie, it is eſtabliſhed in the promiſe of him, who neuer changeth for their ſtile, neither the principles of Plato, the demonſtrations of Ariſtotle
               
the inuentions of Hippocrates, the ſleights of Carneades, the exclamations of Cicero, or the conceipts of Seneca, were vttered in ſo plaine eloquence or commendable phraſes, as the Scriptures of our ſaluation. Alſo if your Ho. conſider the often changes of the lawes of godleſſe Gentiles, you ſhall perceiue that they haue had as many Religions as generations: but you ſhall finde that we haue now the Religion of Adam, the faith of Enoch, the Arke of Noah, the ſacrifice of Abraham, and all the true worſhip of God, as the Church poſſeſſed it▪ many thouſand yeares agoe: and all becauſe the rule hereof, the heauenly word of God remaineth for euer. Lycurgus the beſt law-maker that euer was among the Gentiles, when he ſaw his lawes to be amended of the Spartanes, for very griefe thereof famiſhed himſelfe at Criſſa. The lawes which Papius & Iulius gaue to the Romanes, were diſanulled by Seuerus the Emperour: all the world erreth, ſome one way, and ſome another, mutually condemning each others ſuperſtition; onely the Church of God, in euerie age retained one God, one faith, one Baptiſme, and one ſubſtance of Religion, becauſe it followeth one voice of the holye Ghoſt ſpeaking in the Scriptures. It were infinite to ſet downe all the commoditie we receiue by this heauenly writing

By it our manners are mollified, our minds inſtructed, our liues bleſſed, and we deliuered from Atheiſme, Paganiſme and Papiſme: Atheiſme denieth all things, Paganiſme corrupteth all thinges, and Papiſme confoundeth all things, therefore by the word of God, wee are freed from doubting the truth, deceiuing our owne ſoules, and confounding Religion. And becauſe this requireth ſome proofe, I beſeech your Ho. to beare with my tediouſneſſe, while I manifeſt my minde ſo briefely as I may; omitting Atheiſme fitter for dogges to beleeue, then men to profeſſe, I will briefely declare, how the Gentiles, (ſuch as wee were before the worde wrought our calling,) haue falſified the whole Scripture and corrupted the tradition thereof, with the inuentions of their owne Poets; and how the Papiſts are but confounders of Heatheniſme, hereſie and Chriſtianitie. Firſt to begin with the Gentiles, while reaſon and nature enforced them to confeſſe a God, (which is onely and truely learned in the ſcriptures,) they imagined a multitude of goddes and goddeſſes; in the Scripture we finde the mention hereof, that euerie nation had a peculiar God. The Zidonians and Sirians had Aſtaroth, or as ſome call him Aſtartes: the Moabites had Chemoſh: the Ammonites had Milcom or Moloch;

the Babilonians Bel, the Philiſtins Dagon, the Egyptians worſhipped many beaſtes, but eſpecially a ſheepe: among other writers, we find that the Athenians, had Apollo and Minerua; the Boetian Thebes, Bacchus and Hercules; Carthage had Iuno; Cyprus and Paphus, Venus; Rhodes, Apollo; Taenarus, Neptune; the Creetes, and Epheſians, Diana; the Romaines Mars, the Italians, Ianus, the Arabians Diaſares; The Germaines Tibilenus, the men of Affrique Caeleſtus; and the Moores haue worſhipped the gouernours of their Countrie. Thus they turned the glorie of the incorruptible God, into the ſimilitude of corruptible creatures, as birds, beaſts, fiſhes and Serpentes, and wandered without God while they framed to themſelues a multitude of goddes: and the beſt they coulde inuent, were ſinfull and abhominable wretches, ſuch as exceeded all others in notorious crimes, as I could eaſily ſhew, if it were to my purpoſe: and moreouer they haue forſaken not onelye the true God, but haue blotted the names of their moſt famous men, leauing the worthieſt in hell, and lifting the worſt into heauen. For might not they as well made Socrates a God for his wiſedome, whom Apollo himſelf honoured with this Oracle: Pantoon Androon Socrates ſophotatos, of all men Socrates
               
was the wiſeſt: Ariſtides excelled them all in iuſtice, Themiſtocles for warre, Alexander in honour, Polycrates in felicitie, and Demoſthenes in eloquence: Who was more graue then Cato, more valiant then Scipio, more affable then Camillus, more excellent then Iul. Caeſar, more happy then Sylla, more wealthie then Craſſus, or more religious then Numa Pompilius; truely none among all their Deuils, I would ſay goddes, with whom all the nations of the earth haue committed fornication. In latter times the Romaines had onely power to conſecrate goddes, as now the Pope & his Cardinals doe challenge the ſame to Canonize Saints. But would not the hearts of the godly breake in ſunder, to conſider that euerie Cittie inuented a new God, yea euerie familie had their houſholde goddes, committed Idolatrie with birdes of the ayre, and beaſtes of the earth, men and women, Moone and Starres, Sunne and Angels, euen to the Aſſes head, as commonly as the Serpent liueth on the duſt, or as greedily as the Lyon raueneth when hee findeth a pray. The ſtudie of Aſtronomie verifieth this, for they haue imagined ſignes from the Eagle to the little birde, from the Lyon to the little dogge, from the Whale to the litle fiſh, and from reaſonable creatures to vnreaſonable

monſters: becauſe they would haue ſome colour for their impietie, they tranſlated their Idols to be ſignes in heauen. But now when the light of the word of life once ſhined in the world, they perceiued their owne follies, renounced their olde errours and receiued the wholeſome doctrine of the onely true and eternall God: for as the Lyons runne at the ſight of a fire brand, as the Cockatriſe flyeth when ſhee ſauoureth the Weaſill, and the clouds flie away when the Northeren winde bloweth; ſo theſe ſubtilties of Sathan being once diſcouered, thorough the ſimplicitie of the Scriptures, they fall againe into the breſt of the firſt Author, and I would to God they were for euer buried in his bottomles kingdome. Alſo that which we finde in the word of God, concerning the creation, the floud, the repleniſhing of the earth, the beginning or confuſion of tongues, the deſtruction of Sodom and Gomorhe, the deliuerie of the Iſralites from Egypt, the myracles of Moſes and Aaron, the ouerthrow of the Cananites whome they call Phoenicians, the building of Salomons Temple, the ſcattering of the Tribes of Iſraell, the birth of Christ, the darkeneſſe at his death, and the preaching of the Apoſtles: they haue corrupted with fond additions, wilfull deuiſes, intollerable blaſphemies, ignorant relations, wicked

ſubſtractions, and accurſed deprauations, which if I ſhould follow, I might make a large volume: onely thus much I will be bolde to ſay, that all the wiſedom of the Gentiles was nothing but the doctrine of Deuils, & that all the world before the comming of Chriſt, was without the true knowledge of God, the Iewes onely excepted. The learned haue noted theſe fower as the generall heads of auncient impietie, the firſt is Barbariſme, wherin men liued vnder no guide, preſerued no peace, followed no commendable kinde of life, but euerie one did that which pleaſed him, to the diſgrace of mankind, refuſing onely that which was good, and altogether embracing that which was accurſed. Then one ſatisfied another with bloudy reuenge, making no more accompt of the life of a man thē the bloud of a beaſt; then they mingled themſelues like brutiſh creatures in generation, brother with ſiſter, father with daughter, and mother with her ſonne, then their ſtrength was their lawe, their deſire was their counſellour, their affections pleaded, their will gaue iudgement, & their mallice was the meanes to execute their crueltie. The ſecond head or fountaine of falſehoode among the Gentiles, is called Schythiſme, becauſe it was firſt practiſed among the Scythians a barbarous and cruell people, differing in nothing

from the former, ſaue onely becauſe they had one gouernour or ruler, to whom they were ſubiect, being at his commandement, to execute right or wrong, to ſaue or kil, keeping peace with none, but manie times ſetting the children to drinke the bloud of their owne parents, and the parents to eate the fleſh of their owne children. The third kind of falſehoode which raigned among the Gentiles for want of the word of God, is called Helleniſme, which conſiſteth in the worſhip of Idols, this began among the Grecians, who are called in their owne tongue Hellenes, and therefore was the ſuperſtition called Helleniſme, this deteſtable canker ſo preuailed, that not onely the Grecians, Babilonians, Egyptians, Sirians, Phaenicians, Phrygians, and manie other nations were infected therewith, but the Iſraelites the people of God, were poyſoned therewith, which in the ende was their vtter ſubuerſion, and this hath raigned a long time in the Church of Rome, and in all thoſe kingdomes, where ſhe could plant her chaire, which all the godly doe perceiue will be her euerlaſting deſtruction. But this Helleniſme preuailed mightilie, for the ſpace of two thouſand yeares, vnder which time ſprang vp all the ſects of the Philoſophers: as the Pythagoreans, which taught that men might not ſacrifice to the gods,

that the ſoules of men departed do go into other men, and alſo into bruite beaſts, that whatſoeuer was aboue the Moone was immortal
                  •
               , with ſuch like fantaſies, and in the ende this Phythagoras would be called a God. Next vnto him aroſe the Platoniſtes, who affirmed that the world was created of the Angels and little goddes, that of one God there came many other goddes, that all women ought to bee common, and that no man ought to haue a wife peculiar to himſelfe, in a wel ordered common-wealth. After theſe ſucceeded the Stoickes who affirmed this world to be God, that all fleſh ſhall periſh, and that the ſoules departed from one into another. Then alſo began the Epicures to growe like Serpents, borne onely to deſtroy other, they would haue all things to ende in pleaſure, that there is no God or prouidence, that none are bleſſed but in this preſent life. And thus your Ho. may perceiue how miſerable were thoſe dayes, when men ranne headlong into ſo great extreamities, that their profeſsion of wiſedome was the cōfeſsion of folly, & for al their light of lerning, they groped in a Cimmerian darknes, being ſhadowed with ignorance like the Countrie Odeſſae in Greece, which by reaſon of mightie hils therto adioyning, neuer felt the beames of the Sun. The fourth head or fountaine of vngodlineſſe is

called Samaritaniſme, of the Samarians which mingled themſelues with the profeſsion of the Iewes, and receiued ſome parte of the Bible; yet like the Anabaptiſtes of our daies, without any difference or conſcience, kept companie with Iewes and Gentiles. Of theſe came many accurſed ſects, from whom ſprang many deteſtable opinions, and thus the world laboured with damnable deuiſes, while the Deuill laughed at their dayly deſtruction; whereby this is euident, that Philoſophie or Paganiſme is the corruption of our Religion. But ſome peraduenture will obiect vnto me, that they had very excellent and worthie men, who Crowned their Countrie and kindred with endleſſe memorie. Mutius left his right hand on the Altar. Empedocles willingly caſt himſelfe into the burning flames of the mountaine. Aetna one of the builders of Carthage, to auoide a ſecond marriage, caſt her ſelfe into the burning graue. Regulus being freed from the Carthaginians, chuſed rather to ſuffer death himſelfe in moſt cruel torments, then to diſcharge their priſoners at Rome. Menocaeus, ſeeing his Cittie of the Thebes beſieged by the Grecians, which they threatned to deſtroie, except one of them would giue himſelfe for all, did aſcend to the wall of the Citie, and there pearcing his body with a ſword, fell

downe dead among his enemies, wherewith they contented, departed. Alceſtis the wife of Perilaus ſeeing (as ſhe ſuppoſed) the fiendes come for her husband, who lay ſicke, ſlew her ſelfe, bidding them to take her ſhaddow and ſpare her husbands life. To ſpeake nothing of Lucretia; Dyrachia, Aria, Cyane and many others, only let this ſuffice. Eleates being asked of Dioniſius the tyraunt, what was better then Philoſophie, anſwered, death, whereupon hee was commaunded to be ſcourged to death, which for the defence of his ſpeach, and contempt of death he moſt patiently endured. Yet Tertullian, a Chriſtian father ſpeaking of ſuch like actions, hath theſe wordes, O lawfull commendation becauſe humaine, to whome neither wilfull preſumption, nor deſperate perſwaſion is imputed, to whome it is permitted to die in contempt of death, and all manner of crueltie: to whome is giuen more libertie to ſuffer for his countrie, kingdome or friends then for God. Who is hee that cannot with one eye eſpie the meaning of this father? Improuing this kinde of death, as preſumption or deſperation which may neuer haue any harbour in the hearts of the faithfull, what ſhall wee then ſay of all theſe worthie perſons? Surely whatſoeuer is not of faith is ſinne, and without faith it is impoſsible to pleaſe God.

We muſt not regard what man doth, but what God commaundeth, as the Emperour Conſtantine once ſaid, it is not death but the cauſe of death that deſerueth commendation; as Ageſilaus the beſt Grecian Prince that euer was was wont to ſay, The pureſt Adamant is not worne with yron, nor waſted with fire, yet a little Goates bloud will conſume it: euen ſo if one man could ſuffer al the tryals in the world, and abide many thouſand deathes by fire and torture, yet it ſhall no whit profit him, except the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt looſe the fetters of ſin, and breake the chaines of the Deuill; now the mercies of God in Chriſt, are not communicated to any, but to ſuch as know them, and who can know them without the word of God? This is the fountaine of water of life, and all other are but poyſoned puddles, ſtinking more filthyly in the preſence of God, then the Lake of Camarina in the noſtrels of men. They reporte that in Sycilia there are two ſprings, whereof one will make a fruitfull woman barren, the other, a barren woman fruitfull: if this were ſo, I thinke all the world would haue recourſe vnto it. Yet in this word of God, there is a greater commoditie declared vnto vs, for here wee learne the true cauſe of barrenneſſe; which being knowne, the diſeaſe is the more eaſily remoued

here wee learne the meanes whereby it is cured, as in Rebecca, Annah, Elizabeth and others, which might as eaſily bee practiſed, as true Religion vnfainedly profeſſed. Moreouer they tell vs, that in Epirus at the foote of the hill Tomarus, there is a holy Well, which of it ſelfe will kindle a Torch, being put vnto it, & quench it being brought burning therto; graunt this to be true, & it will repreſent vnto vs the nature of this holy Wel the word of God, which with the water of our Baptiſme doth fire our hearts by the holy Ghoſt, but comming vnto it burning in the heate of our owne luſt, quencheth the flame of our owne concupiſcence. Alſo wee finde in Varro, that there are two ſtreames in Boeotia, whereof if ſheepe drinke, the one burneth their coulour in Ruſſet, and the other maketh them while againe, if this be poſsible as al things are poſsible to the creatour of the world, what maruaile though we are regenerated, not (new couloured) by the immortall ſeede of his heauenly word. Which are his ſheepe, and the corruptions of our nature ſo waſhed in the ſame, that our garments of righteouſneſſe are as white as ſnow in his preſence. Solinus telleth that at the Cittie Debris among the Garamantes, there is a ſpring which at the ryſing of the ſunne congealeth to Yce,

but at the ſetting thereof reſolueth to water againe, which is contrarie to all the world beſide freezing with heate, and thawing with colde: yet we may make this vſe thereof, that it is no wonder to ſee our heauenly Well to worke theſe contraries, to be the ſauour of life vnto life, or elſe the ſauour of death vnto death, that vnto ſome it is a two edged ſword to giue them mortall wounds, vnto other, a broad Target to defend them from danger, that it wrought ſo effectually in the daies of perſecution, when it was oppreſſed in darkeneſſe, but now freezeth and hardneth in theſe daies of peace, when the ſunne of proſperitie ſhineth to all. Surely as the Albeſte ſtone once ſet on fire, can neuer be quenched, ſo if we could but once burn in loue vnfainedly with the Goſpel, our profeſsion ſhould not be ſo luke warme, nor our deuotiō ſo ſmal in the cauſe of religiō. And thus I haue bene bold with your Ho. to proue my firſt aſſertion, wherein if I haue beene too long, let me craue pardon, and I will promiſe greater breuitie in my ſeconde propoſition, which is this, that Poperie is a confuſion of Heatheniſme, Hereſie and Chriſtianitie. And that I may methodically proceede, I will begin at their higheſt degree, and ſo in order lightly touch ſo many things as may certifie your Ho. of the truth of their Religion. Numa
               
appointed one to bee a high Prieſt, at whoſe iudgement all temporall and ſpirituall thinges were adminiſtred, the ſame is retained in the Church of Rome, for the Pope obtained of Phocas the Emperour and murderer of Mauritius, that the Biſhoppe of Rome might bee the heade of all Churches, to whoſe iudgement all the world in ſpirituall matters muſt be ſubiect: by which in time it came to this, that hee corrupted the whole Church of Chriſt, that hee got both ſwords into his hand, and made himſelfe a triple Crowne, after the manner of the late Roman Emperors, who had three Crownes at their inauguration; and as the triple lightning was the auncient of Iupiter, ſo the triple Crowne is the badge of the Pope▪ thourough the honour or terrour thereof, he threatneth what thunder-bolts he pleaſeth in the world. The Cabaliſts imagined two Keyes, whereby Paradiſe was opened and ſhutte; from hence the Pope hath in his banner the croſſe Keyes, telling vs that he hath power, to open and ſhut Paradiſe, for, & againſt whō he pleaſeth. Being thus exalted into the higheſt place, as it was reported, the God Termines would not giue place to iupiter ſtanding both in the Capitoll, no more the Pope giueth place to Chriſt although hee ſtand in the middeſt of his Church, and ſit at

the right hand of his Father in heauen. For this cauſe, as the Emperours had their ſenate, ſo he hath his Cardinals: as the Egyptians bound the Prieſts of Iſis or Apis to liue in perpetuall virginitie; ſo hee forceth the ſacred ſhauelings of his vnholy ſeate, with the vowe of perpetuall chaſtitie, and that he might helpe their weakneſſe in this behalfe, as Caligula ſuffered the whoores of Rome in his daies, ſo the Popes haue graunted the tolleration of a Stewes, builded by a Pope, Sixtus the fourth, which in ſhorte time ſo preuailed, that the Pope receiued for Rents thereof fourtie thouſand Duccats by the yeare. And Paule the thirde had the names of fourtie & fiue thouſand Tennants belonging to that moſt filthie and damnable kinde of life. Furthermore hee furniſhed, or rather poyſoned the Church of Chriſt, with Friers, Munkes, Nunnes. The Friers and Munkes are the ſucceſſors of the Eſſaean, Doſithaean, Naſachaean and Cynicall heretickes, which like theſe take vpon them the vowes of wilfull pouertie, and perpetuall chaſtitie, placing their Religion in abſtinence from meates, in outward and hypocriticall faſting, affirming that they are the ſucceſſors and followers of the Apoſtles, like the heretiques called by Auguſtine Apoſtoliques, defending that the Apoſtles leade a ſingle life,

and had no wiues, ſo theſe Romiſh heretiques accompt Marriage but filthines, like the Marcionites, Tacians, Adamites, Platoniſts, and Valeſian heretiques, and are not aſhamed to make the holy Apoſtles of Christ breakers of wedlocke, and wilfull departers from their own wiues, contrarie to the writings of the Euangeliſts and Saint Paul. The Nunnes or women-Munks are the naturall ſucceſſors of the veſtall Virgins inſtituted by Numa, & as theſe were Dedicated to Veſta, Apollo; Iuno, Argiua, Diana & Minerua, ſo are the Romiſh Nunns to Marie the mother of Chriſt, and other holy women. Then alſo did he begin to dreſſe and adorne the Temples with Images, which he learned of the Gentiles, as I haue already declared, and herein hee ioyned with the Gnoſtickes and Baſilidian heretiques, who defended Images to be lawfull for Chriſtian people; and as the Gentiles had their ſacrifices for the dead, called Inferiae, ſo he inſtituted praiers for the dead, leaſt he ſhould ſeeme to want any thing, which hee ſhould not haue. Then alſo hee tooke the Scriptures from the common people, leaſt they ſhould eſpie his lewdneſſe, and as Lyſis the Pythagorean blamed one of his fellowes for making knowne abroade their Maſters precepts, ſo hee blameth all thoſe that ſhall open the miſteries

of the Goſpell to the common people: and as the Magicians of Perſia were wont to ſing to their Idols in a ſtrange tongue, ſo the Pope commanded all things to bee done in the Church in an vnknowne language, wherein they alſo ioyne with the Baſilidian heretiques, who gaue this as a principle, that their miſteries muſt be concealed and reuealed onely to a few, being worſe then the Pythagoreans, who commaunded but fiue yeares ſilence to their Diſciples, but the Papiſtes keepe men all their liues from reading, ſpeaking and conferring on the Scriptures. By this meanes he deceiued the world with iugling like the heretiques called Mirabiliarii, and affirmed that faith commeth by nature, like the Baſilidians and Gnoſticks; they taught that euerie one that would be ſaued muſt be annoyled in their ſickeneſſe; like the Heracleonite heretiques; that it is lawfull for women to Baptiſe like the Marcionites; that children vnbaptiſed are not vnder the couenant, and that grace is giuen with the outward ſigne, like the Arrians and Heracleonites; that children muſt be annoynted with Oyle in Baptiſme, like the heretiques Marcus and Marcoſus; that Baptiſme waſheth away originall ſinnes, and ſuch actuall as are committed before, like the Nouatians, and Meſſalian heretiques; that the Sacrament

of the Supper of the Lord, after the words of Conſecration ſpoken, is the verie body and bloud of Chriſt, ſo the heretiques called Marcites, ſaid, they made by coniuration, and for this cauſe the Pepuzian heretiques baked the bloud of man with the bread ordained for this ſupper; that wine muſt bee mingled with water, as the Artotyrites ſaid, they muſt offer Cheeſe with the bread in the Sacrament; that good workes merite eternall life, like the Pelagians, Catharites, and Mahumetiſtes; that a man ſince the fall of Adam hath free will, and that God hath▪ Predeſtinated none, like the Pelagians, that it is lawfull for vs to ſweare by creatures, as the Virgine Marie, Saints and Angels, ſo doe the Manichaeans and Mahumetiſtes; that ſome ſinnes be mortall and ſome veniall, ſo doth Mahomet affirme: with a thouſand like, moſt vaine, wicked, wretched, blaſphemous and damnable aſſertions, which were moſt eaſie to bee proued if there were any queſtion of it. By this your Ho. may perceiue, that their Religion is but patched of many condemned hereſies, defended by vnwritten traditions, and maintained by violent and forcible dealing: like the Chamelaeon they haue often changed and poyſoned the world, but the ſcriptures are as a Baye leaſe, to cure the contagion

of ſuch mortall confuſion; and thus in ſome ſort I haue perfourmed my promiſe, in deliuering the vanity of the world which hath refuſed the wiſedome of the eternall word of God. The end of this my ſpeech is to ſhew the wonderfull and incomparable treaſure of the holy Scriptures; for as the Golde hath the brighteſt beames, being laide to the Copper: as the Adamante is of greateſt force, when the loade ſtone is beſide it, and the pureſt colour hath the beſt hiewe, when the counterſaite is compared with it; ſo the bleſſing of God in his word, doth moſt magnificently appeare, when wee behold before our eyes the counterfaite colours of ſuperſtitious conceipts, the crooked deuiſes and curſed opinions of the condemned Crue, which haue refuſed the waye of life declared herein, and chuſed the path of damnation for the hire of their ſuperſtition. The Scriptures are not only a Caſtle to keepe vs from hereſie, but alſo a ſalue or remedie, if wee haue been poyſoned by falſhoode. The ſting of the Scorpion is cured by applying the Achates ſtone, the graſſe Alimos preſerueth the famiſhed perſon from death, The Baare hauing eaten Mandragora ſaueth his life by the little Emmet, and the poyſon of the Chamelaeon is expelled by a Baye leafe: euen ſo the word of God, cureth the hereſies of Poperie, which are compared

to the ſtinging of the Scorpions in the Scriptures, it is the fruite of the tree of life, and whoſoeuer eateth and diſgeſteth in ſhall neuer die, it is a preſeruatiue againſt all poyſon, and the leaues thereof ſhall cure the nations. By this alone the Lord hath wrought the calling of his children, the confuſion of his enemies, the comfort of his Saintes, and the repleniſhing of his kingdome. All the Kings of the earth haue beene in armes againſt it: yet the miniſters thereof, who neuer bore armes againſt them, by their onely preaching haue wonne a glorious fielde. All Egypt coulde not reſiſt Moſes and Aaron, becauſe they came on the Lordes meſſage: no more ſhall all the world ouercome the preachers of peace, ſo long as they faithfully performe their heauenly Ambaſſage. Wordes haue wrought more then weapons; the ſpirite hath pearced more then the Speare; the wals of Paper and the ordinaunce of Fathers haue battered downe the ſtately kingdome of the whoore of Babilon, learning hath done better ſeruice then Launces, Gownes haue conquered moe then Gunnes; Bookes haue done more good then Bullets; and the prayers of the faithfull haue preuailed more then the Pikes of horſemen; the ſtone which the builders refuſed, is become the

head of the corner, this is the Lordes doing, & it is maruailous in our eyes, the bloude of the dead Martyrs hath giuē greater wounds in this quarrell, then the ſwords of the liuing ſouldiours. But thus I haue too long troubled your Hon. with that which you knewe before, and haue preſumed on your fauour for the acceptation of theſe my ſlender labours vpon one parte of Scripture, the booke of Ruth; which as the holy Ghoſt hath vouchſafed to call by the name of a woman, to the praiſe of the whole ſexe, and euerlaſting commendation of her Religion: ſo am I emboldned to Dedicate it to ſo Honourable a Lady, as your ſelfe, whome I know to be a Ruth by Religion, though a Noble woman by birth. For many witneſſes can teſtifie this alſo if I ſhould be ſilent, and the ordinarie exerciſes at Seuenoke, will ſound your name, becauſe your preſence and diligence at them, hath ſtirred vp manye meaner perſons, comforted ſome godly people thereabout, and much euery way countenanced, and encouraged the preachers of the ſame. There are many cauſes which might compell me, (though vnwilling) to commit my labours to the Preſſe, yet willingly to preſent them to the world vnder the name of your Honour. For I am aſſured of the acceptation

of any ſmall thing that ſhall bee offered in the name of Religion, much more of this which comprehendeth the recompence and rewarde of our profeſsion. Your Honour knoweth that better is it to ſee the ſmoke of ones owne Countrie, then the fire of another: ſo I truſt my ſlender ſtudies, which are but as ſmoke, being compared with the burning coales of others knowledge, ſuch as dayly you heare, ſhall be the better accepted, becauſe there I had my being, where your Honour hath your dwelling. Alſo I am hereunto moued, that I might haue any occaſion, to teſtifie my bounden dutie, which I owe vnto that Noble and worthie Gentleman, Sir Henrie Leonard your Sonne, of whome I haue receiued eſpeciall encouragementes in the courſe of my ſtudies, and to whom I muſt remaine a debtour to the ende of my dayes, being no wayes able to recompence his wonted kindneſſe, but onely by this, daylye to praye for the life and proſperitie, that hee may be as the heyre of your Honour, ſo an ornament of the Noble houſe of the Dacres. And the God of all peace bleſſe your owne perſon, with ſuch bleſſings as you daylye deſire, that you may ſtill liue to the comfort of the godlye in this preſent life, to the enlarging of your

owne Honour, to the reioyſing of your whole family, and to the endleſſe ſaluation of your owne ſoule with Ieſus Chriſt the Sauiour of all them, which haue vnfainedly embraced true religion. London this firſt of October. 1596.
            
               
                  Your Honours to command in the Lord. Edward Topſell.
            
         
         
            
            To all them that haue vnfainedly embraced true Religion.
            
               DEarely beloued in Chriſte, when I conſider that comfortable Oracle of the Apoſtle, when he ſaith that godlineſſe hath the promiſes of this life and of the life to come; it commeth into my mind, that religion is none of the meaneſt profeſſions, that is laboured for in the worlde: for the greateſt rewardes are promiſed to the chiefeſt exploytes; and the worthieſt enterpriſes are Crowned with glorious benefits. Ioſeph for his wiſedome was made the gouernour of Egypt. Othniel for his ſeruice receiued Aiſah the daughter of Caleb for his wife. Iiphtah for his victorie was made iudge of Iſrael, and Dauid for his Muſicke was made one of the Courtiers of Saul.
               
In ſo much as it ſeemeth an ordinarie practiſe that euerie knowledge is rewarded with ſome curteſie: whereby wee are certified, that it is no maruaile to heare & hope for ſo excellent bleſſings as are promiſed to the Religious. For they are the houſe of the Lorde, and as hee dwelleth with all maieſtie in heauen, ſo he raigneth with all Authoritie in the righteous; they are a choſen generation borne of God, a Royall and holy prieſthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people, the free men of Chriſt, the inheritours of the earth, the iudges of the worlde, the coheires of Chriſtes kingdome, and the Cittizens of heauen. If wee looke for their Nobilitie, they are the Sonnes of God; if for their inſtruction, they are taught of God; if for their tuition, the heauenly Angels are their ſeruants; if for their degrees they are kings and prieſtes for the eternal God, if for their calling they are Saintes; if for their life it is heauenly; if for their wealth it is the whole worlde; and finally their death is the birth day of all felicitie. For this cauſe Dauid deſired rather to bee a doore-keeper in the houſe of God, then a dweller in the ſtately tents of the wicked;

as if the meaneſt condition among the profeſſors of Religion, were more excellent then the chiefeſt eſtates among the worldlings, their Croſſes excell the others Crownes, their barreneſſe the others fruitfulneſſe, their humilitie the others honour, their ignorance the others knowledge, their ſimplicitie the others wiſedome, their weakeneſſe the others ſtrength, and a little thing that the righteous hath, is better then the great poſſeſſions of the vngodly. When there is famine they are ſatisfied, when ther is warre they are deliuered, when there is plague they are without daunger, if fire fall from heauen it ſhall not burne them, if the waters ariſe aboue the mountaines, they are not drowned, if the earth quake and rend aſunder, yet they are not ſwallowed vp, if the wilde beaſtes fall vpon them they are not deuoured, and if the Deuill himſelfe would oppreſſe them, yet he ſhall not ouercome them. Then how glorious is our calling? That liue vnder the wings of God, that feede with the flocke of Chriſt, to whome are reuealed the ſecrete Counſels of the Lord, ſpeaking vnto vs by his Miniſters, giuing vs the euidence of our

ſaluation by his teſtament, regenerating vs by the immortall ſeede of his holye word, ſealing vs with the ſpirit of promiſe, lifting vs vp from the duſt of worldly miſerie, to the thrones of heauenly Maieſtie. Salomons ſeruants were happie that ſtood in his preſence and heard his wiſedome. Daniel was happy when the Lyons could not deſtroie him, his fellowes were happie when the fire coulde not conſume them, the Iſraelites were happie when the Egyptians were drowned, Iob was happy when his wealth was reſtored, and the Diſciples were bleſſed when they hearde Chriſt preach. How many bleſsings belong to the religious? Sathan that roaring Lyon cannot ouercome them, the fire ſhall haue no power on them, their enemies ſhall neuer hurt them, the riches of the grace of God ſhall be powred vppon them, and the word of life is dayly preached vnto them. Conſider therefore my beloued, what is the hope of our profeſſion whereunto we are called, the dignitie of our condition wherein wee ſtande, and the reward of our Religion prepared for our ſoules. Call to mind the examples of the Fathers, the promiſes of the Goſpell,

the oath of the Lorde himſelfe, the price of our redemption, and the place of our ſaluation: you ſhall finde nothing wanting in Religion, that might encreaſe your bleſſednes. Therefore how happie are the eares that heare the things which wee heare, the eyes that ſee the thinges which wee ſee, the hands that handle the thinges which wee touch, nay; the ſoules that are aſſured of the fauour of God. If all the worlde woulde goe about to ſet downe the felicitie of the godly and the dignitie of the choſen, they could neuer atchieue it: no, not that which they enioy in this life, for their thoughts are heauenly, their hearts the throne of the holy Ghoſt, their hands feele the Lord of glorie, their tongues talke of his praiſe, their feete ſtand in his Temple, their words are acceptable before him, their Prayers like ſweete ſauours of incenſe, their worſhip like Euening ſacrifices, their eyes behold his glorie, their eares heare his wiſedome, and their names are written in the kingdome of heauen. Would not any man become religious, that he might bee rewarded with this excellent honour? To eate his meate with the Kinge of heauen, to

weare the Crowne that neuer ſhall haue ende, to haue the Angels his attenders, the Saintes his fellowes, the heauens his dwelling place, the ſtarres vnder his feete, the euerlaſting light to walke in, the preſence of God to delight? him, & the pleaſures of Paradiſe for the recompence of his Religion. For this cauſe I haue giuen this title vnto theſe my ſlender labours vpon this booke of Ruth, wherein (beloued in Chriſt) you ſhall find the matter to agree with the title, and the hope of all the faithfull concerning the end of their profeſsion, ſo profitably deciphered, as hath comforted manye troubled ſoules, confirmed many wauering mindes, confounded many obſtinate Atheiſts, encouraged many godly perſons; and therefore I hope wil offer the ſame fauour vnto you in reading, 
                  •
               as it hath vnto many other in preaching. Herein the holye Ghoſt (I meane in the booke of Ruth) hath laide open whatſoeuer can bee expected of them that feare the Lord, here are afflictions to humble vs, death to preuent vs, & examples to admoniſh vs; here is the zeale of the godly, the vertue of an effectuall calling, the vizard of hypocriſie declared

vnto vs; heere is the loue of the faithfull, the obedience to parents, and the beneuolence of godly perſons commended vnto vs; here is the care of our parents, the gifts of the ſpirite, and the holines of the religious committed to the Church; here is the office of Magiſtrates, the Prayers of our brethren, and the calling of the Gentiles expreſſed, in the marriage of Ruth with Boaz, who was made a mother of many Kings, but eſpecially of the king of glorie, the Sonne of God, the Sauiour of the world, & the gatherer together of the heires of grace. My deſire therefore is this, that you trye it by peruſing and reading this treatiſe, for it is but ſuperfluous labour for me, any farder to trouble you with the Argument heereof, ſeeing the whole matter lyeth before your conſideration. I wil pray for your ſucceſſe, & commend the ende of my trauailes, (which is the comfort and inſtruction of the members of Chriſt, to the fountaine of mercy, by whome the heauens water the earth, and the earth multiplieth with encreaſe, and the encreaſe thereof preſerueth the world, that by the ſame power, your ſouls may be edified, your faith may be ſtrēgthned,

my labours may bee bleſſed, that his name may be glorified, his worde may euermore be taught among vs, that many generations may embrace his Goſpel, and the courſe thereof finiſhed, our Religion by the mercie of the Father, in the Sonne with the holy Ghoſt may bee rewarded with eternall ſaluation, to whome let vs euermore giue thankes becauſe hee hath vouchſafed vs the dignitie thereof, and walke worthie of our calling, leaſt our ſecure liues, our Idle faith, our vaine hope, our colde profeſsion, and our common conuerſation with the vngodly, bring vpon vs euerlaſting damnation.
            
               
                  Your Louing brother who deſireth your Prayers. Edward Topſell.
            
         
         
            
            ¶Guilielmi Atterſollj, in Ruthae Explicationes carmen Encomiasticon.
            
               EN Pietatis Honos: en ſic in regna reponit,
            Quoſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tulit caſus, abſtulit ipſe Deus.
            En Rutha, en Naomi, per tot diſcriminarerum
            In ſanctum tendunt, regna
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſancta, ſolum.
            Nec te (Rutha) Moab diſtendit amore tuorum,
            Nec colere ignotos barbara terra deos:
            Gens inimica Deo, Legem
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                deum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſequuta,
            Praemia quaeſitis diuitiora tenes.
            Quis te magne Bohaz tacitum ſine laude relinquat?
            Quid prohibet castis nomen ineſſe tuum?
            Coniugio foelix, Rutham miſeratus egentem:
            Nomen ab inſigni poſteritate feres.
            Vade liber, liber titulum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                expande decorum,
            Materiâ titulo conuenie
                  •
               te ſuo.
            Hîc quo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                zelus ineſt: quis enim celauerit ignem?
            Eminet ê proprio prodita flamma loco.
            
               His ſimul exemplis, matres, viduae
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                nepotes
            Inſtruite, & natos (pignora chara) rudes.
            Vtilitas duplex partes ſe ſiſtit in omnes,
            Vtilis iste liber: vtilis iſte labor.
            G. ATTERSOLL.
         
         
            
            The ſame in effect in Englſh by the ſame Author:
            
               LO here what guerdon godlineſſe doth get,
               And how the Croſſe doth come before the crown:
               Lo widowes twain before our eyes are ſet
               Not raiſ'd aloſt, before they be caſt downe.
               And thou O Ruth renouncing natiue towne,
               And Baal-peor God of Moab land,
               Art ſet at reſt, and bleſt by Gods owne hand.
            
            
               The loue of friends and Countrie ouerpeized,
               With loue of Soueraigne Lord behold in ſight:
               The antique age and life of Patriarkes praiſed,
               How liberall, frugall, chaſt, pure, and vpright.
               But now this mould of earth is turned quite.
               Alas that nought in perfect ſtate ſhould ſit,
               The world is chang'd, and we are chang'd in it.
            
            
               Art thou a maide? Learne here of Ruth thy mate,
               To chuſe whome God inſpires with grace diuine,
               A widdow thou? To paines, and labour late,
               In each degree thy ſelfe with Ruth reſigne,
               Or art a wife? To righteous Ruth incline.
               If maide, or wife, or widdow then thou bee,
               Thy ſelfe in Ruth, thou as in Glaſſe ſhalt ſee.
               
                  Go little Booke, diſplay thy golden title,
               (And yet not little, though thou little bee:)
               Little for price, and yet in price not little,
               Thine was the paine, the gaine is ours I ſee:
               (Although our gain, thou deemſt no pain to thee)
               If then O Reader little paine thou take,
               Thou greateſt gain with ſmalleſt pain ſhalt make.
            
            
               The hungrie ſtomacke feedes with full deſire,
               Whereby the vitall ſpirites ſoone renew:
               So if thine heart ſhall burne with heauenly fire,
               Hereby great fruite ſhall to thy faith accrew.
               Trie ere thou truſt, and then giue ſentence trew,
               If reading once, be pleaſant to thy taſt,
               Next pleaſeth more: yet ſweeteſt comes at laſt.
            
            William Atterſoll.
         
         
            
            In Laudem operis, S. Theologiae candidatis Ioannes Brace girdellus.
            HIſtoriae methodum Ruthae cupis, ordine ductam?
            Haec tibi, Theſaea fila ſequenda, cape.
            Inſtar & impoſitae facis eſt, vbi Scrupulus extat,
            Hic liber, oſtendens eruta ſenſa tibi.
            Hinc tibi doctrinae, ſeruatam ſume medullam,
            Multiplicis: opus hoc dogmata ſancta tenet.
            Inſtruit, vt rigidos caſus patiendo repellas,
            Inſtruit, vt dominus colligit, ornat, oues.
            Et quaecun
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tibi remanebit ſors, locus, ordo,
            Ad pietatis opus concitat iſte liber.
            Multa docent multi varijs ambagibus aucta:
            Multa tamen liber hic, ſub breuitate docet.
            Plurima dant multi mendacia, plurimae, vana:
            Hic nihil eſt, niſi quod Biblia ſacra tenet.
            Perge Dei (Topſelle) diu ſic pandere ſacra.
            Carpere vult fruſtrà Zoilus iſtud opus.
         
         
            
            RELIGIONIS Remuneratio per Eundem.
            AVrea mellifluo tribuuntur praemia fructu,
            Si tibi ſanus inest relligionis amor.
            Vnica perpetuum pictas durabit in aeuum,
            Semper & Aetherco, lucet amanda, polo.
            Caetera mortiferis, euaneſcunt ſubdita, telis:
            Caetera poſtremum, ſunt habitura diem.
            Caetera cuncta, maris voluuntur fluctibus vnà,
            Caetera Laethais, merſa ferentur, aquis.
            Caetera quid referunt aliud, quàm vana, labores,
            Et miſeras, animo ſe laniente, cruces?
            Maxima nobilium, pereunt monumenta, virorum,
            Dura ruunt ſubitò ſaxa remota loco:
            Depereunt vires, ſic deperit omne venuſtum,
            Vita perit, regum pompa ſuperba perit.
            Diuitiae, rapidis agitantur caſibus, omnes:
            Deni
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                nil, vaſto permanet orbe diu.
            
               Lucida diuinus, tranſcendit ſidera, cultus,
            Poſt cineres, pietas viuere ſola facit.
            O quam te memorem, dea ſplendida? tu dea certe,
            De caelo lapſam, voxſonat alma, deam.
            Vox tua durabit dum caeli ſidera durant,
            Sola beata ſalus, caetera mundus habet.
            Cum bene nunc vegetans, modo poſt fortuna reflârit,
            Quid valet? en pietas candida ſola viget.
            Cum nebulis poſitis Zephyrus ſpirauerit vltrò,
            Quid iuuat? en fastus tollit, amica, malos.
            Cui micat in vultu, patientia pulchra, ſereno,
            Ciu ſedet in nitido, fulgida fronte, fides.
            Diſcipuli varijs, agitantur fluctibus, omnes
            Chriſti: Chriſtus adeſt, hinc mare triſte ſilet.
            Auxilium differt diuina potentia ſaepe,
            Vt longo vigeat tempore, laeta ſalus.
            Exilium, crux, mors, ferrum, flammae
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , fameſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               ,
            Dilectis domini, tendit in omne bonum.
            Quos deus ipſe tegit ſuffultos numine dextrae,
            Vt ſua, quae ſtatuit, munera ferre, ferant.
            Si non inuenias qua poſses vrbe morari,
            Si tibi ſint nimia membra ſepulta fame,
            Carcere ſi rigido poſitus, vinclîſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                grauatus,
            Si tibi ſit medijs, anxia vita, malis,
            Dat deus vt vincas, de puluere ſubleuat idem:
            Ex humili, miſeros erigit ille, lo co.
            Dat deus orbatis, viduiſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                verentibus illi,
            vt tandem capiant optima farra ſibi.
            
               Ille Iſraëlem miſerum per aequora duxit,
            Hoſtibus immerſis, abſtulit ille iugum.
            Ille ſibi charum Dauidem elegit, & ipſum
            Ex ouium caulis ad noua regna vehit.
            Is Naomi reuocat, Rutham quo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                dirigit ille,
            Vt rectam quaerant, ad loca ſalua, viam.
            Vnde aliena, ſacro ſtabilitur faedere Chriſti,
            Extitit at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſacris regibus alma parens.
            Hoc deus eſt operatus opus, qui tempora ſolus
            Mutat, & arbitrio ſuſtinet omne ſuo.
         
         
            
            Faults eſcaped in Printing.
            GEntle readers, by reſon of my charge being farre from London, I coulde not bee preſent at the Printing heereof, whereby ſome faultes eſcaped the Printing: although they be more then I wiſhed, yet they are fewer then I feared. Of your gentleneſſe Correct them thus. Pag 3. line. 30.31.32. Reade hee nameth the perſons: where was it done? Hee quoteth the place: and when was it doone? He mentioneth the time. The reſidue being but ſmall amend in this ſort.
            
               
                  
                     Faults.
                     Page.
                     Line.
                     Correction.
                  
                  
                      
                  
                  
                     One
                     5
                     21
                     our
                  
                  
                     Meſtres
                     7
                     13
                     miſeries
                  
                  
                     gropes
                     16
                     31
                     Grapes
                  
                  
                     deſireth
                     28
                     19
                     deferreth
                  
                  
                     not
                     56
                     2
                      
                  
                  
                     Eliah foreſee
                     59
                     21
                     Eliſhah did foreſee.
                  
                  
                     fall
                     66
                     13
                     fault
                  
                  
                      
                     77
                     20
                     not priuate
                  
                  
                     proud
                     80
                     1
                      
                  
                  
                     duetie
                     120
                     14
                     dulye
                  
                  
                      
                     124
                     9
                     for feare
                  
                  
                     Secondly
                     196
                     1
                           •
                        
                     
                     Thirdly.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            
            The Analiſis or Reſolution of the booke of Ruth
            
               The Booke of Ruth containeth the lively viewe of the Rewarde of Religion in the familiae of Elimetech wherein muſt be conſidered their
               affliction in 
                     famine which bringeth

                           intollerable wrath and miſerie to the fearefull and pining death 
                                 Utter decay and loſſe of worldly proſperitie
                                 Selling and forſaking their patrimonies
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     ſojourning and wandering inſ
                           •
                        aunge countries to 
                           forsake the people of the Lorde with the 
                                 Temple and place of Sacrifice
                                 Lords Miniſters and Word.
                              
                           
                           to remaine with their enemies infidels 
                                 Manie yeares together
                                 To dye and be buried among them.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               deliverance by 
                     receaving 
                           Hoſpitality as 
                                 houſes 
                                       for thē
                                          ſelves
                                       for their families
                                    
                                 
                                 Landes
                                 Marriages
                              
                           
                           plentie 
                                 Among ſtrangers in the time of their pilgrimage.
                                 Among their owne friendes at home the famine being ended.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     Returning 
                           To their owne countrie where they are 
                                 joyfully received of their friends 
                                       to the praiſe of God in his word
                                       to their own comforts in the Lord
                                    
                                 
                                 Readily reſtored by ye Magiſtrates 
                                       to their libertie 
                                             1 to be present at the Temple
                                             2 to have Juſtice.
                                          
                                       
                                       to their lands livings
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           With companies gained to the Lord for the 
                                 increaſe of the Church by 
                                       wholeſome doctrine
                                       ſanctified and holy converſations
                                    
                                 
                                 reviving of their owne that he dead 
                                       to ſtirre up their names 
                                             in their houſes on their inſterit
                                                   ••
                                                ice
                                          
                                       
                                       to multiplie their Fathers family for 
                                             wordly honour
                                             the Rewarde of the Religion.
                                          
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE REVVARD OF RELIGION.
            
               
                  
                     
                        Ruth. Cap. 1. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
                     
                     
                        1. In the time that the Iudges ruled, there was a famine in the land: and a certain man of Bethleem Iudah went for to ſoiourne in the countrie of Moab, hee and his wife, and his two ſonnes.
                     
                        2. And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wyfe Naomi, and the names of his two ſonnes Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of the lande of Iudah, and when they were come into the land of Moab, they continued there.
                     
                        3. Then Elimelech the husbande of Naomi died there, and ſhee remained with hir two ſonnes.
                     
                        4. Which tooke them wiues of the Moabites, the name of the one was Horpah, & the name of the other Ruth: & they dwelled there about ten yeres.
                     
                        5. And Mahlon and Chilion died alſo both twaine, ſo the woman was lefte deſtitute of her two ſonnes, and of her husband.
                     
                        6. Then ſhe aroſe with her daughters in lawe, and returned from the countrie of Moab: for ſhe had heard ſaie in the countrie of Moab, that the Lord had viſited his people, & giuen them bread.
                  
               
               
                  ALthough the author of this booke of Ruth hath not expreſſed his name, yet there is no doubt but it proceedeth from the ſpirit of God, as well as the bookes of the Iudges, Kings, & Chronicles, which haue not the names of their authors deſcribed: but if it may be lawfull to iudge or giue anie ſentence thereof, it was either Samuel or ſome other godly prophet vnder the raigne of Saul, which is proued by the genealogies in the laſt chapter, where Dauid is by name mentioned, teſtifying vnto vs, that it was then written,

when he was choſen from his bretheren and anointed king ouer Iſraell, and yet before his raigne, or els there had bene added vnto it, the title of a King, for the aduauncing of the name of Ruth, who was his grande mother, vppon whom this hiſtory following dependeth, for the ſumne and ſcope hereof is to ſhewe the pedigree or anceſtry the naturall progenitours of Chriſte from Iudah the fourth ſonne of Iacob, vntill the time that he beganne to challenge the princelye ſeate, the royall ſcepter, & the right of gouernment ouer the people of Iſraell, which was at that time▪ when Dauid was choſen from his fathers houſe, & anoynted king by Samuel. Againe, in this hiſtory, there is deliuered vnto vs; the hope which the fathers had concerning the calling of the Gentiles, for this mariage of Ruth into the kindred of Chriſt▪ who was a Gentile, & by nature none of the people of God, did plainely foretell that the Gentiles ſhoulde be called in Chriſt, for as hee tooke parte of his humane nature of them, ſo he ſhewed vs that hee would giue the ſame for them, that there might be no difference in his bodye, between Iewes & gentiles, but that the power of his death, the graces of the ſpirite, and the knowledge of redemption might redounde to all. Now the occaſion of this hiſtory is deliuered vnto vs in this firſt Chapter, which is the ſoiourning of a certaine Iew in the land of Moab, (by reaſon there was a famine in the land of Iudah,) with his familye, and the returne of them that liued, which were onely Naomi his wyfe, and one other, Ruth the Moabiteſſe the widdowe of his eldeſt ſonne. This wandering or ſoiourning is deſcribed with all the circumſtuances thereof, in theſe firſt ſixe verſes lately read: and generally containe in them, theſe two parts, the firſt is theyr trauaile to the land of Moab, the ſecond, thoſe things that happened vnto them, after they came thither. The firſt parte is expreſſed in theſe two firſt verſes, firſt by the occaſion, which is declared by the time and by the thing that moued them thereunto, in theſe wordes, In the time that the Iudges ruled there was a famine, &c. Secondly by the perſons that trauayled, who are deſcribed by the place frō whence they were namely of Bethlehem

Iudah, theſe were the parents and the children which are named in the 2. ver. The ſecond part of theſe woordes, is in the foure other verſes following, and it concerneth eyther the parents or the children, the parents, that one of them euen Elimelech, the father of the familye dyed, there ſhor
                     •
                  y after their arriuall: the children, firſt that they married ver. 4: ſecondly, that they likewiſe dyed ver. 5: Then remained onely Naomi, with hir two daughters in lawe, and the time of her a bode in Moab, is ſet downe to be ten yeares ver. 4: ſecondly, the occaſion of hir departure becauſe ſhee heard ſay, that God had viſited his people, & giuen them bread, ver▪ 6: of theſe partes let vs ſpeake in order, as the ſpirite ſhall giue vttrance, and the time permit.Gen. 1.1 
                  In the dayes that the Iudges ruled.
                  Eſay 1.1 In theſe wordes the holy Ghoſte after his accuſtomed manner,Iere. 1.2. for the more certaintye of the hiſtorye,Eph. 1.1.2 beginneth at the time as Moſes beginneth his booke of Geneſis, from the firſt creation of the world,Math. 2.1 ſo the prophets in the beginning of their bookes,Mar. 1.3.4 ſet downe vnder what king or kings they propheſied,Luke 1.
                        •
                     . ſo alſo in the newe Teſtament we may ſee how three of the Euangeliſts beginne their Goſpels from the preaching of Iohn Baptiſt and the raigne of king Herod. The which order they vndoubtedly learned of the olde writers, the ſame ſpirite guiding them, to one and the ſame trueth, vſeth but one and the ſame manner of ſpeaking. For the almighty deſiring to meete with the wrangling obiections of humane inuentions, ſo tempereth the texte of euerie ſcripture, as if queſtion were made who did ſuch a thing? He nameth the perſons where it was done? He quoteth the place, and when it was done? Hee mentioneth the time. The cauſe heereof is, that hee might ſtaie the waues of our ſickle mindes, vpon the piller of truth, his euerlaſting word. But in this place he chiefly mentioneth the time of the Iudges, to ſhew vnto vs, that whē religion was corrupted, the worſhip of God decaied, and idolatrye aduannced:Iudg. 2.18 & 21, 25 when the Lord was forgotten of his owne people, when his lawes were no more obſerued, but euery man did that which ſeemed good in his owne eyes, yea, when there were almoſt as many Gods

among them as they were men, then euen then did the Lord ſend this plague of famine among them For, Salomon ſayth the blewnes of the wounde ſerueth to purge the euell,Pro. 20.30 and the ſtripes within the bottome of the belly: as if he had ſayd, as the rypenes of a wounde calleth for a coraſiue, ſo the fulnes of ſinne cryeth for vengeance: by this therfore we note, that the corruption of religion,1. Ki. 14.16 & 16:2.3.4. & neglect of the worſhip of God, is the cauſe of all his iudgments that are exerciſed in the world. For the idolatry of Ieroboam, and his ſinnes, whereby hee induced Iſraell to ſinne: did the Lord threaten by Achia the prophet, to ſcatter the people, ſo we may reade of Bahaſcha king of Iſraell,1 Kin. 18 35:37. and ſo Salomon prayed at the dedication of the temple: when heauen ſhall be ſhut and thou giue no rayne bicauſe they haue ſinned againſt thee &c. where hee comprehendeth the chiefe & capitall worldly puniſhementes of ſinne, as dearth and famine, ſword & peſtilence, blindnes & ignorance, which are alſo the rewards of ſin, & the vnſeparable companions of all vnrighteouſnes. And what ſaith the Lord by the Prophet? Caſt frō you all your ſins wherewithall you haue tranſgreſſed, & make you a new hart, for why ſhuld you die oh you houſe of Iſrael: as if hee had ſayde, either repent, or elſe be damned, for it is a fearefull thing to fall into the handes of the liuing God. And may not wee thinke that all theſe thunderings out of God his iudgements among vs, wil ſtirre vp ſome rain of puniſhments vpon vs. Are we not alreadie put into the wine preſſe, to be bruſed vnder the hand of fearefull deſtruction? How many plagues haue come vppon vs within theſe fewe yeeres? Where is become the remembrance of the late enemies pretended inuaſion? The rumor whereof amazed the harts of our couragious champions, which ſpend all their daies in pleaſure: Oh then they cryed if they might be deliuered, they would a lot ſome time of their dayes to the ſeruice of the Lord? Where is the remembrance of the late plague, which was ſcattered almoſt in euerie place of the lande? Oh then wee cryed vnto the Lord in our diſtreſſe, and he deliuered vs out of all our miſeries, Oh that men woulde therefore confeſſe the

Lord, and declare the wonders hee doth for the children of men. But what are we now amended? Is the vngodly perſon turned from his vngodlyneſſe, and not rather ſtrengthned in his iniquitie? They which were ignorant are ignorant ſtill, and many like Demas, who ſeemed religious, haue imbraced this preſent world. As for the prophane both of poore and rich, they haue made a league with death, & a couenant with the graue, though a ſwoord come thorough the land, yet (ſaie they) it ſhall not come at them. And therefore who can without waterye eyes and bleeding heart, tell this preſent plague of dearth and famine which we now moſt iuſtly endure,Hoſ. 7.14.13. and yet who knoweth how long it ſhall continue. Now, (as the prophet ſayth) wee are gathered together and howle vppon our beds for corne and for newe wine, that is, for the bellye and for the throate, but there is a greater leannes in the ſoule. Now wee bite the ſtone which the Lord hath caſt at vs, but we looke not at the hand, which did ſende it, and who thinketh it to bee a puniſhment of ſinne that now raigneth among vs? The papiſts ſay it is for one hereſies, the popiſhe atheiſts ſay, that the world was beſt when the old religion was, for then all things were cheape, like the idolatrous Iewes,Ier. 44.19 which ſayd vnto Ieremy, that it was wel with them when they burntincenſe and made cakes to the hoſt of heauen.1. Kin. 18 17 The ruſſians ſay to the preachers, as Achab ſaid to Eliah, Are not you the troublers of Iſrael, when it is themſelues and there fathers houſes, while they haue lefte the commaundement of God and followed their pleaſures, yea, almoſt the whole Countrey is ſo vainely addicted, that among thoſe multitudes of preachers that are abroad, there is not one that ſaythfully followeth his vocation, but they are moleſted by the baſeſt, and contemned by the beſt. So that wee may ſaye as our ſauiour ſayth, we haue piped vnto you & you haue not daunced,1. Kin. 18 15.17. we haue mourned, and you haue not ſorrowed,Pſa. 127.5 yet wiſedome is iuſtified of her children, who are not aſhamed to plead her cauſe in the gates of the cities, before the face of her enimies, the Lord increaſe the number of them.
               Wee haue long retained the name of Chriſtians, that

is, the annoynted of the Lord, and yet our lampes are empty,Mat. 25.3 and we deferre our dayes in ſlumber, thinking our ſelues as good Chriſtians as the beſt, till we be vtterly excluded from the bridechamber,Mat. 21.30. we haue promiſed the Lorde oftentimes to worke in his vineyarde, but yet who hath entered?Ioh. 15.2. we are the vineyarde of the Lord, and he hath dreſſed vs:Ioh. 10.14. Ge. 31.34 what fruite haue we brone vnto him? we are the ſheepe of Chriſt and yet we knowe not his voice: & as Rahel couered hir fathers idolls with ſitting on them, and with a lye, ſo we that are the greateſt ſinners, couer our iniquities, with hipocriſy and diſſembling. Such pollution of ſabbaothes as neuer was, yea, euen in this time of dearth and famine, drinking and drunkennes,Pro. 7.22. dauncing and riot, feaſting and ſu
                     •
                  fetting, chambering and wantonnes, ſwearing & foreſwearing, accompting gaine to bee godlines, and godlines to be the burthen of the world, with a thouſand greater and more greueous calamities, as if the bird could ſing in the ſnare, or as the fatted oxe that runneth wilfully to the ſlaughter. Then beloued let vs looke about vs, euen
                     •
                   now is the axe of God his iudgments laid to the root of euery mans heart,Mat. 3.10 and he is accurſed that feareth it not, euen now the Lord is knocking at the doore of our hearts, and if euer, let vs open vnto him, that the king of glory may come in. Euen theſe are the daies wherin iniquity hath gotten the vpper hand, and the loue of many is waxen colde. Therefore as the Angell warned the godly, ſo muſt wee ſtill come out from among them, my people, bee not partakers of their ſinnes, leaſt you beare a parte of their plagues.Reu. 18.4 This is the harueſt of the Lord, oh let vs that be the Lords ſeruants gather out the wheat, leaſt it bee burned with the tares. There is a holye conuocation to the Lord,Num. 16.12.32 & the Lords miniſters, found out the trūpet, if we appeare not, the earth will open hir mouth, and reuenge our rebellion & ſwallow vs vp aliue.Hoſ. 6.1.2 Let vs at the length ſay with the Iewes, Come let vs turne vnto the Lord, for he hath ſpoyled vs and he ſhall heale vs, he hath ſmitten vs and he ſhall binde vs vp: after two dayes he ſhall giue vs life, and the third day he ſhall raiſe vs vp and we ſhall liue before him: if with knowledge wee follow him, to

know the Lord his riſing is like the morning, and he ſhal come vppon vs like raine in a drought, both the firſt and the latter raine vpon the earth. Let not our righteouſnes, bee as the deaw before the ſunne riſing, but put on the Lord Ieſus Chriſt and let none call vppon him, but ſuch as departe from iniquity.
               Secondly, by this we gather that the Lord is as true in his iudgments, as in his mercyes,Deut. 28.23.24 for hee threatened by Moſes ſaying: if you forſake me & fal to worſhip ſtrange Gods (as nowe they did) then your heauen ſhall bee as braſſe and your earth as iron, and your raine like duſt, til they were conſumed from the face of the earth. Of all theſe miſtryes you may ſee in the booke of Iudges, Samuel, and Kings to which I referre you at your leaſure, as of Saul, Dauid, Ieroboam, Achab, Zidkia, & others as in this preſent place: where they are oppreſſed ten yeares together, ſo that heauen and earth may paſſe but the word of the Lord abideth for euer.
               For this cauſe the prophets adde to their preaching of iudgmentes:Dan. 6.9. (Thus ſayth the Lorde) as if they had ſaid it ſhall neuer bee altered.Pſal. 12.
                        •
                     6 And if the lawes of heathen men, ſuch as the Medes and Perſians, might not alter, much leſſe the word of the Lord which is like ſiluer purified ſeuen times, ſhould haue any droſſe or changeable ſubſtaunce in it. Wee ſee the law of nature ſtand inuiolable for euer, and ſhall not the law of him which made nature, be alſo immutable, when the fire ceaſeth to bee hote, and the water to be colde, then ſhall be exception taken againſt God his iudgments, and not before. The vſe of this doctrine is to caſt downe the preſumption of notorious ſinners, who, to auoyd the terrors of God his iudgmentes, deceiue their owne ſoules vvyth this, that God is mercifull. So that in theyr moſt ſingular ſinnes, they will flye to the mercyes of God, as if they were the verie bonde of all iniquitie, yea, and theſe kinde of people perſwade themſelues to bee as good Chriſtians as anie in the worlde, becauſe they can ſaie the Lord is mercifull.
               But heare me a little in one word I praie you, I am perſwaded

that I ſpeake to many theſe people this daie. What hurt hath the Lorde done vnto you, that you rob him of his iuſtice? Shall the Prophet be found a liar that ſayth, The Lord is iuſt in all wa
                     •
                  es, and holy in all his workes.Pſ. 145.17 Or ſhall the Apoſtle ſpeake vntruth, that ſayth: It is a iuſt thing with God to render affliction to them that afflict you,2. The. 1.6 & releaſe to you that are afflicted. Why ſhall we then ſpoile God of his iudgements, vnleſſe wee wyll depriue our ſelues of our owne ſaluation. But you will ſaie this ſerueth for the wicked, as Atheiſts, Turkes, Pagans, Infidels, and ſuch lyke, which ſhall haue no part with Chriſt. I anſwere, what greater wickednes can there be, than to depriue God of his iuſtice? Would a mortall man indure to be accounted without honeſtie, and ſhall the euerlaſting king abide to be ſpoiled of his righteouſneſſe? Nay, the iuſtice of God pertaineth to ſuch as you would be, holy perſons, as well as to anie. For what ſaith the Prophet, When the iuſt man turneth from his righteouſneſſe to doo iniquitie,Eze▪ 18.26 he ſhall die in it. And Peter ſayth, that iudgement muſt begin at the houſe of God. And a father once ſaide, God of his moſt deere iuſtice hath decreed the ſumme of all diſcipline, both in exacting and in defending:1. Pe. 4.17 as if he had ſayd, there is no correction of the Lord, but it proceedeth from his iuſtice, now the children of God are corrected, for hee ſcourgeth euerie child whom he receiueth.Heb. 12.6 And therfore the iudgmentes of God muſt bee thundered out as well for the confirming of the faithfull, as the confuſion of Infidels. But others there are that are ſo farre paſt feeling of either mercies or iudgements▪ that as ſoone the deafe adder wil heare the voice of the charmer, as they anie impreſſion of terrour for ſinne. Hence commeth this cuſtome of ſinning, which euerie ſabboth commit their wonted iniquitie, euerie houre vomit out their poiſon of blaſphemies, and euerie daie violate the lawes of charitie, who through their dayly ſtaring on the ſonne of righteouſneſſe, are nowe become ſtarke blinde, and with the continuall noiſe of God his waters, are made ſo deafe, that they can heare no goodneſſe. Vnto both theſe ſortes

of people, hearken what the Lorde ſayth in his Goſpell, But if that euill ſeruant ſhall ſaie in his heart,Mat. 25.48. the Lorde deferreth his comming, and ſhall begin to finite his fellow ſeruants, and to eate and drinke with the dronken. The Lord of that ſeruant ſhall come in a daie that hee looketh not for, and in an houre that hee knoweth not, and ſhall ſeparate him, and giue him his parte with vnbeleeuers, there ſhall be weeping and gnaſhing of teeth. This ſhall be the end of ſecure chriſtians, and contemptuous ſinners, carnall Atheiſts, & deſpiſers of wholſome doctrine; which haue no part but in this preſent life, with endleſſe and fearefull damnation in the world to come. Thus much of the firſt parte, the circumſtance of time, now let vs go to the thing which is the ſecond parte, of the occaſion. There was a famine in the land. This was the chiefe cauſe which moued theſe perſons to trauell, the auoiding of the pinching penurie of fearefull death, by lingering till the end of this pining famine.
               Of all the puniſhments of ſinne which happen in this life, the
                     •
                  e is none more vehement than famine. Therefore the Lord by the Prophet, threatneth to ſend his arrowes of famine to breake the ſtaffe of bread.Eze. 5.16 Where he alludeth to a maine battell, ſignifying vnto vs, firſt as the arrow is the fitteſt inſtrument to break the ranke, ſo a famine is the ſharpeſt weapon to diſmaye the couragious ſtomackes of rebellious ſinners. For as the arrowe is alwaie in ſight, ſo a famine euer in ſenſe, the arrowe hurteth, but not with a ſpeedie death, a famine ſpoileth, yet with tedious miſerie: the arrowe entered doth procure more paine and greater wound at the pulling forth, than the falling in: euen ſo abundance of meate ſooner diſpatcheth a famiſhed perſon than lingering hunger. Therefore Dauid put to his choice of three plagues, famine, flying, and peſtilence, choſe the laſt as the moſt ſodaineſt, and therefore accompanied with leſſe griefe,1. Sam. 24▪14.15 for that diſeaſe by the rule of phiſicke is moſt daungerous, which is the longeſt in growing. Now wee may reade of many famines in the Scripture, one and the firſt we read of, was in the dayes of Abraham,Ge. 12.10 another in the daies of Izhak, his ſonne. Seuen yeeres famine was in Egypt,Gen. 26.1
                  
where Ioſeph by the hand of God, ſuccored the Church in his fathers familie.Ge. 41.30 And to omit that in Dauids time, and that in Ahabs time, with thoſe in the dayes of Iehoram and Zidkia, with many others. VVee reade in the new Teſtament of a vniuerſall famine, in the dayes of Claudius Caeſar,2. Sam. 21 1. propheſied by Agabus, when the Church dyd moſt notably releeue one another.1. Kin. 18.2. Vnto the which wee may adde that at the deſtruction of Ieruſalem,2. King. 6.25. about fortie yeeres after Chriſte. All which are moſt worthie ſpectacles of humane miſerie, and worthy examples of God his iudgementes, to terrifie all them which ſaie in theyr proſperitie,Act. 18.28 they ſhall neuer be moued. There wee may reade of the pittifull death of many thouſands which ſtarued in the ſtreetes, in the face of theyr deareſt friendes, and yet were not able to releeue them. There wee may ſee howe men were driuen to eate dogges, cats, rats, mice, and horſe fleſh: but that which is moſt miſerable, the mothers to ſuccour theyr ſtomackes and bodies, with the ſlaughter and eating of their owne children. VVhat heart of Adamant would not weepe, yea, rather bleede at the ſight heereof? And yet beholde a greater famine than all theſe. Is it poſſible? yea verily, a famine of the worde of God, when men ſhall goe from one ſea to another,Am. 8.11. and from the North to the Eaſt, running to ſeeke the word of God, & ſhall not find it? In that daie ſhall fall both the fayre virgins & the young men, which ſweare by the idols of Schomron, & ſaie, As thy God liueth, O Dan, and as the God of the waie of Beerſhebah liueth, they ſhall fal; neither ſhall they euer riſe vp again. Is not this greater than the famine of bread? There was neuer famine ſo great, but if liberty were giuē, the famine was eaſed: but in this they ſhall haue libertie to runne too and fro, and ſhall not bee releeued. There was neuer anie famine wherewith men were ſo hunger-ſtarued, but ſome recouered, but in this, ſayeth the Lorde, They that fall ſhall neuer riſe agayne. Oh that the open contemners of God his woorde, woulde drinke but one droppe for a taſt of theſe fearefull iudgementes, I am perſwaded that the heat of greedie ſinne woulde bee ſo cooled in them,

that they ſhoulde recouer the health of their ſoules, which will neuer bee, tyll of open prophaners they become publike profeſſours. But of all theſe famines there is but one cauſe, which is the abuſe of the creatures of God, for ſo the equitie of iuſtice requireth, that in the ſame thing wherein they ſinned, they ſhoulde bee puniſhed. Like as the theeſe was bound for that which hee ſtole, to reſtore foure folde. Fulneſſe of bread was one of the ſinnes of Sodome, and they vnderſtoode not from whome they had it, becauſe they were vnmerciful to the poore, and therefore abuſed it by vnthankfulnes.
               And this is a worthie doctrine to bee vrged in our dayes, wherein our abuſe is greater than our want, and yet our want is ſuch as hath not beene heard of theſe many yeeres. The couetous ſeller keepeth in his corne, and draweth vppon himſelfe the curſe of the poore, ſaying it is ſcantie, it is ſcantie, vvhen his garners are full: Is not this to tell that the Lorde his hande is ſhortned, when in deede it is lengthened? Is not this to ſay, thou openeſt thy hande and filleſt vvith thy bleſſing euerie liuing thing? Nay, you plainely accuſe the Lorde of illiberalitie.
               Oh deteſtable crueltie, vvho for to fat vp their owne poſterityes, vvyll murther the bodyes of manye thouſandes of pouertie
                     •
                   yea, this is more cruell than murther in the ſight of God. VVhy deale you not playnely, and ſaie, the Lorde hath giuen abundaunce, yet your price muſt bee rayſed, ſo you ſhoulde ſpeake truelye, and excuſe the liberalitie of the Lorde in accuſing your owne couetous deſires. But oh vvretchedneſſe, you wyll not laye the faulte vppon the guiltie, you iuſtifie the couetous, whome the Lorde abhorreth, and condemne the innocent liberalitie of him, vvho giueth to all freely, and caſteth none in the teeth. Another ſorte there are more viler than thaſe, who of this great want, vvhich if the Lorde ſuffer to indure, vvyll turne to extreme famine, yet they will ſpend more vpon one to make him dronke, than vpon one dozen of poore folkes, Theſe are the tiplers, aleſellers, & dronkards, the

very caterpillers of our countrey, who like the horse, leache are euen ſucking, and neuer ſatiſfied, and theſe onely conſume much that other ſhould not be contented with it. Of theſe both cities and countreyes are repleniſhed, and the magiſtrates ſuffer them with little or no puniſhment at all: but if the poore preachers rebuke the folly, their ſafety is indangered by this rauenous brood, who are not aſhamed to giue rayling, yea & threatning ſpeeches. And magiſtrates ſeruants are in greateſt fault, who are not onely partakers of this vnſeaſonable drinking, but alſo deale priuatly with theyr ma
                     •
                  ſters, that thoſe which are complained, might eſcape vnpuniſhed. Thus are the poore vnrelieued, the countrie vnprouided, the people vnanſwered, the wicked vnpuniſhed, the commonwealth vnreformed, the godly vncomforted, and the iudgments of God haled downe vppon vs, that we might be euerlaſtingly confounded
               
                  There went a certaine man. Now are we come to the perſons that traueled, which is the ſecond part of this verſe, which we ſhewed you ended in the ſecond verſe: they are firſt generally deſcribed in this verſe: and after ſpecially by name in the next verſes: They are of two ſorts, firſt the parents Elimelech & Naomi, ſecōdly, the children Mahlon and Chilion, who are all deſcribed by the place from whence they went, Bethlehem Iudah: it is so called becauſe there was another Bethlehem, in the tribe of Zebulun: and this is that Bethlehem which in Geneſis is called Ephratha, & therefore theſe perſons are in theſe two verſes, called Ephrathits, of the place, where afterward Chriſt was borne.Ioſ. 19.15 Then it is apparaunt by the booke of Ioſuah,Ge. 35.19 that the tribe of Iudah had the fruitfulleſt poſeſſion,Math. 2.1 in all the land of Canaan, they were the greateſt in number,Chap. 15. the wyſeſt in pollicy, the richeſt by inheritance: yet we ſee when the ſcourge of God came, the famine inuaded their countrie, and crope into the wals of Bethlehem: and made the wealthieſt among them to flie: yet this Elimelech, which was as appeareth by his conſanguinity of the princes of the whol tribe, ſuch is the vehemency of the Lords arrowes,1. Kin. 22 34. when he ſhooteth them abroad, that if king Achab were in his chariot, in the middeſt

of his hoſt, yet one of them ſhall giue him a mortall wound▪ The vſe of this doctrine is, to teach vs that if the Lord ſuffer his plague to continue, he will ſtrike downe the choſen men in Iſrael, the choſen men in England: yea the nobleſt among vs, who thinke themſelues in greateſt ſecuritie, can he eaſily bring to greateſt miſery.Pſa. 29:6.6.8 Therfore you whoſe heads the Lorde hath aduauncted ouer your brethren, look to your calling,Pſa, 149, 8 for the voice of the Lord ſhaketh as well the ceders of Libauns,Pſa. 113 7 as the little ſhrubs in the wildernes of Cades:Exo. 10.22. it is as eaſie with him to bind the nobles in chaines, and the princes in linkes of yron, as to raiſe vp the poore from the dunghill to the throne.Exod. 11.29. Did not his darkneſſe couer as well the court of Pharao as the countrie of Egypt?2. Kin. 25 10. Was not the firſt borne of the king deſtroyed, as well as of the poore peſants of the dwellings of Ham? Yea, when the Iſraelites were carried captiue to Babylon, theyr King had his children ſlaine before his face, his owne eyes put out, and after lead in a chaine, neither was hee ſpared for his throne, nor you for your dignitie and wealth.
               Oh that you woulde therefore bee warned of your ſlipperie eſtate, that you might auoide the heauy wrath of God, when without reſpect of perſons he ſhall iudge both quicke and dead. Let not the lots of your inheritance deceiue you, though their ſoile bee as fruitfull as this of Iudah, and your poſſeſſions neuer ſo great: he that in one night deſtroyed all the fruites of Egypt, can alſo in one houre blaſt your corne with deawes, & conſume your poſſeſſion with drought, for a fruitful land maketh he barren, for the wickednes of them that dwell therein.
               Secondly, we note out of theſe wordes, when he tooke his wife and children with him, an example of a religious father, and a louing husband: he might (if hee had conſulted with fleſh and bloud) done like our husbands in theſe dayes, which had rather in their wandering, ſhifte about for themſelues, and leaue wife and children in a ſea of troubles, to ſinke or ſwimme to ſome doubtfull releefe. But the godly in old time knew that their wiues and children were as themſelues, and as they were carefull to cheriſh their owne bodyes, ſo they were mindfull

to nouriſh their owne families. This the Lorde at the firſt mariage that euer was, comaunded that for a mans wife he ſhould forſake father and mother and they two ſhall be one fleſh,Gen. 2.24 as if hee had ſayd, parents muſt not hinder fellowſhip of wedlocke, much leſſe pouertye or temporall wants: as the barke is ioyned to the tree & the fleſhe to the bone, if one be without the other they both periſh, ſo muſt husband and wife liue and loue togither, vnleſſe they will be the ſlaughter ſlaues of their owne deſtruction. We read of this practiſe in the ſcripture when Abraham by reaſon of a famine went downe into Egypt, hee tooke Sara his wife with him:Gen. 12.
                        •
                     1 8. when I ſhak by reaſon of a famine wēt to Abimelech the king of Gerar, he took Rebecea his wife with him.Gen. 26.1 How do we read of Iacob, how twiſe he ſent into Egipt for al his family & the third time hee went down with all his houſehold,Gen. cap. 42, 43.44. his ſonne Ioseph fed him fiue yeares of famine:1. Tim. 5.8. yea the Apoſtle ſayth, that he is worſe then an infidel that prouideth not for his own family, and Chriſt going from his diſciples asked them if they had wanted any thing, and they anſwered, nothing. Againſt this pointe of doctrine there are manye that offend, ſome that are married by their couetous parents, who reſpect nothing but wealth, are ſo matched, as if a vine were planted in the flowing of the ſea, which proſpereth beſt whē the water is loweſt, euen ſo these are in ſweetest fellowſhip when one is a thouſand miles frō the other.Gen. 6.1. Others there are which in theyr marryages, pleaſe nothing but their eies; which as old perſons cannot ſee without ſpectacles, ſo they cannot find wiues without the ſpectacle of bewty, and these loue as long as bewty eudureth, which is till they be ſicke, for ſicknes is the cutthrote of beauty. Some take wiues and husbands, as fooles find pearles, for as they cannot diſcerne them pebles: ſo theſe are ignorant of all kind of dutie towards one another. From hence proceedeth all the adulteries which are dayly committed, here ariſeth the fountaine of ſtrife, contention, debate, ielouſie, & alſo the vnhappy blows which many giue to their wiues, hence it cōmeth, that ſo many gentlemen and others are ſeldome at home, but eyther beyond the ſea in warres or in trauaile, which

in their vnmaried eſtate wanted nothing but vviues, but novv being maried vvant all things but vviues. Hence it commeth, that they termed them by the odious titles of croſſes, plagues, troubles and alſo as I haue heard ſome ſay the cauſes of their vndoing, vvheras they may as vvell accuſe the eye of his blindnes, as their vviues of their own wilfull miſerie: and to conclude, there is not one breach of loue or kindnes betweene them, but it ſpringeth from theſe corruptions, which then were ſowed, when they intended their mariage. But oh beloued, let not the godly be drawen away with the crooked conuerſation of theſe contentious perſons, but let thē be armed vvith the forenamed examples of godly vnitie that as their troubled daies were eaſed in the ioy of their ovvne loue, ſo let our miſeries be releeued which you ſuffer in wedlock, with your comfortable agreement in chriſtian ſocietie,Pro. 5.18. for ſo ſaith Salomon, Let thy fountain be bleſſed, and reioyce with the wiſe of thy youth, and thus much of this ſecond doctrine. Thirdly, by this we may note that the godly are oppreſſed vvhen the vvicked haue abundance: heere vve ſee the Iſraelites vvhich vvere the Church of God had a famine, but the Moabits, to vvhom this man deſcended being a curſed generation, inceſtuous gentiles,Pſa. 37.35 had plentie & abundance, for els Elimelech vvould not haue gone thither to be relieued.Pſal. 17.14: This may ſeeme a ſtrāge thing that the godly ſhuld be oppreſſed with famine, when worldlings & heathens ſhall wallow in their wealth: Of theſe Dauid ſpeaketh. I haue ſeene the wicked ſtrong & ſpreading himſelfe like a bay tree. And in another place,Pſal. 73.4. They are incloſed in their owne fat: And againe he ſaith, They haue their portion in this life, whoſe bellies thou filleſt with thy hid treaſure, their children haue inough, & leaue the reſt of their ſubſtance to their children. And in another place, there are on bands in their death but they are luſty & ſtrōg, they are not in trouble like other men: and a litle after, theſe are the wicked,Ver. 12 yet proſper they always & increaſe in riches. The very like you may heare in Iob, & in the prophet Ieremy.Iob. 21.7 But of the rightous he ſaith & often crieth out of their afflictions,Ier. 12.1. their ſorrowes & nakednes, their hūger & miſery, all the day long are they

appointed as ſheepe to the ſlaughter, yea, our ſauiour Chriſt pronounceth himſelf in his members, poore, hungry,Mat. 25.42.43 naked, harborles, thriſty, and impriſoned, the foxes haue holes and the birds of the aire haue neſts, but the ſonne of man hath not where to reſt his head.Mat. 8.20. And the authour of the epiſtle to the Hebrues,Heb. 11.37 ſayth of the godly, Some are ſtoned, ſome cut aſunder, ſome ſlaine with the ſworde, ſome wandering abroad in goats skinnes and ſheepe skinnes, deſtitute, oppreſſed, euill entreated, of whom the world was not worthy, wandering in deſerts, in the mountaines, in dennes and caues of the earth. Iudge now I beſeech you, betweene the outward eſtate of the godly and the wicked, are they not contrarie? That which of the world is condemned, is of the Lorde commended; yet I beſeech you my brethren, be not terrified from godlynes, but rather ſtrengthened in your profeſſion. Then will you ſay, tel vs the cauſe of all this inequality. Our ſauiour anſwereth it very wel, You are not (ſayth he) of the world, if you were of the world, the world would loue his owne: and Dauid ſaith, that their portion is onely in this life,Ioh 15.19. but Chriſt ſayth, our reward ſhall bee great in heauen: and againe, you ſhall weepe and lament but the worlde ſhall reioyſe, but your ſorrowe ſhalbe turned to ioy, like a woman that reioyſeth at the byrth of her ſonne, ſo as a woman in trauaile hath no eaſe till a ſonne is come into the world,Ioh. 16 20 neither muſt we looke for any reſt till our ſoules are deliuered out of the wombe of the body into the kingdome of heauen. Our ſauiour compareth vs to the fruitfull vine, which doth not onely abide froſt, ſnow, ſtorme and heate, but alſo at the gathering time is broken of that the gropes might be reached. The gold muſt be tried in the furnace, the ſiluer fined in the fire,Ioh. 15.12 the wheate purged in the floore, and before it be meate for man, is alſo ground in the mil, ſo muſt we be proued in afflictiō fined in perſecution, and cruſhed to pieces, vnder the burthen of our own miſeries, that we may bee made prepared bread for the Lord his own ſpending.
               Why then doth the Lord make ſuch large promiſes to his Church of plenty, ſeeing it endureth continuall pouerty?

I anſwere, the Church of God muſt be conſidered after two ſorts, the firſt as it is cleanſed in the blood of Chriſt, and waſhed pure from all outward and notorious offences, vnto which eſtate pertaine all thoſe outward promiſes of liberality in the ſcripture. The ſecond is the declined eſtate or corrupted condition of euerie one in the Church, euen vnto the worldes end, vnto this pertaine all the puniſhments, perſecutions and ttibulations, which the godly endure: which the Lord ſendeth vppon them, that he might by litle and little ſcoure vs from our tranſgreſſions, and weary vs with the miſeries of this life, that wee might the more erneſtly deſire the life to come, for the Lord doth here ſcourge vs that we ſhould not be condemned with the world. Examples of theſe are moſt plentifull in the old teſtament of the Church of the Iews, & for as much as this perfectiō of the church being once loſt, is like broken glaſſe, which can neuer be ſoldered againe, ſo the Church ſhall neuer attaine thoſe promiſes in this life, but they are all referred to the life to come, where ſhal be no hunger, thirſt, nakednes, pouerty, trauaile, famine, or ſorrowe, but all teares beeing wiped from the eyes of the faithfull, they ſhall then reſt from their laboures, and receiue many thouſand times, for euery afliction which they heere endured, eternall felicitie in the preſence of Chriſt, when all worldlings ſhall be burned with vnquenchable fire.
               Fourthly, in that they went down to the wicked Moabits & there taried, we note that it is lawfull for the godly in the time of neceſſity, to craue help or reliefe of the very enimies of God, ſo they bee not polluted with their ſuperstitions. For the proofe hereof we haue the former examples of Abraham in Egipt, of Iſahac in Gerar, of Moſes in Midian, when he fled from Pharao,Gen. 12.7 & 26.1 of the ſpies of Iſrael which lodged in the houſe of Rahab. So did the Lord commaunde Ioſeph in a dreame,Exo. 2.22. to take Mary and Chriſt, and to goe into Egipt,Ioſ. 2.1. to ſaue Chriſt from Herod. So did Chriſt aske water of the woman of Samaria when he was wearie,Mat. 2.13 Iohn 4.7. with infinit other teſtimonies which the godly may find in the ſcripture. But the vſe of this point is, that although the Lord hath permitted this

libertie, yet we muſt take heede of two things, firſt that we neuer receiue any thing with condicion of religion, or dooing the leaſt thing againſt their owne knowledge, for idolaters deſire nothing more then to winne mens ſoules to the deuill. Secondly, wee may not go vnto ſuch when we may bee eaſed of the godly, for it is free neceſſitie that conſtraineth, not neceſſary liberty that permitteth: By this we learne what to iudge of them which are dayly at talke and table with the wealthieſt papiſts, Atheiſts, and carnall prophane perſons, who care not for the loſſe of religion, ſo they may gaine by their friendſhip Eſteeming more the feathers of a rich man, though vngodly, than the bloud of a poore godly chriſtian: they vſe them too commonly for wealth & commoditie, not for need & necesſitie: theſe are ſeaſoned in the leauen of vnrighteouſnes, baked in the ouen of hipocriſie, and ſhal one day be burned in the fire of euerlaſting deſtruction, for they which for gaine loue their company in this life, ſhalbe partakers of theyr rewards in the life to come.
               Fiftly, by this wee note, that the Lord doth euer prouide for his faithfull ſeruaunts in all their miſeries. We ſee heere,Pſa. 37.18 19. theſe Iewes ſatisfied with plenty in Moab, that were almoſt famiſhed with penury at home: therefore ſayth Dauid. The Lord knoweth the dayes of vpright men,Ge. 45.45 and their inheritance ſhall bee perpetuall; they ſhall not be confounded in the perillous time and in the dayes of famine,1. Kin. 18.13. thay ſhall haue inough. Moſt notable is that ſpeech of Ioſeph to his brethren; telling them, that God ſent him before to prouide victualls for them in that ſeuen yeeres famine. So hee ſtirred vp Obadiah which hid fifty prophets in one caue, and fiftie in another,1. Kin. 17: 4.10 feeding them with bread and water, during the time of famine. Hee prouided for Eliah firſt by the rauens,2. Kin. 8.1. and after by the widdow of Zarephtha multiplieng her oyle and meale, for Eliah her ſelfe, and her ſonne. So hee ſent Eliſa to warne the Shunamite woman of the ſeuen yeares famine, that ſhee ſhould flye for her ſelfe, and liue where ſhee could. I might bee infinite in this pointe, to declare the bountifull liberalitie of the Lord, who euer prouideth one remedie or other,

to ſatisfie the continuall prayers of them that feare him: for we may ſay as Paul ſayth, Wee are afflicted, yet wee are not in diſtreſſe, in pouerty, yet not ouercome of pouerty, we are perſecuted, and yet not forſaken,2. Cor. 4 8.9 caſt down but we periſhe not. This is the mercifull kindnes of him who giueth foode to the young rauens that call vppon him, & maketh his ſun to riſe & ſhine both vppon good & bad. Yea wee our owne ſelues haue experience in our owne countrey, for we which were wont with our abundaunce to helpe other nations about vs, yet now in our want we are ſuccoured by them. How ſhould the poore in many places be relieued, if it were not for the corne which commeth ouer-ſea: therefore as the ſeuen plentifull yeares in Egipt, ſuccoured the ſeauen deare yeares: euen ſo the Lord relieueth the miſery of one time by the multitude of another. Therefore my brethren, let vs not ſay, the Lorde hath forgotten, for although our deſires be not ſatisfied, yet our bodies are not famiſhed; yea the Lord teſtifieth that he is as vnwilling to puniſhe our deſerts, and vtterly to depriue vs of our maintenaunce, as we are to departe from our pleaſant paſtime or dainty belly cheere. Poore Lazarus that was not releeued with the rich mans crummes, yet was he comforted with the licking of the dogs, ſo much doth the Lord affect liberality and kindnes, that he commandeth brute beaſts to execute his goodnes vpon his ſeruants:
               Now let vs proceed to the ſecond part of this ſcripture, and ſeeing we haue brought theſe ſtrangers to their Inne 
                     •
                  t Moab: let vs heare their intertainment, & thoſe things that happened vnto them after they came thither: for the parts wee haue in the beginning ſet downe, which I truſt you remember, and therefore we will to the words.
               
                  And they continued there. This is as much to ſay, as they found entertainment anſwerable to their expectation: they had liberty of reſidence granted, and obtained a place for their dwelling in ſafety. Where wee firſt note the gentlenes or humanity of theſe heathen Moabits. who had learned by nature this pointe of curteſie, which is, friendlye to ſuccour poore harbourleſſe ſtraungers: and no doubte but hee that watcheth

the deſcending of ſparrowes on the ground, directed this iourney to Moab, for the accompliſhing of his owne counſell, and prepared the heartes of theſe people, with fauour to relieue them. For as before he guided the iourney of Abrahams ſeruant to the citie of Machor, where Rebecca was, & framed hir anſwere according to his praier, euē ſo he cōducted theſe to Moab where Ruth was,Ge. 24.13 and tempered the hearts of the wicked to giue theſe pilgrims a dwelling place among them. By the which we are taught what friendſhip or loue we owe to ſtrangers which are come among vs, yea though we know not the purpoſe of their harts, yet we muſt doo good vnto them for the proportiō of their bodies, that is, becauſe they are men. This is not a law written only in the booke of God but imprinted in the verie nature of euery one. Wee ſee theſe Moabits do it by nature & yet they had no religion in them, we know how the king of Fgipt gaue commandement for Abraham, that none ſhould hurt him or any of his poſſeſſions. Read but the Acts of the Apoſtles, you ſhal ſee how barbarous nations receiued the church with curteſy, and ſome vppon their reporte beleeued the doctrine of Chriſt. What ſhall we then ſay to this beaſtlike behauiour of many among vs, who will hardly permit poore Chriſtian ſtraungers to harbour among vs; if it were not for that they are men, & the children of Adam like our ſelues, yet becauſe they call vppon the name of Chriſt, being of the houſehold of ſayth, let vs doe good vnto them. But ſome will ſay, what ſhall wee doe vnto them if they will not ioyne with vs in our religion? I anſwere,Gen. 17 13.14 none muſt bee of Abrahams familye but thoſe which wil be circumciſed, that is, none muſt dwell with thee, but ſuch as wil be of thy profeſſion. Yet thou maieſt for humanity or curteſy receiue a Turke or a pagan, a Iew or an infidell,Ge. 31.54 papiſt or heretike, to talke or table for a night or a ſmall time, ſo thou kepe they ſelfe from his pollutions. So did Iacob feaſt his idolotrous father in law and kinſmen when they purſued him to the mount of Gilead,2. King. 6 23. with purpoſe to hurt him, and our ſauiour Chriſt biddeth vs to feede our enimies and to giue them drinke if they thirſte. So did Eliſchah, to the hoſt of Sirians,

who being ſent to take him, yet when he had taken them and lead them to the city, he ſuffered the king to do them no hurt, but refreſhed them with meat and drinke, and ſent them away in ſafety. For our outward curteous receuing of infidels is like coales of fire, to draw them in loue with our inward religion, we know how the Lord commaunded the Iewes to be good vnto ſtrangers, becauſe they were ſtrangers in Egipt. We know how the Lord commendeth the ſtranger Samaritan beyond the prieſt and the leuite, beccauſe he ſuccoured the poore wounded Iewe, which had fallen among theeues.Luk. 10.30, 38 And truely wee our ſelues may bee ſtrangers in other Countreies, therefore let vs doe good vnto them now that we may receiue the like of them againe, for this is the law and the prophets. Then Elimelech: when they had eſcaped one daunger, they fell into another ſorrow, when by the mercifull kindnes of the Lord they were ioyntly come togither into Moab, and there quietlye ſeated, ſcaped the arrowes of famine, by the hand of God, the father of the family, the nereſt and dereſt vnto them, dieth in plenty.
               Where we note the verie lot of all the godly, namely, that the end of one ſorrow is the beginning of another, like the drops of raine diſtilling from the top of a houſe, when one is gone another followeth, like a ſhip vppon the ſea, being on the top of one waue, preſently is caſt downe to the foote of another, like the ſeede which being ſpread by the ſower is hanted by the foules, beeing greene and paſt their reache,Pſa. 34.19 is endaungered by forſte and ſnow, being paſſed the winter 
                     •
                  s hurt by beaſts in ſommer, being rype is cut with the ſickle, threſhed with flaile, purged in the floore, ground in the mill, baked in the ouen, chewed in the teeth, and conſumed in the ſtomacke. This made Dauid ſay, Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord deliuereth out of all.Act. 14.22 Heb. 2.10 But be not diſcomforted oh my brethren, for thorough many afflictions muſt we enter into the kingdome of heauen, and by affliction we are made like to the ſonne of God. But to the matter. We ſee here their ſweet fellowſhip is preuented by death, which in deed is the end of al

worldly friendſhip. This is a good leſſon for all worldlings to remember, how the Lord diſappointeth all their purpoſes, and ouerthroweth their counſells more vainer then vanity. The merchant hauing obtained his banke, promiſeth reſt and ſecurity to himſelfe; the husbandman hauing gathered his fruits, neuer doubteth but hee ſhall ſpend them,Mat. 17.4. & prouideth for more; the Gentleman comming to his landes, thinketh his reuenewes and pleaſant life, will indure alway: like the apoſtles when Chriſt was transfigured in the mount; preſently they would builde tabernacles of reſidence; but as the cloude came betwixt them and heauen, and bereaued them of their purpoſe: euen ſo ſodainly will death come and depriue you of your profits, call the marchant from his banke, the husbandman from his farme, the Gentleman from his lands, the noble man from his honour, the prince from his kingdome, the Lady from her pleaſures, as this Elimelech was ſodainly from wife and children.
               Secondly, by theſe words we note the goodnes of God toward both the dead man, and alſo wife and children: for no doubte but they all deſired, to bee ſeiled in ſome place or other; and here the Lord ſuffereth the husband with wife and family, to bee quietly feared before their ſeparation. He might haue called him away in his iourney, as he was comming, & then oh how would it haue grieued hoth him and them: him, to leaue a poore comfortles widdow and children behind, without dwelling or maintenance, for home again they could not returne, by reaſon of the famine, and to goe forth on the iourney without a guide, was like as if a ſhip were ſet on the ſea without a mariner. Therefore in ſuffering them all to come ſafe to Moab, and there to liue till they got fauour and dwelling, and alſo maintenance, was a ſingular fauour of the Lord towards both; that howſoeuer they were afflicted, yet they were not lefte deſtitute. And this teacheth vs,Rom. 2.7. that in al our afflictions we receiue eſpeciall blesſings at the hands of God, for this end that we ſhould not bee ſwallowed vp of ſorrowe. There is no ſickneſſe but it is eyther ſhort and ſharpe, or els tedious and light, if it bee ſodaine and verie extreame,

the continuance of it is but ſhort, if it belong and tedious, it hath ſome time of eaſe, ſome time of more quietnes, ſo that in all our miſeries we may ſay with the godly,Pſa. 124.3 If the Lord had not bene on our ſide we had bene ſwallowed quick: he tempereth the ſodaineſt ſhowres with leaſt continuande, and the longeſt winter hath many faire dayes. Be ſtrong therfor my brethren and ſiſters, for ſure the Lord will ſtabliſhe your hearts, feare not all the daungers of the world: though as many troubles compaſſe vs, as there were Sirians about Eliſeah, yet lifte vp your eyes,2. King. 6.20. there are many thouſands more with vs then are againſt vs. He that ſuffereth none to bee tempted aboue their power, will not lay more vppon vs then we are able to beare: but as he wreſtled with Iacob with one hand, he held him vp with the other, ſo though hee afflict with one arme, he ſhall ſuſtaine with the other.
               
                  Which tooke them wiues Now we are come to the childrē, & the holy ghoſt expreſſeth the frendſhip which they receaued of the Moabits after the death of the father, which is, their mariage with their daughters: Where firſt of all it may be demanded in this place, (ſeeing the Lord forbideth all ſtrange mariages, whither theſe ſons of Elimelech did not offend againſt this law:Deut. 7.3.4. we know that the vnmaried are at liberty, to mary whom they will onely in the Lord: now the Moabits were heathen people, and ſtrangers from God his couenant, and therefore theſe perſons maried not in the Lord. To which, I anſwere briefly, that the Lord forbiddeth mariages with infidells, for two cauſes, firſt when wee may lawfully and without daunger ioyne our ſelues to them that are godly,1. Kin. 
                        •
                     1.4. and wil preſumptuouſly for worldly reſpects, run to the daughters of men: ſecondly that wee ſhould refraine from all ſuch mariages where wee are like to bee drawne away from our profesſion, as wee ſee in Salomon. But theſe ſonnes of Elimelech offended in none of theſe.Exo. 2.21. For firſt they were now ſtraungers and had no other choiſe,Math. 1.5 and ſecondlie it appeareth by that which followeth that they were both well perſwaded in religion. For as Moſes marryed a Madianitiſh woman, and was blameleſſe, and Salman the ſonne of Nahaſſon, the

prince of the Iewes, maried with Rahab, (which both were the parents of Boaz mentioned hereafter) and was faultles, nay it was done by the permiſſion of Ioſuah, & therefore lawfull; euen ſo theſe ſtraunge Iewes moued with the ſame reaſons, chuſed the like mariages. But ſome wil ſay, the Iewes which had maried ſtrange wiues, in the captiuity of Babilon, might haue alledged this againſt Nehemiah,Nehe. 9 1, 2, 3. that they were in captiuitie, & had no women to take but ſtrangers. To the which I anſwere, if they had ſo obiected, they had ſpoken vntrueth, and ſo would Nehemiah haue replyed, for there were Iewiſhe women captiues as well as men; and further I ſay, that this their marying of ſtrange women, was the cauſe of the deſtruction of many Iewiſh women, who being forſaken of their owne people, muſt of neceſſity bee maried to infidells, which could neuer returne to Ieruſalem. Again, theſe ſons of Elimelech by their mariage, gayned greater fauour of the Moabits; but eſpecially the hande of God was in it, that when they both ſhould be dead, Ruth might be maried to Boaz, and be made a mother of Chriſt.
               Firſt therfore we note out of this, that as theſe Moabits were kind to the father in giuing him reſidence, ſo they were louing to the ſons in giuing them wiues: a notable example of humane curteſy, giuen vnto vs by theſe heathens, that we with the like fauour ſhould entertaine ſtrangers. But manie couetous parents in theſe dayes, which would be accompted Chriſtians, are ſo farre from doing this vnto ſtrangers, that they will hardly doe the like to their natural Countriemen, rather imitating that vngodly Laban,
                     Ge. 31.15. who made marchaundiſe of his daughters,Iud. 1.13. then godly Caleb in beeſtowing them on Othniell be he neuer ſo poore, if they haue deſerued well of Church or cōmon wealth, rather deſiring to aduance their poſtiritie in the glory of the world, thē to diſcharge their duetyes in the preſence of God. They will ſay they ayme at this, the feare of the Lord, when as if they had matched their children with Turkes or infidells they would not or could not be more profane then thoſe, ſauing onely theſe are outwardly obedient to a Chriſtian

prince, that they might with more libertie followe theyr licentious Atheiſme, when as peraduenture the other woulde not ſo diſſemble: ſo that goods, and not goodneſſe, the worlde and not the woorde, earthly vanitie, and not heauenly felicitie our parents ayme at. But what ſhall wee ſaie to them that force theyr children not onely to match agaynſt theyr mindes, but to marrie with publike papiſts and knowen recuſants, onely for thinges of this lyfe. Truely I aunſwere, that it is agaynſt theſe that the Lorde ſpeaketh, when hee ſayth,Deut. 7.3 You ſhall not take theyr daughters to your ſonnes, nor giue your daughters to theyr ſonnes, but as they haue marryed wythout the counſell of the Lorde, in murdering the fruites of theyr owne bodyes, euen ſo they ſhall proſper wythout the bleſſing of God, in confounding the ſoules of theyr owne poſteritie: and as the children of the Iewes which were borne of ſtrange women, were ſeparated from the newe founded temple, euen ſo theſe ſhall bee excluded from the euerlaſting Ieruſalem.
               
                  And they tarryed there. This time of theyr abode in Moab, ſignifieth the great continuance of this miſerie. Firſt for the Iewes at home, who indured famine: and ſecondly for theſe abroade, which liued among Infidels tenne yeeres together. It is a fearefull thing wyth vs that wee haue but one yeeres famine, oh then wee thinke that the Lorde hath forgotten to bee mercifull. But we haue heard alredie of famines of great continuance, that in Ioſephs time was ſeauen yeeres together, that in Dauids time was three yeeres and a halfe, and this miſerie laſted tenne yeeres together. Wherein many godly perſons dyd patiently indure it. Howe is it then that for this lyttle dearth among vs, there are ſo great exclamations for corne and plentie, ſuch horrible blaſphemies agaynſt the Lorde himſelfe, ſaying: Shall this indure alwaie? Was there euer anie poore people thus afflicted? Is this the fruit of the Goſpell? Are theſe the fauours of God and his righteouſneſſe, in keeping his promiſe? with ſuch lyke, too horrible to bee

ſuffered as if the Lorde were not able to releeue vs; or elſe were vniuſt in puniſhing our ſinnes, howe can that bee, ſeeing hee calleth for repentaunce and amendement, and then promiſeth plentye and abundaunce. Theſe ſaintes endured ſome three, ſome ſeuen, and other tenne yeeres famine, and yet wee ſaye, was there euer ſuch a people thus afflicted like to vs with one yeres dearth?
               They were driuen to wander abroade in their enemies Countrie for manie yeeres together; ſhall wee then thinke it ſuch a miſerye to goe two or three miles for our corne? They aduentured the loſſe of their liues, and wee are afraide of the leſſening or diminiſhing of our goods. And ſhall wee yet ſaye, there was neuer anye people tormented like vnto vs? Yea, I adde this, that euen at this daye there are people in the worlde, which ſ
                     •
                  ant in all their liues doe eate anye bread, but onely the barke of trees, with ſome other vnſeaſonable fiſh; others liue on the rootes of the earth, ſome on the fruites of trees. And what ſhall I ſaye more our wickedneſſe is greater then our want, our ſore is ſmaller then our ſinne, our tranſgresſions haue deſerued to bee puniſhed with the ſcourge, and yet wee are ſcarce corrected with the rodde, our complaintes are greater then our hu
                     •
                  te, and our murmuring exceedeth our miſery: therefore wee haue greater cauſe to tremble at that which hangeth ouer our heades, then to feare or crye for this which wee already ſuffer, for it is hardly the beginning of ſorrow.
               
                  So Mahlon and Chilson. Now when they were compaſſed about vvith the friendes of their vviues, vvhich did promiſe ſecuritie, then after a fevve yeeres, ſpent in ſafetie, the Lorde called them avvay after their father. Where vvee ſee our former doctrine iuſtified, that the end of one ſorrovve vvas the beginning of another. When they were moſt like to continue, then they gaue ouer, as it were, in the armes of theyr wiues, and the ſight of their aged mother, to whome no doubte, this was the greateſt griefe of all other, that now

beeing lefte deſtitute both of husbande and children, ſhe ſhould without comfort liue with the Moabites, and without ioye returne agayne vnto her owne Countrey, as a bird robbed of her young ones. Yet ſeeing this is our worldly lot ſtill to endure miſery, let vs ſet both our ſhoulders vnder the burthen, if it be too heauy, let vs flee to the finiſher of our faith with zealous and earneſt prayers, deſiring him eyther to eaſe or to remooue his hande. But ſeeing wee haue ſpoken of this before, this ſhall ſuffiſe at this time to ſerue for a remembrance.
               
                  Then ſhee aroſe. When her friends were departed, and her ſelfe lefte comfortles, yet the Lord remembred her, for euen then came the rumor vnto her, that the famine was ceaſed in Iewry, that the Lord had viſited the ſicknes of his people, and reſtored the plenty of the earth againe, and therefore it is time for her to bee haſting home againe, for here the holy Ghoſt ſetting downe her returne and the cauſe of the ſame, ſheweth that it was euen then when her children were dead, for what ſhould a godly woman liue there, where were non that could ſtrengthen hir in the wayes of the Lord, but rather prouoke her to imbrace infidelity; And againe, euen at that time when ſhee was moſt comfortleſſe for the loſſe of her children came this rumor vnto her of the reſtoring of her Countrey, ſo that now Naomi, thou art here in Moab a ſorrowfull pilgrime, go home to thy Countrey and bee a ioyfull inhabitant: indeede thy children are dead, but thou ſhall haue greater comfort of thy ancient acquaintaince. What knoweſt thou, but now the Lord hath called thee to conſolation, whereas of late, thou mighteſt thinke, hee had wrought thy confuſion:
               By this wee note, that the Lord deferreth to helpe till greateſt neceſſity,Gen. 22.10.11 euen as hee ſtayed the ſtroke of Abraham when hee was at the verie inſtant to cut of little Iſaks necke. So wee read that when the king of Aſſiria had inuaded the kingdome of Ezechia,
                  2. Kin. 19 9. wonne his cities▪ ſubdued his Country, conquered his people, and had not lefte him two thouſand horſmen, & being

deſtitute of all helpe, then the Lord raiſed vp the king of Ethiop, who called the Aſſyrians from the ſiege of Ieruſalem. What ſhall I ſaie of Lazarus raiſed from death? Of the deliuerance of Peter out of the handes of Herod,Ioh. 11.43 the daie before he ſhould haue bene martyred?Act. 12.7, 8. Of the ſhipwracke wherein Paul was, and yet not one of them were loſt.Act 27.44 And excellent is that of Chriſt, ſleeping in the ſhippe on a pillowe,Math. 8 25, 26 ſuffered his diſciples to bee ſo long toſſed with the violence of the ſea, till they cryed out, Lord ſaue, we periſh, and then hee awaked, rebuked the rage of the windes, and ſtilled the ſtormes of the ſea, and a peaceable calme followed. This is that preſeruatiue agaynſt deſperation, which muſt ſtaie our mindes on the leaſure of the Lorde: wee muſt not at the firſt look for our deſires, but as Abraham and Zacharia were old before they had any children: and yet in the end the Lord promiſed and alſo perfourmed, euen ſo when wee haue leaſt hope, for obtaining of our deſires, wee moſt often receiue them. For the Lord deſireth our requeſts for the triall of our fayth and pacience, that like as the wheate corne groweth not, till it bee dead, euen ſo his works doe not anſwere our expectation, till they ſeeme to vs impoſſible: that as the moſt precious pearles are fartheſt brought,1. Cor. 15 36. and longeſt in comming, when wee haue them we keepe them more carefully: euen ſo his excellent mercies, being with difficulty obtained ſhould be eſteemed more thankfully. Therefore be of good comfort, you that now ſorrow, for you ſhall bee comforted, you that now hunger for you ſhal be ſatisfied, you that nowe weepe for you ſhall laugh; the Lord will ſhortly come, beare but a litle and he will wipe away all teares from your eies, & then oh how happy ſhal they be which haue truſted in him.
               
                  That the Lorde had viſited. This is the laſt parte of this ſcripture, being the reaſon that moued her to returne into her Countrey. O it is as if the holy ghoſt had ſayd. The Lord looked vpon the afflicted eſtate of his people, & ſupplied their want of food.Exo. 20.5 & 32.34 To viſit, in the ſcriptures is taken two wayes, firſt to puniſhe, as when God ſayth in the ſecond commaundement, that he will viſite the

ſinne of the fathers vppon the children, vnto the third & fourth generation: ſecondly it ſignifieth ſome times to pardon or to ſhow mercy, as that of Zachary.Luk. 2.68 The Lord hath viſited and redeemed his people, that is,Hoſ. 4.9 hee hath ſhewed mercy in redeming his people. In this later ſenſe it muſt be taken in this place.Math. 25 Now the word properly ſignifieth to goe to ſee, and is referred to them that are ſicke, which by a metaphor is applied to ſinne, for ſinne is the ſicknes of the ſoule, and is very fitly applied to puniſhments ſent of God, for when he ſcourgeth he cometh to ſee, as he ſayd of Sodome: I will go downe and ſee whither it be altogether ſo, if not, that I may know; for hee commeth to ſee vs in our miſeryes, as a phiſitian to his patient, whom he hath firſt or before made ſick with his potion or coraſiue, & bringeth a wholſome or ſpeedy remedye with him. Where wee note the miſerable eſtate of men in the ſicknes of ſinne, or vnder any of God his iudgments, as dearth & famine, warre or peſtelence; that euen as ſicke perſonnes are not able to helpe or comfort themſelues, or to take any pleaſure in their wealth, though they poſſeſſed the whole world: ſo if we be oppreſſed in the puniſhment of our iniquities, we can not or maye not reſt in our ſelues but in the Lord our phiſitian and watchman, for if the Lord ſhut who can open, if hee wound who can heale, if hee curſe who can bleſſe, he that hath the bond or writing muſt diſcharge the debt, & the Lord that ſtroke muſt bind vs vp again. Oh my dearly beloued brethren, now are the childern come to the birth, and there is no ſtrength to be deliuered, for this is the day of tribulation. Now are wee in the ballaunce of the Lord eyther to viſite our offences with his famin,Eſa. 37.3 or to ſcourge our ſinnes with the rod of dearth if either of both continue, what end can we looke for but the pining of our bodyes, and the conſuming of our ſoules? Whither ſhall we go to eſcape the iudgments of the Lord, we are already clogged with his irons and faſt bolted, if wee ſtriue to ſhake them of, what doe wee els but rebell againſt the power of the higheſt? if they continue,

we are but miſerable priſoners and can looke for nothing but the fearfull day of execution. Let vs turne to the Iudge before that daie, and ſend vp our prayers as our deareſt friendes vnto his ſonne, that hee may viſite vs with the forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes, that hee may ſue out our pardon, and bee intreated for our tranſgreſſions, that wee may obtaine the releaſe of our preſent miſerie, the remouing of his iudgementes, the increaſe of the fruites of the earth, that hee would viſite vs, in giuing our dayly bread, to ſatiſfie the poore with his goodneſſe, and giue vs all the bread of this lyfe to baniſh our dearth, and the bread of lyfe to eſcape damnation. And thus much for this time. Now let vs giue praiſe to God.
               The end of the firſt Lecture.
            
            
               
               The ſecond Lecture.
               
                  
                     
                        Chapter 1. Verſe 7. to the 15.
                     
                     
                        7. Wherefore ſhe departed out of the place where ſhe was, & her two daughters in lawe with her, and they went on their way, to returne vnto the land of Iudah.
                     
                        8. Then Naomi ſayd vnto her two daughters in lawe, Go, returne each of you vnto her owne mothers houſe: the Lorde ſhew fauour vnto you as you haue done with the dead, and with mee.
                     
                        9 The Lord graunt that eyther of you may find reſt in the houſe of her husband: and when ſhee had kiſſed them, they 'lift vp their voice ad wept.
                     
                        10 And they ſaid vnto her, ſurely we will returne with thee vnto thy people.
                     
                        11 But Naomi ſayd: turne againe my daughters, for what cauſe will you goe with mee? are there any more ſonnes in my wombe that they may bee your husbands.
                     
                        12 Turne again my daughters: go your way; for I am too old to haue an husband: if I ſhould ſay I had hope, and if I had an husband this night, yea if I had borne ſons.
                     
                        13 Would ye tarry for them, till they were of age? would you be deferred for them from taking any husbands? nay my daughters, for it grieueth mee much for your ſakes, that the hand of the Lord is gone out againſt mee.
                     
                        14 Then they lift vp their voice and wept againe, and Orpah kiſſed her mother in law and departed, but Ruth abode with her ſtill:
                  
               
               
                  IN theſe wordes is expreſſed howe Naomi departeth out of Moab, to go into the land of Iewrie. The wordes diuide themſelues into two partes: the firſt is the iourney, in this ſeuenth verſe▪ The ſecond parte, is the communication, in the next ſeuen verſes. The iourney is deſcribed by the perſons, which were Naomi & her two daughters in lawe.
               
                  The communication which they had by the waie principally conſiſteth in the perſwaſion of Naomi to her daughters, that they ſhould returne backe agayne: and firſt ſhee ſpeaketh in the eight and ninth verſes. Her ſpeech containeth two partes, the firſt is the counſell ſhe giueth to them, in theſe wordes, Go returne. The ſecond is her prayer for them, which is double, or conſiſting of two partes. The firſt is generall, in theſe wordes, The Lord ſhew fauour, to the end of that verſe. The ſecond is ſpeciall in the ninth verſe, in theſe words, The Lord grant you that you may finde reſt, &c. Which beeing ſpoken, they lifte vp their voice and wept, beeing ſorrowfull for this newes, and therefore they anſwere in the tenth verſe that they will returne with her to her people: In the next verſe to the fourteenth, Naomi confirmeth her former counſell by waighty arguments, which are expreſſed in her queſtions, and they all are taken from their ſecond marriages.
               The firſt is in the eleauenth verſe: that ſhee had no mo ſonnes, to bee their husbands, eyther already borne; or which hereafter might bee borne, therefore their labour would be but loſt if they went with her; ſeeing ſhe could prouide them no mo husbandes. This is amplified in the eleuenth and twelfth verſe.
               The ſecond reaſon is in the thirteenth verſe, that although ſhe had now children borne, yet it would bee to long to ſtaie for them till they were of age: much more ſhe hauing none borne: and leaſt her daughters ſhould thinke ſhe cared not for them, ſhee addeth in the thirteenth verſe, that it grieued hir more for their ſakes, that is, the loue ſhe beareth to them, then for her owne, but it is the hande of God, and therefore ſhee is contented. Laſtly in the 14. verſe is declared the effect of this communication, what it wrought, for Orpah departed as a woman ouercome by theſe worldly perſuaſions, but Ruth abideth ſtill with her. Of theſe let vs briefly ſpeake in order as they lye, by the premisſion and aſſiſtaunce of the almighty.
               
                  And ſhee aroſe. This iourney of Naomi to her owne people, as in the former verſe wee heard was vndertaken,

when ſhee heard, that the Iewes were deliuered from their famine; ſo it is more commendable if we conſider the obiections, lets and hinderances, that may be made againſt it. Firſt the way was very long betweene Moab and Bethlehem, which might terrifie an old woman: but if any ſay that it was no longer to returne then it was to come downe, I anſwere, when ſhe came thither ſhee had her husband and children to beare her company, but now ſhee was to returne alone and therefore the iourney would be the more tedious. Secondly, the conſideration of her age might haue hindered this trauaile, for her withered body would be wearyed in the iourney; and what knew ſhee but that ſhe might die in the iourney and that among ſtrangers, who peraduenture would haue no regard of her age, honour or honeſty: againe, no doubt, but ſhe had ſome wealth in Moab, which of nyceſſity ſhe muſt be conſtrained to leaue behinde her, and for euer to looſe, with many other ſuch greiuous thoughts which might accomber her troubled breaſt. But notwithſtanding all theſe ſhee proceedeth on her intended iourney, comitting her ſelf to the preſeruation of God in all places, who ſhe knew would giue her ſome comforts for the aduerſity ſhee had endured:
               Where firſt of all we note the duety of all the godly, if with Naomi they are far frō the company of the faythfull, or compelled to departe from them vpon the like occaſion, as famine, pouertie, perſecution and ſuch like, that when occaſion ſhall bee giuen, they returne with Naomi to the temple, to the people, to the arke, to the goſpell of the Lord. For as God ſayd to Eliah, when hee was in mount Horeb, What doeſt thou here Eliah?1. Kin. 19.9. euen ſo he ſpeaketh to all perſecuted pilgrims, and poore true Chriſtians which are at the gates and tables of carnall atheiſts, the enimies of Chriſt, VVhat do you heere? there is corne and bread, in Iſrael againe, the Church, your brethren, haue now receiued maintenance:Ioh. 2.22. returne to the place of ſacrifice: they that worſhip muſt worſhip God at Ieruſalem: the mountaines of Samaria are no place of God his worſhip, but at Shilo is his tabernacle and his dwelling in Sion. This wee may reade practiſed

of the auncient fathers long ago. When Moſes had dwelt fortie yeares in Madian, then the Lord bid him returne to his poore brethren againe. Dauid beeing in great ſecuritie with the king of Gath,Exo: 2.11. yet the Lord would not ſuffer him there to dwell.1. Sam. 27 9. And as the Iſraelits might not dwell with the Egiptians, but muſt go into the land of Canaan, ſo the Lords people muſt abide but where he appointeth thē.1, king. 8, And as the Shunamite woman, after the ſeuen yeres famin returneth to her wonted dwelling, euen ſo muſt not wee linger with recuſant papiſts, atheiſts, ſwearers, blaſphemers and open deſpiſers of God his miniſters and miniſterie.
               Secondly we may note in this verſe a godly example of holy obedience & commendable friendſhip, for here the daughters in law are going with their mother to the land of Iewry. Where, eyther for religion or loue which they beare to their mother in law they forſake both Countrey and friendes to go with her. Was it not ſufficient for them to take ſtrangers for their husbands; who being dead, and they at liberty, but they muſt go from their owne kindred, with a mother in law: was it not wel for them to abide with her ſo long as ſhee would abide with them, and was able to maintaine them, but now when ſhee had forſaken her dwelling and wealth, muſt they accompany her in her pouerty. Surely it ſeemeth, that as Paul ſayth to the Corinthians, hee ſought not theirs but them, ſo theſe women deſire rather the preſence then the wealth of Naomi, O excellent obedience and godly friendſhip, worthy to bee regiſtred with eternal memory. They had not paſt ten yeares ſpace to learne this point of religion that it is true friendſhip to loue at all times,Poro. 17.17. whether it be in wealth or proſperity, in want or aduerſity. We haue many old profeſſors in Chriſtianitie, which haue not profited thus much in twentie, thirtie, or fourty yeres profeſſion. They ſay to their neighbors as Iorams meſſenger ſaid to Iehu, Is it peace? ſo they aske,1. king. 19.17. is it wealth? is it riches? is it honour? or is it fauour of prince or Gentleman that dwelleth neere them. As if they ſhould ſay, if thou be welthy, thou ſhalt haue my friendſhip, but if thou be poore, then as Nabal anſwered

Dauids meſſenger, what is Dauid? and what is the ſonne of Ishai? ſo, what art thou? I care not for thy companye, get thee from my preſence, I can abide on ſuch beggers. Is this the fruite of religion, condemned of the heathens, abhorred of the brute beaſts, hated of the wicked, and yet practiſed of or among Chirſtians, ſurely I had rather be a friendly Moabite then a thouſand ſuch carnall Iſralits: Yea, the verie ciuill honeſt men among vs will riſe in iudgment againſt vs in this pointe, they will liue without hipocriſie, we diſſemble in all vaine glory, our friendſhip is like the company of the dolphin, if it bee faire weather ſhe will neuer be from the ſhip, but if a ſtorme come, ſhee withdraweth her fellowſhip. Awaye with this moſt beaſtlike, yea rather vnnaturall ſmiling vppon proſperitye, but grim and ſtraunge countenances vppon the afflicted, eyther loue at all times,Poro. 17.17. which is Salomons friendſhip, or loue at no time, which is Sathans amity.
               
                  Then ſayd Naomi. The counſell that this godly Naomi giueth vnto her daughters, is ſimply that they ſhould reurne to their owne parents, as if ſhee ſhould ſay vnto them, Be aduiſed my daughters, ſome will thinke you very vnnaturall, that you forſake your owne mothers, to go with me your mother in lawe, & forſake your owne country to go vnto a ſtrange place: the iourney is long & tedious, you are tender & weak, better returne before we be far gone: to be wiſe too late, is to repent too ſone, care not for me, the Lord wil inable me to go as well alone as with your company. VVhere wee firſt of all note, a moſt godly example of mother-like loue and godly charitie, for if Naomi had gone alone, it could not chuſe but be farre more dangerous then with company, and none could receiue any diſaduauntage by her counſell beſide her ſelfe, yet wee ſee ſhee careth not for her owne commoditie ſo ſhee might procure the welfare of her daughters. Shee might haue friendlye accepted their owne proffers, and if any danger had come, ſhee might haue ſaid, ſhee did not entreat them, it was their owne vp ſeeking, yet ſhee dealeth more plainelie with them in telling them the daunger, & as before they deſired more her company then her wealth, euen ſo now ſhee loueth

their company wel, but coūſelleth their ſafty better. This is the duety of all that feare God, as the apoſtle ſayth. Let euery man ſeeke anothers and not their owne good; this was ſo deere vnto the Lord himſelf, that hee commaunded by Moſes,1. Cor. 10.24. that if their neighbours cattell went aſtray, they ſhould bring them home again. Doth the Lord take care for oxen, & not much more for men? But oh where is the carefull keeping of this commaundement; now euery man ſaith, euerie one for himſelf and God for vs all: but rather,Deut. 22.7. how ſhall the Lord be for vs, when we are not for one another? Now this wicked world is full of deceitfull bargaines, now mens houſes and lands are bought ouer the heads of their young and vnthriſtie ſons: now mens farmes and leaſes are foreſtalled by other, that they them ſelues cannot enioy them: ſuch buying, & ſelling, coſoning and deceiuing, borrowing and lending vppon vſury, taking of fines, raiſing of rents, vndoing of the poore, and thruſting the weakeſt to the wall, as if charitie were forgotten, and the precept of the Lord had neuer bene written, and finally as though all were our owne which we can get in our handling, manie giue counſell like lawyers for their fees, but few like Naomi, for their conſcience. They licke their owne fingers, as the prouerb goeth, but few will caſt any ſalt on their neighbors meat, if they can get aduantages of their neighbours vpon ſtatuts they ſue the extremity,Gen. 73.9 as if they were infidells. They will not ſaye as Abraham to Lot; If thou take the right hand, I will take the lefe: that is, my brother my neighbor take thou the choiſe, I wiſh not thy wrong, aske coū
                  ſel, & let there be no occaſion of ſtrife betweene vs: men will hardly giue either coate or cloake in theſe dayes, by ſuffering iniurie, they will rather take both, & although they thinke it better to giue almes then to take, yet they had rather take bribes & rewards them to giue. Oh my beloued, let vs at the length bee ruled by the counſell of the Lord,Phil. 2.3. Le. 19.14 & eſteeme better of others then of our ſelues, help as many as we can, but hinder none. Curſed are they that lay ſtumbling blockes before the blind, and giue euill counſell for their owne aduantage.
               Secondly, by theſe words we may gather to whom widowes

belong, their husbandes beeing dead, namely, to their owne mothers houſe: that is, to their parents: if the parents of their husbands will not prouide for them. Therfore is it that the Lord cōmaunded,Le. 22.13. if the daughter of a prieſt were a widdowe, and returned to her fathers houſe, hauing no children, ſhee might eate of the peace offrings of the childrē of Iſrael.1. Tim. 5.16. And Paul giueth charge to the godly in his time, that if any of their kindred were a widow, of their owne coſts they ſhould prouide for her, and not charge the church. This is a profitable doctrine both for parents and children: for parents that they bee carefull to beſtowe their children in godly marriages, where they may be well prouided for, neither muſt they then caſt them of, but if neede bee receiue them to their owne families againe: for children, ſeeing the Lord doth thus commend their welfare, & careth for their widdow head, as wel as their virginity, that they caſt not thēſelues away vpon euery one they can loue, without the conſent of their parents, wherby they impoueriſh their frends, vndoo themſelues, & bring a woful curſe vpon their innocēt poſterity. Thirdly & laſtly, by this counſel of Naomi we gather, that if the father be dead, we ow the ſame duty to our mother which is aliue, for ſhe ſaith, to her owne mothers houſe. And Salomon ſayth, it is fooliſhneſſe or wickedneſſe to deſpiſe ones mother. The Lorde curſeth him in the Lawe, that deſpiſeth or curſeth his mother as wel as his father.Pro. 15.20 In the fift cōmandement hee commandeth to honor the mother equally,Deut. 27.16. or as well as the father. Many thinke they may bee more bolde vvith their mothers, becauſe they are more tender ouer them, than with their fathers, but the godly muſt knovve, that vpon paine of Gods heauie curſe, they muſt follovv the counſell of their mothers vvith Iacob,Gen. 17.13 as vvell as the aduice of their fathers vvith Eſau. And the Lord doth often cloath the vveaker veſſell vvith more honor, that thereby wee might learne to continue our obedience to our parents.
               
                  The Lord ſhew. In theſe vvords the general bleſſing or praier is contained, vvhich Naomi maketh for her tvvo daughters, vvhere ſhe praieth to God for his fauor vpō thē
                  
as they ſhewed fauor to her, and to their dead husbands, as if ſhe ſhould ſaie, I wiſh no more acceptable bleſſing vpon you, than you haue done to others.
               VVhere we briefly note, that our duties which we diſcharge to parents or husbands, are as pledges before the Lord to doo good vnto vs. This maketh him delight to poure his bleſsings vpon vs, when he ſeeth wee dutifully walke in his preſence, and it prouoketh thoſe to whome wee offer this obedience, to poure out their prayers for vs into the eares of the almightie: Euen ſo the neglect of our duties, the contempt of our parents, and the diſobedience to our ſuperiours, procureth both the curſe of God and them, not onely in this life, but alſo in the life to come.
               
                  The Lord. Theſe wordes are her ſpeciall prayer for her daughters marryage, and are thus in effect, I can praie for no greater worldly bleſſing vpon you than this, that eyther of you being young women, may find quiet and louing husbandes, and bee made ioyfull mothers of many children.
               VVhere wee firſt of all note, that as parents are bound by the law of nature to prouide marryages for their children, ſo they are willed by the lawe of God, to praie for their proſperous eſtate, both before and alſo after they bee marryed. And truelye this neuer ſinketh into the heads of carnall parents, who are able to doo more wyth their purſes than with their prayers, who wiſh extremities to their children, minding onely a wealthie, & not a quyet lyfe. Oh how are wee beholding to ſuch ignorant parents, which onely take care for vs that we might bee lifted higher, when they prouide not for vs againſt the ſtormie tempeſts of vnquite liues, and the dangerous downfals of worldly confuſion? Let them neuer thinke that theyr wiſhes are praiers, when they ſaie, I would God my ſon were marryed to ſuch a mans daughter, or my daughter to ſuch a mans ſonne. This is all they aime at, ſimple and bare wealthie marriages, neuer minding or praying for God his bleſſing vpon them.
               Secondly, by this prayer of Naomi, we note the dutie of all husbandes towardes their wiues, which is, that they ſhould prepare reſt for them: theyr mindes beeing troubled,

they ſhould pacifie them with counſell: their bodyes diſeaſed, they ſhould comfort them with their loue: their eſtate indangered, they ſhould deliuer them with carefulneſſe, and finally, they ſhoulde loue their wiues as theyr owne ſoules.
               The Prophet Dauid compareth a wife to a vine,Pſa. 128.3. which if it be not propped vp with a ſtaie by the hande of the gardener, what will it doo but wallow on the ground & remaine fruitleſſe? Euen ſo the beſt wiues if they bee not carefully maintained by the kindnes of their husbandes, their ſorrowfull liues will increaſe their curſe, yea, & deſtroie the fruit of their owne bodies.
               The Apoſtle wiſheth husbands to loue their wiues, as Chriſt loued his Church,Eph. 5.25. which is not only mindfull to deliuer it out of preſent dangers, but alſo hath redeemed it from the curſe of eternall damnation: ſo the husbands duties are to prouide for the temporall welfare of their wiues bodies, and ſpecially for the euerlaſting ſaluation of their ſoules: that they twayne which in this life, haue had corporall ſociety, in the life to come might enioy eternall felicity. Now this condemmeth the carnall behauiour of wretched husbandes, who vſe their wiues as their ſeruants and not as themſelues, who deale with them as men do with nuts, firſt they reach and trauaile for them, and hauing gotten them, they take out the kernell but they tread the ſhell vnder their feete: ſo they hauing gotten the wealth, the bewtie, the health and young yeares of their wiues, deſpiſe their gray haires, which are their greateſt credite, as the ſhels wherein the kernel was, giuing thē ouer in their weakeſt daies, wherin they want greateſt comfort. Is this the reſt you prouide for your wiues, to cauſe them to weare their bodyes with weary trauailes, to conſume their minds with dayly griefe, to procure their paines by bearing of children, and to lay the greateſt burthens vppon the ſmalleſt beaſts, for ſo ſome moſt wretchedly terme them. Oh looke vnto it, this meaſure will the Lord meaſure to you againe, yee vnnaturall husbands which follow your pleaſures, and paſtimes abroade, and neglect your profits and ſorrowfull wiues at home. To fly ouer the ſeas with vnneceſſarie

iourneyes, to frequent the company of ſuſpected women, to follow the counſel of vaine perſons, ſpending their patrimonies, & bringing thēſelues, their wiues, & poſterity to woful miſery. Is this to dwell with your wiues like men of knowledge? Is this to giue honor vnto thē as the weaker veſſels?1. Pet. 3.7 Is this to account them the heyres of the ſame grace? & finally, is this to ſee their praiers be not interrupted? Nay rather, ther are many thouſand husbands which neuer either could or would pray with their wiues, that think neither vpō heauē nor hell, and haue no knowledge of their duties towards God or their neighbours, (much leſſe to their wiues) than brute beaſts, carnal infidels, prophane atheiſts, the murderers of thēſelues & of their own poſterity. Oh fearful danger that hangeth ouer your heads whō neither the lawes of God can compel to learne their duties, or men inſtruct them to amend their liues. But you my beloued, who are guiltles in this point are the bleſſed of the Lord, & forſake not your carefulnes alredy begū, that you looſe not your reward. Thirdly, by this praier we obſerue the duties of wiues or women in families, namely, that they ſhuld be peaceable thēſelues, for if they ſeeke peace they muſt enſue peace, and if their ioy conſiſt in the quietnes of the family, they muſt be carefull they breake not the vnity. If like Iſmael, their hands be againſt all, the hands of all vvill be againſt them, if they will bee the louing turtles, they muſt not bee the chattering pies, if they be the vines, their fruit muſt be grapes, & out of grapes commeth wine, & wine reioiceth the hart of man, ſo women muſt reioyce their husbands and families. Some women wil neuer be at reſt til they beare rule, & wil ſay their husbands loue them not, except for their ſakes they will diſplace their ſeruants, fall out with their neighbours, enuy their friends, and in all things follow their mindes: ſuch men giue not peace, to their wiues, but ſwoords to ſlay themſelues with all. The harkening ouer much to womens counſell, old Adam and wee his poſterity may for euer lament, yet godly men may heare their godly wiues, remembring alway themſelues to be the head & the choiſe to reſt in them eyther to lyke or diſlike their counſell. And they anſwered. This is the anſwere of theſe

women to the counſel & bleſſing of their mother in law, wherin they refuſe to returne, & promiſe to go with her to her own people, as if they ſhould ſaye, wee are rather bound vnto thee, thē to our own mothers, & for thy ſake whoſe godly conuerſatiō we know, are we drawn in loue with the whole people: ſo that in theſe words they teſtifie their louing affection to their mother, their deſire to be with her among her people, and the cauſe vndoutedly to be her godly & wiſe conuerſation with thē in the land of Moab. Wher we note the duty of al the faithful, which is, ſo to walke that other by their good example may bee drawne to loue the trueth. For ſurely theſe women liked wel of the religiō of Naomi, but much better of her conuerſation, as a thing they better vnderſtoode then the other. For this point, the▪ Apoſtle warneth that wee walke in wiſedome becauſe of them that are without.Col. 4.5. 1. Pe. 1.12 And Peter ſayth to the diſperſed Iewes of his time, that they muſt haue a good conuerſation among the gentils, inſomuch as their enemies might haue no occaſion to ſpeake againſt them. And our ſauior ſayth, Let your light ſo ſhine before men that they may ſee your good works,Luk. 8.16 & glorifie your father which is in heauen. For as the vnbeleeuing husband may be wonne by the godly behauiour of the beleeuing wife; ſo many infidells & carnall perſons, are ſooner drawne to the Lord by the works which they ſee, then by the words which they heare. Seeing, this is plaine by the word of god, where ſhal I beginne to complaine of this our vnhappy age, wherein are but few talkers of God his word, but much fewer walkers, when the Goſpell of Chriſt is made the cloake of wickednes? Oh how grieuouſly is the Church of God rent in ſunder by daily diſquietnes, inſomuch as there is no peace amōg vs. Can the infidells & papiſts ſay of vs, as old Emor ſaid of Iacob & his family, Theſe men are mē of peace, therfore let vs be circumciſed with them? What peace is ther left in the Church of God? Truly we are like vnto a tree,Ge. 34.21 we agree all in the body of religiō, but as the branches ſpred themſelues an hundred wayes, ſo in our indifferenteſt pointes of religion there is little or no vnitie. There is no care had of giuing offences vnto the weake, there

is no conſcience to ſtaie the ſlaunder of the Goſpell, Oh how grieuous is it, that many nowe a daies will defende their diſſimulation, by ſaying, Take heed to our wordes, and not to our deedes: liue as we ſaie, and not as we do, making Chriſtianitie like the profeſſion of phariſies, which ſaie and doo not. Eſteeming of religion lyke the occupation of a Smith,Math. 23 wherein one is diſcharged by blowing, and another by beating: ſo theſe thinke, if they can blowe out any good wordes, and bee able to cry, the Goſpell, the Goſpell, the preachers, the preachers, and to ſaie vnto Chriſt,Luk. 13 26, 27 Thou haſt propheſied in our ſtreets, and we haue eaten in thy preſence, they are right good chriſtians. But the Lord ſhall ſaie vnto them, Depart from me ye workers of iniquitie, I knowe you not. Yet let vs bee warned by the examples of the godly, the exhortations of the Scripture,1. Cor. 1 30. and the motions of God his ſpirite in our hearts, that ſeeing Chriſt is our wiſedome, let vs walke in wiſedome, or elſe we dwell not in Chriſt: ſeeing Chriſt is our light, let vs ſhine forth in holy conuerſation, & ſeeing the world is our enemie, which dayly lyeth in wait to diſcredit our profeſsion, let vs adorne the Goſpell wee profeſſe,Ioh. 13.36 eyther make the tree good, and the fruite good, or the tree euill and the fruit euill, caſt awaie this counterfeit holyneſſe, which is double iniquitie, let vs confeſſe with the mouth vnto ſaluation, beleeue in the heart to iuſtification, and practiſe in lyfe vnto ſanctification, and let euerie one that calleth on the name of the Lorde, departe from iniquitie. Thus much for the Daughters aunſwere, Nowe to the mothers replie in the nexte verſe.
               
                  But Naomi. In this verſe and in the two next following, Naomi confirmeth her counſell by forcible reaſons, taken from their ſecond marryages, and ſtudying more for theyr good than her owne. The firſt reaſon is, that ſhee hath no mo ſonnes eyther borne or vnborne, to bee their husbandes: for by the lawe one brother being dead without iſſue, the next was to marrie his wife, and to raiſe vp ſeede to his brother. They knewe ſhee had no mo children alreadie borne, and ſhee proueth that ſhee is out of hope to haue anie mo, by her ovvne

age, ſhe is too old to marry & therfore to beare children, ſo that the force of this reaſon is to perſwade them to go back againe, that they might marry at home, for ſhe knew not how to beſtowe them in her owne Countrey. In the which words thus taking a reaſon frō their marriage, ſhe noteth the duetye of younger widdowes and women, which is to marry and to beare mo children, and in her ſelfe perſuading them vnto it, ſhee noteth the duetie of godly parents, which is to deale priuatly with them for their publique commodity. For the apoſtle Paul willeth the ſelfe ſame thing, that the younger widdowes marry and bring foorth mo children, as the moſt acceptable condition for their fruitfull dayes,1. Tim. 5 14. and a neceſſary duety for repleniſhing the Church. But theſe perſons muſt not ſo marry for wantonnes, as if they minded nothing but procreation of children, but they muſt ioyne with it all Chriſtian obedience to the aduiſe of their husbands: ſecondly they muſt be carefull to bring vp their children in the feare and nurture of the Lord: thirdly, this muſt bee the end of their mariage and childbirth, that they may the more deuoutly giue themſelues to the worſhip of God, and by their children to increaſe the number of the faythfull. For it is better to be barren then to bring forth children to the deuill, which they do that mind nothing leſſe then their carefull education, and Chriſtian inſtruction; yea, it is more excellent to bee a religous widdow then a prophane maried wife. But ſome will ſay that ſecond mariages are not lawful at all, becauſe Paul willeth that ſuch widowes ſhould not bee choſen into the number of church ſeruants:1. Tim. 5.9. and the holy ghoſt giueth ſuch commendation of Anna becauſe ſhee neuer married,Luk. 2.36 though ſhee were left a widdow very young: moreouer, the counſell of Paul is that if they bee loſed from husbands or wiues,1. Cor. 7 27 they ſhould not ſeeke to beioyned vnto them. Vnto all which I anſwere with the ſame Paul, That a woman ſo ſoone as ſhee is looſed from her husband, or ſo ſoone as her husband is dead,Rom. 7.2. ſhee is at liberty to marry with whom ſhe will, onely in the Lorde. Anna is commended more for her religion them her

chaſtity, And Paul his counſell is to them that could forbeare in thoſe dayes of perſecution. But to come to Naomi, ſhee ſaith ſhee is to old to marry, therefore it ſeemeth, though ſecond mariages bee good for young women, yet they are not lawfull for the old. To this I anſwere, her meaning is not that it is ſimplie vnlawfull for her to marry, but that it ſhould not profit her in regard of child bearing: men deſire young and fruitfull women, not old and barren, & her purpoſe is to perſuade her daughters, that ſhe neither had, nor coulde haue anye more children for them, therefore in the next verſe ſhe addeth, If I hoped, or If I were this night with an husband: But in my iudgment,Non certū
                   I ſee no reaſonable cauſe why old women (eſpecially) ſhuld marry, how ſoeuer others may be contrarye minded, my reaſons are theſe: Firſt, I reade it not practiſed by any body in the ſcripture, I meane ſuch old women as in their owne conſciences are perſuaded they are paſt child bearing. Secondly, they breake the greateſt conſideration in marriage: they vndertake it for luſt and not for children, for marriage was not ordained for the luſt of the mind, but the neceſſity of the body, to withdraw it from ſinne, Now their withered bodies cannot accompliſhe the deſire of theyr carnall mindes. Thirdly, it bringeth great inconuenience with it: if they marry with a young man there is no equalitie, as anone ſhall bee proued, if with old men like themſelues, what comfort can they miniſter vnto them. Laſtly, ſuch mariages are more for wealth then woman or neceſſitie. Yet this is but my poore iudgment, if anie doubt of it let them examine my reaſons, if they bee waighty, let them receiue them, if light, amend them. If any ſay they marry for comfort, as they can ſay nothing els, I demaund why poore women haue not this comfort as well as the rich, I ſee ſeldome any poore widowes maried, but the wealthy ſo ſoone as eyther honeſty or modeſty will ſuffer them: Againe, comfort is no ſufficient cauſe for marriage, becauſe it may bee had without marriage, but children cannot. It is the duety of married folks with their mutuall loue to comfort one another,

but not a cauſe that ought to conſtraine to mariage. The Eunuch wanteth comfort, yet who thinketh ſuch a perſon fit for marriage: a continent perſon, which as Chriſt ſayth hath made himſelf chaſt for the kingdome of God, vvanteth comfort, yet he ſhould ſinne greiuouſly if he married for comfort: let lawfull things be ioyned with expedient, and I thinke olde women will neuer marrie.
               
                  Yea if I had This is the ſecond reaſon wherewith ſhe perſuadeth her daughters to turne backe againe, namely, graunt ſhe had ſonnes new borne, yet it were too long for them to tarry till they were growen vp and fit for marriage, yea, then they would bee paſt children, alſo they ſhould loſe the ſeaſon of their youth, and ſo ſhould reape no harueſt of their daies: there would be no agreement in yeares betweene them, when they ſhould be as a withered ſtubbe, and the young men as greene oliues. Where we note, that by the iudgment of this godly Naomi, there muſt bee an agreement in yeeres betweene the parties that ſhal be married, for ſhe ſaith, would ve be deferred for them, from taking any husbandes? nay my daughters: by the which wordes ſhee ſignifieth that it would be no fit marriage that one ſhould be ſo old and the other ſo young. The Lord created Adam and Heuah in one day, not only that marriage ſhould not bee deferred too long, but alſo becauſe their age ſhould be alike, but if any be the elder, let it bee the man. In the planting or gardens, they get the youngeſt impes, for the continuance and equality of the fruiete: they will not digge vp an olde tree, and plant him in a orchard of tender impes, euen ſo muſt it be in marriage, for the matrimony of olde men and young women, is like Ioſephes partie coloured coate, which cauſed iealouſie in his brethren: for, as, that was a ſigne of loue in his father, ſo this is a token of fondnes in a husband. But moſt vnſeemely is the marriage of young men and old women, which a godly preacher in our daies cōpared to the grafting of a young head vpon an olde payre of ſhoulders: & I maye compare it to the mixture of oyle and water, the which are quite againſt the nature of all medecines. And euen the brute beaſtes and the birdes, as wee reade

of the turtles, the harts, & the Elephants, condemn herein the folly of mankinde, which from their youth chooſe their mate, and beeing dead refuſe another, fearing inequalitie of age and nature. Both theſe kind of matches are neither begun in the Lord, continued in nature, or ſatiſfie the deſire of both parties, but breake out into impatient iealouſie or filthie adulterie, thinking euerie daie a yeere till the eldeſt partie bee dead. Oh vnſeemely and vnfriendly behauiour towards thoſe to whom they haue bound themſelues to loue and liue together, beeing the onely cauſe of the breach of fidelitie, curſed diſcord mutuall enuie, and euerlaſting miſerie.
               Secondly by this we note, that it is the dutie of parents in time to prouide for their children, if they be willing to it,Gen. 24.1. ſome godly and fit marryage. So did Abraham for Iſaac his ſonne, ſo did Iſaac and Rebecca for Iacob theyr ſonne,Exo. 2.21. ſo did Iethro for his daughter Zipporah. The neglect of this dutie in parents, is the cauſe that ſo many children match contrarie to their mindes, euen to theyr owne vndoing. And then they crie out towne and countrie, My ſonne or my daughter hath marryed agaynſt my minde, when as themſelues are in the onely faulte: then they puniſh them by keeping awaie their portion: ſo, as before by their neglygence they ſought their diſhoneſtie, nowe by their wilfulneſſe they bring them to perpetuall beggerie. I defend not the raſh and headlong marryages agaynſt parents conſents, eſpecially where godly parents are, and ſurely I feare there are but few in England that euer maried ſo, but they procured the curſe on themſelues, and haue often (though too late) repented their wilfull & vngodly marryage. But yet beloued; bee warned, if you deſire the diſcharge of your owne conſciences, or the ſafegard of your children, deale like parents with them, & they will performe like children to you: the Lorde puniſheth your negligence with their diſobedience: you ſinned firſt, and they followed your ſteps, forgiue them their offence, and receiue them to fauour againe, and the Lorde wyll likewiſe pardon your tranſgreſſion, and bleſſe your poſteritie with more dutifull obedience to you.
               
                  But this, Now when ſhe had perſwaded her daughters

to returne, leaſt they ſhoulde thinke ſhee careth not for them, & was willing to be rid of their companie, as thoſe that were troubleſome and burdenous vnto her, ſhee addeth this clauſe in the end of this verſe. Wherein ſhe teſtifieth her care for them, and her patience to the Lord. Her care for them when ſhe ſayth, It grieueth me much more for your ſake than for mine owne: the death of my huſband & loſſe of my children grieue me, but not ſo much as this, that now either I muſt departe from you, or elſe with your companie indanger your ſafetie, I coulde not but ſorrowe for the dead, yet I am more grieued for you poore deſtitute widowes: I haue loſt their companie for a while, til I meet them againe in God his kingdome, but now we depart, I to the Lords people, & you to Infidels, and wee ſhall bee ſeparated for euer. Would God that I coulde ſo promiſe you proſperitie with mee, that ſo you might receiue the peace of your ſoules. Thus and ſuch like ſhe vttereth in theſe wordes for her owne excuſe & theyr comfort.
               Where wee are firſt giuen to vnderſtand, how hardly true friendſhip is separated, yea though ſome parties are indangered thereby. Naomi would haue her daughters departe, they weepe at it and ſhee is ſorrow full: inſomuch as either partie ſtriueth who ſhall receiue the worſt. The mother counſelleth their good, and the daughters promiſe hers: ſhee would haue them returne, and liue at reſt in the armes of ſome louing husbands, but they had rather trauell than ſhe ſhould go alone, And this telleth vs that true friendſhippe is not to receiue good of other, but to doo good vnto other. Chooſe thy friend, that when hee is in heauineſſe thou mayſt comfort him, when hee is hungrie thou mayeſt feed him, when hee is caſt downe, thou mayeſt raiſe him vp: and finally, when hee wanteth make thou a ſupplie. This is godly friendſhip, like Ionathans and Dauids. If anie chooſe friendes for other reſpects, their friendſhip is carnall, and not ſpirituall, momentanie, and not euerlaſting, like the ſtanding pooles which drie vp in ſummer, not like the running ſtreames which indure continually.
               
                  Secondly, by this we note that one miſery commeth not alone, for warres cauſe death, dearth, enuie, and robberyes, ſicknes bringeth paine to the partyes, and ſorrow to their friends: euen ſo death doth not onely bring ſorrow for the dead, but griefe for the liuing, as Naomi ſayth, it greiueth mee much more for your ſakes. There is none that die but ſome ſhall want them, many friends comfortles, many chrldren harbourles, many ſeruants maiſterles, and many creditouers moneyleſſe by the death of men, I will ſay nothing, that the godly may and ought to mourne for their friends that are dead, as Abraham for Sara,1. The. 4 13. Iacob for Rahel, the Iebuſites for Saul, Mary and Martha for Lazarus: and the Apoſtle willeth vs to mourne, but with this clauſe, not as men without hope. Therefore the vſe of this doctrine is, with pacient & brotherly loue to beare with the weaknes of thē which ſeem in our conceipts to weepe more for their husbands and wiues, children and friends, than we thinke needfull. It is their weakenes, and what knowe we, if the like burthen were on our backs that we ſhould not be preſſed downe vnder it like them? Let vs therefore conſider with our ſelues leaſt wee alſo bee tempted, and helpe them with brotherly kindnes, not increſe it with daily murmurings: that which is to day their sinne, to morrowe may bee our wickednes.
               
                  But the hand. In thoſe wordes ſhe gathereth patience for the remedy of her own griefe, & ſheweth howſoeuer ſhe is afflicted, yet ſhe is not ignorant, that as the ſhowers come from the cloudes, ſo her afflictions from the Lord: his hand that wrought her felicity, hath alſo brought her to miſery, her eaſe is her patience, her weakenes is her ſorrow, her comfort, that God with whom is mercy hath wounded her heart.
               The hand of the Lord is taken in the ſcriptures many wayes, but generally it ſignifieth the meanes whereby he accompliſheth his counſell, and is referred eyther to his mercy and fauour; as when it is ſaid, the hand of the Lord was with Iohn Baptiſt,Luk. 1.66 or els to his iudgements, puniſhement or chaſtiſement, ſo the hand of the Lord was

againſt the Iſraelites when they had forſaken him and ſerued Baalim.Iud. 2, 15 So when the Arke of God was in the houſe of Dagon the god or idoll of the Philiſtines, the Lorde ouerthrewe their god, cut of his hands and head, and ſmote the Prieſts with Emerods, then they confeſſed the hand of God to be ſore againſt them:1. Sam. 5.7. ſo in this place it is taken for his chaſtiſement or correctiō vpon Naomi. Out of the which we note many profitable doctrines.
               Firſt, that all our afflictions come from the Lord, that he might chaſtiſe his owne and confounde the vngodly. Reade but the 34. & 36 Chapter of Iob; moſt excellently intreating of this matter, wherein is ſhewed that neyther the godly eſcape, nor the wicked goe ſcot-free. This is the confeſſion of Moſes, to terrifie the Iſraelites,Deut. 31 18 of Ioſuah to keepe them in obedience, and of Dauid a man more exerciſed in trouble then all the world beſide.Ioſ. 24, 20 This muſt we accompt with ourſelues in all our miſeries,Pſal. 1 19 71 we are robbed by theeues, ſpoiled by murtherers, ſtroke by bruite beaſtes, reproched by ſlaunderers, euill intreated by the worlde, hurte by our enemies, ſuſtaine the loſſe of our goodes, the daunger of our health, and are oppreſſed with ſickeneſſe: ſurely in all theſe thinges ſay; The Lorde gaue, and the Lorde hath taken away, euen as it hath pleaſed the Lorde, ſo commeth thinges to paſſe. But men will ſay, we knowe it well ynough alreadie, & we confeſſe it. And doe you knowe and confeſſe, and will you not practiſe? A man being ſicke, at the beginning neuer thinketh on the Lorde, but poſteth to the Phyſition for counſell, without crauing the forgiueneſſe of his ſinnes, the cauſe of his ſickneſſe: yet you ſay, God hath ſent it and laide vpon vs, as if the Lorde ſendeth ſickeneſſe to helpe the Phyſition to money; for with him you agree for his paynes and cunnning, but with the Lorde you agree not for your owne paynes which you endure. But you will ſay, we find eaſe by medicines, & our ſickeneſſe is a bated; I aunſwere, ſo the Lord ſuffreth witches and coniurers, to tell them that come vnto thē, the things they deſire, yet you will not ſay, they are guiltleſſe. I ſpeake nothing againſt the excellent and commendable profeſſion of Phyſicke, but rather for the commendation

of it, ſeeing God ſo accepteth it, as that thereby he ſeemeth to ſalue vp the ſinnes of many, doing away their paynes, and alſo to giue them longer time of repentance. But this I wiſh both in this & in all other miſeries of mankinde: that firſt we purge our conſciences from notorious crimes, and then the Lorde will ſtay his hande from ſtriking our hearts from wauering, our goodes from waſting, our bodies from pining, and our ſoules from euerlaſting dying.
               Secondly, by this we note, whence it commeth, that the godly are ſo patient in all their tribulations; euen frō this conſideration, that the Lordes hand afflicteth them. This is worthie to bee noted, in the example of Dauid, when Shemei curſed him,2. Sam. 16.10.11.12.13. Abiſhai ſtanding by, wiſheth Dauid to puniſhe him: but Dauid anſwereth him, what haue I to doe with you yee ſonnes of Zeruiah, hee curſeth, becauſe the Lorde hath bidden him to curſe me: as if he had ſayde, I may puniſh the Lord as wel as Shemei. The very like did Iob aunſwere his wife, when ſhe would haue him curſe God and dye. Thou ſpeakeſt like a fooliſh woman,Iob. 2.10. what? ſhall we receiue good at the hands of God and not euill: as if he had ſayd, wee are bounde to receiue euill at the hand of God, as well as good: & if we receiue the one with bleſſing, let vs not curſe him for the other. This was it that made the Apoſtles to reioyce that they were accompted worthy to ſuffer for the name of Chriſt: and this muſt ſincke into our ignoraunt and rebellious heartes,Act. 4.3. that we may learne at the firſt to humble our ſelues, leaſt as wee now ſuffer for ſinne, ſo anone we be puniſhed for impatiencie. The patient abiding of the righteous, auaileth much in the ſight of the Lorde: men thinke they be forgotten, if they bee a little afflicted, and crie out like deſperate perſons, Lord, Lord, but they neuer pray for patience, but all for deliuerance. Oh howe excellent is this example of Naomi, which being in many miſeries in a ſtraunge countrey, hauing buried husbandes and ſonnes, being now to departe from her acquaintaunce, to take a tedious iourney into her owne countrey, poore, wearie and deſolate, yet all her woordes are theſe: The hand of the Lorde is gone out

againſt mee: as if ſhe had ſaid, hee that gaue them tooke them, and he that tooke them, lefte me patience. Thus muſt we ſtay our mindes on the worke of the Lorde, as the Arke was ſtayed by the Prieſtes in the middeſt of the riuer Iordan, which made the waters to flie backe,Ioſ. 3.16.17. till all the children of Iſrael were paſſed thorow: euen ſo the the floudes of great troubles ſhall not ouerthrowe vs, if we ſtay our minds on the hand of the Lorde, and ſafely eſcape the dangerous deſtruction of worldly affliction.
               
                  Then they lift. Now cōmeth the effect of this cōmunication, wherein is ſhewed how ſorrowfully theſe daughters tooke it, & yet diuerſly minded, for Horpah notwithſtanding her gentle proffers to her mother in law, her bitter teares & pitiful lamenting, yet ſhe taketh her leaue with a ſweet kiſſe, & returneth back to her idolatrous friends. Naomi vſed no perſwaſions but worldly reaſons, taken from marriage, to perſwade thē both: ſhe ſeeth her ſiſter remaine conſtant, & ſhe that euen nowe for the loue of people & mother in law would goe as far as the fartheſt, now for the cogitation of a heathē husband, forſaketh both God, people, mother and ſiſter. Who would haue thought that Horpah which bid her friends farewell, her countrey adieu, her kindred forſake, & idolatry abhorre, would thus cowardly (as I may tearme it) flie back again in hope of a husband. But yet we ſee ſhe doeth, and out of her example we may note many thinges.
               Firſt, that the world & carnal reaſons are feareful hinderances vnto vs in Religion. We ſee this woman, how doth ſhe fall away from God, his people, all the Church that ſhe knewe, her mother and ſiſter? We knowe, how many being ſent for to the great Mans ſupper; which is the Lorde, they excuſed their abſence, one for his farme, another for his oxen, another for his wife,Iam. 4.4. as Horpah doeth for her husbande: What ſhall I ſay? the loue of the worlde is the hatred of God: and Iohn ſaith,Ioh. 2.15. Loue not the world, nor the thinges of the world, for he that loueth the worlde, the loue of the Father is not in him. And Chriſt ſayth, Whoſoeuer commeth to me and hateth not father and mother, and wife and children,Luk. 19.26. is not worthie of mee. Where are nowe our naturalles, that woulde be profeſſors, but their friends will not let them,

they woulde be Chriſtians, but their wiues will not agree to them, this yeere, they will be worldlings, and the next yeere when they haue ouercome their buſineſſe, if they haue any leaſure they will heare the word preached; Oh daungerous delayes of ſubtill Sathan, ſtudying by the worlde, to drawe men from God, they lye like ſluggardes; in winter it is too cold, in ſommer it is too hotte to worke, ſo they in their youth, will be religious when they are olde, beeing in age when they bee riche, being rich, they waxe harder and harder, and ſo continue till the day of their damnation.
               Secondly, by this we may gather howe farre an hypocrite or an infidell may goe in Religion. Horpah forſaketh her owne people, for the loue of God his people, ſhe weepeth and cryeth, when it is but mentioned vnto her that ſhee woulde departe, ſhee trauaileth on the way towardes the countrey▪ of God his people; and in this her iourney, for a fewe worldly reaſons, ſhe turneth backe againe, though as it may ſeeme with a bitter heart. Euen ſo hypocrites may forſake the worlde and their friendes, ioyne themſelues to God and his people, trauaile and profite in Religion towardes the heauenly Ieruſalem, bee readie to weepe with them that weepe, and lament with them that lament: and in any good action, ſet his foote as farre forth as the beſt: yet, ſome occaſion giuen, eyther for profite or pleaſure; feare or daunger, ſodainely turneth ſayle, and commeth to the worlde againe.Mar. 4.17 18. Euen ſo ſayth our Sauiour of the ſeede, that is ſowen in the 2. and 3. grounde, it taketh roote, it ſpringeth,Ioh. 6.66. and groweth vp, but ſodainely the heate of perſecution ariſeth, or offence taken at the doctrine, which is taught them, or the cares of this life & deceitfulneſſe of riches choake them. By this we learne what to thinke of our ſofte hearted Chriſtians, many among vs, that will diligently heare, and wring out teares from their moiſtened braine, at the hearing of God his iudgementes thundered and threatned by the Preacher: yet, being gone, will make no conſcience of oathes, carding, dicing, tabling, gaming for their neighbors mony, going abroad on the ſabboth day to feaſts, and beeing ſharply

reprooued for it, then farewell Religion and profeſſion alſo.
               Thirdely, by this we gather what exceeding kindnes an heathen, an Atheiſt or an infidell, may ſhew to them that feare God: Horpah for the loue of godly Naomi, goeth with her on the way, weepeth and kiſſeth at their departure, ſo great loue did ſhe beare to her mother in lawe, that had it not bene for one thing, ſhee had gone thorough with her to her owne people; So wee may ſee many among vs ſpeake well of Religion, yet they will not go ſo farre as Bethlehem for it, that is, they will wiſh they had a preacher, yet they will hardly, eyther on the Sabboth day or weeke daye, ſtirre one foote from their owne places, to heare a Sermon, ſo colde is their deuotion: but if they giue a poore man a meale of meate, or lende him a little money at his neede, or receiue a Preacher for a night, then he is the onely man in the Countrey. But oh Lorde, open their eyes, that they may ſee their curteſie is but light, in regard of their duetie: if for their brethren they would die, it were but their duetie, howe little is it then? that they giue them meat. But they woulde knowe of vs what is the way to be ſaued;Mat. 19.22
                        •
                     
                   I aunſwere, ſo woulde the young man in the Goſpell, yet when Chriſt tolde him, he woulde not doe it, but went away ſorrowing, euen ſo theſe men may outwardly and inwardly in ſome meaſure profeſſe kindeneſſe and humilitie to be inſtructed, but alaſſe their profeſſion is far from true feeling of Chriſtian religion.
               Laſtly, by this verſe we note that as Horpah and her companions are carnally minded, ſo Ruth and her fellowes are ſpiritually minded, though one be ouerthrowen with worldly reaſons, yet the other remaineth inuincible in her firſt pretended purpoſe. So that here is an image of a Congregation, where all heare, and yet there is a difference of hearing in one and the ſame Company: one parte with profite, another with diſprofite, one to their health, another to their ſickeneſſe, to ſome the ſauour of life vnto life, to other, the ſauour of death vnto death. Yet bleſſed be God, that hath no earth ſo barren, but it bringeth forth ſome fruite, no people ſo rude, but

there are ſome ſanctified perſons among them, which will not be drawne away till death: no battell ſo cruell, but ſome eſcape with life. If the Phariſes will not beleeue in Chriſt,Act. 17.34. yet the poore people that knowe not the lawe will receiue him for the Meſſiah. Among the mockers at Athens, Paul receiued ſome fruite of his labours, and the Goſpell was neuer preached in any countrey, but it gayned ſome. This teacheth vs to follow the example of Ruth and we ſhall haue the rewarde of Ruth: ſticke to the Lorde, and to the faithfull, with purpoſe of heart, let not the vaine glittering pleaſure, of pleaſaunt paſtime or profite, drawe vs from the hope of our euerlaſting bleſſedneſſe. The time is but ſhorte wee haue to ſpende, the labour eaſie if we willingly endure it, the profite euerlaſting if we continue to the ende. This is the victorie that ouercommeth the world,1. Ioh: 5.4 euen our Faith: for to him that beleeueth are all thinges posſible: Let vs therefore heare the worde with diligence, that our fayth may be ſtrengthened, beleeue with aſſurance, that our ſoules may be iuſtified, and ſtand faſt in the tryall of this world, that bodie and ſoule may be crowned: for bleſſed are they that endure to the ende, And thus much of this conference or communication, and the effecte thereof. Novve let vs giue thankes to God for that vvhich hath bene ſpoken.
            
            
               The thirde Lecture.
               
                  
                     Ruth. cap. 1. Verſ. 15.16.17.
                     
                        15. And Naomi ſaide, beholde, thy ſiſter in lawe is gone backe to her people and to her gods, returne thou after thy ſiſter in lawe.
                     
                        16. And Ruth anſwered, intreate me not to leaue thee, nor to depart from thee, for whither thou goeſt I will goe, and where thou dwelleſt I will dwell, thy people ſhall be my people, and thy God my God.
                     
                        17. Where thou dyeſt, will I dye, and there will I be buried, the Lord do ſo vnto me and more alſo, if ought but death

departe thee and me.
                  
               
               
                  IN theſe wordes the holy Ghoſt declareth vnto vs, the conference had betweene Naomi and Ruth; after the departure of Horpah, wherein Naomi ceaſeth not throughly to trie and examine the minde of Ruth, for what cauſe ſhee woulde goe with her; the wordes containe in them 2. partes. The firſt is the perſwaſion of Naomi in the 15. verſe, to make Ruth to returne by the example of her ſiſter. The ſecond is the anſwere of Ruth, in the two next verſes, conſiſting of two partes: the firſt is the petition ſhee maketh to her mother, in theſe words, Intreat me not to leaue thee, &c.: which ſhe amplifieth by the reſolution of her minde in the next wordes. Firſt, that for her life ſhe would dvvell vvith her, and goe vvith her, Secondly for her profesſion, her people and God ſhoulde be Naomies. Thirdly for her death, that ſhe vvould die and be buried vvith her. The laſt part of this aunſvvere of Ruth, is the confirmation of it by an oth, in theſe wordes; the Lorde doe ſo vnto me, and more alſo, if ought but death depart thee and me.
               
               
                  Beholde thy ſiſter is returned; Novv Naomi goeth forward to deale with Ruth alone, for the Caſtle may ſeeme almoſt wonne, where one halfe of the ſouldiers are ouercome; the vnitie betweene theſe two ſiſters being brokē, and Horpah being departed, what was poore Ruth able to doe alone, ſurely this was a greater diſcouragement vnto her then any ſhe had yet, namely; that her ſiſter being departed, ſhee ſhould lay before her her ſiſters example to drawe her likewiſe to fall. And truely thus the Spirite of God dealeth moſt times,Mar▪ 10:13. with thoſe that labour to come vnto him, ſetting ſome in the way like the Diſciples which forbadde young children to come vnto Chriſt, and as the preaſe of people,Mar. 3.4.5 kept the poore man diſeaſed of the palſy from comming to our Sauiour: euen ſo many ſcandals, ſtumbling▪ blockes, lettes, interruptions and hinderances come between the godly & Chriſt, as did betweene Naomi and Ruth.
               But here we note, that the examples of our kindred, and eſpecially of thoſe that ſeemed any thing in Religion,

are dangerous argumentes to drawe vs from Chriſt. Wee ſee in this place Naomi taketh not example of one vngodly ſiſter to draw away the other: which when our Sauiour forelawe, he gaue this commaundement, that for his ſake we muſt forſake both father and mother,Mat. 10.34, 35. brother and ſiſter, wife & children, or elſe we are not worthie of him.Luc. 9. 60, And in another place, one deſiring of him but a little ſpace to burie his father, he ſaide vnto him, let the dead burie their dead. This is a verie profitable doctrine for theſe dayes, wherein men are thus diſcouraged from Religion, for feare of their friendes, for now Satan ſtirreth vp one brother againſt another, to hinder them from hearing the ſauing worde of God, now they crie out againſt vs, Are you wiſer then your forefathers? Hath not all thy friendes before thee beleeued on this wife? And wilt thou be ſingular? And ſurely beloued, we knowe it is the greateſt argument, that popiſh atheiſts haue, their aunceſtours, fathers & mothers, their maſters and miſtreſſes, haue miſliked this preaching, and theſe new doctrines, wherein many repoſe their greateſt felicitie, and God ſend vs (ſaye they) to liue no worſe then they did, and to die no more bleſſed then they. But woulde you ſo rather be followers of your popiſh and ignoraunt predeceſſours, then of the doctrine of Chriſt and his Apoſtles reueiled in his worde: this is to builde your ſelues vpon another foundation, which when the fire commeth, will vtterly conſume it. But they ſay, are all our predeceſſours damned which did as we doe? to whome I may well aunſwere, How doe you know that all your fathers were of your mindes, but wee are not in God his place, to iudge and araigne them: but ſay with the Apoſtle, The time of this ignoraunce did not God regard, but nowe hee admoniſheth all men euery where to repent: Becauſe hee hath appointed a day to iudge the world in righteouſneſſe.Act. 17.30.31 So that if God ſeeme not to regarde it, why ſhoulde we ſtande vpon it. And ſeeing now the trumpet of the Goſpell is ſounded by the Lordes Miniſters, let vs not with Marie lament ouer the graues of the dead: But leauing them at their reſt, trudge & trauaile to the mount of the Lord, that of him

we may freely receiue that which many kings & prophetes could neuer obtain.Mat. 17.6. Though Moſes went not into the land of Canaan, yet he ſaw it, ſo it may be the Lord let our predeceſſors ſee the light of ye goſpel, though they could not inioy it. But as Peter & Iohn wer with Chriſt whē he was trāſfigured & ſaw his kingdom, yet could not enioy the continuall preſence of his glory, but beeing warned of Chriſt, tolde it to no man: ſo many godly in time of darkneſſe not onely ſaw but imbraced the trueth, which it may be is forgotten of their graceles poſterity. Let the parents eate the ſowre grapes, ſhal the childrens teeth be ſet an edge? if they made cakes to the hoſt of heauen, ſhal we worſhip the ſun & the moone? what diſcredite is it to a blinde father that hath a ſon well ſighted? no more is it to idolaters, whoſe children are the appointed heires of the lande of Canaan. Let vs abide with him that hath the wordes of eternall life;Ioh. 6:68 & as the wealth of our parentes is deare vnto vs, yet many thouſand times more dearer is the health of our ſoules.
               Secondly by this we note, that to ſticke by our frendes & to go with them from the Lord, is to commit idolatry, for Naomi ſaith, Thy ſiſter is gone to her people, and to her Gods: as if ſhe had ſaid, indeed for kindredsſake ſhe is gone backe, but it is vnto idols & falſe Gods. Yea & more alſo, vnto deuilles, this is a worthy leſſon for our naturals to learne, who will forſake goſpel, church, prayer & preaching, ſome for the loue of their wiues to keepe them company at home, when God calleth for them in one congregation or other, ſome their idolatrous frendes which are notable recuſants, yet becauſe they ſhould thinke well of thē, they will falſifie their faith to the Lorde & be vniuſt in his worke, that they may pleaſe thē with their preſent company: ſome are hindred by their profite, ſome by vnlawfull gaming, and many by bare idlenes. Thus men make gods, ſome of their people, ſome of their wiues, ſome of their popiſhe frends, ſome of their profit, ſome of their pleaſures, and ſome of their idlenes, & few or none are to be found, that are both able & willing to follow Chriſt when he calleth thē,Luc. 19.
                        •
                     .6. as litle Zacheus did, but euery one hath ſome excuſe to keep them from the Lords ſupper, who ſhal neuer taſt of his heauenly pleaſures, ſeeing they mind earthly things, making their

glory their ſhame, their bely their God, let their end be damnation. But oh my beloued, let vs be warned by the danger: of others, whē Peter rebuked Chriſt & bid him fauor himſelfe,Mar. 8.23 Chriſt rebuked him & called him ſathan: euē ſo whē our deereſt frendes would haue vs be ſlacke in preaching, & fauour our bodies, come to the church ſeldome & make no toile of it, agree with the moſt in religion, or rather in worldlines, & ſo ſhal we haue fauour, aſpire to the greateſt promotions, for there is greateſt profit, & finally take pleaſure in vnlawfull things, let vs ſay, come behind vs ſathan. For it is not our frend, but our enimy ſathan, that thus alureth vs with the baite of pleaſure, eaſe, and profite, that wee might hang on the hooke of perpetuall perdition. Then ſeeing we haue eſpied his pollicy, diſcouered his deceipt, & tried the diſcommodityes that enſue his obedience, let vs innocent children once burned dread the fire, and as Iacob ſaid by his own ſons Simeon & Leui, My ſoule come not into their habitation, ſo let vs ſay to our dereſt frends when their counſell & a good conſcience cannot ſtand together, better breake the league of frenſhippe betweene vs, then ſuffer the ſhipwark of a pretious & peaceable conſcience. The wiſeſt Salomon by hearkning to his wiues, diſobeyed the Lord, & it coſt him ten tribes of his kingdome: if ſuch greene peeces be deſtroyed, what ſhall become of the rotte & feare:1. Kin. 11.2 therfore if angels from heauen muſt not be heard, much leſſe deuils frō hell drawing vs away from following the trueth by the mouth of our deareſt & neareſt frendes, though it were by your wiues that lye in your boſomes. Therfore let vs take vnto vs the whole armour of God, that we may ſtand faſt in the day of battell: better neuer run, except we obtain the price, better neuer to haue known God or his Goſpell, then now to fall away from him againe.
               
                  But Ruth ſaid, intreat mee not: This is the firſt part of the anſwere of Ruth, to the argument of her mother, & it is her petition with the reaſon of it: wherein ſhe proteſteth that it is better vnto her, not to bee intreated to depart, or once to haue it motioned, or mentioned to go frō hir, for her reſolution is, that neither the troubles or trauailes of life could ſeparate her, neither the ſorrowes of death or deſolation of the graue ſhoulde depriue her of Naomies company, for

ſhe ſaith, Where thou dyeſt will I dye, and there will I be buried. Out of which I obſerue theſe thinges. Firſt, howe the godly behaue themſelues in all tryalls and temptations, namely, that the very thoughts of departing from God and yelding to ſin, are very gall and bitternes vnto them, inſomuch as they ſay with Ruth, intreate me not to leaue thee, that is, neuer ſpeake worde to moue me from hearing God his word, to ouerthrow my faith, to turne me to diſobedience, to periſh my conſcience, to hinder my courſe, or to ſubuert my profeſſion. A notable example hereof is in Eliſha, who was intreated by Eliah as here Ruth is by Naomi, Firſt he bid him tarry at Gilgal till he went to Bethel;2. King. 2.2.3.4.5.6. but Eliſha ſaid, as the Lorde liueth, & as thy ſoule liueth, I will not leaue thee nor depart from thee: then they went to Bethel together, and bid him tary there, for the Lord ſendeth him to Iericho: but Eliſha anſwered, as the Lord liueth & as thy ſoule liueth, I will not leaue thee nor departe from thee; then they went to Iericho, & Eliah bid him tary there till he went to Iericho, and Eliah bid him tarrie there till hee went to meete the Lorde at Iordan. Eliſha aunſwered as he did before: for Eliah foreſee, that if he went not with Eliah, he ſhoulde haue no benefite by his ſeruice, ſo if we abide not the obiections of our friends, the reporches of our enemies, the intiſements of the world, & the perſuaſions of our owne fathers and mothers that are againſt vs in religion, we ſhall looſe al that we haue done before, yea though they ſhoulde ſay as Rabſakeh ſayd to the men of Ezechia. The Lord hath ſent vs to ſpeake vnto you. But many will ſay, if profane worldlings ſhuld diſcourage vs in religiō, & thoſe yt are open contemners ſhuld perſwade vs from it, thē we could abide it, but it goeth nie vs whē our own wiues or husbands, fathers or mothers, brethren & ſiſters, companions & acquaintāce, ſhal try vs ſo narowly. But marke dearly beloued, thou art not alone, Ruth was thus handled by Naomi her deare mother in law, for whoſe ſake ſhe had departed from kindred & country, yet ſhe trieth, moleſteth, & vexeth her; yet by the ſauing grace of God his aſſiſting ſpirit, in the end ſhe acquiteth her ſelfe, like a woman of ſtrength in the Lords quarel: for the Lord for our farther triall doth not only proue vs in the leſt, but in the greateſt afflictions.

The Iſraelits cared but little for the philiſtins, had they not had giants among them, ſo the Lord will bring croſſes like armed men to diſmay vs, that our valor and courage may be knowne, Iob had firſt one herd taken away and then an other, in the end his children cruſhed to death, and then he was ſtrangely viſited in his own body, but hauing only one comfort in al the world left, his wife, ſhe bid him curſe God & die. But ſome ſay, we would willingly be profeſſors, but the preachers themſelues tell vs how we muſt be mortified;2, Cor.5.20 & they cal vs in their ſermons wretches, & curſed creatures, theſe hard words hinder vs, if they ſpoke faire vnto vs & cried mercy,Mar. 8.23 mercy, we would with more dilligence frequent their exerciſe.Mat. 15.23.24 
                  I anſwere, if they ſpeake in God his name whoſe embaſſadours they are, cannot you beare it for his ſake: they are not commō perſons in that place, but ſupply Chriſts roome: now Chriſt called his diſciples a faithles generation, he called Peter ſathan, & a poore woman he called dog, when ſhe came vnto him. How did he deale with king Herod, and with the Phariſees, euery man knoweth, & and are you better then theſe? Paul called the Galathians foliſh, was it not to make them wiſe, that therby he might draw them to the truth, they had forſaken? euen ſo the miniſters of Chriſt muſt handle this rough world, ſetting it out by the titles, that by the name they may geſſe of the nature. If the rich man promiſe peace to his ſoule in the multitude of his poſſeſſions, ſhal not the Lord cal him fool for his labor?Luk. 12.20 if all the world follow the prince that raigneth in the aire, ſhall not we ſay that they bee without God, and ſo without ſaluation? Doth not the Lord chaſten vs in this world yt we ſhuld not be condēned in the world to come? Are not ſeruants contented to bear hard words at the hāds of their maſters, becauſe they receiue wages of them? euen ſo ſuffer God his miniſters to ſpeake the worſt they can of you, yet I aſſure you, there is no faithfull preacher that will ſpeake, ſo baſely of the notableſt wicked perſon that is, but he ſpeaketh & thinketh a thouſand times more baſely of himſelf. Beare with them therefore, you are children & infants in religion, not able to ſpeake, they ſpeake for you to the Lord in as humble manner as may be:1. Pet. 5.5. knowing that the Lord reſiſteth the proud and giueth grace to the humble

and meeke:Luc. 16.18 19 the prodigal ſon by ſpeaking moſt vilely of himſelfe, purchaſed his fathers fauour: Euen ſo theſe hard ſpeeches of our ſelues, and other penitent ſinners, are as faithfull meſſengers to reconcile vs vnto God. Secondly, by this wee note, how we muſt be inabled to encounter or reſiſt the examples of others, that are laid againſt vs to draw vs frō God: euen as Ruth doth in this place. Naomi telleth her, Horpah is turned away, and therefore ſhee muſt alſo. Ruth anſwereth, Where thou dwelleſt I will dwell: as if ſhee had ſaid; if thou turne backe, I will turne backe alſo, but I know thy conſtancy is ſuch as thou wilt neuer yeld, therefore all the examples of my ſlippery ſiſter, and fearefull falawaies in the world ſhal neuer moue me: it is thy conſtancy that I looke vpon & nothing els, which is as a ſafe ſhip for me to ſaile in through the waues of my vnſtedfaſt minde: ſo that by this you perceiue, how ſhe oppoſeth the ſtedfaſtnes of her mother, againſt the backſliding of her ſiſter, depending vpon the ſureſt hold, not vpon a broken ſtaffe. Euen ſo muſt we againſt the examples of vngodly ruffians ſet the examples of ſober minded. Match the world and Chriſt together, what ſhall the world get, If it ſay, be ignorant, the other ſaith if the goſpel be hid it is to them that be loſt: if it ſay folow the ways of thy own hart, the other ſaith, for this thou ſhalt come to iudgment: if the world ſay bee couetous & inrich thy ſelf by gaming, coſning, carding, diſing, buying, & ſelling, the other ſaith, ſuch ſhal not inherit God his kingdome: if the world ſay, ſeeke honor, the church ſaith, it is vanity: if it ſay, eſteem beſt of thy ſelfe, the other ſaith, thinke better of another: if it wiſh thee proſperity, the church ſaith, rather ſuffer aduerſity with God his children, then to enioy the pleaſures of ſin for a ſeaſon. So the fleſh luſteth againſt the ſpirit, and the ſpirit againſt the fleſh: if thou be tempted to inſidelity, remember Abraham that beleeued in hope; vnder hope, and beyond hope: if to incontinency, remember Ioſeph the mirror of chaſtitie: if to impatiency, thinke vpon Iob, if to vniuſt dealing, remember Iacob: if to idlenes, think on the piſmire: if to drunkenneſſe, remember what Dauid did with the water of the well of Bethleem. This is vſual in the ſcripture to exhort by examples, Peter wiſheth godly women to looke vpon Sara her obedience,1. Pet. 3. 6. Iam. 5. 10 Iames willeth the poore in his dayes to take the

prophets for an example of patiēce. Paul exhorteth the Corinthians to liberality,2. Cor.8.23 4. by the example of the Macedonians: euen ſo on the contrary, threatnings are denounced by the example of others, as we may often read in the Goſpel. The Lord ſaith, the Queene of Sheba ſhall riſe in iudgment againſt the nation of the Iewes which came to heare the wiſdome of Salomon, likewiſe he prouoketh them by the exā
                  ple of the publicans & harlots, telling them, they ſhall bee preferred in the kingdome of God,Mat. 25. 1 12 & I thinke there is none ſo ſimple but they know they ought rather to followe the wiſe than the fooliſh virgines. But ſome will ſay, now the world is altogether corrupted, & the moſt part is the worſt part, therfore they muſt needs follow their manners and be defiled. To whom I anſwere, if thou were in a litle bark vpon the greateſt ſea, & ſaweſt a thouſand mighty waues about thee, like huge mountaines, woldeſt thou forſake thy litle barke which is alone, & leap into the middeſt among the waues, becauſe they are many? ſo thou ſhouldeſt worke thy own deſtruction: euē ſo, wilt thou forſake the maners, life, & company of a few godly perſons, with whom is ſafety, to wallow in the millions of worldly men with whom is no peace, but is like the raging ſea yt cannot reſt? ſhalt not thou be toſſed with them, I will not ſay troubled, but euerlaſtingly confounded? I grant we ſhould liue by precept & not by example, but ſeeing we muſt needs ſee the Goſpell, before we beleeue it, let vs looke on the liues of the pureſt & feweſt among vs, & ioine our ſelues to them, as Noah to his arke, that the water flouds of euerlaſting deſtruction ouerwhelme vs not in eternall damnation.
               
                  Thy God. By theſe wordes it may ſeeme that Ruth is not ſo wel grounded in the knowledge of God as ſhe ought to be, in that ſhe dependeth vpon her mother, in ſaying, thy God is my God, as if ſhe had ſaid: if thou worſhip the true God, ſo wil I, if thou be an idolater, ſo wil I, if thou turne backward, ſo will I, if thou go forward, ſo wil I. But I take it far otherwiſe, that theſe words proceed frō a hart fully grounded vpon the truth: as if ſhe had ſaid, I know Naomi, thou wilt neuer worſhip any Gods but the true God, thou art conſtant in that which thy ſelfe haſt taught mee, I remaine ſtedfaſt in that which I learned of thee, and therefore I can neuer forſake thee. The which interpretation is confirmed

by the wordes that follow, Thy people my people: who were Naomies people but the Iewes which alwayes worſhipped the true God, ſo that if Naomi could change her birth, parentage, people, and country, then alſo in the mind of Ruth ſhe could change her God, and as ſhee was perſuaded, ſhe knew her people, ſo ſhe knew her God, and as ſhe thought, ſhe could not change her people, ſo ſhe conceiued ſhe wold neuer alter her worſhip: ſo that theſe words proceed of a ſtedfaſt perſuaſion in the knowledge of God, and an aſſured hope of her mothers continuance.Dan. 3.29. Euen as whē the king of Babel calleth the almighty by the name of the God of Shadrach,Dan. 6.26. Meſhach, & Abednego, was perſuaded he was the true God, by ye miraculous deliuery of thoſe his ſeruants frō the f
                     •
                  ry furnace. And as the king of Media called him by the name of Daniels God, becauſe he had deliuered him frō the hungry lions: euen ſo Ruth called the true God by the name of Naomies God, becauſe ſhe was inſtructed by her. But ſome wil ſay, is it not lawful for vs to depend von our fathers or elder frends in religion or to beleeue as the church or as catholique men beleeue? I anſwere, if the queſtion bee made of the neceſſary pointes to ſaluation, as the knowledge of the trinitie, the worke of our redemption with ſuch like, it is by no meanes lawfull for vs to depend vpon men, though they be the chiefeſt in knowledge, and the greateſt in authority in al the world, if they teach it neuer ſo truly yet we muſt haue recourſe to the word of God.1. Cor. 4.16 For Paul wiſhed the Corinthes that they ſhould be followers of him as he was of God, as if he had ſaid,Act. 17.11 where I agree with God and his word, conſent with me, where I diſagree, diſſent from me. We know what commendation the Lord giueth the Iewes of Berea, which ſought the ſcriptures dayly, whither thoſe thinges were ſo or not,Gal. 2.11
                        •
                     
                   which were taught by Paule and Silas: we know how Paul withſtood Peter to his face, who was a piller of the church and a more ancient Apoſtle then him ſelfe, yet hee was faulty: and to conclude, we muſt receiue the Goſpell as from God the onely author of it, not from man, leaſt we make the preaching of the corſſe of none effect: it is farre ſurer to ſend vs to the fountaines of the written word of God, then to the braines of the beſt learned in the world. Therfore the concluſion is, that we muſt not in the foundation of religion

depend vpon men or angels, though we were neuer ſo truly taught by them, but muſt referre our faith and the credit therof, to the onely written word of God, But ſome wil ſay? had Ruth this word of God, or did Naomi cary it with her into the land of Moab. I anſwere that it is very likely they had, for the Iewes at this day haue the old teſtament with them in all nations: ſecondly, if they had not, yet the Lorde by his ſpirite did perſuade the heart of Ruth of the truth of thoſe things which Naomi had taught her, ſo did he perſwade his church when there was no word written, for the ſpace of aboue two thouſand, yeres: ſo doth he at this day keepe his church among infidells, where is neither preaching, word nor ſacraments, yet not one of them is loſt. But if any ſay, let vs then forſake the written word of God and attend to theſe reuelations or priuate inſtructions of the holy ghoſt, I anſwere, ſo the Iewes when they came into the land of Canaan, might haue eate no meate tyll the Lord raigned downe more manna vpon them: ſurely then they had all ſtarued many thouſand yeares ago: euen ſo if we looke for ſuch extraordinary illuminations, & forſake ye, preſent food of our ſouls, God his writtē word preached among vs, the other being ceaſed, we ſhal iuſtly be condemned as the murderers and ſlaughterſlaues of our owne deſtruction, Let vs therfore take heede to God, not to men, ground our faith vpon his word, not on humane, giftes attend to the voice of Chriſt ſpeaking by his miniſters to the ears of ye body, not waiting for extraordinary illuminatiōs: if we want this means, labor for it as a pearle worth all our marchants ſubſtance, yea a treaſure greater then all the world. But of lighter pointes of religion, if we receiue any thing of men who in one point haue diuers iudgments, let vs learne to examine the reaſons of all, and being proued by prayer & peace of conſcience leane to the beſt: neither doubting to depend vppon men or the credit of the truth, but to the word. Where wee note many things, what great care ought parēts, magiſtrats, miniſters & prechers, to haue ouer their children people & ſubiects, for their inſtruction, ſeeing as Ruth had truly learned of her mother in law that did ſhe conſtantly defend, namely the worſhip of the onely one God, If Naomi had peruerted her from on heatheniſme to another, it is very likly ſhe wold haue abode by it

but being inſtructed in the trueth, and ſealed by the holy ſpirite of promiſe, ſhee doth carefully maintaine it,Eph: 1:13. giuing vs thereby to vnderſtand how ineſtimable is the benefite of good education, and firſt, training vp in religion. And ought not this to bee deare vnto vs, that watch ouer the ſoules of our people and children, who by vs beeing rightlie grounded in the foundation of chriſtian religion, maye happely growe vp, like to glorious oliues for the church and commonwealth. Wee read when Laban ſwore by his falſe gods, then Iacob ſwore by the feare of his father Izaac;Gen. 31.53. ſo excellent was the inſtruction giuen him of his father, that in the preſence of idolatrous Laban, for feare nor fauour would he alter his religion: yea it ſeemed to be faſtened in his fleſh, that hauing bene twentie yeeres among the idolatrous Sirians, yet hee had not changed the manner of his oth, the which he lerned of his father. Oh where are theſe Izaaks in our dayes, which teach their children any religion? indeed men are too careful for their childrens temporall wealth, they put them to ſchooles and vniuerſities, to be ſtudents at the law, and men of occupations, (which are good) but aske them why they do ſo, they will anſwere, that they might haue ſome thing to liue by heereafter: neuer a word I warrant you of the ſaluation of their ſoules, but for that, they will hope in God they ſay: and thus they compaſſe ſea and land for trifles, but the neuer fading health they leaſt thinke vpon.Gen. 24.42. In times paſt ſeruants prayed to the God of their maiſters, but in theſe dayes if they ſhould do ſo, they muſt praye eyther to pride, couetouſnes, or ignorance: maiſters and ſeruants can ſweare by the name of God liberally, but pray ſparingly, inſomuch as if the life of God conſiſted in their praiers, they woulde ſurely murder him, they ſo ſeldome call vppon him. Oh that this helliſh behauiour of maiſters and ſeruantes, could be reduced to the line of God his worde; but nowe they deale with their ſeruants as the Egiptians did with the Iſraelits, they look for their tasks and worldly buſines, but they neuer exhorte them to ſacrrfice to the Lord: nay, they hinder them, and call them idle perſonnes, if

there bee any forwardnes of ſeruants and children that wayes; truely now is like ſeruant, like maiſter; like maide like miſtreſſe, like father like ſonne, like mother like daughter, ſuch is the ſeede ſuch is the harueſt, they go from cradles to graues, and from graues to damnation, their whole care is for pleaſure and wealth, and therefore they haue no part or portion but in this preſent life. Yet let the children of Abraham do like Abrahā, teach their ſons,Gen. 18.19 daughters & ſeruants, the couenant of the Lord, that all their ſeed & poſterity may be bleſſed, both with the temporall & euerlaſting promiſe, for godlines hath the promiſe of this life and of the life to come.1. Tim. 4.8. Secondly by this we note, the fal of vngodly flatterers which will outwardly for ſhew or fauor be godly with the good, & wicked with the profane, they wil in good company temper their ſpeech like good men, they will trudge & trauel to ſermons & godly exerciſes, becauſe it pleaſeth ſome gentleman or other, & will ſay to thē, thy God my God, your preacher, my preacher, your profeſsiō ſhalbe my profeſsion, whom you loue I loue, whō you hate I abhor: Of this ſort are many ignorant perſons, one miſliketh our religiō, becauſe ſome popiſh frend of his miſlike it, ſome ſpeaks againſt our gouernment, becauſe one or other which gape for the churche liuings ſpeaketh againſt it: and to ſay the truth, it is very lamentable to ſee, how all religion of many is turned into man pleaſing, but theſe tame beaſts will one day come to the ſlaughter as well as wilde, when it ſhall be manifeſted, that the ſureſt & ſafeſt way in religion, is to depend on God and not men.
               
                  Where thou dyeſt. Hauing promiſed her life to bee ſpent in her mothers company, ſhee proceedeth to her death, ſhewing vnto her ſuch perfect frendſhip as neither the trauailes of life or ſorrows of death, could euer abrogate, and ſhe addeth, that euen in that place where Naomi ſhould be buried would Ruth bee enterred: for wee know the ancient cuſtome was to bee buried with the fathers or predeceſſours, whereof vndoubtedly the cauſe was, the hope of the reſurrecton, that as they were buried ſo they ſhuld riſe together, to be made partakers

of eternal woes, or euerlaſting ioyes. And by this we obſerue, the loue which we owe vnto our fathers & frends muſt be of ſuch continuance, yt it reach vnto the graue: not only to be here the inheritors of their lands, but alſo being dead, to giue our bodies to their ſepulchres, and the meaſure of it muſt be ſo perfect, that we muſt be the companions of life & death. And truely ſuch as is the loue of children to their naturall parents, ſuch muſt bee the peoples to their ſpritual fathers in Chriſt. The Galathians to pleaſure Paul wold haue pulled out their own eies, but men in theſe daies are ſo far frō this liberalitie, towards the ſmall number of preaching miniſters,1. Cor. 3.15 Gal. 4.14.15 that they wil hardly giue any penny towardes their maintenance: they had rather haue their gold then the goſpel of Chriſt, their paltry pigs then preaching: They cry out chargeable, chargeable is the miniſtery, when they thē
                  ſelues which ſhould pay the tenths, yeld not the twentith of their increaſe, ſuch ſuing for their right, ſuch triing of cuſtomes, ſuch ouerbearing the weake, & finally they would be religious, but ye miniſters muſt be as beggers among thē. Who ſeeth not in many places where they crie out for preachers, and promiſe largely in their behalfe, yet when the Lord hath ſent them, they almoſt ſtinke in their preſence. I ſpeak plainly I confeſſe, & yet but the truth: & moreouer, they are not onely poorely prouided for, but euery baſe perſon, peſant, & pot cō
                  panion, are ſuffered to crow ouer thē & cry out againſt thē. Thus Chirſt was before, & yet like vs, contemned of the braueſt & reuiled of the baſeſt: the world I ſee is no changling, although many hundred ages haue paſſed ſince, yet the maners thereof remaine, it agreeth in nothing ſaue onely to perſecute Chriſt: and ſeeing we are ſent forth as a ſilly lambes among ten thouſand wolūs, and as men borne out of due time, although our calling be deſpiſed, our labor vnprofitable, & we made laughing ſtocks, yet our pains will be rewarded, our offences pardoned, we crowned, & they euerlaſtingly confounded. So let God. Laſt of all, that ſhee might be no more moleſted by her mother in law, ſhe confirmeth the reſolution of her mind by an oth, in theſe words, So let God

do vnto me, and more alſo if ought but death do ſeparate thee and mee: which is an vſuall manner of ſwearing in the ſcripture,1. Sam. 25.22. as we reade of Dauid how he ſwore he woulde bee reuenged of the churliſh Nabal, for the vncourteous meſſage he returned him by his ſeruants, and is vſed by all the godly in the olde Teſtament, and indeede it doth moſt notably deſcribe the nature of an othe, for it is thus much in effect, I pray God confound mee if I ſpeake not this with purpoſe of heart: out of the which wee note many thinges moſt profitable. Firſt that in euery oath wee curſe our owne ſoules, if we publiſhe not the truth, or performe not that which we promiſe: as if euerie time we ſweare wee ſhoulde ſaie, The Lord confound mee bodie and ſoule with ſathan and his angelles, if this bee not ſo. Oh that our othe-mongers & common ſwearers in our daies, wold remember or vnderſtand this, that wheras in their daies they haue ſworne many milions of times, ſo many curſes & damnations, they haue wiſhed to themſelues, the very conſideration wherof would make them as gulitie in their own conſciences as euer Cain was for killing a man, or Iudas for betraying the Lord of glory: they haue with their arrowes of blaſphemy ſhotte thorough & boared the Lord to the very neereſt place of his life, for euerie trifle. And truly as the common Inne is knowen by his ſigne, and the black Moore by his skin, euen ſo is an atheiſt and carnal man by his othe. We ſhal talke with honeſt worldly men,Leuit 24.23 who at euery worde or ſentence, will breake foorth into moſt horrible ſwearing vppon no occaſion, if they be rebuked they waxe much worſe. We read of an Egiptian Iſraelite that blaſphemed, and was by God his owne commaundement ſtoned to death. How if this law were put in practiſe among vs? where woulde the gallant companions, which will ſweare by all the colours of the moone,Num. 1.46 become? would not they crye out to the hills to couer them, and to the rocks to fal vpon them? was it not ſtrange, that among ſixe hundred thouſand men which were able to beare armes, with olde men women and children almoſt innumerable there ſhuld be found but one man that had

blaſphemed, or taken God his dreadfull name in vaine and he muſt be ſtoned? But among vs, if ſo many choſen men were taken, my life for it, there ſhall not be found among euery hundred ten perſons which are not common blaſphemers. Oh Lord, how doth thy mercy ſtay the heauens from powring downe ſtones vppon vs; as they did vppon the Cananits.Iud: 10.1
                        •
                     
                   There is not now a child in the ſtreets, if he be able to ſpeake, but he murmureth an oth, onely excepted ſome few which haue godly parents: there is not a woman eyther mayde or wife, ſome few excepted, which doth not dayly increaſe their curſe by their continuall blaſphemies: may wee not now ſay? Lord what is man that thou viſiteſt him, or the ſon of man that thou ſo regardeſt him. Truly the moſt folow the counſell of Iobs wife, they curſe God and dye, a godly martir required to curſe chriſt and hee ſhould liue, anſweared, ſeuentie yeres haue I ſerued him & yet hee neuer did mee any hurt, why then ſhould I curſe him. And I pray you what hurt hath the Lorde done vnto you, that you thus blaſpheme his honour, curſe your owne ſoules, rebell againſt his lawes and ſweare many hundred times oftener then you eate or drinke: ſurelie the diſeaſe of leproſie was contagious, and whoſoeuer had it was excluded from the congregation, how much more ought this poyſon of ſwearing and ſwearers, to be cut of from the ſociety of God and men? And ſurely now helpe O ye Gods of the earth, I meane you magiſtrats and men of authority, this knot will neuer be vnlooſed except you draw out your ſwords and ſtrike it a ſunder: though you would giue them all your poſeſſions, & ſteale away their ſwearing as Rahel ſtole her fathers idols, yet they will ſweare by falſe Gods ſtill as Laban did; that is, they muſt etiher dy, or the wrath of God muſt be powred downe vppon vs for euer, for his curſe ſhal neuer departe from the houſe of the ſwearer.Eſay. 9.3 And if you helpe not to cure this euill, the Lord ſhall curſe both you and them with euerlaſting plagues. Hee crieth and ſaith, whome ſhall I ſend? the miniſters haue ſaid they will go; yea, they haue told Iacob his ſin and Iſrael his tranſgreſſion, and England his ſwearing alſo,

but they are come again with Ieremie, vnto you O princes, publiſh you the decree, that whoſoeuer ſweareth by the name of God raſhly, hee ſhould be cut off from the people, and his houſe ſowed with ſalt, neuer to be builded againe. Secondly, by this we obſerue, that it is not lawful to ſweare but only by the name of God, for Ruth ſayth ſo, And ſo let God do vnto me, and more alſo She calleth not heauen and earth to record, or any other thing, ſaue only he which is able to puniſh or els to pardon, & knoweth the ſecrets of euery mans hart. Wherby we are taught, that it is ſacriledge in God his ſight to ſweare by our faith or troth, our honour or honeſtye, bread or drinke, or anie thing elſe. Many think they auoid ſwearing verye cleanly, if they ſweare by anie of theſe, not knowing that he that ſweareth by the gold, ſweareth by the temple, & he that ſweareth by the temple, ſweareth by him that ſitteth thereon: euen ſo he that ſweareth by his faith, ſweareth by Chriſt (for faith is no faith without Chriſt) & he that ſweareth by the ſonne, ſweareth by the father and the holy Ghoſt. Therefore dearely beloued, let vs frame our tongs to honour, not to diſhonour God, to glorifie, not to defame his name. For if he that toucheth his Saintes, toucheth the apple of his eie, what doth hee which thruſteth at his name, which is dearer vnto him than heauen and earth? Surely the Lord will not holde him guiltleſſe, but as he hath not pittyed the Lorde in tearing him with oaths, no more ſhall the Lord ſhew anie mercie to his ſoule from puniſhing it in hell.
               Laſtly, by theſe wordes of Ruth wee obſerue, that an oath muſt be the laſt thing we produce in the teſtimonie of any truth. Shee denieth her mother once, and the ſecond time, when her ſiſter went awaie, but nowe the third time, after ſolemne proteſtation made, ſhe addeth an oath, as the laſt refuge and end of all controuerſie. Againſt this do all the former offend, which will not tary till the laſt, but euen at the firſt rap out their oathes, as faſt as a brauling dog his barking, ſwearing through cuſtome to truth and falſehood, making no difference betweene waightie matters and idle toies, eſpecially in gaming, playing, hunting, chiding, and ſuch like, they ſpit

out their poiſon againſt God himſelf, neither ſparing the wounds, bloud, hart, death, and nailes of the Lord, renting him worſe being in heauen, than the Iewes did vpon the croſſe. But let Ruth and her companions teach ten thouſand of them, with what reuerence they muſt vſe the holy name of God: ſhee had not bin paſt ten yeeres with a godly woman, but ſhe had learned her religion, both of faith and manners, for in this ſhe vttereth both: but we haue a great many both men & women, which haue had twentie and thirtie a peece, not with one, but with a whole church of godly perſons, and yet they haue got neither faith nor maners from them, they can eaſily giue them leaue to practiſe religion, but themſelues wallowe in pleaſure. But bee not deceiued, God is not mocked, when he beginneth hee will make an end, and conſume your viperous tongues and beaſtly heartes, as the fountain of this miſchiefe in the fire of hell. We are as importunate on you as the blind men of Iericho, the more we are rebuked, the more we cry vnto you, let not our countrie bee curſed, our prince remoued, our God blaſphemed, his Goſpell tranſlated from vs, & our ſouls & bodies euerlaſtingly plagued, To God let vs giue praiſe
               
            
            
               The fourt Lecture.
               
                  
                     Ruth. 1. Verſe. 18.19.20.21, 22.
                     
                        18 When ſhe ſaw that ſhee was ſtedfaſtly minded to go with her, ſhe left ſpeaking vnto her.
                     
                        19 So they went forth both vntil they came to Bethleem, & when they came to Bethleem, it was noiſed of them thoroughout all the citie, and they ſayd, Is not this Naomi?
                     
                        20 And ſhe anſwered, Cal me not Naomi, but call me Mara, for the almightie hath giuen me much bitternes.
                     
                        21 I went out full, and the Lord hath cauſed me to returne emptie, Why call you me Naomi ſeeing the Lorde hath humbled me, and the almightie hath brought nice vnto aduerſitie.
                     
                        22 So Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabiteſſe, &c.
                  
               
               HAuing heard ye conference between Naomi & Ruth, now the holy ghoſt deſc
                     ••
                  beth the iſſue of this iourney, to the end of this chapter: wherein Naomi ceaſeth to

vex her daughter, or diſſuade her to proceed in her purpoſe, but willingly taketh her with her, & both of them trauaile to Bethelehem, whither they come in a moſt fit and acceptable time, neither hindred in their iourney, nor forgotten of their freinds, but kindly receaued to their great comfort.
               Thoſe wordes containe in them two parts, the firſt their conſent to trauaile and iourney vnto Bethlehem, the ſecond is their intertainment there. The firſt part is expreſſed in the eighteene and ninteene verſes: & hath two members, firſt Naomi reſted ſatisfied with the anſwere of Ruth & vexed her no more, verſe eighteen, ſecondly their proſperous iourney to the city Bethelehem verſe ninteene: In the end of this verſe is ſet downe the entertainment they found there, which is this, the citizens came flocking to ſee her, calling and welcomming her by name in theſe words, Is not this Naomi? vnto the which ſalutation ſhee her ſelfe aunſwereth in the two next verſes, firſt acknowledging her name, but confeſſing hir ſelfe vnworthie of it, in theſe wordes, Call mee not Naomi, but call me Mara, ſecondly ſhee addeth the cauſe of her ſpeeche, in theſe wordes, for the Lord hath giuen me much bitternes: this is amplified in the next verſe by an allegory taken from a veſſel. In theſe words, I went out full: finally ſhee ſetteth downe the vſe ſhee maketh of her affliction, ſhewing vnto them, that ſhee could not glory in all the vaine titles of the world, firſt becauſe the Lord had humbled her, ſecondly becauſe he had brought her into aduerſity: in the laſt verſe is ſet downe the time when theſe pilgrims came from Moab to Bethlehem, which was the beginning of barley harueſt.
               
                  When ſhe ſaw. As Naomi in the beginning dealt very wiſely, in the triall of her daughters before they were too farre gone, ſo in the end ſhee dealeth very godly with Ruth, in that ſhee yeldeth to her anſwere and petition, giuing ouer to moleſt her with any more obiections. This frendly and worthy meeknes, is very commendable in all the godly, for without this they can neuer in charity and compaſſion try and examine their

brethren. When our ſauiour Chriſt, had dealt with the Cananitiſhe woman about the like cauſe, ſeeing that ſilence would not anſwere her, nor deniall ſatisfie her,Mat. 15 22 nor the opprobrious word of dogge diſmay hir, then he yelded to her deſire, cured her daughter, and proclaimed her faith to bee wonderfull: By which wee gather that it is an vngodly thing, to try any in religiō or in any good motion beyond their ſtrength, for it is no doubt but Naomi if ſhee would, could haue multiplied mo obiectiōs againſt this enterpriſe of Ruth, but hir mind was to try her, not to trouble her, to confirme her, not to confound her, and to ſhew vnto her what muſt bee her reſolution, if ſhe go vnto the Lords people, ſhe can hope for no earthly felicitye, ſhe muſt neuer repent and turne backe againe, ſhe muſt bury both countrey and kindred in the graue of forgetfulnes, that the thoughts or deſire of their fruition muſt neuer hinder the courſe of her religion. Whereby all the godly are by Naomi admoniſhed, to be carefull whō they receiue into their company, and how gentlye they muſt entreate them when they finde their fidelity: the rauens will not feede their owne birds or young ones ſo long as they bee naked till their feathers come out, and they knowe them to be their owne, which iealouſy of ſoules muſt teach vs, that if wee ſee not the euident tokens of godlynes, we muſt not receiue, yea our owne kinſmen into the ſecrete of our hearts, to communicate vnto them the ſweet felowſhip we haue with Chriſt, for many daily creepe into the church to eſpie our liberty, but as Iohn ſaith, if any come vnto you & bring not this doctrine receiue them not to houſe,2. Ioh: 10 nor bid them good ſpeede. But in this it is ſtrange to ſee howe farre manie godly perſons are deceiued, which beleeue euerylight word of hipocriticall perſons, eſteeming them good chriſtians, giuing thē the right hand of fellowſhip, & opening the treaſures of the Lord to theſe mockers of ſpiritual things, caſting the childrens crummes to dogs, and their pretious pearles before theſe filthy ſwine, which tread both Chriſt and his goſpell vnder the feete of their hearts, and rent, reuile, perſecute and ſeeke the

deſtruction of the truely religious, would God we were all Naomies in this point, to trie their ſpirites whether they be of God, ſeeing ſo many falſe ſpirits are gone out into the world; for we muſt not commit our ſelues to euery one that will outwardly ſay as wee beleeue, but firſt ſee the fruits and afterwards iudge of the tree. We know how many in the Goſpel our ſauiour Chriſt refuſed, which offered themſelues vnto him,1. Ioh. 41 Iohn 2, 24. for none can come to him but thoſe whom his father draweth. And againſt this eſpecially do all the flattring Michaes and pleaſe-man preachers of England offend, which as the prophet ſaith, ſowe pillowes vnder the elbowes of the people, that is, they giue them reſt in their ſingular ſins, if they can ſay Lord, Lord, they tell them they are good chriſtians, if they come once a weeke to the church, their deuotion is ſufficient, if they ſpend all their dayes in ignorance & vanity, yet a few words at the later end will recouer them. Oh, how fearefull and lamentable is the condition of ſuch paſtours and people, where they are thus flattred in their ſins & ſtroked in their iniquityes, they heare the goſpell, feed on the ſacraments, dwel ſafely in the houſe of God, and eate of the fatte of the lands; that their iudgement might be without excuſe, their damnation the greater, & themſelues the prepared oxen for the Lords ſlaughter houſe; they cry peace peace, mercy, mercy, ſpeake of plenty not penury, of feaſting not famines, of pleaſures not ſuffrings, of mirth not mourning, of newe wine not God his word; nay they bid the moſt couetous cormorants, in croching vſurers, prodigall ruſſians, beaſtly drunkards, filthy adulterers, curſed blaſphemers, common ſwearers, dumbe miniſters, and prophane and carnall atheiſts, to hope for ſaluation, whereas the Apoſtle ſayth, not one of theſe ſhall inherite the kingdome of God. Is not this to caſt childrens bread to doggs, and to make the moſt holie Goſpel a cloake, nay rather a patent or charter to worke all manner of licenciouſnes? ſurelie if Naomi would not promiſe any thing to her deere daughter Ruth, but rather diſcourage her from following the Lorde in the triall of her fayth, you are as farre wide from any hope

of ſauing health, as heauen from the earth, or light from darknes: therfore to conclude, as the gold is not knowen but by the touchſtone, ſo is not any Chriſtian, till he be throughly tried in religion, & as the goldſmith will not accept it (though it ſeeme neuer ſo fayre) till he haue tried it, ſo muſt not wee looſe the bands of ſins till they be repented, or bind the breaches of iniquity, till they be ſatisfied, nor account any a chriſtian till wee haue throroughly tried him. Other there are which will neuer bee ſatisfied in their brethren, euery day troubling thē with vaine & vnprofitable queſtions, neuer giuing thē ouer, til they haue wearied them with their wranglings, ſeking to deface in thē that little knowledge which they haue▪ & diſcourage them from the profeſſion of chriſtiā religion. But moſt abhominable is ye dealing of many with their neighbours, both chriſtian men & women, who forſaking the curſed paſtime of carnall cōpanions, eſpiing the inſufficiencie of dumbe & vnpreaching miniſters, burning in loue for the pure preaching of God his word, and ſeeking that where it is to be found, abſent themſelues from their aſſemblies now & then, they preſent thē to the courts as wicked recuſants,Act. 24.26 where I warrant you, they find as much fauor as Paul did before Felix thus we are many times vniuſtly vexed for good cō
                  ſciēces, turmoiled aboū for hearing of ſermons, almoſt as much as any papiſt for abhoring our religion: & this it is that feareth many, cauſeth other to fall back before troubles come, & diſmaieth many weake ſoules when they ſee their poore brethren in this peaceable time, vnder the gouernment of ſo godly & gratious a prince, ſo tormented as is incredible; the experience of this is too too cōmon in euery corner of our countrey, where ther is any diligent preacher or profitable hearer. Let vs therfore my brethren, with Naomi, ceaſe to vexe the godly minded Ruths, both mē & womē: our dānation ſhalbe the greater, if we draw & driue men from God, the laws require it not, the magiſtrates like it not, our profeſsion forbiddeth it, & accurſed are thoſe godles iudges which pronoūce any ſentence againſt theſe innocent perſons. Therefore ſaye with the prophet, Come let vs aſcend to

the mountaine of the Lord, euen to the hill of the God of Iacob, for hee ſhall teach vs his waies, and wee will walke in his pathes.
               
                  So they went foorth. Now are theſe two good women both going, and alſo come to Bethelem, and vndoubtedly their tedious iourney was eaſed by their mutuall conference: but what things happened to them by the way the ſcripture mentioneth not, onely their intertainment is heere ſet downe, how their comming being noyſed about the citie, they came vnto them and ſaluted their old acquaintaunce Naomi by name. For this queſtion, is not this Naomi? after the manner of the Hebrues is a vſuall manner of affirmation,Gen. 18.14 17. Numb. 23.1: Iud. 6.31. 2. Sam. 3:8: as we may ſee in theſe places of ſcripture. Where firſt of all we ſee the wonderfull mercy of God toward Naomi, which in ſo many yeares abſent ſuffered not her memory vtterly to periſh, but at her firſt arriuing, did publiſh her name, and comfort her ſorrowes. Thus God hath many bleſſings in ſtore for the relieuing of his poore afflicted ſaintes, and ſurely hee is carefull that the candle of the righteous be not put out for euer. But as in one day (after many yeares ſorrow for Ioſeph & famine for bread, Iacob receiued tidings of the welfarre of his ſonne and prouiſion for his familie,Gen. 45:28. Pſa. 30.6 euen ſo the Lord compaſſeth about the faithfull with ſongs of deliueraunce, that though heauines endure for a night, yet ioy commeth in the morning. Let vs therfore with the loſſe, and laying downe of our owne liues confeſſe the goodnes of the Lord,Dan. 4.33 37. for as he draue the king of Babilon for ſeuen yeares from the throne of maieſtie, to the wildernes of wild beaſts, ſo he called him aganie and reſtored to him his ſcepter and ſeate, eſtabliſhed his kingdome all the dayes of his life. Therefore feare not, feare not my beloued, haue wee now famine? we ſhall plenty againe: Do we cary foorth our ſeed weeping? We ſhal come againe with plentyfull ſheaues. Haue we ſowed in teares? wee ſhall reap in ioy, Haue we bin ſtrangers in other lands? we are come home with Naomi to the citie of God his people: & finally, thoſe that feare the Lorde ſhall bee as mount Sion which can neuer be moued: for as there

is a time to mourne, ſo there is a time to reioyſe,Pſa: 125.
                        •
                     
                   and as the wicked ſhall haue meaſure for meaſure, ſo the godly ſhall receiue reward, for reward: Secondly by theſe wordes wee obſerue the frui
                     •
                  te of charitie, or duetie of neighbours and acquaintance: for as theſe cityzens of Bethlehem came to ſee and to comfort Naomi, ſo muſt euery one beare ſome part of his brothers or ſiſters ſorrow, in relieuing their troubled minds by their preſence and ſpeeches.Luc. 1.39. Ioh: 11.33 Act: 9.39 Mar: 2: 4.40. We reade that Mary went to her coſin Elizabeth, being with child, that they might commune & comfort thēſelues in the promiſes of the Lord. We read how the Iewes accompanyed Mary and Martha weepping for Lazarus, and the ſame alſo we reade was done at the death of Dorcas. What ſhal I ſay of the four men which brought the ſicke of the palſie vnto Chriſt: and moſt excellent is the felowſhip of the ſaintes in the primitiue church, which are ſaid to continue & abide together with one accord in praier & breaking of bread, ſo that their ſpirituall comfort of praying, and temporall refreſhing of corporall foode were priuate to any, but alſo for their comfort as a young child is wrapped in his ſwadling clothes, ſo was the infancie of Chriſts church maintained by the company of their faythfull fellowſhip. Oh that wee could loue and liue thus together, in the bond of vnitye and chriſtian concord, that as we are members of one body, ſo we ſhuld not be ſo ſtrange one to another, as if the eye had neuer ſeen the foote, or the head neuer knowne the legges: ſuch is the ſcornefulnes of our age, wherein men are aſhamed of Chriſt in his members, if they be a litle falen into decay, how hardly will they comfort them as theſe Ephrathits do Naomi a poore widow now, though once a noble woman. They will rather curſe thē with Shemei, than bleſſe thē with Tziba, but let the faithfull like feeling members of their brethrens affliction looke vppon the Naomies in our dayes, ſome are poore and frendles, other ſicke and harborles, ſome ſorrowfull, ſome hungry & many deſtitute, let vs gather to vs theſe members of Chriſt, our company will more refreſh them then our contribution, our talke more then our almes, our feelling

and fellow prayers more then the diſtribution of our money, let vs lay hold on that, and yet forget not this, for as God hath giuen both to vs, ſo he looketh wee ſhould giue both to other. Thirdly by this we obſerue, how the world is wont to comfort one another, for theſe Bethlemits ſay vnto her, Is not this Naomi, that is, they comfort her with the conſideration of her name, which in hebrewe ſignifieth bewtifull or pleaſant, as if they had ſayd vnto her, Although thou art old, yet thou art beautifull, for thou remaineſt Naomi ſtill, thy name is a prophet vnto thee, to forewarn thee of thy welfare, and if thou be now like the ſtubble after the crop, yet thou ſhalt ſhortly be as the green hearb or pleſant plāt, comfort thy ſelf, Iacob always preuailed with God, becauſe his name was alwayes Iſrael: the doue ſhall bee chaſt, becauſe it is a doue: the eie ſhalbe bright, becauſe it is the eie, & Naomi ſhalbe bleſſed, becauſe ſhe is Naomi. Thus worldly perſons wiſh worldly things, & the beſt they deſire moſt is outward proſperitie. Neither is this ſimplie vnlawfull, for ſuch as is the ſore, ſuch muſt bee the ſalue, and where the wound is, the medicine muſt be miniſtred: if in the world they be oppreſſed, in the ſame they may not onely wiſh, but praie for releaſe, yet alwayes remember, that friendes and parties muſt ſo deſire and requeſt it, as may bee moſt for the glory of God. Therfore this is our dutie, that in praying for earthly benefites, we aime at God his will, but in deſiring ſpirituā bleſsings, we muſt regard our ſaluations. And more alſo, wee muſt not ſo rauiſh the mindes of the worldly afflicted, as if they had no other hope, but this temporal welfare: but ſo promiſe the bleſſings of God as they may haue a ſpirituall ſignification, for worldly miſerie is abated but with euerlaſting felicity.
               
                  And Naomi ſaid. In theſe words Naomi anſwereth to the comforts of her frends, & telleth thē ſhe rather deſerueth to be called Mara, then Naomi, that is bitter then beautifull:Iam. 3.1 whereby ſhee teacheth vs howe vaine are outward and worldly titles: for which cauſe Iames wiſheth vs not to bee called many maiſters, knowing we ſhal receiue the greater damnation, as if he had ſaid,

worldly honor bringeth death but deſire or loue of carnall comforts cauſe damnation. When the arke of God was taken by the Philiſtines, and the ſons of Heli both ſlain,1. Sam. 4.21 the wife of Phinehas the ſon of Heli died after her trauaile, and named her ſon Ichabod: which is by interpretation, wher is the glory? although there a man child was borne yet the woman forgate not her ſorrowe, becauſe the arke of God was taken by the heathen, for if ſhee were the daughter to the chiefeſt in Iſrael, as ſhe was and wife to the third, yet what glory had ſhe of her place, when her husband and was iuſtly ſlaine, and her people ouercome, therfore ſhee called her ſon (no glory) for neither dignity of place, highnes of birth, fruitfulnes of children, or the dominion ouer a whole countrey may miniſter any comfort to them whome the Lord hath hūbled. Rahel that bid Iacob giue her children or els ſhe ſhould die, at the birth of her ſecond child died, and yet had children, ſhe ſuppoſed if ſhe were made fruitful,Gen. 30.7. & had many children ſhe could not chuſe but liue in felicity; but hauing the firſt ſhe called him Ioſeph becauſe God would adde more, yet at the ſecond, ſhe called him Ben-oni which is the ſon of her ſorrow,Gen. 35.18 becauſe ſhe died in trauaile, ſo that ſhe which accounted bearing of children her chefeſt ioy, by that which ſhee loued, came her greateſt ſorrow. Thus Naomi, which was once as beautiful and pleaſant in proſperity as any, yet now in aduerſity who more bitter thē ſhe, yea the very remembrance of her name increaſeth her griefe. Were ſhe the daughter of a prince, yet nowe beeing a begger it is a greater diſcomfort vnto her, then if ſhe had bene borne poore, for mans nature is like a pleaſant plant which proſpereth when it groweth higher & higher, but decaieth if it fal lower & lower: if Naomi had bene a Lady, yet hauing loſt her husbande childrē & wealth, the cogitation of her wonted welfare, encreaſeth her diſquietnes, euen as Phine has his wife and Rahel at the birth of their children. Why then do men thus highly eſteem of worldly vain glory? Cannot one meaſure of honour afford one mite of cōfort to a diſtreſſed perſon? Do not mē becauſe they are proper was proud, & becauſe they

are learned, proud, ambitious, what then is the fruicte of worldly titles? is pride the reward of proportion? loftynes of worſhip? ſcornefulnes of riches? and ambition of learning? ſurely theſe things in the day of trouble can miniſter no medicine to make eaſe if godlynes bee not with them. What was Achan the better for his gold, when he was ſtoned to death? Abſalon for his beautie, whan he was hanged? Haman for his honour, when he was mounted vppon his owne gallowes? the ſorcerers of Egipt for their knowledge, when darknes was ouer the land? or Herop for the peoples voice whed they cried a God and not man, and the wormes fel vppon him & conſumed him? Truſt not therfore in princes, much leſſe in the titles of princes, in the ſtrength of an horſe, much leſſe in the wealth of man: ſay not, I ſhall be the better becauſe I am a gentleman,Ecci
                        •
                     . 17.18 a doctour, or a noble man, for when Salomon had conſidred all theſe things, he ſaid all is vanity and vexation of ſpirite.
               
                  For the almighty hath. This is the reaſon wherfore ſhe denieth her name, or rather changeth it, ſhewing that her firſt name had nothing in it which did expreſſe the relation betweene her ſelfe and it, but her ſecond name doth moſt ſignificantly declare hir bitter affliction. Where we firſt of all obſerue the cauſe which moued the fathers to giue ſuch names to theyr children which to ſignify or put them in mind of their duety or ſome other euent. So God called the firſt man Adam which is as much as man or earthly, becauſe hee was made of the earth,Gen. 1.27. Gen. 3.20 or the red earth: ſo Adam called his wife Chauuath (which we call Heuah by reaſon of the Hebrue letters) becauſe ſhe ſhould be the mother of all liuing: the like may bee ſayd of Noah, Seth, Abraham, Izaac, Iſrael, Samuel, Iohn Baptiſt and many others, who being named eyther by the Lord himſelfe or by other, were ſo called, to put them in minde of their duetyes, or to note the thankefulnes of their parents. The which is alſo lawfull for godly parents now to imitate, in giuing ſuch names to their children, as may bee notes to al the world of their profeſſion. But ſome cannot brooke this liberty, accompting it newnes and preciſeneſſe

in them that vſe it, as though it were a deadly ſinne, one iot to depart from the cuſtome of the multitude. But this curioſitie is well confuted by the name of Iohn Baptiſt: anceſtors muſt not alwayes be followed, thoſe which are new creatures in Ieſus Chriſt,Luc. 1.59.60. maye alſo haue new names. But in this the worlde bewraie their palpable ignorance, for they like the olde names which were verie plaine in their owne tongues, wherein they were giuen, but Engliſh names they cannot abide, belike for verie feare, leaſt their names ſhould bee witneſſes of condemnation againſt theyr licentiouſneſſe. Againe, they account it a glory proper to a few perſons to be called by the worldly ſurnames of ſome of theyr great anceſtours, but they will not beare theſe names of reioycing, thankeſgiuing, repentance, godlynes, mercy, conſtancie, & ſuch lyke, they will as eaſily admit them, as a deafe adder the voice of the charmer. But let the godly in this vſe chriſtian wiſedome and ancient libertie, for that which was lawfull in this point in the firſt age, the Iews commonwealth, & the primitiue church, with the practiſe of all ages ſince, is alſo lawfull for them, to giue holy and ſignificant names to their children, for I would haue all (if it were poſsible) to haue no other names but ſuch as they vnderſtand: if they be called by the names of the ancient fathers, kings, or prophets, which we reade of in the Scriptures, it is alſo needful that they vnderſtand the liues and the diſpoſitions of thoſe perſons, that as they haue them for the euidence of their names, ſo they might looke vppon them, as the examples of their faith and manners.
               Secondly, by this wee note, what God his children thinke of their ſuffering, which Naomi ſetteth out by this worde Bitterneſſe, for bitterneſſe of all other taſtes doth moſt dull the ſenſe, and corrupt the ſtomacke, ſo that they account their afflictions as ſharpe to them as to anie, and may as lawfully complaine of them vnto the Lord. This I ſpeake for inſtruction of them that are ignorant, and the comfort of the afflicted. Firſt for inſtruction, because ſome thinke they are not truely religious, excepte they feele their miſeries no more than a

ſtone, when they are afflicted, and this maketh them ſo to wauer and doubt of themſelues, that in their greateſt plagues, they can hardly receiue any comfort, being alwayes troubled with this, that if they were faithfull they ſhould delight more in their tribulations: yet beloued, marke a litle, Naomi calleth it in this place, bitternes, as if ſhee had called the enimy to her health, for when Peter would expreſſe the danger of Simon Magus,Act. 8.23 becauſe he offered money for the gift of the holy ghoſt, he telleth him he is in the very gal of bitternes, by that metaphor or allegory declaring the loathſomnes of ſin to his ſoule,Pſa. 31.10 as bitternes to the body. Dauid ſaith that his affliction was his death, as if he had ſaid, euen as a man ſtriueth to be deliuered in the pangs of death, ſo he from his tribulation. Iob that mirrour of patiēce, did ſo delight in his ſuffrings, that in one place he ſeemeth to accuſe God himſelfe, to adde to his tranſgreſſions, that is to make his ſins ſeem greather then they were,Ioh. 16.18.19. and how doth hee deſire to plead with God about his affliction, & curſed the day and houre of his death? Our ſauiour would neuer haue warned vs that in the world we ſhould haue ſorrowe and lamentation, had he not knowne that the ſmart of our ſufferings would thruſt foorth abundance of teares, through the vehemency of the paynes: and preſently hee addeth a ſecret compariſon between a woman in trauail, & a chriſtian in perſecution, ſo that as the one hath moſt vehement ſorrowes and pitifull lamentations, ſo alſo may the other: infinite teſtimonyes might bee brought for the proofe of this, to teach vs, that God his children are made of fleſhe as well as of ſpirite, and the fleſhe is weake, though the ſpirite bee willing: therefore wee may feare and cry vnder the burthen of our paines, that our afflictions are bitter vnto vs, and that the hand of the Lord is grieuous vppon vs. Againe, for the comfort of the godly I ſpeake this, that if any haue grieuouſly complained of their ſufferings, let them impute it to the ſharpnes of their paines, and the weaknes of their natures: wee ſee this Naomi calleth bitternes vnto her, ſuch as ſhee woulde not willinglye

take except it were for the phiſicke of her ſoule, and nowe almoſt ten yeares ſpace this griefe hath growen vppon her, ſo that it may ſeeme of all others ſhee was moſt grieued, for now ſhe vttereth her minde as freſhlye, as if the potion were yet vndigeſted in the ſtomacke. Be comforted therefore my ſorrowfull brethren and ſiſters, you ſee you are not alone in this miſerie, for Dauid, Iob, Naomi, Annah, Nehemiah, and many other are as farre indebted to the Lord in this pointe, as euer was any: ſtriue to ſuppreſſe it by prayer, and quench it by ſinging of pſalms: neither let vs iudge but charitably of thoſe which in this caſe are troubled, bee it for the loſſe of their children, the death of their husbands, the decay of their wealth, or the lacke and want of their health. If they ſeme impatient and weaker then our ſelues, let vs beare parte of their burthens vppon our chriſtian comforts, that they with vs, & we with thē, like ſeling members of the ſame infirmities, may ſuſtaine our croſſes by our mutuall ſupplications, and obtaine our deliuerance by the bloud of Chriſt.
               
                  I went out ful. In theſe words ſhe amplifieth her former complaint by this compariſon of a full veſſell and an empty, ſhewing that as the fulleſt veſſell is the ſoundeſt, & the emptieſt good for nothing, ſo it fareth with her when ſhe looketh vpon her former life, when ſhee went foorth ſhee had plenty, but now ſhee returneth in want; then ſhe was found, but now broken, then ioyfull, but now ſorrowful: why ſhould ſhe be called pleaſant or beautiful, or by her old name, ſeeing God hath humbled her, whereas in times paſt hee vpheld her in proſperity, but now hee hath caſt her downe into aduerſity. Where wee firſt of all obſerue the nature of worldly proſperity, which to day is like a ful veſſell, but to morrowe like an emptye, now it is greene, anone it is withered, now it groweth, anone it is cut downe, now like Nabuchadnezzar ſitting vppon his throane with his counſellors and courtyers of eſtate about him, but anone both Court and Countrey driue him to the companie of wilde beaſtes: for as a little breache emptyeth the barrell▪ ſo a lyttle trouble

bringeth worldly welfare to wallow in the mire. Therfore we read of none, either king or country which had ſuch a proſperous eſtate but it had one enimy or other to worke his woe:1. king. 10 17 if wee conſider the raigne of Salomon, where gold was innumerable and ſiluer as plentifull as ſtones, yet it wanted not his miſeries, the people were puniſhed by paiments to their prince, the king was threatened which the loſſe of ten parts of his kingdome, & God ſtirred Hadud the Edomite againſt him, where ended their peace.& 11. cap 11.14 Where is then ye roialty of Salomon? was it not caſt downe in one day, his riches conſumed, his buildings burned, his children captiuated, his wiſedome turned to idolatrie, his poſperitie decayed and al his honour ouerturned. Oh that worldlings would conſider their ſickle eſtate and bee admoniſhed of their iminent dangers: the Lord putteth them into his balance, & finding them to light caſteth them out.Ier: 12.3 Ieremy ſayth, they are but fatted ſheepe, kept for the day of ſlaughter, now in the paſture and preſently it the fire, they are but aduanced to bee caſt downe againe, as the veſſel is filled to bee emptied in due time, the eares which are now full of corne in the field, anon ſhall ly without on the dunghyll, Babilon the queene of the world which ruled as yet, was troden downe & made a ſeruant. Tyrus that crowned men with her wealth, was conſumed by warre, for the Lord of hoſts decreeth al this, to ſtaine the pride of glory, & to bring to contempt all that be mighty vpon the earth.Eſay. 23.9 Weep, weep O daughters of honor, the days will come whē ye tēder ſhal not be regarded, for your welth ſhal not al. ways endure, the crowne abideth not from generation to generation, your houſes ſhall bee ouerturned, your names forgotten, your children impoueriſhed, your glory defaced your inheritance changed, your welfare powred on the earth like water, and your worſhip ſhall bee neuer repayred. This haue God his deareſt children felt, and the greeneſt trees haue bene ſcorched which the fire of God his wrath, for hee is not delighted in worldly brauery, but hath buried great treaſure in the ſea which ſhall neuer bee found, to keepe mankind

kind from the ende of his purpoſe: for this is their honour, they get nothing but with much trauaile, and in one houre, looſe labour, life and wealth.
               Secondly, that which in our texte is, the Lord hath humbled me, in the hebrew is, The Lord hath teſtified or witneſſed againſt mee, for by his iudgments hee humbleth vs, as it 
                     •
                   were producing witneſſes to accuſe vs of ous iniquityes, as wee ſee in common iudgments all things paſſe by euidence if they be antient, & by witnes if it be late, ſo the Lord when hee hath a quarrell againſt vs, he firſt prooueth vs guilty by witnes of our ſins,Deut. 31.5.26 and then puniſheth vs for committing tranſgreſſions. For this cauſe Moſes commaundeth the book of the law to be laid vp in the ſide of the ark of the couenant, for a witnes againſt the people:Pſa: 50:7 ſo the Lord ſpeaketh by Dauid, Heare O my people, and I will ſpeake, heare O Iſrael, & I will teſtifie vnto thee, for I am thy God: and after this hee reporteth his witnes againſt them, firſt yt their ſacrifices were corrupted, that their religion was all outward,Pro. 28.1 they ſpake well but did ill. And thus God witneſſeth the ſins of commonweales by the changing of their prince,Eſth: 7, 9 Eſa. 22.19 the ſins of publique perſons by caſting them out of their office, the ſins of priuate perſons, ſometimes by inpriſonment, ſometimes by ſcourging or pouerty and ſometimes by ſicknes, aluding to trials of iudgment where the noble is condemned for treaſon as well as the meaner perſon for ſtealing. And this my beloued hath the Lord teſtified againſt vs, our peace hath beene threatened by warre, our prince by treaſon, our banquetting by famine, our exceſſe by penury, our pride by pouerty, our peoples contempt of preaching by peſtilence, and ſtill the Lord hideth one ſin from this witnes that we might repent for all. Then we muſt needs ſet down with our ſelues, that our actions are noted, our prophaning of ſaboths regiſtred, our contempts againſt God his miniſters deſcribed, the times of our drunkennes, idlenes & wantonnes, numbred, our owne conſciences examined, the witneſſes produced, we arreigned, and now, euen now before God his iudgement ſeate in danger to

be euerlaſtingly condemned, for as Naomi ſayth, the Lord emptieth vs of his graces, and teſtifieth againſt vs: who ſhall plead for vs when the iudge knoweth our guiltineſſe, ſurely, ſurely there is no hope of pardon but to the penitent, & patience muſt be prayed for, that our ſufferings may be eaſed.
               
                  So ſhee returned with Ruth the Moabiteſse with her. This verſe is the concluſion of this firſt chapter, where is deſcribed the time of Naomies returne vnto Bethlehem from the countrey of Moab, which was the beginning of barley harueſt, that the reporte ſhee hearde in Moab, (how God had viſited his people and giuen them bread) might at her firſt arriuall bee found true: wherein is noted the bleſſing of God vnto her that ſhe came in the beginning of harueſt, the pleaſanteſt and profitableſt time of all the yeare. This barley harueſt was in the latter parte of the firſt moneth, and the beginning of the ſecond among the Iewes, which with vs are called March and Aprill, for the warmnes of thoſe contreyes is ſuch, that their harueſt is ripe much ſooner then in ours.
               By the which alſo we note, that ſhee had a proſperous ſucceſſe in her iourney, that euen in thoſe dangerous dayes, ſhee came ſafely to Bethlehem: all thoſe doubts which in the beginning we ſhewed you, might haue hindered her iourney, ſhee well ouerpaſſed, for no doubt in ſo rare a matter, if any lette had bene offered, the holy ghoſt would not haue omitted it. So that this teacheth vs with Naomi, that as ſhe was not hindered in her trauaile from Moab to God his people, euen ſo muſt not we be ſtayed from the profeſſion of true religion. She was an old woman, yet ſhe would go ſo tedious a iourney to the company of the faithful, therfore let no man thinke that age excuſeth them from the true worſhippe of God, or ſincere profeſſion of religion. Shee had little companie to encourage her, onely poore Ruth her daughter in law wayted vppon her, therefore it muſt not hinder o
                     •
                   diſcourage vs that ſo fewe followe religion, for Chriſtes flocke is a little flocke, like the firſt fruits of the harueſt field, which is

but a handfull to many cartloades. Naomi aduentured her body and forſoke her goods, to come to the houſe of the Lord: Oh how colde are our dayes, when men neede neither of both, yea they will hardly go any farther for knowledg thē the vileſt atheiſt in the world: & to conclude, many dangers hung ouer her head, yet by the prouidence of God ſhe eſcapeth al, euen ſo my brethren admit no delayes, inuente no excuſes, receiue no hinderances, imagine no ſuſpitions, and abſtaine from all ſtayes which maye let you from comming to the mountaine of the Lord, the company of the faithfull, for bleſſed are the people, whoſe God is Iehouah, and it is better to abide but one daye in the courtes of the Lord, than a thouſand yeeres in the pallaces of the wicked. Now let vs giue praiſe to the Lord.
               The end of the fourth Lecture.
            
            
               
               The fifth Lecture.
               
                  
                     Ruth. Chapter 2. verſe 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
                     
                        1 Now Naomies husband had a kinſman, a man of great wealth, of the family of Ei
                           •
                        melech, whoſe name was Boaz.
                     
                        2 And when Ruth the Moabitiſh ſayd vnto her mother in lawe, Let mee goe, I praie thee, into the field, to gather eares after him, in whoſe eyes I ſhall find fauour: and ſhe ſayd, Go my daughter.
                     
                        3 And ſhe went and came to gather in the field, after the reapers: and ſhee met with the poſſeſsion of a field pertaining to Boaz, who was of the familie of El
                           •
                        melech.
                     
                        4 And behold, when Boaz came from Rethleem, hee ſayd to the reapers, The Lord be with you. And they ſayde, The Lord bleſſe thee.
                     
                        5 And Boaz ſayd to his ſeruant which was appointed ouer the reapers▪ Whoſe is this maid?
                     
                        6 And the ſeruant which was appointed ouer the reapers, anſwered and ſayd, This is the Moabitiſh maide, which came with Naomi from the countrie of Moab.
                     
                        7 Which came and ſaide, Let mee gather, I praie you, among the ſheaues, after the reapers: and ſo ſhe came, & ſtayed heere from morning vntill now, onely ſhe tarried a little while at her houſe.
                  
               
               
                  IN the former Chapter we heard by our generall diuiſion, that the occaſion of this hiſtorie was therein contained: but now in theſe three Chapters following, is declared the meanes whereby this marry age was accompliſhed, whereof the firſt is deſcribed in this ſecond Chapter, which is the acquaintance of Boaz & Ruth, and the circumſtances thereof, as ſhall appeare in the ſpeciall treatiſe of euerie particular thing. The occaſion of this acquaintance is the gleaning of Ruth in the field

of Boaz. Theſe ſeuen verſes containe two partes, the firſt and principall parte is of Boaz, and the ſeconde of Ruth. The firſt part is contained in the 1.4.5.6.7. ver. wherein Boaz is deſcribed, verſe 1. to be Naomies kinſman by her husband. Secondly, to bee a man of great wealth, in ye other verſe is ſet down his diligence, which came to the field to viſit his workmen, & view the cō
                  panie. His actions after hee came to the field, are, firſt the ſalutation of the reapers, verſe 4. and they doo the like to him: ſecondly, he asketh his ſeruant who Ruth was, verſe 5. To which queſtion the ſeruaunt anſwereth, firſt telling his maſter that it was Ruth the Moabiteſſe, the companion of Naomi, verſe 6. ſecondly, he excuſeth her gathering, becauſe ſhee asked leaue, and tarryed there but onely that morning, verſe 7.
               The ſecond part, which reſpecteth Ruth, is contained, verſes, 2.3. Wherin firſt ſhe asketh leaue of her mother to go and gather eares, where ſhe ſhould finde fauour, and her mother graunteth, verſe 2. Secondly, the place where ſhe gathereth is deſcribed, which was the field or poſſeſsion of Boaz, her husbands kinſman. Of theſe partes let vs briefely ſpeake, as the ſpirite of God ſhall giue vtterance, and the time permit.
               
                  Now Naomies husband. In this verſe is contained the deſcription of Boaz, vppon whome the whole hiſtorie following dependeth. This Boaz was the ſonne of Salmon, who was ſonne to Nahaſſon,1. Chr. 2.10 Ioſ. 2.4.5. Math. 1.5. Heb. 11.31 the prince of the hoaſt of Iudah: the mother of Boaz was Rachab the harlot which receiued the ſpies of Iſrael into her houſe at Iericho) as we see in Mathew, and is commended for her faith, by the author of the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes. So that euerie waie wee ſee this dignitie commended vnto vs: if we looke for birth, his grandfather was the chiefe of the princely tribe of Iudah: if for authoritie, he was, ſayth this ſcripture, of great power:Cap. 2.23 if for wealth, his inheritance muſt needes bee great, who was deriued of ſuch noble anceſtours, and the reaping of his corne laſted to the end of all harueſt, & the chief of all, his religion is excellently commended vnto vs in the text and hiſtorie following. So that we haue not to

deale heere with meane and baſe perſonages, being all of a kindred, howſoeuer ſome are ſoner come to decay then other: but out of this wee learne many profitable leſſons.
               Firſt that ſeeing Boaz and Elimelech are ſaid to be kinſmen as thoſe which are deſceaded from the ſame predeceſſors or anceſtry, wee are admoniſhed of the frailty and vanity of worldly dignity, that howſoeuer parents prouide for the maintenance of poſterity, yet the Lord muſt diſpoſe the decay of their children. Here we ſee poore Naomi hath a wealthy and an honourable kinſman, yet ſhee a deſtitute and a deſolate widdowe. Her husband and ſhee were no meane perſons, but vndoubtedly both deſcended of noble familyes: the yeares were but few ſince the death of Ioſuah, vnder whom the inheritance of euery tribe, was giuen by lot, and all the Iewes & Iſraelits wealthy poſſeſſors, yet ſee this godly Naomi, is faine to liue of the gleanings of her daughter, which neither her parents, nor her husband did euer thinke vppon. Beholde therefore as in a glaſſe, the perfect image of temporall felicyty, the father a king, the children beggers, the father honourable, the ſonne not worſhipfull, the predeceſſors the chiefeſt in authority, but the ſucceſſors the meaneſt in calling: this made the fathers thinke, that the world was like the ſea, heere a mighty waue, and there a great downefall, ſome thought it to be like iſe, where a man can neuer ſtand ſure, but the one will bee breaking, or hee bee ſlyding, ſome like to trees, whereof the talleſt are ſooneſt ouerturned, but all agree in this that worldly felicity is miſerable vanitie: For, our preſent wealth is like a pleaſant ſummer, which muſt needes come to an end, though all the world ſhould ſtriue to the contrary: it was accounted to king Dauid,Sam. 7.12. for a ſpecyall bleſſing of God vnto him, and none other, that ſhee ſhoulde not bee without a ſonne to ſit on his ſeate, if his poſteritie would obſerue his commaundements: yet wee ſee in Ioſeph and Mary the mother of Chriſt, beeing both of his ofſpring, how they could not obtaine

in his owne citie, a chamber to lie in,Luc. 2:7. but were faine to lodge in a ſtable, ſo that this is not onely to the wicked, but to the deareſt ſaints of God. Adam continued not ſtill in paradiſe, but was caſt out that his felicity might bee heauenly, and not earthly: euen ſo the poſterity of the righteous are brought into pouerty, that they ſet not their mindes vppon temporall glory. Therefore the Lord doth heere correct vs, with pinching pouerty, that there wee ſhoulde not with the world be condemned for delighting in vanity. Then by this we learn humilitie in our wealth and worſhip, honour and dignitie: Set not vp your homes ſo highe, ſayth Dauid and if riches encreaſe ſet not your hearts vppon them,Paſ. 62, 10. for the Lorde reſiſteth the proude, and giueth grace to the humble and meeke. Wee read of ſtately kings and Emperours which haue beene caſte from throne to the foote ſtoole, of wealthy perſons which in one houre haue beene vtterly vndone, but of children whoſe parents were honourable, riche, many thouſandes brought to perpetuall ſlauerye. If you feare not your owne eſtates, yet care for your poſteritie, and make much of them whome now you ſee caſt downe, the poore, the deſtitute, the deſpiſed, the miſerable: for if Ionathan, in his honour, make of Dauid in his humilitie, when Dauid commeth to his kingdome, hee will aduaunce his ofſpring to his owne table: euen so if you make much of them that are poore, nowe, when you ſhall bee humbled in your poſterity, the Lord ſhall prouide for your iſſue by theſe that haue beene fauoured by you. The wheele of the world runneth round, ſometime that which was loweſt is higheſt, and that which was higheſt is made lowe againe. So bee you aſſured, the Lord aduanceth dayly out of the duſt, to ſet with princes, therefore make you friendes of the vnrighteous Mammon, that when you ſhall haue neede, they may receiue you into their euerlaſting habitations. Diſtribute liberally, giue plentyfully, line peaceablie, walke humbly, for the wealth of the world doth not

alway laſt, neither the crowne from generation to generation.
               Secondly, by this we gather, that the godly may ſafely enioy great poſſeſſions, & of the bleſſing of God be exceeding rich men: but ſome will ſay, indeede they may be wealthy, but with the hazarde of their ſoules, for Chriſt ſayth▪ How hardly ſhall they which haue riches,Luc. 18.25 enter into the kingdome of God: it is eaſier for a cable to go thorough the eye of a needle then for a rich man to enter into the kingdome of heauen. Then if the danger of it bee ſo great, the pooreſt condition is the ſafeſt welfare. I grant you, but Chriſt ſpeaketh of carnal wealthy, which make their goods their God, as after he ſaith, thoſe that put their truſt in their riches. Of this ſorte the world was neuer fuller: as on the contrary, of the other there was, neuer fewer, you ſhall haue them in all places which ſpeake againſt the Goſpell, becauſe it is an enimy to their liuings and offices, promotions and honors, like Demetrius for Diana, a heathen deuill: you ſhall haue other that will offer largely to the Goſpell, like the young man that came to Chriſt, but when it toucheth a litle greater coſt, then farwell religion. But this is the faulte of the men, not of their wealth, and yet I am perſuaded that there are many wealthy Abrahams, which will giue of the tenthes of their poſſeſſions, to the heauenly Melchiſedech Ieſus Chriſt, many Lots that will harbour the angels of God and rather wiſhe, violence to their own daughters, then to the righteous: and finally, like to this Boaz in riches & religion, of whom wee dayly pray the Lord increaſe the number.
               Thirdly we ſee in this Boaz an excellent example of the reward of religion and faith, for we haue heard that hee was the ſonne of Rachab, which receiued the ſpyes of Ioſuah, who afterwarde was married to Salmon the ſon of Nahaſſon, by whom came this godly and wealthy Boaz. In this then we ſee true the ſaying of the Apoſtle, that godlineſſe hath the promiſes of this life and of the life to come: for in hir ſelfe ſhe was bleſſed with an honourable marriage, in her poſterity with

a godly and a wealthy ſon. This my beloued is a notable encouragement to religion, for Chriſt ſayth that whoſoeuer ſhal for him forſake father or mother,Luc. 18.30 wife or children, ſhall receiue many times ſo much in this world, but eternall ſaluation in the life to come. This anſwereth and ſtoppeth the mouthes of the enemyes which call the profeſſors, bankeruptes, impoueriſhed & decayd perſons, yea as baſe as beggers in this world, which by their religion vndoe themſelues and their poſterity. But on the contrary, we affirme that religion bringeth no diſcommodity, euen in worldly things; the reaſon is, becauſe it teacheth vs to vſe our riches aright. If a man had mountaines of money, & knew not how to employ it, what profit could he receiue therby? euen ſo ſurely, without Chriſt and his Goſpell, I meane the true knowledge thereof, there is no lawful vſe of theſe worldly benefits, and except euery one learne to apply them by the word of God, hee poſſeſſeth his wealth, as a thiefe doth the purſe of a true man, & in the preſence of God is no better then a violent robber, which takeeth away the mony from the lawfull poſſeſſors which haue proued and learned the way to vſe it: and as they haue it without his knowledge, euen ſo they ſhall vſe it without his bleſſing. Therfore be not diſcouraged my dere brethren, come forward in religion, it is the deuil that telleth you, you muſt make bread of ſtones, that is, you muſt relye vppon the world, and follow the cuſtome thereof: there is greater plenty and 
                     •
                  ſtore in the garners of God his word, then in all the cornefields of the world. He which could feede fiue thouſand people,Ioh, 6.13 with fiue barly loaues and two fiſhes, hath hee not inough for the maintenance of thy family? He which fed the hoſt of Iſrael almoſt fourty yeares with angells foode, are not the heauens his for euermore: when almoſt all the world was in a famine, did hee not prouide for his ſeruant Eliah, firſt commaunding the rauens to bring him bread and meate morning and euening to the brooke Cherith, and that being dried vp, ſuſtained him with a widdow and her ſon,2. King. 14.34 by a handful of meal & a litle oile for a long ſeaſon? Did not our

gracious father multiplie the oile of a poore prophets widow into many veſſels,2. King: 5.12 34 which before coulde not fill one? And what ſhall I ſaie more? I haue neuer ſeene the righteous forſaken, or their children left deſtitute.
               
                  And Ruth. After the holy Ghoſt had ſet downe the deſcription of Boaz,Ver. 2.3. as the neceſſarie occaſion to vnderſtand that which followeth, in the next place he expreſſeth this of Ruth. Wherein he ſheweth vs the carefulneſſe of Ruth, for her mother and her ſelfe being in a ſtrange place, would not in hunger harbor at home, but rather aduenture her perill in an honeſt labour, by going abroad to gleane in the fieldes, therefore to her mother ſhee commeth and asketh leaue, which beeing granted, forth ſhe goeth, the prouidence of the Lorde directing her iourney, ſhe commeth to the harueſt field of Boaz her kinſman.
               Where firſt of all wee gather, what manner of lyfe they lead after they came to Bethlehem, namely, a very poore, baſe, and deſpiſed eſtate, not halfe ſo good to ſee to, as that which they lead and liued among the Moabites, inſomuch as one may nowe ſaie vnto mee, you tolde vs euen now, the golden rewards and precious commoditie of true religion, which it bringeth to all them that faithfully receiue it but you ſee theſe two godly women, as armed examples againſt your ſelfe, they liued wealthily in Moab, but poorely in Iudah; with the wicked they found gentle liberalitie, but with the godly they indure wofull pouertie. What colde intertainment doo they finde at Bethlehem, euen in the Church of God, for whoſe ſake one forſooke her countrie, the other her wealth, and both of them their welfare? ſo that the profeſsion of religion looſeth our friends, denieth our countrie, diſquieteth our peace, ingendereth our trouble, conſumeth our wealth, and deca
                     •
                  eth our ſubſtance. Is this the profit of your profeſsion, which promiſeth mountaines of ſecuritie, and paieth multitude of miſeries? How ſhall we bee incouraged to religion, when at the firſt entrie we ſhall paie ſo great an in-come, and depart from a fine worth all our ſubſtance? To this I anſwere, that if the beginning bee

not ſo ioyful as you or they wiſhed▪ yet the end anſwered their expectation. I grant, you ſhall firſt find a little want, but in the end you ſhall poſſeſſe a great gaine. A man that hath a thouſand pounds layde beſide him, & layeth it out vpon a bargaine, whereof hee ſhall receiue no profite in many yeeres, but the date expired, and the daie of receit come, hee receiueth his owne, and many thouſand pounds for his gaine, you will graunt at the firſt hee emptieth his coffers and bags, and leaueth him ſelfe bare and mony leſſe, yet you would account him a foole, if he would not vpon ſure bands of ſo great aduantage aduenture his owne, and giue forth his monie: Euen ſo it is in religion, it is a pearle for which we muſt ſel both liuing & landes, and yet it is worth both, and many thouſand times more: if thou feele not the profit at the firſt, tarry a while, thou haſt the promiſe & band of the Lorde of hoaſts, hee is able and willing to performe and paie at the time appointed, and if thou canſt abide a little want of earthly commodities, ſhortly thou ſhalt ſee them rolling vpon thee in excellent aboundance and exceeding quantityes. And this teacheth vs with what mind we muſt embrace religion, not for any preſent commoditye, or temporall gaine, but with deniall of our liues and riches, that they may ſerue vs as ordinarye expenſes in our iourney to euerlaſting ſaluation, the kingdome of heauen. For they are much deceiued, that receiue the truth to increaſe their wealth, making Chriſtianity a gainefull trade, for although it hath the promiſes, yet it hath not alway the poſſeſſion of things in this life, but as the right heires are many times put beſide their inheritances, which are poſſeſſed by vnlawfull owners, ſo the godly are the right heires of the whole world, although the wicked haue driuen them out of poſſeſſion, for the which the Apoſtle ſayd, that godlyneſſe hath the promiſes of this life, and alſo of the life to come. Againe, thoſe promiſes that the meeke ſhall poſſeſſe the earth, and their ſeede ſhall inherite the land, and eſpecially that the verie ſame which are the elected heyres of grace, are alſo the appointed inherytours of this worlde.

But this my beloued muſt eſtabliſhe our mindes, that as the ſeed which is caſt into the ground; ſeemeth for a long ſeaſon to be loſt, yet in the end it groweth for the comfort of mankind and the great profit of the poſeſſors, ſo although at the firſt the fruite of religion is peraduenture but ſharp in worldly affaires, yet if wee waite like the husbandman vntill harueſt, our conſciences ſhall be plentifull garners of heauenly corne, for the preſent comfort of our liues, and the perpetuall benefit of our ſouls. A man dreſſeth his vineyard all the yeare long, and doth nothing but empty his purſe, and weary his body in the tillage and pruning and digging thereof, yet there is but one vintage or time of gathering grapes, euen ſo wee muſt willingly depart with our wealth, and trauaile in diligence, for the preparing of our ſoules, to beare fruite to the Lord: & the end wil be moſt profitable, though ye begining ſeem moſt chargeable. The like may be ſaid of the marchant, which cutteth the ſeas, of the goldſmith, that melteth his metal, & of euery worldly trade which at the firſt begin with charges, but at the laſt acquite the coſt, and ſatisfie the deſire, and end with the increaſe of ſubſtance: which are but carnall and outward things, to put vs in minde of inward and ſpirituall ſignifications, for as in none of theſe wee are diſcouraged by the coſtly entrance, ſo, more accurſed ſhall we be, if we forſake the wel of the water of life, the running fountaine of euerlaſting health, to rake in the puddles of tranſitory riches, for feare the one will giue vs too much eaſe, and for feare the other will withdraw our wealth, which is like the Gergeſits ſin, which had rather poſſeſſe their heards of ſwine, then enioy the preſence, and preaching of Ieſus Chriſt. Come not to religion for hope of world lye aboundance, for nether Abraham, or the Iſraelites, or Rachab, or Ruth, or Zacheus, or Cornelius, or anye of the faythfull had this intention.Gen. 12:1: Exo: 12.38 Ioſ: 6:29: Heb. 19.8 Act. 10.1 But the Lorde for our farther ſtrengthning, hath giuen two bleſſings, that if the temporall fayle which are but conditionall, yet the euerlaſting benefits ſhall neuer deceaue: for although the leaues fall, yet bodyes of the trees abide

continually. Therefore let vs ſtay our mindes vppon this double ſtring, which is grounded vppon the credit of him that giueth the promiſe, before whom heauen and earth ſhal decay, and the ſun ſhall looſe her light, rather then he fruſtrate the hope of the godly.
               Secondly, here wee note a moſt excellent example of obedience to parents, and auoyding of idlenes. Ruth was lately come to Bethlehem, where it is likely ſhee might long haue taried, before her mother woulde haue entreated her to ſo baſe a labour as gathering of barley, but ſeeing her ſelfe employed in nothing, firſt ſhee commeth to her mother, and after asketh leaue, as one deſirous of ſome honeſt, though neuer ſo ſimple a calling. If ſhee had departed, not acquainting her with it, being to labour for their liuing, ſhee might well bee excuſed: but this ſeemeth much, that ſhee muſt come vnto her, not to tell her ſhee would go to ſuch a buſines, but to giue her leaue to gleane in the fields, promiſing ſhe would not go beyond her bounds, but onely gather in that place, where the owner thereof ſhould grant her licenſe▪ vnto which when the mother had granted, foorth ſhee goeth to the field of Boaz. Where wee ſee what effect godlines worketh in the hearts of children, for Ruth offered her ſeruice, which her mother intreated not, ſhe abhorred no labor were is neuer ſo baſe, ſhe was not aſhamed of her pouerty, euen in a ſtraunge countrey: and all this muſt bee imputed to her religion. For as Ioſeph for the feare of God, bore with the wrath of his father,Gen. 37.10 when hee told him his viſion of the ſun and the moone & the eleuen ſtars bowing vnto him, ſo did Ruth with the poore eſtate of her mother in law, which had nothing to liue by: thus the Apoſtle teacheth children to obey their parents in all things, that is,Eph: 6:1 not onely to be willing to performe their commaundements, but alſo, to bee alway contented with their eſtate, for this wretchednes of curſed children, is worthy to be condemned, wherein thoſe which haue wealthy parents, will pleaſe them, till they haue gotten their riches, which are like the prodigall ſonne in the Goſpell: other becauſe their parents

are poore, wil thinke they are bound vnto them in nothing, becauſe they haue litle or no wealth to leaue behind them: both theſe kindes of children are heere condemned by the example of Ruth, who did not onely forſake her wealth to goe with her mother, but alſo labor with her hands to maintaine her liuing, yea to her step-mother, which is more commendable then if it were done to her naturall parents. The vſe of this doctrine is, to exhort and ſtirre vp parents, to bee more carefull to teach their children the feare of the Lord, then to leaue them mountaines of riches behind them, which if they will practiſe, would their countenances be ſo ſorrowfull as often they are? would not their naturall oliues, I meane their children, anoint their faces with the oyle of cheerefulnes: if mothers eyther would or could doo as Naomi did for Ruth, teach their children the feare of the Lord, their hearts ſhould not bee ſo heauie, for their vngracious life. But ſince parents had no care to inſtruct their children, children had no feare to diſobey their parents. Will they in theſe dayes acquaint their fathers & mothers with their iourneis & labors? or runne not they headlong to their own vtter vndoing? they chuſe them maſters & seruices without fathers conſent, they marry & are married againſt parents good will: do they not take pleaſure for profit, & paſtime for godlines? thinking thēſelues to be born for wantonneſſe, referring the care of their old age to their gray headed parents, & neuer conſidering till beggery catch their bodies, & damnation their soules. Surely, as the fruite is ſower becauſe it is not grafted, ſo their manners are wicked, becauſe they want religion: this lieth then in the ouerlouing parents, who make ſuch dandlings of their babes, while they are young, that they care not for their fathers when they be old. They conſider not, that lions are tamed when they are yong, that trees are bowed when they are twigges: And that Salomon ſaith, Intruct a child when hee is young, the way of his life,Pro. 22.6 and when he is old he shall not departe from it. Their owne ignorance is ſo palpable, that their children learne nothing but folly: they themſelues ſo vain, that the other are wanton: they ſo obſtinate, that

their feede is rebellious: and finally, a wilde vine bringeth foorth nothing but wilde grapes, and ignorant parents muſt haue vngracious children. Therfore, ſeeing by nature you wold haue obedient and wiſe children,Pro. 1.7 Pſa:
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     1:10 teach them the feare of the Lord, for that is the beginning of wiſedome, and if you would haue your names in your poſterity long to endure, the prayſe of it continueth for euer. Thirdly, here we may note an example of chriſtian honeſtie, one of the fruicts of religion; for ſhe telleth her mother, ſhe would go gather where ſhee could get leaue, as if the holy ghoſt had ſaid, the gleanings are for the poore,Leuit: 19.9 Deut. 15.7. 1. Cor. 9.7. yet poore men muſt not take them, without the conſent and fauour of the owners. The Lord euery where exhorteth to giue to the poore, but he neuer bid the poore take where they found, vnknowing to the poſſeſſor: but they muſt as Ruth heere doeth, not take their right, the very gifte of the Lord, without the fauour of man. This condemneth the raſhnes of many, which thinke if they bee poore, that men are bound to giue to them, and ſmall matters they may take freely, without the conſent of him that poſſeſſeth it: yet we ſee not onely religion, but alſo plaine reaſon to gaine-ſay it: for the leaſt thing a man hath in his owne, as well as the greateſt, & one law condemneth the taking of a handfull, and a buſhell of corn, though the offence be not ſo great. But ſome ſay, it was permitted by the Lord, that a man might take the eares of corne and rub them in his hande and eate them, as the diſciples did, without the conſent and treſpaſſe of the poſſeſſor: he might alſo take a bunch of grapes and eate them, and likewiſe the fruit of the orchard, by the ſame law, and therfore we may take without the conſent of him that poſſeſſeth it, I anſwere, if the queſtion bee made of an apple, or an eare of corne,Deut: 23.24.25. or a bunch of grapes, as then it was permitted, ſo I think there is none that wil now ſtand in it: but then you muſt remember by the ſame law, that no man might put a ſickle into the corne to reape downe a handfull, neither yet fill any litle meaſure with grapes or apples without the conſent of the owner. But now men will take great meaſures

and quantities, and yet thinke not themſelues ſatisfied, and being winked at for once, yet will they proceed till they be forbidden, and then will they vncharitably and vngodly report of ſuch men as will not ſuffer their goods to be ſpoiled by them.
               Laſtly, when her mother had graunted, forth ſhee goeth, and commeth to the poſſeſsion of Boaz her kinſman: where we may behold the hand of the Lorde fauouring her diligence, & leading her to the appointed place, where among all other ſhe might be, as ſhee was, moſt gently intreated: for ſhee a ſilly ſtraunger, knowing none beſide her mother, not acquainted with people or countrie, was ignorant whether to go, but God which directeth the goings of all, ordered her footſteps to his poſſeſsion, where firſt ſhe ſhould find fauour and feeding, that by this meanes the waie for her marry age might be prepared. Where we ſee an excellent example of the prouidence of God, looking vpon the pooreſt as well as the richeſt, and working all things in the world from the higheſt to the loweſt. Hee which directeth the deſcending of the ſparowes vpon the ground,Mat. 10, 34 doth hee not alſo conſider the goinges of the poore? It is no diſhonour to him, (as ſome would haue it, that they might more freely giue themſelues to iniquitie) to note euerie vile and loathſome thing in the world, or to looke vpon the baſe as well as the beſt: ſurely if anie thing be vncomely, it is to the ſinfull, but to him which is alwaies righteous are all things pure. What parents doo not loue the baſeſt partes of theyr childrens bodyes, which were borne of themſelues? yet greater is the loue of God vnto vs, than the loue of a mother to her owne ſonne; neither doth he or can hee but loue the meaneſt worke of his creation as well as chiefeſt, and the ſilly flie as well as the ſtately king. Oh how doth this comfort vs more than all the world beſide, when we knowe the king of glorie beholdeth our nakednes and pouertie, and giueth his angels charge ouer vs, that not the pooreſt Lazarus may bee loſt, but our bodies either eaſed with reliefe, or parted from life, our ſoules may aſcend to the boſome of Abraham. Euen

hee which directed the ſeruant of Abraham to the citie of Nachor, and brought Rebecca out to draw water, and moued her aunſwere to his prayer, her curteſie to ſatisfie his expectation, dyd alſo leade Ruth to the fields of Boaz, and guideth all the faithfull to the end of theyr deſires, knowing the counſels of the heart, diſpoſing the wordes of the mouth, feeding the hungry with good things, and ſending the riche away emptie, conducting vs all for his mercies ſake to walke in his pathes of righteouſnes.
               
                  But behold. After theſe things ſet downe by the holy Ghoſt concerning Ruth, he returned to Boaz againe, and this verſe is the beginning of the ſecond parte of that which reſpecteth him, in the which is declared his comming from Bethlehem, his ſalutation to the reapers and their anſwere to him againe.
               By the which wee gather the dutie of all maiſters of familyes and great perſons in the worlde, which is, not onely to be carefull their buſines be performed by other, but alſo that themſelues as the eye witneſſes of their ſeruants fidelity, ſhould look ouer their labours. This wee may ſee in Boaz, hee commeth from the cittie to the harueſt field: hee had committed the care of the reapers to a truſtie ſeruant: yet not contented therwith, in his own perſon he commeth to the worke. And ſurely, this diligence of Lords and maiſters, cauſeth faithfull labourers and ſeruantes: as the idlenes and negligence of the one cauſeth the vnfaithfulneſſe and ſlacknes of the other, for whiles the maiſters followe their worldly pleaſures,2. King. 5.16 the ſeruants omit their carefull buſines. Therefore we may reade in the building of the firſt & ſecond temple, there were ouerſeers of the worke, beſide the ordinarie labourers, and often times would king Salomon and Nechemiah come in their owne perſons to viewe the works. The like may wee reade of Eliſ
                        •
                     hahs hoſt,2. King: 4.1
                        •
                     . which was abroade in the field with his reapers, when his litle ſonne fell ſicke inſomuch as this ſeemeth a point of neceſſitie, that euery one, whom the Lord hath made a maiſter of poſſeſſions, although hee labour not, yet muſt hee certifie

himſelfe of his labourers diligence, with his owne eye ſight, which condemneth many inferiour maiſters, of negligent ſlothfullneſſe, and idle negligence, in not regarding their worldly talents giuen them of God, but referring the diſpoſition to their ſtewards and ſeruants, refuſe in their own perſons to deale with God his benefits, as too baſe thinges for their occupations, which is the cauſe that ſo many maiſters fall to be ſeruants, and ſo many ſeruants aſcend to be maiſters: their wealth is quickely conſumed, & theſe which would not be their own ſeruants to keepe themſelues in labour & wealth, come to be other mens ſlaues in drudgery or beggery, eyther in themſelues or their poſterity, as the iuſt iudgment of God, for he that would not vſe his talent had it taken from him: therfore ſeeing this ancient nobilitie were imploied in their own buſines, let not the new & ſoddaine vp ſtart wealthy men among vs, diſdaine at poore laboring perſons, or thinke it any diſgrace to do as their fathers did, faithfully to labour in the meaneſt vocation. Secondly, after Boaz came to the field, he ſaluteth the reapers & ſaith, The Lord be with you, & they anſwered. The Lord bleſſe thee: where wee ſee the firſt thing he doth, he prayeth for the labourers, in this his godly ſalutation, for he wiſheth the preſence of God to be with them, which is his fauour, for his preſence ſignifieth his fauour and bleſſing, as abſence betokeneth his iudgments and curſings.1. King: 8:11. This we may ſee in the dedication of the temple by Salomon, the glory of the Lord ſo filled it, that ye prieſts were not able to ſacrifiſe in it, & the angel ſaluteth Mary the mother of Chriſt wt the ſelfe ſame wordes, The Lord be with thee: wherin he ſignified the wonderfull fauour of God vnto her which ſhould be the mother of the Meſſiah.Luc. 1, 28. And on the contrary, the abſence of the Lord is the heauy wrath of his maieſty, as appeareth by that complaint of Dauid, Wil the Lord abſent himſelfe for euer? or hath he forgotten to be mercifull?Pſa: 77.7 and Paul ſaith that the wicked are ſeparated with euerlaſting deſtruction from the glory & preſence of God. By the which we learn how reuerētly we muſt vſe our ſalutations, leaſt when we wiſh the fauour of the Lord to be preſent with others, his mercy

through our vnaduiſed praier be abſent frō our ſelues: for how lamentable is it, to heare in many places, with one breath prayers to be powred out for other, and bitter blaſphemyes againſt the maieſty of God, with wofull curſes to the death of their ſoules?Iam, 3, 11: May wee gather any comfort by theſe ſalutations, when men in deriſion paſſing by other ſhall vſe the ſalutation of Boaz, other wiſhing they know not what, do as well by their ignorant greetings pray for their owne deſtruction, as their neighbours prosperitie? ſuch precious balmes let them not come vpon the heads of the righteous, for this is as certaine as the world ſhall haue an end, that all their ſupplications either at morning, noone, or euening, are but mere cuſtomary ſpeeches, proceding of the vſage & manner of men, not of the ſpirit or religion of the faithful. Yet let it not grieue vs to vſe this language of Canaan, the phraſe of the ſcripture, in our ciuill and godly comunication: and though, al the world cry out, puritaniſme, puritaniſme, yet bleſſed is hee that is not offended at Chriſt. Let the Samaritās worſhip in their mountaines, but we will worſhip at Ieruſalem in ſpirit & in truth: and let vs vſe, in deſpight of the world, ye weighty wordes of God his ſpirit, that they may be our owne mother ſpeech, we the children of the church, & the heires of ſaluation. But in this it is noted, to be the duety of all men to ſalute them whome they meete, to pray for the ſucceſſe of laborers and workmen, For wel we muſt remember, that except the Lord doe build the houſe, the builders build but in vaine, and except the Lord do giue the victorie, what though millions of horſes be prepared of ye battel? ſurely it is in vain to riſe early and to go late to bed & eate the bread of carefulnes,Pſa. 12.7.1. to labour hard, & cōpaſſe the world by a thouſand deuiſes, except their own prayers, & the prayers of the faithful, appeare in the preſence of the eternall for thē. And this noteth the carnal conſtitutions of many mens harts among vs, which raſhly enterpriſe their workes without calling on the Lord, & vnprofitably end thē to their owne deſtruction. Oh how it grieueth God his Saintes, dayly to heare his name abuſed by ſwearing,

euen among them that husband the earth. They crye out on theyr ſeruants morning and euening, abroad, abroad, to worke to the field: but who ſayth, come let vs firſt fall downe together and humble our ſelues in the preſence of God, and call for a bleſsing vppon our labours, or ſaie thus much, The Lord bee with vs: no, no, that will hinder their dayes worke, they hire theyr ſeruants to labour, and not to praie. Therefore the prophet ſayth,Hag. 1.6. You ſowe much, but you bring but little in, you eate, but you are not filled, you drinke, and are not ſatiſfied, you cloath your ſelues, but you are not warmed, and he that receiueth wages, putteth it into a broken bag: therefore thus ſayth the Lord, Hearken vnto my wayes. This is the plague vppon vs that minde our wealth, and not the welfare of God his Church, therefore we labour lyke ſlaues, but other receiue the benefite by vs: wee imagine the earth bringeth forth of it ſelfe, children are borne by nature, the cloudes muſt needes raine, and our fruites muſt needs increaſe: thus wee make many Gods, while wee aſcribe the power of God to his creatures. But be not ſo rude as brute beaſts, the dogge will craue his meate at the hands of his maſter: more accurſed are they which pray not for a bleſſing at the hands of God the father.
               Thirdly, by this ſalutation of Boaz, wee obſerue the dutie of elder perſons or ſuperiors, which is, firſt to ſalute or ſpeake to their inferiors, as maſters to ſeruants, magiſtrates to ſubiectes, and paſtours to their people: yet againſt this, in outward behauiour we haue many and dayly offences, for you ſhall haue Gentlemen and yeomen which will hardly ſpeake to a poore man, being asked a queſtion by him, much leſſe when they meet him will they giue anie curteous or friendly greeting. But heere we ſee Boaz, though honorable, yet humble, ſaluteth his poore and hired reapers, who condemneth ten thouſand that are contrarie minded, for proud and ſurly perſons. Olde Eli would ſpeake to young Samuel, a little boy: though hee were the high prieſt, yet hee ſcorned not ſo gentle a child: what then ſhall become of theſe ſtately perſon, which being ſaluted, will not ſalute

againe, as if euery word were gold that commeth from them, ſo ſparing are they to ſpeake to a poore or a ſimple man, whereas with their betters, their tongs are too bigge for their mouthes, whome they wearye with their vnprofitable bablings. This kind of euill ſpirite wil not be caſt out till the heart be humbled, pride abated, ſorrowe for ſin increaſed, and the whole man perfectly regenerated, for by thy wordes thou ſhalt bee iuſtified, and by thy wordes thou ſhalt be condemned, for an humble heart will ſhew it with meeknes, but a proud heart will looke ſtrangely.
               Fourthly, as Boaz praied for the reapers, ſo the reapers returned to him, and ſayd, The Lord bleſſe thee. Where wee ſee a mutuall ſalutation much commended, for as hee ſaluted, ſo was hee reſaluted, like to the Queene of Shebah, which gaue princely gifts to king Salomon, and Salomon gaue royall rewardes to her againe: ſo that inferiours are bound, by the ſame lawe with as kind affection to pray for other, as they themſelues wer firſt entreated: for this too much ſhamefaſtnes in many is worthy blame, becauſe it doth not onely couer the countenance, but alſo couer the tongue, leauing them ſpeecheles, when they are to anſwere their ſuperiors: but as theſe labuoring reapers vſe Boaz, ſo alſo muſt wee any of our betters: which is with reuerence to ſpeake our mindes, and godlines to pray for their welfare: and therefore wee muſt put on the ſpirite of meekenes, and euery one eſteeme better of another then of our ſelues. But ſome will ſay, there is no ſuch neceſſitie of ſalutation as you would make it,2. Kin. 4. 29 for Eliſehah ſending his ſeruaunt, commaunded him to ſalute no man by the way, and if any ſaluted him,Luc. 10.4 he ſhould not anſwere them: likewiſe our ſauiour Chriſt ſending his diſciples to preach, willed thē not to ſalute any by the way: therefore it is no ſuch ſigne of pride as you would make it.
               To the which I aunſwere, firſt that Eliſehah ſent his man in wonderfull haſt, which reſpected the life of the Shunamites ſon, therefore he willeth him to admit no let or hindrance in his iourney, but with all ſpeed to go

forward, inſomuch as he ſhould not doo the common curteſie to ſtrangers either in ſalutation or in anſwer: Euen ſo meaneth our ſauior that his diſciples being haſtilie ſent, as it were, to gather the harueſt of the Lorde, might admit no delay either in neceſſary or vnneceſſary buſines. And this teacheth vs that the labor of preaching excelleth all earthly duties, yea, that all other muſt ſerue to it as handmaides and ſeruaunts, to further the courſe, and not hinder the proceedings. Therefore this muſt remaine inuiolable, as grounded on the lawe of God and men, that curteous and godly ſalutations are verie commendable.
               
                  Then Boaz. Now in theſe three verſes following inſueth the communication had with his ſeruaunt, who Ruth was: vnto which his ſeruant telleth or anſwereth in the 6. and 7. verſes. Firſt, that it is Ruth which came with Naomi from the country of Moab: ſecondly, that ſhee asked him leaue to gather among the ſheaues: thirdly, that ſhe came but that morning, and had continued till that inſtant. Where we ſee the carefulneſſe of Boaz in doing good, would know the perſons whether they were worthie or not: and the faithfulneſſe of the ſeruant, which ſo plainly declared the truth to his maſter. And this is the pure meaning of the wordes: other doctrines can none be drawen from hence, and therefore let vs giue praiſe to God for that which hath beene ſpoken.
               The end of the fifth Lecture.
            
            
               
               The ſixt Lecture.
               
                  
                     Chap. 2. Verſe 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
                     
                        8 Then ſayd Boas to Ruth, Heareſt thou my daughter, go to none other field to gather, neither go from hence, but abide here by my maidens.
                     
                        9 Let thine eies be on the field that they doo reape, and go after the maidens: Haue I not charged the ſeruantes that they touch thee not? Moreouer, when thou art thirſtie, go vnto the veſſels and drinke of that which the ſeruants haue drawen.
                     
                        10 Then ſhee fell on her face, and bowed her ſelfe to the ground, and ſayd vnto him, How haue I found favour in thy eies, that thou ſhouldeſt knowe mee, ſince I am a ſtranger.
                     
                        11 And Boaz anſwered and ſayd vnto her, All is tolde, & ſhewed me that thou haſt done vnto thy mother in law, ſince the death of thy husband, and how thou haſt lefte thy father and mother, and the land where thou waſt borne, and art come vnto a people which thou kneweſt not in times paſt.
                     
                        12 The Lord recompence thy worke, and a full reward bee giuen thee of the Lord God of Iſrael, vnder whoſe wings thou art come to truſt.
                     
                        13 Then ſhe ſaid, Let me find fauor in thy ſight, my Lord, for thou haſt comforted me, & ſpoken to the hart of thy handmaid, yet I ſhall not be like to one of thy maides.
                     
                        14 And Boaz ſaid vnto her, At meale time come thou hether, and eate of the bread, and dippe thy morſell in the vineger: and ſhe ſate beſide the reapers, &c.
                  
               
               
                  IN theſe wordes the holy Ghoſt declareth the cōmunication which Boaz had with Ruth: for ſo ſoone as he vnderſtood who ſhe was, he turneth his ſpeech from the man to the woman. This conference, according to the number of the perſons, hath two partes. The firſt is of Boaz, and the ſecond of Ruth. The firſt parte which reſpecteth Boaz,

is the ſingular curteſie he offereth to Ruth, ver. 8.9.14. Wherin firſt he biddeth her to gleane freely among his maidens, not onely in that fielde, but alſo whereſoeuer the reapers beſtowe themſelues: ſecondly he commandeth his ſeruants that they doo her no iniurie, but giue her drinke when ſhe is thirſtie, and himſelfe called her to meate, and gaue her ſo liberally, that ſhe being ſufficed, left for her mother.
               The other part which concerneth Ruth, is her manner of behauior to this curteous intertainment of Boaz, wherein firſt ſhee boweth her ſelfe to the ground, verſe 10, ſecondly, ſhe confeſſeth the greatneſſe of his kindneſſe, in the ſame verſe, becauſe ſhe was a ſtranger, and her vnworthineſſe of anie benefit, verſ. 13, becauſe ſhee ſhould be as one of his maidens. For this ſpeech of Ruth Boaz ſheweth the cauſe of all his curteſie, ver. 11. becauſe ſhee had dealt ſo well with her mother in lawe, and had forſaken countrie and kindred to come to the people of God, therefore ſhee deſerued to be honourably intreated: ſecondly, he prayeth for her, ver. 12 that the Lord would not fruſtrate his promiſe, deceiue her hope, but recompence her labour, and ſhield her with his wings. Of theſe partes let vs ſpeake in order, as the ſpirit ſhall giue vtterance, and the time permit.
               
                  Then ſayd Boaz. So ſoone as hee vnderſtoode who that woman was, whereof hee had demaunded his ſeruant, hee, turneth his ſpeech vnto her, that ſo ſoone as might be he might comfort her afflicted pouertie, and teſtifie any good will to a godly ſtranger: where firſt of al it is commendable, that he vouchſafeth to cal ſo baſe a perſon by the name of Daughter, for truly this louing word bewrayeth the tender affection of a godly heart, forgetting his lofty degree, and calling an abiect ſtranger by the name of daughter, which proueth that hee longed to giue vnto her ſome comfort of kindnes. This humble and moſt tender title of daughter and ſonne are very vſual in the ſcripture, for when the Lord would comfort the Church of the Iewes againſt the blaſphemies of Senacherib & Rabſakeh, he calleth it a virgine the daughter of Sion,Eſay. 37, 22 as if he had ſaid, euen as a father

is carefull for the wealth of his daughter,Luc. 23.28 ſo do I watch for the welfare of my church: in like manner Chriſt our ſauiour comforted the women that wept at his death, by the name of the daughters of Ieruſalem.
               Out of the which we gather this profitable doctrine, that it is one property and duety of an humble minde, to ſpeake kindly where it wiſheth frendly, eſpecially, when we talke to our brethren & the profeſſors of the same religion, our harts muſt be as the ſweet roſes, and our wordes as ſoft as butter, to ſupple and refreſh their troubled dayes. For wee muſt not doo as many haue both in their writings and familiar ſpeeches, comforted them with the vileſt reproches, tanting termes, and vncharitableſt titles they could inuent, that the poyſon of aſpes may ſeeme to lodge in their mouths, being by their wordes right deuills, they ſpeake, ſo curſedly: but handle them, if they bee faulty with gentle wordes, for men in authority muſt puniſh with the ſwoorde of magiſtrates, not the wordes of ſlaunderers: equalls by admonition, not by reuiling: inferiors by petition, not by exclamations. If wee will haue humble heartes, we muſt ſhew them by gentle words, for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth ſpeaketh: the faithfull are compared to ſheepe which are meeke and ſilent, but the reprobate to dogs which are alwais barking & brawling. If wee brand other with the marke of contempt, we burne our ſelues with the iron of an vngodly tongue: many can bee content to diſtribute their wealth liberally, but their ſcornful words diſgrace their deuotion, becauſe they taſte more of wormewoode, then of the roſe: and this I haue noted in many greate perſons, that their wordes are as kind to their dogges as to the poore: Oh how vnlike are they to the Lorde himſelf, which calleth vs ſons, to this godly Boaz, which calleth Ruth his daughter, to ye apoſtle Paul, which called the meaneſt in the church of God a brother. Why do you forget your ſelues to be the children of Adam? or rather will you not be their fellowes heyrs of grace, yt thus raign ouer your brethren in diſdainful ſpeeches, as though heauen were not high inough for you both

to abide in.
               
                  Go not hence. Now we are come to another curteſie of Boaz, which conſiſteth in his commandement hee giueth to Ruth, firſt that ſhee ſhould not go into anie other field to gather: ſecondly, that ſhe ſhuld ioyne her ſelfe to his maidens: thirdly, that ſhe ſhould follow the reapers whether ſo euer they go: that by this it ſeemeth the man was delighted to handle hir gently. Was it not ſufficient that he ſuffred her without denial or reproof, or if he gaue her leaue by name aboue many other (as no doubt but there were many in the field) but hee muſt admit her into the company of his own maidens: or hauing giuen her that libertie, he muſt alſo bid her to follow his reapers whether ſo euer they go? ſurely this was ſtrange kindnes to a ſtrange woman, to be intreated more like a daughter than a Moabiteſſe: nay, he addeth the ſecond part of his commandement, telling her that he had charged his seruants quietly to indure her preſence, and giue her for her neceſſitie. Where we firſt of al note a heauenly example of godly liberality, how far it differeth from worldly pinch-penies. They giue in gentleneſſe, the other in pride: they in cheerfulneſſe, the other in murmuring: they in liberality, the other in couetouſnes: and looke how many degrees the moone is aboue the earth, ſo many the giftes of the godly ſurpaſſe the carnall: the reaſon of this is, becauſe the one are perſwaded to what end they giue, but the other do think it to be caſt into the ſea.Exod, 36.9. We read of the Iſraelits, when the tabernacle of the Lorde was to bee builded, they offered ſo much, yt Moſes proclaimed they ſhuld offer no more: this heat of liberalitie is well cooled in this frozen age, for we haue much iſe, but little water: as the iſe will afford no water till it be thawed, ſo men will giue nothing to the church, poore, or tabernacle of the Lord, til they be dead: now there is ſuch ſtriuing to go formoſt in godly contributions, that euery one sitteth ſtil, many plucke from the church, perſonages & profits, tiths, & ſancitified offerings, but few adde one mite into the Lords treaſury. Let the poore be famiſhed, the goſpell vnfurniſhed, the churches vnbuilded, the

people vntaught, learning contemned, idle & ignorant perſons aduanced, and many poore ſoules condemned for want of the bread of life: yet they ſaie ſtill, come let vs ſearch for more treaſure, let vs take to our ſelves the houſes of God in poſſeſsion: yea, they ſpare not the verie altars of the Lord, but think it a charge that the ſacraments ſhould be ſo often adminiſtred at the coſt of the pariſh. Oh moſt miſerable and vngodly behauior of wicked wordlings, who (like the lions den) ſuffer all to come in, but none to come out: like the adamant which draweth all things, but caſteth abroad nothing. Where is the wonted contribution, which in the primitiue church we reade? The Apoſtle commended the Macedonians, that they gaue beyond their power, willingly, not of conſtraint. Which anſwereth the carnall obiection of many which ſaie,1. Cor. 16.
                        •
                     
                   they muſt giue of their abundance, ſo if they haue not abundance,2, Cor. 8.23 they are exempted from giuing. But the holy Ghoſt woulde exempt none, for euerie one of his abilitie is bound to giue to church and poore, none muſt appeare before the Lord empty, he which had not a lambe muſt offer a doue,Deut, 16▪ Leuit, 12. & ſhe which had no more, gaue two mites into the Lords treaſurie. The ſeruant for his wages,Luc. 21.2. the laborer for his hire, the crafts-man for his taking, the yeoman for his profits, the gentleman for his office, the noble man for his reuenues, muſt euerie one giue ſomewhat to poore and religion: but ſome take from the Church one hundred poundes a yeere, and giue ſcant an hundred ſhillinges: ſome hath more and ſome haue leſſe, and they preie vppon vs as the Eagles on the altars, carrying with theyr commodities coales of fire, which ſhall burne both their houſes and progenie, becauſe they tooke it from the Lord.
               Secondly, in this kindneſſe of Boaz vnto Ruth, this is worthie to bee noted, that hee commaundeth his ſeruantes to offer her no wrong: for to touch, is to iniurie in many places of Scripture, as when the Lorde ſpeaketh by the Prophet Dauid,Pſa. 105:15 Touch not mine annoynted,Zach: 2
                        •
                     : neyther doo my prophettes anye harme. That is, neyther doo you hurt my Prophets,

or annointed. And againe by the prophet Zacharie, Hee that toucheth you toucheth the apple of his eie, that is, which hurteth you, harmeth the tendereſt place of all his owne bodie: euen ſo doth Boaz take it in this place. For well knew that good man that her ſimplicitie would be quickly abuſed by the rigour of his ſeruants, and wee knowe it hath beene and alſo is a common plague to moſt of the godly, euil and diſcurteous ſeruants, as appeareth in the hiſtorie of Abraham and Lot,Gen. 13.7: and verie often the maſters which are well affected in religion, are abuſed by their ſeruants, in theyr friends. If they bee worſhipfull, then the ſeruants will churliſhly intertaine thoſe godly perſons which reſorte to theyr maſters houſes: if they bee higher, they wyll ſcorne them, if baſer, they will enuie them: this miſchiefe had godly Ioſeph noted when hee commanded his ſeruants to vſe his brethren ſo kindly:Gen. 42.25 1. Sam, 24.4.5 and Dauid by a ſeruant was whetted on to bee reuenged vppon Saul. Therefore right worſhipfull, and yet our brethren in Chriſt, as you are careful in your owne perſons to do good to the godly, euen ſo followe this Boaz, in commanding your ſeruants to deale friendly alſo. I knowe you ſhall neuer chooſe all your ſeruants of your owne diſpoſition, yet if you often warne them, you maye chance to winne them, for the beginning of religion is the loue of them that profeſſe it, euen as hunger in a ſicke perſon is a token, of recouerie. Then ſhall you cheerefully receiue Chriſt into our houſes in his poore members, and ioyfully aſſure your conſciences, you haue vnfainedly loued him, for hee which hath giuen his Angels charge ouer vs, willeth alſo that we ſhould giue our ſeruantes charge ouer our brethren: the vnkindneſſe which many poore ſoules haue receiued at the handes of your churliſh and ſtubborne ſeruantes,Mar: 10.13 hath diſcomforted them more than all your liberalitie hath comforted them. What acceſſe coulde the little children haue to Chriſt whē the diſciples forbad them: euen ſo, how ſhal we repaire to your dwellings, when your owne ſeruants, ſo much as in them lyeth, diſwarn vs of your houſes, keepe vs from your preſence, enuie

our meetings, and deride our profeſſion:
               
                  Wherefore ſhe fell. This verſe concerneth Ruth, and her anſwere to thoſe wordes of Boaz firſt her geſture is deſcribed, that ſhe fel vpon the earth, & bowed hir ſelfe to the ground, that is, with all ſhewe of humilitie: ſecondly, ſhe commendeth this his kind curteſie, becauſe ſhe was a ſtranger: ſo that by outward behauiour, ſhee gratifieth his gentlenes, and exalteth his liberality toward hir, by the conſideration of her own perſon which was a ſtranger, & therefore vnworthy of ſo great kindnes.
               Out of the which we chiefely obſerue, firſt, that it is a dutye of the poorer ſort, not onely to acknowledge their thankfulnes by woordes, but alſo to teſtifie it by outward ſubmiſſion: for Abraham himſelfe vſed it euen to the idolatrous Hithits,Gen. 23.7.12. whē they gaue him leaue to bury his dead, twiſe together. This noteth a greater thankfulnes then all the wordes of the worlde: in ſomuch as it is accounted a ſpeciall duetye belonging to ſuperiors, as wee may ſee in Bathſhebah to her husband, when ſhee came to tell him how Adoniah raigned, and likewiſe in king Salomon towarde her,1. Kin. 1.16 when ſhe came to aske Abiſag. Now, if theſe ſtately perſons bowed themſelues, but in curteſie,1. Kin. 2.19. much more ought wee of duety. Then is heere condemned, the vnciuill behauiour of many ſtout perſonnes, which are ſo farre from bowing, that they will hardly thanke theyr brethren for their liberalityes, accounting it their duty, as they ſay, to giue: as if alſo it were not their dutie to bee thanfull. The knowne example of the ten leapers, doeth much commend this kind of thankfull behauiour, and alſo condemne the ingratefull affection. Other there bee that are in ſuch loue, with this cap and knee, that it doth them more good to ſee the poore people bende vnto them, then they reioyſe that they haue giuen for Chriſtes ſake, inſomuch as they giue, that themſelues, and not the Lord might bee honoured.
               This lacke of reuerence in the one, and loue of honour in the other, are both vnlawfull, becauſe

they both proceed from one roote, which is the pride of our owne heartes, and the conceit of our owne perſons.Heſt. 3, 2. But ſome will ſay, wee do but as that godly Mordecai did, which refuſed to honour the wicked Haman, ſo wee abſtaine from doing reuerence to the proud and vaineglorious, becauſe wee will not feede their diſpoſition. Vnto whom I anſwere, that there were manye cauſes for which Mordecai refuſed to bend vnto Haman, which they can neuer alledge for themſelues:Exod. 17.14 the firſt, becauſe he was a wicked Amalekite,Deut. 25.17, of a nation, whom the Lord commanded the Iewes vtterly to deſtroy, neyther to ſpare man, woman or child,1. Sam. 15.9 as appeareth in the hiſtorye of Saule, who becauſe he tranſgreſſed this commandement of God in ſauing Agag their king and certaine oxen to ſacrifiſe, it coſt him his kingdome and diſpleaſure of God. Becauſe of this lawe of the Lorde, Mordecai woulde do no honour to this childe of deſtruction, and was blameles.
               Secondly, it is thought that the honour which Haman obtained, was proper onely to God, becauſe hee was aduanced aboue all other: and ſuch kind of reuerence we muſt alway beware of, for Shedrach, Meſhach and Abednego,Dan. 3.16.17.18 had rather dye then fall downe before the image of the king of Babylon: euen ſo wee muſt not giue more to man then is his owne, but vnto Caeſar the thinges which are Caeſars, and vnto God the things which are Gods. And if any for theſe cauſes defend their ſtately behauiour, let them conſider that the Lord bids vs not to deſtroy, but rather to loue our enemyes. And though they require ſuch worſhip as is due onely to God, yet we muſt not refuſe to giue them that which belongeth to man. Other can be content to honour them whom they knowe to be godly, but the wicked they thinke vnworthy of reuerence, becauſe our ſauiour would do none to Herod or Pilate, Paule to the high Prieſt, when hee called him painted wall.
               To whom I anſwere, that Chriſt (though he called Herode a foxe, and woulde do no miracle before him,

becauſe hee deſired but to wonder, and not to gloryfie God by it.) Yet gaue to Herod that duety which pertained vnto him. Likewiſe vnto Pilate, when hee tolde him, his power came of the Lorde: ſo Paule did reuerence, not onely the high prieſt, but alſo Felix, Feſtus & Agrippa, who were heathen men, though magiſtrates, and therefore were honourable by the lawe of God. So then this muſt remaine for a grounded truth, that our betters muſt bee honoured as men, not worſhipped as God: wee muſt with Abraham bende as well to the idolatrous Hebron, as with Bathſhebah to godly Dauid: if they receiue more then they are worthy, it is not our default, but their danger, let vs giue to the prophaneſt perſon his right, and vngodlieſt caytife that which is his owne.
               Secondly, by this wee note, that the godlye in giuing muſt haue no reſpect of perſons, countrey or kindred, ſtrangers, or neyghbours children, as Boaz did heere to Ruth, who by her owne confeſſion was a ſtranger, and therefore vnworthy, but wee ſhewed you this in the firſt chapter by the example of the Moabites, to Elimelech and his family, to bee a thing incident to very naturall men, and by them condemned that vſe it not,Gen. 1.18 ad 9. much more in them that haue known the truth. The which Abraham did to angelles, wherevppon the Apoſtle wiſheth, to keepe hoſpitalitie,Haeb. 13.2. for ſo ſome haue receyued angelles, in ſteede of men.Exod. 22.21 The Lorde commaunded verie ſharplye, Leuit. 19.33. that no violence bee done to ſtrangers, neither yet that any ſhould oppreſſe them.
               Whereby the vngodly entreating of ſtrangers, that manye wiſhe for among vs; is too wicked enuying, that any ſhoulde bee permitted to come and ſoiourne among vs, like free borne children: Yet heerein wee are to prayſe God, that theſe perſons cannot bite, although they barke at poore harbourles ſtrangers, and alſo that hee hath bleſſed our magiſtrates with more pitifull mindes. And let theſe perſonnes knowe and conſider, that it is as eaſie to go out as to come into England, this is, they may as

ſone be driuen to other places out of their owne countrey, to bee ſtrangers there, as theſe are, repayred for ſuccour hither. The vncertaintie of worldly eſtate, that hath brought great princes to extreme pouerty, ſhould bridle their churliſhe and vngodly affections, from offering one thought of iniurie to theſe poore harbourleſſe ſtrangers. Wee knowe the parable of Chriſt, of a man that trauailed from Iericho to Ieruſalem, and fell among theeues: the kindnes of that ſtranger Samaritan, ſhould mooue vs to do good to ſtrangers while the world ſtandeth, ſeeing wee are more helped by their preſence, then by our owne neyghbours: but theſe kinde perſons that thus rayle vppon poore ſtrangers, are ſuch as are grieued againſt God and men, who in their hearts would haue no man liuing in the lande, beſides themſelues and theyr curſed poſteritye. But ſome will ſaye, you make too much account of ſtrangers,Deu. 23.20 the Lorde doeth not make ſuch reckoning of them, becauſe, forbidding vſury to the Iewes, yet hee permitted them to take vſurye of the ſtrangers, I anſwere, thoſe ſtrangers were the curſed Cananites and none other, whome God had vowed to deſtruction: to the intent the Iewes might haue them in all ſlauerie. Of them he permitted to take vſury: for this is the bleſſing of God vppon that people,Deu. 28.12 that they ſhould bee able to lend to other, but ſtand in no need to borrowe of other. Therefore that beeing but a permiſſion for the Iewes onely, hath ceaſed in that common wealth: but in Chriſt there is no difference of Iewe or gentile, male or female, bond or free, for all are his and hee the Lordes: ſo that nowe the name of a ſtraunger is quite ceaſed, but all are neighbors and brethren for euermore.
               
                  And Boaz anſwered. In this verſe is contained the replye of Boaz vnto the ſpeeche of Ruth▪ wherein is ſet downe the true cauſe of his liberalitye vnto her, firſt in regarde of her mother in lawe and his kinſwoman, with whome ſhee had dealt ſo well in her owne countrey, ſecondly, in regard of her ſelfe, ſhe had forſaken father and mother with countreye and kindred,

to come among ſtrange people.
               Where we firſt obſerue, a ſingular encouragement to obey our godly parents, for wee ſee that our good actions needed not to bee preached abroade by other, for our farther cōmendation, but at the time appointed, they will ſhewe themſelues, as the life of trees by ſending foorth leaues in the ſpring time of the yeere. Ruth, as wee haue heard, dealt moſt louingly with her mother in lawe in Moab, yet you ſee that her kindnes hath followed her to Bethlehem in Iudah, manye myles diſtant the one from the other. If it had beene knowen there to a few onely, it had bin ſufficient: but being ſpread a broade; the chiefe man in a citie doth commende her for it, among a multitude in a harueſt field: the place could not hide it were it neuer ſo far of, the time not conceale it, bee it neuer ſo ſecret: the commendation of it be couered, becauſe ſhee was a ſtranger, nor the credit of it bee loſte in another countrey. Such is the nature of good thinges which wee do to other, that no obliuion can euer bury it. What needeth this boaſting of our almes deedes, like the blowing of a trumpet, this bragging of our worthynes: ſome of their manhood, ſome of their friendſhip, other of their riches, and many of their labour: as if they ſlept not foundly til al the world did ring of their commendation. This one thing loſeth all our reward, for it is better that the workes then the wordes ſhould witnes it. We may alſo by this aſſure our ſelues, that we haue done nothing ſo ſecretly to the flocke of Chriſt, but it is knowne, and the name of God prayſed for it:Reue. 14.19 for as euill deedes remaine to the graue, ſo good workes re
                  
                     •
                  ound to perpetuall memory.
               Secondlye, by this wee obſerue the excellencye of religion, for whoſe ſake it is commendable to forget nature, and praiſe worthye to forſake our parents and people. Which, if we ſhould doo for any other cauſe whatſoeuer, we were accurſed.
               When the Lorde woulde eſtabliſhe his couenant with Abraham 
                     •
                   hee called him from Father and

countrey,Gen. 12.1 to ſhewe that for religion ſake it is a glory, and not onely to do thus,Leuit. 7.44. but alſo for to bee ſcourged, yea,Act. 5.41. and to ſuffer death.
               Why then is it ſo contumeliouſly vpbraided, ſo ſcornefully refuſed of many, and but of fewe 
                     •
                  ectiued till this day. Among all the world, onely Abrahams poſterity had the couenant and promiſes, and now though men bee as the ſande on the ſea ſhoare, and the ſtarres of heauen,Rom. 9.27. which cannot bee numbered, yet ſhall but a remnant bee ſaued; none come vnto it but by the eſpeciall grace of God, whereby hee draweth them, as it were, againſt theyr mindes: fewe perſons woulde reſorte to Noahs arke, becauſe they ſcorned his preaching: euen ſo fewe are religious, becauſe they account it a baſe worke to heare the worde of God plainely opened, and ſincerely expounded. Where is then become this auncient zeale, that made men and women, as well noble as baſe, to bee obedient to the calling of the Lord, for which cauſe they forſook both wealth, parentage, cuntry, & kindred, but in theſe dayes men will forſake Chriſte and his Goſpell, religion and preaching for the leaſt of theſe. Once the Apoſtle ſaide hee accounted all thinges as dung in regarde of Chriſte, but nowe Chriſt is regarded as dung in compariſon of the worlde. Once Chriſt ſayd, whoſoeuer loueth father or mother, wife or children, houſe or landes more then mee, is not worthy of mee, but nowe whoſoeuer loueth Chriſte more then theſe, is not worthy to liue.
               Once it was ſaide, firſte ſeeke the kingdome of God and the righteouſnes thereof; and all other thing ſhall be caſt vppon you: but nowe, firſt ſeeke the worldes riches and wealth, and religion will follow too ſoone. Oh what miſerable daies are we fallen into, where ignoraunce aduanceth it ſelfe like the moone, and is not aſhamed, the Goſpell reuiled by euerie atheiſt, the ministers moleſted for euery papiſte, the ſacramentes prophaned, the profeſſours tearmed by ſlanderous titles, which for Chriſtes ſake

haue loſte their kindred and aduentured their liues. Surely, ſurelye, ſome great plague is approaching, for the quenching of this burning heate of ſinne, when they ſhall ſay, here is a God that rewardeth the righteous, verily there is a God that iudgeth the worlde.
               Thirdly, we obſerue out of this verſe, that wee muſt not without conſideration giue liberally to all, but with ſpeciall fauour do good to the godly: for you ſee Boaz telleth this ſecond cauſe, of her forſaking both countrey and kindred, as if hee were bound to do for ſuch, as for his owne children, thereby ſignifying, that if wee haue neuer ſo much to giue, yet wee can neuer giue inough to the ſaintes of God. This our ſauiour ſignifieth when he ſaith,Luc. 4.26.27 There were many widdowes in Iſrael in the dayes of Eliah, yet to none was hee ſent but to Sarephthah, a cittie of Zidon, to a woman a widdowe: as if hee had ſayde, as God with ſpeciall kindnes releeued her in the three yeeres famine, euen ſo muſt wee with the like fauour ſuccour the godly and labouring poore. Therefore,Gal. 6:10: when Paule biddeth do good vnto all, hee addeth, eſpecially to the houſehold of faith.
               This is profitable for our dayes, that wee might alſo learne to whome we may giue: for now our land is full of wandering and roaguing beggers, who as their life is moſt baſe, yet their manners are far worſe: firſt they worke not at all, but are idle, and hee that worketh not, muſt not eate, becauſe he walketh inordinatly: ſecondly, they are for the moſt parte, vtterly voide of all feare of God, atheiſtes, ignorant perſons, blaſphemers, prophaners of Sabaothes, diſobedient to magiſtrates and maiſters, common whooremaiſters and whoores, hauing almoſt euerye weeke newe huſbands and wiues; theeues, and ſuch drones as ſucke away the almes from poore labouring perſons. They will praye at euery doore for any ſimple reliefe, with their hats on their heades, moſt unreuerently: but if any man appeare before them, they will preſently breake off their prayers, and vncouer their heades, eſteeming more of the preſence of a seely man or woman, then

of the maieſtye of the eternall God: if they bee not ſatisfied they will curſe more vehementlye, then before they prayed earneſtly. Thoſe are the poore which get our almes: but for other I heare of few, for I ſpeake nothing but that which I haue heard and ſeene with my owne eyes. And to ſpeake nothing of their changing of their voyce, their counterfaiting ſores, and their common drunkennes: I thinke I maye euerie way conclude, they are the caterpillers of our countrey, the Canaanits of our common wealth, the vngodlieſt and vnprofitableſt members among vs.
               For whome I haue two ſutes, the one to the magiſtrats, that ſo often as they finde ſuch perſons, they would duety execute the lawe vppon them, that the other may beware: and my other to the people, that they would bee deafe at their cryes, and ſhut vp their compaſſions from them, and beſtowe it vppon the poore labourers among vs, to encourage them with patience to endure their trauailes, and to diſcourage the other from this kind of wicked life. Whatſoeuer you giue them is but ſeede caſt into the ſea, whereof ſhall neuer come any profit: but thoſe that are of the houſe of the Lord let vs wiſhe them proſperity.
               
                  The Lord recompenſe. This is the ſecond parte of this replie of Bohaz, which is his prayer for Ruth: wherein as wee ſhewed you, are deliuered two thinges: firſt that the▪ Lord would giue her ſome reward: ſecondly, hee comforteth her, in that hee telleth her, ſhee is come to truſt vnder the wings of God. Where firſt of all heere ſeemeth ſome holde for popiſh merites, ſeeing hee prayeth for a recompenſe and perfect reward. Therefore it may be probably gathered, will they ſay, from hence, that workes after faith merite grace: for heere I cannot conceale the ſubtilty of our Engliſh papiſts which they learned from the Remiſh Seminarie, being asked whither workes merit, they anſwere no, meaning thoſe workes which goe before faith, whereas they euerie one doo confidently beleeue that workes after fayth doo merite eternall life. Thus they blinde our eyes with the ſchoole diſtinction

of workes before faith, and after faith, that they might the better couer their ſophiſtrie, but we (prayſed be God for it) moſt confidently affirme, that no workes eyther before or after faith, doe concurre in the matter or cauſe of iuſtification. As for workes before faith,Rom. 14.23 wee acknowledge they are ſinne; for whatſoeuer is not of faith is ſinne; and for workes after faith,Rom. 4.2. Galat. 2.16 Eph. 2.6. we conſtantly beleeue with Paul, that our ſaluation commeth not by them. But let vs come to this ſcripture, and continue a little with our ſaluation▪workers. We grant Bohaz prayeth for a reward: What then? therefore works eyther merite, or he prayeth amiſſe: both which wee denie, and will confirme by this ſcripture. Firſt did Bohaz thinke that Ruth had merited by this forſaking of her, countrey? I anſwere no: why then doth he pray for her? if ſhe had deſerued it, God is not vniuſt, hut hee that commanded that the hire of a labourer ſhoulde not bee kept backe one night, woulde not, or needed not to be intreated for that which he muſt of neceſſity performe. By the which we ſee, that the praier of Bohaz the merite of Ruth, & the iuſtice of God, cannot ſtand together.
               Secondly, for what cauſe doth hee praye for a recompenſe? Was it not becauſe ſhee had forſaken her owne idolatrous people, to come to the Lordes common wealth? yes verily it was ſo. Then was it of faith or of workes? no worke aſſuredly, but faith; for faith cauſed Moyſes when hee was growen vp, to forſake the courte of Pharao,Heb. 11.2. and to ioyne himſelfe with God his afflicted people: Faith cauſed Abraham to come into the land of promiſe, from his owne idolatrous countrey:Heb. 11.8 and this ſame faith cauſed Ruth to come from the Countrey of Moab to the people of the Iewes, and therefore Bohaz addeth, that ſhe was come to truſt vnder the winges of God, but confidence proceedeth of faith, and not of workes. Therefore to conclude, Bohaz prayeth for ſuch a rewarde, as God had promiſed to all the faithfull: for as the ſunne looketh vpon the earth, and the earth looketh vpon the ſunne again, ſo faith reſpecteth the promiſe of God, and the promiſe

of God regardeth faith:Ioh. 3.18. becauſe it is written, whoſoeuer beleeueth in me hath euerlaſting life; but whoſoeuer beleeueth not (though hee purchaſe landes for Catholikes, build Churches, ordaine chaunteries, and got neuer ſo farre on pilgrimage) yet is hee condemned already. But now they wil renewe their wonted outcry, ſaying, we preach for faith, we condemne works, wee driue men to a wicked life, and tell them all is well, if they beleeue wel: we condemne, ſay they, houſekeeping, giuing to the poore, with builders of colledges, and Churches, and founders of hoſpitals, with all charitable actions: but theſe are great thunderclappes, but yet without rayne. I aske the reſoluteſt papiſt liuing, where euer he read any of theſe, in all the writinges of the proteſtants, once mētioned wt out ſingular cōmendatiō: for I am ſure none of you yt are reſolute papiſts, wil come to the churches, to hear our preachers ſpeak againſt them: yet you crie out, beleeue them not, they broche hereſies. This is brought vnto you, by your penſioner hangbies, and luke warme profeſſors, papiſticall Atheiſtes, which come to our Churches to ſleepe, and there dreame, who being come vnto you, make you beleeue that their dreames, were the preachers ſermons: and you that are apt to beleeue lies, beleeue liars. But to come to the purpoſe, you accuſe vs for condemning good workes, when we attribute no merites vnto them: this we deny, for the reaſon is like this: None will become a papiſt, but hee that hopeth to bee Pope: ſo none will do good workes but hee that hopeth to bee ſaued or crowned by them: If they graunt the latter, then they muſt giue the former: which I am aſſured many honeſt minded papiſtes would not bee, though they might haue as much as the Popes father, the Deuill offered Chriſt, which was all the worlde. Therefore as a papiſt is not a papiſt, becauſe hee woulde be a pope, ſo good workes muſt not bee done, that men might bee crowned by them. Euery Catholike which beleeueth as the Church beleeueth, muſt not preſently ſteppe into Peters chayre: no more, euery one that doth a good worke, muſt by that aſcend vp into heauen

Good workes haue another vſe then to iuſtifie. Becauſe the eye cannot ſmell; ſhall it therefore bee puld out? noe, it was created to ſee and not to ſmell: becauſe good works iuſtifie not, ſhal no man do them, God forbid, they were giuen to the faithfull, for outwarde teſtimonies of fayth, and of God his ſpirite, that by them they they might aſſure themſelues and others to be ſanctified and elected: not that they ſhould helpe, in their ſaluation. As the tree dyeth without the barke, and fire is nothing without heate, ſo workes without faith, and faith without workes, is curſed and vnprofitable.
               Therefore wee ſay, let euery one that calleth on the name of Chriſt, depart from iniquitie, eſchewe euill, and do good, feede the hungrie, cloath the naked, viſite the ſicke and impriſoned, harbour the harbourles, prouide for children and widdowes, yea and builde Churches, and Colledges for the maintenance of God his worſhip and learning. Yet we ſay,Rom. 6: 1.2.3. we are iuſtified by faith, we haue peace with God through our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, by whome we were brought to this grace, through which we ſtand, & glorie vnder the hope of ye glorie of God: for all the works in the world cannot ſatiſfie for one ſin, becauſe there is none other name vnder heauen by which wee may bee ſaued, but onely by the name of Chriſt.
               Out of this, firſt wee gather the goodneſſe of God, which of his owne promiſe and owne mercie, accepteth that little obedience of faith, which wee offer vnto him. What can we doe to the fulfilling of the lawe? if we keept all and yet fayled in one, we had loſt all our labour: but if we kept one point onely, and faulted in the reſt it were like to a man that was bounde to pay ten thouſand pound, and ſhould offer a ſhilling: but we keepe none,Rom. 6.21. and yet hee accepteth vs in the death of his Sonne, that our righteouſneſſe might abound to euerlaſting life. Nowe, the vſe of the mercy of God is, that hereby wee ſhoulde bee made more fearefull and carefull not to offende him: not as ſome imagine, that hereby is giuen the greater libertie

to ſinne,Eſay 24.18. becauſe the Lorde ſpeaketh peace vnto vs in his beloued Chriſt: for this is, as the prophet ſpeaketh, being eſcaped out of a ditch to fall into a ſnare, and as a man which is drawne out of a riuer, ſhould caſt himſelfe into the ſea. But the regenerate muſt bee more affraide to offend the mercy of God, then the vnregenerate at his threatning iudgementes. They will not ſinne, becauſe they loue God; the other will abſtayne feare of puniſhmente: the promiſes of the Goſpell terrifie them more then all the terrors of the lawe; for they find a ſweeter comfort in the preſence of the ſpirite, then to reſt in all the gardens of pleaſure, when they finde acceſſe to the throne of grace, through the blood of Chriſt, and by him all their infirmities couered, their petitions graunted, their ſinnes remitted, & they at peace with God: like ioyfull men diſcharged from euerlaſting impriſonment, they walke in holines and righteouſneſſe before him all the dayes of their life. Oh that theſe mercies would ſinked deeper into our hard harts, that the force of the cogitation of the blood of Chriſt might both ſoften and mollifie, purge and cleanſe them from wauering and doubting, wantonnes and preſumption, and prepare our fallow groundes fit to receiue the Lords owne feed, his euerlaſting word which is able to ſaue our ſoules.
               Secondly by this when he ſaith, vnder whoſe winges thou art come to truſt: the dignitie of the faithfull is commended vnto vs, for they liue vnder the wings of the Lord: Which is a Metaphor or borrowed ſpeech, comparing him to a hen which couereth her chickens with her winges, ſhewing vnto vs that then wee are in ſafetie, when wee are couered with the winges of the Lord. This our ſauiour noted when hee ſaide, that hee woulde haue gathered the Cittie of Ieruſalem, as a henne gathereth her chickens. This dignitie of the faithfull is by many ſuch ſpeeches manifeſted in the ſcripture,Mat. 23.37 wherein the Lorde ſheweth vs the care hee hath for our ſafety, when he calleth vs the apple of his eye. He ſheweth his loue, when he calleth vs his childrē, his brethren and ſpouſe, to teach vs our dueties: he calleth

vs the braunches of a vine, which are good for nothing but to bring forth grapes: euen ſo are the godly pleaſed with nothing which they doe, ſaue onely the worſhippe of God. This conſiſteth in the holy fellowſhip which the faithfull haue with God, which Dauid faith, bringeth life for euermore, with whome is a well of life, and the fulnes of all ioy. And in another place the Lord ſaith, Behold I ſtand at the dore and knocke, if any man open, I will come in, and ſuppe with him, and he with me: and Iohn ſaith, He that abideth in the doctrine of Chriſt, he hath both the father and the Son.2 Ioh. 9. Here is the comfort of the ſpirit that dwelleth in vs, the aſſurance of faith which ouercommeth all the worlde, the euidence of our ſaluation,1. Ioh. 3.24 euen the confeſſion of the Goſpel with the mouth, and the beleeuing in the hart, the hearing of it when it is preached, and praying in the aſſemblies of the faithfull; for whereſoeuer are two or three gathered together in my name, there am I in the middeſt of them, ſaith the Lord: for he dwelleth among his ſaints, the Arke is with his miniſters, the couenaunt or tabernacle of preſence with them that feare him for euermore. Oh, who will not be drawne to be the member of Chriſtes owne bodie, the heauenly Temple for the holy Ghoſt to dwell in, the ſincere profeſſor of true religion, that they may haue both the Father and the Sonne. Who will not open to the Lords knocking, that hee may receyue the king of glorie for his gueſt? Finally, who would not forſake the ſhadow of all the trees in the worlde, to bee couered vnder the the winges of the Lords preſence, Where is more comfort to be found but one day, then a thouſande yeares in all the thrones of maieſty?
               Thirdly and laſtly, by theſe wordes, as is noted the dignity of the faithful, ſo on the contrary is vttereth the deſperate and comfortles eſtate of the wicked, namely, they are like vncouered birds alſo, but neuer are ſhielded with the winges of the Lord: they lie open and ſcattered, ſubiect to all the ſoules of the ayre, euery minute in danger to be torne in peeces by the helliſh & infernal deuils.
               
                  Therefore Dauid ſaith, howſoeuer they bee nobles, and Princes of the earth,Pſal. 73.18.19. and haue houſes and poſſeſſions, after their owne names, yet they ſtande but in ſlipperie places, ſo ſoone as they mooue, they fall. Our ſauiour ſaith, They are like a man hauing no wedding garment:Mat, 22.13 ſo ſoone as the king eſpieth him, hee is caſt into vtter darkeneſſe.Epheſ. 4.18. Paule ſaith, they are ſtraungers from the life of God, ſo that being liuing, yet they are but condemned perſons, which euery houre, looke for the tormentor, then to bee burned in euerlaſting fire? Oh fearefull eſtate of all Atheiſtes, papiſtes, idolaters, Iewes, Turkes and Pagans, carnal men and hypocrites, deſpiſers of the miniſterie & Goſpel of Chriſt; who as in this world they are without God, ſo in the world to come, ſhalbe ſeparated from his preſence with the Deuill and his Angels. Looke on your reckoninges, you guiltie conſciences, which euery day adde thouſandes to your former inniquities. The greater your debte is, the ſharper ſhall bee your impriſonmente. The oftner you are warned, the more ſhall bee your ſtripes: As none were ſaued but thoſe that entred into the arke, ſo not one of you ſhall euer ſee the face of God, (except at your condemnation) vnleſſe you become zealous profeſſors, and heare our ſermons, bee partakers of our prayers, and as obedient to the voyce of the Goſpell in the mouth of his miniſters, as if there were a law of preſent death, to be executed on you for euery default.
               
                  I finde fauour. This is the ſecond part of the ſpeech of Ruth, wherein ſhe thanketh Boaz, and excuſeth her ſelfe. She thanketh in the firſt wordes when ſhe ſayth: I finde fauour in thine eyes, oh my Lord, becauſe thou haſt comforted me, and hast ſpoken thoſe thinges which are to the hearte of thy handmaide. For ſhe confeſſeth his curteſie: and thankefulnes, by the verdite of the learned, is the humble confeſſion of a benefite. She excuſeth, when ſhe ſaith, I ſhall not be as one of thy maydens. As if ſhe had ſaide, I am vnworthy of this curteſie, becauſe I come to labour for my ſelfe, not for thee, as theſe thy maydens doe. Out of the which wee obſerue theſe

things.
               Firſt holy example of commendable thankefulnes, much accepted of God and men, as vnthankefulnes is abhorred by heauen and earth: we haue examples hereof in many wicked perſons,Gen. 21.2. as Laban his diſcurteſie to Iacob, Saule vnto Dauid,1 Sam. 19.10. and the wicked Ammonites to his ambaſſadors: To ſpeake nothing of Pharaohs butler vnto Ioſeph, of Nabal vnto Dauid,2 Sam. 10.
                        •
                     
                   and alſo the inhabitants of Keilah,Gen. 40.23. which being famous in the ſcripture for the enemies of God,1 Sam. 25.10. ſo are they branded with this note of vnthankefulnes, as if it were an eſpeciall fruit of vnrighteouſnes.1 Sam. 33.12. And truely this is moſt worthy to be vrged in our ſinful age, for the children forget their duties to their naturall parentes, the people tread their preachers vnder their feete, for telling them the truth; we alwaies remember what we haue giuen, but forget what we haue receyued: whereas it is a token of the beſt nature, to forget what we haue done to other, but to remember what we haue receyued. Surely, ſurely, vnthankefulnes towardes God, and towardes men, neuer raigned or raged more. Toward God, for the continuance of his Goſpell, peace, plenty & welfare of our countrey: toward men, in gadging the benefites that are dayly beſtowed, by caſting in the teeth, as if they were deſerued. The heauens abhorred this wickedneſſe, and the heauens will raigne downe deſtruction vpon theſe thankeleſſe perſons,Luc. 17.27.28. as they did vpon Sodom and Gomorra for the like offence.
               Secondly, by this we gather, that the prayers of the righteous, are more acceptable to the godly, then giuing or taking of almes. For when Boaz promiſed Ruth this kindneſſe, ſhe thanked him, and no more:Verse 10. but nowe, when hee prayed for her to the Lorde, ſhe proteſted that hee comforted her, and that hee had ſpoken thoſe thinges which were to the heart of his handmayde, (that is) which pleaſed her exceedingly well. As if ſhee had ſaide, I am bounde vnto thee my Lord for thy kindneſſe, but thou haſt comforted mee more with thy prayer, then with that: So that here for herſelfe & for all the godly, ſhe proteſteth, that of two benefits,

ſhe was moſt of all comforted by his prayer: which noteth in her, a more hungring and thirſting after righteouſnes, then after all the maintenaunce of this preſent life: for whoſouer drinketh of that water of worldely welfare,Ioh. 4.14. ſhal thirſt againe: but whoſoeuer drinketh of the water of faithfull prayer ſhal neuer thirſt any more. This one conſideration made the blind men of Iericho crie ſo importunately after Chriſt, ſaying, Ieſus thou ſon of Dauid haue mercy on vs. Some heauenly benefite they looked for, earthly he had none. And this teacheth vs,Eccleſ. 11.1 that when we giue, wee ſhould alſo pray for a bleſſing vpon our beneuolence: for Salomon compareth the giuing of almes to the caſting of corne into a moiſt or fruitfull lande, ſo as the huſbandman prayeth for a bleſſing vpon his ſeede, euen ſo he which giueth to the poore muſt pray for a benefite vpon his beneuolence.Iam. 2.15.16. But if any gather by this my ſpeech, that it is ſufficient to pray, and not to giue to the pore, I anſwere, The ſcripture condemneth this folly, when it ſaith: If a brother or ſiſter be naked and want meate, and thou ſay vnto him, go warme thy ſelfe, and feed thy ſelfe and yet giue them nothing, this is a dead and damnable, not a liuing and a ſauing faith: of theſe kind of people the world is full, which ſay, alas God help you, God prouide for you, God giue you patience, but nothing commeth from them, ſaue onely fayre wordes. To whome we may ſay as a beggar once did to a popiſh Biſhoppe, deſiring a peece of money of him, were it neuer ſo little, but the Biſhop ſaide no, hee woulde giue him a pardon: to whom the beggar replyed, I perceiue, if your pardon were worth any thing I ſhould not haue it: euen ſo if the prayers of theſe people were any thing worth, they woulde not giue them, becauſe they giue nothing.
               Laſtly, by this verſe, when Ruth excuſeth her ſelfe that ſhe ſhould not be as one of his maidens, ſhe ſetteth downe a true example of Chriſtian ſimplicitie: for it may be ſhe thought that Boaz was deceiued in her, that hee might thinke ſhee came to worke for him and not for her ſelfe: therefore ſhe telleth him playnely that

ſhe ſhould not be as one of his maydens, that is, as one of his hired ſeruantes. So that theſe, wordes of Ruth tend to her owne hinderaunce: if Boaz had beene deceyued in her, yet godlines will not conceale that, which maketh againſt it ſelfe, if the queſtion be made of profite. Whereby we note, that encroching for bargaines, facing for promiſes, ſuing for counterfait titles, & ſuch like actions, cannot agree with the ſimplicitie of a godly minded chriſtian: whoſe conſcience is his court, his religion his atturney, and the word of God his iudge, to pronounce definitiue ſentence againſt his owne cauſe, if it tend to the perill and damage of his neighbour, or diſcredite of his profeſſion. Oh that wee had more of this ſimplicitie; and leſſe of this ſubtiltie, whereby wee deceiue our owne ſoules, betray the glorious goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt, confound the weake mindes of our wauering brethren, make ſhipwracke of pure conſciences, & caſt our ſelues headlong for the worlde into the fire of hell.
               
                  But Boaz ſaid. This laſt verſe ſheweth vnto vs, that Boaz was not deceyued in Ruth, but ſhutteth vp the communication, by calling her to meate, and dealeth to her ſo abundantly, that ſhe leaueth ſome. By the which wordes there is noted two degrees of the kindneſſe of this man. Firſt, that in his owne perſon hee calleth her to meat: ſecondly, that with his owne handes hee gaue her abundantly. Where we ſee againe and againe commended vnto vs the humility & liberalitie of this Boaz: he diſdayneth not to call ſo ſimple a gueſt to his table, knowing her to be a faithfull ſiſter, for whoſe ſake, if need were, he was bound to lay downe his life. Whereby we are inſtructed to caſt of the ſtatelines of our ſtomackes, ſtanding vpon our pantophles, ſcant vouchſafing to looke frendly on a poore man or woman, much leſſe to ſpeake kindly to eyther of both. Againe, his liberality by giuing ſo plentifully vnto her with his owne handes, it appeareth hee was none of theſe counterfaite giuers, which promiſe much and performe little, and for euery carnall companions tale bearing, and

whiſpering, withdrawe their promiſed and bounden liberalitie, from church and poore, from miniſter and religion. Oh how colde is this deuotion, which proceedeth from a ſodayne humour, and ſoone endeth to God his diſhonour: Better had it been for thoſe men, not to ſhew any fauour at all, then after they haue raſhly begunne, cauſleſſe to withdrawe their beneuolence from Chriſt. But I conſider, there ſhall bee ſome that ſhall ſay at the latter ende, vnto our ſauiour; wee haue propheſied in thy name, we haue eaten in thy preſence, and yet hee ſhall ſay vnto them, departe from mee yee workers of iniquitie, I know you not: then ſhall they bee bleſſed, which haue waſted their wealth for religion, conſumed their liuing on the faithfull, and continued their liberality vnto the end. Nowe let vs giue prayſe to God.
               The ende of the ſixte Lecture.
            
            
               The ſeuenth Lecture.
               
                  
                     
                        Chap. 2. ver. 15.16.17.18.19.20.21.22.23.
                     
                     
                        15. And when ſhe aroſe to gleane, Boaz commaunded his ſeruants, ſaying: let her gather among the ſheaues, and do not rebuke her.
                     
                        16. And let fall ſome of the ſheaues for her, & let it lie that ſhe may gather it vp, and rebuke her not.
                     
                        17. And ſo ſhe gleaned in the field til euening, & ſhe threſhed

that which ſhe had gathered, & it was about an eph
                           •
                         of barly.
                     
                        18. And ſhe tooke it vp, & went into the citty. & her mother in law ſaw what ſhe had gathered, & ſhe tooke foorth & gaue vnto her, of that which ſhe had left, when ſhe was ſufficed.
                     
                        19 Then her mother in law ſaid vnto her, where haſt thou gleaned to day? & where wroughteſt thou? Bleſſed be he that knewe thee: & ſhe ſhewed her mother in law, with whome ſhee had wrought, & ſaide the mans name with whome I wrought to day, was Boaz.
                     
                        20. And Naomi ſaid vnto her daughter in law: bleſſed be he of the Lord, for he ceaſeth not to doe good, both to the liuing, & to the dead. Againe Naomi ſaide vnto her, the man is neere vnto vs, & of our affinitie.
                     
                        21. And Ruth the Moabiteſſe ſaide. He ſaid alſo certenly vnto me, thou ſhalt be with my ſeruantes, vntill they haue ended all the harueſt which is mine.
                     
                        22. And Naomi anſwered vnto Ruth her daughter in law: it is beſt, my daughter, that thou go out with his maidens: that they meet thee not in another field.
                     
                        23. Then ſhee kept her by the maydes of Boaz, vnto the end of barley harueſt, & wheat harueſt, & dwelt with her mother in law.
                  
               
               
                  THeſe verſes vnto the ende of this Chapter contayne thoſe things which Boaz & Ruth did, with Naomi alſo after that Ruth had dined. The words haue two partes. The firſt between Ruth and Boaz in the field. The ſecond betweene Ruth & her mother in lawe at home.
               The firſt part is in ver. 15.16.17. wherein is ſet down what Ruth did after dinner: that ſhe aroſe to gather eares, which is declared by the time, verſe 17. and the quantitie in the ſame verſe, an epha of barley. Secondly, Bohaz reneweth his commandement to his ſeruantes for

Ruth, wherein hee willeth them, firſt, that they ſuffer her to gather where ſhe pleaſe: verſe 15. Secondly, that they willingly let fall vnto her out of the ſheaues, and ſuffer her to take it vp.
               The other part of Ruth and Naomi, is contayned ver. 18.19.20.21, 22.23. & declareth what theſe twaine did after Ruth came from the field, and after her comming home, verſ. 18. bringing both her gleaned corne, and reſerued victuall. They twaine commune of thoſe thinges which Boaz had done to Ruth. Firſt, Naomi asketh Ruth, where ſhe had gleaned that day. ver. 19. To which Ruth anſwereth, telling the name of the man in whoſe poſſeſſion ſhe had gathered to be Boaz. verſ. 19. Secondely, his curteſie towarde her, not onely for that preſent, but alſo biddeth her to abide with his maydes vnto the end of his harueſt. After this, Naomi firſt praieth for the man, ver. 20. alleadging his kindnes▪ not onely to them that are liuing, but alſo to thoſe that are dead, & telling Ruth that the man was their kinſman. Secondly, ſhe counſelleth Ruth, verſ. 22. that ſhe take his proffer, and abide with his maydens, for feare ſhee be denyed in another fielde: which Ruth perfourmeth ver. 23, and keepeth with them to the ende of barley harueſt, and wheate harueſt, and afterwarde with her mother. Of theſe parts let vs briefely ſpeake, as the ſpirit ſhall asſiſt, and the time permit.
               
                  Then ſhe aroſe. After dinner, like one carefull of her buſines, ſhe repaireth to her former worke, & here by ye way this queſtion may be made, whether Ruth gaue any thanks to God, for her meat, ſeeing it is not mentioned: for this doubt muſt not be omitted, nor paſſe vndiſſolued, leſt our▪ carnal companions in this age, which come & go to their meat like bruit beaſts, may ſeeme to haue the example of ſome godly perſons, for the defence of their abhominable vnthankfulnes. To which I anſwer, firſt, if any godly perſon haue at any time, omitted his dutie, we muſt not by his example be drawne to do the like; for we muſt liue by ye rule of the word of God, not by the examples of the faithful: Secondly, wee muſt know that euery thing or circumſtance is not needefull

in euery place of the ſcripture to be declared particularly, for in this place wee reade not that Ruth gaue any thanks to Bohaz for her meate: yet wee muſt not conclude that ſhe gaue none at all, & if ſhe thanked a man, much more the eternall God, which framed his minde to ſhew her that fauour. Thirdly, ſhe being with Boaz, it was his duetie at his owne table to pray, and to giue thankes, which no doubt but he did, and ſhe did with him. Therefore to the wordes, where we firſt note the true vſe of eating and drinking the benefites of God, which is, that by them we may bee enabled to followe our vocations: For here we ſee Ruth after meate, returneth to her worke againe, as if the holy Ghoſt had flatly ſet downe, that for this cauſe we muſt eate and drink that by them wee might worke more freely, and labour more diligently. Therefore Salomon pronounceth a bleſſing vpon a whole countrey,Eccleſ. 10.17. whoſe princes and nobles eat for ſtrength, and not for drunkennes: & theſe are accounted two ſinnes of Sodome, idlenes & fulnes of bread, that is, eating and no working.Ezec. 16.53 This point can neuer be ſtoode enough vpon, that the belly-gods and vnorderlye perſons of our age might be perſwaded therwith to leaue their drinking & drunkennes▪ their eating and gluttony, and their plaies and paſtimes: for the meat is no ſooner out of their mouthes, but the renewing of their ſport entreth into their hartes, how they may ſpend more time in idlenes & vanitie. And aboue all, this is profitable for ſeruing men to note, who wiſh nothing but libertie: & their owne conſciences knowe, yt if they may chooſe, they will dwell with no maiſters, but where they may do little worke; therefore came the old prouerb, a yong ſeruing man, an old beggar; becauſe vnthriftynes in youth is ſeldom worne out in age: This I ſpeak not againſt ye calling which no doubt but is good & lawfull, but onely to warne them & exhort them, to baniſh their vntimely eating & drinking, and to put away idlenes wt ſome lawful & profitable buſines. And let vs all be Ruthes in this point, as in other her conditions, that we may eate our breade in the ſweate of our browes, & riſe to labour, not to paſtime: that wee may

remember our old curſe which came by reaſon of ſin, and eaſe the contagion of our diſeaſed natures, with the dayly following our honeſt vocations.
               Secondly, by this alſo may we vrge, (although the holy Ghoſt in this place ſpeaketh not of it) the worſhip & obſeruation of ye Sabbaoth: for as men go from worke to meat, & after from meate to worke againe: euen ſo reaſon would, that as wee ſanctifie the Sabboath in the fore noone, by preaching and hearing, the afternoone ſhould be hallowed with the ſame exerciſe. But of all works, this the greateſt is in ſmalleſt reputation; for men go from hearing to their meat: but from their meat either to ſleep, or to opē prophaning the Lords day, with moſt execrable & accurſed pleaſure or negligēce. They ſay, once a day is inough, yea and too much alſo, except they did it better. Such clipping of God his ſeruice to ſatiſfie our pleaſures, will not ſtande with the leaſt and the ſmalleſt point of chriſtianitie. And this they may be aſſured of, that in the laſt day, their owne diligence & weekely labours, in worldly buſines, ſhal ſtande vp in iudgement againſt them, to condemne their negligence in the trauaile of godlines: yea and till this ſlacknes be amended, the time loſt and paſt repented, they ſhal neuer come to the knowledge of God or his truth, themſelues or their owne ſaluation: for he that ſanctifieth the Sabboath, hath all religion: but he that prophaneth the Sabboath, hath none at all.
               
                  And Boaz. In theſe wordes Boaz reneweth his commandement to his ſeruants concerning Ruth, which we ſhewed you was vttered in the ver. 9. and now hee willeth them, that though ſhe gather among the ſheaues, yet none ſhoulde ſhame her: meaning, none ſhoulde reprehend her: for reprehenſion to a godly and modeſt woman, is a matter of bluſhing or ſhame: And this to bee noted, that his minde is, though ſhee deſerued blame, yet none of them ſhoulde ſay, blacke bee her eye, (as the prouerbe is) that is, once accuſe her for any fault, Where wee note the wonderful care that Bohaz had of her, that the longer hee looked on her, the better hee liked her: her ſolitarie behauiour:

her contented trauaill, her diligent order in going ſo orderly to her buſines agayne, were as orations or perſwaſions, to make him being godly, to approue and commend her aboue all the reſidue. Which teacheth vs, that we ſhoulde bee haled on with the ſame cordes of honeſtie, diligence and religion, to extend our liberalitie in large giftes and curteous ſpeeches, to euery poore perſon that wanteth our helpe: and that the rather conſidering pouertie is a curſe of ſinne, wherein wee are all as guilty as they: therefore like feeling members of our brothers miſeries: where we ſee the foreſaid graces appeare, there let our bounden beneuolence excell, that they may bee encouraged with our benefites, and wee may bee comforted with their prayers, and both conioyned in this life, and in the life to come.
               Secondly, Ruth woulde not gather among the ſheaues, becauſe no doubt ſhee was ſtudious to auoid offence, for if ſhe had ſo done, ſhe muſt needes in curre the ſuſpicion; though not the reproofe of miſbehauiour, coueting more then was her due: for the eares, & not the ſheaues were appointed for the poore. Whereby wee note that the poore muſt bee carefull aboue many thinges, they abuſe not the libertie of the rich: although they may goe without correction to the ſheaues in the fieldes, or the heapes in the barne, yet they muſt not eate vp more then beſeemeth them to aske. Now it were without conſcience to aske ſo much as the owners cannot giue, without the ſhortening of their handes to other their poore brethren. And this condemneth the raking deſire of them, which are neuer contented: and thoſe vngodly robbers and theeues, which aske and yet haue no need: both which kinde of people will to the vttermoſt, crau
                     •
                   and haue all a mans poſſeſſions, without any mercy, vnder pretēſe of pouertie, yea & will neuer accept the willing minde of thē that are not able to giue, but like the ſea, gape for ye water out of the little land brookes. Theſe are officers & bribers, extortioners & vſurers, rackers of farmes, rayſers of rents, takers of fines & defrauders of ſimple perſons,

bargaining, who all are condemned in the laſt commā
                  dement as the couetors of other mens goods: and therefore guiltie of eternal damnation.
               
                  And do you. Theſe words are the ſeconde part of his cōmandement, whereby the former point is confirmed, that Bohaz knew Ruth would not picke the ſheaues; & therefore willeth to let fall on the grounde plentifully, for her to auoide her farther and more vnprofitable labour, which he therefore doth, that he might teſtifie, his goodes, to bee not onely his, but all theirs that feare the Lord: for no doubt but there were many that did gleane in the field beſide Ruth, with whom Bohaz did not thus deale: ſhewing vnto vs that there may be a difference in giuing, and that we are not bounde to giue equally to all, but as the perſons are, ſo muſt bee the gift: the pooreſt muſt not haue the greateſt ſhare, but the godlieſt, for pouertie without godlines, is like the apple of Sodome, which is as fayre to looke on, as any other, but being taken in the hand, reſolueth to ſmoke and powder: ſo if vngodly poore folks be a little examined, they ſhal be found as the apple not worthy eating, ſo the other not worthy to be giuen to; although they crie like the horſeleaches daughters, giue, giue; yet wee muſt anſwere thē wt ſpare, ſpare. But Bohaz doth in this place as Ioſeph did to his brethren,Gen. 43.34 he feaſted all of thē, but Beniamins part was fiue times ſo big as the reſidue: afterward,Cap. 45.22. he gaue to euery one chaunge of garmentes, but vnto Beniamin he gaue three hundred ſhikles, and fiue change of garments, the reaſon of all this was, becauſe hee was Rachell, his owne mothers ſonne, but all the other were his fathers children onely; euen ſo muſt we do good to all that are our fathers children by creation: but to our mothers children, which is, the Church of Chriſt, the houſhold of faith, whereof Rachel was a tipe, we muſt wt ſpecial portions, for feeding their hunger and clothing of their nakedneſſe, compaſſe their wantes,Gal: 2.10. with the ſupply of our beneuolence, for which cauſe Sainte Paule in his preaching was willed by the other Apoſtles, to haue ſpeciall and heedfull care ouer the poore brethren: which if it were

put in practiſe, wee ſhould be more able to do good vnto the godly: and to denie the contrary minded. This one thing is aboue all other to be required, yt euery one giue where God may moſt of all be glorified; but the vngodly ſort take their reliefe as the hungry houndes their feeding, if they bee hindered they will flye vppon their owne maiſters, in like ſort the wicked will blaſpheme God liberally, and not humbly thanke or praiſe him, for anye thing they receiue. What if they murmure againſt thee and ſaye, my part is not ſo good as thine, you giue him more then to mee, and you care for none but for theſe preciſe fellowes. Tell them againe, it is lawfull for thee to doo with thy owne as thou wilt: neyther ought thy eye to bee euill, becauſe my hand is good: the vnworthieſt in the world ▪ ſhall haue the worthieſt portion: they which with them are laſt, with thee let be firſt, & the firſt with them, be laſt with thee: for ſpirtuall men muſt looke for ſpirituall hearts, to caſt the ſeed of their almes into good ground, where the fruit may be increaſed, the want of the faithfull may be relieued, the glorie of Chriſt may be magnified, thy owne duetie may bee diſcharged, a good conſcience ſatiſfied, and thy ſoule for euer comforted. Secondly, by this wee obſerue, that Boaz might haue admitted many hinderances, whereby hee might haue bene better aduiſed before he gaue ſuch large liberty, either to Ruth or to his ſeruants for her, as to gather among the ſheaues, or to let fall hand
                     •
                  ulls vnto her. Hee might haue thought thus with himſelfe, it was lately a derth for a long time together, it may be ſhortly ye Lord wil ſend ſuch another, & then all that I haue will be too litle for my ſelfe and my family, and therefore I muſt be wiſe, and giue not ſo much till I knowe what I ſhall lacke: but all this coulde not turne away the heart of Boaz from doing good vnto Ruth, for he eſteemed more of one godly Ruth, then of all the poſſeſſions hee had: neyther ought any of the godly once to admit any ſuch doubt in their minde, as to be vexed in diſtruſt of the mercye of God to come.Pſa. 119.36 They muſt pray with Dauid, o Lord incline my hearte to thy teſtimonies,

& not to couetouſnes. The widdow of Zareptha might haue ſo anſwered Eliah,1. King. 17. that ſhe had but ſo little lefte as would onely ſuffiſe for one meale and giue him nothing, yet ſhe was obedient and beleeued the worde of the prophet, and her ſtore increaſed, that ſhe wanted no more.
               
                  2. Cor. 8.2, 3.4. The church of the Macedonians might haue ſaid, that they were poore ſaints as wel as the reſidue, therefore, as they asked nothing but were content with their pouerty, ſo none ſhould charge them in giuing to other, but yet the Apoſtle Paule ſaid, they ſupplied the want of the Cornithians, and gaue more then they were able. And euerlaſting is the commendation which hee giueth of Oneſiphorus,1. Tim. 1.16 17, 18. how often hee refreſhed him and was not aſhamed of his chaines, but came to Epheſus and viſited him there, and followed him to Rome many hundred miles, that there alſo he might ſuccor him, with his charity. Which teacheth vs, when wee haue to deale with the godly, as all theſe perſons had, no coſte muſt be ſpared, couetouſnes not admitted, no feare of want ſuſpected, for he which is Lord ouerall, is alſo rich vnto all.
               Obadiah in a famine fedde an hundered prophets, yea and hidde them in caues, from the wrath of Iezabell. What want did he ſuſtaine thereby? ſurelye none:1 King, 18, 13. for diſtruſt cauſeth want, and not liberalitye: for hee which maketh thee to feede his ſaints nowe, will alſo prouide another to feed the when thy ſtore is waſted. Oh hearken to this you poſſeſſors of the earth, vppon whome in this time of dearth the eyes of the poore doe looke, as on the handes of the Lord, whereby hee filleth euerie liuing thing with his plenteous goodnes. Open your gates wider, that more poore maye come into your houſes, to bee refreſhed with breade: open your purſes farther, that more beneuolence maye come out, to bee caſte into the fruitefull lande of the famiſhed poore, for after manye dayes you ſhall finde it againe: put on the bowels of compaſſion, and let not

your owne bretheren want, ſeeing you haue inough. Hee that willeth you to doo this for his ſake, will commaunde heauen and earth, to reſtore his owne debte, which you haue lent him: feare not that you ſhall want, for the Lorde is the owner of the earth, & this is ſen
                     •
                  e vppon vs, to trye your charitye and compaſſion towarde the poore for his ſake: if you nowe bee liberall, Paule hath prayed for you that you may finde mercye in the daye of the diſſolution of all thinges, and the Lorde hath promiſed to the mercifull mercye, at that daye when hee lyeth ſicke vppon his death bed. Make you treaſures therefore of this worldely wealth, and ſende them by the handes of the poore into God his kingdome before you: ſpare not the ſheaues in the barne, the eares in the fielde, nor the heapes in your garners, for hee that ſpendeth for the members of Chriſte, ſhall receiue the greater aduantage. Remember you are the partakers of the ſame faith which they had that ſold their poſſeſſions to giue to the ſaintes and to gaine heauen: but you neede not to ſell any landes, onelye deliuer your corne plentifully to the poore: which if you doo not, they ſhall riſe in iudgemente againſt you at the latter day, becauſe they ſpared neither landes nor liues, and you will not giue a little corne for the name of Chriſt.
               
                  And ſo ſhee gathered. This is the laſt parte of that which Ruth did in the field, ſhewing her diligence ſhee vſed in her labours, by working out the whole daye vntill the euening, and gathering an epha of barley: for by this appeareth, that ſhee laboured as faythfully for her ſelfe and her mother, as if ſhee had beene an hired ſeruant; or her mother looking vppon her. By the which is noted vnto vs the diligence of children and ſeruants, in the labours and buſines of their maiſters and parentes, for they muſt not ſeeke or couet to pleaſe them with eye ſeruice, but their duetyes are required as well in the time of their abſence as in their preſence.

Bee Ruthes, my beloued, in this pointe, whoſoeuer are bond or free, for they wc are faithfull in a little, ſhal be made great rulers, and they which haue not beene faithfull in the earthly treaſures, ſhall neuer be truſted with the heauenly. By this alſo they may learne, which thinke they may lawfully take their eaſe in their owne buſines: but we ſee by this example of Ruth, that religion bindeth vs to be as diligent in our owne, as in another mans trauaile, committed vnto vs vppon truſt, for as to him we are faithfull, becauſe wee receiue wages, ſo in our owne we muſt bee painefull, leaſt the Lord ariſe againſt vs for the miſpending of our time: and wee owe more duety to our heauenly father, then to all the earthly maiſters of the world
               Againe; the quantity of her gathering is here deſcribed, to be an epha of barley: for the vnderſtanding whereof we muſt note that there were three kindes of meaſures among the Hebrewes,Leu. 19:36. &. 27.16. Exo. 16.36 which are mentioned in the ſcripture: the firſt was an homer, which was the meaſure of Manna that the Lorde allowed to euery houſhold when they were wandring in the wildernes, and contained of our Engliſh meaſure, ſixe pintes & ſomewhat more; the ſecond meaſure was a bin, which after our meaſure contained ten pints and ſomewhat more, the third was an epha, which is this that meaſured the barley of Ruth, and it contained ten homers, which commeth to ſixtie pintes, which being deuided by eyght, amounteth to the quantity of ſeuen gallons and one pottell, which is a buſhell lacking one pottel, after our Engliſh meaſure. By the which wee may obſerue, howe largely the Lord prouided for Ruth by the liberality of Boaz, for ſhee gathered more in one daye then otherwiſe ſhee coulde in two or three: where the Lord himſelfe ſheweth vs how ſhe tooke the curteſie of Boaz, and the ſeruants ſcattred for her according to their maiſters cōmaundement, that her hand might bee quickly filled, her trauaile the more eaſed, her labour better rewarded, & finally mother & daughter be both more comfortably refreſhed wt their kinſmans kindnes. And when ſhe tooke vp. The day being ended and

Ruth wearied with her vnwonted and yet diligent trauaile, vp the taketh her bundel of corne, and the ſcraps of meate ſhe had reſerued, & trudgeth to her mother, that ſhee might vnderſtand of her good hap, and they both together reioyce for the corne Ruth had gatherred, and the good will which Boaz had offered. Out of the which we may firſt of all obſerue a heauenly and godly example of obedience and loue toward her mother in lawe, for we ſee in this place, that ſhee doth not onely labour for her liuing, but refreſheth her with that which was giuen her to ſatisfie her owne hunger; while ſhe was in the field in her diligent labour. Was it not ſufficient for Ruth, that ſhe left her people and countrey to come with her mother in lawe, but ſhee muſt alſo go for her, ſhe ſitting at home, in a poore and contemptible manner to gleane in the field: or if ſhe did that willingly, yet muſt ſhe ſaue the meat from her owne mouth and put it into Naomies? Here we ſee ſhe failed in nothing that might eyther commend her loue, declare her obedeince, & ſignifie her care toward poore and old Naomi her deere and godly mother. And this teacheth vs, that we muſt be Ruthes to our aged parents, we muſt labor abroad, & they muſt tary at home, we muſt ſet our nimble bones to the heauy buſines, and their wearied bodyes muſt reſt in the houſes: It is vngodlynes to ſaye, that the old man or woman, ſhall labour and care, for our wretched riot, and careles expenſes, but rather let the young gallant take his owne parents vppon his backe,Gen. 27.3 cary them from their houſe of trouble to the harbour of peace. Let Eſau and Iacob hunt veniſon for Izaack, for hee is old and muſt tary at home. Let Iacob and little Ioſeph tary in their tents and the luſty youthes his ſons and brethern lie in the fieldes and keepe their fathers ſheepe,Gen, 37.14 and rather then old Iacob ſhould go, let yong Ioſeph t
                     •
                  udge to his bretheren though he bee ſold for his labour. Let Ruth go gleane for Naomi, and not Naomi for Ruth, for this is the firſt commaundemente with promiſe. But oh the graceleſſe generations of our vngodly age, where men are become ſo tender ouer their diſobedient

broode, that in their labours they will ſpare their wanton children, and weare their crazed carkaſes, they had rather put both feete into the graue by their ouer labours, then bring their vntamed ſteeres, and vnrulye heyfers, their ſons and daughters to the yoke of diligent trauaile. And theſe graceleſſe impes, will looke and laugh vppon theyr parents, and ſay, it doeth their olde bodyes good: And doeth it ſo? why, is it better for a tyred horſe to runne a race, then for a reſlye palfreye? You are ready inough to catche that which is good from your parentes, why take yee not their labours, if they bee ſo good for them? No, no, you are the heauines of your parents: you ſhoulde bee oliues to make them looke cherefully, but you are onions that make them weepe bitterly. But yet let not Ruth and the godlye exhorte vs in vaine, for if wee doo the labour, wee ſhall haue the hire, if wee honour our parentes, with our actions and deedes, as wee do with our wordes, then ſhall our dayes bee multiplied in the land, or elſe our liues ſhall bee ſhortened with vntimely death, and our poſterity rooted out by the iuſt iudgment of God.
               Secondly; by this example of Ruth, that ſhee brought her mother of that which ſhee had lefte: wee learne this doctrine, if our freindes giue vs liberally, and wee haue plenty, let vs not conſume all vppon our ſelues, but let vs reſerue ſome for other. When our ſauiour had twiſe feaſted many thouſandes, ſtill there was ſome thing lefte which hee commanded to bee taken vp: ſhewing vs thereby, if God liberallye poure out his benefites vppon vs, it is not that wee ſhoulde the more riotouſlye lauiſhe them out vppon meate or pleaſure: for it is a common anſwere in theſe dayes, if wee reprooue gameſters for their play, drunkards for their coſts, and proud perſonnes for indecent apparell, wherein euerye one ſpendeth more then woulde ſuffiſe two or three poore perſons, they will tell vs, they ſpend nothing but their owne, and what haue wee to doo with it? But wee replie, that they ſpend more than is theyr owne, for the

earth is the Lordes, and all that therein is. They are but ſtewards of their goods, and not Lordes and maſters, and therefore they ſhall giue account for euerie pennie miſſpent, when it ſhall not profite them to ſay, wee waſted our wealth at dicing and gaming, we conſumed our landes by eating and drinking, and ſpent thus much monie in ga
                     •
                  e apparell, and other brauerie.
               Secondly, God gaue them thoſe benefites, not ſo much for themſelues as for others: for as the Sunne ſhineth not for it ſelfe, but for vs, the earth bringeth forth fruite, not for it ſelfe but for vs: ſo wealthie men, are not wealthie for themſelues onely, but for al the poore members of Chriſt, that they might liberallye beſtowe vpon others. The Heathen king Aſſuerus, making a feaſt to al his Empire; yet hee gaue this lawe,Eſth. 1.8 that none ſhould bee compelled to drinke or to eate more than they needed or pleaſed: ſo abhominable is gluttonie, euen in nature, that it hurteth man, ſpoyleth beaſts, and killeth the frutes of the earth: for the rankeſt corne is none of the beſt. Then heere is temperance by this example commaunded: for the phiſitions ſaye, that it is moſt wholeſome, to come and riſe from meate with a hungry ſtomacke, and the worde of God ſayth, that wee muſt eate for ſtrength and nature, not for appetite and drunkennes. But oh that our fat Baſanites would admit this as a wholeſome and a godly doctrine, then woulde not their bellyes and panche
                     •
                   growe ſo greate as they are, not their heartes ſo hardned againſt the poore: for their dogges, ſhoulde go empty, their aboundance woulde bee miniſhed, their gluttonyes and drunkennes baniſhed, their pleaſures and delightes expelled, and their pride and apparell be humbled, and their godly and needy bretheren ſuccored.
               Thirdely, by this wee note, that the pooreſt muſt ſtriue to beſtowe ſomewhat vnto theyr brethren that want: yea, though they ſpare it from their owne neceſſityes: but eſpecially children to their parentes, and one kinſman to another: for

thus we ſee Ruth doeth, ſhee ſpared when ſhe had inough, and that ſhee gaue to her mother that wanted. Which godly kindnes putteth vs in mind of the poore widdowe in the Goſpell, that came and gaue two mites in to the Lordes treaſory,Luc, 21▪2. and the Lord doeth greatly commend her for it, aboue the riche offrings of the wealthy: as if a little thing that a poor man doeth, were more accepted then the multitudes of rich men. Indeed to the world the largeſt gift maketh the greateſt ſhewe, but to the Lord the little portions of a willing minde, if it bee but a cup of colde water, is greater then the fleſh pots of Egipt, and all the daintye fare of the king of Babylons courte. For our ſauiour encourageth vs by this meanes that they which haue little to giue ſhould not abſtaine, but certainely knowe that the Lorde looketh on the hearte not on the hand, on the minde not on the gifte,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   for that which in the preſence of the worlde is deſpiſed, in the ſight of God is beſt accepted. Therefore euery one muſt looke to deale ſome good by their liuing, bee it neuer ſo ſmall, for as there is no hearbe, but it yeldeth ſome frute, ſo there muſt be no man but he muſt giue ſome what, that ſo he might fulfill the lawe of the Goſpell.
               
                  But her mother in law. Heere in this verſe Naomi ſeeing the plenty of the gleaned corne, and reſerued victual, like a godly woman falleth to praier for a bleſſing vppon him that had giuen ſo liberally vnto Ruth: 
                     •
                   is as a thankes-giuing for the benefite receiued: & 
                     ••
                  terward▪ ſhe queſtioneth with Ruth, where ſhe had gleaned that day, & Ruth telleth her, in the poſseſſion of Boaz.
               Where we firſt of all note the dutie of parents to their children, and maiſters to their ſeruants, which is to call them to a reckoning where and how they beſtowe their time, therefore ſaith Naomi, where haſte thou gathered to daye, and where haſt thou wrought. Condemning this ſoftnes & ſuffering in ſuch kind of parents, as are afraid to ſpeake to their children & ſeruants, not for their work, but for their miſpending the ſabaoth, the idle iourneyes they make to tauernes and

playes, to feaſting and dauncing, ſhould be examined by their gouernours, as Naomi doeth Ruth. Where haſt thou wrought to day? Whoſe buſineſſe waſt thou imployed in? what place did call thee from the ſeruice of God? and what motion did cauſe thee to diſhonour the ſabaoth? No, no, they can ſuffer them to violate the Lords day in pleaſure, that they might drudge all the weeke after in their worldly trauailes. Why doeth not ſome man giue recreation to his ſeruants of his owne ſixe? but they muſt rob the Lord of the ſeuenth alſo, Howe vnequall is this, to put him out that hath but one parte, and to ſcore him vp that hath ſo many? I am perſuaded, that of all other tokens, of irreligion among vs, there is none greater then this, to ſuffer our children and ſeruants to violate the Lordes owne day, that they might the more willinglye labour and trauaile for them on the weeke dayes. But yet let the authoritie of parents remaine, that God hath giuen this power vnto them, and let the dutye of children and ſeruants appeare, that as Ruth giueth anſwere to Naomi from point to point, how & where ſhe applied her time, euen ſo they are bounde vppon paine of God his eternall curſe, to giue willing and gentle accounts to them, when they are demanded in ſuch like matters.
               Secondly, by this prayer of Naomi, Bleſſed bee 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the Lord, that knew thee, that is; which approued thee and ſhewed thee fauor, we note this to bee our duety, to pray for our benefactours, ſeeing we cannot reward them, ſo doeth Naomi in this place,Tim. 1.1
                        •
                     
                   and ſo doeth Paul for Oneſiphorus, that the Lord would ſhew mercy vnto him in the day of his appearing: teaching vs that our ſpiritual praires are more neceſſary for them, then their temporall benefits are for vs: & therfore let vs learne to pray aright, ſeeing it is our duty to pray for our frends. Theſe painted praiers of many which come from the lips, or from wicked harts, are ſuch as the praiers of roaguing beggers at euery doore for baſe reliefe, and alſo the commoneſt that are among many poore people in theſe dayes, are abhomination in the eyes of the Lord, no benefite to them for whome they are vttered, and

the poyſon of thoſe that thus do vſe them. Therefore beloued, learne to acount of them as they are; cloudes carried about with euerie winde, welles and no water, great wordes, but no grace in them: ſtoppe your eares at theſe bread prayers, and withdrawe your handes from giuing any reliefe to them that abuſe this heauenly bleſſing.
               
                  Then ſaid Naomi. In this verſe Naomi repeateth her prayer, and addeth a reaſon of the ſame, becauſe he hath not ceaſed to do good toward the liuing, and toward the dead, that is, hee did good to my husband and children when they were aliue, and nowe to vs their poſteritye, they being dead, for in doing good to vs for their ſakes, they doe it to them: for eyther interpretation will ſtand. For wee muſt not imagine, that this liberality doeth any good to them that are dead, becauſe they were in Moab 
                     •
                   theſe in Inda, they were conſumed in their graues, and vnfit for any benevolence, as for their ſoules they needed no earthlye beneficence: for that remaineth true for euer which Salomon ſayth,Ecll. 9.5.6. the liuing knowe that they ſhall dye, but the dead knowe nothing, neyther haue they anye more parte, ſeeing their remembrance is forgotten, the thing which they loued & the thing which they hated and the thing they deſired is now periſhed, with them, neither haue they any more part of al the things that are done vnder the ſunne. By the which we may ſee the deluſion of them which teach vs, to buy prayers and pardons for our frends that are dead, that their paines may bee eaſed which nowe they endure, for if nothing can profit them that is done vnder the ſunne, then neither our prayers nor purſes can giue them any reliefe▪ But by theſe words we learne, that if we do good to the children and widowes of our deceaſed friends, it is all one, as if we did good to their own perſons. Thus ſaid Naomi in this place, and thus Dauid did good to his frend Ionathan being dead,2. Sam, 9.11. when he did kindly entreate Mephiboſheth his ſon being aliue. The Lord himſelfe proteſtteth in the ſcriptures, that he did good to the Iſraelites and Iewes,Mat. 25, 40. for Abraham, Iſaack, and Iacobs ſakes:

and our ſauiour in the Goſpell declareth, that the good wee do to the leaſt of his bretheren being on earth, wee do it to him which raigneth in heauen; for this is a duetye of true frendſhippe, to make much of our frendes when they are departed, to be a frend to their frendes and to bee an enemie to their enemies, as the Lord promiſed Abraham. Therefore let vs caſt awaye this counterfaite kindnes, and perfourme this godlye loue, wherein others before vs haue walked,Gen. 12.13. and as wee were wont louinglye to receiue the parentes being aliue, ſo let vs ioyfullye entertaine the children nowe they are dead, for true frendſhippe loueth at all tmes,Pro, 17:17. and godlye kindeneſſe muſt neuer bee remoued. As wee wiſhe that others ſhoulde vſe vs when we are gone, ſo let vs vſe others now they are abſent.
               
                  Moreouer Naomi ſaid. In theſe wordes ſhee giueth comfort vnto Ruth, ſhewing her, that his beneuolence was not cauſeleſſe, ſeeing hee was neere vnto them and of theyre affinitye, being an appointed perſon to redeeme their inheritance.leuit. 25:25 Deut: 25:5, 6. For in the lawe of the Lorde, hee hath decreed for the poore of the Iewes, that if any perſon had ſolde his inheritance, the nexte of his kindred might redeeme it, and reſtore it to the familye againe▪ which comming into the minde of Naomi, ſhee hopeth that by this meanes they ſhoulde come to their inheritance againe, ſeeing Bohaz, who was one of the nexte of her kindred, had ſo curteouſly intreated the widdowe and heyre.
               Whereby wee note the great care that the Lorde hath ouer the poore, which by a lawe decreed, that they ſhould not for euer bee depriued of their inheritance, for at the fartheſt they ſhoulde come to it againe at the yeere of Iubile. And truelye this Iawe being ceaſed, becauſe the Iewes common wealth is ouerthrowen, yet the Lorde executeth the ſame in ſome meaſure amongſt the gentiles daylye. For nowe wee maye ſee and heare, howe he exalteth many from the duſte, to walke and ſit with princes: howe hee

giueth greate poſſeſſions vnto them whoſe fathers had not one foote of land, and caſteth many from their vnlawfull titles. And euerie day wee heare of ſome caſte down and humbled, and other lift vp & exalted. Who doth this?Heſt. 7.10. & 8.1. 1. Sa. 16.14 Eſa. 22.20. but the hand of the almightye that putteth downe Haman and raiſeth vp Mordechai: refuſeth Saul and chooſeth Dauid: remooueth Abiathar, & eſtabliſheth Sadoch: baniſheth Shebnah, and aduanceth Eliakim: and finally, that in fewe ages changeth all things. Therefore promotion commeth neither from the eaſt, nor from the weſt, nor from the wildernes, but from the throne of the Lorde of hoſts, which openeth, and no man ſhutteth, humbleth and no man ſetteth vp, exalteth and no man caſteth downe, and ruleth the courſe of all mankind by his vnchangable decree. Let not then the mightieſt bee proude for their honour and dignity, for the Lord deſtroyed the Anakims greate princes & giants before the family of Caleb: much more will he do thoſe that are lyfted vp by their wealth that ſhould rather caſt them down: and let vs do good to theſe poore bretheren among vs, for they ſhalbe lifted vp vnto riches, when the greateſt and wealthieſt among vs ſhall be caſt downe into pouerty. But of this matter wee ſhall haue more occaſion to ſpeake in the fourth chapter.
               
                  But Ruth ſaid. In this verſe Ruth maketh relation of thoſe things which Boaz had ſaid vnto her, and praying for a bleſſing vppon him, becauſe hee vouchſafed to take her into the company of his maidens, & gaue her leaue to gather to the end of harueſt. So that in this place, by theſe wordes of Ruth, wee haue an example of perfecte thankfulneſſe, omitting nothing that might ſerue to commende the kindnes of Boaz: and alſo of womanlike and godlye modeſtye,& ver. 11.12 that concealeth the cauſe of all this curteſye, which was her owne commendation, as alreadye wee haue ſhewed you. So that it is no parte or pointe of godlynes, to do as our euill conditioned and ingratefull perſons doo, which omitte that which ſerueth moſt for to commend their benefactours, and to

lay all the prayſe vppon their owne deſertes. But Salomon willed that another mans, and not our owne mouth ſhoulde prayſe vs: and moſt vngodlye is it, when men will not in ſo ample manner confeſſe the benefites they haue receiued of other, but by all meanes extenuate them, which maketh men vnwilling to doo any good, becauſe they can haue no thankes for their labour. And this it is that cauſed couetouſnes and bribery, extortion and vſury, to enter vppon their bodies and wealth, that woulde not gratifye with kinde and deſerued reportes. So that nowe men will pleaſe themſelues with money and rewards, that would haue beene ſatisfied with thankefull wordes: which is a iuſt iudgment vpon the world, that woulde not bee contented to recompence kindenes for kindnes; are now plagued with couetouſnes for kindnes.
               
                  Wherefore Naomi. This is the laſt parte of this conference or dialogue, wherein Naomi counſelleth Ruth to follow and take the proffer of Boaz, and abide with his maidens, to auoyde all dangers, if the reapers denye her in another field. Where wee firſt of all note, that if wee acquainte our parents and friendes, with our actions and enterpriſes, it might goe farre better with vs in the things of this life, for their aged counſell which they haue bought with much experience may ſtay our vnſteddie mindes with their approued aduiſe: Ruth in this place, declaring the curteſie of Boaz, hath it confirrmed with the counſell of Naomi, and grounded vppon a reaſon which ſhee knewe not, nor feared not. For ſhee thought, that in euerye place ſhee ſhoulde haue found the like entertainemente, and the reapers that then were, ſhoulde ſo continue to the ende of harueſt, but Naomi knewe they were often changed, and ſo in the ende it might fall out otherwiſe, then Boaz appointed, or Ruth expected. And this (me thinketh) doth ſhewe vnto vs what manner perſons parentes ought to bee, for if children wante counſell they ſhoulde bee

aduiſed by their parents: if comfort, it ſhould bee miniſtred by parents, if neceſſaries, they ſhould be prouided by parents: if inſtruction, they ſhould be guided by parents: and finally, if correction, they ſhould be orderred by parentes:Eph. 6.2. which is not onely to bee wiſhed, but is required by the Lorde that they bring them vp in the feare and nurture of the Lord. And if this were duelye weyghed, and reuerently conſidered, as Eliahas cloake parted the waters of Iordan, ſo this woulde parte aſunder, and breake of many thouſand mariages in our dayes, where parents are not able to counſell nor willing to bee counſelled, which if they woulde they had not beene married. This I ſpeake, not to the diſcredite of marriage, but onely I exhorte, as from the Lord, that thoſe which eyther are, or intend to be married, would looke and trauaile firſt for wiſedome, and then for wiues, firſt for vertue, and then for husbands, wherein, if they followe my aduiſe, I aſſure them their marriages will be much merrier, and their poſterity much happier.
               Secondly, by this wee gather, that it is a daungerous or indecent thing, for women to trauaile or worke alone without any company, for the weakeſt are ſooneſt oppreſſed, and women are quickely conquered.Gen. 34.
                        •
                     . We knowe Dinah trauailing alone was taken & rauiſhed by Sichem: and Abigail when ſhe went to pacific the wrath of Dauid, tooke ſeruantes with hit, as in this place Naomi counſelleth Ruth, to abide in the companye of the ſeruants of Boaz, accounting it an indecent and vnſeemelye thing for women and maidens, to bee ſeene alone. And truely if ſeruantes in our dayes had many times more companye, there woulde bee leſſe diſhoneſtye among them; for wee knowe and ſee to our griefe, that the daylye and vſuall familiaritye of a fewe, hath bredde ſome diſeaſe in our church, and diſtemper in our common wealth. This I ſpeake, that euen in theſe dayes of peace, men woulde bee more carefull ouer daughters and ſeruauntes, and not to employe them ſo

commonlye as they doo, in iourneyes and trauaile and ſolitarye buſines, but for more aſſurance keepe them with company, which may bee their defenſe againſt all dangers, if any happen, and the auoyding of diſhoneſty, if any be ſo lightly diſpoſed.
               Thirdly, by this we note, what companie were beſte for both kinde of youthes, either young men or maidens, when Naomi ſaith it is good for thee to go foorth with his maidens: that is, thou art a woman, and abide among his women and maidens, for all companions are neither fit nor lawefull, maidens among men, and men among maidens is for many cauſes diſalowed. Firſt, becauſe there is no ſuch equality in the ſexe, that they might keepe together: for if they labour, it is not alike, and if they ſporte their pleaſures are contrary, and if they dallye it is flat iniquitye. In conſideration whereof in olde time the wiues had one tent to dwell in and the husbandes another: as wee maye ſee in Abraham,Gen, 18.30 Gen. 31.33. Erod: 15.20 in Sara, in Iacob and his wiues, and like this it is that Miriam, and the women of Iſraell prayſed God by themſelues after their deliuerance out of Egipt, and Moſes and Aaron her bretheren, with all the men of Iſrael by themſelues. And alſo wee knowe howe the virgins of Iſrael went vp euery yeere in to the wildernes to lament and talke with the daughter of Iephthah. Whereby we are taught,Iud. 11.37. that not onely for▪ feare of daunger, but alſo for modeſtye and conſcience ſake, wee muſt auoyde this mingled companyes of men and women, excepte in neceſſarie occaſions, as prayer priuatelye and publiquelye, communication of godlye pretended marriages, and ſuch like buſineſſe. Whereby alſo wee ſee at once condemned the feaſting, dancing, meeting, playing and running of men and maidens together: without all reſpect of honeſty or modeſty. And that which is worſt, parents and maiſters will beholde their paſtime, and delight in the vanitye of their wanton children, trayning them vp in a diſſolute life, and commending

their indecent and vnſeemely behauiour. Amend this neglygence in the ſhell of infancye, and your children will growe vp to your greater comfort, and proſper to their more happye welfare, and the occaſion of many ſinnes will be cut of, if we follow the counſell of the ſpirite of God.
               
                  And ſo ſhe abode. This is the concluſion of this chapter, & ſecond part of this hiſtory ſhewing vnto vs that Ruth followed ye counſel of her mother, abiding with ye maidens of Boaz to the end of barly and wheat harueſt, & aferward dwelleth wt her mother again. Where wee obſerue another example of obedience in Ruth, that hearkened to the voice of her mother, and went forth with the maidens of Boaz. And ſurely it is commonly ſeene, that ſuch as the mother is, ſuch is the daughter, for more Naomies would make mo Ruthes, and mo good mothers would make more good daughters: And in theſe dayes all the faults of children may iuſtly bee imputed to the folly of parents, as the olde crabbe goeth, ſo goeth the young, and as the old cocke croweth, ſo croweth the young: a ſerpent hatcheth a ſerpent not an eele, ſo euill parents bring foorth euill and vngodly chilren, but good fathers by diligent inſtruction and tender admonition,Iob. 1.5. & 42:12. by praying with and for their children, as Iob did, ſhal liue to ſee their generations as bleſſed as his was.
               Secondly, by this wee learne an excellent example of godly liberalitie. in that Boaz ſuffered Ruth to gather wheate as well as barley, the beſte as well as the meaner. In like manner muſt wee as willingly departe with, for Chriſtes ſake our wine as our water, our drinke as our draffe, and as wee commonly ſpeake, our white bread as our browne: and truely in this many good men offend, not becauſe they giue it not, but becauſe they thinke it too much to giue: as if our beſte giftes were not beſte accepted in the preſence of God. Hee which fed the Iſraelites with Angels food, would alſo that we ſhould feede him in the godlye poore with our worſhipfull and daintieſt fare.

This I ſpeake not, that thoſe which aske, ſhoulde bee diſcontented with the meaneſt and fitteſt for them, for the prouerbe is, beggars muſt not bee chooſers, as it is couetouſneſſe not to vouchſafe, the beſt wee haue (if need require) to the poore, ſo it is ſcornefulnes for the poore; like the Iſraelites, which loathed Manna, and deſired fleſh to be diſcontented with their neceſſarie and preſent foode, and to luſt for that which is aboue their vocation. But the vſe of this pointe is, to perſwade to bee like minded vnto Boaz in this, to the godly poore, that wee euery one without partialitie or grudging, when neceſſitie requireth, giue our gold as well as our ſiluer, and diſtribute our deereſt almes to our pooreſt breethren.
               Thirdely, harueſt being doone, Ruth abideth with her mother in lawe, for none of the godly will make a dayly and continuall trade of asking almes, or forſake their owne parentes or poore habitations, for worldly reſpects; as appeareth by this example of Ruth. For it is no doubt, ſhe fared well euery day with the ſeruantes of Boaz, and much better then her poore mother could prouide for her at home, but ſhee is not drawen away therwith, but it as contented to eat the hungry morſels with her mother at home, as the plentifull abroad. And it is great pittie that any ſhoulde be ſuccoured, which are not contented to liue hardely at home, and then to aske, when there is no other honeſt meanes left to liue. And this condemneth the common walking mates, which neyther haue houſes nor honeſtie, and it is greateſt pittie that they eyther ſhould be ſuccoured or ſuffered ſo to doe, for they are drones, which neuer come in hiues, but to the hurt of other: they waſte all, but get nothing; neither haue they any other care, but to charge the godly and charitable people. Vnto ſuch giue not, as wee haue often ſaid, for they which will not liue of the ſweate of their browes, let them not eate of the bread of our labours. Now let vs give prayſe to God.
               The end of the ſeuenth Lecture.
            
            
               
               The eyght Lecture.
               
                  
                     
                        Chap. 3. ver. 1.2.3.4.5.6.
                     
                     
                        1. Afterward, Naomi her mother in law ſaid vnto her, ſhall I not ſeeke reſt for thee my daughter, that thou maieſt proſper.
                     
                        2. And now, is not Boaz our kinſman, with whoſe maide thou was, beholde hee winnoweth barley in the floore this night.
                     
                        3. Waſh thee therefore and annoint thee, and put on thy clothes, and goe downe into the floore, and let not the man knowe thee, vntill hee haue made an ende to eate and drinke.
                     
                        4. But when hee lieth downe, marke the place where he lyeth: then come thou, and vncouer the place of his feete, and lie downe, and he ſhall tell thee what thou ſhalt do.
                     
                        5. And ſhe ſaid vnto her, whatſoeuer thou haſt commanded me, that will I doe.
                     
                        6. And ſo ſhe went downe into the floore, and did altogether, as her mother in lawe had commanded her.
                  
               
               
                  THis thirde Chapter is the ſeconde occaſion of this mariage, wherein Naomi eſpecially dealeth with Ruth, howe ſhee ſhoulde make knowne her ſute to Boaz. The whole Chapter hath theſe two partes, firſt the counſell of Naomi to Ruth, ſecondly the effect of that counſell. The counſell is contained in theſe ſixe verſes now read, conſiſting alſo of two partes: firſt, her care for Ruth, verſe 1. that her deſire is to procure her proſperity: ſecondly, the meanes whereby Ruth might performe that which ſhe aduiſeth: firſt becauſe Boaz was then alone in the floore winnowing of barley: ſecondly, ſhe muſt prepare herſelfe to go to him: firſt, in her body, by waſhing and annointing it: ſecondly, in her ornament, that ſhee put on her beſt clothes, and ſo goe downe to

the floore: after ſhe was come thether, ſhe inſtructeth her, howe to behaue her ſelfe: firſt by keeping out of his ſight and knowledge, till he had ſupped: ſecondly, by marking the place of his bed, and lying downe at his feet, and declaring her ſute vnto him; and he would tell her what ſhe ſhould doe. After all this Ruth promiſeth obedience, verſ. 5.6. and accompliſheth her mothers deſire. Of theſe partes let vs briefly ſpeake, as the ſpirite of God ſhall aſſiſt vs, and the time permit.
               
                  Afterwarde Naomi. In theſe wordes is declared vnto vs the great care that Naomi had of her daughter in law, Ruth, for they are thus much in effect. Nowe, both of vs are in quiet, and peaceable reſt at home, yet I ſee that our welfare cannot alway endure, for I am olde, and the graue gapeth after mee, thou art young and a good mariage tarieth for thee: it is my dutie to looke for thy welfare, and to prouide for thy continual reſt, if I be taken away: and being carefull of it, I haue now inuented the meanes, &c. Out of the which wee note theſe two profitable doctrines.
               Firſt, that it is the duetie of parents to prouide for their children, when themſelues ſhall be taken away, yea though they haue no certaine aſſurance, whether they ſhall neede it or not. This wee may ſee here practiſed by Naomi: for ſhe was neuer in better caſe ſince her arriuall at Bethlehem, then ſhe was at this preſent: Harueſt was ended, prouiſion obtayned, houſhold furniſhed, & theſe two poor widows liuing louingly together, yet then we ſee in her beſt eſtate, ſhe is moſt carefull for the mariage of Ruth. And truely this is required of all them that haue any children, to prouide for them that they ſhould not care onely for their preſent maintenaunce, but alſo for their future commoditie. And this maketh many godly perſons to maruaile, why men doe trouble their houſes with their children, when they are able honeſtly to prouide for them abroade. Why doe many permitte and ſuffer their their ſonnes and daughters, to ſpend the beſt of their youth in ſingle eſtate, when it is rather required

that while they are young, they ſhoulde bee beſtowed. Truely this maketh many ſo mariages againſt ye parents mindes, when they are negligent to looke to their children, & then the children prouide for themſelues. Men looke for offers, as the mariner looketh for wind, and when the wind ſerueth, the tide falleth: ſo many would prouide for their children when it is too late. This iniury is all heaped on the children; they match without wealth or bleſſing: they are detayned in the beſt tyme of their dayes; and finally, are diſcredited by their owne parents. Would God, you that are naturall parentes would learne of Naomi, which was but a ſtepmother. She differred not the time; ſhe knewe it a ſinne againſt nature, that youth ſhould bee waſted, and not in marriage: ſhe had a conſcience of her duetie; and a care to her daughter in lawe, that her welfare might encreaſe, her ſolitarie life be comforted, her name aduaunced, & her religion rewarded, with a temporall bleſſing of a godly husband, and eternall ſaluation in the kingdome of heauen.
               Secondly, by this wee gather that for many cauſes mariage is better then the vnmaried eſtate, if with the feare of God it be vndertaken. For in this place Naomi calleth it reſt, as ſhe did in the firſt Chapter: and therefore by relation the vnmaried life is diſquietnes, and as reſt is better then trouble,Verſe 9 ſo the maried life is better then the other. And truely, in the vnmaried life, wee find many inconueniences: Firſt, the heart is neuer ſatiſfied: if a man haue riches, honour, pleaſure, health, and fauour; yet wanting a conuenient mariage, hee is not at reſt, but deſireth that, If he bee in ſicknes, the diligence & care of a wife is better then a phiſition, Nature biddeth him marry to increaſe his name. The world biddeth him marry, to multiply mankind. The Lorde biddeth him marry, to prepare ſome heyres for the kingdome of heauen: So that if nature; worlde, & religion require it, who ſhal ſpeak againſt it? Secondly, in the vnmaried eſtate, is either too too much ſolitarineſſe, or too too much pleaſure: the meane betweene both is mariage, where hee ſhall alway finde company

to expell ſorrow, and ioyfull care to driue away ouer merry paſtimes: it calleth a man to grauitie, it admoniſheth of death, if ſheweth the world to bee vanitie, & hath no hope but in heauen. Therefore Salomon ſpeaking of one kind, and alluding to both, ſaith:Prou. 18.2
                        •
                     
                   Hee that findeth a wife, findeth a good thing, and receiueth fauour of the Lord: euen ſo may a woman ſay, If ſhe find a godly husbande, ſhe hath a great fauour. Chriſt taketh greateſt delight in his Church, and his Church in Chriſt. Such is mariage, when the hart of one reſteth in another, that is the reſt which is to be required. As for temporall bleſſinges which further it:Deut. 8.18 they muſt be ſought for by diligent labour, and prayed for by faithfull ſupplication, becauſe it is the Lord that giueth power to get riches, grace to vſe them, and his bleſſing to increaſe them. We knowe, all the fathers ſo ſoone as their children were growen vp, they willed and wiſhed them to marry, that their mindes might firſt be ſtayed at home, as it were the foundation, and then their actions would bee wiſer abroad, which would make a perfect building. But ſome will ſay, Paule affirmeth,1 Cor. 7.1 it is not good for a man to touch a woman, that is, to marrie. I anſwere, that ſaying of Paule is becauſe of troubles that are incident to mariage, by reaſon of the wickednes of the world. The marchant that ventureth on the ſea, hath greateſt gaine, and ſuddaineſt loſſe, not as if the ſea were in fault, but becauſe the ſtormes fall on the ſea; euen ſo, if any find their mariages bitter vnto them, let them knowe, the fault is not in the thing, but in the time, place or perſons: And though troubles followe it, it is but ſowre ſawce to ſweet meat: as the furnace doth purge the golde, that their loue might be manifeſted, their fidelity tried, their patience approued, and their religion (if they haue any) declared.
               Againe, they will obiect, the ſame Apoſtle ſaith in the ſame Chapter, He that giueth in mariage doth wel, but he that giueth not in mariage doth better: therefore the vnmaried life is better then the married: To which I anſwere, firſt, he ſpeaketh to them that haue the gifte,

of chaſtitie, but we knowe the feweſt parte are endued therewith: Secondly, his ſpeech is for thoſe troubleſome dayes of perſecution, when the faithfull were in continuall troubles and feare of their liues, then was it better to die ſingle, then leaue many helpeleſſe widdowes behind, that they might the better flie in danger, bee conſtant in affliction, and haue no lets, or pul-backes, to keepe them from Chriſt: ſo hee wiſheth and proteſteth, for their troubles were meanes to keepe them from mariage, in which ſenſe the Apoſtle calleth it better not to marrie, and yet yeeldeth the other to bee good and lawfull.
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   But in times of peace, where there is plentie and libertie, the ſwelling nature will not bee appeaſed, but onely by mariage, where the gift is not, and the Apoſtle ſaith in thoſe daungerous times, that it was better to marrye then to burne: that is, to bee vexed with the daylie deſire, through the feeling of our owne neceſſities.
               Thirdelie, they may obiect, that the vnmaried care for the thinges of God, but the maried to pleaſe their husbandes and wiues: to the which I aunſwere, that marriage hindereth not the ſeruice of God, but furthereth it in many reſpects: firſt, becauſe a houſeholde is a little Church, where the married perſons are the miniſters of their families, by priuate inſtruction to drawe both children and ſeruantes to the kingdome of heauen. Secondly, it putteth them in minde of the loue of God to them, when they loue one another: and admoniſheth them of their duties, which is to loue God againe. Thirdely, they haue mo priuate bleſſinges, as the ſeales of God his fauour towarde them, which alſo ſtirreth them vp to ſerue the Lorde. Fourthly, two are better then one for if one bee negligent in the worſhippe of God, the other may whette his fellowe on, & their prayers are more acceptable, becauſe the number of them that praye is greater. And if any omit theſe duties, the fault is in the perſons, not in the marriage: for that is it which the Apoſtle Saint Paule condemneth, when eyther partie are ſo much inclyned to one

another, that they weigh not the loue of God, and care of heauenly thinges, for the fondeneſſe ouer themſelues and trauaile for earthly commodities: but wee muſt bee married, as if wee were vnmarried in this reſpect, we muſt vſe the world as if wee vſed it not, reioyce in the company of one another; as if wee reioyced not. Therfore, to conclude, mariage is honorable in all, inſtituted by God himſelfe, obſerued by the Fathers before Chriſt, both princes, prieſtes, and prophets, commaunded by our Sauiour & his apoſtles, to bee vndertaken, that ſuch perſons as haue not the gifte of continencye might marry & keepe themſelues the vndefiled members of Chriſtes miſticall body. Let vs then bee exhorted to bee patient in the troubles that accompanye it, for although a bitter ſhell doe compaſſe the nutte, yet how ſweet is the kernell that lyeth within: although it haue as many miſeries, as the winter hath colde dayes, yet vnſpeakeable is the comfort of it, to them that are equally minded. And as our labour in innocencie was nothing but pleaſure, which now is nothing but ſorrow: So mariage was then more ſweeter, though now for ſinne it is become more bitter: but the hardeſt labour hath ſome profite; and the pooreſt mariage hath much comfort. But moſt accurſed are they, which for to auoide the troubles they haue conceiued of mariage, do giue their bodies to moſt filthy whoredomes, and wretched adulteries: Of whome Saint Paul ſaith, That God ſhall iudge them, that is, vtterly condemne them: for they ſhall neuer bee made the members of Chriſt, which haue incorporated them to bee the members of harlots, and heyres of eternall and euerlaſting damnation.
               
                  And is not Boaz. As in the former verſe wee haue hearde the diligent carefulneſſe of Naomi for Ruth, to prepare her ſome reſt, that is, a mariage. So nowe wee are to intreate or ſpeake of the meanes whereby this might bee accompliſhed, which Naomi expreſſeth in this verſe, to this effect. By my dayly ſtudie I haue founde out a meanes whereby thou

mayeſt come to more continuall reſt Boaz, with whoſe maydens thou haſt gleaned, and did ſo curteouſly entreat thee, hee is our kinſman and defendour, by the lawe, and euen now he is alone in the floore, winnowing his barley, to whom if thou wilt go, & follow my counſell, he will ſhew thee the way that tendeth to thy wealth.
               Out of the which we gather, an example of ancient nobilitie, how they followed not their dayly pleaſure, but continuall labour: how they honoured the wealth that God hath giuen them, with the diligent labour of their of their owne perſons: that euen this pooreſt worke,Iud. 6, 11 of winnowing and threſhing (as wee reade of Gedeon) was not onely committed to their ſeruantes, but performed by themſelues. Whereby we are taught that it is no ſuch vnſeemely thing, as many would make it: for men of wealth to followe their baſeſt labours. This Boaz had a prince to his grandfather, and he was the heyre vnto all his poſſeſſions, yet here we finde him alone winnowing his owne corne. We reade of Iudah the ſon of Iacob,Gen. 38.13. 2 Sam. 13.24. a progenitour of this Bohaz, that hee went in his owne perſon to the ſhearing of his ſheepe: and ſo did the ſonnes of king Dauid, when Ammon was ſlayne by the ſeruantes of Abſolon becauſe hee defiled his ſiſter Thamar. Examples of this are more plentiful, thē the time wil ſuffer me to rehearſe, which are all left to vs, for patterns of thankefulnes, in their diligent labours, and witneſſes of our vnworthineſſe in all our poſſeſſions. Adam could not dwel in paradiſe, except in his owne perſon hee tilled it: but many with vs, I thinke would deride him and all their fathers, if they ſawe them in any thing but the gentlemans trade: for being hindered neyther by the magiſtracy, nor by the miniſterie, they had rather follow hawking or hunting, gaming and playing, then at any time to foyle their hands with their own labours, but waſting their wealth in vnprofitable pleaſure, while they might increaſe their ſubſtance by godly trauaile. Caſt away therefore this worſhipfull idlenes, for men thinke, nothing maketh them gentlemen, but abſtinence from bodily labour,

whereas that one thing is the greateſt blot to our lateſt nobilitie, that they haue caſt of the care of their labors to others, applying their time to greater libertie, opening by idleneſſe the paſſage to all manner of iniquitie. Remember, the fatteſt Oxe commeth firſt to the ſlaughter, when the labouring beaſte is merrie in the yoke: euen ſo the idleſt bodies are ſooneſt ſeyſed by ſickneſſe, and conſumed by death: whereas labouring perſons haue many daies; in ſomuch as it ſeemeth a matter of murder, by idleneſſe to haſten the death of of our bodies. Therefore ſome loathing labour, take themſelues to licentious riot, and ſweat out their ſicknes in vnlawfull paſtimes: but bodily exerciſe profiteth little, and will rather in the ende procure the paynes they moſt of all abhorre, like the hayre of Abſolon, wherein hee moſt delighted, with which was wrought his death. But the concluſion of all this is,2 Sam, 18.9 that thoſe which are the cheefeſt in ſpending, ſhoulde bee the cheefeſt in working: and the princes of the poſſeſſions, muſt bee the principall in the labours.
               
                  Waſh thee therefore. Theſe wordes contayne the preparation, which ſhe counſelleth Ruth, before ſhee deſcend to Bohaz in the floore, that ſhe waſhe her, and annoynt her: Two vſuall thinges in thoſe countries: and the meaning of Naomi is, that Ruth prepare her ſelfe in moſt comely manner to go down vnto him, whom ſhe deſired to be her husband. For theſe actions of waſhing and annointing, were & are very common in thoſe places: waſhing, to ſcoure of the filth of the bodies; and annointing, to make them looke cheerefully. So wee reade of Dauid,2, Sam. 12.20. 2. Sam. 11.2 after hee had long faſted for his adulterous childe, hearing it was dead, he waſhed and annoynted himſelfe: and as Bathſhebah was waſhing her ſelfe, it happened that hee ſawe her; whereby his hearte was taken with her loue, and drawen from God at one time. In ſomuch as wee ſee it an vſuall and accuſtomed thing in thoſe daies the waſhing of men and women,Mat. 6.17. and for annointing our Sauiour ſpeaketh that when wee faſte wee annoyte, our ſelues, that wee ſeeme not vnto men to faſte. Heere then

wee ſee Naomi commaundeth Ruth no vnſeemely addreſſing of her ſelfe, but ſuch as was vſuall, and common amonge her owne people, and lawfull alſo for her to put in practiſe. Whereby wee firſt of all obſerue, that comely ornamentes and modeſt addreſſing of our ſelues, eyther of men, or women, is a thing required of them that feare God; for the outwarde cleanſing and waſhing away of the filth of our bodies, being the ſauour of ſinne raigning in vs: inſomuch as it is a brutiſh thing, to goe in their bodies (as many will) without all reſpect of perſon or humanitie, handes ſpotted, face beſmeared, countenance diſfigured. And their naturall complexion defaced in them, through their dayly vnciuill and vnnaturall behauiour and negligence, who by their cruell labouring to get the worlde, looſe the comfort of their owne bodies, while in ſwiniſh attire they wallow in the company of God and men.
               Secondly, by this wee gather, that the Lorde hath giuen the fruites of the earth, as wel for our ornament, as for our nouriſhmente; becauſe it is as neceſſarie in ſome reſpects for the comelineſſe of the bodie, that it bee rayſed vp to handſomneſſe, being nouriſhed: as that it ſhoulde bee nouriſhed being weake. Therefore ſaith Dauid,Pſa. 104.15 With wine hee refreſheth the hearte of man, and hee hath giuen oyle to make him haue a cheerefull countenance:14. and in the verſe before hee ſaith, He maketh the graſſe to grow for the beaſt, & the greene hearbe for the vſe of man: not ſimply for the meate, but for the ſeruice or vſe of man. And notable is the hiſtorie of a woman, that came to annoint our ſauiour before his death, that powred on him a rich and coaſtly boxe of ointment, and he excuſed her, and commended her for it.Mar: 14.34. And it was an vſe in old time to annoint the bodies of them that were dead, as wee may ſee how thoſe three women, Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of Iames,Mar. 16.1. and alſo Salome, came to annoint the body of Chriſt lying in the graue. If this was lawfull to bee done to the deade carkaſes, much more is it to the liuing bodyes of God his

Saintes.
               And here by the way wee may profitably deſcribe, what is to bee thought of ſtarching, becauſe the godly are much troubled therewith: for ſome thinke it vtterly vnlawfull: ſome ſuppoſe it to bee indifferent; but other imagine it to bee neceſſarie: and euery one of theſe doe mutually condemne one another: Therefore let vs heare the reaſons that are brought againſt it, if they bee waightie receaue them, if light and of little force, wee will leaue it to the diſcretion of the faithfull.
               Firſt, they ſay againſt it, that it conſumeth the graine of wheate whereof it is made, ſo that the ſame which was ordayned for foode, is tranſferred to another vſe, which is vnlawfull. To which I anſwere, ſo was oyle ordayned for nouriſhment as well as wheate; yet the godly might take that moſt comfortable creature, and apply it to the adorning and ſetting forth▪ of their bodies: which was lawfull for them, and therefore the other for vs, if it bee ſparingly vſed. But they will ſay, oile was applyed to the body, but this is onely in the apparell, therefore the reaſon of them is not alike: To which I aunſwere; that which is done to the apparell, is done to the bodie, becauſe it is done for the bodies ſake, as we read of Izaack, which ſmelled the ſauour of Eſaus garmentes,Gen. 27.29. that Iacob wore when hee got the bleſſing, and vpon that pronounced his bleſſing.
               But they reply againe, and ſay it maintayneth pride, and therefore is vnlawfull: but I aunſwere, it is harde to condemne, except wee knewe the hearte, for that is the feate of pride and not the apparell. Agayne, if any doe ſo abuſe it, they more offende in that by a thouſande partes, then if the thing in it ſelfe were vtterly vnlawfull: therefore the faulte lyeth in the perſons, not in the manner of addreſſing themſelues.
               But they obiect agayne, That it is a greate loſſe of time, for it asketh much more labour then ſimple waſhing: but I aunſwere, ſo did this annointing

and if the reaſon be good againſt the one, it auayleth alſo againſt the other: ſo that of the three former iudgmentes, I thinke it in the meane to bee indifferent. And thus in a worde, and briefly I haue touched it, as a thing not worth any farther handling, and haue vttered my poore iudgement in the ſame, in the behalfe of them that indifferently vſe it, becauſe ſome haue ſlaunderouſly giuen out, that none but proude and ſingular perſons vſe it: others haue ſcornefully aunſwered, that none but preciſe fooles miſlike it. But let vs in the ſpirite of meekeneſſe and gentleneſſe neither condemne them that vſe it, nor contemne thoſe that doe forbid it. Neyther doe I ſpeake this to perſwade any to imbrace it, whoſe conſciences haue alwaies beene againſt it, but I charitablie deſire them, to beare with their breethren, and in theſe vnneceſſary trifles; to ſuffer all the faithfull to inioy their chriſtian libertie. But eſpecially let vs learne to praiſe the Lord, which hath thus carefully and plentifully prouided for vs euery waye: outwardly in our bodies, making his creatures to comfort vs: and inwardly in our ſoules, giuing his owne ſpirite to bee the earneſt of our ſaluation: that wee might want nothing to drawe vs away from his maieſtie: but in all thankes-giuing to walke before him in the profeſſion of the Goſpell, being compaſſed about with the helpes of this life, as Eliſha was with the mountaines of Angels: that the comfortles ſorrowes of worldly miſeries may neuer driue vs to deſperation.
               
                  And put thy garmentes. This is the ſeconde thing which Naomi willeth Ruth in her preparation to goe downe to Bohaz, for firſt ſhee commaunded her to dreſſe her bodie: ſo nowe ſhee willeth her to put on her beſt apparell, as the goodlieſt ornaments of her bodie: for wee muſt not imagine, that Ruth went naked in the houſe, although ſhee bid her put on her apparell, but her meaning is, that ſhe ſhould put on her beſt apparel that euery way ſhe might bee furniſhed to deale with ſo noble a perſonage, & ſo waightie a cauſe: Out of the which we note.
               
                  Firſt, another duetie of humanitie, that if God giue any bleſſing vnto vs, we ſhould alſo bee carefull in theſe bodies of ſinne, to prouide for our ſelues change of apparell. For wee knowe after Adam had ſinned,Gen. 3.7 the firſt thing hee thought on, was ſomewhat to couer his nakedneſſe. By the which wee may learne that the firſt entraunce or occaſion of clothing was giuen by ſinne, that wee might couer the ſhame of our bodies, for if Adam had continued in his eſtate of innocencie, there had beene no ſhame of nakedneſſe, no cauſe of garmentes, no feare of colde, or terrour of heate: and therefore before all thinges he ſowed ſome fig leaues together, for the hiding of his offence: but God made them garmentes of skins. So then we muſt bee verie carefull for the conſcience of ſinne, that wee couer our bodies with outwarde apparrel, which indeede is but a type of ſhew, howe our ſoules muſt be clothed with Ieſus Chriſt. For this cauſe it was vſuall in auncient time, that they not onely prouided ſimplie a garmente for the preſent neceſſitie, but many changes for their bodies commodities. And as the worlde grewe, ſo ſinne increaſed, and as ſinne increaſed, the miſeries of our bodies multiplyed: like a ruinous houſe, that euery day falleth to decay more and more: Therefore more helpes were inuented in the dayes of Abraham, then in the life of Adam: and more in the time of Moyſes then in Abrahams, and more in Salomons, then in all the reſidue or former: for as the ſoare ſpread it ſelfe, ſo the ſalue muſt be lengthened; now the ayre is intemperate, the earth vnfruitfull, the bodies of mankind moleſted by a thouſand diſeaſes, and euery herbe which was the firſt mans nouriſhment, is our ſurfet; in ſo much as, the auoyding of all theſe, muſt bee carefully prouided by lawful deuiſes. which the Fathers ordayned and appointed by longe experience, to bee not a little holpe by the chaunge of apparrell. And here wee ſee theſe poore people haue this benefite for their bodies, as wel as the rich.
               
                  Now, becauſe in ſome the exceſſe hereof is ſo great, that they paſſe all humanitie: and in other the want is ſo indecent, that it ſhameth mankinde, to ſee their breethren go ſo baſely: Some being able, yet like aſſes laden with much wealth, they haue no power to beſtowe it on themſelues or other: againe, many poore ſoules, which haue nothing to prouide, or to couer them, are neglected by them that are able: Therefore, in this place wee muſt ſet downe ſome rules out of the worde of God, to take away all theſe extremities.
               And the firſt thing that muſt bee knowne, is the cauſe for which it is not onely needefull, but alſo lawfull to prouide apparell, which already we haue ſhewed you, to bee the ſinne of Adam which wrought in vs the ſhame of our naked bodies, and brought vppon vs colde and heate, ſickneſſe and ſoares, ſurfets & death: ſo then the bodies couered by clothing, are made comelye againe, are armed againſt heate, warmed againſt colde, ſtrengthned againſt ſickneſſe, and the daies of health lengthened, life prolonged, and death auoided: For as the priſoner looking vpon his irons, thinketh vpon his theft, ſo euery one, when he ſeeth his garments, muſt thinke on his ſinnes. And this one conſideration ſtriketh down al deuiſes of faſhions, or conceits of pride: for alas what glorie hath the theeſe in his bandes, or what profit by their making; for now hee is clogged with them, but anone hee is tucked vp with the halter:Zeph. 1.8. ſo proude perſons are nowe prancked vp while they looke on their feathers, but anone are paide for their faſhions, wt eternall damnation. For the Lord cryeth out by the prophet, that hee will take vengeance of the princes & the ſons of the king, for vſing ſtrange apparell.
               
                  Mat. 6.30.Secondly, there may bee a difference of apparell, one kinde for the riche, another for the poore; one for he prince, another for the people, one for the noble man, and another for the gentleman: for our ſauiour ſpeaking of the royaltie of Salomon in all his apparell,

doth not diſcommend it:Gen. 27.29. and wee haue hearde already of the apparell of Eſau lying in his father Iſaackes houſe. And this may bee alſo in many ſutes; as Iacob had ſent him by his ſonne Ioſeph, and Ioſeph gaue his brethren to euery one garmentes, but to Beniamin▪ hee gaue fiue chaunges: But ſome will ſay, our Sauiour biddeth vs not to haue two coates: and therefore this chaunge is vnlawfull: To which I aunſwere, that it is vnlawfull to poſſeſſe chaunge, or varietie of garmentes, when wee ſee and behold our brother hath none: therefore our Sauiour Chriſt addeth, that hee that hath two coates muſt giue to him that hath none: So that our aboundance muſt neuer be to the want and neceſſity of our brethren.
               But alas, where is this difference in manner of garmentes, I ſpeake for the matter wherefore they are made: wee may make the olde complaint of a chriſtian father, a thing worthy to bee ſeene, yea rather to bee lamented: The maide followeth the miſtris in ſuch brauery of apparell, that it is harde to know whether maide or miſtris goeth formoſt. Such confuſion of degrees, conſuming of wealth and goods, condemning the humble, and aduauncing of baſe perſons by apparell into the place of worthy men, is the ouerthrowe and deſtruction of a whole country, the ruine of a common wealth, and the defacing of the Church of Chriſt. But all this while the naked may goe naked ſtill, for any clothing they can get of theſe that haue ſuch plentie and aboundance: ſo that men cloth themſelues in the fineſt ſilkes, feede themſelues with the fatteſt calues, and the caſe themſelues in the ſofteſt beddes; while Chriſt in his members is harbourleſſe without houſes, hungry without breade, and naked without any raiment to caſt vpon him. Oh woe be to you dainty perſons, that thus prouide for your own mayntenance, and neglect the ſuſtenaunce of the poore: you are cloathed in ſofte and gorgeous apparell, and fare deliciouſly euery daye: you eate vp the needy like breade:Ezec. 16.53 you are deafe at their cryes, blinde at their nakedneſſe,

and like the cittizens of Sodome, vnmercifull to their miſeries:Luc. 17.28 conſider that their eating and drinking brought brimſtone from heauen, with fire to burne vp their citties and ſoules.Luc. 16.17. Conſider the end of that riche glutton in the Goſpell, which was ſo tormented in the paines of hell, that hee deſired but a drop of water, & could not obtaine it. Your brauery ſhall bee turned into ſhame, your pride into paines, your eaſe into reſtles trouble, your aboundance into euerlaſting want, your frendes into deuils, your honour into hell, your vnmerciful harts into vnſufferable plagues, and your pleaſures repayed with eternall deſtruction both of body and ſoule. The like may be ſaid of thoſe couetous perſons, which goe as farre vnder their calling as other aboue, and will hardely beſtowe any garmentes on themſelues worth the wearing, and diſgrace the proportion of mankind through their baſe apparell, and vnreuerent addreſſing themſelues, without all reſpect of honeſtie, regarde of religion, conſcience of their places, and knowledge of the true vſe of the benefites of God. But many ſpende all that they 
                     ••
                  n get vpon their bellies, neuer caring how ſimplie they goe in the face of the worlde; ſo they haue any thing to couer their nakedneſſe, and wee knowe what kinde of beaſts are the puniſhment of ſuch ſlothfulnes. Therefore let vs euery one helpe thoſe that are not able to prouide, yea and to buy them apparrell: and let vs all learne hereby what care wee ought to haue of the chaunge of our bodies, that if wee will bee ruled by the example of the godly, wee muſt rather ſtudie and trauaile for our couering, then for our nouriſhing; Therefore wee muſt pray for our clothing of him that clotheth the Lillies of the fielde, in ſuch meaſure as wee may bee comforted, our nakedneſſe couered, our ſhame abated our vncomelines adorned, and the ſauour of ſinne expelled, that wee might prayſe his power for euermore.
               Secondly, by this we alſo may note, what reuerence, wee owe to magiſtrates and to men in authority, that

we muſt be carfull in their preſence to giue no offence euen in our apparell, for here wee ſee Ruthe going to Boaz, an elder of Bethlehem, ſhe is commaunded by Naomi to put on her beſt apparrell, as a duetie of all the faithfull, that they make not their perſence odious in the ſight of their rulers, and for this cauſe we read in ſtoryes, that when any were wont to come before the magiſtrates hauing any ſuite vnto them, they were apparelled with white, which ſignified the innocencye of the perſon and puritye of the cauſe, and alſo they had one ſuit, that in al decent manner they might deliuer their mindes in the preſence of the magiſtrate: for the baſenes of apparell, is loathſomenes to many. But this ſhal ſuffiſe for ye touching of this matter.
               
                  Let not the man. After ſhee had commaunded her to prepare her ſelfe, ſhee deſendeth to inſtruct her of her behauiour: after ſhee commeth downe to the place; which was this, that ſhe let not him knowe of her till he had ſupped, and were gone to lie downe in his bed, which ſhe aduertiſeth her diligently to marke, and to come and beſtowe her ſelfe at his feete. Where it may ſeeme that Naomi counſelleth her daughter an vnlawfull thing, yea rather to play the whoore, then to get her a husband by a lawfull meanes; for ſhee biddeth her to trimme and ſmooth her ſelfe vp, ſhee warneth her not to come to the man till hee were layd to his reſt, and finally ſhee counſelleth her to lye downe at his feete. Truely in outwarde ſhewe it ſeemeth vnlawful, yet in ſubſtance very honeſt if we conſider euery circumſtance. Firſt I demaund, what is it that ſeemeth diſhoneſt in this whole diſcourſe; ſome will ſay, firſt the dreſſing of herſelfe is ſcant the parte of an honeſt woman, for it is very likely, Naomi had this intention, by this meanes, to drawe the old man in loue with her, for ſhe tooke him as it were at aduantage alone in the floore,Pro. 7.9.1.0 11, and ſuch ſayth Salomon is the parte of whoores. I aunſwere,Pro: 31.10. &. 21. that them other of Salomon ſayth, that it is alſo the point of a wiſe and a godly womā to watch in the night, to be finely appareled, to clothe her houſehold and ſuch like. Therfore ſeeing

an honeſt woman may do theſe thinges. Ruth did no diſhoneſtye in this. Againe this kinde of dreſſing in Ruth was needefull, becauſe ſhe had to deale with an honorable man, and therefore the more carefully and comely ſhee muſt appeare in his preſence. But you will ſay, that Naomi had ſome ſuch meaning, becauſe ſhee bid her that ſhee ſhoulde not let her ſelfe be knowne till the man were gone to his reſt: I anſwere, this ſhee did, that they might more freely talke together of the matter of her mariage, for if ſhee had come before hee wente to ſupper, the daye woulde not haue ſuffiſed to commune of the cauſe of her comming, niether would the old man haue gone to his loding, if he had knowne a woman to bee preſent. Then you will ſay, why did ſhee not come to his owne houſe at home, and that in the daye time? I anſwere, becauſe it was a reproch to Ruth to bee knowne to deale publiquely in her owne marriage, which muſt needes bee knowne if it had beene done in the city, or in the daytime: and therefore ſeeing time and place were nowe conuenient, the man being alone, they tooke opportunity by the forelock, and prepare themſelues for the aduenture of her marriage.
               Why then will ſome ſay: what moued Naomi to giue ſuch counſell vnto Ruth, ſeeing ſhee knewe it might bee defamed? I aunſwere, Naomi knewe Boaz to bee an olde man, not giuen to ſuch lewde and filthy conditions, but eſpeciallye ſhee knewe him to feare God, and Ruth her daughter in lawe to bee a vertuous woman, & truſting to his age, and both their godlines, ſhee is emboldened to giue this aduiſe. And this may ſuffiſe any ſober mindes, from ſuſpition of Naomies counſell, Ruthes diſhoneſty, or the religion of Boaz. But ſome will ſaye, if the matter bee ſo cleare as you will make it, then maye wee alſo followe the example and doo the like. To which I anſwere, if any doo ſo, it is much amiſſe: for wee muſt not imitate euerye example wee reade of in the ſcripture, as that of Rebeckaes counſell to her ſonne Iacob, whereby hee got awaye the bleſſing from

Eſau. There is no cauſe that can mooue vs, as there was Naomi, for Ruth muſt bee married in her kindered, we neede not: ſhee was bound to one or twaine, but wee are free to manye thouſandes: ſhee might challenge in her owne behalfe, for the law of God, but wee cannot doo ſo, excepte there bee a promiſe of marriage: therefore neyther muſt wee followe this example, nor yet ſuſpecte the actions of either.
               
                  And Ruth, Nowe the counſell propounded, and the meanes for the execution thereof declared, Ruthe approueth her mothers aduiſe, by promiſe of obedience, that firſt ſhe woulde do it: and in the verſe, 6, ſhe doeth perfourme it. Where wee haue a good example, in the matter of marriage for all children to depende vppon their godlye and religious parentes. If any aske mee, whither they bee bounde vppon neceſſitye ſo to obeye their parentes, that if they offer them husbandes or wiues they cannot refuſe them, but their parentes maye compell them: to whome I anſwere, firſt, if it bee poſſible, hearken to the voice of thy parentes; but if thou canſt not, thy parentes cannot commaund thee againſt thy minde, for they muſt propounde it conditionallye, not abſolutelye: In thy body (concerning thy labour) thou muſt obey them in all thinges, becauſe they are the parentes of thy bodye, but thy minde or ſoule which commeth from God, is alwaye at libertye; ſo that diſobedience to parentes is the refuſing of their temporall commaundement, but marriage is euerlaſting to the death of a man.
               Secondlye, children maye refuſe, becauſe the Lord manye times reuealeth that to the childe which hee ſhewed not to the parentes: as wee may ſee in the example of Sampſon, when hee woulde marrye with a philiſtine woman: for his parentes gaine-ſayeng it, ye ſcripture ſheweth the reaſon of it, becauſe they knew it not to come from the Lord: but Sampſon did,Iud. 143.4.5 & they fore ſtood in it, & his parents harkned vnto him in the end & got him yt womā for his wife. By the which wee

gather, that no children maye lawfully celebrate their marriage without the parents conſent: ſecondly; that they muſt be very circumſpect to marry their children: thirdly, that they cannot in any good conſcience deny their conſents to their children to keepe them from honeſt marriage, if there bee any equality betweene the partyes, or hope of honeſty in the time of louing. But of this matter wee haue often ſpoke and therfore this ſhal ſuffiſe for this time: Nowe let vs giue prayſe to God.
               The end of the eight Lecture.
            
            
               
               The ninth Lecture.
               
                  
                     Chap. 3. ver. 7.8.9.10.11.12.13
                     
                        7. And when Boaz had eaten and drunken and made his heart merry, he went and lay down beſide the heape of corne, & ſhe came ſoftly and vncouered the place of his feete and lay downe.
                     
                        8. And at midnight the man was afraid, and turned him ſelfe hither and thither: and he hold a woman lay at his feete.
                     
                        9. To whom he ſaid, who art thou; and ſhee ſaid, I am Ruth thy handmaide, ſpread the wing of thy garment ouer thy handmaide, for thou art the kinſman.
                     
                        10. Which ſayd, bleſſed be thou of the Lord my daughter, for thou haſt performed more kindnes at the laſt then at the firſt, becauſe thou followedſt not young men, were they poore or rich.
                     
                        11. Now therefore my daughter, feare not, whatſoeuer thou ſayeſt, I will doe vnto thee, for euery one within the gates of my people knoweth thee to be a vertuous woman:
                     
                        12. Now indeede it is true that I am thy kinſman, yet there is one neerer than I.
                     
                        13▪
                         Sleepe heere this night, in the morning if he will do the parte of a kinſman, let him: but if hee will not do the kinſmans duty, I will do the kinſmans dutie, as the Lord liueth, ſleepe vntill the morning.
                  
               
               
                  NOw it followeth, in this ſcripture to ſpeake of the effect of this counſell, and of thoſe thinges that happened, after Ruth came downe into the floore; and the happy ſucceſſe ſhe had with Boaz: The words do eaſily deuide themſelues into two parts: the firſt reſpecteth Boaz, the other Ruth.
               The firſt parte concerning Boaz, is that which he did after his worke, and before his ſleepe verſe, 7. that

he eate and dranke and made his hearte merrye, and laye downe beſide his corne. For that hee did after his ſleepe verſe, 8. firſt hee feared when hee felte a woman at his feete: and ſecondly, hee asketh who ſhee was. After he knewe her, hee bleſſed her, verſe 10. Secondlye, hee comforteth her, verſe, 11. In theſe wordes feare not my daughter. His comforte hath 2. partes, firſt his confeſſion that hee was her kinſman, verſe, 12. Secondly, the counſell hee giueth to her verſe 13, to tarrie vntill the morning, and then he would try her other kinſman: if he refuſed, Boaz promiſeth by oath to the confirme hir right, and do her kinſmans duety: and therefore biddeth her to ſleepe vntill the morning.
               The ſecond parte, which concerneth Ruth, is her behauiour after ſhee came to the place appointed, and hath theſe two branches: firſt that which ſhee did alone verſe, 7. That ſhee came and laye downe at his feete, ſecondlye, that which ſhee did with Boaz: firſt ſhe telleth him her name, when ſhee perceaued the man was afraid: ſecondly, ſhe ſheweth him her petition, deſiring him to ſpreade the wing of his garmente ouer her, verſe 9. Of theſe partes let vs ſpeake in order as they lye, by the aſiſtance of the ſpirit of God, and permiſſion of the time.
               
                  And when Boaz: Theſe wordes concerne Boaz and that which hee did after his worke the daye being ended and his bodye being wearied, hee went to his meate, eating and drinking, refreſhing his ſtomacke and cheering his hearte with thoſe bleſſings of God which he had preſente: afterwardes getting him to his lodging at the ende of his corne; in ſted of a ſofter bed harboureth vppon the ſtraw. Out of the which we obſerue theſe thinges.
               Firſt, the bleſſing of God vppon his creatures, that are moderatelye taken; for it is ſaide that hee cheared his hearte after his eating and drinking; his bodye was not onely nouriſhed, his hunger abated, and his ſtomacke filled, but alſo his hearte was

cheered thereby: as if the holye Ghoſt had ſaide, Heere is my bleſſing vppon meate that is moderatelye receiued, that the powers of the ſoule are refreſhed by it: therefore wee reade in the preacher,Eccl: 10.17. that a whole lande is bleſſed by the moderate receiuing of theſe benefites in eating and drinking. The experience whereof is plainelye proued euerye daye among vs. For what is the fruite of this immoderate deuouring the benefites of God, but as Salomon ſayth,Pro. 23.29. the eyes, wounds without cauſe, quarrels and contentions to the woe of manye, wherein they that reioyce are voyd of all reaſon, which ought to bee the grounde of all our mirthe: but like beaſtes ſome from feedinge to ſleeping conueye themſelues: other from eating to gaming turne their bodyes, delighting in nought but vanitye, being as farre from this cheerefullnes of hearte by their meate and nouriſhement, as Nabal was after his feaſte, when one worde of Dauids anger ſtroke his hearte dead. But this Boaz was heere alone and none beſide him: and yet you ſee, that in his ſolitarye barne voide of companyons, hee made himſelfe merrye, with the fellowſhippe of the bleſſing of God vppon his meate. Euen ſo aſſuredlye, if the handes of many could guide their mouthes, their mouthes rule their appetites, and both were gouerned with the ſpirite of God, that they receiued for ſtrength to nouriſhe their weakenes, not for gluttony to ſtuffe vp their ſtomackes, they ſhoulde with greater comforte ſit downe to their meales, and exceeding ioyfullye, riſe vp againe. But ſince our mindes haue as manye deuiſes, as our ſtomackes receiue morſels, wee eate and yet wee are not ſatisfied, wee drinke and yet wee are not merrye: but ouercome with the good creatures of God, wee ſeeke after idle ſonges, vaine ieſting, and vnprofitable fables of falſehood, and forged conceiptes in vngodly bookes, which drowneth our

ſpiritual ioy, and plungeth our mindes in the gulfe of worldly mirth and woefull miſery. Then let vs learne the wiſdome of Chriſt, and looke for ioye which ſtandeth not in laughter, but in the inward comfort of the aſſurance of the ſpirite, being perſuaded wee feed in ye preſence of God, we may haue Chriſt at our temporall and worldly meales, that wee may eate and drinke with him in his euerlaſting kingdome.
               Secondly, by this wee obſerue, that our meate after our labours is much more ioyfull to our harts, and profitable to our bodyes, then if it bee receiued in an idle life: for Boaz had wrought hard all this daye, and the reward of his labour is the worke of his meate, which in the end of all maketh his hart merry.Gen. 3.19. In conſideration whereof, the Lord inflicted this as a punniſhment vppon mankind, that their meate ſhoulde be vnprofitable vnleſſe it were eaten in the ſweate of our browes: for as ſleepe to a man that hath long watched,Pſa. 42, 1: ſo is meate to a man that hath long laboured, & as the courſing of the Hart maketh him to breath for the water ſprings; ſo labour cauſeth men to hunger more vehemently, to eate more liberally and diſgeſt more effectually their deſired morſels. We read of Ionothan the ſonne of king Saul,1 Sam. 14.27. when he had wearied himſelfe in the ſlaughter of ye Philiſtines, & being very hungry did but dippe the toppe of this batte in a hony combe, and putting it to his mouth, his eyes receiued ſight: ſo acceptable are the crummes and drops to them that labour, that they reſtore the life & power of the body, and for this cauſe the greateſt perſons in the firſt and pureſt age (when the life of man was many hundred years) were not exempted from bodily labour.Pro, 23.20, On the other ſide, as Salomon ſaith, they which ſit long at wine and ſeeke after ſtrong drinke, meanning thoſe which with idlenes followe their bellyes are moſt noyſome to the worlde, vnwholeſome to themſelues, and woful for euer: for their end will bee as the byting of a ſerpente and the ſtinging of a cockatrice▪ teaching vs that labouring mens morſels are moſt ſweet: & if we ſhould ioyfully recreate our ſelues

in the benefites of God, wee muſt diligentlye prepare our ſtomackes in ſome honeſt trauailes, that the baſeſt fare may be acceptable meate vnto vs: for the health of the body is preſerued by labour, as the planted corne by the diligence of the husbandman:Pro. 12.14. for hee which tilleth the earth is ſatisfied with breade; but idlenes is neareſt kinſman to madens. Againſt this wee haue often ſpoken heeretofore, and let this ſuffiſe for this time.
               Thirdly, we muſt note, what manner of mirth or cheerfulnes was this of Boaz: it could not be in talking, for hee was alone, nor yet in ieſting, for the former reaſon: nor yet was it outward in ſinging, for it is ſaide his heart was cheerefull, as if there were a mirth that were not outwarde. And truely,Rom. 14.17 Eph. 5.22. where the holy Ghoſt dwelleth, there abideth this inwarde ioye. Which proceedeth from it as a ſtreame from a fountaine,1. Sam. 16.24 or heate from a fire. Saul coulde bee merrye when Dauid played on his harpe, the king of Babilon was merrye in the middeſt of his delicates, Aſſuerus was merry among his princes,Dan. 5: 4; Eſt. 1.10. and Nabal was merry in the middeſt of his reapers: but what maketh the godly merry among the wild beaſtes,1. Sam. 25.36. ioyfull in the dungeons of the earth, and ſing hartyly when they receiue browne bread? nothing but this ioy of Boaz, which is the ioye of the holy Ghoſt. This maketh men ioyfull in death, merrye in miſerye and leaping vnder the yoke of chriſtian troubles: which all the princes in the world cannot do, vppon their thrones of maieſty: this is mixed wt no feare, becauſe it proceedeth from ſo excellent a roote. Why do men meruaile, that ſo many godly perſons liue ſo ſolitarily? the birde had rather be in the wildernes alone, then with thouſandes of her fellowes ſitting in a cage, & the godly are moſt merry when they are fartheſt from worldly companye. If the godly bee a company together, this their ioy muſt be expreſſed by ſinging of pſalmes, as Iames ſaith,Iam. 5.13. Mar. 14.26. and our ſauiour with his diſciples practiſed this at his laſt ſupper, for whē they had done, they ſung a pſalme, and went out into the mount of oliues, yea euen then when Chriſt had propheſied of his death, and they were

ſorrowful, yet this inwarde and ſpirituall ioye was not extinguiſhed: wherein wee ſee an excellent commendation of ſinging after meate, that it might bee an outwarde teſtimonye of our inwarde ioye. This ſtriketh downe all fooliſhe talking for ſtirring vp of mirth, and aunſwereth to them that ſaye, if they followe not vaine paſtimes they cannot bee merry: Truely that pleaſeth the fleſhe, but diſpleaſeth the ſpirite: and let them aſſure them ſelues whoſoeuer they bee, that this temporall and wanton ſporting will bring vppon them euerlaſting lamenting. But ſome will ſaye, is this ſinging and mirth at tables commendable, ſeeing the prophete ſpeaketh ſo againſt it:Amo. 6.5.6 They ſing to the viole, and frame to themſelues ſonges like the ſonges of Dauid, &c. I anſwere; all curioſitye and pleaſure in outwarde ſinging at our feaſtinges is forbidden by the prophet, which hee doeth notablye deſcribe in the ſame place by theſe markes, Firſt, when it is vſed to forget their ſinnes and to driue awaye the terrours of their conſciences:Verſe 3:
               
               
                  Verſe 4.Secondlye, when it is added for pleaſure and eaſe. Thirdlye, that with greedier appetites, they might deuour their meate and drinke, to drawe awaye their mindes from the remembrance of the Lord. Fourthly,Verſe 6. ſuch mirth as maketh them forget the afflictions of the church of God. If any deſire mirthe for theſe cauſes, the woe of the prophete taketh holde vppon them.
               And ſurelye, heere is condemned all playing on inſtrumentes and ſinginge at table when wee eate our meate, as a thing againſt which the prophete much aymeth, and is too much vſed among vs in Englande, for nothing maketh vs more readily to forget the affliction of Ioſeph then that doeth: when two occaſions of mirth are ioyned together, meate and muſicke, it is like two diuers plaiſters layde to one wounde, which by their vehemente operation, increaſe the ſore. In like manner wee are more apte to be made worſe then to bee amended by the benefites

of God. For as too much raine drowneth and ouerfloweth, and too much drought chippeth and cleaueth the earth: ſo too much mirth and pleaſure ouercommeth the hearte of man, This I ſpeake not to diſcommende muſicke, which I acknowledge freely with all the godly, to bee holy and lawfull: but I exhort and admoniſh, that it may not be vſed at the preſent time of eating, but ſparingly before or after our feaſting. And let vs all chuſe rather to ſing Pſalme from a feeling ſpirite, with a grace in our heartes and mindes, then to heare a thouſande ſonges vpon inſtrumentes of pleaſant muſicke, without inward comforte.
               
                  He went to lie downe. Nowe we are come to the ſeconde parte of that which he did alone, which in theſe wordes is declared to be the choiſe of his lodging, at the end or one ſide of his corne. Where we note another vſage or cuſtome of auncient nobilitie: in ſteade of a pallace, they had a cottage: in ſteade of attendors and waitors, they had the inſtrumentes of their labours: & as this Boaz, a heape of ſtrawe, in ſteade of a bed of downe: ſuch as his toyle and labour was, ſuch is his lodging: a harde worke, a harde bed: For hee that is wearied with trauaile or labour, can ſleepe and quietly take his reſt on the graſſe. And this putteth vs in minde, of the eſtate of all our forefathers many yeares agoe, before this ſoftneſſe and tenderneſſe was inuented, they were glad wee ſee, though they were greate Lordes, yet to bee labourers: And although their poſſeſſions excelled ours, yet they had leſſe bodily eaſe then wee: for the richeſt and higheſt eſtate or dignitie is not the quieteſt life. By the which wee are admoniſhed; with all kindneſſe, to harbour the poore and needy, though it bee but in a padde of ſtrawe, conſidering they bee the images of the ancient nobilitie, who were contented with the like entertainment: & the poore are exhorted with patience to abide their tedious trauailes and harde lodginges, ſeeing the Lords of the worlde,

had no better eſtate; they which had moſt wealth had leaſt eaſe, and wee which haue ſcant one mans inheritance among twenty, do peaceable enioy more worldlye ſecuritye. And truelye this maketh vs to feele, that euerye commoditye is tempered with ſome moleſtation: ye Iſraelites being deliuered from Pharao thought they were well, but then they were driuen to goe thorough the bottome of the ſea, and being come to the land of Canaan, they founde many enemies, and did not ouercome them all, till the raigne of Dauid: ſo that euery pleaſure is mingled with ſome worldlye ſorrowe: they which vſe the ſea get much wealth, but yet with great danger, and they which are on the lande, are in ſafety though not in ſuch wealth. And thus muſt wee frame our mindes, that when wee enioye the ende of our deſires, yet it bringeth with it alway ſome occaſion of diſlike: therefore it is better to bee contented with hard fare then diſcontented with dainty cheere, to like in harde harbour then diſlike in the ſofteſte beds: and better is a little thing with a quiet mind, then the poſſeſſion of a kingdome with the trouble thereof.
               
                  And Ruth came. Boaz being wearye with his labours, and ſuffi
                     •
                  ed with his meate, no doubt but beeing quietlye laid, a ſleepe had ſoone taken him: and Ruth, when ſhee eſpied a conuenient time, came, and conueyed her ſelfe ſoftlye to the place of his feete, which at midnight was perceiued by Boaz and not before. For ſhee ſo layde her ſelfe, as hee being awaked, might quickelye eſpye her: whereby wee ſee the occaſion that mooued Naomi to counſell Ruth to come ſo neere him, which was this, that Boaz might firſt bee grieued and then ſhould Ruth beſt vtter her ſuite. But of all this we haue ſpoken before, and therefore to the petition of Ruth.
               
                  Spread the winge. Ruth omitting no opportunitye, ſo ſoone as ſhee had vttered her name, ſhee putteth vp her petition, and by a figurative ſpeeche deſireth him to bee her husbande and defendour: For▪ to ſpred the winge, wee knowe, is taken from birds

who keepe their young ones vnder their winges. And this ſpeech of Ruth to Boaz is indeede to intreate him to bee her husband: for wee reade the ſence of theſe wordes to bee ſpoken to Sara by Abimelech the king of Gerar,Gen. 20.16. that her husbande Abraham ſhoulde bee vnto her a couer againſt all thoſe that woulde oppreſſe her. And therefore in ancient time, women were wont to be couered in the preſence of their husbands. And Ruth ſaith to Boaz, ſpread thy winge ouer mee, that is, bee thou my husbande to couer mee: for in times paſte it was a thing very odious to bee without husbandes, euen as odious as to bee ſtarke naked, or a maiſterles dogge, as the prouerbe is: Which appeareth by that complaint of the prophet Eſaye,Eſa. 4.1. That ſeuen women ſhoulde laye holde vppon one man and deſire to bee called by his name, promiſing to prouide their owne liuing. So that this figuratiue ſpeeche, doeth moſt notablye deſcribe, the duetye of husbandes towarde their wiues.Pſa. 63.7. Firſt the wing ſignifieth protection; for it is the duetye of husbandes to defend their wiues, to bee able and willing to ſhield them from iniuries, prouide for them neceſſaries, couer them in dangers, miniſter to them comforte and ſtrength in their weakenes, But truelye it is pitye to ſee what married men wee haue in theſe dayes, and how little commoditye manye helples wiues receiue by their retchles husbandes, that ſurely they are driuen with Abigail manye times to ſhifte for their own liues and the liues of their families. Theſe roiſting companyons, haſtye and headye husbandes which for euerye light occaſion forſake their families, or weary their wiues with their preſence; miniſter neither couering or comforte, according to their bounden duetye: but like periured and forſworne caitiſes, that haue falſified their faith to God, the church, and their wiues: runne headlong to their owne deſtruction and decaye of their poſteritye. Oh howe ſorrowfull is the eſtate of women, if they be not ſupported with the kindenes of their yoke-fellowes. Bearing

of children is nothing in compariſon of this: for that is their deſerued puniſhment of God; but the other the intollerable hande of the Deuill. Wee reade, that the Pellicane will teare out her owne breaſte to feede her younge ones: but wee reade of fewe ſo vnkinde as to feede vpon their young ones, ſaue onely theſe vnnaturall husbandes. Wee read that the Storkes are alwaies fedde ſo long by their younge ones when they are olde, as they nouriſhed them when they were younge: But theſe godleſſe fathers care neyther for to nouriſh their little ones being young, nor how they ſhalbe maintained when they are olde.
               Finally, by this, wiues are inſtructed their obedience to their husbandes, that as the little bi
                     •
                  de is at the call of his damme, ſo wiues muſt be ready at the becke of their husbandes. And let vs looke vpon the bruite beaſtes for examples of hues, who in their brutiſhe kinde condemne our humanitie. The Emme
                     •
                   laboureth and prouideth for winter: that condemneth ſluggardes. The Aſſe knoweth his owner, and the oxe his maiſters cribbe: Theſe condemne vnthankefulneſſe to God. The Doues teach vs innocency, the ſerpentes wiſedome: the dogges watchfulneſſe, the Foxes warineſſe, the Lyons courage, and the little birds our duties to wiues and children. Therefore let vs not be more graceleſſe then theſe, leſt their diligence, like the voyce of Balaams Aſſe, condemne our diſobedience to perpetuall miſery.
               
                  Bleſſed bee thou of the Lorde. Nowe commeth the ſeconde parte of the conference betweene Bohaz and Ruth to bee handled: wherein onely Bohaz ſpeaketh. And firſt of all, hee bleſſeth or prayeth for her, ſaying, Bleſſed bee thou of the Lord, for this latter fauour is greater then the ſor
                        •
                     er: Then thou forſookeſt thy country to come with thy mother in lawe, but nowe thou forſakeſt younge and youthfull husbandes to come to mee a diſeaſed olde man: neither wealth nor pouertie can alter or chaunge thy minde, from following the

commandement of God to thy owne hinderaunce. So in this example wee haue an excellent patterne of true and vnfayned religion, which is this: when Ruth is obedient to the ordinaunce of God, euen in that which ſeemeth to her owne diſcommoditie and earthly conſolation: for ſhe was a young woman, and therefore by nature deſired a young companion, and not to bee troubled with a withered olde man; from whome ſhe coulde receiue but little bodily comforte: yet becauſe by the lawe ſhee was tied to her neereſt kinſman of her deceaſed husband: forſaking all other, ſhe cleaueth to him, making the lawe her choiſe, his age her honour, and the triall of his former curteſie, as bandes of aſſurance for his future kindneſſe. This was the faith of Ruth, that cauſed her like Leui to forſake his cuſtome: like Zacheus to departe from his wealth:Luc. 5.28. & 19.8.9. Act. 13.1 like the courtiers of Herode to forgo their honour, and alſo the ſaintes of God to forſake their deareſt frendes, to followe the voyce of the Goſpell.
               And this teacheth vs, to caſt of earthly commodities in worldly buſineſſe, to forſake nature and naturall affection: to forget life and liuing, and account all thinges but dunge in regarde of obedience to the worde of God. This is it that toucheth the quicke, & will proue the heart of euery chriſtian. If this condition were propounded, Chriſt ſaith, That for him, wee muſt forſake all that wee haue: Nowe, if this lawe were made, that whoſoeuer went to hearing of the worde, ſhoulde preſently confiſcate his goods at the pleaſure of the law-maker. Who woulde in this caſe, be obedient rather to the bare voice of Chriſt, then to the threatning wordes of the lawe. Examine beloued, & arraigne euery man his owne hearte, for this point and then you ſhall ſee, whether the loue and deſire of the worlde hath not droue out the loue of the Father. Euery daſtarde will offer and make ſhewe to fight hardely, till hee come to approch the fielde, but in the face of the enemie if hee abyde, there is the triall:

nay, if hee ſee but one waye to eſcape hee will ſurelye take that, though it bee to his owne diſcredite. So I feare mee, I feare mee, many, if danger were woulde not onelye turne from vs, but fight hotlye againſt vs, for all their faire faces to vs. They which nowe will hardelye of one hundered poundes giue one to the Goſpel, will not then leaue the principall to follow the trueth: but as the glare worme doeth not gliſter but in the night, ſo true chriſtians will not bee knowne, till the dayes of darknes and errour come, when theſe diſſembling hipocrites ſhall bee founde to be nothing but rotten woode, good for nothing. But to come to Ruth, ſhee perfourmeth her promiſe to God, as Dauide ſayth, though it bee to her owne hinderance,Pſa. 15.4. Act. 4.19. ſhee knoweth it with the appoſtles, better to obeye God then men, to followe Chriſte and not the fleſh, for the world it ſelfe ſhall bee ſhortelye conſumed and then the louers thereof ſhall bee vtterlye condemned. Oh, let vs then practiſe the deniall of our ſelues before the time of tryall come, let vs as the martirs did, trye the burning of our fingers before wee venter our whole bodyes: let vs giue ſome of our wealth to the poore nowe, rather then keepe all to be ſpoyled by the wicked apoſtataes then: but howe will men doo this at that fierye tryall, when nowe in peace they will forſake and forſweare the Lorde, ſome for their merchandiſe, other for rentes & reuenewes, ſome to bringe the poore Nabaothes into deſtruction, many for worldly profite and temporall gaine: but this quene of worldly deſire ſhall one daye bee meate for the dogges; when it ſhall bee ſayd, that happye are all you that in wealth and pouertye haue followed the ſonne of righteouſnes in ſinceritye.
               
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Feare not my daughter. His prayer and the reaſon thereof being ended, nowe followeth the conſolation hee giueth to Ruth, in theſe wordes bidding her to caſte awaye feare, for what ſoeuer lyeth in his power he would doe: for the whole citty would

teſtifie the eſtate of her perſon, and vprightnes in her liuing: and therefore hee ſhould bee much to blame, if hee denyed ſo lawfull a requeſt. Out of the which we note.
               Firſt, here is ſet down the duetie, of all magiſtrates, which is with meekenes and gentlenes to heare the petitions of their ſutors: for Boaz was a publike perſon, or els Naomi had complayned to the magiſtrate; but himſelfe being a godly elder, the ſuite is firſt priuately handled with him. Therfore, they muſt follow ye example of Bohaz here declared, which is with the kindeſt wordes to intreate them, and iuſt iudgementes to proceede for them, alway yeelding to equitie where the cauſe is required. For our ſauiour accompteth a magiſtrate that is contrary minded, neyther to feare God,Luc. 8.2.4 5. or to reſpect man: that is, ſuch a one is hated of God and man: For if magiſtrates loue God or regarde their ſubiectes, they muſt bee eaſily entreated by the voyces of their ſuitors. Therefore is that euerlaſting commendation of Moyſes, yt hee ſate in the door of his tent in iudgment frō euening vntil morning, where al the people might freely haue acceſſe to his preſence, and godly conference with his perſon, the which all the iudges in chriſtendome might imitate, without impeachment to their honours. Olde Samuel when he had annointed and appointed Saule to raigne in his ſteade ouer all Iſrael, appealed to the people what iniury he had done to any, and the people iuſtified him in all thinges:1. Sam. 12.2.3.4.5. now hee was eaſily come vnto at all times, when Saule and his fathers ſeruant ſeeking for aſſes woulde go to the man of God, meaning Samuel. Oh that all that are in authoritie would hearken to theſe examples, that with all gentleneſſe they might intreate the people of God committed to their gouernment, that they might freely come to them, and frendly ſpeake with them, that at the daye of their deathes, they might haue the poore ſaintes of God▪ praying for their deliueraunce, their conſciences vnburthened, their duties diſcharged, their ſubiectes ſatiſfied, iuſtice offered, and their ſoules

euerlaſtingly ſaued.
               Secondly, by this wee gather, that iudges and iuſtices muſt eſpecially looke to the godly: for Boaz ſaith, that all the cittie knew Ruth to be a godly woman: So that hee bindeth himſelfe by her religion to be as carefull for her being a ſtranger, as if ſhe were his naturall daughter. For as all the cittie knewe her religious, ſo they would all reioyce to ſee her aduanced. And this is the cauſe wherefore the Lorde hath ſo much commended vnto vs the eſtate of widdowes and fatherleſſe children,Deut. 10.18 Prov. 3.3. becauſe for the moſt parte they are oppreſſed, and not oppreſſors: vexed, and not vexours: receyuers, and not doers of iniurie. And ſurely, ſuch are ſimple godly men, they will beare many burthens before they complain; & for euery trifle they wil not trouble a magiſtrate. Therefore euery magiſtrate muſt ſaye with Dauid,Pſal. 101.6. My eyes ſhalbe on them that ſpeake truth on the earth, and they that walke vprighly ſhall be my ſeruantes: ſo haue you reſpect of perſons, though not in iudgement, yet in common opinion: for the profeſſors of religion are your deareſt friends, who without ceaſing powre forth their prayers for you, that in equitie you might drawe your ſword for them. Oh howe lamentable is it to heare, how poore godly men are dayly blaſphemed and reproched for their religion: when wicked Atheiſtes, carnall perſons, common ſwearers, & godles wretches, haue their harts deſire at the hands of the magiſtrate. Surely ſuch perſons, who deſire your aide againſt other, deſerue your ſwordes of iuſtice againſt themſelues: for they neuer come into your preſence; but to the diſhonour of God. Execute iudgement therefore, for them and vpon them.
               Thirdely, by this wee gather what it is that moſt commendeth women: for Boaz ſaith vertue; and if all yt world crie the contrary, yet Bathſheba the mother of king Salomon will confirme it: for thus ſhe ſaith, Fauour is deceitful, beautie is vaine; but a woman that feareth God,Prov. 31.30. ſhee ſhall get praiſe for her ſelfe: for vertue and the feare of the Lorde are both one thing. So

that this is the thing they are moſt commended for, if religion will take any roote in their hartes: for beauty is worne by age, proportion of body loſt by ſicknes, loue of men at the wagging of a hand, and braue apparell when wealth decayeth, onely the feare of the Lord endureth for euer. We reade that Vaſti the queene of Aſuerus was exceeding beautifull, but ſhe diſobeyed her husbande, and was put from her princely roome,Eſth. 1.16 when godly Eſter was taken in her ſteade. If the feare of God had beene in the former; to obey her husbande, Eſther had not ſo ſoone come into her place. But the Lorde, that hee might puniſh the pride of the one, and reward the religion of the other, lifted vp vertuous Eſther, and caſt downe that ſtately Vaſti: to ſhewe vnto vs, that much better is the feare of the Lorde, then all the beautie and glorie of the world.
               We finde many commended in the worde of God, for their faith, but fewe for their faireneſſe, that all ſhoulde learne more earneſtly to labour,1. Pet. 3.4 that the hid man of the hearte may bee founde in incorruption of a gentle and a quiet ſpirite, which is very precious in the ſight of the Lord.
               Laſtly, let vs all learne by this, aſwell rich as poore, gouernours as ſubiectes, men as women, that aboue all thinges we followe the example of Ruth, to pleaſe God more then our ſelues, to labour for vertue and religion as for a treaſure hid in the ground, to ſearch for it as for golde and ſiluer, that wee may boldly come before the iudges of the Lorde, and pleade as ſubiectes, ſeeing the knowledge of the lawe reſteth in our hartes. And let vs diligently labour for good reportes, that the magiſtrates may ſpeake for vs, as Bohaz doth for Ruth, to her ſingular comfort, that we may with boldnes ſtande to be iudged & not to ſuffer as euill doers.Eccleſ. 7.1. For a good name is better then a precious ointment, & the godly and guiltleſſe are moſt honorable, when they are cauſeles accuſed: euen as Ioſeph; the neereſt way for him to come to the kings fauour, was firſt of all to be wrongfully impriſoned. So if we ſtudie to lead holy conuerſations, let thē draw vs to the iudgment ſeates as offendors;

yet our religion ſhal ſpeake for vs, not guilty: and though all the world ſhould vniuſtly condemne vs, yet the ſonne of God ſhall ſue out our pardon.
               
                  And true it is, I am thy. Wee ſhewed you in the beginning, that his conſolation had two partes. The firſt his confeſſion in this verſe: and the other his counſell in the nexte. Nowe then con
                     •
                  meth his confeſſion to be handled, wherein hee graunteth himſelfe a kinſman, and therefore bonde vnto that dutie ſhee required of him, but yet withall hee ſoberly telleth her, there is one neerer then I: meaning to ſhewe her, that the whole care of the matter doeth not cheeſely depende vppon him. Whereby wee gather, the ſingular conſcience and humilitie of Bohaz: for if the feare of God had not hindered him, hee might like ſcorneful perſons, haue denied that he had any kindred ſo baſe: and therefore hee might haue tolde her, that ſhee was come to a wronge man, that ſhee had miſtaken her marke, that ſhe muſt not looke ſo hic, as the choiſe man in Bethlehem, & ſome baſer husband wil beſeem a Moabiteſſe. But hee doth not ſo, for hee confeſſeth againſt himſelfe that her ſuite was equall, and he bounde to deale in it. Where againe wee haue another worthy example for all magiſtrates to imitate; euen to pronounce iudgemente agaynſt their owne cauſes, and giue euidence againſt their owne commoditie. For what a ſimple thing was it for Boaz to marry with ſo poore a woman as Ruth, by whome he could hope for no great portion, but onely religion. Oh that this vprightnes woulde enter into the hartes of men in our dayes, when they handle their mutual affaires, to ſpeake the trueth indifferently, as well againſt as for themſelues, yea and forſake their deareſt frendes in vnlawfull ſuites. But rather it reioyceth them at the hearte, to ſee bad matters bolſtered vp, and wronge iudgementes through ignorance vniuſtly pronounced: whereas the plaintifes, and defendantes themſelues, do eyther of them in their owne conſcience knowe their cauſe to be nought: yet againſt both conſcience, iuſtice, and equitie, will ſpende their money and heartes alſo

to be throughly reuenged on their chriſtian neighbours, to ouerthrow their cauſe be it neuer ſo equall: yet this is their drift, to make the righteous law, the onely defendour of all their vnrighteous and vngodly dealinges. Howe if there were no lawe nor magiſtrate, woulde theſe malicious perſons behaue themſelues, that dare to wreſte the helme of iuſtice by corruption in theſe peaceable daies, and are more ſitte to bee the inhabitantes of Sodome and Gomorhe, then the fellowe dwellers with the godly and faithfull? Woulde God, that euery offendour were bounde to reſtore for euery defaulte, foure times ſo much, then woulde our quietnes bee greater, our ſuites vprighter, the truth vttered, before danger, cauſes ended without chargeable coſtes, wiſe men ſhoulde bee the lawyers, the trueth ſhould be the euidence, yea & equitie ſhould giue iudgement againſt our ſelues.
               
                  Tarry this night. This is the counſell that Boaz giueth vnto Ruth, that ſeeing it was night; ſhe ſhould tarry till the morning, and then he will deale with her kinſman in the behalfe of his right, which if hee will doe vnto her, Bohaz cannot withſtande him, but if he refuſe, then will Bohaz performe the duetie. Which promiſe hee confirmeth by an oath, as the Lord liueth: bidding her to ſleepe vntill the morning. Where we ſee firſt of all the kindneſſe of the man, that would not preſently thruſt a poore woman from the place of her lodging, but quietly ſuffered her to harbour beſide him, yea and biddeth her to tarry at her reſt, & to ſleep vntill the morning.
               Secondly, hee woulde doe nothing which might preiudice the cauſe of her other kinſman, before hee had gotten his conſent to the deliuery of his right: teaching vs thereby, that it is not lawfull to enter into the leaſt parte of our neighbours titles, though wee may ſeeme to haue as great right in it as Bohaz had in Ruth, without the free & willing agreemēt of him that hath any propertie or intereſt therein.
               
                  Laſtly, Bohaz confirmeth his promiſe with an othe, which is the laſt ſpeech vnto the woman, for her aſſurance to depend on his credite, and the laſt thing that muſt bee vſed in all our communications: But of theſe matters we haue already ſpoken, and therefore thus much for this time. Nowe let vs giue prayſe to God.
               The ende of the ninth Lecture.
            
            
               
               The tenth Lecture.
               
                  
                     Chap. 3. ver. 14.15.16.17.18.
                     
                        14. And ſo ſhe lay at his feet vntill the morning, and then ſhe aroſ
                           •
                         when one knew not another: For Boaz ſaid, Let no man know that a woman came into the floore.
                     
                        15. And then hee ſaide, Giue me the ſheete wherewithall thou art couered, and holde it vp: then he meaſured ſixe meaſures of barley, and laid it vpon her: afterward he went into the Cittie.
                     
                        16. But ſhe came to her mother in lawe, which ſaid, who art thou, my daughter? and ſhe declared whatſoeuer the man had done vnto her.
                     
                        17. And ſhe ſaid alſo, he gaue mee theſe ſixe meaſures of barley, for he ſaid, thou ſhalt not returne emptie to thy mother in law.
                     
                        18. Then ſaide ſhe, Be of good comforte vntill thou knowe how the matter will fall out, for the man will not reſt vnles he end it this day.
                  
               
               
                  THeſe wordes are the laſt parte of this Chapter: wherein is ſhewed vnto vs howe Boaz diſmiſſeth Ruth, after they had ſlepte till the morning: and Ruth returneth ioyfully to her mother againe.
               The wordes contayne two partes, generally in them: The firſt parte is betweene Bohaz and Ruth, verſe 14.15. The ſecond is betweene Ruth and Naomi, in the three next verſes following. The firſt parte betweene Boaz and Ruth, is of thoſe thinges which they did together in the barne. Firſt, that Ruth laye at his feete vntill the morning. Secondlye, that ſhee aroſe earely before daye, becauſe Bohaz would haue none to knowe that a woman came into the floore. After

they were both riſen: Boaz giueth to her ſixe meaſures of barley, layeth them vppon her, and ſendeth her away. Secondly, hee himſelfe goeth into the cittie, verſe 15. to performe that which hee had promiſed vnto her.
               The other parte betweene Ruth and Naomi, in the three nexte verſes, contayneth a declaration of thoſe thinges which paſſed betweene them twaine, after ſhee came from Bohaz. Wherein firſt Naomi asketh who ſhe was becauſe comming home earely before the day; ſhe coulde not knowe her by her countenaunce: To whom Ruth declareth all things which paſſed between Boaz and her, ſhewing vnto her the ſixe meaſures of barley which the man gaue vnto her for Naomies ſake, verſe 16.17. Secondly, after Naomi vnderſtood the proceedinges of Ruth, ſhee comforteth her, verſe 18. aſſuring her of the diligence of Boaz, that hee woulde not ſleepe, till hee had ended the matter the very ſame day. Of theſe partes, let vs briefly ſpeake in order as the ſpirite of God ſhall giue vtterance, and the time permit.
               
                  And ſo ſhe lay at his feete vntill the morning. As we haue heard in the former verſes, the conference had betweene Bohaz and Ruth, the ende and concluſion whereof was this, that Ruth ſhoulde content her ſelfe to tarry with him, and ſleepe vntill the morning, So in this place, the performance thereof is noted vnto vs. For the holy Ghoſt vndoubtedly expreſſing theſe wordes, doth it to ſignifie vnto vs theſe two thinges: Firſt that Ruth remayned ſatiſfied with the anſwere of Bohaz, and troubled him no more with farther talke. Secondly, that hee might deliuer theſe two innocent perſons, from all ſuſpicion of incontinency: for neyther talked they anye more, or turned one to another, but either of thē both contented with their hard lodging, gaue themſelues to quiet ſleepe vntill the morning.
               Where wee firſt of all note, that the gift of continency or chaſtity is not in nature, or the power of man, but is a holy fruite of true and vnfayned religion: yea, a

ſpecial worke of the ſpirite of God, as appeareth in both theſe godly perſons: for if eyther of both had beene giuen ouer, no doubt but nature hath put them forward to the ſatiſfying of their carnall luſtes: But ſeeing, as Chriſt ſaith,Mat. 19 1
                        •
                     . Iam. 1.17 none can haue it but them to whom it is giuen, and every gift commeth downe from the Father of lightes. This among other, is a ſpeciall and extraordinarie bleſſinge of God, vpon many perſons truely religious: not for any other cauſe,Gen. 39.9 but that thereby they might more freely giue themſelues to pleaſe the Lorde, as Ioſeph anſwered his wanton miſtreſſe, howe ſhall I doe this, ſeeing I feare God? The vſe of this pointe is this, ſeeing wee acknowledge this benefite, to come from the Lord, let vs among our prayers deſire ye ſame, that we might crucifie the works of the old man within vs, ſanctify ye powers of our ſouls & bodies,Gal. 5.24. be ſtrengthened to reſiſt the temptations of Sathan, and bring euery wanton deſire and wauering affection into ſubiection of the ſpirite of God which ruleth and raigneth in the heartes of the faithfull. And aboue all thinges let vs earneſtly labour for the feare of the Lorde, that wee may haue the tree aſwell as the fruite, the fountain as well as the ſtreame, the roote from whence it ſpringeth as well as the blade, & increaſe of the ſame, for except the ſtreame be ſupplyed by the ſpring it will quickly die, except the blade be nouriſhed by the roote, it will ſoone bee withered, except the fire of the holy Ghoſt be increaſed with the coales of the knowledge of God, it will ſoone be quenched with the colde water of humane infirmities; or els willingly go out of it ſelfe. And if euer this exhortation were needefull, it is moſt neceſſary, in theſe our vncleane and filthy dayes: wherin fornications, adulteries, whoredomes, and all actions of incontinency did neuer more abounde▪ and the reaſon hereof is this, becauſe men and women, haue refuſed the knowledge of God: and therefore as the Apoſtle ſayeth, hee hath giuen them ouer to worke filthines one with another.Rom. 1 
                        •
                     4 As the fleſhe luſteth agaynſt the ſpirite, ſo the ſpirite luſteth againſt

the fleſh: the one is carnall and bringeth damnation
                     •
                   the pure knowledge of God is ſpiritual & worketh ſaluation: but if the bodies of men were made the temples of the holy Ghoſt, how coulde they conuert them to the members of harlots? But be not deceiued, for God who is true, is not mocked: you which now delight your bodies in the pleaſures of vncleannes, ſhall lament your woes in the ſorrowes of bitternes, when your ſoules and bodies for their wonted follies, ſhall eternally curſe themſelues, and crie vengeaunce vengeance to all their deſerts: Yea though the Almighty ſhold graunt you repentance, yet the conſideration of your whoredomes will trouble your conſciences, that it will be much longer before your hearts be eaſed, or ſinnes releaſed, for ſuch as is the feſtered wound, ſuch muſt be ye ſearching & purging coraſiue: he that ſtole little, hath but little to reſtore; but he that ſtole much, muſt recompence much againe.
               Secondly, by this we note, the diuerſity of the diſtribution of the giftes of God, for many godly perſonnes are cleare from one ſinne which raigneth in other, and have ſome proper gifts which are denied to other, ſome are ſubiect to one ſinne and ſome to another. In this place Bohaz and Ruth are declared, and commended for continent perſons, but in another place Dauid and Bathſhebah godly alſo,2 Sam. 11.4 Gen. 38.18. are ouertaken with this folly: Iudah the ſonne of Iacob was a good man, yet hee lay with his daughter in lawe Thamar; ſitting in the likenes of a whoore; Ioſeph his brother; alſo feared God, yet he refuſed his Lady & miſtreſſe: And as it is in this, ſo it falleth out in all other,Gen. 39.9 for ſome that haue great giftes of God his ſpirite, yet are too much giuen to the loue of money; others againe like Zacheus diſtribute the greateſt parte of their poſſeſſions, to ſatiſfie their iniuries and relieue the poore:Luc. 19.8. Other of the faithfull like the Apoſtles Iames and Iohn, deſire the ſuperioritie, and chiefeſt places in the Church: but manye, like the other Apoſtles, enuy and diſdaine them for it.
               
                  And thus the Lorde which deliuereth his ſpirite by meaſure, giueth to ſome a leſſe, and to ſome a greater meaſure thereof, euen as a rich man diſtributeth his almes, giuing to one a good rewarde, and to another a ſmall, ſo the Lorde leaueth ſome to bee ouercome by their luſtes, other by their money, many by their honour, ſome by their office, other by their pride, & euery man hath ſome ſpeciall ſinne that raigneth in him aboue other: for diuers men being called to one hope, and obtayning the like precious faith in regarde of Chriſt, yet are diuerſly affected and infected with ſinne. And this teacheth vs theſe doctrines: firſt that we neuer condemne the perſons of the ſinners, but the ſinfull actes they do committ: who ſhould condemne Noah for drunkennes, Dauid for murther, Iudah for inceſt, or ye Apoſtles for deſiring ſuperioritie: ſurely theſe were godly perſons, and had their ſeuerall falles, that the mercy of God might be magnified in their rayſing vp againe: for none of the godly are able to go vpon the waters as Peter woulde, but they muſt ſinke as Peter did; and yet they periſh not, but are lifted vp and ſaued by Chriſt, as Peter was: though our olde Adam cauſe vs to commit many ſinnes, yet our newe Adam will remoue all: wee muſt iudge charitably of all our brethren that are ouertaken in their ſeuerall ſinnes: Sara lyed vnto the Lorde himſelfe: Oneſimus was a thiefe and a runne away from Philemon, Rebecca cauſed Iacob her ſonne to beguile his owne father, and all the holy Patriarkes had many wiues, yet none muſt bee ſo bolde as to condemne any of theſe, notwithſtanding their ſeuerall and manyfolde faultes: Euen ſo in theſe our dayes, though we ſee and beholde our brethren, ſome ouercome with the worlde, other by promotion, many by their luſtes and concupiſcences, other in their braue apparell: nay if they ſteale and robbe, yet wee muſt not iudge but charitably of them. I ſpeake not this to encourage any hereunto: for if grace abounde aboue ſinne, yet curſed are they that ſinne, that grace and bleſſing might abounde vnto them: for if wee may not doe

euill where wee certainely know good may enſue thereof, much leſſe may wee doe euill, to make the mercy of God the baude of our ſinnes, but this we muſt remember, that there is no condemnation to the righteous, although they fall ſeuen times a day, but if any ſinne vppon preſumption of God his mercies, theyr damnation is iuſt, and are like a thiefe that ſtealeth becauſe hee ſeeth one among twentie pardoned by the Prince.
               Secondly, there are many that condemne the whole profeſſion, becauſe they liue not all in the ſame perfection, and bring not forth the ſame fruites which by this doctrine we ſee here condemned: For as the grapes of the vine haue ſome leſſe and ſome more ſweetnes, yet all are grapes, and grow of the vine: ſo the Saints of God,Ioh. 15.1. haue ſome more purity and ſome leſſe, and yet all are nouriſhed by Chriſt the vine: what if ſome (ſaith the Apoſtle) haue not beleeued, ſhall the grace of God be made of none effect,Rom. 1.11.12. and what if ſome haue often fallen into ſinne ſhall the whole Goſpel for their ſakes bee diſcredited? nay the Lorde hath alway ſome that liue ſo purely, ſuch as Iſaacke, Ioſeph, Bohaz, Daniell, Zacharie and Elizabeth, whom all the world can neuer blemiſh: howſoeuer others haue their publike faultes, firſt that the worke of repentance, which is a grace of God, might be practiſed: Secondly, that God his mercy in ſauing great ſinners might be magnified: Thirdely, that the faithfull (ſeeing their dayly falles) might more earneſtly deſire their finall deliuerance: Laſtly,2. Pet, 2.1. 1. Cor. 11.19 that the wicked by this meanes might haue occaſion, by their blaſphemies to worke their owne damnation.
               
                  Afterward ſhe aroſe, for Boaz ſaid: Nowe the night well paſſed in quiet ſleepe, and the dawning of the day approching, Ruth at the commandement of Boaz ariſeth before the day light, leaſt any ſhould know ſhe had taried wt him all that night, whereby the good old man ſignifieth vnto vs that it is no newe thing in the worlde, that ſlaunders ſhould bee raiſed, for this was the thing that Boaz feared, that if any ſhould haue ſeene the woman

with him, they woulde preſently conceiue it were for no goodnes. For the worlde muſeth as it vſeth, and they will ſooneſt eſpie a mote in the eye of a godly man: it euer was, is, and will be, that cauſles ſurmiſes, and reproches, ſhall be brought vp, vpon the godly, for princes nor people can be freede therefrom: the which Dauid felt wel inough when he ſaid in a certain place, that one bleſſedneſſe in God his kingdome,Pſal. 31.20. ſhall bee this, to be kept from the ſtrife of tongues, thereby inſinuating, that they muſt needes endure them in this life preſent. We knowe what our ſauiour reporteth of the Phariſies, how they accuſed him to bee a friend of publicanes, harlots, and ſinners;Mat. 11.18.19. and Iohn Baptiſte to haue a Deuill. Therefore this muſt worke patience in the faithfull, that are like affected and afflicted with venemous tongues, for wee are not better then thoſe fathers are, who many yeares agoe ſuſtayned the ſame reproches, and lefte the burthen behinde them, to bee borne by vs, for the world is no chaungeling: that which then they ſpoke againſt them, now they ſpitte agaynſt vs, and though the authours of theſe ſlaunders be many yeares ſince departed, yet their manners and heyres ſhall abide while the worlde ſtandeth. But to come to the wordes, wherein the minde of Bohaz is, that none ſhould knowe that woman were with him, at ſuch a ſuſpected time: Why? will ſome ſay, is it ſuch a matter to talke with a woman priuately and alone, we may doe it publikely, and who can ſay nay vnto it: I graunt wee may and with leſſe offence,1. Theſſ. 5.22. yet Bohaz woulde giue no occaſion of offence becauſe we muſt abſtayne from all appearaunce of euill: wee muſt not onely bee carefull wee ſinne not, but Chriſtians muſt bee carefull to auoide all ſuſpition of ſinne: it is not lawfull for Chriſtians commonly to company and keepe with enemyes, becauſe it may bee thought that they are ſecreatly in league with them it is not lawfull for a chriſtian to go into the houſe of a harlot, becauſe it will diſcredite his name, it is not lawfull for a Chriſtian to goe into a Temple of idols vnleſſe it be to deface them, becauſe it may be thought he goeth

to worſhippe: the like may bee ſaid of all other in the like kinde, where men are as guiltie that looke on, as they that are the principalles. And beloued I would to God that this carefulneſſe to auoide and ſhunne the outwarde appearaunce of iniquitie were well conſidered: then extraordinary charges in diet or apparel wolde bee eſchewed, leſt wee bee accompted daynty and prodigall or proude: ſlackeneſſe in going to ſermons woulde bee amended, leſt wee be deemed idle and ſecure Atheiſtes: buying, ſelling, playing and gaming on the ſabbaoth day, would be puniſhed, leſt it be thought we haue no feare or care to worſhip the Lorde: the dayly and moſt lamentable ſwearing of rich and poore, old and younge, parentes and children, mayſters and ſeruantes, huſbandes and wiues, men and women, would with terrour of the Lordes iudgementes be reſtrayned: idlenes woulde be reformed, drunkenneſſe in euery degree woulde bee corrected, dalliaunce and wantonnes aſhamed, coſening and deceyuing ſimple perſons bee baniſhed: and finally if this fearing the ſhaddowe of ſinne would reſt in the heartes of mankinde, neyther ſhould the ſubſtance thereof ouercome them, the pleaſures allure them, the hope deceiue them, the profite compel them, the glory prouoke them, or the end these▪ of condemne them. Let vs therfore beloued, neyther frequent or approch to perſons yt are ſuſpected, or places that are corrupted: we can touch no pitch but wee muſt be polluted, nor any vncleane thing but wee are defiled: ſinne is a contagious diſeaſe, it wil infecte the walles and the garmentes where it is committed, and what agreement is between the children of God & Beliall, touch not their meats, handle not their pleaſures, & taſte not their companies, for the world ſeeth thee & wil ſlaunder, the Lord ſeeth theee, & wil recompenſe: We auoid the ſight of ſerpents as Moyſes fled from his rod, why ſhould not wee then flie from the ſight of that olde ſerpent the father of lies which by all meanes poſſible ſeeketh to deface the name of Chriſt, & the nature of the faithfull: we come not to the picture of ye deuill, which is deuiſed by a painter, but we loath the preſence,

and abhorre the proportion of it, why ſhould wee not then, as much the workes of himſelfe, whereby he is more ſl
                     •
                  ly communicated vnto vs, then in all the pictures and images of the world? We auoid the aire where the cockatrice layeth her egges, becauſe ſhee poiſoneth the ſame: but alas, wee dayly delight in the pathes of vnrighteouſnes, where is greater daunger to our ſoules, then all the poiſons of the world can bring to the body: thus wee eſcape out of the ſnare, but we fall into the ditch, we ſtraine at gnats but wee ſwallow vp cammels: we play with the Lion, and are afraide of the lambe: death is at the end of our iourney, and yet we wil not ſee it. Therefore, againe and againe beware of offences, that is, take heed you bring not the glorious names of Chriſtians to diſcredit, your faith to ignominy, your hope to ſhame, your liberty to ſlauery, and fill not the mouthes of the wicked, with your vnwiſe and intemperate walking.
               Secondly, by this we note, yt we muſt not onely abſtain from the appearance of euil things, but wee muſt alſo beware, we make not good thinges euil, for Bohaz knewe it was lawfull for him to talke priuately or publikely, day or night, alone or in company with any woman liuing: but hee was afrayde leſt any ſhoulde take his example, as a rule or defence for their priuate wantonnes, or iudge his company with Ruth to bee vtterly vnlawfull, whereby the name of a magiſtrate, the tytle of an Elder, and the credite of two faythfull ſeruantes of God might be impayred. Therefore to ſtop theſe occaſions, with timely aryſing, hee was carefull that the knowledge thereof ſhoulde come vnto none, that a lawful thing miſunderſtood or conceiued ſhould not bee made vnlawfull. And truely, this teacheth vs alſo in chriſtian wiſedome to weigh all our doinges by the rule of the Apoſtle, when he ſaith,1. Cor. 12.1
                        •
                     
                   all things are lawfull, but all thinges are not expedient
                     •
                   all thinges are lawfull, but I will not bee brought into bondage of anie: where hee willeth vs not onely to ſee what we maye doe without daunger to our ſelues, but alſo without danger to any other: Secondly that in nothing

we preiudice our chriſtian libertie: whereby we gather yt euery thing muſt be conſidered wt the circūſtance of time, place, & perſons, a lawfull thing in time may bee out of place, & being lawful for time and place, yet it may be vnlawful for ye perſons, this we wil make plain by yt examples of alms faſting wc our ſauiour Chriſt himſelf vſed. It is lawful & a holy thing, to giue almes at all times,Mat. 6.1, 2.3.4.5. yet if it bee done in a market place, or with a publike ſigne, as to blowe a trumpet, or tolle a bell, or ſuch like, it is hypocriſie by the ſentence of our Sauiour, and therefore vnlawfull: euen ſo to pray continually is a good thing, but if it bee done in the corners of the ſtreetes, or in the Churches while all the congregation be hearing the preacher, it is vtterly vnlawfull: the ſame may bee ſaide of preaching and reading, eating and drinking, laughing and weeping, working & playing, buying and ſelling, watching and ſleeping, with ſuch like, all which are good neceſſary and lawful, yet as they exceede in time, place and perſons, they may bee vnlawfull, and therefore not to bee done. By this let all the godly learne, to vſe the meane in all their indifferent actions; and ſpecially according to this preſent ſcripture of Bohaz and Ruth, I woulde to God, that this too common accompanying of men & women together were altogether buryed and baniſhed from vs, I meane ſuch as is in this wanton manner, not onely in the maried, who with their open & publike dalliance giue great offence to ſober mindes, but alſo in the vnmaried, in their vnſeemely meetings, daungerous conuenticles, wanton feaſtes, and immodeſt running, and dancing together, wc in many vnſtayed perſons, ſtirreth vp the fire of concupiſcence, that ought rather to be quenched. Euen as Phineas ſtroke ye Iſraelite and the Madianitiſh woman,Num. 25.8. together vppon one ſpeare, ſo woulde God our Zimries and Cozbies had ſome puniſhment, to ſtay other from committinge the like in euery age, for it is much to bee feared, that the heauy hande of God is gone out agaynſt vs, by reaſon of our open and publique whooredoms, for euen now the children are infected with the

example of their elders, and what hope can there be of the ages to come, when thoſe that muſt be the parents of them, are thus poyſoned with ſinne, in the dayes of their youth: ſurely as the rotten ſeede bringeth but a ſorrowfull harueſt, ſo corrupted and wicked children will bring foorth a wofull and lamentable poſteritie. Put away therefore this euill, of laying ſtumbling blocks before the blinde, giuing offences to the weake bretheren, breeding the ſelaunder of the whole Goſpell, greeuing the hearts of the ſober minded, drawing the curſe from heauen vpon vs, and vtterly drowning our ſelues and all our progenie in euerlaſting deſtruction.
               
                  And when he had ſaid giue me thy ſheete.] This is the firſt thing which the holy Ghoſt reporteth of Boaz ſince he awaked from ſleepe, and aroſe from his lodging, wherein he calleth for the ſheete wherewithall Ruth was couered, (which no doubt but ſhe brought from home with hir) the which he filleth with ſixe meaſures of barley: the which meaſures as I take it, were hins, and contained an epha, which we haue ſhewed you was ſeuen gallons and a halfe of our engliſh meaſure, for ſo much gathered Ruth the firſt day of hir gleaning. Out of the which we note the duetie of euery godly man, which is this, neuer to be weary of diſtributing to the Church: for Boaz had often beſtowed much vpon Ruth and Naomi, yet we ſee ſo often as he could conueniently, he ſtill continueth his liberalitie. For this cauſe Paule willeth vs neuer to be wearie of well doing,2. Theſſ. 3.13. for he which needeth our liberalitie to day, will alſo want our reliefe to morrow, and ſo often as a faithfull brother commeth and complaineth, ſo often are we bound (if we haue) to ſuccour his neceſſitie. I know many are willing to do good once or twiſe to one perſon, but to giue ſo often as Boaz did to Naomi, they cannot abide, yet this is our weakenes and hardnes of heart, for as we pray euery day for our dayly bread, ſo euery day (hauing inough) we muſt diſtribute our bread: therefore wee muſt follow the counſell of Paule, not to ſlacke in doing of good, for in due time we ſhall reape if we faint not,Gal. 6.9.10 and therefore

while we haue time, let vs doe good vnto all, but eſpecially to the houſhold of faith, for as a father doeth euery day ſuſtaine and prouide for his owne houſhold, ſo ſhould we which are the ſtewards of the Lords poſſeſſions, giue of his owne to his poore ſeruants, for we ſhame his maieſtie, if we ſuffer his family to want. We reade that our Sauiour came often to one houſe, yet was not accompted a chargeable gheſt. We reade that all the poore in the primitiue Church, were dayly maintained at the coſt of the wealthie: Our Sauiour hath tolde vs that we ſhall alway haue the poore among vs, to whome wee may do good, not that wee ſhould once or twiſe beſtowe liberally, and euer after cloſe vp our beneuolence, but that the ſame poore perſons that dwell among vs ſhould dayly receiue their dayly reliefe. For how ſhall we deſire of God to finiſh his worke of redemption begun in our ſoules, when we ceaſe to perfect our liberalitie beſtowed on the poore. And now beloued in the Lord, if euer you did; put on compaſſionate hearts towards your poore bretheren in this time of dearth, and thinke not ſufficient to diſtribute once, but ſtretch out your hands againe and againe, to help the neceſſities of the poore ſaincts which dayly cry vnto you, giue, giue: that your loue may increaſe your compaſſion augment, and your fellow-feeling of the ſame hunger, may worke a fellow feeding on the ſame reliefe.
               
                  And ſhe came home.] Now we are come to the ſecond part of this ſcripture, which concerneth Naomi and Ruth. And firſt heere is ſet downe her comming home to her mother in lawe before day, to whome ſhe declareth how the man had vſed her, what promiſe he made her, and what gift he ſent her: where we ſee the diligence of Ruth, who haſted to her mother in lawe to ſhew her the newes, and to auoid the ſlaunder which we ſpoke of before. And this teacheth vs a mutuall concord in the duties of our profeſſion, that the weaker ſhould be warned by the elder, as Ruth was by Boaz, for we muſt not let any be loſt through default of our negligence, but the wiſeſt muſt gouerne, and the other

muſt obey, if any be weary, let them lay their heads vpō our aduiſe, for the credit of ye Goſpell pertaineth to all, & therefore all muſt be carefull to maintaine the ſame.
               
                  Then ſaid ſhe] Naomi hearing the report of this proſperous ſucceſſe, & ſeeing the corne that Boaz had giuē her, comforteth her daughter to tarry the iſſue, looking for a ioyfull end of ſo happy a beginning; for ſhe knew Boaz would not faint in ye cauſe that ſo much cōcerned his credit as this did, nor ſleepe till he had ended his intended deuiſe. Whereby we firſt of all note, that here is  a godly example for parēts to imitate, to ſtay their childrē by exhortation, to depend in all things vpō ye leiſure of ye Lord: for if they be ſick, the comfort of parēts is much worth, if in trouble, the counſell of parents may eaſe them, if in labour, the parents aduiſe will much encourage them, if in danger, the care of their parents may deliuer thē, and if they be obſtinate, who but parents can reclaime thē, for as Abraham anſwered Izaak his ſonne when he asked him for a ſacrifice,Gen. 22.78. the Lord (ſaid he) will prouide a ſacrifice, euen ſo parents muſt ſhew their children, the prouidene of God to maintaine them, his loue to embrace them, his care to defend them, his word to inſtruct them, and the merits of Chriſt to ſaue them. Secondly, by this we gather a  worthy example of a godly Magiſtrate, who by his wonted and accuſtomed diligence, had wonne and deſerued this commendation that heere Naomi giueth of him, that he would not reſt till he had finiſhed the matter, and followed the ſuite of the widdow to the end. Which is a worthy example for men in authoritie to imitate, that for conſcience they ſhould labour as faithfully in the cauſe of the poore, as if they were hired by fee in the ſuite of the wealthie, and would God this could enter into their mindes, which like dull horſes will trauaile no farther, then the ſpurre of money pricketh them forward; how farre are they from the vprightnes of Iob, which was an eye to the blinde,Iob. 29.15.16. feete to the lame, father to the poore, and diligentlye fought out the ſtrife which he knewe not: they are no Rulers, that in meekenes intreate them not,

in mercy forbeare them not, and in iuſtice reward them not. But of this we haue ſpoken before: now let vs giue praiſe to God for that which hath beene ſpoken.
            
            
               The eleuenth Lecture.
               
                  
                     Chap. 4. Verſ. 1.2.3.4.5.6.
                     
                        1. And Boaz went vp to the gate and ſate downe there, when behold, the kinſman came by, of whome Boaz had ſpoken, to whome he ſayd, hoe ſuch a one, come hither and ſit downe heere; who came and ſate downe.
                     
                        2. Then Boaz tooke ten men of the elders of the City, and ſaid to them, ſit downe heere, and they ſate downe.
                     
                        3. Afterward he ſaid to the kinſman, Naomi that is come againe out of the countrey of Moab, will ſell a parcell of land, which was our kinſman Elimelechs.
                     
                        4. And I thought to aduertiſe thee ſaying: buy it before the aſsiſtants and the elders of my people: if thou wilt redeeme it, redeeme it, but if thou wilt not redeeme it, tell me, for I know there is none beſide thee to redeeme it, and I am after thee. Then he anſwered, I will redeeme it.
                     
                        5. Then ſaid Boaz, what day thou buyeſt the field of the hand of Naomi, thou muſt alſo buy it of Ruth the Moabiteſſe, the wife of the dead, to ſtirre vp the name of the dead vpon his inheritance.
                     
                        6. And the kinſman anſwered, I cannot redeeme it, leaſt I deſtroy my owne inheritance; redeeme my right to thee, for I cannot redeeme it.
                  
               
               
                  NOw, by the permiſſion of the almightie, are we come to the laſt Chapter and laſt part of this hiſtory, wherein the holy Ghoſt ſheweth vnto vs how Boaz perfourmeth his promiſe made vnto Ruth in the former chapter, and taketh her to be his wife
                     •
                  : the whole Chapter containeth two parts, the firſt is the mariage of Boaz, and the ſecond is the deſcription of

his kindred, as well his aunceſtors, as his offſpring. The firſt part of his mariage is deſcribed in the firſt 15. verſes of this chapter, with all the circumſtances thereof neceſſary to be knowne, and we will deuide it into two parts: firſt, muſt be conſidered that which paſſed betweene the other kinſman and Bohaz in the firſt 10. verſes: ſecondly, the maner and circumſtances of the mariage vnto the end of the 15. verſe. The things that paſſed betweene Boaz and his other kinſman, are firſt their conference about the matter in theſe firſt 6. verſes: ſecondly, the alienation of the right from the other kinſman to Boaz, in the foure next verſes: the conference, is deſcribed by the place, that it was at the gate of the City, verſe 1. ſecondly by the witneſſes, that it was before the elders of the City verſe 2. The matter being thus prepared, Bohaz propoundeth the cauſe of their meeting in two parts, firſt, for the redeeming of the land at the hand of Naomi, which was the inheritance of their kinſman Elimelech: whereunto he anſwereth, that he will redeeme it verſe 4. ſecondly, he propoundeth to him the mariage of Ruth, that the caſe ſo ſtandeth, if he redeeme the inheritance, he muſt alſo marry with the widdow, for otherwiſe ſhe would not agree, and this is in the fift verſe. Vnto which latter condition the kinſman anſwereth, that he cannot doe it, firſt ſhewing the reaſon of it, leaſt he deſtroy his owne inheritance, ſecondly yeelding him power to redeeme his right in his behalfe verſe 6. Of theſe parts let vs briefly ſpeake as the ſpirit of God ſhall giue vtterance, and the time permit.
               
                  And Boaz went vp to the gate.] We haue heard in the former Chapter how Boaz after he had diſpatched Ruth backe againe to her mother in law,Cap. 3.15
                        •
                     
                   himſelfe went into the City, to finiſh vp the matter, now in this verſe, we ſee the place mentioned where Boaz beſtowed himſelfe after he was come thither, which is the gate of the City, where he wayted till he could ſee his kinſman come in or out, and ſeeing him, called, who came vnto him, and ſate downe beſide him. Now the gates of the Cities in thoſe auncient dayes were the

publike places of iudgement, as appeareth in many places of ſcripture,Gen. 34.20. among other, when Hemor and Sichem would perſwade their people to be circumciſed, it is ſayd, they ſate in the gate of the City; the like is that of Moſes that the obſtinate ſonne ſhould be brought by his own parēts to the elders of his City, and to the gate of the place;Deut. 21.19. & 22.15. likewiſe if any man ſhould accuſe his wife not to be a virgin at the day of her mariage, then her parents ſhould bring the ſignes of her virginitie to the elders of the City, and the gate thereof. But we muſt alſo know, that the publike iudgements and trials, were done ſo openly for diuers cauſes; firſt, that no truth might be concealed, and ſo wrong iudgemēt pronounced, for thither euery one might freely come and ſpeake their minds. Secondly, that ſtrangers might haue lawe and iuſtice as well as their naturall and natiue inhabitants, and therfore it was at the very entrance of their Cities, ſo we ſee Abraham a ſtranger, in the iudgemēt place was heard before Hebron & Heth whē he bought his burying place.Gen. 23.10. Laſtly, becauſe ye munition, ſtrength, furniture, power and defence of the City lay in the gates:Gen. 22.17. Gen. 24.60. Rebecca.
                   as God bleſſeth Abraham, and ſo alſo Laban and his mother bleſſe their ſiſter Ribkah, that their ſeede ſhould poſſeſſe the gates of their enemies, that is their ſtrongeſt defenſes;Mat. 16.16.18. And our Sauiour Chriſt ſhewing his Apoſtles that he would build his Church vpon the faith which they had confeſſed, ſaith, that the gates of hell ſhould not preuaile againſt it, meaning the whole power of the deuill, ſhould neuer ouerturne it.
               
                   And this teacheth vs many things, firſt, that in matters of triall, equitie and iuſtice, it is an iniury, if publike faults be priuately adiudged: for Abraham dealing but for a piece of land wt Hebron which was but a priuate matter, could not obtaine it till it came to the gate of the City, the publike place of iudgemēt, and if a matter ſo honeſt and lawfull could not be ended, without ſuch an open & publike aſſembly, much more open offences which are in themſelues wicked and diſhoneſt,1. Tim. 5.20. for the Apoſtle ſaith, that thoſe which ſin opēly muſt be openly rebuked. Surely there is none of vs that

are ignorant of the great euill which commeth by the priuate handling of offences, for thereby guilty perſons eſcape vnpuniſhed, vniuſt matters are by deceipt confirmed, publike peace is much abuſed, as if colours were diſcerned by blind men, or gold without the touchſtone in the light: Yet heerein are we much bound to magnify ye Lord, who hath vouchſafed vs open Courts for deciding of controuerſies, puniſhing of fellons, and maintenance of peace, ſome for waightier, and ſome for lighter contentions, for as the waxe melteth before the ſunne, ſo the ſubtiltie of offendours at the examination of the magiſtrate.
               Secondly, by this we note, that we muſt in iudgement  haue regard both to the ſtranger and to the free borne, to the poore and to the rich, to the widdow and to the maried, and finally both alike to women & men: for thus the Lord commaundeth,Deut. 24.17. Peruert not the right of the ſtranger and infant, neither take the garment of a widdow to pledge. For we muſt remember that Abraham, Izaac and Iacob, the fathers of the faithfull, were all their liues ſtrangers in other lands, and therefore we which either would or ſhould be their children, by doing iniury to harbourles ſtraungers, do reuile and oppreſſe our ſpirituall fathers, when we loue not their perſons, maintaine not their right, receiue not their ſuites, and heare not their ſupplications, though they were againſt our owne ſelues, if we iuſtly deſerue them; but of this matter we haue ſpoken in the firſt and ſecond chapters. Thirdly, by this we learne, that  publike Iudges, Iuſtices and iudgements, ſhould be defended by publike authoritye; for as theſe Iudges fate in the gate where the munitions were, that if any ſhould refuſe them, they had power and ſtrength to compell them: euen ſo if men of wiſedome haue not authority, who ſeeth not yt euery diſordered perſon doth contemne them. But if they haue authority and do not ſhew it in puniſhing offendors without feare or fauor of men, they are like to Saul whē God had commanded him to kill the Amalekits, & ſpare neither man, womā,1. Sam. 15.33. child or beaſt aliue, yet contrary to this cōmandement,

he ſaued king Agag; but the Lord refuſed him, and caſt him out of fauour, and Agag was hewen in peeces by the prophet Samuell: euen ſo it is to be feared, that there are a great many Saules in euery place, whoſe affections ſtand for law, ſparing their friends for fauour, and great men for feare, who are likewiſe reprobated of the Lord, and rebuked by his miniſters. And heere we haue good occaſion to be thankefull to the Lord, which hath giuen our Magiſtrates this power, that all things are done in the name of the Prince, and aſſiſted by the countrey, for the puniſhment of offendours: and I pray God increaſe more obedience to their authoritie in others, and more courage in themſelues, to ſtrike aſunder with the ſword of iuſtice, the indiſſoluble knots of iniurious and contentious perſons, and to giue the offendours their deſerued reward. Then heere we haue Boaz ſitting in the iudgement place, as one that was not aſhamed of his lawfull cauſe, and the Lord which guideth all things, and would now reward the religion of Ruth, bringeth the other kinſman to the ſight of Boaz, who calleth him, and he commeth at the requeſt of Boaz, and there tarieth and ſitteth downe, where we will leaue him, and goe to the ſecond part, which is the witnes of this conference.
               
                  Then Boaz tooke ten men.] The witneſſes of the actions which are to paſſe in this place, we heare in theſe words to be ten men of the elders of the Citie: there are onely ten, in my iudgement, becauſe euery Citie of the Iſraelites had twelue gouernors, according to the number of the tribes of Iſraell, to whome appertained the ordering of all ciuill cauſes among them, for they medled not with religion: now it is very likely that Boaz and this other kinſman, being men of ſo great kindred and wealth, were two of the number of the elders, who being the parties in ſuite, had the reſidue of their fellowes to be witneſſes of the actions that paſſed betweene them. And this interpretation is confirmed, by the diligent examination of the place, for it is ſaid that Boaz tooke them, as if he were equall or greater in authoritye then they, and the other being a

man of great wealth as appeareth by this that he was willing to redeeme the inheritance of Naomi, which could be no ſmall charge conſidering the late troubleſome dayes, and after we ſhall heare in the 6. verſe that he would not take Ruth for feare his owne name ſhould be put out in Iſraell, whereby appeareth his calling not to be meane, beſide his linage which was to the greateſt houſe in Iudah, by the which it muſt needes follow that he was an elder or ruler among them, which being plaine both by this and other places of ſcripture, that the ciuill gouernment of the people was exerciſed by elders, and that the elders themſelues could do nothing without the conſent of their fellowes. We ſee heere noted vnto vs this excellent doctrine, namely, that men in authority and gouernment muſt exerciſe nothing without the due execution of their owne law and decrees: we ſee heere this Boaz, a man of great authoritye, and lead by the ſpirit of God, hauing a cauſe for himſelfe, would not deſire or goe about to accompliſh it, but in the iudgement ſeate and preſence of the elders, ſo that no fauour of perſons may breake the courſe of iuſtice, whereby a common wealth is ruled. Some thinke it a baſe thing that great men ſhall ſtand to be iudged in the place of common perſons: and I thinke it as great a fault that common perſons ſhould haue any acceſſe to Magiſtrates to be iudged by them, for as it debaſeth their eſtate to be ioyned with theſe iudgement, ſo it troubleth their quietnes to be iudges ouer thē. But ſome, and they of the greater ſort, which haue the law in their owne hands, deale with it as Iudah did, when it was told him, that his daughter Thamar was with child, then there was nothing but fire and fagot to puniſh her for her whoredome, till ſhe ſhewed him that he was the man by whome it came, as Nathan did with Dauid, but then the heate of the fire was well cooled, when himſelfe was found to be the greateſt offendor: euen ſo many deale againſt the weaker and poorer ſort, the lawes are executed to the vttermoſt, but the rich and wealthy which offer all the iniurye, gather all

the friendſhip, which is not onely a fault to others, but in their owne conſciences, for how can they iudge another when the ſame offence condemneth themſelues? and therefore as there was one generall place of iudgement, ſo there was but one common manner of triall: like as God iudgeth the rich and poore, ſo a good Magiſtrate ſhould equally receiue both, and be as willing to be iudged themſelues, as to giue ſentence vpon other.
               Secondly, by this example of Boaz and the elders of Bethlehem we obſerue that in our publike buſines, we muſt reſort eſpecially to the Magiſtrates euen in thoſe things that require nothing but record and witnes-bearing. This Boaz might haue gotten ſome of his priuate friends, before whome he might haue effected the matter, but we ſee him heere the ſollicitour of his owne cauſe, and craueth no friendſhip, but the witnes of the elders, by the which this doctrine is confirmed:Math. 8.3.4. and therefore our Sauiour hauing clenſed a leper, biddeth him goe ſhew himſelfe to the Prieſts for a witnes vnto them, and for this cauſe it was commaunded in the law, that the waighty matters ſhould be brought before the Prieſts. for Magiſtrates muſt heare as well the concluſions of peace, as the contentions of diſquietnes betweene man and man. Wherein we are bound to render moſt humble and earneſt thanks to almighty God, who hath vouchſafed vs this bleſſing, that the contracts of matrimony, the conueyance of poſſeſſions, the redeeming of morgaged lands, the records of inheritances, and the purchaſe of euery lawfull thing remaineth written in the ſeuerall courts and offices of credit, that they might be euerlaſting testimonies for the poſterities ſucceeding.
               
                  Afterward Boaz ſaid] Boaz like a wiſe man concealeth his minde from the elders and kinſman, till they were all quietly ſet together, and then he beginneth with one part of his ſuite, telling his kinſman of the land of Elimelech, which was to be redeemed by his neereſt kinſman, the which Boaz propoundeth but very obſcurely, that thereby he might thoroughly try his minde

and good will toward Naomi, and making it knowne in the preſence of the elders, he might by no meanes recall his word, And this teacheth vs not only innocent vprightnes, but alſo godly pollicy, that we be carefull for the ſpeaking in iudgement, ſo much as may further our iuſt and lawfull cauſe, and not hinder it. For thus dealeth Boaz, he did not at the firſt ſhew the drift and secret of his minde, which was the mariage of Ruth, whereof as yet he ſpeaketh nothing, but beginning the matter with the redemption of the lands, coloureth the mariage by the reſtoring of the inheritance, for by this meanes, he openeth the ſecrets of his kinſmans heart, that he bore ſome good will to the cauſe of Naomi, but of this matter inough.
               
                  Wherefore I determined] In the former verſe and in this, Boaz propoundeth the matter to his kinſeman, teſtifying thereby that of duety and conſcience he did it in the behalfe of the widdow, and requireth him for his duetie and conſcience, to perfourme the part of a kinſeman, which is either to redeeme the right, or to render it vp, ſhewing that beſide them two, there is not one that was bound vnto it: and alſo promiſing, that if he refuſed, then he himſelfe would diſcharge that duetie. Where we ſee firſt of all a holy  example, teaching vs to deale with our neighbours, for our ſelues, or for other, euen as Boaz did in this place: for he might haue charged his kinſman that he had no loue or care to Naomi; that he had omitted his duetie in not redeeming the inheritance before this day; that his couetouſnes was ſo great, that he had forgot the very lawe of God: and finally, he might haue called vpon the Magiſtrates for ſome puniſhment to be inflicted on him for his diſobedience to the lawe of God, and neglect of his duetie towarde Naomi. But he doeth none of theſe, but ſoberly in the preſence of the elders, hee turneth his gentle ſpeech to the partye, and hauing propounded the matter, requireth a preſent anſwere. Whereby wee are admoniſhed, that with the like charitie, wee handle our neighbours, if wee haue them at

any aduantage, for this is that meekenes that cauſeth to inherit the earth,Math. 5.5.29. 1. Cor. 13.5 Epheſ. 4.2. for thereby we follow Chriſt, with whome we ſhall find reſt for our ſoules, for loue dealeth not churliſhly, it ſeeketh not his owne, it is not bitter, it thinketh no euill. Therefore as Paule intreated the Epheſians, ſo muſt I intreate you, that we ſo walke as is worthy our vocation vnto the which we are called, in all modeſtie, meekenes, and gentlenes of minde, bearing with one another through charitie. Oh how vngodly are theſe clamorous accuſations among vs, for which many lye in wayte, that they might haue any cauſe to draw their bretheren, as it were ſtarke naked into the preſence of the magiſtrates, that is, with moſt impudent and ſhameleſſe vntruthes, to charge and examine them vpon their owne ſuſpitions, neuer thinking on the iniuries they offer vnto them, or looking for the ſame meaſure againe at the hands of other. Some there ar
                     •
                   alſo which for euery trifling farthing, will call their neighbors before the Magiſtrate, delighting in their owne iniuries, the troubles of their friends, the diſquietnes of the Magiſtrates, and the abuſe of the lawe: whoſe impatient conſtitution calleth for vengeance at the hands of the Lord, and the curſe of the land is gone out againſt them, nothing is wanting, but that the braunches of their vnquiet ſpirits, ſhould be pruned by the ſword of iuſtice, by them to whome they make their complaints.
               
                   Secondly, by this example of Boaz we gather, that the onely cauſe of bringing ſuites before the elders and magiſtrates, was the peace and quietnes of the people, not for the kindling, but the quenching of contention before it aroſe, that the dayly brawling, rayling, chiding, and quarrelling, might be preuented by the wiſedome of the Magiſtrates; for as the Philiſtines tooke away all the armour from the Iſraelites to keepe them from rebellion, ſo Magiſtrates hearing of cauſes with ſeueritie and iuſtice, ſhould take away the inſtruments of oppreſſions, and the weapons of contentious perſons from the common wealth. Thirdly, by this alſo we gather the diuerſitie of proceeding in

iudiciall cauſes in theſe dayes and the times paſt. Then men in their owne perſons did pleade in iudgement their owne cauſes, but now others make gaine of it, then ſuites were not ſo tedious as now they are, then men ſought not out ſuch ſliding ſhifts to couer their falſehood, but they did as Boaz and his kinſeman doeth, the one ſimply propounded his griefe, and the other gently anſwered his queſtion, for ſo ſhould euery one vtter, the truth indifferently, both to their benefit and damage: then the world was not troubled with writs, fees, or counſellors, but euery man brought his cauſe and his witnes, ſo the iniury was quickly confeſſed, eaſily tried, and ſpeedily remedied, finally, we retaine almoſt nothing of the auncient manners in this point, but only the bare and outward names. By the which we are admoniſhed of humane miſery, for as the world groweth, the troubles thereof are increaſed: in the firſt age they had no warres, in the ſecond age they had no certaine dwellings, in the third age they had no chargeable ſuits, in the fourth age they had no quietnes, and euer ſince warres haue multiplied bloud, one countrey caried to another, mens lawfull inheritances are taken by violence, the Church is ſpoyled of her libertie, the world of her peace, our bodies of their health, our goods of their continuance, our names of their credit, our corne of increaſe, our lands of their fruits, and all our liues of their naturall benefites. Our Sauiour ſhewed vs, that before the end, the loue of many ſhould waxe cold, but ſurely it is not onely cold, but frozen in our lamentable age: the Apostle hath ſhewed vs, that men ſhould be louers of themſelues, and louers of pleaſures more then God, when ſhall theſe dayes be if they be not now? may we not ſee that euery man raketh for his profite, as the Eagle raueneth for her pray, if they may get houſe or land, leaſes or farmes, goodes or carrels, money or meate, apparell or eaſe, they care not though all other lye harborles in the fields, naked in the ſtreetes, and pining in their weary and dayly labours. Doeth not now the Gentleman make more accompt of his worſhip,

then the worſhip of God, the Merchant of his profit, then of Ieſus Chriſt, the husbandman of his fruits, then of the feare of the Lord, the labourer of his wages, then the wealth of his ſoule, the begger of his almes, then of vnfained deuotion, & euery crafteſman of his trade, more then of true religion: when ſhall the day of vengeance come, for the Church of God trauaileth with child of theſe miſeries, and euery day is a thouſand till ſhe be deliuered, ſurely the day cannot be long before the ſmall remedy appeare.
               
                  But Boaz. ſaid] After he had entred with the land, and the other had graunted to redeeme it, he proceedeth alſo to the ſecond part of his ſpeech, telling him, if he redeeme it, he muſt redeeme it at the hand of Ruth the Moabiteſſe, the wife of the dead, with whome he muſt marry, to rayſe vp the name of the dead vpon his inheritance.Deut. 25.5.6. This law for a man to marry with the widdow of his deceaſed brother as it is commaunded by the Lord, ſo it had a ſpeciall regard to many things, firſt, for the continuance of the firſt borne in euery family, who were the Lords by the law; ſignifying thereby that Chriſt the firſt borne of the almightie, ſhould remayne with all his Church, like the firſt borne of this world, and be the heyres of grace for euer and euer. And as he would not ſuffer any family to want a firſt borne, becauſe it was the Lords, ſo not one of the faithfull can be loſt, becauſe they are the Lords. Secondly, becauſe it was an image of the reſurrection, for as a man being dead without iſſue, his brother taketh his wife, begetteth a ſonne, which ſhall be called the ſonne of the deceaſed, and he which is dead ſhall liue in him, in as much as his name is reuiued: euen ſo the body layd dead in the graue, ſhall be reuiued at the laſt day by the powerfull working of the almighty, for as the firſt is wonderfull, ſo the ſecond is admirable. Thirdly, by this lawe of ſubrogation, is ſignified the great care which the Lord had for the temporall augmenting of euery family among the Iſraelites; and in that, the loue of God in Chriſt to his Church, that though we dye without fruit in barrennes, yet the

Lord will giue vs a name, whereby after a few dayes we shall liue with him for euer.
               But in theſe words we firſt of all note, when he ſaith, that he muſt buy it at the hand of Ruth the Moabiteſſe, the wife of the deceaſed; that one cauſe both of the redemption of lands, and marriage of the brother or next heyre to the widdow, was for the womans or widdowes ſake, namely, that ſhe ſhould not be left deſtitute: for we reade in the Goſpell of Luke,Luc. 1.2.
                        •
                     . that barrennes was a great reproch among women in thoſe dayes, now we know that this law was onely for barren widdowes, and not for them that were fruitfull, and who would marry with ſuch a woman, whome in his owne heart he feared would be fruitleſſe: therefore the Lord to ſuccour theſe poore deſolate widdowes, gaue this for a lawe, that the brother or neereſt kinſeman to their husbands deceaſed, ſhould take them to be their wiues: where he againe commendeth vnto vs the carefull eſtate of deſtitute widdowes, if they be oppreſſed, we muſt eaſe them, if reiected, we muſt receiue them, if forſaken, we muſt comfort them, if reproched, we muſt acquire them, and finally if they will marry, they may, yea their owne friends, or the Church muſt prouide them husbands. And ſeeing the Lord would thus decree by a lawe, the ſafegard of thoſe that were deſpiſed, much more would he defend by iudgement the cauſe of poore fruitfull widdowes, the mothers of many children. Now although we are not bound to this lawe of mariage, yet wee are tyed to doe good to the widdowes, for the nature of the lawe being long ſince abrogated, yet the vſe thereof remayneth for euer and euer. For maintenance by the word of God muſt be allowed them wherewithall they may liue, theyr husbands beeing dead: Therefore Boaz telleth hys kinſeman, that hee muſt redeeme the inheritance at the handes of Ruth the Moabiteſſe, becauſe by her marriage, it is made the widdowes, the husband dying without iſſue, like as in this place wee obſerue that all the inheritance deſcendeth to the widdow,

and therefore ſhe beſtowed her ſelfe vpon the next of the kindred, who indeede with vs is the heyre to all. Therefore by this we muſt all learne, but eſpecially the married, or thoſe that intend it hereafter, that it is one eſpeciall duty of a carefull husband, to prouide before hand for the maintenance of their wiues, that if death neuer ſo ſuddaine take them away, yet they may not leaue them as many haue done, harbourles without houſe, comfortles without friends, and wealthles without conuenient maintenance. By this we ſee, the cōmendable aſſurance of ioyntures & dowers in lands or money, which many parents do wiſely take for their daughters, to be a thing alowable by the word of God: yet many offend in the exceſſe, that they will neuer match where they can haue none, though there be neuer ſo great hope in time to come, ſo that wealth and nothing els is the end of moſt mariages. Then by this we ſee cōdemned firſt all thoſe which hauing ſufficiēt, will hardly leaue to their wiues anything, beſide that which they cannot keep from them, and hence it is, that many leaue to their children hundreds and thousands, but ſcant twentyes or fortyes to their helples widowes. Other hauing many children, leaue the greateſt part of their wealth to their widdowes, through whoſe youthfull mariages, many times, their whole poſteritie is brought to pouertie. But a third ſort there are which mind nothing ſaue only mariage, and to borrow a little for their feſtiuall day, but afterward let the world ſinke or ſwimme, children without bread, wiues without comfort, themſelues as bare as the graſhopper in winter, and their whole families moſt pitifully tormented, they repent though all too late, the children wiſh they had neuer bin borne, the parents curſe the day of their firſt acquaintance, the family complayne of pouerty, the countrey of charges, the people of neceſſity, but they poore ſeely ſoules, the innocent infants are left to the merciles world, to liue in beggery. Oh that this godly forecaſt would enter into the minds of many headlong parents, that their liues might be more bleſſed, their children more happy, their families more contented,

the countrey better furniſhed, and the poore better ſuccoured, that there might bee no complayning in our ſtreetes, no leading into captiuity, and not one feeble perſon among vs, that our ſonnes may bee as the fruitefull garners, and our daughters like the poliſhed corners of the temple: Oh bleſſed are the people that bee in ſuch a caſe, yea bleſſed are the people whoſe God is the Lorde. Then ſhould the name of God bee honoured by our liues, and praiſed in our deathes, when our widdowes are prouided for, our children maynetayned, our families nouriſhed, and our ſoules ſhalbe bleſſed.
               
                  Then the kinſman ſaid. This ſeconde queſtion of marriage being propounded, the kinſeman in theſe wordes anſwereth, that hee cannot redeeme the inheritance vpon that condition, and giueth a reaſon thereof, becauſe then to ſaue anothers, hee ſhoulde deſtroy his owne, meaning if hee had but one childe by Ruth, that ſhoulde bee for Machlon her deceaſed huſbande, and ſo his owne name ſhoulde bee forgotten in his inheritaunce. Whereby wee ſee that he oppoſeth the feare of the loſſe of his owne name, againſt the ſeuere commandement of God, and doubteth that if hee followe the lawe of God and cuſtome of the faithfull, his land may lacke an heyre, his houſe a mayſter,Gen. 38.9. and himſelfe a ſonne. The like vnto this was that of Onan the ſeconde ſonne of Iudah, when he ſhoulde haue taken the wife of his deceaſed brother, would not performe his duety towarde her, but abuſing in filthines his owne body, becauſe he woulde not benefite his brother, was therefore iuſtly ſlaine by the Lorde. And I feare that a great many are ſicke of this diſeaſe, that loue the world aboue the worde, their lande aboue the lawe of God, their children more then charitie requireth, who thinke they are borne for no bodie but onely for themſelues: but eſpecially in mariage, they had rather haue the lande then the man, the portion then the woman, like this man which was willing to take the inheritance, but vnwilling to marrie the widdow, for this cauſe they oppreſſe both children and widdowes, they preferre

their priuate gaine, before publike godlines, who for their poſteritie ſome are occupyed in briberie, ſome in vſury, ſome in extortion, and many in vnlawfull bargaining, whoſe only and chiefe care is for nothing, but that they may die rich: but better is poore Lazarus at his death, then all the rich gluttons in the worlde: for wealth maketh not to die well, but rather choketh the ſoule with infatiable care, onely religion is the ſureſt badge of a godly man, whoſe riches is pouertie, whoſe pleaſure paine, and whoſe rewarde is ſaluation. But this man is well contented to giue ouer his right to Bohaz, wherein ſurely he doth him a pleaſure, but if there had beene any profite in it, hee woulde firſt haue ſerued himſelfe: wherein wee haue a worthy example of a worldly minde, which graunteth all things, til it touch his diſcōmoditie: for thus the world wil heare vs preach till we rebuke their couetouſneſſe, or craue their beneuolence, for euery one will goe as farre dry foote as they can, but none will be wet for the law of the Lord: that is, ſo long as we tell them of their faithes, exhorte them to repentaunce, perſwade them from pleaſure, and drunkenneſſe; but once touch their purſes, as Iohn Baptiſte did Herodes whoredome, then farewell preaching, faith and repentance: But thus much ſhal ſuffice for this time. Now let vs giue praiſe to God.
               The end of the eleuenth Lecture.
            
            
               
               The twelfth Lecture.
               
                  
                     Chap. 4. ver. 7.8.9.10.
                     
                        7 Now this was the manner before time in Iſrael, concerning the redeeming and chaunging for to ſtabliſh all thinges, a man did plucke off his ſhooe, and gaue it his neyghbour, and this was a 
                           •
                        ure witneſſe in Iſrael.
                     
                        8 Therefore the kinſeman ſaid to Boaz, buy it for thee & he drewe off his ſhooe.
                     
                        9 And Bohaz ſaid vnto the elders, and vnto all the people, ye are witneſſes this day, that I haue bought all that was Elimeleches, and all that was Chilions and Mahlons, of the hande of Naomi.
                     
                        10 And moreouer, Ruth the Moabiteſſe the wife of Mahlon, haue I bought to bee my wife, to ſtirre vp the name of the dead, vpon his inheritance, and that the name of the deade bee not put out from among his brethren, and from the gate of his place ye are witneſſes this day.
                  
               
               
                  THeſe wordes contayne the finiſhing vp the matter betweene Bohaz & his kinſeman; how the one reſigneth his right to the other, and the knitting vp of the marriage. They conſiſt of two partes: firſt, a deſcription of the auncient maner of alienation, or chaunging of titles, rightes, and properties: in the ſeuenth verſe, in theſe wordes: Nowe this was the manner afore time &c, to the ende of the verſe: The ſeconde is the manner how this man doth giue ouer, and reſigne his right to Boaz, in the eyght, ninth and tenth verſes: and contayneth two partes; the firſt reſpecteth the kinſman in the ninth verſe: where firſt, hee biddeth Boaz to buye or redeeme it: Secondly, hee draweth off his ſhooe.
               
                  The ſecond parte reſpecteth Boaz, and ſheweth how he receyueth it in the 2. next verſes: wherin firſt he calleth witnes of the elders and people verſ. 10. Secondly, he accepteth the proffer, or purchaſe which is double: firſt the lande or inheritaunce, verſ. 10. Secondly the widdowe or wife of Machlon, verſ. 11, of theſe let vs briefly ſpeake in order as they lie, with the aſſiſtaunce of God his ſpirite, and the permiſſion of the time.
               
                  Now this was] Firſt of all here is deſcribed the manner of God his people, how in ancient time, they were wont to alienate, or put of their right from one to another, which the holy Ghoſt ſetteth downe for the better vnderſtanding of that which followeth. And this manner of chaunging or ſelling was commaunded by the Lord himſelfe,Deut. 25.8.9, 10 as we reade in theſe wordes. Then the Elders of his cittie ſhall call him and commune with him, if he ſtand and ſay, I will not take her: Then ſhal his kinſwoman come vnto him, in the preſence of the Elders, and looſe his ſhooe from his foote, and ſpit in his face, and aunſwere and ſay, ſo ſhall it be done to him, that will not builde vp his brothers houſe. And his name ſhall bee called in Iſraell, the houſe of him whoſe ſhooe is put of. In the which wordes, wee note theſe thinges: Firſt that it was the dutie of the woman to complain of ſuch a man before the magiſtrates, as wee may ſee in the 7. ver. Secondly that the magiſtrates were bounde to call and examine ſuch perſonnes, of the cauſes of their deny all. Thirdely, that the woman ſhoulde pul off the ſhooe and alſo ſpit in his face, which the Lorde did doubtles commande for the poore comfortles womans ſake, that no excuſe ſhoulde bee admitted of delay, but that they might eyther be preſently receyued, or preſently refuſed: for ſhee which was not fit to day, woulde not be to morrowe, where wee gather the great care of the Lorde for widowes, which hath warned their frendes to prouide for them marriages, & armed the magiſtrates to defende their weakenes, truely as they which are leaſt accompted in the worlde, are moſt eſteemed of the Lord, euen ſo they which are moſt regarded of the worlde, are leaſt reſpected of the Lord:

for in this lawe: the almighty had an eſpecial eye to the poore, for hee knewe the wealthy could want no huſbandes: Whereby wee are taught firſt, to magnifie the goodnes of the Lorde: which as Marie ſayth, looketh vpon the poore degree of his ſeruantes,Luc: 1.48. and beholdeth the rich a farre off, his delight is in aduauncing of them that are caſt downe, and all his lawes defend the cauſes of the oppreſſed. Secondly, that wee make no light accompt or reckoning of thoſe whom the Lord in his worde doth ſo highly commende vnto vs: for it is an eſpeciall token of them that ſhall bee ſaued, that they make much of them that feare the Lorde:Pſal. 15.4. Luc. 16.29. what though they bee as poore as Lazarus, and neuer so contemptible in the eyes of the worlde: yet it is a thousand times more commendable to be frendly to ſuch, then to al the rich gluttons of ye world, but of this point we haue spoken before, and it is ſufficient to touch it nowe.
               Secondly, by this wee alſo note, that if there bee any iniury done to the children by their parentes, or to  widdowes, by their friendes, in their marriages, it is lawfull for them to appeale to the magiſtrates: As for example, if the parentes woulde force their children, eyther not to marrie at all, or els to marry againſt theyr mindes, rather then they yeelde to eyther of both, they may and ought to ſue to the magiſtrate. The which as it was lawfull for the Iewes by this lawe here mentioned, euen ſo it is left to vs to immitate, although the ceremoniall vſe of it bee ceaſed, which conſiſted onely in the brothers marriage, and as long as magiſtrates are; ſo long the true vſe of it remayneth, as it doth in many others. Yet although the Goſpell ſpeake not of it, becauſe it is a thing ſo farre againſt nature, yet it commaundeth that they which doe euill ſhoulde feare the ſworde of the magiſtrate,Rom. 13.1.4. becauſe hee beareth it not in vaine: and moreouer it is flatly againſt the Goſpell: that any ſhoulde doe vnto other,Mat. 7.12. which they woulde not haue done to themſelues: much more this forcible dealing with frendes or children: And if it bee lawfull for the wife or huſband to flie to the magiſtrate in priuate iniuries, much more for the children which are

weaker, and therefore neede more helpe. This I ſpeake not to ſtirre vp the mindes of any againſt their parents; but with the Apoſtle I exhort and commande that euery one obey their parentes in all thinges lawfull: for hee is accurſed that doth otherwiſe; but to this ende I vtter it, that wee may knowe what is lawfull and what is vnlawfull: for the ſame God which hath commanded that parentes ſhoulde bring their vnruly ſonnes & daughters for to bee puniſhed, willeth alſo that they wc do any hurt to their children, either in ſoule to drawe thē from ye Lord: or in body, as in vnlawfull or vngodly mariages, in vnlawful & vngodly actions, their only rerefuge ſhould be to ye miniſter of God, ye lawful magiſtrate, to whom they owe more obedience then to their owne parents: Therefore Paul willeth parents, that they prouoke not their children to wrath, which is by their tirannous commaundementes to binde their conſciences, and their cruell authority to murther their mindes: For if a priuate ſubiect may ſue agaynſt the Prince, and craue the lawe, much more a ſonne or a daughter, being grieued by their parentes: The vſe of this doctrine is to teach and inſtruct vs, firſt what duetie wee owe to the magiſtrates, who haue greater care and charge ouer vs for the peace of our countrey, and publike welfare, then parentes for our maintaynance, and priuate obedience: therefore Paule willeth to pray and giue thanks for the magistrates, that vnder them we may liue godly and quiet liues,1 Tim. 2.2.3 for that is good and acceptable in the ſight of God our Sauiour, whereby wee maye iuſtly complayne of the ſlacknes of our vnhappie age, wherein men murmure & grudge at any charge which ariſeth for our prince, but eſpecialy that there are ſo few which in all their liues haue prayed for Prince or Magiſtrates, and if they haue, it was but a wiſhe and no more, that they might liue in peace to gather wealth, not in godlines, for the profite of their ſoules: Again by this all parentes muſt bee inſtructed howe to deale with their children, that they reygne not like Gods ouer the fruites of their bodyes, but intreate them in meekeneſſe, being of yeares of diſcreation, like their

fellowe heyres of God his kingdome: euen as they wil aunſwere to the Almightie, who gaue them ſuch iſſue, and to the lawes of our Prince, that requireth accompt of them, for the chiefeſt ſtroke lyeth not in them, but in thoſe that gouerne both church & common wealth, and wee haue already ſhewed that in ſome cauſes, it is a glorie for their children, to decline from their counſelles: Laſtly, all children muſt herein alſo bee ſchooled, that with all reuerence they ſubmit themſelues to the aduice of their parentes: but eſpecially like free men in Chriſt, they liſten alway what the word of God ſaith: for that muſt bee their iudge, and parentes alſo, when it ſhall not goe for payment, that they did it for feare of their friendes: but they which feare them more then God, ſhall with them bee excluded for euer from God: and let vs euermore giue thankes to the Almighty, which thus prouideth for our miſery, to defende our innocency that if wee bee in one place oppreſſed, we may bee redreſſed in another, appointing courtes of appeale from our owne parentes to his owne magiſtrates:
               Thirdely, by this alſo wee obſerue and note, when  hee ſaith that this was a ſure witnes in Iſraell, that it is a thing required in our religion, that of our publike affayres there may bee publike teſtimonyes, as for example, our purchaſing, buying or ſelling, ought by religion and the feare of God, to bee done with open and publike witneſſe, for the better aſſuraunce to buyers and ſellers, to auoide deceit in the one, and couetouſneſſe in the other; and therefore it was ſaid in the lawe, that vnder the witneſſe of twoe or three shall euery worde ſtande. And further alſo, there muſt bee ſome outwarde ſigne, to ſeale vp the matter; in this place here is the putting of the ſhooe, which ſignifieth poſſeſſion and diſpoſſeſſinge againe, the rendring of a mans right to him that hath it: Therefore in some places there is vſed ſtriking of handes as the ſhutting and making vp of bargaines and couenauntes, and who knoweth not that in the, purchace of Lande, there is ſeiſin and deliuery by a peece

of earth and a twigge, of houſes all goe forth and the buyer entreth in alone and there abideth, and this I may ſay is a ſure teſtimony in Englande. But you woulde knowe why the Lorde beſide the recorde of the magiſtrates, required ſuch outwarde and open ſignes: To which I anſwere; he did it for this cauſe, that the ſimpleſt among them might not be deceyued, but might haue yt as the euidence of his poſſeſſion for euermore: witnes ſayleth, magiſtrates dye, people are vnconſtant; yea, and ſome will falſely ſweare and witneſſe to any vntruth, yet the ſhooe remayned an euerlaſting teſtimonie. Therefore among vs there is writing and ſeale, by the which thinges are confirmed, which paſſed many ages ago; and this was taken from the ancient vſage, wherein mens names were entred in braſſe and ſtone, and the quantity of their poſſeſſions deſcribed. Therefore doth the holy Ghoſt ſo preciſely ſet downe the purchaſe which Abraham made with Ephron: where the fielde is named,Gen. 23.17. the borders or boundes of it is deſcribed; the caue is mentioned, and the very trees that grew in the ſame, are made ſure vnto him, the like may bee ſaide of the ſtones in mount Gilead, that Iacob reared as a witneſſe betweene him and Laban, and many other which ſerue to this ende,Gen. 31.52, 1. Theſ. 4.6 that as Paule ſayth, Wee ſhoulde not defraude one another: For if hee were accurſed that remooued the lande marke of his neighbor, what ſhall they bee which get markes and lands both, ſome by deceyuing, ſome by forged euidence, other by falſe witnes, and ſome force their neighbours, wil they, nil they, to depart from their dwellings and poſſeſſions, and to leaue them for little or nothing in the clawes of theſe cormorantes, their great poſſeſſions require great accomptes, and I feare mee, when that day ſhall come, they will be as ready to reſtore, as euer Iudas was, but it shall bee to late and without fruite, for the ſentence is already pronounced, that fire ſhall conſume their dwellinges, and their children or poſteritie ſhall be vagabounds, but the righteous ſhall haue the land in poſſeſſion.
               
                  Therefore the kinſeman] This verſe ſheweth howe

the right was reſigned, firſt the kinſeman giueth Boaz authority, when he biddeth him buy it for himſelfe: and ſecondly, hee renounceth his owne, when he pulleth off his ſhooe. Where firſt of all it may bee demaunded, why doth hee plucke off his owne ſhooe? ſeeing by the lawe, the woman ſhoulde doe it, and alſo ſpitte in his face; as wee haue hearde already. Vnto which I briefly aunſwere: Firſt the law beforeſaide, wherein the woman was bound to plucke off the ſhooe, and to ſpit in her kinſemans face, was for ſuch as vtterly denied both to redeeme the inheritance, and to marrie the widdowe, as alſo that woulde not prouide any ſubſtitute to doe it in their behalfe: but this kinſeman of Naomies, got Boaz to redeeme his right, as we may ſee in the 6, verſe of this chapter, in theſe words redeeme my right to thee: Therefore that ceremony was needeles: Secondly I anſwere, that the woman by that lawe was bounde to complaine to the magiſtrates: but neyther Naomi nor Ruth did make any complaint, ſaue onely a priuate petition vnto Boaz for to marrie her in his owne behalfe; and therefore the matter being confeſſed before the complaint, as he was willing to releaſe his title vnto Boaz, who was ready to receiue it, ſo wt leſſe rigour ye law was executed vpō him: for a penitent offendor is worthy of moſt fauor. Thirdly, neyther Naomi nor Ruth were preſent whē this matter was in hearing, becauſe they were vncertain of their kinſemans minde, who if he had granted, it had been immodeſty for them, ſeeing they neuer aſked him before: and if hee denyed as hee did, by their preſence they ſhoulde ſeeme to diſtruſt the promiſe which Boaz made to Ruth: But ſeeing the conſent of Naomi and Ruth was yeelded to Bohaz, and that being but the firſt motion, they needed not bee preſent, and the matter at the firſt confeſſed, was at the beginning diſpatched: Out of the which wee firſt obſerue, that it is a pointe of godlineſſe, and worthy of frendſhippe, that in our ſuites wee ſhoulde at the firſt confeſſe our oppreſſions: if wee haue done any; I knowe many will commit their vniuſt dealing to the

triall of the law, looking for a doubtfull iſſue of the ſame: and will ſay if I bee condemned, the charge is but the more to my ſelfe: but I reply and ſay, why doeſt thou not confeſſe thy folly, and the iniury which thou haſt done, & ſaue ye charges wc thou ſpēdeſt in the trial, thou doſt but ad murther to thy mallice, drunkē
                  nes to thy thirſt, & prodigality to thy couetouſnes: Thou haſt already robbed thy neighbor, by thy oppreſſiō, now thou wilt ſpoyle the Lorde of thoſe his goodes, whereof hee hath made thee ſteward, by coſuming them in Lawe to defende thy iniuries: Follow the counſell of the Lorde,Mat. 5.25. agree with thy aduerſarie quickely, whileſt thou art in ye way with him, leſt he complain of thee to the iudge, and the iudge deliuer thee to the taylor, and ſo foorth: Let wiſe men ende your matters at home, abide not the verdite of the law, it is too coſtly: for as you are accomptable to your neyghbour for the vttermoſt farthing, ſo you ſhal bee anſwerable to the Lorde for euery mite, you haue miſpent, when the very money you haue laide out ſhall riſe in iudgement againſt you to condemne your contentions.
               Secondly, wee note here in Naomi and Ruth: an excellent example of a godly minde: for if Naomi would, ſhe might haue dealt with her kinſeman, and hee denying, ſhee might haue done him all the diſgrace ſet downe in the lawe, to haue pulled of his ſhooe, to haue ſpit in his face, to haue defamed him and his houſe for euer: but ſhe dealeth not ſo, ſhe would not reuenge one iniury by another, ſhee maketh the matter ſure before hande, that if he refuſed, Ruth might be married, and the other not diſgraced: So deare is the name and credite of ones neighbour to a godly perſon, that they will aduenture their owne loſſe and hinderaunce, to ſaue the honeſty of the other. Therefore ſaith Peter, it is the glorie of a man to paſſe by the infirmities of his brother, Ioſeph might haue diſcloſed the luſtes of his miſtreſſe,Gen. 39.17 18. and ſaued his owne impriſonment: but hee concealed it which wrought firſt his miſery, and then his felicitie. But oh howe fewe are there like Ioſeph in our dayes, which hauing their brethren at

uauntages, will not to their vttermoſt accuſe them. Wee haue many Zibaes which accuſe poore Mephiboſheth to Dauid, with giftes and with bribes,2. Sam. 16.3 pretending ſimplicitie, with wordes ſweeter then honye: when warre is in their heartes, their lippes haue learned their flattering ſtyle, they are of their father that olde accuſer of God his children, but as hee is caſt downe, ſo they ſhall bee condemned:Rev. 12.10. Iob. 1.10 yea euen then when it is no benefite to them, how doeth it reioyce them to ſee their neyghbours impriſoned, their enemies ſlaundered, their poſſeſſions remooued, their wealth diminiſhed, their credite abated, and they depriued of frendes and fauour at one time.
               Is this the thing that you woulde haue them doe to you? might not the Lorde haue ſuffered him to ſtande, and caſt downe you that he might haue laughed at your deſtruction. Conſider your ſelues beloued in the Lorde, and let vs be the ſchollers of this godly Naomi, if wee may get our owne with faire ſpeeches, let vs not vſe theſe threatning wordes: If wee muſt hide the truth for the benefite of our neighbours, much leſſe muſt wee conceale falſehood, that not one worde of diſgrace bee vttered to the diſcreadite of our neighbours. Oh that thoſe which contende with their neighbours woulde bee inſtructed in this doctrine; howe much woulde it moderate their malice for the benefite of their aduersaries, and bring peace vnto both, neuer to bee repented of? Wherefore laye aſide all maliciouſneſſe and guile,1. Pet. 2.1.
                        •
                     . diſſimulation, enuy, and all euill speaking, as innocente and newe borne babes: and let vs deſire the ſincere milke of the worde of God, that wee may grow to bee perfect men in Ieſus Chriſt, that as hee ſuffred and gaue no aunſwere, being led as a ſheepe before the ſhearer, which openeth not his mouth: hauing many cauſes to alleadge againſt his aduerſaries, yet in ſilence endured both their iudgemente and reproches, that wee with the ſame lenitye and meekeneſſe, ſhoulde forgiue other, euen as hee hath forgiuen vs.
               
                  Thirdely, by this alſo we obſerue, that the lawes both of God and men bee they neuer ſo ſharpe, yet in ſome cauſes they may bee moderated, according to the diſcreation of the magiſtrate, eſpecially when they reſpect priuate perſons: In this place the ſpitting on the face, and the diſgracing of the name of the man is omitted: which the magiſtrates might haue conſtrained, if they pleaſed: neyther are they to bee blamed, for the party which was moſt grieued, by this denyall was beſt pleaſed, neyther did ſhee call for extremity. And as Chriſt woulde not in his iudgement,Iohn. 8.1 condemne or accuſe the woman taken in adultery, but bidde her ſinne no more, euen ſo the rigour of the Lawe is not to bee executed vpon euery offendour, but where hope of amendment is, there may bee a teſtiſtimony of fauour. This is worthy doctrine for our dayes, wherein men lie in waite as the dragons doe for the Elephants, to get their brethren within the compaſſe of the lawe, and though God his worde & their owne conſciences condemne them, yet if the lawe ſay it, depriue men of their liuinges, Chriſtians of their liberties, ſeruantes of their freedome, in the ſeruice of God, parentes of their children, wiues of their huſbandes, Churches of their preachers, and no man dare open his mouth for them, that if Chriſt himſelfe, were on the earth againe in his humane ſhape, they neede no other argument, but this: we haue a lawe, and by our lawe hee ought to die: But woe bee vnto you ſaith the prophet, that vrge the lawes of Omri,Mich. 6.16. that is, which dare maintaine the decrees of princes againſt any of the Lordes ſeruantes: Surely it is an argument that men feare the creature aboue the Creator, which will not bee drawne from their lawes bee th
                     •
                  y neuer ſo childiſh: but in our dayes it is moſt lamentable, that any good lawes ſhoulde bee wreſted againſt the courſe of the Goſpell, which were made for the enlarging thereof, ſuch as is the forcing of men to abide with dumbe miniſters when the Goſpell preached calleth for them at the nexte Church: But I ſpeake not one worde againſt lawfull

authoritie, or againſt the lawe, but onely the partialitie of the executioners thereof, is worthy of blame, many times punniſhing ſeuerly where is no or little offence, and pardoning by ſufferance notorious blaſphemers. But let no magiſtrates thinke when they may mitigate offences, that they may altogether bury the force of the lawe, when they ſhutte their eares aagainſt the crie of them that complayne, or execute it not for fauour or frendſhippe: But on the contrarye they muſt not in matters of iudgement repell any information or euidence: but if the partie grieued require extremitie, by wiſedome they may perſwade him; but by authoritie they cannot deny him: Finally, in all thinges conſider with the Apoſtle, not onely what is lawfull, but alſo what is expedient, that charitie being ioyned with authoritie, loue may rather amende our faultes then lawe, and ſeuerity put vnto iuſtice, the greateſt faultes may haue the ſharpeſt puniſhmentes, that not the wordes, but the minde of the Law-maker may euer be conſidered.
               
                  And Bohaz ſaid vnto the elders] Nowe the ceremony being ended, the reſignation deliuered, the holy Ghoſt proceedeth to expreſſe howe Bohaz receyued it, where he firſt of all calleth witnes of the elders, and of the people, that nowe hee hath bought the inheritaunce of Elimeleches, and whatſoeuer was Mahlons, and whatſoeuer was Chilions, he hath bought at the hand of Naomi: So that here he teſtifieth with the witneſſe before ſaide, that it ſhall be as his owne in poſſeſſion foreuer.
               Where firſt of all here commeth in queſtion whether  then it were, or nowe is lawfull to tell inheritances, which by this place appeareth to be very lawfull, ſeeing Bohaz buyeth that which was Elimeleckes: & if it bee ſo lawfull, then was Naboath in great fault, that he did not depart from his in Iezreell:1 King 21.3 and ſo might haue ſaued his life. But Naboath had the expreſſe lawe of God on his ſide,Leuit. 25.23 which commaunded that the lande ſhoulde not bee ſolde to bee cut off

from any family: and giueth this reaſon of it, becauſe they were but ſtraungers in the lande, and ſoiourners, but the fee ſimple (as wee call it) was onely the Lords: Therefore Naboath was not wronge, but had the lawe of God for his defence: nor yet Bohaz did not amiſſe, which bought Elimeleches poſſeſſion or inheritaunce of Naomi. Therefore wee muſt briefly ſet downe the conditions of ſale, as they may be gathered out of the law of God.
               
                  Leuit. 25.Firſt therefore theſe are the wordes, If thy brother bee impoueriſhed and fell his poſſeſſion, then his redeemer ſhal come,Leuit. 25. euen his neere kinſeman, and buy out that which his brother hath ſolde: And if he haue no redeemer,Leuit. 26. but his hande hath gotten to buy it out. Then ſhall hee count the yeares of his ſale, and reſtore the ouerplus to whom hee ſolde it:Leuit. 27 ſo ſhal he returne to his poſſeſſion.Leuit. 28 But if hee cannot get ſufficient to reſtore to him, then that which is ſolde ſhall remaine in his hande that bought it, vntill the yeare of Iubilee: and in the Iubilee it ſhall come out, and hee ſhall returne to his poſſeſſion.
               Out of theſe wordes wee gather theſe propoſititions for certayne truth: Firſt that for pouertie it was lawfull for men to fell away their inheritaunce: Secondely, that the nexte kinſeman might redeeme it, and no man elſe beſide him that ſolde it: and they might at any time redeeme it, neyther coulde the poſſeſſour deny them. Thirdly, that no ſale of any lande was good or effectual for any time after the yeare of Iubilee: By theſe three concluſions we may trie the title: Naomi was nowe impoueriſhed, and therefore ſhe might fell her inheritaunce to whome ſhee pleaſed; Bohaz was by ſubſtitution, the next kinſeman: therefore hee might lawfully buy it: For Naboath, hee was neyther poore nor wanted, neyther was Ahab any of his kinred, and if it had once gotte into the kinges inheritaunce, who coulde euer haue required it againe.
               
                  Therefore Naboath was without blame in denying to ſell his vineyarde, and Bohaz without faulte and blame for buying of Naomies: And Boaz knew that hee had the conſent of the ſeller, and therefore hee was the bolder. Then by this wee may gather, in what cauſe it is lawfull to buy or to ſell ones inheritaunce.
               Firſt it is lawful to buy with the conſent and good will of him that ſelleth: ſo wee reade howe Abraham bought a fielde of Ephron, after he had firſt communed with his ſonnes, and had their liking of his ſuite, and after at the gate of the cittie, hee had his aſſurance,Gen. 23.17. and without this it is not lawfull at all to deale, for except the will bee free and not compelled, it is no bargayne before the Lorde, but playne robbery, and vniuſt diſpoſſeſſing, becauſe in the laſt commandement the Lorde ſaith, Thou ſhalt not couet thy neighbors fielde, or his houſe, or his oxe, or his Aſſe, or any thing that is his, whereby is forbidden euery thought of couetouſneſſe, much more forcible and vniuſt dealing, to compell men to departe from their inheritaunce: Therefore Ahab was blamed by Eliah, (though onely Ieſabell wrought the murther) becauſe hee knewe it was forcible dealing, and hee ought not to haue entred, ſeeing the meanes of his death. But how many conſtrayned purchaſes are there made, the Lorde onely knoweth, and the countrey euery where ringeth of them, where many by one meanes or other, are driuen to depart from their patrimonies, are leſt deſtitute of dwelling places, wiues without maintenaunce, children without inheritaunce, familyes brought to pouerty, by ſuch dayly and vſuall purchaſing.
               Secondly, it is lawfull to buy if it bee publiquely done, not onely for the conueyaunce or aſſuraunce, but alſo for the price: Therefore Ephron made Abraham the pryce of foure hundred ſhekels in the gate of the Cittie, and here Bohaz doth it before the elders. This is a moſt worthy conſideration, becauſe by the

neglect of this pointe it commeth to paſſe, that great lyuinges are done away for a ſonge, as the prouerbe is, young men priuately ſell their patrimonies, their fathers being aliue, for little or nothing: others which haue not ſo much worldly wit, as were to bee wiſhed, make priuate bargaynes of their landes, when they are in want or pouerty, wherein they ſell them halfe for nothing. And thus younge men are deceyued with the ſight of a little golde, vnwyſe and vnthriftie perſons are coſoned, with nothing in regarde of the value of their inheritaunce, widdowes leſte comfortleſſe, children left harbourleſſe; and the country troubled and peſtred with ſuch couetous encrochers, and why: becauſe they make ſubtill and deceytfull bargaynes in ſecreate, whereof they woulde be aſhamed, if eyther before iudges, Elders or Magiſtrates this ſale were propounded. Therefore by the rule of God his worde, wee holde him a thiefe and a robber, which hath thus bought to the hinderance of the ſeller.
               Thirdely, it is lawfull to buy for neceſſity houſe or landes, or any other thing lawfull to bee ſolde, the former conditions alwayes obſerued, but it muſt not bee for vayneglorye, or for the aduauncing of their children or poſteritye, or that they might bee lande lordes to many: Not euery one that is wealthy and hath much money muſt alway purchaſe lande: the former example of Abraham proueth this: who being a very wealthy man; yet hee neuer offered to buy any lande, till Sara his wife was deade, and that was for neceſſitie to bury her in. So did Iacob his ſonne buy a parcell of lande of Hemor the father of Shechem for an hundred peeces of ſiluer,Gen. 33.19. whereon hee pitched his tente, and builded an Altar: Hee might haue bought and purchaſed much more, as hee was able, but hee woulde not; onely a dwelling place and an Aultar roome he prouided: ſurely wee haue an infinite and great number that buy dwelling places, but fewe that giue any of their landes

or liuings to build aulters or Churches on. Nay, who ſeeth not how men ſue dayly to pull downe the aulters, and to make arrable land where they ſtand; that is, they pull perſonages and ſpirituall liuings to their neſts, they get away tythes and oblations, they enter vpon the lands and profits of the miniſtery, and I think verily in many places they are grieued that the Churches and Churchyards are ſo big, bicauſe they would haue the more profit, theſe perſons I warrant you are none of Iacobs children nor Abrahams neither, which haue taken to themſelues the houſes of God in poſſeſſion. Againſt theſe the Prophet cryeth, woe be vnto them that ioyne houſe to houſe and field to field,Iſa. 58.9. that there might be no more place, that ye may be placed by your ſelues in the mids of the earth: therefore heare their puniſhment. This ſayth the Lord is in my eares; ſurely many houſes ſhall be deſolate, euen great and faire houſes without inhabitants; This ſhall be the end of theſe couetous cormorants, who deſire to be the Lords of the earth, And if good King Dauids poſteritie within a thouſand yeares after him had not one houſe to lodge in, but euen in the ſame which was their fathers: Ioſeph and Mary were fayne to harbour in the ſtables; feare not you but your poſterities will be beggered within a hundred yeares after you, which neyther are ſo wealthy, or ſo godly as Dauid was; but I may ſooner poure out my very heart, then make any forſake their purchaſing, ſo louing a ſinne is the deſire of wealth, that men chooſe it with abundance heere for a ſeaſon, and damnation there for euer, but let the godly vſe the world as if they vſed it not, for the deſire of money is the roote of all euill.
               But now we haue laboured for the buyers, whome I know will be more carefull of their profit, then my inſtruction, let vs in a word direct the ſellers alſo before we goe from this point. If any demaund wherefore, or for what cauſes they ought, or it may be lawfull for them to ſell their poſſeſſions, I anſwere briefly, for theſe cauſes a man may and for none elſe. Firſt, to relieue  his pouertie, as being in ſicknes, for to recouer his

health, being impriſoned for ſome good cauſe or lawfull debt, being taken a captiue to pay his raunſome, or ſuch like, all this is vnderſtoode by the name of pouertie, or any other meanes whereby a man may come into pouertie: for the Lord which gaue inheritances, gaue them for the benefit of the poſſeſſors, that they might be helpes vnto them in this miſerable life; for they muſt euer eſteeme more of their life then of their lands,Gen. 47.18.19. of their libertie then their inheritance, of their welfare and health then riches or wealth,Gen. 47.20. and therefore the Lord permitted the Iewes to doe away their inheritance: and mention is made of a godly woman in the Goſpell,Mark. 5.25. that had ſpent all the ſubſtance ſhe had vpon Phiſitions,Mark. 5.26. which is reported to magnifie the goodnes of our Sauiour vnto her, which cured her for nothing, and deferred to helpe her, till ſhe had ſpent all, that ſhe might accompt more of her health, then her wealth, of the kindnes of Chriſt, then the cunning of the Phiſitions, but I neede not many reaſons to prooue this, and therefore I will leaue it.
               
                   Secondly, a man may lawfully depart with ſome of his inheritance, to helpe him that hath none at all, eyther to ſell it or giue it. So did Ephron ſell Macpelah to Abraham that had none; ſo did Hemor ſell a parcell of land to Iacob that had none, and vnto this I may referre the threſhing floore of Arannah, which Dauid bought to build an aultar on,2. Sam. 24.24. when the Lord ſtayed the plague,2. Sam. 24.25. after he had numbred the people: this was to ſpeciall vſe, and therefore for ſome ſpeciall cauſes I thinke it lawfull for men to giue or ſell their inheritance. By this we learne what to iudge of them which are ſo farre from giuing or ſelling, that it is a hart-ſore vnto them to ſee ſuch goodly hoſpitalls and almes houſes erected for the poore, although not of their coſt, yet to their griefe, for they had rather be fatted with the rent of the houſes, then poore and miſerable maimed people ſhould be fed with the reuennewes: theſe perſons thinke nothing well ſpent, but that which is beſtowed in ſurfetting and pleaſures, in coſtly apparell and dainty fare, thinking the time long

till theſe poore almes-mens gownes be turned into veluet coates, but I pray God their poſſeſſions may be hoſpitalls, not hoſpitalles their poſſeſſions. Other thinke much if a poore bodie get a little Cottage to be builded vpon the Commons or waſt grounds, they had rather haue ſtyes for theyr ſwine, then dwellings for ſuch deſtitute ſoules: ſurely let them take heed, that their owne ſtyes, I meane their houſes wherein ſuch fat hogs as themſelues are, liuing in pleaſure and in follyes, be not made worſe then the ſilly houell of the other, and God curſe thē & their poſterity, becauſe they haue hated him in his pouerty: for if he which giueth to the poore do lend to the Lord, then he which reuileth the poore, reuileth or (as Salomon ſayth) ſcorneth his maker, then he which taketh from the poore ſhall rob the Lord, and ſure his iudgement ſhall be very ſeuere, and his damnation very ſwift.
               Thirdly, it is lawfull to ſell inheritances, and to beſtowe or employ the money vpon the Church, ſo we reade of the primitiue Church, how they which had land, ſold it, and brought the money,Act. 2.45. and layd it down at the Apoſtles feete, and therefore is that excellent and fearefull hiſtory of Ananias and Saphira his wife, who keeping backe but a part of the money that was their owne, and confirming it with a lye, were ſodainely ſtroke dead. I would to God the niggards of our age would conſider this, which will depriue the poore of that which they owe them, and plucke from Church and miniſtery that which is giuen them. But of this latter diſeaſe, few are ſicke in our dayes, that they will ſell their land to giue to the Church, rather ſpend it in gluttony for their belly, then liberality for their ſoule, in good fellowſhip among ruffians, then chriſtian charity among the faithfull, clothing themſelues aboue their calling, that for a ſeaſon they may liue like Gentlemen, and euer after in wofull ſlauery: theſe ſinging fooles of all other are moſt miſerable, for their friends will not comfort them, their fellowes will forſake them, their wealth will decay, but their woe ſhall be euerlaſting.
               
                  Laſtly, by this verſe we note, that women or widdowes had the rule of their husbands inheritances, if they died without heyres, for heere it is ſayd, that Boaz buyeth it at the hand of Naomi, becauſe ſhe was her husbands heyre, and being paſt childbearing, had giuē ouer her right to Ruth: this we haue already ſhewed you was the ſinguler care which the Lord hath ouer poore deſolate widdowes, that they ſhould not be deſpiſed, although they were barren, and therefore, for their better preferment, willed the inheritance to diſcend vnto them: whereby we may ſee it is no new thing that women ſhould be inheritours, for the daughters of Iob had inheritances among their bretheren,Iob. 42.15. Numb. 36.6. the daughters of Zelopehad had their fathers lot,Numb. 36.7. and Caleb gaue his daughter Acſah with an inheritance vnto his kinſman Othoniell, which may ſuffice for proofe of this matter,Iud. 1.13.14. for the perpetuities of inheritances are condemned by God and man; but I would to God that the wealth of many women were not their vndoing, and their riches the cauſe of their caſting away; eſpecially where friends haue aſpiring mindes, there the miſery of maidens and widdowes falleth in nothing ſooner, for ſetting them aloft with wealthie portions, and forgetting what they are in nature, their riches fall to vnthriſts, and themſelues to lamentable want.
               
                  And moreouer] After the lands, he deſcendeth to his mariage, which is deſcribed in this verſe: wherein he proteſteth that he taketh the lands, that he might alſo marry with the woman, and he marrieth the woman for no other cauſe, but to ſtirre vp the name of the dead according to the commaundement of God: for what els ſhould mooue an old man, to do that in his withered age, which he refuſed in his luſty youth. By the  which we firſt of all note, how wiſely Naomi dealt with her husbands inheritance: ſhe might haue kept it to get her ſelfe a good marriage, yet ſhe giueth it to Ruth: ſhe might haue ſold it to fill her purſe, but ſhe beſtoweth it to preferre her daughter. Wherein ſhe teacheth vs, with what loue we muſt do for our children,

namely, that for them we muſt depart with our owne maintenance, and vnto their good, not only to the vttermoſt, but alſo beyond our power. And this is worthy to be noted of widdowes, which are wealthily left by their husbands, who are wont but little to care for their children, but to beſtowe their goods vpon youthfull companions: ſee heere this Naomi hauing but a daughter in law, ſhe giueth her the whole inheritance, as if ſhe had beene borne for it: and truely, the onely cauſe (in regard of our ſelues) of all our wealth is, that we might beſtow it vpon our children, how grieuous is it in many places to ſee both lands and liuings conſumed by them, which neuer ſwet for them, and many poore children to whome of right they do pertaine, to be deſtitute both of friends and maintenance, and all through the wanton mariages of their youthfull mothers, but of this matter we haue ſpoken already, and ſhall be ſufficient to remember at this time.
               Secondly, by this we may gather, that a mariage is a  meere ciuill action, becauſe in the finiſhing thereof, there is not vſed eyther Prieſt, or Leuite, as we may ſee in this place, but is onely pronounced by the man in the preſence of the elders, euen in the place of iudgement. Hence it commeth, that in auncient time we reade of mariages, but neuer celebrated in Churches, but in priuate aſſemblyes, except Princes, which were wont to make great and generall feaſts. For this inſtitution that mariages ſhould be kept in Churches, came vp of late, many hundred yeares ſince the dayes of the Apoſtles: but yet muſt not be diſanulled, but obſerued as a holy and commendable order, firſt, for the auoyding  of confuſion, that thoſe which are fit, might be ioyned together before the faithfull, ſecondly, for the  more honour of the eſtate of matrimonie, that they might know it was with all reuerēce to be vndertaken, ſeeing they came as it were euen before the face of the almighty, there to be vnited. Thirdly, that it might be  begun with moſt earneſt and ſeruent prayer, and therevpon came ye Miniſters to haue a hand in it. Fourthly, that it might be publikely knowne among all the congregation.

                   Fiftly, that thoſe mariages which were priuatly kept and concluded, might be accompted ſuſpitious and vnlawfull. Wherefore we muſt not in any wiſe breake this godly order of the Church of God, for as it was lawfull for the godly in old time to keepe them in houſes, much more may the company of the faithfull now celebrate them in Churches, alwayes remembring, that we make it no article of our faith, but hold it neceſſary onely for order and vnity.
               Thirdly by this we alſo obſerue the end of all mariages, which is firſt for the commaundement of God, and ſecondly for the increaſe of the Church. Both theſe are heere ſet downe by Boaz in theſe words, to ſtirre vp the name of the dead vpon his inheritance, and that the name of the dead be not put out from among his bretheren. This was the ſpeciall commaundement of God that he ſhould marry his kinſemans wife, and rayſe vp ſeede to his kinſeman, which was as we lately ſhewed you for the multiplying of the Church. By the which we may examine all the intentions of mariage, whatſoeuer. Firſt, if we do not take it in hand for the commaundement of God, what hope can they euer haue of the bleſſing of the Lord vpon them; like as a labourer which ſetteth himſelfe to another mans worke without his conſent, hath nothing for his paynes, euen ſo all they whatſoeuer they be, which haue married of their owne brayne, without reſpect to the law of God, can neuer haue or craue any bleſſing of the Lord vpon themſelues or their poſterity: Oh, fearefull conſideration, worthy to be conſidered of all them which vnaduiſedly go about to marry, for a wild tree bringeth foorth ſowre fruite, and wicked parents which haue no regard of holineſſe in their mariages, do ſeldome bring any wholeſome fruite to the Lord. But ſome will ſay how ſhall we knowe how or in what ſort to behaue our ſelues, that before wee marry wee might ayme at nothing beſide the commaundement of God? Hearken a little and I will briefely inſtruct you out of the word of God.
               
                  Firſt of all, the care of thoſe that will be maried, muſt be for the onely bleſſing of God, which is the very finall cauſe of this inſtitution. Therefore after the floud, the Lord in the reſtoring all things,Gen. 9.1. amongſt other confirming marriage, Moſes ſayth:Gen. 9.7. And he bleſſed Noah and his ſonnes, and ſayde, Increaſe and multiplye, ſo that they which looke for any increaſe or fruite of their marriage, muſt firſt of all be aſſured that the Lord hath bleſſed them. But how ſhall we obtayne this bleſſing of God? I aunſwere, by diligent reading of his word, and by prayer. Dauid aſking this queſtion,Pſal. 119.9. wherewithall a young man ſhall cleanſe his way? and then he aunſwereth himſelfe, and ſayth, euen by taking heed vnto thy word. And Paule ſayth, that the vnmaryed care for the things that pleaſe the Lord, as if he had ſayd,1. Cor. 7.34 they muſt remayne vnmaryed for no other cauſe but that they might the more freely giue themſelues to the ſeruice of God. If a man want faith, he may obtayne it by prayer, and if he want the bleſſing of God vpon his mariage, which is a leſſe thing then faith, may hee not obtayne it by prayer? Izaac hauing beene maryed twentye yeares, yet was without children,Gen. 25.21.22. and then hee prayed for iſſue, and the Lord gaue him two at one time, and may not prayer obtayne this for the vnmaried as well as for the maryed? yes verily, if eyther woulde take the paynes to vſe it. But oh who are they that euer in their liues once offred of theyr prayers to God to bleſſe them with wiues or husbands? that is, that they might be ſo marryed as the name of God might be glorifyed by them. Nay, what young man or woman among a thouſand in theſe dayes, that is delighted with eyther prayer or preaching, but rather affect nothing but libertie, pleaſure, and paſtime, they neuer thinke of any neede they ſtand of theſe thinges, but rather imagine that theyr youthfull dayes and yeares muſt bee conſumed in riotous ſports, and wanton wandrings, ſo that moſt men and maydens come by their wiues and husbands at feaſtings and dauncing, by dallying and playing,

                   choſen by outward apparell, not inward and ſecret vertues, which are wonne with vanitie, kept with pride, and forſakē to the deſtruction of wiues and husbands, therefore firſt ſeeke the kingdome of God, and the righteouſnes thereof, and all other things ſhall be caſt vpon you.
               
                   Secondly, the intention of them that marry for the commaundement of God, is, that thereby they might liue more ſoberly in their ſeuerall vocations; for as the wanton oxe is brideled in the yoke, ſo vnruled youth is gouerned by mariage, for if we regard the minde of them that marry, it is ſtayed vpon one, if the company of the body,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   it is bound to one, if life, it can not be ſolitary▪ if wealth, it muſt not be poſſeſſed alone.1. Pet. 3.7. Therefore Peter ſaid, husbands dwell with your wiues like men of knowledge, as if he had ſayd, in your vnmaried time you were wanderers, but now you are maried you are dwellers; in your vnmaried age you were inconſtant; but now you are maried you are as vnmoueable as a houſe; when you were ſingle, you were ignorant▪ but now you be married▪ be men of knowledge:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   and finally, when you were young, you were troubled with the deſire of many, but now you are maried you are comforted with the loue of one; and as a man without a dwelling place; ſo is the vnmaried without a companion. Such is the commoditie of mariage if it be duely conſidered, and each party rightly inſtructed, that it is as ſleepe to a weary man, as wine to the thirſtie, as a houſe to the harbourleſſe, and as a garment againſt winter; and therefore is it compared to the felowſhip of Chriſt with his Church.Eph. 5.29. How then commeth it to paſſe that men liue more riotouſly being maried then when they are vnmaried, for they amend nothing▪ but thinke all things as lawfull for them then as it was before, their houſes without their preſence, their wiues without their company, their families without their gouernment, ſo that you ſhall ſee married perſons wandring abroad, as if they were vnmaried, diſporting themſelues as ſhamefully and as looſely as any in the world: not liuing in ſobriety and modeſty

like the turtle doue, but in gaming and daunſing like the wanton goate; theſe partyes neuer marryed for the commaundement of God, but ſome raſh deſire poſſeſſed theyr mindes, and a little youthfull luſt tickled theyr fancies, much like the ſauour of iuniper, which continueth but a little while. Other are ſo farre from this point to marry, that they might liue more ſoberly, that they make their mariages the couer of their diſhoneſty, making the world beleeue they liue in perfect chaſtity, becauſe they are maried, but priuily they giue themſelues to moſt filthy adulteryes: but the Apoſtle ſayth, mariage is honourable, but adulterers God will iudge, that is, will vtterly condemne;Heb. 13.4. and if their behauiours were well examined, you ſhould finde this the cauſe, that their houſes cannot hold them, the filthineſſe of theſe partyes is condemned by the very bruite beaſts, and ſhall be puniſhed by the ſeueare iudgement of God: for they which make the members of Chriſt the members of harlots, ſhall be with harlots the members of the deuill, therefore marry for modeſty, not for filthineſſe, that your vngouerned age may be brideled with the conſideration of your preſent eſtate, your wearyed dayes may be quieted in the bed of godly, holy, and honourable mariage.
               Thirdly, they which marry for obedience vnto God, muſt onely minde godly and not wealthy matches, they muſt looke on the heart not on the face, they muſt waigh the diſpoſition, and not the riches, they muſt not ſay as the deuill ſaid to Chriſt, all this will I giue,Math. 4. Gen. 34.15. but they muſt ſay, as Iacobs ſonnes ſayd to Shechem and Hemor, if you will be circumciſed you ſhall haue our ſiſter: that is, if you feare God, and receiue his true knowledge, if you loue his word and honour his ſacraments, if you can benefit the ſoules as well as the bodies: But a man may weary himſelfe many dayes before he finde any of this inclination, for parents will denye their conſents, if they ſee not the riches for their daughters husbands, or ſonnes wiues, keeping them in continuall burning, for lacke of this wealthie

licour; And I knowe many parents which haue caſt off their children for poore mariages, but neuer any for the wealthy, were they neuer ſo wicked▪ therefore whoſoeuer for this cauſe, denieth right to his childe, ſhall be more faultie for their vngodly diſpoſition, then the children for their vnaduiſed mariage. Now in theſe dayes, it is a wonder to ſee how the mindes of men and women can loue for wealth, that euen as a harlot humbleth her ſelfe for money to him, whome otherwiſe ſhe would not looke vpon, ſo men and women will marry themſelues for wealth, where if there were pouertye, they would thinke them vnworthie to be theyr ſeruaunts. I maruaile if the heathen lawe were now in force, that no man ſhoulde giue any thing to theyr daughters marriage, in what time of theyr dayes would theſe men marry, truely I thinke they would neuer marry, except it were to make drudges of their wiues. But theſe are not of Boaz his minde, for he marrieth a ſtraunger who had but little wealth, becauſe the Lord ſo commaunded to take his kinſmans wife; although he might haue refuſed, yet he was contented for this cauſe, to buy her as he ſayth in this verſe, to teach vs, that if God bid vs to marry, that is, if we finde in our owne conſciences that we cannot liue otherwiſe, then rather aduenture thy wealth, then the diſpleaſure of God. But ſome will ſay, is it not lawfull to deſire and to ſue for wealthie marriages? Yes verily with this affection, that thou like thy choiſe as well if there were little,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   as now there is much. And therefore thou muſt euermore remember theſe cautions, both in  the chooſing and vſing of a wealthie marriage. Firſt, that thou deſire it, to the intent thou mayeſt bee more able to doe good to thy bretheren that want, for it is a more bleſſed thing to giue then to receyue.Act. 20.35.
                   Secondly, that thou mayeſt the more freely giue thy ſelfe priuately, and publikely, to the ſeruice of God; for wee knowe that pouertie taketh our greateſt time to labour for wife and family, but the wealthie neede leſſe labour, and may applie the

more time to the ſeruice of God, therefore was it that Paule ſayd,1. Cor. 7.34 the maryed care for the things of this life to pleaſe theyr wiues: ſhewing, that it is one miſery vpon the poore when they are maryed, that they are troubled about worldly and neceſſarye prouiſion, but if theſe things be ſupplyed by a good marriage, thou mayeſt prayſe God with the greater diligence.
               But who are they which haue deſired or obtayned a wealthie marriage for eyther of theſe cauſes? if the poore ſhould goe in collection for reliefe of them which for this occaſion haue richly ioyned themſelues, what ſhould they gather? or how farre ſhould they goe? to how many perſons might they come, before they get a ſhilling? Truely for this cauſe they deſire them, ſome, that they might lauiſh out the more in riotous expenſes, with the rich man in the Goſpell, to ſeede in pleaſure, to be clothed in ſilke, to mayntayne dogges, houndes, haukes, horſes, and retinues of idle men, but neuer the Church of God fareth the better for them. Agayne by their wealth, they haue idleneſſe and time to wander abroade, heere to feaſt and to make merry, there to playe and diſporte themſelues in bodilie exerciſes, and worldlie vanities, but neuer one houre the more is ſpent in the ſeruice of God, but much the leſſe, for the Deuils ſweete and pleaſant baits drawe away theyr mindes from the conſideration of theyr owne miſeries. Agayne, they are many times a thouſand folde more clogged with the cares of their wealth, then the pooreſt ſoule to prouide bread for his family, by his bodily labour. Laſtly, theyr deſire is to leaue great poſſeſſions to theyr poſteritie, that the honour of theyr houſes may be increaſed, and the name of theyr memory might bee euerlaſtingly recorded, ſo that neyther the glory of God, the promoting of the Goſpell, the relieuing of the faithfull, or the ſuccouring of Ieſus Chriſt hymſelfe, is any part of the thought of theſe couetous wretches, but as they deſire the inheritances of the Lord

to be their portion in this preſent life, ſo they haue them for the canker of their ſoules, the ruſt to conſume them, the care to torment them, the feare to forſake them, the loue to enioy them, the trauaile to increaſe them, and the reckoning for abuſing them to their endleſſe confuſion. Therefore except the Lord doe build the houſe, their labour is but in vaine that build it, except the Lord make the marriage, the riches of Salomon cannot continue them, for better is a little that the righteous hath,Pſal. 57.16. then the great poſſeſſions of the vngodly.
               
                   Laſtly, he that marrieth for obedience vnto God, muſt haue this care to prouide before hand things honeſt and lawfull for the preſent maintenance of wife and family.Gen. 24.35. Therefore when Abrahams ſeruant came to the City of Nachor, among others which he told vnto Laban,Rebecca. and the mother, of Ribkah, he ſhewed them what cattell, and flocks, ſeruants and maidens his maiſter had, which all ſhould be Izaaks, thereby ſignifying, that all neceſſary prouiſion for their maintenance was alreadie procured, and there wanted nothing, but a wife for Izaak.Gen. 30.32.33. So Iaakob after his foureteene yeares ſeruice with Laban, couenaunteth to haue the profit of the flocks which ſhould be ſpotted, and this was when he knew he was to depart from his father in law, and therefore was bound to prouide for himſelfe. Now this prouiſion is not ſo meant, as though euery one were bound to get all things before hand which are needefull to marriage, but it is required that euery one ſhould procure ſomewhat according to their degree, and the maintenance of their calling. This point is clearer then the ſunne, and it ſerueth to the reproouing of them, which runne headlong to marry one day, but fall into wofull beggery the next, neither houſes to dwell in, labour to worke on, meate to ſuſtaine them, money to procure them, friends to relieue them, or credit to helpe them, onely wiues and husbands they muſt needes haue, not caring what ſhall become of them afterwarde. And truely, if the hurt did onely redound to theyr

owne hinderance, the pity was the leſſe, but wofull it is to tell how theyr miſerable poſteritye are thereby (euen thorough their parents raſhnes) brought to euerlaſting pouertye, and ſuch as is moſt lamentable, for theyr mindes are not inſtructed, they haue no knowledge of the true God, neyther can they pray to theyr comfort, or hope for any ſaluation. If it were but the labour and pouertye of the bodye, it were much to be deſired▪ and nothing to be feared, but being the endaungering of both body and ſoule, how much is it to be diſliked, that any for their owne luſts ſhould leaue their wretched poſteritye to the power of the deuill. Therefore beloued, counſell your acquaintance to be carefull for theyr children as well as themſelues, firſt to try and then truſt, firſt to prepare ſomewhat, that if ſicknes come or charges come, or are ouertake thee, yet then thou mayeſt comfort thy ſelfe with thy owne gotten goods, and rather be helpefull, then chargeable to any.
               Fourthly, by this that Boaz ſayeth, he taketh Ruth to wife, for to ſtirre vp the name of the dead, and that the name of the dead be no more forgotten among his brethren in the gate of his place: We note, that our mariages muſt be taken in hand alſo to this end, for the multiplying of the Church of God; we haue alreadie ſhewed how one cauſe of this brothers mariage was for that vſe and purpoſe, and in this place not vnneceſſary to confirme. For the lawe of this mariage was ſpeciall onely for God his people, and therefore for the augmenting of the number of the Lords flocke. And as this was among the Iewes, that euery family might haue ſome temporall inheritours, euen ſo is it among the Gentiles, that if it be poſſible, eueryone ſhould bring one infant or other, to be an inheritour of the Lords kingdome. By the which parents are taught to be more carefull for the education and inſtruction of their children, then for their procreation and birth, for they are made the fathers and mothers of Chriſt in his members; therefore

they muſt not leaue him to Herod, that is, they muſt not giue their children to the power of Sathan by theyr negligence and want of teaching: they are accurſed that lay ſtumbling blocks before the blinde, and ſhall not they alſo that leade them into the ſea, where is nothing but drowning? euen ſo if godleſſe parents doe le
                     •
                  de theyr children and innocent babes into damnable ignorance, who ſhall aunſwere for their ſoules? ſhall not the authors of this deſtruction? Had not parents neede then to looke to themſelues, for if they haue as much golde as Salomon had, and as great inheritances as Caleb had, and as much poſſeſſion of Cattell as Iob had, yet if they be not able to bring vp their children in the feare of God, it were better for parents and children they had neuer beene borne, then miſerably to liue in wealth, and bee euery houre in daunger of damnation. But how then will you ſay, muſt we be carefull for the inſtruction of our children? I aunſwere, you muſt be carefull of theſe two things: firſt, that you teach them that which is good, ſecondly, that you giue no euill example vnto them.
               Concerning the firſt, for the teaching of them the truth, you muſt firſt teach them the matter of theyr faith, and ſecondly how to pray. The matter of theyr faith, is contayned in the twelue articles, commonly called our creede or beliefe, which euery father and mother is bound to teach theyr children, with the pure vnderſtanding thereof, and as they be able to ſhewe them the proofes thereof out of the word of God, I meane as the children be able to receiue it. Heerein, they muſt inſtruct them of the miſerable eſtate of mankinde after their fall, by the vſe and vnderſtanding of the morall lawe, contayned in the two tables of the tenne Commaundements▪ with the proofes thereof out of the ſcripture, and the deliuerance by the death and bloudſheading of Ieſus Chriſt the eternall and onely begotten ſonne of God.
               
               
               
                  Againe, you muſt teach them to pray according as the Lord hath taught vs in that forme which we call the Lords prayer,Math. 6.9. with the vnderſtanding thereof out of the word of God, for except you teach them what they pray for by the vnderſtanding of it, you were as good to teach them in Greeke or Latine as in Engliſh. For there are many thouſands in England that call God Father in their prayers, but I knowe not that there be any which knowe the meaning of the word. I my ſelfe haue reaſoned with many both young and olde, and of men of good calling in the world, about that one word, which is the eaſyeſt and playneſt in all the word of God, but ſome fewe excepted, which haue laboured for knowledge in the hearing of Sermons, I neuer met with man, woman, nor childe, that coulde giue mee any reaſonable aunſwere vnto this queſtion beſide this, that God made them, and therefore is theyr Father, which euery Iewe and almoſt euery Pagan knoweth as well as they: Therefore as our righteouſneſſe muſt exceede the righteouſneſſe of the Scribes and Phariſies, Iewes and Gentiles, ſo muſt our knowledge alſo, for by our knowledge of Chriſt wee are iuſtified to be hys members.Iſa. 53.17. And although wee repeate the Lordes prayer a thouſand times euery day, and vnderſtand it not, we doe but bable before the Lord, taking his name in vaine, vſing it in our lips, when our hearts haue no vnderſtanding, and therefore our prayers are without fruite.
               Laſtly, if you your ſelues doe not walke before them without reproofe, in pure and ſanctified conuerſations, whatſoeuer you teach them, you preſently tread out againe, for ſimple people and young children liue by examples, and not by precept: If you teach them to worſhip God, you muſt alſo before their faces, worſhip the ſame, that they may practiſe by your example. If you bid them that they ſweare not, you your ſelfe muſt be carefull not

to ſweare, or elſe they will not beleeue you; for as the people looke vpon the life of their paſtour, ſo the young children beholde the ſteps of their parents. And we ſee in bruite beaſts that examples are much more effectuall then precepts; they cannot ſpeake, yet how do they traine vp their young ones. It is reported of the Harts of Scithia, that they teach their young ones to leape from banke to banke, from rocke to rocke, from one turfe to another by their owne example, leaping before them, which otherwiſe they would neuer practiſe, by which meanes when they are hunted, no beaſt can euer take them. Euen ſo, if you goe before your children in examples while they are young. Sathan the hunter and roaring Lion ſhall neuer haue them for his pray. When they learne to ſpeake, they take the words from our owne mouthes, euen ſo when they ſhall learne to worſhip, feare, loue, honour, and pray vnto the Lord, let them take you for their examples, as Iacob did Abraham and Izaak.Gen. 31.53.
               
               Now let vs giue prayſe to God.
            
            
               
               The fourteenth Lecture.
               
                  
                     
                        Chap. 4. ver. 11.12.
                     
                     
                        11 And all the people that were in the gate, and the elders ſaide, we are witneſſes: The Lorde make the wife that commeth into thy houſe, like Rahel and Leah, which twain did build the houſe of Iſrael, & that thou mayeſt doe worthily in Ephrathah, and bee famous in Bethlehem.
                     
                        12 And that thy houſe be like the houſe of Pharez, whom Thamar bare vnto Iudah, of the ſeede which the Lorde ſhall giue thee of this young woman.
                  
               
               
                  AS we haue hitherto heard of Boaz and his kinſeman, the one in reſigning, & the other in receyuing his right, in the place of iudgement, and the preſence of the elders and people: So now the holy Ghoſt proceedeth to declare vnto vs, the behauiour of this latter ſort at this marriage of Boaz: which is their aunſwere vnto that ſpeech of Boaz, when hee calleth them to witneſſe the bargaine.
               The wordes doe eaſily deuide themſelues into twoe partes, the firſt is their confeſſions to bee witneſſes of the contract, in theſe wordes: Then ſpake all the people and elders, we are witneſſes. The ſecond part is the praier they make for Boaz and Ruth in the nexte wordes, conſiſting of two partes; the firſt is the fruitfulneſſe of Ruth, when they pray ſhe may be like Rahel and Leah: that he may bee wealthy in Ephrathah, and famous in Bethelehem: The ſecond member of this ſecond parte is for the bleſſing of God vppon the poſteritie of theſ
                     •
                   two new married perſons: In the 12. verſe, that their houſe might bee like the houſe of Pharez the ſonne of Aidah, which till that time, had the cheefeſt dignitie in the tribe of Iudah, and ſo continued till the ſcepter

was taken from Iudah, and the lawgiuer from between his feete, which was almoſt fifteene hundred yeares, vntill the raigne of the Idumean Herode: Of theſe partes let vs briefly ſpeake in order, by the aſſiſtance of God his heauenly ſpirite, and the permiſſion of the time.
               
                  And all the people] Theſe wordes as we ſhewed you, are the firſt parte, wherein the rulers and people acknowledge their teſtimony with one conſent, freely yeelding vnto the requeſt of Bohaz, and willingly reioycing at that ſo ſtraunge a matter, when one of the chiefe of their elders, for loue of the lawe of God, woulde to his owne diſcommodity, marrie with a ſtraunger, and ſo baſe a woman, looking neyther on birth nor wealth, but on the hidden man of the hearte, making vertue his choiſe, and religion his portion: Out of the which we note.
               Firſt, that it is the dutie of the godly willingly in any good matter to giue their teſtimonie for their brethren: for men in this latter age are grow
                     •
                  n ſo feareful, that they, will hardely teſtifie the truth, for dreade of ſome euil that might enſue thereby, theſe perſons are not of the minde of theſe godly Iewes, both Elders and other in this place, which of their owne accorde, giue witneſſe vnto Bohaz for the purchaſe of his lande, and the marriage of his wife,1 Sam. 12.4. 5 ſo wee reade the people witneſſed with Samuell when Saule was a choſen king yea againſt their owne ſelues, becauſe they had refuſed him, to bee their king, and chooſed a king to raigne ouer them, after the manner of the heathen. This is the more worthy to bee conſidered in this place, becauſe this poeple did not after any ſcoffing manner, but ſoberly and in the feare of God (as appeareth by their prayer) witneſſe this contract vnto Bohaz: the world in theſe dayes, if the like thing ſhoulde fall out, that an old man in the preſence of ſo great a congregation, ſhoulde take to his wife ſo young a woman, would rather mocke, ſcorne and diſdaine it, then with ſuch reuerent modeſty pray for it: For herein the world ſheweth it ſelfe, which is wont to condemne that in others,

which in themſelues they highly commende, and to looke but vpon the outwarde appearance, diſcerning and iudging but with bodily eyes and carnall mindes, yet here theſe Iewes Bethlemites, ſhall ſpeake for the godly not deriding ſtraunge actions, not denying their voyces to a lawfull condition; not iudging but with a ſpirituall eye, pearcing through the barke of humane body, into the ſoule of a godly olde man: and this is the more commendable becauſe the magiſtrates and elders themſelues ioyne them to the people in ſo godly proceeding, by whoſe example it is no doubt, the wauering multitude was much encouraged. And this teacheth vs how excellent is the profeſſion and forwardeneſſe of men in authoritie, vpon whom the eyes of the common wealth dependeth: they are neuer alone, but as all beaſtes and creatures followed Noah into his arke, becauſe hee went before; ſo all ſortes will followe their diſpoſition, be it good or euill: Wee reade of the wicked iudges of Iezraell which condemned innocent Naboath, had alſo wicked witneſſes againſt him,1. King. 21.12.1
                        •
                     
                   for ſuch as Ahab and Iezabel were, ſuch were their iudges, and ſuch as the iudges were, the ſame were the people, if they be godly, the lightes of their liues will ſhine vnto others; if they bee profane, their darkeneſſe is like the darkenes of Egipt which ſpread it ſe;lfe ouer all the land. Oh how comfortable is your preſence at our godly aſſemblies to ye diſpiſed members of Chriſt: if you come, many come: if you abide at home, many follow your ſteppes, the ſouldiours will followe their captaynes, into the hotteſt ſkirmiſhes, but without them, it is a griefe to go into the eaſieſt battels, ſo right worſhipful, if you continue your diligence in hearing the Goſpell, wee your ſubiectes and ſeruantes will followe you to the fartheſt, but if you fall away, wee are diſcouraged alſo: one worde of your mouthes in the commendation of goodneſſe, is like golden apples in diſhes of ſiluer; but one ſteppe of your trauaile to the mountaine of Sion, the company of the faithfull is is like the companye of Ionathan and his armour bearer,1 Sam. 14.16. to driue a whole armie of vngodly Philiſtines from the tentes of

Gods saintes:Iud. 7.20 If Gideon be once named, what are the companie of the Madianites: if the magiſtrate or gentleman frequent the exerciſes of religion, all ye mouthes of the ſwiniſh Atheiſtes, which treade the pearles of the Goſpell vnder their feete, are ſtopped. Looke vppon the Eunuch to Queen Candaces,Act. 8.27. Luc. 14. which came euery year many hundred miles to worſhip at Ieruſalem: he was a noble man, yet it was diſcredite to his honour to bee diligent in God his ſeruice. Looke vpon that noble Theophilus,Act. 11. to whome Luke dedicateth his bookes, when all the worlde perſecuted Chriſt, yet hee ſuffered his name to be formoſt in the Goſpel, that none ſhould be diſcouraged at the profeſſion of Chriſt, when ſuch a noble man woulde ſuffer his name to goe publikely in the booke. Looke vpon the noble woman of Theſſalonica,Act. 17.4 which in greateſt daunger ioyned themſelues to the profeſſion of the Goſpell. Looke vpon that excellent Lady, to whome Iohn writeth his ſeconde epiſtle, and her ſiſter alſo, whoſe children fauoured and confeſſed the Goſpel, as well as the parentes, the day would not ſuffice to follow all that I might; theſe went before in the worlde; and before in the Lorde, that is, they were noted in wealth, but notable in religion, they were ſingular in authoritie, but excellent in chriſtianity, the memory of their wealth is loſt, but the recorde of their faith remayneth regiſtred in God his booke for euer. Theſe men and women were worthy of their places, ſuch as coulde rule their riches by the worde, feede their ſeruantes with the Goſpell, and clothe their ſoules with Ieſus Chriſt.
               Secondly, by this wee note, that ſeeing they all witneſſed, and they all prayed for Boaz, the dutie of them that are gathered together in any godly aſſembly, which is to ioyne themſelues in the ſame holy exerciſes, if they heare the other muſt heare; if they pray the other muſt pray: if they ſing, the other muſt alſo ſing: for this is the felowſhippe of the ſaintes, or els nothing is: When we read the church of God continued together in breaking breade:Act. 2.46: it is alſo ſaide they continued in prayer, as if the holy Ghoſt had ſaide, as if euery one did eat bread.

ſo euery one did pray to the Lorde, as it auaileth not a hungry man, to ſee another eat, & he haue none, but rather increaſeth his deſire, ſo if you be euery day & hour where praiers are made, & your ſelues taſt not of them,Acts. 4.23.31. it doth but increaſe your damnation: So wee read when the Apoſtles were forbidden to preach in the name of Chriſt, they came to their fellowes and lift vp their voices with one accorde to the Lorde, and when they had prayed, the place was ſhaken where they were aſſembled, and they all were filled with the holy Ghoſt, and ſpake the word of God boldly, ſuch is the effect of God his faythful, when they pray vnto him with one accord, like the aſſault of the four windes vpon Iobs childrens houſe, which not onely ſhooke but alſo ouerturned the ſame: many handes make a great labour to be lightly diſpatched, and many mens prayers doe pull downe the mercyes of God vpon vs. This I think is very needfull for our dayes, wherein this dulneſſe is growne ſo groſſe, that among a churchfull of hearers, you ſhall haue very fewe which are not faultie in this doctrine: for it is a world to ſee howe many haue their bodies at the ſermons, but their ſoules and affections are wandering in a thouſande matters: theſe pray not when we pray, heare not when wee preach, neyther ſing when wee ſing. What profite haue theſe perſons by our prayers, or preaching: ſurely they are idols, they haue tonge but ſpeake not, eares but heare not, eyes but they ſee not. And this is moſt lamentable, to ſee many vpon whom the Lorde hath beſtowed this gift of reading or learning, to come hande ouerhead to Churches, without eyther booke or minde to profite themſelues or other: Thus they bury the graces of God in them, they quench the fire of the holy ſpirite; they looſe the coſtes of their parentes, which they beſtowed to bring them to learning; they diſdayne to ſing with the faithfull, they abhorre the labours of their youth, and mocke the Lord with their preſence: Looke vpon it my brethren, for if the Lorde haue giuen any of you learning, that you are able to reade his worde, then hee hath planted you to beare fruite in his owne orcharde, but if you vſe

not this gift then you are fruitleſſe trees, and the Lorde will cut you downe and caſt you into vnquencheable fire, if you ſay you haue no books: I aunſwere, the fault lyeth in your ſelues, for if you bee poore aſke the godly and your want ſhall bee ſupplyed: if you bee wealthy ſaue ſome of your idle expenſes to ſpende vppon ſuch a holy buſineſſe. If you ſay you forget your bookes behinde you, I aunſwere, it is a ſigne you care but little for your iourneys ende, for if you had that reuerence, to come prepared to the exerciſes of the faithfull which you ought to haue, you coulde not forget your bibles, nay you ſhoulde rather forget your apparell, then your bookes, if you conſidered as it becommeth you. But ſome ſay, they vnderſtande well enough though they ſay not amen to our prayers, and though they ſing not to the Lorde with vs: but Paule ſayth to ſuch,1. Cor. 14.16.17. that they doe no good to their brethren, becauſe they edifie them not, and that it is better in the Church to ſpeake fiue wordes to inſtruct others, then ten thouſande for his owne benefite: for in the Chuch wee are aſſembled for our brethren, not for ourſelues onely, and whoſoeuer prayeth not with his brethren in the Church or congregation, doth breake the fellowſhippe of the faithfull, and ſtandeth for a cipher among the ſayntes: Therefore if you haue any care of your duety to the Lord, of the loue of ye faithful, of obedience to your parents, of increaſing your talent of learning, or the ſaluation of your owne ſoules, both magiſtrate and ſubiect, elders and people, riche and poore, olde and younge, men and women, fulfill the expectation of the godly, praye when wee pray, ſing with vs when we ſing, heare vs when wee preach: for with ſuch ſacrifice is the Lord pleaſed.
               
                  The Lorde make] Now wee haue made an ende of the firſt parte, let vs go to the ſecond, which is the prayer of theſe people and elders, the firſt member whereof is contayned in theſe wordes, wherein they pray for the fruitfulneſſe of Ruth, alleadging an example to teſtify the loue they beare to Bohaz that they deſire his wife to bee as fruitfull as eyther Leah, or Rahell, who

builded the houſe of Iſrael, ſo that they would haue him the father of much people, in ſo much as his name both of wealth and children might aduance the dignity of Bethlehem Ephrathah.
               Firſt therefore hence we note the duetie of all the godly which is to pray for the welfare one of another, but eſpecially in marriage, for the prayers of the faithfull are as needfull for the married as ſkilfull mariners in the boate of paſſengers. Therefore wee reade of fewe godly marriages in the ſcripture, but they were celebrated with prayer,Gen. 24.60. when Rebecca was married to Iſaake, her mother, brother and frends prayed that ſhe might grow vp into thouſand thouſandes; and her ſeed to poſſeſſe their enemies gate: and in this place theſe frendes of Bohaz pray the like for Ruth, for what make the peoples preſence, the multitude of lookers, the number of acquaintaunce, at the time of celebrating marriages, excepte it bee to pray for the parties, wee haue ſhewed you the laſt Saboath, that for the ignorance of the people, which coulde not pray, came the miniſters to haue a hande in it, for ſupplying their wante: and howe lamentable is it to ſee in many places, and moſt perſons that are marryed, where their company are none but godleſſe ruffians, ignoraunt Atheiſtes, prophane ſwearers, and notable blaſphemers, to bee preſent at their vnhappy weddinges, what prayers can theſe powre forth, for their newe marryed frendes, can the Cockatrice breath forth any thing but poyſon, or the ſpider ſpinne any ſounder cloth then her webbe; no more can theſe perſons but curſe them with their prayers, not bleſſe them with their curſinges: Is it not a worlde to ſee howe many agaynſt their marriages compaſſe the countrey, ſome to prouide delicate diuerſities of meates, to feede both the belly and the eye, other to inuite their friendes which come ruffling into the Churches, in ſilkes, veluets, ſattins, and ſofte apparel, and ſome to decke vp themſelues in braue clothing, againſt their mariage day, but neuer one thought for the faythfull prayer of the godly, that their proſperous lyfe may bee bleſſed in

wedlocke, this they ought to be moſt careful for, and yet not to leaue the other vndone, but godly prayers are better then great portions, and it is better to haue poore Chriſt at your weddinges, then a thouſand thouſande of theſe gliſtering gallantes. Truely in theſe dayes how doe men and women prouide for mirth, not for modeſtie, that their day of marriage may bee ioyfull with worldly diſportes, not godly with Chriſtian exerciſes: they buy & hire muſitians to paſſe the time in pleaſant dauncing, but neuer entreate or ſpeake one word to the godly, to beſtow their hearty prayers vpon them. Let therefore beloued, this bee our direction, that as we marry for the Lorde, not for the world, ſo we ſtudie for prayer, and not for pleaſure.
               Secondly, by this wee gather that the greatteſt bleſſing in marriage is the bearing of children, the bleſſing vpon the vyne, is to bring many grapes, the bleſſing vpon the earth is to bee fruitful in bringing and ſpringing much corne, and paſture: the bleſſing on the ſea, is the multiplying of the fiſh, and the bleſſing of marriage is many children: Therefore in this place they pray that Ruth might bee like Rahel and Leah, which builded all Iſraell, that is, they were the mothers of a greate nation, they multiplyed in their poſterity to a number like the ſtarres of heauen.Gen. 9.1. For this cauſe the firſt bleſſing vpon mankinde after the floode, was that they ſhoulde increaſe and fill the earth, for this cauſe the fathers deſired children ſo much, and the ouerloue of many children, encreaſed the multitude of their wyues: & for this cauſe the Apoſtle ſaith,
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 2.15 that women through bearing of children ſhall bee ſaued, if they continue in fayth, and loue, and holyneſſe with modeſty. For all other bleſſings may be had without marryage, wealth and ryches, comfort and frends, honour and pleaſure, quietneſſe and reſt, may be founde in the liues of vnmarried perſons, onely children muſt come of a grafted ſtocke, which is a holy and ſanctified marriage, or wedlocke: When Abraham wanted a ſonne he prayed for one: when Rebecca was barren, Iſaacke prayed for her, and ſhe conceaued: When Mauoah wanted

children, he prayed, and the Lorde gaue him Sampſon: when Amah was barren, ſhee prayed and obtayned Samuell: and when Zacharie and Elizabeth had no iſſue, by prayer they obtayned Iohn Baptiſt. So they accompted of their marriage without children, as a faire and pleaſant garden without fruites, and as the one doth fructifie by ſeaſonable ſhowers, ſo the other doth multiply by faythfull ſupplications: Therefore here this people of God pray for Bohaz and Ruth, that many pleaſant twigges may ſpring out of their fruitful bodies. By the which wee ſee the ready remedy for barrenneſſe, which are godly and zealous prayers, powred forth into the eares of the Almighty, that he would remoue his hande from puniſhing, and withdrawe the curſe of barrenneſſe from penitent ſinners. But in our prayers we muſt alway take heede that wee appoint not the Lord what he ſhall giue vs, eyther ſonnes or daughters, but reſt vpon the will of God to receyue eyther of both. And indeed be it that children are the greateſt bleſſing of marriage, yet all things conſidered, it is much happier to bee barren, for our miſerable dayes, adn ſinfull liues call for a ſcourge, and once more the ſaying of Chriſt ſhall be fulfilled, that there ſhall be woe to them that are with childe,Mat. 24 and that giue ſuck in thoſe daies, yea vndoubtedly our poſteritie count them happy that are vnborne, and themſelues ſhall wiſh with Iob & Ieremy they had neuer ſeene the ſunne. Oh who are they that haue any deſire of many children? Looke vpon the worlde, it falleth to Atheiſme looke vpon the Church, it declineth to errour: looke vpon the Goſpell, it is perſecuted by the Deuill, and viewe euery degree, if corruption groweth not vpon them: truely, truely as Eſau ſaide, the dayes of mourning for my father will ſhortly come, ſo may all the faithfull ſay,Gen. 27.43. the day of mourning for ye Goſpel and knowledge wil one day come, and the Lorde knoweth how ſoone. Therefore if you woulde leaue your children to be atheiſtes, your iſſue to bee heretickes, your poſterity to bee afflicted, and all your ofſpring to bee corrupted, and miſerably puniſhed in this life, or eternally plagued in the life to

come, then deſire little children, be it you can prouide landes to maintaine them, teachers to inſtruct them, learning to defend them, honour to aduance thē, frends to aſſiſt them, & caſtels of ſecurity to keep them from the hurt of the world: yet alas, alas, into how many thouſand aduerſities may their ſoules deſcend, I ſpeake not this to diſcourage any from deſiring children, but I admoniſh from the Lorde that you bee wiſe in your petitions, and thinke as well of your infantes miſery, as your owne ſuffering: nowe you deſire eaſe without paines, but they in all manner of afflictions may ſende vp cries to the heauens and not bee heard. Oh that all degrees both marryed, and vnmarried would haue pitty on their poſterity, before they be borne, then ſhoulde fewer be vagabondes then now are, & more be prouided for then nowe can bee, then ſhould men and women for their childrens ſake amend their looſe and deſperate behauiour not fit for pagans, much leſſe for chriſtians, left the children ſhoulde be plauged for the fathers fault: Aſſuredly beloued, the Lord hath ſpoken it, that if your children proue wicked, they ſhall ſuffer and beare the ſinnes of all their aunceſtors, yea though they be dead many hundred yeares agoe.
               Thirdely, by this prayer of theſe elders and people, we note that for the helping of our weaknes in prayer, and releeuing of our wantes, we may ſet before vs the goodnes of God vnto others. In this place they pray that Ruth may be as fruitful as Rahel and Leah which were the wiues of Iacob, who bare him eight ſonnes & one daughter, expreſſing their hearty prayer for Bohaz and Ruth, by the example of theſe twaine. The like we may reade of the Apoſtles,Act. 4.25. when they prayed after their deliuerance from the rulers and elders, they alleadge Dauid for their helpe, as he ſpeaketh in the ſecond Pſalme. For wee many times know not what to aſke as wee ought, but the ſpirite which wrought theſe giftes in the fathers, helpeth our infirmities by the examples of the ancient godly, that wee ſhoulde aſke the ſame graces which they enioyed, to leade the ſame lyues which they liued, and obtayne the ſame

crowne, wherewith they are all rewarded. Yet we muſt alway remember the rule of the Apoſtle, that this is our aſſuraunce,1. Ioh. 5.14. if wee craue any thing according to his will, wee receiue it: that is, wee muſt not deſire the leaſt thing in worldly affaires, but vnder this condition, If it bee thy will O God, becauſe the Lorde is not bounde to giue vs any thing, no more then wee are to giue euery beggar that aſketh an almes of vs, but if we abſolutely craue without this exception, we breake the lawe of prayer and bring the maieſty of God into bondage by our petitions.
               This teacheth vs this profitable leſſon, that before we pray, wee ſhoulde learne and conſider our wantes by the worde of God, that we aſke not at the handes of the Almighty, any thing beſide that which is godly, honeſt and lawfull: for many I am perſwaded, doe ſodainely and vnaduiſedly ſtarte vp into the preſence of the Lorde with raſh and vngodly deſires, becauſe they want the knowledge of the word of God, and the due conſideration of thoſe thinges which they wante. Of this ſort are all the prayers of the papiſtes, for they neither vnderſtand their prayers in a ſtraunge tongue, nor yet will examine them by the worde of God: Vnto theſe I adde the prayers and wiſhes of the ignorant multitude, which are as farre from the 
                     〈◊〉
                   yers of the faithfull, as the Moone is from the earth. For as it is impoſſible for a man to go without his legges, or to ſee without his eyes, ſo is it impoſſible for theſe to praye without the knowledge of the Goſpell: For in our prayers wee muſt ſpeake to the Lorde in his owne tongue, as he ſpeaketh in his worde, but what can theſe perſonnes bring out of the treaſures of the holy ſcriptures? ſcant one ſentence in the whole goſpel rightly vnderſtood, how thē can they bring the matter of theyr whole prayers, if they want but one thing that will ſuffice? but who is liuing which ſtandeth not in neede of many thouſande mercyes? But I knowe their olde excuſe, for they ſay they praye according to the Scripture,Mat. 6.9. when they repeate the Lordes prayer, which is ſet downe in the ſcripture:

to whom I aunſwere, they doe well if they vnderſtand it, but where doe they finde thoſe wiſhes to grow rich, thoſe curſes vpon them with whome they are angry, whether it be man or beaſt, and tell me the vnderſtanding of one petition in the Lordes prayer. Therefore beloued, pray in ſpirit, but pray in vnderſtanding alſo, vſe the ſcripture for the rule of your ſupplication, for as no man can ſay that Ieſus is the Lord, but onely by the Spirit of God; ſo none can pray rightly, but by ye knowledge of the Goſpel: If you once entertain this knowledge of God his worde, then you will doe with it as a cunning workeman in his trade: hee will euer take delight in his work & occupation, euen ſo if you had this this feeling, you woulde delight in prayer, which now is a hel vnto many, then your harts both priuatly would bee as ſtudious in meditating goodnes, as euer they were deſirous of worldly pleaſure, and woulde publikely breathe after it as the Harte in his chaſe doth after the well ſpringes. But oh dearely beloued, this condemneth the worlde of hatred of God, of the pride of themſelues, of ignorance in the trueth of coldneſſe in religion, of tru
                     ••
                  ing in the worlde, miſpending of time, louing of pleaſure, and lacke of deuotion, that they are as hardely drawne to praier, according to the common Prouerbe, as a hare taken with a tabret. Think you that theſe perſons, which abſent themſelues from publique petitions, and priuate prayers, haue any loue of God in them: nay are not thoſe condemned which are drawne to them agaynſt their will, and where ſhal theſe curſed companions appeare, which forſake ſermons, goe out of Churches, lye idlie at home, and are diſporting themſelues in brauery abroade, when the time of prayer calleth for their preſence at home or in the Church, doe they not ſeperate themſelues from the faithfull in this life? and therefore they ſhall bee miſerably damned with the Deuill and his aungelles, and euerlaſtingly excluded from Chriſt and his Saintes.
               Fourthly by this prayer of theſe elders wee obſerue, that we muſt eſpecially pray for the multiplying & augmenting of the faithfull, for they pray that Ruth may

bee like, not to the daughters of Lot, of whome came the curſed Moabites and Ammonites: nor yet to Rebecca, of whome came the vngodly Edomites: nor yet to Keturah, from whom came the godleſſe Madianites and Arabians, but to Rahel and Leah which builded the houſe of Iſrael, that is which increaſed the Lordes people, which multiplyed the heyres of the promiſed land, and augmented the number of the faithful. This our ſauiour commanded to be done, next to the glorifying of God: for firſt wee ſay, hallowed bee thy name; and then thy kingdome come, which is, firſt that the ſpirit might raign in our harts; & thē that mo ſaints may be added to the Church. For we muſt pray for the frends & not for the enemies of Chriſt. For this cauſe Paule compareth marriage to ye coniunction betweene Chriſt & his Church: for as the one ingendreth many ſaints,Epheſ. 5.24.25. ſo the other muſt beget many faithfull members: & truly as one pearl is worth ten thouſand pebles, ſo one good child is better to the parents, then many thouſands of euil. The vſe of this doctrine is, that we ſhould not bee like the Iewes, deſirous of many children, becauſe our families ſhoulde grow great, but like the doues which bring forth few, which might be the children of innocency: the Elephant being the greateſt, and yet the meekeſt beaſt, conceaueth but once in all her time, whereas the leſſer and more hurtful creatures encreaſe many, yet it is better for the firſt to haue but one, wc are good & hurtles, then for the latter to haue many which are euil and harmefull, euen ſo beloued it is good to increaſe doues and not ſerpentes, Elephantes and not Tigers, and better is one Iſaacke the ſonne of promiſe, then a thouſand Iſmaels the children of bondage: We know the moſt precious hearbes bring the leaſt fruites, and that is not the beſt which doth moſt of all multiply, ſo the godly like good trees, muſt rather deſire one or two children like themſelues, and to bring forth & grow in iſſue ſparingly, by little & little, then ſodainly to ſwell vp like the waues of the ſea.Gen. 25.
                        •
                     6 28. Wee reade that Iſmael had twelue ſonnes, all princes, but Iſaacke his brother had onely twaine, Iacob & Eſau, and them he obtained by

prayer, ſo hardely the godly are borne and conceyued, when with the wicked they come as thicke as the haileſtones in Egipte for the confuſion of the fruite of the lande. Therefore as the ſeede is caſt in vaine vpon the lande, which the ſoules doe preſently deuoure, ſo thoſe children had beene better they had neuer beene borne, whom darknes blindeth, ignorance poſſeſſeth, mallice ruleth, vngodlines leadeth, and Sathan tormenteth: for the feweſt number are the godlieſt poſterity, in whom light ſhineth, knowledge dwelleth, meekenes raigneth, godlines guideth, & Chriſt eternally bleſſeth.
               Fiftly, by the praier of theſe people we note, ye ſecond bleſſing of a godly mariage, which is to gather by lawfull meanes much wealth: for that which in the Engliſh is, doe worthely in Ephrathah in the Hebrewe is, gather wealth in Ephrathah: For it is more generall in the engliſh, then in the originall, for to gather wealth by honeſt meanes, is to doe worthely, becauſe it is the bleſſing of God: Therefore wee wil take the ſureſt and the ſafeſt interpretation, by ye which this collection is confirmed, and their meaning is, that Boaz which in his mariage reſpected not riches, ſhould by his godly choiſe enioy a vertuous wife to bring vp faithfull children, & increaſe his ſubſtance by the bleſſing of God, that he might aduance the honour of their countrey and Cittie. Neyther is this vnknowne that after children, the growing in wealth is the next bleſſing of the Lorde, as Abrahams ſeruant telleth Laban, the Lorde hath bleſſed my maiſter exceedingly,Gen. 24, 35. and made him very great, for he hath giuen him flockes and heardes, ſiluer and gold, ſeruants and maidens, cammels and Aſſes, all this did the Lord bleſſe Abraham with, after his marriage with Sara: Againe,Iob. 1.3. the holy Ghoſt deſcribing Iob, after his children which were ſeuen ſons & three daughters, he reckoneth his wealth & faith. His poſſeſſion was ſeuen thouſand cattel, three thouſand camels, fiue hundred yoke of oxē and fiue hundred ſhe aſſes, with a great houſhold. For wealth in marriage, is the beſt ſeruant that can be entertained, I might ſpeake of many moe, but few perſwaſions will ſuffice in this point, becauſe wealth was wont

to be the maide, and godlines the miſtreſſe: but nowe riches is become the miſtreſſe, and religion the maide: For wealth, men riſe early and go late to bed, labour diligently, and fare hardely, trauaile earneſtly, & ſweat painefully, and I can finde no fault but with too much following this wealthy trade: For firſt of all, I muſt complaine with Salomon, that there is but one and not a ſeconde, who hath neyther brother nor ſonne,Eccleſ. 4.7 yet there is no end of his labour, neyther is his eye ſatiſfied with riches, for this olde canker infecteth euery age, whereby it is a pleaſure to certaine couetous wretches, to toyle theyr bodies with vntimely labours, to clogge their mindes with golden cares, and to weary their ſences in numbring their wealth: & what is ye end hereof? ſurely this the gatherer is like an aſſe which carryeth the treaſure but cannot vſe it,Eccleſ. 6.2. being laide on his backe it muſt be taken of agayne: the heyres like the drones ſpend all, but gather none, for as they ſweat not for it as it was in getting, ſo they ſpare not as long as it laſteth, lauiſhing out that in riotous company, which was gathered in couetous encroching. Others, that they may thriue, count all thinges lawfull: for they ſaye God hath giuen the earth to the children of men, therefore they ſpende the ſabbaothes in buying and ſelling, in bargayning and labouring: they get by right & wrong, forgery and deceite, play and worke, neyther lands not cattels come amiſſe to them, ſo they may haue them: But we muſt alway remember, that wee neyther go to the right hand nor to the left, that is if thou haue many children, thou muſt vſe no vnlawfull meanes to keep them: if thou haue none, thou muſt not hoarde vppe thy wealth, as if thou haddeſt ſome, but remember the day of aduerſitie, and deale ſomewhat for thy preſent neede, and not altogether for thy owne commodity. But you will ſay, ſhewe vs ſome briefe rules, by which wee may practiſe the truth: by your fauourable audience I will giue you theſe three rules: the firſt is in getting, the ſecond in keeping, and the thirde in departing from it.
               Concerning the firſt, which is getting of wealth; firſt

our onely care muſt bee for the bleſſing of God to encreaſe vs:Gen 30.33. We haue an excellent example in Iacob, hauing nothing in the worlde beſide his wiues and children, yet woulde receyue no wages of Laban, but promiſde his ſeruice for the ſpotted lambes, chooſing rather to depend vpon the bleſſing of God, then the pollicy of his owne wit, to teſtify his vprightnes in the preſence of Laban, & to teach vs all, that thriuing commeth more by ye fauour of ye Lord, then the wiſedome of the world. For Laban thought he had made a good bargain for himſelf, wc indeed proued to his great hinderance, euen ſo when men think they haue compaſſed the world to increaſe theyr profit,Deut. 8.18. ſodainly the Lorde ſendeth a croſſe to diſapoint their purpoſe yt they might know yt to be true wc Moſes ſaith, that it is the Lorde wc giueth power to get wealth: againſt this thoſe offende wc encreaſe their wealth, & liue vpon vſury, for they depend not vpon the bleſſing of God, but bind their debtors in bands, win or looſe, they wil haue both principal & increaſe. Againe, others are ſo greedily bent vpon their profits, that their only deſire is to wax rich, of whō Paul ſpeaketh.1. Tim. 6.9.10 They which wil wax rich fal into many temptations, & ſnares; & many fooliſh & damnable luſtes, wc drown men in euerlaſting deſtruction: for ye loue of money is the root of all euil, which while ſome deſired, they erred from the faith, & pearced themſelues wt many ſorrowes. This ſtriketh to the earth falſe meaſures, naughty wares, breaking of promiſes, detaining of heirs, rayſing of rentes, oppreſſing the poore, deceytful bargaynes, & vnlawful trades; for none of theſe depende vpon the Lord, but giue their ſoules to the Deuil, for encreaſing their wealth. Secondly, you muſt know how to vſe your wealth according to the word of God: wc is thus, according to the coūſel of th'Apoſtle, if thou haue little,1. Tim. 6.6.7.8 be contented, for godlines is great gaine, if a man be contented with that he hath, for we brought nothing into the worlde, neyther ſhall wee carry any thing out of the worlde: this is the reaſon of contentation, but ſome will ſay, howe much ſhal wee haue before we be contented, the Apoſtle anſwereth in the nexte verſe: if

we haue meat & clothing, we are there wt all contented. Againe if they be rich, the ſame Apoſtle ſheweth how they ſhall beare their wealth in theſe words,1. Tim. 6.17 Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high minded, neither truſt in their vncertaine riches, but in the liuing God, which giueth vs all things to enioy aboundantly; That they diſtribute to other,1. Tim. 6.18. that they be rich in good workes, that they be willing to giue, and eaſy to be intreated;1. Tim. 6.19. Laying vp for themſelues a good foundation againſt the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternall life. Out of the which words we muſt obſerue theſe things. Firſt, that riches muſt not make men proude, for they are the gift of God, but our rich men ſcorne and diſdaine their poore bretheren of Chriſt, commaunding and oppreſſing them both by word and deede, in moſt odious and ſhamefull manner. Secondly, they muſt not put any confidence in their wealth, but repoſe their truſt in the liuing God, who gaue it to them, and to whome they ſhall giue an accompt for vſing and abuſing it, for to put truſt in their wealth, is to thinke they may doe with it what they pleaſe. Thirdly, they muſt diſtribute willingly, liberally and dayly, for as they are riche in ſubſtance, ſo they muſt be rich in good workes, that is, they muſt excell other in giuing, as they doe in poſſeſſion. Fourthly, that thoſe men which doe thus beſtowe their wealth, haue layed the foundation of their ſaluation, and lay hold on eternall life. This is the way to keepe wealth after the word of God, and who ſo euer doeth otherwiſe eyther in mariage or vnmariage, doth hoord vp but ruſt to torment him; the canker to conſume him, the care to moleſt him, and vengeance againſt the day of vengeāce eternally to condemn him.
               Laſtly in departing from his wealth, firſt, if hee  haue wronged any man, he muſt follow the example of Zacheus, reſtore foure fould,Luc. 19.8. and he ſhall be blameleſſe for that, ſpend liberally vpon his family in good ſort, after the counſell of Salomon, for this pinching of ſeruants and families fauoureth not of God,Prou. 5.15.16.17. nor of religion, nor of humanitie, the bruite beaſts condemne

it, but ſpend nothing in waſte, for thou art but ſteward of thy goodes, now you know a ſteward muſt giue an accompt to his maiſter. Finally, that which thou reſerueſt, giue to thy children, as Abraham and all the godly did to their poſteritie: and whoſoeuer followeth this counſell, ſhall be guiltleſſe for miſpending, cleare from euill keeping, free from wrong getting, and acquitted from the dreadfull reckoning which all the worlde ſhall make one day to the Lord for abuſing his benefites.
               Now let vs giue thankes to God.
            
            
               The fifteenth Lecture.
               
                  
                     Chap. 4. Verſ. 12.13.14.15.
                     
                        12 And that thy houſe be like the houſe of Pharez, whome Thamar bare vnto Iudah, of the ſeede which the Lord ſhall giue thee of this young woman.
                     
                        13 So Boaz tooke Ruth, and ſhe was his wife, and when he went in vnto her, the Lord gaue that ſhe conceiued, and bare a ſonne.
                     
                        14 And the women ſayde vnto Naomi, Bleſſed bee the Lord, which hath not left thee this day without a kinſeman, and his name ſhall be continued in Iſraell.
                     
                        15 And this ſhall bring thy life agayne, and cheriſh thine old age, for thy daughter in law which loueth thee hath borne him, which is better to thee then ſeuen ſonnes.
                  
               
               
                  WE haue ſhewed you the laſt ſabbaoth, that this 12. verſe is a part of the prayer of the elders and people at the marriage of Boaz and Ruth, for in the firſt part they prayed for the fruitfulneſſe of the woman, but in this they commend vnto God the bleſſing for their poſteritie, and becauſe we then deuided it, we will

firſt of all handle it, and then proceede to that which followeth.
               Firſt therefore out of this ſecond part in their prayer, we gather another duety of the godly in praying for children, which is, to deſire in ſome meaſure the bleſſings of this world, eyther riches or honour vpon them: which in this place theſe Iewes doe vnfainedly pray for the houſe, or poſteritye of Boaz, when they ſay, and that thy houſe may be like the houſe of Pharez, who had the birthright of Iudah, whoſe poſteritye was the nobleſt of all the family, from whome alſo deſcended this Bohaz, as appeareth by the end of this Chapter, which flouriſhing eſtate, as it had continued in the progeny of Pharez for ſixe generations, ſo they wiſh it might follow in his poſteritye for many more, neyther is this ſpeciall in this place, but alſo diſperſed thorough all the ſcripture, for wee knowe what promiſe the Lord made vnto Abraham,Gen. 12.4. that vnto his ſeede hee woulde giue all the land of Canaan, as a comfort vnto him, to thinke that his poſteritye ſhould be ſo well prouided for, whereby they might not onely bee continued, but richly aduaunced as the Lordes of the earth. The like was it that hee promiſed to Dauid,2. Sam. 7.12 that hee ſhould alway haue a ſonne to ſit on his ſeate, not ſimply a ſonne, but a ſonne to ſit on his ſeate, as if the Lord had ſayde, thou ſhalt alway haue the kingdome in the poſſeſſion of thy poſteritye, and the ſhall raigne as Kings for euermore. So on the contrary, it is a curſe when the name of houſes are put out,Pſal. 10
                        •
                     .8.9.10. theyr memory forgotten, theyr wealth diſperſed, their honour abaſed, and their children like vagabonds vppon the earth.Deut. 28.12 It was alſo a ſpeciall promiſe to the people of the Iewes, that if they obſerued the ſtatutes of the Lord, then ſhould they and their ſeede be able to lend to other, but they ſhould not neede to borrow of any.
               Theſe things conſidered by the example of theſe promiſes of the Lord, and the perſons of theſe fathers, we haue an excellent way deſcribed for the mayntenaunce

of our poſſeſſion, in the name of our poſteritie: which is this, to commend it by prayer to the tuition of the eternall God, for that which he hath promiſed, may we pray for, the ſame way, that maketh barren women to become fruitfull, the increaſe of the earth to multiply, the heauens to giue theyr rayne, Countreyes to be deliuered from ſword, famine, and peſtilence, and pulleth downe all the bleſſings of God vpon vs, is alſo the appointed meanes for the continuance of worldly families. But how long, how long ſhall I perſwade the world before they beleeue it? doe they not ſpend their dayes in worldly deuiſes, to compaſſe the earth by multitudes of purchaſings, which are alwayes trauailing abroade in reſtleſſe iourneyes by many bargaines to augment their ſubſtance, vſing all lawfull and vnlawfull meanes for to increaſe their wealth, and inlarge their poſſeſſions, that their poſteritie might be honourable when they are dead, their children aduaunced by money not by vertue, maintained by pride not by humilitie, raigne like kings in all manner of pleaſure vpon the earth, while the fathers are tormented in hell for their wrongfull oppreſſions; thus men pray on the world as the eagles on the altars, and the birds on Abrahams ſacrifice, but not to the Lord, as the young rauens that call vpon him, who being left of their owne parents, are fed by the Lord, that his kindnes might be manifeſted to our children as well as to birds, and that their welfare dependeth vpon the bleſſing of God, not the benefite of elders, the fauour of our maker, not the couetouſnes of our fathers. Againſt theſe it is that the Prophet cryeth and curſeth,Eſa. 5.89. becauſe they ioyne houſe to houſe, land to land, field to field, inheritance to inheritance, that themſelues might raigne alone vpon the earth, this is the care of them, which are ſodainely from the duſt to the chayre of wealth aduaunced, from ſlauery to honour, from beggery to riches, that they might (as the Prophet ſayth) build fayre houſes,Pſal. 49.12. encroch greater compaſſe of lands, that their names might be famous vpon the earth. But who is he that

maketh any ordinary and dayly prayer vnto the Lord, that his ſubſtance might be by his bleſſing increaſed, with his fauour preſerued, and to his glory beſtowed. Nay, nay, if none had no more wealth then that which they had gotten by prayer, their glorious ſhewes would in little ſpace grow as bare as the trees in the winter, when they haue neyther fruite nor leaues to couer them. This I ſpeake not to the diſcredit of any wealthy perſons, but ſhew them the way to attayne the end of their deſire, the continuance of their poſteritie in godlines and wealth, which is by prayer. For as Chriſt prayed for Peter that his faith ſhould not faile him,Luc. 22.32. ſo parents muſt pray for their poſteritie, that their names may not decay in them. If any thinke when theyr barnes are inlarged, their corne gathered, they filled, health enioyed, wealth increaſed, and reſt obtained, that eyther ſoules or children ſhall haue the greater reſt, like that foole in the Goſpell,Luc. 12.16.17.18. their markes are much amiſſe, for wealth and iſſue are loſt both in an houre, looke vpon the example of Iob, the death of his children, and decay of his wealth. Againe, none muſt be hereby emboldened, to preſent their prayers before the face of the almighty, for the maintenance of their children in worldly vanitie, to make that the onely end of all their deſire, which is, to be more carefull for the ſhoe then the foote, for the rayment then the body, and for the body then the ſoule: but this muſt be their direction as the Lord commaunded the Iewes,Deut. 28.12 Pſal. 144.12.13.14. if they kept his ſtatutes then ſhould their oxen be ſtrong to labour, their ſheepe bring foorth thouſands and ten thouſands in their ſtreetes, their daughters like the poliſhed corners of the temple, and their ſonnes as their fruitfull garners, which neuer are emptye. For vngodly Haman was hanged,Eſth. 7.10. though he were the prince of the princes, but godly Mordecay was aduaunced, which was as poore as the baſeſt. Shebna was depriued of his office, becauſe he was wicked, when godly Eliakim was promoted to his place,Eſa. 22.20. euen ſo it is not honour, but the feare of God that bringeth and ſuſtaineth honour, that you muſt pray

for your children, Kings for vngodlines were depriued of their ſeates and thrones of maieſty whereunto they were borne, much more will the Lord execute his iudgements of pouertie and ſlauery vpon thoſe that would be aduaunced and yet are wicked; for Salomon ſayth, that the proſperitie of fooles ſlay them, and the crowne doth not endure from generation to generation, yet the feare of the Lord abideth for euer.
               
                   Secondly, by this verſe we may note, when they expreſſely make mention of Thamar the mother of Pharez, and wiſh the poſterity of Boaz to be like his, the great bleſſing of God vpon that inceſtuous birth; for we know the hiſtory, how that Thamar was ye daughter in law of Iudah,Gen. 38.18.29. the wife & widdow of his eldeſt ſon, diſſembling her ſelfe to be a whore, by her apparell and place, had the company of her father in law, by whome ſhe was conceiued of two ſonnes, the elder was this Pharez, and the yonger Zerach: yet wee ſee how ye Lord doth magnify this Pharez with a glorious and godly poſterity. By the which he teacheth vs theſe two profitable leſſons, that the ſinnes of the faithfull are forgiuē, though they be neuer ſo great. We ſee this Iudah an excellent man, yet ouercome in this action, had not any ſuch plague inflicted on him, as Ruben his eldeſt brother, or Simeon & Leui, but he which couered and omitted that ſin of Abraham with Hagar, of Iacob with Bilhah and Zilpah, of this Iudah with Thamar, Lot wt his own daughters, and ſuch like, wil alſo forgiue all the defaults of the godly vnto the end of the world. By the which we gather exceeding comfort when we come to this perſuaſion, that there is no condemnation to them that are in Ieſus Chriſt, that the gates of hell ſhall not preuaile againſt the mercies of ye Lord, that the victory of our faith ſhall conquer the world, when Noah ſhall be cleanſed from his drunkennes, Moſes and Aaron frō their doubting, Miriam from her murmuring, Dauid from his murther, Peter from his deniall of Chriſt, and all becauſe the Lord will couer the ſins of his Saints, be they neuer ſo great, when he puniſheth the faults of many thouſand wicked perſons with eternall damnation,

although they haue not ſinned with the like tranſgreſſion. Secondly by this we learne, that the Lord doth not puniſh the childrē for the parēts faults, if they commit not the like themſelues, for this Pharez begotten in inceſt, was bleſſed by the Lord, not only with temporal glory in himſelf and his iſſue, but alſo with this, that he was made one of ye fathers of Chriſt. And this teacheth vs, that this vpbraiding of men for their birth, be they baſe borne or free borne, is no fruit of the word of God, but the malice of the deuill, which firſt deceiued the parents, and now would diſcredit the childe. Let it not therfore beloued be any ſpeech in our mouths, to ſhoot at them whom the Lord hath wounded by nature, any thought of our hearts to enuy their welfare, were their parentage neuer ſo baſe, but pray for them, that though they proceede not of a ſanctified birth, yet they may grow vp to a ſanctified and holy life, to make a godly & a bleſſed end. And finally, let vs be encouraged vnto religion by the fauour of God, which dealeth thus mercifully with his Saincts, neuer ſuffering any thing to be laid to the charge of his choſen, ſtopping the mouth of the deuill himſelfe, yt he neuer riſe in iudgement againſt ye faithful, or bring any litle ſin of theirs into the remembrance of God, but waſhing them all in the lauer of regeneration, ye bloud of his ſonne, and will giue thē white robes clenſed frō al filthines, yt they may be chaſt virgins for ye Lords ſeruice, and feed at his own table for euermore, this cōſideration made Dauid to cry out, and ſay oh whē ſhal I come and appeare before the preſence of God? it made Simeon to ſay, now Lord let thy ſeruant depart in peace, it cauſed Paule to vtter theſe words, I deſire to be diſſolued and to be with Chriſt, for bleſſed are the people that are in ſuch a caſe, yea bleſſed are the people whoſe God is the Lord. Thus much for this verſe. Now let vs goe to the verſe following.
               In theſe three verſes following, the holy Ghoſt declareth the bleſſing of God vpon this mariage of Boaz and Ruth. The words containe in them two parts, the firſt part is of Boaz ver. 13. the ſecond is of the women that were preſent at the trauaile of Ruth. The firſt

part ſheweth, how Boaz taking Ruth, and vſing her as his wife, had the bleſſing of God, in conceiuing and bearing him a ſonne: the other part of the women, is their reioyſing with Naomi for this fruitfulneſſe of Ruth; it comprehendeth two partes, the firſt, theyr thankeſgiuing to God, verſ. 14. in theſe words, Bleſſed be God, ſecondly, the matter of their thankeſgiuing in the words following, firſt, for Bohaz his ſake, in that God had left him to be Naomies kinſeman, ſecondly, becauſe this childe of Ruthes her louing daughter in law, ſhould renew her yeares, and cheriſh her old age: of theſe parts let vs briefely ſpeake in order.
               
                  So Boaz, tooke] After the ſolemnitie of this mariage, in the preſence of the people, and their prayer ended which they powred foorth in the behalfe of both theſe partyes and their poſteritie, Bohaz proceedeth to the end of this action, and taketh Ruth to his houſe to be his wife, as a duety of a kinde and a godly husband. For all this while we muſt imagine that Ruth was abſent from the place of this communication, and according to the counſayle of her mother,Cap. 3.18. ſate wayting at home, for ſome proſperous newes, and praying no doubt, for a ioyfull ſucceſſe of this deſired mariage, our of this we gather.
               
                   Firſt, the duety of all godly husbands, which is to take their wiues and dwell with them, as this Boaz doth Ruth, for it is no doubt, but that he preſently went to the houſe of her mother, and thence tooke her, bringing her to his owne houſe, that there they might liue and loue together. This phraſe of ſcripture wee may finde vſed in many places, as in the hiſtory of Izaak,Gen. 24.67. Rebecca. how he tooke Ribkah his wife, and brought her into the tent of Sarai his mother, and was comforted after his mothers death, where the holy Ghoſt doth not onely declare the kindneſſe of Izaak, but alſo the commoditie of dwelling with a wife, for the preſence of Ribkah cauſed her husband to forget the death of his mother,Rebecca. as if he had ſayd, the preſence of a wife is greater then the comfort of a mother.1. Pet. 3.7. For this cauſe Peter exhorteth that husbands ſhould dwell with their

wiues, like men of vnderſtanding, giuing honour to their wiues as to weaker veſſels, becauſe they are the heyres of the ſame grace, and that their prayers be not hindered, as if he had ſayd, they muſt dwell together, and they muſt pray together, for as Chriſt is alway preſent with his Church, ſo husbands muſt keepe the companies of their wiues. This point being euident both by reaſon and religion, it condemneth the wandring abroade of many idle husbands, ſome which are neuer ſatiſfied with riches, by markets and merchandiſe, trauailing in the world, depriue their wiues of their due beneuolence; others for their pleaſure walke from Countrey to Countrey, ſpending their dayes in pleaſant diſport among carnall and ſuſpitious companions, leaue wife and family, to the ſea of this world, like children in a Ship, without guide or mariner; many are preſent, but to the diſcommoditie and diſcomfort of their poore wiues and children, oh how doe any of theſe perſons take their wiues with godly mindes eyther to dwell or pray together? How can the vine proſper when the roote is vncouered, and how can women be comforted, when their couer is taken from them, I meane their husbands,Gen. 20.16. as Abimelech the king of Gerar tolde vnto Sara, Is not the body dead without a head, yea if it be but a minute of an houre, do not then our wandering youths murder the bodie of their owne family, being abſent about vnneceſſary buſines, ſometime for the ſpace of many moneths. Is not the body maymed if it want but the leaſt member, yea, but a finger, how is then thoſe houſeholds wounded, where the chiefeſt parts either husbands or wiues be wanting and wandering abroade, and finally what is this but to diuorce themſelues for a ſeaſon without any lawfull cauſe, to put aſunder them whome the Lord hath ioyned together, to breake the felowſhip of holy wedlocke, to deſpiſe the ſocietie of godly marriage, to lay open themſelues to the temptations of the deuils, and to thruſt both bodyes and ſoules into daunger of damnation. This I ſpeake not, as if all abſence frō eyther party (which conſent for a time about

neceſſary buſines) were vtterly vnlawfull: for ſo Iacob, Moſes, Aaron, Dauid, and the Apoſtles, ſhould be faulty; but I ſpeake againſt this wilfull departing of one from the other, without either conſent of man or wife, conſcience of the law of God, or regard to their owne perſons, for the company of theſe twayne is greater then parents or children, for which the Apoſtle ſayth, that if one be a beleeuing perſon, and the other an infidell,1. Cor. 7.13. yet they muſt not depart if they be willing to dwell with them, and he giueth no libertie for breaking theyr companie,Verſe. 5. except it be to pray the more feruently, and wiſheth alſo that if they doe ſo, yet it muſt be but for a ſeaſon, that ſathan tempt them not, ſo great regard muſt be had of the fellowſhip in marriage, that the zeale of prayer, the worſhip of God, the loue of our owne parents, the increaſe of wealth, and the pleaſure of the world, muſt not ſeparate, without the voyce of both partyes, and yet the time muſt be but ſhort for the auoyding the temptation of Sathan, and the daunger of their owne damnation.
               Secondly by this we may gather who is the author and ſender of children, which is the Lord: for this ſcripture ſayth that the Lord gaue her to conceiue, for as Paule ſayth of the corne that is caſt into the earth,1. Cor. 3.6. that it increaſeth neither by the planter nor yet the waterer, but by the Lord, ſo muſt we ſay by the ſeede of mankinde, that it lyeth neyther in the husband nor in the wife, but in the bleſſing of God: for which cauſe, when Rahell ſayd to her husband Iacob, giue me children or elſe I dye;Gen. 30.1.2. he anſwered her in anger, am I in Gods ſteede, that kept thee frō the fruite of thy womb? as if he had ſaid, it is God that ſendeth iſſue, and not man:Pſal. 127.3. therefore Dauid ſaith, that children are the poſſeſſion of the Lord, and the fruite of the womb is his reward. By the which we are taught many excellēt and worthy leſſons: firſt, that ſeing they come from the author of euery good gift, we haue a ready way where to aſke them, when we want them, for as when we want wiſedome, the Apoſtle ſaith, we muſt aske wiſedome

at the hand of God, ſo whē we want children,Gen. 25.21. Rebecca. we muſt aske children at the hand of God. When Ribkah was barren, by her husbands prayer ſhe was made fruitfull, ſo barren women by their husbands prayers haue bene made the mothers of many children. Annah obtained by her prayer at the temple not only Samuell,1. Sam. 2.21. but alſo three other ſonnes and two daughters. Oh let vs not be vexed then for many children, but let euery one aske confidently by the will of God, and they ſhall receiue (if it ſo pleaſe him) plentifully to their owne deſire. Secondly, ſeeing children come of the Lord, we are taught to vſe them as the bleſſings of God, and as the child by nature ſhould firſt know his mother that bare him, ſo we by inſtruction ſhould firſt teach our childrē the feare of God that gaue them; it is farre better for many children that they had neuer bene borne, except their parents had more knowledge to till their mindes with the immortall ſeede of God his holy word, then to looke vpō the ſunne as the condemned perſon which commeth out of priſon, and ſo goeth to execution, in like maner childrē without the knowledge of ye feare of God, do come from the womb of their mothers, which is their priſon, to the fire of hell which is ye place of execution. Oh my beloued, looke vpō your tender childrē, and ſo often as you ſee them, you behold the bleſſings of God vpon you, make much of their ſoules by praying for their ſaluation: you haue brought thē into the world, leaue thē not to the deuill. Thirdly, ſeing children are ye gift of God, thoſe which haue children haue greater accompt to make, then thoſe which haue none, for of him to whom much is giuē ſhal much be required, and they to whome ye Lord hath giuen childrē and ſeruants, lands and cattels, ſhal anſwer for euery one of theſe to ye Lord: therfore parēts muſt finiſh their reckning which they muſt giue to the Lord, and let not one farthing of their debt be omitted, for he will plague thē as well for not doing their duties to their own children, as graceleſſe children for contemning of God. And this one cōſideration, ſhould mitigate ye deſire of poſterity, becauſe if they abuſe thē, their own damnation ſhall be

the greater, if they be vnruly, they bring nothing but ſorrow to their parents, if they be godly, the world will hate them, and if they be wicked the deuill will haue them. Were it not a pitifull ſight to ſee the father burned, for murthering his ſonne, how much more grieuous is it to ſee both father and ſonne, mother and daughter, husband and wife, maiſter and ſeruaunt, miſtreſſe and maides, paſtors and people, to goe all to damnation together, becauſe the former did not guide the later, oh, would God that the deſire to eſcape this iudgement, would ſinke into the hearts of all, that we might euery one addict our liues to holines, our minds to knowledge, our bodies to obedience, our hearts to vnderſtanding, our children to inſtruction, our ſeruants to religion, and all our ſoules to ſaluation.
               Thirdly, by this we gather, that it is a greater bleſſing  to be the mother of a ſonne, then the parent of a daughter, if it ſo pleaſe God to ſend them: for in this place the holy Ghoſt ſayth, that the Lord gaue her and ſhe conceiued and brought foorth a ſonne, as if he had ſaid, the Lord gaue her her owne deſire, and the beſt iſſue, which was a manchild: for this cauſe our Sauiour ſaith,Iohn. 16.20 that a woman forgetteth her paines in trauaile ſo ſoone as a man child is borne into the world. Therefore is it that the Lord promiſed Abraham a ſonne,Gen. 18.10. Luc. 1.13. that he gaue Zachary and Elizabeth a ſonne, and finally therefore the Lord calleth vs all his ſonnes, as a father reioyſeth more for a ſonne, ſo the Lord reioyseth in the ſaluation of all the faithfull. By this we are taught to magnify the name of the almighty, for euery one his benefits in their degree, and if we want any, by prayer to craue it at the hands of God, alwayes remembring that we leaue the end of our deſires to be agreeable to his will. And here we ſee the prayer of the people in the former verſe to be in part fulfilled, when the Lord did ſo ſoone bleſſe this good old man, by giuing him a ſonne: for it is no doubt but the holy Ghoſt doth ſo preſently after their prayer adde her conception and his birth, that he might ſtirre vs vp with greater zeale, to deſire the prayers of the faithfull,

which are alwayes auaileable in the preſence of ye Lord. Come therefore my bretheren, and let vs fulfill the deſire of the Lord, and accompt more of the petitions of the godly, then all the poſſeſſions of the wealthy: by prayer the earth is made fruitefull, and the heauens drop downe abundance, by prayer famine is remoued, warres appeaſed, the wrath of God pacified, and the health of the bodye recouered, by prayer wiſedome is increaſed, faith confirmed, remiſſion of ſinnes obtained, the barren woman made a fruitfull mother of many children, the dayes of life lengthened, peace of countreys and conſciences prolonged, and the kingdome of heauen eternally inherited. Therefore thoſe which cannot pray, abhorre the preſence of God, are weary of our aſſemblyes, forſake ſermons and congregations, depart from the fellowſhip of the faithfull, and haue their ſinnes ſealed vp, their liues accurſed, and their ſoules euerlaſtingly condemned.
               
                  And the women] Now we muſt proceede to the ſecond part of this ſcripture, wherein is declared what iſſue and effect this wrought in other, for ſo ſoone as the child was borne, it did not only bring comfort to the parents, but alſo ioy and gladnes to the godly citizens of Bethlehem: among whome theſe women are reported by the holy Ghoſt (which no doubt, were preſent at the deliuery of Ruth) to magnify the name of God, for this ſo great a benefit beſtowed vpon the old woman: although her childrē were dead, yet her name might be recouered by her louing daughter in lawe. By this we firſt of all obſerue the duety of all the faithfull, which is to reioyſe with them that reioyſe,Rom. 12.12 15. and to weepe with them that weepe, for as there godly Iewiſh women reioyſe with Naomi for the fruitfulnes of Ruth, ſo muſt we euery one be like affected for the bleſſings that are powred vpon our bretheren. The like vnto this, may we reade of the neighbours and kindred of Elizabeth, hearing of the wonderfull mercy of God vnto her, they reioyſed with her.Luc. 1.58. This teacheth vs the ſame duety, that the ioy of our brethren ſhould be our reioyſing, and their ſorrow our lamentation, for there

is no fellowſhip, but there muſt be a feeling of the ſame ioyes or miſeries, not onely in publike affayres which reſpect their whole common wealth, but alſo in priuate buſines the benefit of euery particular perſon. The head is ſore when the ſtomacke is ſicke, the hand is grieued, when the foote is maymed, and euery part of the body being in proſperity, reioyſeth together. For this cauſe Paule biddeth vs to endure all things with the ſame minde,Rom. 12.16 meaning that euery mans minde ſhould be like his brothers eyther in ſorrow or reioyſing. But is this the fellowſhip that raigneth among vs in theſe dayes? or rather are we not merryeſt when our neighbours are tormented, and doeth it not grieue vs to ſee other to proſper beſide vs: yes ſurely, for there is no more hartie and vnfayned friendſhip among men in our dayes, then is betweene the hauke and the bird, when either of them is taken, the other reioyſeth. This is the cauſe that men are no more accompted after wealth fayleth, friendſhip withdraweth when they ſtand in moſt neede, and leaſt pitie is in the greateſt extremitie. Euery tree is greene in the Spring, euery bird will ſing in ſommer, and euery falſe hearted Chriſtian, will faune vppon theyr bretheren in proſperitie, but bee aſhamed of theyr want in aduerſitie: yea, there neuer wanteth priuie repiners and grudgers, at the wealth and welfare of euery one: for ſome ſay it is too much if theyr neighbours corne increaſe, others ſay it is too little, when they are vexed and troubled by loſſe of their goodes, and this maketh many medlers in other mens matters, many backbiters for other mens welfare, many enuye that any ſhould haue theyr ſhares as good as themſelues, like him in the Goſpell, whoſe eye was euill becauſe the Lords hand was good, and as all the waues of the ſea doe beate vpon the ſhore, ſo all the braines of the world doe breathe againſt the proſperous.
               
                   Secondly, the manner of theyr reioyſing muſt be conſidered, which the holy Ghoſt hath ſet downe in theſe words, Bleſſed be the Lord: wherein they teſtifye

perfect ioy both to the Lord by prayſing him and giuing thankes; and alſo to Naomi, vnto whome nothing could be more acceptable, then to heare the name of God to be bleſſed for her ſake. To bleſſe in the ſcripture whenſoeuer it is referred to God, ſignifieth to prayſe or to giue thankes: as when Zachary ſayth, Bleſſed be the Lord God of Iſraell,Luc. 1.68. for he hath viſited and redeemed his people; that is, Prayſed be the Lord God of Iſraell.2. Cor. 1.3. Likewiſe the Apoſtle Paule ſayth, Bleſſed be God the Father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the father of mercyes, and the God of all conſolation, that is, prayſed be God. And in another place he ſayth, If thou bleſſe with the ſpirit, how ſhall he that occupieth the roome of the vnlearned,1. Cor. 14.16. ſay Amen to thy thankſgiuing, that is, if thou giue thanks with the ſpirit. In this place it is of the firſt ſence, as if theſe women had ſayd, We prayſe thee O God, that thou haſt looked on the miſery of Naomi, and haſt reſerued her a kinſeman, by whome the name of the dead might be rayſed vpon the inheritance, and his owne honor continued in Gods people. By the which we are taught what manner of ioy the faithfull are to haue for their bretheren, namely, ſuch as may redound to the prayſe of God, according to the ſaying of the Apoſtle, that he which reioyſeth,1. Cor. 1.3
                        •
                     
                   muſt reioyſe in the Lord: for as bodily exerciſe profiteth little, ſo carnall ioy profiteth leſſe, ſuch as is the framing of vayne ſongs, giuing ouer our labours, and to reioyſe in paſtimes, and ſuch as is vſed in ringing of bells, and the like ſort, being onely for man and not for God. Therefore heere wee haue an excellent manner of reioyſing, when God is glorifyed by our mirth.Exod. 15. Thus we reade Moſes and Aaron with theyr ſiſter Miriam did, after they came out of Aegypt.Iud. 5. 1. Sam. 18.5 Thus did Deborah and Barach after the victory againſt Siſera. Thus did the women after the victory of Saule and Dauid, when they came from the ſlaughter of the Philiſtins. Thus did Zachary when his tongue was reſtored vnto him.Luc. 1.68. Thus did the children of Ieruſalem cry when Chriſt

came riding vpon the Aſſe.Luc. 19.38. Thus doe the faithfull reioyſe after the deſtruction of Rome and Antichriſt, ſinging,Reue. 19.1.2. Prayſed be God, ſaluation and honour and glory and power to our Lord God:Reue. 19.5. And the Lord cryeth out of heauen vnto vs, Prayſe the Lord all ye his ſeruants, and whoſoeuer feare him both ſmall and great. Therfore beloued, ſeing it becommeth the iuſt to be thankefull, let vs prayſe the Lord both euening and morning, and let vs not ſee a ſparrow to light on the ground, without ſome prayſe to God, by whoſe prouidence all things are gouerned, by whoſe will all things are ordered, for whoſe glory are all things appointed; that we ſhould euermore giue thanks to him that ſitteth on the higheſt heauens, and ruleth the mightieſt princes, appointing the meaſure for the ſea, and calling the whole world to iudgement, in whoſe preſence is light and life for euermore.
               
                   Thirdly, the matter of their thankſgiuing, muſt be conſidered, for they prayſe God, becauſe he had kept a kinſman aliue for Naomi, whoſe name ſhould be continued in the people of God; ſo that in plaine words they commend the kindnes of God, becauſe he had ſo prouided for this godly Naomi, as ſhe might be comforted by his meanes, and his name continued by her daughter, and all three eaſed by this one childe. By the which we are taught theſe two profitable leſſons: firſt, that we muſt magnify God for the life of our friends; ſo doe theſe Iewes for the life of Bohaz, by whome the Lord brought ſuch great comfort to both theſe deſtitute and deſolate widdowes, for as we are ſorry for their death, when it is too late, ſo muſt we be thankefull for their life, when yet they are with vs: the ſonne for the life of his father, and the father for the ſonne, the wife for her husband, and the husband for his wife, the ſeruant for his maiſter, the ſubiects for their prince, the people for their teachers, and ye daughters for their mother. There are few of theſe but they bring much benefit vnto vs, and no ſmall comfort doth ariſe by their preſence, which we ſhall better perceiue when we want them, then now we enioy them, and for

theſe the Apoſtle alſo willeth vs to pray,1. Tim. 2.1. and one cauſe of theſe two miracles vpon Lazarus and Dorcas, was that their life might bee prolonged with the church of God, and more kindnes ſhewed to their godly frendes:Ioh. 11. Act. 9. Secondly, by this all thoſe that are able to beſtowe any kindneſſe vpon other, are taught their duties to their owne kindred, that eſpecially they bee carefull for the reliefe of their pouertie, the maintaynance of their dignitie, the preſeruation of their honeſty, & the nouriſhing of their own fleſh, for vnto that end hath ye Lord encreaſed their ſubſtance, continued their name, prolonged their daye, and aduanced their ſeates, that they may be more able to do for their poore brethren which are commended to them by the Lorde, committed by the worlde, & compelled by nature, which are bone of their bone, and fleſh of their fleſh, that they might bee maintayned as your owne ſelues: When Dauid was made king he aduanced his ſiſters ſons & his kinſemen: when Saule was king, he aduanced Abner and other his frends; and wee knowe that many of Chriſtes Apoſtles were his kinſmen: vnto the which end Paule exhorteth,1. Tim. 5.16 that poore widdowes be prouided for by their frendes, that the Church be not charged with them. This condemneth the forgetfulneſſe of many in our age, which being in wealth, will ſcant acknowledge their poore kindred, whereby they ſhew themſelues like vnnaturall beaſts, as if the Lord were not able to bring thē down to ye footſtool in the place of the other, yt they might cry and not be heard.
               
                  And this ſhall] In this verſe is the ſecond part of their ioy, in ſo much as now Ruth hath brought forth a ſon, it is better to Naomi then ſeuen ſonnes, for ſeuen is taken for many, & not for any definite number, as when Dauid ſaith, that he prayſeth God ſeuen times a day, yt is many times euery day. Alſo they proteſt in this verſe,Pſal. 119.164. that it reioyceth them to ſee Naomi ſo comforted with the birth of this childe, as that now her life is reſtored, whereas before it was dying like an old ſtubble, which had no greene twigges vpon it; but nowe this one being ſhoote forth, ſhee reuiueth and gathereth comfort

in her olde yeares.
               By this wee ſee the duetie of parentes, which is to reioyce when their children encreaſe, and they ſee their childrens children: theſe Iewiſh women no doubt but ſpake by the experience of their owne dayes, that as a woman, lying at the point of death, being recouered, is ioyful & thankeful for the ſame: euen ſo old perſons haue newe liues in their childrens children: for which cauſe they ought to be thankeful to the Lorde: for the comfort of their children, who may likewiſe reioyce whē they ſee their parentes delight in their ofſpring. Thus no doubt but Abraham did when he ſaw Eſau and Iacob his ſonne Iſaackes children, being borne about fifteene yeares before his death: this did Iacob when hee ſawe Manaſſeh and Ephraim his ſonne Ioſephes children,Gen. 48.10.11. kiſſing and imbracing them, and ſaying, I had not thought to ſee thy face any more, but the Lord hath let me ſee thy ſeed and poſterity, as if he had ſaid, I thanke God for ſeeing thee, but I reioyce that I ſee thy children alſo. And truely, this I am ſure wil godly aged parentes do, who haue theſe for their examples, of faith & conuerſation that they might with more thankfulnes prayſe the Lorde who letteth them ſee their childrens children, & with greater comfort reioyce in them, that were born of their owne bodyes, but with greateſt ioy and moſt willing mindes commend their withered age, and all worne yeares to the hands of the Lord, who hath multiplyed their ſeede in this life, and will glorifie themſelues in the life to come:
               Nowe let vs giue prayſe to God.
               The end of the fifteenth Lecture.
            
            
               
               The ſixteenth Lecture.
               
                  
                     Chap. 4. ver. 16.17.
                     
                        16 And Naomi tooke the childe and laid it in her lappe, & became nurſe vnto it.
                     
                        17 And the women her neighbours gaue it a name, ſaying, there is a childe borne to Naomi, and called the name thereof Obed: the ſame was the father of Iſhai the father of Dauid.
                  
               
               
                  IN the former wordes wee hearde the laſt Sabboath, the prayer and thankes giuing of the people, or the women of Bethlehem, for the birth of this ſon of Bohaz, and the comfort of Naomi: but now in theſe words the holy ghoſt proceedeth to the education and circumciſion of the childe in theſe two verſes: wherein the holy Ghoſt deliuereth vnto vs theſe thinges: firſt that Naomi tooke the care of the education of this childe verſe 16. Secondly, the naming of the child by the neighbours, the women of Bethlehem, which they gaue vnto it by occaſion of their owne wordes, when they ſaide in the 15. verſe, that he ſhould cheriſh her, namely Naomi, and therefore they call him Hobed, which ſignifieth ſeruing; thereby ſignifying, that he ſhoulde ſerue for the comfort of Naomi: of theſe parts let vs briefly ſpeak in order, as the ſpirite of God ſhall giue vtterance and the time permit.
               
                  And Naomi tooke the child] After the mercy of God in the bleſſing of Ruth with a ſonne, who was the onely heyre vnto the houſe of Elimelech, the huſbande of Naomi, which brought no ſmall ioy to the old woman, to ſee her name and the name of her family reuiued in the birth of this ſonne, when it was vtterly decayed in the ſight of the worlde, for ſhe was olde & a ſtraunger in Moab, and had no hope of any moe children, neither

was it likely that her daughters in lawe (their huſbandes being deade) woulde returne from their countrey and kindred vnto a ſtraunge people, with whom they had ſmal acquaintance, euen none at all, Naomi their mother in lawe excepted, ſo that the hope of her poſteritie being buried in Moab, the life of her family muſt needs decay in Bethlehem. Therefore her returne to her owne countrey was a fauour of God vnto her, and rayſing vp the minde of Ruth to bee partaker of her iourney, and companion in her trauaile, was an eſpeciall comfort to her wearied age, but prouiding ſo honourable a marriage for her, and making her ſo fruitfull a wife in ſhort time, was the life of Naomies death the renewing of her family, the reſtoring of her hope, and the reſurrection of her dead ſonnes, for the continuance of their names in the gate of their places: and therefore ſhe like a ioyfull and thankfull grandmother for diſcharge of her conſcience, loue of the infant, & eaſe of her daughter; becommeth a fellow nurſe for the better educatiō of the child: out of the which we note.
               Firſt, that as we haue heard how the miſeries of Naomi were caſt vpon her together, ſo now the mercies of God are multiplyed in the ſame in greater meaſure: For then her wo was begunne by the death of her huſbande, continued through her long dwelling with the wicked Moabites, and ripened through the death of her two ſonnes: ſo now it falleth againe, as the darkeneſſe departeth at the dawning of the day, and giueth place to the light of the Sunne, ſo her miſeries are repealed, firſt with the louing and conſtant felowſhippe of her daughter in law Ruth, who was as a carefull huſbande to her, in labouring for her liuing, and a bleſſed childe to increaſe her poſterity: Againe, ſhe now was in quyet dwelling among the people of God, enioying the company of the faithfull, and the fellowſhippe of her frendes: moreouer her poſterity is reſtored in the fruitfulneſſe of Ruth, and ſhe, euen ſhe herſelfe liueth to ſee the day when al this falleth vpon her, to the endles comfort of her withered age, and preſent prayſe of the name of God. Thus we ſee it a righteous thing with God,

firſt to wound and then to heale; firſt to ſtrike and then to ſtroke: firſt to caſt downe, and then to lift vp: for this is certainely the cuppe of all the faithfull, that they muſt taſte of many bitter afflictions, before they come to the poſſeſſion of eternall bleſſedneſſe, yea of worldly miſery, they muſt ſuſtayne ſome croſſe, before they can be thankefull enough for that which they quietly inioy. So wee reade of Iob, howe in one day hee had his corne burnte, his cattell ſtolne, and his children ſlaine:Iob. 1.14.15.16.17. & 42.12.13. this was bitter vnto him for many dayes, yet in the ende he was reſtored two for one, and ſawe more ſonnes and more beautifull daughters, yea his childrens children to his vnſpeakable comfort: The like may be ſaid of innocent Ioſeph, he was rebuked by his father,Gen. 37.10.11. hated & ſolde by his brethren, impriſoned by his maiſter, forgotten by Pharaohes butler, all theſe were no ſmall diſcouragements to ſo young a man, yet in the ende hee was aduaunced to the higheſt ſteppe of honour as a recompenſe for all the tribulations he had endured. I may alſo adde this of Dauid being perſecuted by Saule, betrayed by the inhabitantes of Keilah, driuen to the Philiſtines his ſworne enemies, to craue a dwelling of them, ſeeing many martired for his ſake, in the ende had the poſſeſſion of the kingdome of Iudah, and after of Iſrael, which was the gift of the Lorde, the rewarde of his afflictions and his religion. By the which wee may ſee the hope of the godly: not that which they ſeele, but that which they may lawfully look for, the eaſe of their paines, ye remedy of their griefe, the comfort of their troubles, and the end of their miſerie to be ſpeedy redreſſe, if with patience they looke and wait for the pleaſure of the Lord: Therefore the godly ſay with Dauid, if ten thouſande compaſſe them rounde about, they will not be afraide, for the Lorde is the eye witneſſe of all their miſeries: the hot furnace of Babilon feareth them not: the Lions den cannot driue them to diſhonour God, if flames of fire conſume their bodies to aſhes, the dartes of Sathan pierce theyr ſoules to the quicke, the reproches of the worlde deſtroy their names, and the enemies of God ſpoyle their ſubſtance, yet they are not left deſtitute, for

their faith ouercommeth the world, their patience, all their afflictions, and their loue of God their deſire of earthly proſperitie. All which, cauſed the Apoſtle to ſay,Heb. 6.19. that hope was the anchor of the ſoule, meaning that as the anchor ſtayeth the ſhippe in the middeſt of all the waues, though they be neuer ſo great and huge: in like manner the hope of the godly keepeth them in the barke of Chriſtes Church, among the thouſandes of worldly tribulations: For Dauid ſaith, great are the troubles of the righteous: for the Lorde deliuereth out of all, as if hee had ſaide, the righteous and godly are afflicted to this ende, that the Lorde might ſhewe his power in their deliueraunce: And in another place hee complayning of his ſufferinges, & the ſorrowe of his ſoule: yet concludeth with this figurative ſpeeche: Why art thou ſo ſadde O my ſoule,Pſal. 13.1. & 43.7. and why art thou caſt downe within me, truſt ſtill in the Lorde, for by him I haue deliuerance againſt all my paines and griefe. Euen ſo doe I ſay to all my poore brethren in the worlde: why are you ſo ſad, if you want mayntenance, the earth is the Lords: If frendſhippe, the hartes of kinges are in his handes, as the riuers of waters: if libertie, hee can breake aſunder the iron gates, and deliuer the priſoners from their tormentors: if health, in his preſence there is ioy and life for euermore: if children, hee maketh the barren woman to bring forth many children: if apparell, hee clothed the Lillies aboue the royalty of Salomon: if meate, hee can multiply the leaſſe morſelles into the greateſt meaſures: and finally, if defence, hee giueth his royall Aungelles charge ouer the pooreſt of the godly, that the violence of princes, and the force of the Deuill him ſelfe ſhall neuer go beyond the decree & purpoſe of the Lorde? Therefore if grypes of griefe, and tormentes of ſorrowe doe lodge with vs all the night, yet ioy ſhall come in the morning, when the poore ſhall be reſtored, the ſicke recouered, the ſorrowfull comforted, the faithfull rewarded, and the wicked eternally plagued.
               
                  Secondly, by this verſe wee alſo gather a worthy example of a godly grandmother, which for the eaſe of her daughter, the loue of the infant, and the thankefulnes ſhee owed to God, ſhee became a fellowe nurſe vnto this younge ſonne of Bohaz: for although the wordes of the Scripture bee theſe, that ſhee became nurſe vnto the childe; yet the meaning is not, that ſhee tooke it from the mother, but that her tender care ouer it was ſuch, that during the weakenes of Ruth, and abſence of his mother, ſhee layde it in her lappe, and was as carefull for it, as any nurſe that was hyred to that duety: for Naomi coulde not bee a nurſe in theſe olde dayes of hers, without huſband or milke: which we know is the chiefeſt nouriſhment for younge children, and therefore a nurſe in this place, is taken for one that had a great care to procure the welfare & eaſe of the child.
               By the which wee note another duety of aged parentes, which liue to ſee theyr childrens children, namely that they bee as nurſes vnto them, to be as carefull for them as theyr owne, for therefore the Lord ſuffereth them to ſee the increaſe of their ſeede, that they might couer and nouriſhe it in their owne preſence. For this cauſe wee may reade, that the ſonnes of Manaſſes, and his ſonnes ſonnes were brought vp on the knees of Ioſeph theyr great grand-father,Gen. 50.23. for this laying in the lappe or on the knee, ſignifieth a moſt tender care ouer the infantes, that they be alwaies not onely in the preſence, but alſo in the handes of their grande parentes, as Rahell when ſhee gaue her maide Bilha vnto Iacob, and ſaide, that ſhee might bring foorth vpon her knees: that is,Gen. 10.3. ſhee woulde bee as carefull in the nouriſhment of them, as if they were her owne. Then by this they are taught their dutyes, vppon whome the Lorde hath vouchſafed to beſtowe this bleſſinge, that they ſee theyr childrens children; namely, that it is requyred at theyr handes, that they prouide for theyr education, good inſtruction and bringing vp: for they may ſay as Laban ſaid to his daughters children, yt they

are their owne, and therefore the care of the bringing vp dependeth vpon them: wee ſee the little twigges at the toppe to bee nouriſhed as well by the roote, as the bowes that growe out of the bodie of the tree, euen ſo grand-parentes prouide as well for the mayntenaunce of their childrens iſſue, as for their owne: ſo that in all kindneſſe they muſt bee intreated, in all wiſedome bee inſtructed, with all carefulnes be corrected, & with all religion be gouerned: for alas if the twigges fayle, there can be no fruit, and if your ſeed be corrupt, there wil come but a hard harueſt, ſo if your childrens childrē be not ouerſeene by you that are parentes and rulers of both, your name will decay, your family die, & your poſteritie be vtterly forgotten.
               Thirdely, in this place we may profitably enquire, about the nurſing of children, ſeeing Naomie is ſaid to be the nurſe of this childe of Ruth: Whether it be lawfull at all to put out children to nurſe from their owne mother, or whether the care of parentes be not to bring vp their childrē in their infancy, in their owne perſons or preſence, or els commit the tuition of thē to other. Vnto the firſt queſtion I aunſwere, that euery woman being in health of bodie and minde, is bound by the word of God to nurſe her owne children, and the reaſons for the confirmation hereof are theſe, firſt becauſe the Lord in the creation of their bodyes, hath giuen to euery woman breaſtes which are the meanes whereby children ſucke their nouriſhment: and therefore eyther the Lord created their breaſtes in vaine, or els they ſinne, if they ſet them not to worke: if any ſay, that the Lorde did giue the breaſts not for any neceſſity that they are boūd ſo to doe, but that they might bee furniſhed with the meanes if they had the pleaſure to do it, to whom I anſwere by the like example, the Lorde hath giuen to euery one handes to worke, eyes to ſee, eares to heare and tongues to ſpeake; is it in the choiſe of men, to cut of their handes, to pull out their eyes, to ſtoppe vp their eares and to keep their tongues in ſilence all their life, & neuer vſe them, as many women doe their naturall breaſtes: I thinke not, for if they ſhoulde, they muſt

deface the workemanſhip of God; diſmember their own bodyes, and murther the parts of mankinde: Therefore as the Lorde hath giuen to euery one handes, euery one muſt worke, or els he is accurſed, vnleſſe they wil be idols: of whom Dauid ſpeaketh, they haue hands & handle not, eyes and ſee not, eares and heare not, feete and walke not, noſes and ſmell not, and ſuch are women that haue plentifull breaſtes, and yet giue no ſuck. Secondly, the example of all the godly confirme it, as we ſee in Sarah, which nurſed her ſonne Iſaacke:Gen. 21.7. Exod. 2.8.9 Iud. 13.4.24. Cant. 8.1. in the mother of Moyſes, which was careful that her childe ſhould bee nurſed by no other then her ſelfe: in Manoahs wife the mother of Sampſon: ſo did Bath ſhebah the mother of king Salomon, being a queene in Iſrael the wife of king Dauid; yet ſhe thought it her duety to take her owne child and nurſe it:1 Sam. 1.23 Luc. 1.80. Luc. 2.7 Pſal. 22.9 I will ſpeake nothing of Hannah, of Elizabeth the wife of Zachary and mother of Iohn Baptiſt: of the virgin Mary, which gaue ſucke to the Lord of glory, Ieſus Chriſt her ſauiour: and of the mother of Dauid, all which are as patternes of naturall affection, for all the godly women in the world to imitate, and what bleſſing was powred vpon their children, who knoweth not: Therefore eyther women muſt follow their godly examples, or ſhew ſome charter of their libertie aboue theſe, or proclaime open diſobedience to God, and the godly, becauſe they ſwarue from his holy worde, and their moſt pure and worthy examples: but it is better to obey God then men, and to be ruled by the troubleſome liues of the faithful, then by the peaceable, and pleaſant deuiſes of all the gentlewomen in the worlde whatſoeuer.
               Thirdely,Rom. 
                        •
                     .30. it is a ſigne of the wante of loue and naturall affection in the parentes (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh) when the mothers doe not beſtowe the labour to giue their owne children their naturall milke: for if they had the ſame naturall feeling of theyr duties to their children, they coulde not (hauing no occaſion) commit the nouriſhing of their children to ſtraungers, who can neuer bee ſo inwardely kinde to the infantes, as the mothers eyther are or ought to bee: therefore although

though they pretende a kinde of ſorrowe for their childrens abſence or departing from them, yet it is like the lamentation of Eſau, which wept when hee could not get the bleſſing, whereas he ſolde it before, and was the onely cauſe of his owne reprobation: ſo women weepe at the departure of their children: whereas it lyeth in their owne power to keepe them in their owne poſſeſſion, and more thankefull woulde the chylde bee in his hearte to his mother; if ſhee had beſtowed the labour to nurſe him.
               Fourthly, it is not ſo naturall for the chylde to bee nurſed where hee was not borne, for the ſame body whereof hee had his being, is moſt fitte for his feeding, as wee ſee a plant doeth beſt proſper when it is grafted where it ſprunge vp firſt of all, then being remoued into another grounde, ſo the bodies of children doe growe more freely, and like mote cheerefully with their owne mothers milke, then with all the worlde beſide, and the auncienteſt Phiſitians ſay, that it were alſo better for the mothers if they gaue themſelues to this labour, therefore they doe but hinder their owne infantes borne of their owne bodyes, and as it were keepe them from their naturall welfare, when they giue them to bee made another nature, which is by their nurſing and feeding: Theſe cauſes and more alſo being duely and carefully conſidered, you ſhall fynde it a greater ſinne, to giue your children to other to bee nurſed, then heretofore you conceyued of it, ſo that you muſt for this one thing, condemne the vſe of your breaſtes, (which were the creation of God, and the practiſe of the auncient godly women, which were euery way as noble as any aliue) forſake the tender loue that annother ought to beare to hir innocente babe, bring your childrens bodyes to a ſeconde, yea, a contrary diſpoſition and complexion, and ſtoppe vp the plentifull conduytes of ſtreaming milke in your breaſtes, to the loſſe and hinderaunce of your owne health: Therefore if any haue any power to performe this naturall duety to theyr children, let them practiſe it: for all the carnall reaſons of the worlde, muſt not

preuayle agaynſt the leaſt collection of the worde of God. But ſome will ſay, admit that any through negligence doe put their children to bee nurſed of other, doeth the faulte onely reſt in the parentes, and nothing in the nurſe? to whome I aunſwere, if it bee vnlawfull for the parentes to giue, it is alſo vnlawful for the nurſe to take: ſo that whatſoeuer is ſaid againſt the one, may alſo bee brought againſt the other. But in cauſes of weakeneſſe in the woman, daunger to the childe, or ſickneſſe in eyther of both; it is not onely a duety of neceſſity, but of conſcience, to nouriſh and cheriſh the children of other.
               Therefore although the mothers had the nurſing of their children, yet there were others alſo like peti-nurſes, which had ſome eſpeciall care in the keeping of the children, as we may read of the nurſe of Rebecca,Gen. 24.59. which was the true vſe of nurſes for the eaſe of the mother to take the cuſtody of the children in all thinges, ſaue onely in giuing them ſucke, and therefore is it, that wee may reade in auncient hiſtories, that one childe had many nurſes, that is, many to attende the welfare and nouriſhment of the infant: of this ſort was Naomi at this preſent, who tooke vpon her ſome care of this ſonne of Bohaz, that they both might bee more diligent for the education thereof. Now for the other queſtion, whether it bee lawfull for the parentes during all the time of the infancy thereof, if the mother be not able to giue it ſucke, to commit their chyldren to other to be brought vp: I aunſwere, that euery man and woman are bounde to ſee their childrens firſt inſtruction, that is, if it bee poſſible to haue them in their keeping at their firſt entraunce into knowledge, and when they are firſt of all capable of any goodneſſe. So wee reade Iſaacke remayned with his father Abraham in the time of infancy,Gen. 21. 12 13 & 42, 4 2. King. 11 2.3 when God commaunded Iſmaell to bee caſt out: ſo Iacob kept little Beniamin with him: neyther would he depart from him vnto any, til Simeon was bound in Egipt: ſo we read of the king Ioaſh, whom his aunt Iehoſhebah hid from ye rage of Athaliah, who was

brought vp in the houſe of her huſbande Iehoiadah, where hee was moſt worthely inſtructed in the feare of the Lorde: ſo wee reade our ſauiour Chriſt kept till he was twelue yeares olde, with his mother and ſuppoſed father, and after he had beene at Ieruſalem, hee was obedient to them till the yeare of his preaching, which was when hee came to the age of thirtie yeares. Therefore the concluſion af all this is, that neyther the nurſing nor inſtruction of our children muſt be deferred to other, at the leaſt ſo as wee ſeeme not but to bee many wayes as carefull for them, as if they were in our preſence, to be euermore mindfull for the wealth of their bodyes, and health of their ſoules.
               Fourthly, and laſtly, by theſe wordes wee may gather, how great and excellent is this worke, the bringing vp of children, for which the Lorde hath expreſſed in his worde, that it is required that many ſhoulde bee applyed, for in this place we ſee Naomi and Ruth beſtow their labours for the education of this new borne babe: and we haue heard that Rebecca had a nurſe that came with her from her fathers houſe to the lande where Abraham dwelt; which ſignifieth vnto vs, that neyther their infancy can bee vnfedde, nor their youth vnruled; for this is not ſo baſe a worke as many thinke it, that one is enough, if not too much to take the care of their children, for wee knowe they are eaſily drawne to many inconueniences, neyther can the parentes bee preſent to foreſee all, but if any bee helpers in this buiſines, their care is much eaſed, the children leſſe endangered, theyr welfare better prouided, and the parentes dutie better diſcharged, Euery flocke hath a keeper beſide the owner, euery garden hath a dreſſer, beſide the mayſter: and if it be poſſible, let euery childe haue an ouerſeer beſide the parentes, for alas the ſilly infante is ſoone caſt into the fire, falleth into the water, ouerturned with the wind, and euery beaſt is ready to work his deſtruction: all which may bee wiſely preuented, though not with the preſence, yet with the counſel and care of the parents, by prouiding ſuch carefull perſons to be their guides, as may alſo defend them when they

are abſent.
               
                  And the women her neighbours] In this verſe is the ſeconde parte which concerneth the naming of the child, where the holy Ghoſt doeth declare vnto vs the perſons that named the childe to be the women of Bethlehem, the neyghbours of Naomi, which no doubt was then giuen to the childe, at the eyght day which was the circumciſion, according as wee ſee in the hiſtory of Iohn Baptiſt, after the law of the Lorde, calling him by the name of Obed, which ſignifieth ſeruing, or a ſeruant; ſhewing howe hee ſhould ſerue for the comfort of Naomi, Boaz and his mother.
               By this wee firſt of all note and obſerue, that it is the duty of the faithfull to be helpers one to another in the ſeruice of God, and admonition of their dutyes: for here the childe being circumciſed, was accompanyed with many godly women, whoſe deuiſe they vſed, and followed in the naming of the childe. Indeed we may often read that the parents gaue names to their children, ſometimes the fathers, ſometime the mothers, & ſometimes the Lorde himſelfe, as in many perſons wee may perceyue: but wee neuer reade that the people were ſo kinde to helpe in this matter, and to further the duty of any godly minded, (onely this place excepted) ſo that theſe women are a moſt godly example for all the faithfull to beholde, how they muſt further, and helpe one another in the cauſe of religion: For the naming of children in olde time was very excellent, when they were carefull by their earthly and outwarde tytles to admoniſh them of their inwarde and heauenly duties. And that which theſe did in this one, muſt wee doe alſo in all other duties, to draw more and more to the loue of religion: as wee reade the Apoſtles did one another, when they came to the firſt knowledge of the Meſſiah: for as a little leuen ſeaſoneth a whole lumpe, euen ſo a fewe godly perſonnes may drawe a great many to religion. Therefore this one dutie of all other belongeth to the flocke of Chriſt, that they helpe one another in the workes of Chriſtianity. When the ruler of the Temple his daughter was ſicke, for the little childe hee

went to our ſauiour, by which meanes he recouered her life, this was the duetie of a godly father: when the ſicke man of the palſie coulde not come to Chriſt, foure of his neighbours brought him to his preſence, and the Lord forgaue him: this was charity and the duety of neighbours: When Dorcas was deade, the women ſent for Peter, who being come, ſhe was reſtored to life. And thus parents muſt helpe forwarde their children, neighbours, their fellowes, and euery man one another: if they want knowledge, let vs teach them knowledge out of the pure worde of God: if they cannot pray, let vs pray with them, and for them, to the almighty God; if they trauayle to heare the word, let vs trauaile with them to encourage their carefulnes: But of this matter wee haue often ſpoken: Now let vs giue prayſe to God.
               The end of the ſixteenth Lecture.
            
            
               The ſeuenteenth Lecture.
               
                  
                     Chap. 4. ver. 18.19.20.21, 22
                     
                        18 Theſe are the generations of Pharez: Pharez begat Chetzron.
                     
                        19 Chetzron begate Ram: Ram begate Hamminnadab:
                     
                        20 Hamminadab begate Naſchon: Naſchon begate Salmā.
                     
                        21 Salman begate Bohaz: Bohaz begate Hobed.
                     
                        22 Hobed begate Iſhai, Iſhai begate Dauid.
                  
               
               
                  NOwe by the mercifull kindnes of the Lorde we are come to the laſt part of this hiſtory & the concluſion of this Chapter, where the holy Ghoſt deſcribeth vnto vs, the kindred of Boaz, euen all the generations, frō Pharez to king Dauid: ſhewing vnto vs the increaſe of theſe Iewes, from their dwelling in the land of Canaan,

before they went into Egipt vntill the time that Dauid was annointed and appointed king in Iſraell: we may, for the eaſier handling of theſe wordes, deuide them into theſe two partes: The firſt is, thoſe perſons that were the progenitours, aunceſtors or fathers of Bohaz, in the ver. 18. 19 & 20. which are ſet downe to be Pharez the firſt, Chetzron the ſecond, Ram ye third, Hamminadab the fourth, Naſchon the fift, and Salman the ſixte, who was the immediate and naturall father of Bohaz. The ſecond parte is the progeny, of ſpring and children of Bohaz, which ſucceeded him; firſt Hobed: ſecondly, Iſhai, and thirdely Dauid the king. Of theſe parts and perſons, let vs briefly ſpeake, ſo much as ſerueth for the expoſition of the Scripture, and the ſatiſfying of the tyme, through the aſſiſtaunce and help of the ſpirite of God.
               
                  Theſe are the generations] Now that the holy Ghoſt had declared vnto vs this hiſtory of Ruth, though briefly and in a fewe words, yet in ample and large circumſtances, for the vnderſtanding of his minde: at the ende hereof hee annexeth the kindred of the perſonnes, whome it chiefly concerneth, that he might ſhew vnto vs, that they were no meane or baſe perſons for whom this hiſtory was compiled, but ſuch as deſcended of the nobleſt family in all ye world; who were the appointed fathers of many kinges, and that which is moſt of all, the perſons, of whoſe ſeede our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt tooke the beginning and ſubſtaunce of his humane nature. And therefore in this place wee muſt declare the cauſes that moued the holy Ghoſt to be ſo careful in the rehearſing of the genealogies of the fathers; for we muſt not imagine
                     •
                  , that hee muſtereth not the names of thoſe auncient perſons, to worke any wonder in our mindes at the recitall of them, or that the ſcripture coulde haue beene perfecte without the ſeuerall generations therein deſcribed: but wee muſt knowe that there were dyuers neceſſary and waighty cauſes, by the iudgement of the auncienteſt and moſt approued wryters, which moued the Spirite of God to interſert theſe genealogies.
               
                  Firſt therefore according to the condition of all mankinde, there is equally deſcribed, the generations both of the godly and vngodly in the ſcriptures, for this cauſe to ſhewe the multiplycation of mankinde: of this ſort are the generations of Adam, Seth and Cain reported by Moſes,Gen. 5. that hearing the number of mankinde ſo quickely multiplyed, wee might the more earneſtly giue prayſe vnto God: Agayne the genealogies of the ſonnes of Noah are deſcribed vnto vs, to ſhewe the repleniſhing of the earth, the deſtruction of countryes,Gen. 10. and the reſtoring of the worlde: But to come neerer vnto the matter wee muſt take this for a generall rule that the genealogies of the wicked are reported in the ſcripture for to ſhewe the bleſſing and loue of God vpon the godly and righteous men: as for example, the Lorde reckoneth vp the poſterity of Iſmaell,Gen. 25.13.16. the ſonne of the bonde woman, ſhewing vs howe great a people hee became, and howe many Dukes or princes proceeded out of his loynes; to ſhewe vnto vs the promiſe and couenant which hee made to his father Abraham, that hee ſhoulde bee a great people, was fulfilled, and this ſerued to magnify and exalt the name of godly Abraham:Gen. 21.13. We read that the Lorde beſtoweth a great genealogie vppon wicked Eſau or Edom,Gen. 36. numbring or reckoning vp his ſonnes, and his ſonnes ſonnes, his kingdome and the kinges of his ſeede that raigned after him, for no other ende but to report and to manifeſt the bleſſing vppon godly Iſaacke and Rebecca his parentes, according to the oracle that hee gaue to his mother, when ſhee demaunded and enquired the cauſe of the ſtrugling or ſtriuing in her wombe. The like may bee ſaide of godleſſe Cham for Noah his fathers ſake,Gen. 25.23. of the ſonnes of Iacob for Iſraels ſake, of Ephraim and Manaſſes for Ioſephes ſake. By the which we gather and note this excellent doctrine, that if the wicked haue any good, it is for the ſake of their godly and righteous parentes or frendes: Wee ſee they ſhould not haue ſo much as a name in the booke of God, were it not for the cauſe of the righteous and godly:

we reade that when the Sodomites were ouercome in warre, their people lead captiues,Gen. 14.16. and their goods ſpoyled by the company of Cedorlahomer, then for Lots ſake, the Lord ſtirred vp Abraham, and armed him with men and courage, who wonne the victory, recouered the ſpoyle, brought backe the priſoners, reſtored their goods, and gaue them all libertie, for godly Lots ſake, who was ſhortly after deſpiſed by them, but they for their wickednes were burned in brimſtone, when righteous Lot was deliuered from them. If Ioſeph had not beene, they had had no corne in Egipt. If Moſes had not beene, the Lord had often deſtroyed the Iſraelites while they wandered and wauered in the wildernes. For Iacobs ſake, the Lord increaſed the flocks of Laban; For Ioſephs ſake he bleſſed the affaires of Potiphar; for Paules ſake he ſaued all them that ſuffered ſhipwracke at Myletum. Euen ſo alſo he bleſſed the houſe of Obed-edomi, becauſe the arke was kept therein, and at this day giueth greateſt peace to thoſe Countreys, where his Goſpell is promoted. Let the atheiſts thinke if there were none that feared God, they ſhould quickly be condemned, let the drunkards know, if there were not ſome temperate perſons, their bodies ſhould be quickly conſumed, let the couetous wretches aſſure themſelues, if there were not ſome liberall men, their owne goods would turne to their death, let the profaners of ſabbaoths remember, that if there were not ſome ſanctifiers thereof, their delightfull vanities would long agoe haue wrought their ſorrowfull deſtinies, let the contentious plaintifes be certified, that if there were not ſome peaceable Chriſtians among them, their wealth had long agoe beene waſted: for the prayers of the faithfull are like the walled Cities againſt the rage of enemies, to keepe the vengeance of the Lord from falling vpon vs: as the bloud of the Lamb ſpotted vpon the poſts of the Iſraelites houſes, cauſed the angell to paſſe by them, when all the firſt bornè in Egipt were ſlaine, euen ſo the bloud of the lambe of God, which is ſhead in the hearts of the godly, maketh his meſſengers of death to depart

from our countrey and kingdome. If there were not a remnaunt among vs that are in league with the Lord that dayly are the hearers of his word, the beſeechers for his mercy, and as the ambaſſadours of peace to diſſwade him from puniſhing our contempt of his word with condemnation, our abuſe of his creatures into pining famine, our wantonnes in peace into lamentable warres, our riotous liues into forraine captiuitye, and our pampered bodyes, to the ſlaughter of the ſword. You, euen you, that blaſpheme the name of God, if there were not a number that reprooue your abhominations, the heauens would raigne downe ſtones to reuenge your accurſed tongues: you, euen you, that ſpend the Sabbaoths in dauncing and playing, if there were not a company that refraine your pollutions, you had beene cut off from your pleaſure with ſome fearefull death, before you had paſſed thus many dayes of ſecuritie: you, euen you, that thinke the preaching of the Goſpell like the voyce of one that ſingeth, whereunto you owe no more obedience, then eare-ſeruice: if there were not a remnant that heard the word of power, which they beleeue is able to ſaue their ſoules, you had beene many yeares ſince, ſuffering the reward of ſuch impious infidelity. What ſtayeth the Lord from comming to iudgement, but the faithfull and elect company: what keepeth you in your poſſeſſions, reuennews, and lands, but the poore Saincts of God, who are hardly admitted to the tables of your ſeruants, who prayeth for the increaſe of your wealth, the proſperitie of your liues, the feeding of your bodies, and the continuance of your honour, but theſe deſpiſed perſons who haue entered a couenaunt for your dayly welfare with the king of heauen and earth. They are the flocke for whoſe ſake you haue your wooll to clothe you, and your milke to feede you; they are the bees, for whoſe ſake you enioy the hony for your delight, and the hony combe for the pleaſure of your meate; they are the birds, which haue builded vp your pallaces and houſes of reſt, for the defenſe of

your weakeneſſe; they are the oxen that bring your corne to your barnes, and your ſtore into your garners; they are the beaſts, that beare you out of the daungers in ſafetye, and deliuer your liues from trouble. Finally, there is not a vſurer, but he hath his money for theyr ſake; there is not a Gentleman, but hee hath his landes for theyr ſake; there is not a Prince but hee hath his Crowne for theyr ſake; there is not a rich man, but hee hath his wealth for theyr ſake; there is not a Miniſter but hee preacheth for theyr ſake, and there ſhoulde be no peace, proſperitye or plentye, if it were not for them, for the Angels are theyr ſeruaunts, the earth is theyr mayntenaunce, and heauen is theyr inheritaunce. Be aſſured therefore beloued, if righteous Lot goe out of Sodome, or godly Noah into his Arke, then fire will fall from heauen, and the depthes will open theyr fountaynes of water to burne and deſtroy the world: euen ſo if the Lord take away the righteous from among vs, then, euen then preſently ſhall follow the deſtruction of our countrey, the conſuming of our kingdome, the confuſion of the world, and the condemning of the reprobate, and therefore let vs make much of them, in whome we ſee any hope of religion, for they are the right heyres of the world, and you that haue their lands, are but ouerſeers of their fathers teſtaments, and therefore ſhall giue an accompt of your poſſeſſions to them when they come to age, and be anſwerable for euery farthing which you ſpent not vpon them.
               Secondly, another cauſe of the genealogies, or recitall of generations in the Scriptures, is for the Chronologies or noting of ſeuerall times, wherein euery worthie thing was done, and how the world grewe in yeares, and the mercy of God in ſparing the wicked liues of ſo many godleſſe men, and chooſing but one family among all the world, with whome hee would eſtabliſh his couenaunt: for this cauſe in the genealogie of Adam, we reade how long he and euerie one of his children liued, to ſhew how long

the Lord ſuffered the wicked before he brought the floud,Gen. 5. and in what age of the world the ſame ouerflowed, which by the genealogies there ſet downe, appeareth to be in the yeare of the world one thouſand ſixe hundred fiftie and ſixe, when Noah was ſixe hundred yeares old. Againe we reade in the genealogie of Sem,Gen. 11. by the ſupputation of the yeares therein mentioned, how long after the floud, Abraham was called from his countrey, and receyued the couenaunt of promiſe, concerning the incarnation of Ieſus Chriſt, and the ſaluation of the world. The ſame may be ſayd of the often repetition of the age of Abraham, as at his calling,Gen. 12.3. Gen. 17.24. at the time of his circumciſion, at the birth of Izaak, and at his death, which giueth a great light to euery part of the ſcripture, for thereby the occaſions of many excellent hiſtories are taken, the darkeſt places are opened, the faithfull are confirmed, and the Church of God inſtructed of her age, of her continuance, of her members, and of her condition, which is ſubiect to many often changes. Sometimes her glory is greater, as in the firſt age, ſometime leſſer, as in Abrahams time, ſometime afflicted, as the eſtate of Iacob in Egipt, and all his children teſtifieth: ſometimes without any knowne and publique miniſtery, or offices, as till Aarons dayes, ſometime without any ciuill or politique gouernement, as in the time of all the Patriarks, ſometime without peace in perſecution, as in the time of the Iudges, wherein theſe perſons heere named, liued, and ſometime in moſt flouriſhing eſtate, as vnder Dauid, Salomon, Aſa, Ioſiah, and ſuch like. By the which we gather, that it neuer ſtandeth in one ſtay, but either increaſeth or decreaſeth, ebbeth or floweth, riſeth or falleth, waxeth or waineth: therefore heerein lyeth the great comfort of the godly euen in theſe troubleſome dayes (but yet the beſt that euer are to be looked for in this earth) wherein they ſee the auncient to depart, and new men in theyr roome, one generation commeth, and another goeth, iniquitie aduaunced, coldnes in religion embraced, diſſimulation and hipocriſie maintained, warres and

perſecution threatned to the Goſpell, ſchiſmes defended, errors inuented, the world blinded, the truth declined, godlines defaced, and the Church of God diſquieted, with a thouſand greater calamities, this all the fathers ſuffered before vs, and this we their children muſt alſo abide; onely heerein let vs reioyſe, that we ſhall be accompted worthy to ſuffer for Chriſt, and that our names are written in the kingdome of heauen.
               Thirdly and laſtly, the eſpeciall cauſe of this genealogie, and of all the fathers and children of Abraham in one kindred, was for to ſhew the naturall diſcent of Chriſt from Adam, and ſo foorth vnto the virgin Mary: for ſeeing he was to be incarnated, it behoued that his parentage ſhould be deſcribed from the beginning of the world:Luc. 3.23. for this cauſe Luke the Euangeliſt, gathered togither the ſeuerall deſcriptions of all the genealogies pertaining to Chriſt, throughout all the whole ſcripture, as a neceſſary ground of the Goſpell, to declare the kindred of our Sauiour from the beginning of the world, whereof theſe perſons mentioned in this place are a part, from whence he tooke them into his number.
               Now leaſt any man ſhould thinke, that the birth of Chriſt ſhould be obſcure, and the taking vpon him the fleſh of mankinde, ſhould be incertaine, as well to conuince all errours that aroſe about his humanitie, as to teſtifie the nobilitie of his birth, and worthines of his parentage, the perſons of whome he deſcended, are in many bookes of the ſcripture ſeuerally named, and not without great commendation. For this family of Chriſt had many and ſpeciall bleſſings, which were the armes of the ſame, by which it was diſtinguiſhed from all other. In Adam it had this promiſe,Gen. 3.15. that the ſeede of the woman ſhould breake the ſerpents head; meaning, that Chriſt which ſhould be borne of a woman, ſhould ouercome the force of the deuill. In Noah it had this promiſe,Gen. 9.9. that the couenaunt of God ſhould be eſtabliſhed with him and his ſeede, meaning that his promiſe which he had made

vnto Adam, ſhould be perfourmed in his poſteritie, which was for the comming of Chriſt. This promiſe was renewed vnto Abraham, vnto Izaak, and vnto Iacob, and moſt plainely vnto Iudah, the third ſonne of Iacob,Gen. 29.10. who was the father and graundfather of this Pharez, that the Scepter ſhall not depart from Iudah, nor the lawgiuer from betweene his feete, vntill Shiloh come, and the people ſhall be gathered vnto him:Pſal. 132.11 and againe vnto Dauid he ſwore, that the fruite of his body ſhould ſit vpon his Throne, both which promiſes or propheſies reſpect the comming  and the raigne of Chriſt. By this then we firſt of all gather the ſcope of the whole ſcripture, namely, that aboue all other it reſpecteth Ieſus Chriſt the Sonne of God, and Sauiour of the world, the Prince of peace, the mightye King, and the great Counſellour. For this cauſe, he himſelfe ſpeaketh to the Iewes, Search the Scriptures,Iohn. 5.39. for in them you thinke to haue eternall life, and they are they that teſtifye of me. Agayne,Iohn. 20.31 Iohn ſpeaketh in the end of his Goſpell, that the Scripture was written that we might beleeue in Chriſt.Act. 18.28. And we reade that Apollo did mightely confound the Iewes, proouing by the Scriptures that Ieſus was Chriſt. But moſt euident and playne is that of the Diſciples going to Emaus,Luc. 24.27. to 46. and Ieſus ouertaking them by the way, it is ſayd, that hee began at Moſes and all the Prophets, ſhewing them, that Chriſt ought ſo to ſuffer, and that redemption and remiſſion of ſinnes, might be preached in his name to all the world. By the which it is moſt eaſye to be gathered, and doeth neceſſarily follow, that the ſumme, drift, and ſcope of the Scripture, dependeth vpon Chriſt. Firſt, becauſe all the godlie that are named therein, were eyther his Fathers according to the fleſh, or elſe the ſinguler types prefiguring his perſon, ſuch was Melchizedeck, Ioſeph, Moſes, all the Iudges, Samuell, and the Prophets, which although they were not of his naturall linage, (Melchizedeck excepted) yet they did moſt liuely repreſent him, Moſes and the Iudges

in this, that as they deliuered the people from earthlye captiuitie, ſo ſhould hee redeeme them from euerlaſting calamitye. Samuell and the Prophets in this, that as they inſtructed the Iewes in the lawe of the Lord, which was giuen by Moſes, ſo Chriſt ſhoulde put his lawe in the inwarde partes of the Churche, and teache them the Goſpell of trueth, theyr redemption wrought by himſelfe, the lawe of righteouſneſſe, the words of eternall life. Aaron and his fellowes in this, that as they ſacrificed for the ſinnes of the people with bullocks and beaſts, and ſprinckled the bloud with hyſop for their outward cleanſing, ſo Chriſt ſacrificeth his owne bodye, and cleanſeth from ſinne, thorough the ſprinkling of his owne bloud. Dauid and the Kings in this, that as they ruled the people by theyr temporall lawes conquering theyr enemies, and giuing them reſt and worldly honour, ſo Chriſt doeth raigne with the ſpirituall lawe of his word, triumphing ouer hell, death, and ſathan, leading captiuitie captiue, aſcending vp on high, receyuing gifts for men, deliuering his Church from theyr aduerſarye the Deuill, beſtowing vppon them ſpirituall peace and libertye, giuing them the honours of hys Miniſterie, Word, and Sacraments in this life preſent, and Crownes of glory in the life to come. Thus if wee looke vpon the Iudges, they ſhewe vs our redemption. If wee looke vppon the Kings, they ſhewe vs our ſaluation. If wee looke vppon the Prophets, they ſhewe vs our inſtruction. If wee looke vppon the Prieſts, they ſhewe vs our reconciliation, and if wee looke vppon the very names of the fathers of Chriſt which are deſcribed in the old Teſtament, they teach vs that our names are alſo deſcribed in heauen, and this is the profit we reape by the generation or genealogie of the faithfull, to confirme vnto vs the true humanitie of our Sauiour.
               So that heerein moſt liuely appeareth the dignitie of the Scriptures, and the maieſty of Chriſt, one mutually looking on another, as the ſunne doeth

the ſtarres, and the ſtarres the ſunne, for as the excellencie of the ſunne appeareth by the glory of the ſtarres, to whome it giueth light, ſo the maieſty of Chriſt is manifeſt by the ſcriptures, to whome he giueth credit: On the other ſide, as the glory of the ſtarres is magnified becauſe it is the light of the ſunne, ſo the credit of the ſcriptures is exalted, becauſe they concerne the Sonne of God. If the doings of earthly men be but paynted in ſome pamphlets, tragedies, or bookes of Chronicles, we accompt them famous, becauſe their actions are commended in print, what ſhall we then ſay of the Sonne of God, whoſe workes excell the worthieſt enterpriſes of all the world togither, and are recorded by the holy Ghoſt, the eternall God of trueth, thoroughout all the ſacred bookes of his eternall word, farre aboue the credit of worldly commendations, is not his maieſty incomparable? Do we buy the bookes of earthly mens deuiſes, to reade the fayned and doubtfull aduentures of Princes long ſince in their graues, and ſhall we ſuffer this booke of the heauenly ſtratagemes of our Sauiour lye aſleepe in the ſhops? Compare their worthines togither, you ſhall finde the difference as great, as is betweene the light of the ſunne, and a little rotten wood gliſtering in the darke. They ouercame ſome worldly Princes, but he ouercame the Prince of the whole world: they thorough a multitude of earthly ſouldiours, but he thorough himſelfe alone an infinite number of infernall powers: they inuented politique lawes for their peaceable gouernment, but he giueth ſpirituall precepts, and ruleth by them the hearts of men himſelfe: they had the heads of many noble perſons vncouered at their preſence, but he hath the tongues and knees of all them in heauen, in earth, and vnder the earth, bowing vnto him, yea, the Angels do him reuerence, for he is their head: they prepared names of Ships to cut the ſeas, but he could commaund the waters to beare him vp when he walked vpon them: they had their glory in gold, ſiluer, pretious ſtones, and ſoft apparell, but he being on earth, had his countenance

like the brightnes of the ſun, & his garments as white as the light; they could digge in the earth to find treaſures for their maintainance;Mat. 17.2. but he commanded the fiſhes of the ſea to render him his want: they were able vpon infinite charges, to keepe great families: but he without any charge fed fiue thouſand men, beſides women & children with a few barley loaues & two fiſhes, and cauſed much more to be taken vp, then at the firſt was deuided among them, finally they were able to deſtroie the bodies of men; but he is able to deſtroy both body and ſoule, they ſhewed themſelues in outward glorie, but he ſhall ſhew himſelfe in flaming fire, to render vengeance to all them that haue not obeyed his Goſpell. Therefore here muſt wee learne the maieſtie of Chriſt euen in the Scriptures, who was promiſed to theſe Fathers, appeared in their fleſh, ſatiſfied for our ſinnes, to whome all the Scriptures giue witneſſe, that he ſhall be the iudge of Princes, and ſubiects, liuing and dead. Vnto whom wee muſt giue reuerence, as to his Maieſtie appertaineth, for euen now he beholdeth with what feare we heare his word, with what loue we receiue it, with what hunger we deſire it, and with what conſcience we will practiſe it. Oh come let vs kiſſe the Sonne leaſt he be angrie, let vs waſh his feete with the teares of our eyes, and wipe them with the heares of our head. Let vs ſue to him, for hee is the Iudge wee are the rebels, hee the Sauiour, and we the ſlaues. Againſt him onely haue wee ſinned by contemning his Maieſtie, prophaning his Sabbaothes, blaſpheming his honour, diſobeying his Goſpell, and treading the pardon of our ſoules vnder the feete of our pleaſures; therefore while we haue time, let vs loue his truth, receiue his Goſpell, belieue his word, ſanctifie his Sabbaothes, magnifie his name, reuerence his Miniſters and repent vs of our ſinnes.
               
                  Pharez begat Cheizron] Now after the cauſes of the Genealogies deſcribed and the vſe of them, gathered out of the word of God and godly writers, wee muſt proceede to the ſpeciall perſons heere mentioned, for whoſe ſake the former hath beene ſpoken; we ſhewed

you in the beginning that theſe generations were ſom of them before Boaz, and ſome after him, as his children, and this we muſt put you againe in mind of, that here is handled the Genealogie of Chriſt. In the which this ſeemeth doubtful that he beginneth with Pharez, what ſhould moue him thereunto, ſeeing (as alreadye wee ſhewed you) that this Pharez was an inceſtuous birth: and therefore to common reaſon, it ſeemeth much more commendable that hee ſhould haue beene vtterly blot out of the note of theſe Fathers, or elſe the Genealogie ſhould haue beene farther repeated as from Abraham to Noah, that ſo the conſideration of his birth might haue bene hindered, thorough the companie of other godly Fathers. Vnto which I briefely anſwere, that for this cauſe he beginneth at Pharez, for the better vnderſtanding of the Prayers of the Elders, in the 12. verſe, which deſired that the houſe of Boaz might be like the houſe of Pharez, whome Thamer beare vnto Iudah, wherefore at the end of this Hiſtorie the Author annexeth the deſcription of the houſe of Pharez and of Boaz, for whom they prayed, vnto the third generation. So that in thoſe daies, moſt commendable was the poſteritie of Pharez, for they were ye chief of the tribe of Iudah, becauſe this Pharez was by nature the heire of the birth right of Iudah, becauſe he was the Son of Thamar, the widdow of Iudah his eldeſt Son. Againe, the ſcripture is not wont to couer the faults of the deareſt children of God, neither doth the holy Ghoſt euer conceale the ſinnes of the godly. It telleth vs of the drunkenneſſe of Noah, the inceſt of Lot, the vnlawfull oath that Ioſeph ſwore to his brethren, (by the life of Pharao:) the adulterie of Dauid, the diſtruſt of king Aſa, the fellowſhip that good king Iehoſaphat had with wicked Ahab, and Peters deniall. At all theſe the ſpirit of God neuer ſtandeth, but indicteth them of their ſinnes, though hee giue them their pardon by Chriſt. But wee muſt know farther that the ſpirite of God ſo ruled the pen-writers of the Scriptures, that he ſuffered them not to omit the grieuous ſinnes of themſelues their fathers and children: as

for example, Leui was the great graund-father of Moſes, which was the firſt writer of the Scripture, yet he ſetteth downe the curſe that the Lorde pronounced by Iacob againſt him for the ſlaughter of the Sichemites.Exod. 6.20. Likewiſe it is held of euerie one that Iob was the writer of his owne Hiſtorie,Gen. 49, 7. yet how doth he lay open his owne corruptions, curſing his birth,Iob. 4. accuſing God of iniuſtice, and deſiring to pleade with him. Moreouer, Samuel wrote his owne Hiſtorie, eſpecially the greateſt parte of the firſt booke, yet he layeth out the corruptions of his Sonnes in the gouernment of the people and how wicked they were, for whoſe ſake the people were driuen to deſire a King, the like may bee ſaid of many other, whoſe curſed ſinnes are by themſelues detected, being not aſhamed to confeſſe them, as they were not to commit them, but thus the godly are their owne iudges to condemne their owne ſinnes, for they know if they condemne themſelues, they ſhall not bee condemned of God. They ſaye with the prodigall Sonne that they haue ſinned againſt heauen & againſt earth, and are no more worthy to be called the ſonnes of God: they ſay with Paule, that they are the greateſt of all ſinners, and therefore haue receiued the greater mercie: they ſay with the man in the Goſpell, I am not worthy that thou ſhouldeſt come into my houſe, and euermore they lay the worſt ſide of their garmentes outward, that they might be more vile in their owne eyes, more fearefull to ſinne, more louing to God his mercies, more humble in the world, and more hunger for righteouſneſſe. Caſt away therefore if you be the children of God, this ſhame to acknowledge the infirmities where withall you are infected, for he that confeſſeth not his ſinnes, euen to his brethren, can neuer confeſſe the mercies of God to himſelfe. He that commendeth a Phyſitian, telleth what dangerous ſickneſſe he deliuered him out, and hee that will commend Chriſt the Phyſitian of our ſoules, muſt tell what ſinnes his ſoule was ſicke of, and how his Sauiour hath deliuered him: but yet alway remember that no man is bound vpon neceſſitie to declare his particular ſinnes, except

when his conſcience is grieued for them, that he 
                     〈◊〉
                   receiue comfort, or when he muſt ſatisfie the iniu
                     •••
                   he hath done to his neighbours. But wee muſt learn not once to deſpiſe any penitent ſinners, but rather embrace them or lay them in our owne boſomes; they are the ſheepe which wandered, but now is found; the groate which was loſt, but now is recouered; and the braunches which were dead, and now are greene, for the Angels reioyce for them; Chriſt dyed for them, heauen is prepared for them, and wee muſt praye for them. We haue heard already that this Pharez was the inceſtuous Sonne of Iudah: now if any aske why the Lord would take any part of ſuch vngodly beginnings, I anſwere with Paul,1. Tim. 1.15 that Chriſt came to ſaue ſinners, that is, he was incarnated of inceſtuous progenitours, to ſhew vnto vs that he could ſaue ſuch; of adulterous birthes, to ſhew vnto vs that he could ſaue the children of adultery, of Gentiles ſuch as Ruth, Rahab and Bathſhebah was, that hee might ſhewe vnto vs, hee was the appointed Sauiour of the Gentiles, becauſe hee vouchſafed to take his nature from them: for thus it be commeth him to fulfill all righteouſneſſe, to deſtroye the gates of Hell, to deliuer his members from the thraldome of Sathan, to gather together in one, from the Eaſt and Weſt, North and South, all the children of Abraham, to enioy the preſence of his Maieſtie, the inheritance of his kingdome, and the end of their faith, the ſaluation of their ſoules.
               
                  Pharez begat Hezron] Now we will briefely giue you the expoſition of the names & ſo make an end of this Hiſtorie. Pharez or rather Peretz in Hebrue ſignifieth a diuiſion; and the occaſion of this name was, becauſe of the two twinnes in the wombe of Thamar, he firſt of all brake foorth,Gen. 38.29 Gen. 46.12 and therefore they called him a diuiſion, from the time of his birth, hee was borne in the land of Canaan. Hezron or Chetzron, which was alſo borne in the land of Canaan, and the Sonne of Peretz, who was borne about the time, that the Iſraelites went into Egypt, and ſignifieth in our Engliſh tongue, the arrow of ioye; for till the Iſraelits

went into Egypt, they endured a great famine, which 
                     •
                  zechiel calleth the arrowe of famine, and when they were deliuered from this famine,Ezech. 5.61 by going into Egypt for corne, this child being then borne, he was called the arrow of ioy, as the famine is called the arrowe of ſorrow, as a remembrance of the mercie of God to them, in giuing them bread. Ram was the Sonne of Chetzron, and was borne in Egypt, about the time of Iacobs death, when the children of Iſrael began to be hated of the Egyptians; and therefore they called him Ram: which ſignifieth in our Engliſh tongue, caſt downe, or caſt off, becauſe they then began to bee afflicted, and ſaw (no doubt) great miſery like to fall vpon them, and they ſhould be caſt downe ſo ſoone as either the king or Ioſeph ſhould bee dead. Haminadab the Sonne of Ram, was alſo borne in Egypt, about the time of Ioſephes death, when he tolde the Iſraelites, that the Lord would viſite them, and deliuer them from the Egyptians, and it ſignifieth in our Engliſh tongue a people that would be free, being compounded of two words; wherein the Iſraelits teſtifie the hope of their deliuerance, that although they were now in thraldome, yet they ſhould bee in freedome againe. Nahaſhon or Nachſchon, the Sonne of Haminadab, was alſo borne in Egypt a little before the departure of the Iſraelites, when hey cryed grieuouſly to the Lord for their affliction which they endured in Egypt vnder the Taxemaſters, and it ſignifieth a crying or complayning, thereby noting in the name of the child that hee was borne in affliction, which might put him in minde of his Fathers miſerie, this man when the children of Iſrael were gon out of Egypt,Gen. 50.24. Num. 1.1. & 7. and pitched their tents in wilderneſſe of Sinai; was by election or appointment of God, made the Prince of the whole Tribe, Salmon or Shalmon the Sonne of Nachſchon, was borne after the Iſraelites were departed from Egypt, while they wandered in the deſert and were deliuered from the Amalekits and other their enemies; and his name ſignifieth peaceable, becauſe they liued then peaceably, being freed from the Egyptians and other calamities,

this man married with the victualer Rachab of Iericho, of whō he begat Boaz. Boaz ſignifieth in ſtrength, who was born about the time of the deliuerance of ye Iewes,Mat. 1.5. from the tyrannie of the Moabites by the hand of lame Ehud:Iud. 3.16. by which meanes they got ſtrength, and remained a long time in peace▪ Obed ſignifieth a ſeruant, who was borne as wee ſee in Ephratha Bethlehem, his mother being Ruth the Moabiteſſe, the women gaue him this name, becauſe hee ſhoulde ſerue for the rayſing vp of Elimelechs family, the reſtoring of Naomies life, and the comfort of his parents, Boaz and Ruth. Iſchai; or Iſhai, the Sonne of Obed, ſignifieth an oblation, and was borne about the daies of Iipthach; and it may bee had, his name giuen by reaſon of the vowe of Iipthach, when he went againſt the Hammonites, that he would offer the firſt liuing thing that met him after he returned with ye victorie, whervpon his daughter meeting him, ſhe liued in perpetuall virginitie. Dauid the youngeſt Sonne of Iiſchai, who no doubt was borne in the time of Heli, ſignifieth beloued, becauſe commonly the youngeſt are beſt loued, or elſe his name did propheſie that hee ſhould be ſo loued of God, with whom he would eſtabliſh his couenant concerning Chriſt, and aduance him to the kingdome. By which wee may plainely ſee, that this Hiſtorie was written after he was choſen from his brethren and anoynted to be king after Saule, or elſe the eldeſt Sonne of Iiſchai, ſhould haue beene named becauſe the birth-right belonged to him.
               Laſtly by this we may gather, that the foundation of the Goſpell muſt be ſearched for in the olde Teſtament for this Genealogie, as all the other of Chriſt is taken from thence, and the Apoſtle defining the Goſpell, ſaith that God had promiſed it before by the Prophets, in the holy Scriptures, that is in the olde Teſtament:Rom. 1.2. and therefore it was needfull, for Mathew to begin his Goſpell with the Genealogie of Chriſt, from Abraham and Dauid who had moſt liuely promiſes of his incarnation; alſo Marke and Luke begin with Iohn Baptiſt who was the promiſed Eliah, and the forerunner

of Chriſt according as before it was propheſied: and Iohn fetcheth it from the creation and beginning of the worlde, as it appeareth in the entraunce of his Goſpell. By which we may ſee the hope of the Fathers for the comming of Chriſt, to be the ſame with ours, and had the liuely promiſes thereof reuealed in the law and the Prophets. Secondly, the heauenly agreement that is betweene the olde Teſtament and the new, for there he was promiſed, thence he was proued to be the Meſſiah, all the Prophets giue witneſſe vnto him, now he is exhibited, humbled, and aduanced to the higheſt degree, the gouernment, heauen and earth: ſitting at the right hand of God, making interceſſion for his Saints, working in the calling of his ſeruantes, with the miniſterie of his worde, diſpoſing all things to the damnation of the wicked, and the ſaluation of the godly. Now let vs giue praiſe to God.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   