
      
         
            
            
            A Funerall Poeme. VPON THE DEATH OF THE MOST WORTHIE AND TRVE SOVLDIER; Sir Francis Vere, Knight. Captaine of Portsmouth, &c. L. Gouernour of his Maiesties Cautionarie Towne of Briell in HOLLAND, &c.
            LONDON Printed for Eleazar Edgar. 1609.
         
         
            
            
            DEDICATED TO HIS LIVING MEMORIE; WHICH ASCENDS TO THE INHERENT HONOVR OF THE HEROYQVE HOPE OF NOBILITIE, THE EARLE OF OXFORD, &c. FROM WHOSE NOBLE FAMILIE, THIS IMMORTALL WORTHIE, HATH THE HONOVR TO BE Descended.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A Funerall Poeme. VPON THE DEATH O
                  •
                THE MOST WORTHY AND TRVE SOVLDIER; SIR FRANCIS VERH, Knight; Captaine of Portsmouth, &c. Lord Gouernour of his Maiesties Cautionarie Towne of Briell in HOLLAND, &c.
            THy Earth's return'd to Earth, from whence it came;
            But from thy Spirit rizze thy worthy Fame,
            
            
               Immortall Vere; and that shall neuer dye;
            But with it liue to all Posteritie.
            
            How can the Memory of such a Spirit,
            VVhose Actions eu'n of Enuie got his Merit
            
            Acknowledgement, Subscription, Approbation;
            
            And made it clearely shine through Emulation,
            
            VVhich with Contracted Cloudes did interpose,
            Betweene the world and him, to darken those
            
               
               
                  
                     •
                  lustr
                     •
                  ous honours of his noble worth,
            Which his eff
                     •
                  ntiall Souldiership brought forth;
            
               
                  •
               e euer ruin'd? Nor can Death or Fate,
            
            Confine his Fame to an expiring date;
            
               
                  •
               ince all they can doe, is to kill his Earth;
            
            Whose Dust wip'd of his Soule, a second Birth
            
               Regenerates the honour of his Acts
            
            
               
                  •
               nto Eternity. He that detracts
            The dead Mans good, defames his owne intent;
            
               
                  •
               nd makes obscured vertues, eminent.
            
               
                  •
               ut (Noble Vere) this Monument I raise,
            With vncorrupted purpose to thy praise.
            
               
                  •
               ll that I speake, is vnexacted, true and free;
            
            
               
                  •
               rawne clearely from vnalter'd certaintee.
            For heere I doe ingenuously professe,
            
               
                  •
               he nature of this Subiect would oppresse
            
               
                  •
               nd trouble my reposed state of Soule,
            With contemplating that which should contruleo
            Our Licences of Conscience, if the due
            Of this I attribute thee, were vntrue.
            
            And you the worthies of our present daies,
            
               
                  •
               hose ludgements and experience knew his waies;
            
               
                  
                     •
                  nuersed with his Actions and Intents,
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   priuate and in publique managements;
            
               
                  •
               o your true vnderstandings it is knowne,
            
               
                  •
               hat he might claime 
                  •
               ese honours for his owne.
            
               His Minde was like an Empire, rich and strong,
            
            In all defensiue pow'r against the wrong,
            That ciuill tumult or inuasiue Hate
            
            Might raise against the peace of her estate.
            It was a plentifull and fertile ground,
            Wherin all needfull riches did abound.
            
               Labour increas'd what natiuely was bred;
            No part was bairen, or ill husbanded.
            And with the paines of Industrie and witt,
            
            In little time, He made such Benefit
            
            Of Conuersation (the Commerce of Mindes;)
            That what his hable obseruation findes
            In other knowledges of vse, and good,
            
            Which in his owne was yet not vnderstood;
            Through this rich trade (wherby al good is known)
            
               Conuerts them home, and plantes them in his owne.
            Which was so sweet and temperate a seate,
            Without th'extremities of cold or heate;
            
            That it could easily it selfe apply
            To eu'ry vsefull Nature, properlie.
            
            And so did yeeld such prosperous increase
            Of vertues qualifi'd for warreand peace;
            That not a Mind wherewith He did conferre,
            Could vtter speech of that particular,
            Though in the waies which other men profess'd;
            Where with his vnderstanding was not bless'd.
            
               
And whatsoeuer He deliuer'd forth,
            
               Inserious things, was of a Solide worth;
            
               Commodiously materiall; Full of vse;
            
            And free from ostentation and abuse.
            
            And as that Empire of his minde was good;
            
            So was her state as strong wherein she stood.
            Her scituation most entirely lay
            Within it selfe; admitting not a way,
            Nor any open place, infirme or weake,
            
            By which offensiue purposes might breake
            
            Into her gouernment; or haue accesse
            Thorough the most familiar passages
            That led vpon him, vnder faire pretence,
            Without discouering they ment offence,
            
            Before it was too late to giue retreate
            To their proceedings. Nor could any heate
            
            Or violence of such inuasion, make
            His passions mutin'; or his pow'rs forsake
            Their proper places. Nothing could disband
            The strength and order of his minds commaund.
            
            For neuer mind her nature better knew;
            
            Or could obserue a discipline more due
            
            To such a Nature; or was fortified
            
            With workes were more ingentously applied,
            To answere all attempts and iniuries,
            In their owne kinde and seu'rall qualities.
            
               
And in that scope, (offences to auoide)
            The vse of all those forces was employ'de.
            
            Within his Natures lines it might be read;
            He was a Souldier borne, aswell as bred.
            And out of his owne morall Character,
            
            He might haue learn'd his Mysterie of Warre.
            
            
               Warre was the Spheare wherein his life did mooue;
            And in that course, his actions did approoue,
            How well his worth did his employment fit;
            
               Th'vnited prouinces can witnesse it;
            And will acknowledge gratefully, that Fate
            
            VVas graciously propicious to their state;
            
            VVhen their most happie Genius gauetheir voic
            
            And did direct their wisedomes to make choice
            Of one so hable and so fit in in all,
            
            To be that worthy Nations Generall;
            
            On the sufficiencie of whose commaund,
            
            The chiefest hopes of their Successe did stand.
            And Noble Willough by, thy ludgement knew,
            And he hath reallie confirm'd it true;
            That in his life, thy memorie should liue,
            For the iudicious fauours thou didst giue
            To his beginnings. VVhich did still produce
            Some Action, promising of what high vse
            His generous courage, wit, and Industrie,
            
            Pract
                  •
               z'd with Iudgement and dexteritie,
            
            
               
Should be vnto that State. In whose braue Warre,
            
            When he had brought his seruices so'farre,
            That they deseru'd the chiefest English charge;
            His spirit with his fortune did enlarge
            
            It selfe, according to his place. For as
            His former carriages did duely passe
            Through those right waies by which he should obey;
            
            Now, he did prooue he knew as right a way
            How to commaund. And suited all his Course,
            
            With correspondent order; life, and force.
            
            He put not on those popular aspects,
            Which Greatnes oft obsequiously affectes,
            To winne the vulgar fancie. For he knew,
            
               That bum our would distract him from the true
            And faithfull Course wherein he should attend
            The publique seruice; to a priuate ende.
            And with too easie and familiar sense
            
            Make Fauour apprehended. And dispence
            
            With such neglect of dutie as proceedes
            From that presumption which remissnes breedes.
            But gaue himselfe vnto the publique cause;
            And in the due performance of her Lawes,
            
            His fauours had their constant residence;
            
            To th'end he might attract mens diligence
            
            Directly to their dueties; and aduance
            The Armies seruice. For his Countenance
            
            
               
Respected men with a Reseruednesse
            
            
               Refer'd to that where with he did expresse
            His exemplarie actions. So that none
            Could gather from him any Signe whereon
            To raise themselues a promise or a hope
            Of their preferment, but within the scope
            Of their peeuliar merites. And the waies
            And manner by the which he vs'd to raise
            
               Deseruing men, and did his fauours spread;
            
            Were with as much discretion managed:
            And nourish'd industrie no lesse. For whan
            He did bestow preferment on a man;
            The gift descended from no second hand,
            That might diuide a generall commaund;
            But from himselfe, as a proprietie
            
               Reseru'd vnto his owne authoritie.
            And often (vnrequested) singled forth
            Some priuate men, whom for desert and worth,
            He did aduance to some emploiment fit,
            Before they sought it, or expected it.
            Hence, did his troupes not onely vnderstand
            Their hopes to rise depended on his hand;
            But that he caried an obseruing eie
            That would informe him how deseruingly
            
            They bore themselues: which did aswell produce
            Endeuour to doe well, as curbe abuse.
            
            
               
And made example, Emulation breed;
            Which (leading vnto gen'rous ends) doth feede
            The actiue disposition of the spirit,
            With a desire to goe beyond in Merit.
            In which pursuit, his Action still was wont
            To lead the way to honour. And i'th'front
            Of danger, where he did his deedes aduance;
            
            In all his gestures and his Countenance,
            
            He did so pleasing a consent expresse
            Of Noble Courage, and free Cherefulnesse;
            
            That his assurance had the pow'r to raise
            
            The most deiected spirit into praise
            
            And imitation of his worth. And thus,
            By meanes Heroique and iudicious,
            
            He did incline his armies gen'rous part
            With loue vnto the practise of Desart.
            
            And in that moouing Orbe of actiue warre;
            His high command was the transcendent Starre,
            
            Whose influence, for production of mens worthes,
            
            Did gouerne at their militarie Birthes;
            And made them fit for Armes. VVitnesse the merits,
            
            Eu'n of the Chiefest ranckes of warlike Spirits,
            Who for our Princes Seruice doe suruiue;
            
            Which from his vertues did their worthes deriue.
            Then; to reduce th'affections of the rude
            
            And ill dispo'sd licentious Multitude;
            
            
               
His wisedome like wise did as amplie show.
            
               Tradition and experience made him know,
            That men in Armies, are more apt t'offend;
            And faults to greater danger doe extend
            
               There, then in ciuill gouernments; and are
            More difficult to be suppress'd in warre
            Then peace; and that there's nothing can restraine
            Their dissolute affections, but the Reine
            
            Of strict and exemplarie punishment.
            Since of necessitie, such gouernement
            
               Must bee; his entrance (therefore) was seuere:
            
            Which did possesse them with a timelie Feare.
            For when a Chiefe comes first into his place;
            Then all mens eies are bent vpon the Face
            
            Of his Behauiour, with a fix'd regard.
            In which Attention, they are best prepar'd
            
            To take impression what they ought to doe,
            That he would haue them be accustom'd too.
            For as his manners, then, report him; So
            The reputation of his Name will goe.
            And thus his name grew hable to suppresse
            
            The strong'st Commotions of licenciousnes,
            Euen in their first conceptions. Or if some
            Were still so bold to vndergoe his Doome;
            
            Yet in the terrour of his very name
            They were so long proiecting how to frame
            
               
And execute their practise safe and free,
            Without the danger of seueritee;
            That if their doubtfulnes did not diuert
            And vtterly disanimate the heart
            O their proceedings; yet their coldenesse brought
            The Act so impotentlie from the thought;
            And made their strong'st performances so lame,
            
            That they were ouertaken ere they came
            To preiudice the publique cause. And now;
            
            When as the few complaints reported how
            Effectually his labours prosper'd; and
            His men grew well conform'd to his command;
            With their obedience, he did slacke the bent
            Of his seueritie in punishment.
            Yet with so wise a moderation, that
            His fame to be seuere, continu'd at
            The full opinion. For the pardons gain'd,
            Seem'd alwayes difficult to be obtain'd;
            As if they rather came through intercession,
            
            Then from the purpose of his owne remission.
            And lenitie, (which commonly incites
            A boldenes in disorder'd Appetites,
            To more offence,) thus wisely managed;
            
               Offensiue mindes were more discouraged
            
            By Mercie, then by Iustice. For when they
            That stood to die, by some vnlook'd for way
            
               
VVere pardon'd, when they did dispaire to liue;
            
               Th'obseruing Souldiers, instantly, did giue
            Themselues perswasion, that vndoubtedly
            The next offendour should be sure to die.
            And that opinion, like a Centinell
            
            Held watch vpon their Actions; did repell
            
            Th'extrauagant eruptions of offence;
            
            
               Enlarg'd the scope of care aud diligence;
            And did not onely hold a regular
            And orderly obedience to the warre;
            But likewise did as happily preuent
            
            The iust necessitie of punishment
            
            On many liues, which vnder a milder course
            
               Presumption would incurre; and law (of force,
            To cut off wayes to dang'rous consequence)
            
               Must execute. Thus, that which in the sense
            Of vulgar apprehension, seem'd to bee
            A disposition vnto crueltie;
            
            Appear'd a worke that wisedome did proiect
            With purpose to a contrarie effect.
            That which malignant Censure would suggest
            To be a humour cruellie express'd;
            That did mens liues regardlesly depriue;
            Was of mens liues the best preseruatiue.
            
            But to disprooue that idle imputation,
            (that made it seeme a vitious inclination,
            
               
Inherent with his nature) and augment
            The sorce of his true honours Argument;
            Offences done against his owne estate,
            (Which alwayes doth more strongly aggrauate
            
            The weight of iniurie to priuate sense,
            Then publique apprehension of offence;
            
            And stirres mens passions more;) haue oftentimes
            Subduc'd the Malefactors for those crimes,
            Into the hands of lustice: where he might
            With approbation and consent of right,
            
            Haue satisfied that Nature to the full;
            Aswell in punishments that iustly pull
            On Death, as other grieuous penalties.
            
            And yet his hurt that from those faults did rise,
            And nearely touch'd him, neuer did incense
            
            Or mooue his mind, (Since with no reference
            
            They did engage him to the publique cause;)
            To prosecute the rigour of the lawes.
            But held himselfe sufficiently content,
            
            To learne by one, another to preuent.
            
            Nor neede I from his martiall scope, digresse;
            T'approove that, by his morall cari'ges:
            Since if we doe proceede to note his course,
            We shall obserue; where Mildnes was of force
            To propagate the Armies seruice, more
            
            Then stern-nes; with conformitie he bore
            
               
Himselfe. As in the exercise of Armes;
            (Where terrour alwaies generally harmes;
            
            And dulles the apprehension and conceipt;)
            Hee hated roughnes, violence and heate;
            And with a most vnweari'd patientnes,
            Would labour to insinuate and impresse
            His demonstrations. Hence it might appeare;
            He had a mind so temperatelie cleare
            And free from passion, that he could applie
            
            His Methode to his subiects propertie.
            
            And both approoue, that his seueritie
            
            Was dedicated to vtilitie.
            
            Wherein his Nature did it selfe expresse,
            
            
               Adapted vnto publique bus'nesses;
            That had the strength of patience to dispise
            
            The bitter censures of malignancies,
            
            In managements so subiect to construction;
            
            And fixe himselfe vpon the right conduction
            Of his affaires, to publique vse dessign'd;
            Nor giuen, nor forc'd, to any other end.
            He was not of that soft and seruile mould,
            That all impressions takes, and none doth hold;
            But his owne Reason in himselfe did raigne;
            
            What she inspir'd, he firmely did retaine.
            Hee could not flatter Greatnes; Zanie humours;
            Or be obsequious to aswage the Tumours
            
            
               
That in corrupted mindes did rise and swell
            Against him: But did residently dwell
            Vpon the purpose of a true intent;
            In whose successes he was confident.
            
            And as his word was, all his deedes were so;
            — Veritate, non obsequio.
            Thus did his Armie in obedience stand,
            Vnder the Count'nance of a braue Commaund.
            
            Which from the force his wisedome did applie,
            Receiu'd more strength then from's Authoritie.
            
            And as the disposition of the Mind,
            
            Was by his gouernement well disciplin'd;
            
            So was the Bodie by his exercise:
            
            
               Practis'd, and perfect in th'actiuities
            
            And postures, on the which consist the right
            Wayes of Agilitie and skill to fight
            
            In Armes, and Armies. Where, his hand did show
            As much as Reason and Experience know,
            How they should Marshall them. How to compose,
            
            Diuide, transpose, conuert, open or close;
            
            
               Partes, bodies, figures, aspects, distances;
            
            
               
                  
                     •
                  n quarter, march, attempts, resistances;
            According as the grounds capacity,
            
            Or the condition of an enemy
            
            
               Requireth or admits the fittest course
            Of forme or change; with order, speede, and force;
            
            
               
And best assurance from defensiue art,
            To'th most aduantage in th'offensiue part.
            And all those other partes, whereof consist
            
            The gen'rall worth of such a Martialist;
            
            In him vnited their habilities;
            
            And made him compleate. All his industries,
            
            (aswell in actiues, as contemplatiues;)
            Were such as those whence prouidence deriues
            
               Apt instruments to stand in present stead,
            According to th'occasion offered;
            Which either on the principall dessigne,
            Or some adherent int'rests that entwine
            And sway the principall; may fasten on
            An answerable disposition:
            And so worke way to prosperous euents;
            Aswell in vnexpected accidents,
            As things proiected and premeditate.
            In Councell; he was of so temperate
            
            And free a Mind, that Reason in his Soule,
            
            Like an imperiall presence, did controule
            And scilence all those passions that haue force
            To interrupt the passage of discourse.
            
            While to the cleare and vneclipsed eye,
            
            Of his strong intellectuall faculty,
            His well informed knowledge did present
            The state and Nature of the Argument:
            
               
The partes; th'entire; and eu'ry circumstance
            
            That was contingent, or had reference
            
            
               Materiall to the thing consulted on.
            Which when his free discourse had pass'd vpon;
            His iudgement in conclusion, did lay ope
            The waies, the meanes, the reasons, and the scope,
            
               What, how, whereby, and when, and where to doe;
            And eu'ry due respect annex'd vntoo,
            With such demonstratiue and pregnant force;
            That, practise without speculatiue discourse;
            Nor speculation without practise tried;
            Nor both, without great prudence amplified,
            To know their vses and applie them well;
            To his aduise, could make a Paralell.
            
            Nor did his knowledge and experience stand
            Vpon that onely limit of commaund,
            That Marshalleth an armie fit to fight;
            
            But had as perfect and profound a sight
            Into the iudgement how it should be led,
            And with the most aduantage managed,
            Aswell through all the Bodie of a warre;
            As in performance of particular
            
            
               Dependent seruices. As They may note,
            Who haue perused how his Penne did quote
            The margent of our Ages great dessignes,
            With his obseruing and iudicious lines.
            
            
               And in those obiects of the iudgements eie,
            
            (As if he kept a key of Mysterie,)
            His vnderstanding had so deepe a sight,
            That in dessignes which were without the light
            
            Of practise or example, he hath found
            (Oft times) a way, which when he did propound,
            Was of so difficult and high a straine,
            That eu'n experienc'd sense could hardl'attaine
            To find it probable or fit; vnlesse
            Approou'd by demonstration and successe.
            Yet (of true iudgement constant in pursuit,)
            When Action did his Counsaile execute,
            The progresse and euent subscrib'd in Act,
            
            His way for largest vse, was most exact.
            
            Nor was his iudgement, onely so mature
            
            In purposes, whose distance could indure
            
               Deliberate aduise; but did expresse
            It selfe, as fully ripe, with readines
            
            And order, where the cause would not admitt
            The Action any time to studie it.
            And had so present a conce
                  •
               pt, (that did
            Attend occasion as it offered;)
            That when the thunder of a hotte Alarme
            
            Hath cald him sodainly from sleepe to arme;
            
            Vpon the instant of his waking, hee
            Did with such life, and quicke dexteritie,
            
            
               
His troupes direct; the seruice execute;
            
            As practis'd Printers, Sett and Distribute
            
            Their Letters: And more perfectly effected;
            For what he did, was not to be corrected.
            
            And as his Counsailes shew'd his Iudgements merit;
            So did his deedes as infinite a Spirit.
            
            In Action, both (contracted) did embrace;
            What one perform'd, was to the others grace.
            
            There, wisedome did his Fortitude direct;
            
            And Fortitude his wisedome did protect.
            
            For in the Heart of actiue seruices,
            Where sodaine dangers with a fierce accesse,
            Haue made surprise vpon him; vnremoov'd
            His Iudgement stood; and there,, was most approou'd
            His vnderstandings greatnes did appeare
            In perturbations, least disturb'd, most cleare;
            
            And then gaue amplest witnesse of her worth.
            
            All the directions he deliuer'd forth,
            Were then, most orderly, assur'd and sound.
            
            The sense of terrour neuer could confound
            
            His Iudgement. Reason did such freedome find,
            Within the gen'rous greatnes of his Mind;
            
            And was so guarded by his Fortitude
            From eu'ry violence that would intrude.
            
            
               Which, in such dangers, doth precisely trie
            
            The true and natiue Magnanimitie.
            
            
               For nothing doth the Iudgement more torment
            
            With rude confusion and astonishment,
            Then Feare; which by contraction of the hart,
            Doth force the power's of soule from eu'ry part,
            Out of their proper seates and offices,
            
            Into a narrow lymitt; where the presse
            
            And vndistinguish'd croude of faculties,
            Doth interrupt the passage of aduise.
            
            Hence, not improperly, the word might rise,
            That termes them litle minds, which Cowardize
            
            Possesseth. Where, when feare of death doth start
            
            The spirits, and makes them flie vnto the heart,
            They want that competent required space,
            
            For eu'ry power in a distinguish'd place,
            To worke in order. Consequently thence,
            It may be taken in as apt a sence;
            
               Courage is termed greatnes of the minde,
            
            Where Reason with her faculties doth find
            Sufficient roome, wherein she may dilate
            
            Their seu'rall properties, with ordinate
            
            Distinction; (when inuasiue terrours rise
            Vpon th'exteriour senses, to surprise
            Those passages;) by making good their grounds,
            
            Vnto the largenes of their proper bounds.
            
            Yet may we not deseruedly repute
            
            That nature worthy this great attribute,
            
            
               
Where boundlesse Choler doth predominate.
            
            For that extention's rather vast, then great;
            And by extreamnes in another kind,
            As dang'r ously disturbes the powers of mind.
            As Feare contrudes; so choler doth disperce.
            
            But Fortitude, nor violently fierce;
            Nor coldly dull; as prudence doth require,
            Holds them distinguish'd, mutuall, and entire,
            
            For that which is a vertue, will admit
            All vertue free societie with it.
            And this was that true valour which the spirit
            
            Of this Heroique Worthy did inherit.
            Now if malignant Censure quarrels it,
            And say it was a Habite, he did get
            By custome with such danger; rather than
            The natiue vertue of a valiant Man:
            Let enuie' please to turne her clearer eye
            
            On his Beginnings. They will satisfie;
            
            Or prooue her false. For when he first bore Armes;
            Among the first that press'd to front Alarmes;
            
            His Sword thrust formost. And his chiefe desire
            
            From the beginning, labour'd to aspire
            
            Through enterprise and danger. When the face
            
            Of bloodie handed warre, in it's owne place
            Did first encounter him; and did appeare
            In shapes of terrour to impresse a Feare:
            
               
He met it smiling. And did make it yeeld,
            That he brought Courage with him to the field.
            And when but in a priuate ranque he seru'd;
            
               That vertue made him publiquely obseru'd.
            And was th' effectuall Cause that did aduance
            His fortunes to a higher countenance.
            The first examples of his worth in Act;
            
            Were like to that whose valour did attract
            Th'impartiall Eye of valiant Williams; And
            In honour of him publish'd with his hand,
            In a discourse now extant, then put forth;
            Where he to his effect, reports his worth.
            Braue Vere was by his Scarlet Cassock known;
            Who at th' assaults both of the Fort and Towne,
            
            Stood alwaies in the Head of th' Armed Men.
            Where, hauing twice beene hurt and wounded, when
            My selfe (with other of his friends desire)
            Requested him that then he would retire;
            
            His answere was, that He had rather die
            
            Tenne times vpon a breach; then once to lie
            
            Vnder the hand of death within a House. &c.
            Thus at the first, his vndertaking showes
            It selfe; and no occasion doth omit,
            That might giue witnesse of his worth in it.
            And as his Courage, then, was true to'
                  •
               h waies
            Through which hee did's deserued fortunes raise;
            
               
To his particular and priuate good:
            So for the publique seruice when he stood,
            It euer was so faithfull to the lawes
            Of that integritie he ought the cause
            He seru'd; that when occasion did present
            His obseruation with some accident
            Within the enemie, that did inuite
            
            The side he seru'd in, to attempt a fight;
            With promise of good seruice to the state;
            Though dangers might make it infortunate
            
            To his particular; and did obiect
            Their terrours to disanimate th'effect.
            And though the presence of superiour place,
            Did show no disposition to embrace
            The enterprise. When nothing did enforce
            
            His Courage, but his voluntarie course;
            If promise of good sernice did inuite;
            Through dangers he expos'd himselfe to fight,
            
            Against all difficulties that withstood;
            And wonne his bonour, with his losse of blood.
            
            And what his sword could not directly hit;
            He circumuented by the power of wit.
            
            Vsing that licence (only) which in warre
            
            Hath iust allowance, though irregular.
            
            Where he shew'd all wherewith wit can assist
            The workings of a Stratagematist;
            
            
               
Without conducting them to their successe,
            Through any passage of perfidiousnes.
            
            And th'vndertakings of his indvstrie
            VVere caried with such dext'rous secrecie;
            
            That while the Breath of his divulg'd pretence,
            
            Suited with fit ostentiall instruments,
            
            Transported expectation to that face;
            And made him look'd for in another place;
            His expedition ere it was suspected,
            
            Set forth, ariu'd, attempted, and effected.
            And where his purposes requir'd no name;
            
            His Actions euermarch'd before their fame.
            
            And (for a cloze) to crowne his worth; Bless'd Fate
            
            Did render all his Actions fortunate.
            Witnes the best performances of warre;
            Whereby th'vnited Netherlanders, are
            
               Entirely of their owne prouinces possest:
            
            With aduantageous footing on the rest.
            Mongst which atchieuements, Nieuport and Ostend
            
            (those famous seruices) doe comprehend
            Large interest in the deserts, whereby
            
            They haue attain'd to that prosperitie.
            
            And of those Actions, (They themselues consesse)
            He was an instrument to the successe;
            
               Elected by Heau'ns high Omnipotence,
            
            To manifest his gracious prouidence,
            
            
               
In fauour of their cause. Nor did he lesse,
            
            In any of his other seruices.
            And when the GLORY of the Warre did cease;
            
            
               Retir'd with Honour. And expir'd in peace.
            
            Leauing his deathlesse memory and Fame,
            To be an honour to that Noble Name
            And familie, from whence he had descent:
            
            
               Which by his luster's made more eminent.
            
            And now, Great Britaine, though thou dost possesse
            The SOVERAIGNE Ioy of Peace and happinesse;
            And feel'st no Reason why thou should'st disperse
            Or spend a teare vpon a Souldiers Hearse;
            Yet for the sake eu'n of thy blessed Peace,
            
            Thou maist lament this worthy Mans decease.
            For Warre's a subiect, that may comprehend
            
            The greatest wisedome, Nature can extend
            Vntoo; to manage it. Whose Noblest wayes,
            Proou'd Him a Worthy; Heroë of his dayes.
            His praise may iustly (then) extend thus farre;
            Hee was a Man, fit both for Peace and Warre.
            
            Whose Monument, while Historie doth last;
            Shall neuer be forgotten or defac'd.
            
               Cyril Tourneur.
            
         
      
   