
      
         
            
            
               
TIMES LAMENTATION: or An expoſition on the prophet IOEL, in ſundry Sermons or Meditations.
            
               
                  Ierem. 13. 17.
But if you will not heare this, my ſoule ſhall weepe in ſecret for your pride, and my eies ſhall weepe and drop downe teares, bicauſe the Lords flocke is carried away captiue.
            
            
               
                  Bernard. ſentent.
The whole race of mankinde may lament theſe three things; their birth full of vncleanneſſe, their life preſſed with wickedneſſe, and their death in woefull danger.
            
            
            AT LONDON, Printed by Edm. Bollifant, for George Potter. 1599
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sir Charles Blunt, Lord Mountioy, Knight of the moſt noble order of the Garter, &c. all earthly and heauenly felicitie.
            
               RIght Honorable Lord, Time is the meaſure of all things, and therefore to ſhewe the miſertes thereof is the fittest noueltie for our daies. To conſider the ancient or first time of the world, which God created and approoued to be good, Gen. 1. 4, 5. where of one ſpeaketh thus,

                  Flumina iam lactis, iam flumina nectaris ibant,
                  Flaua
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      de viridi ſtillabant illice mella;
               
And this was called the golden age of the world, wherein were riuers of milke and nectar, and the rocks dropped downe honie; where in was no deſtroying ſword, or pining ſickneſſe, or burning hatred, or weariſome labour to moleſt or diſquiet the life of man: would make vs either to woonder like fooles, or to weepe like wiſe men. But time is changed, it was golden, it was good; it is wooden, it is euill: ſhort was that time; for it continued not many (or as ſome thinke) not any daies, for ſinne followed the creation; therefore time may well clad her ſelfe in mourning weede, and ſay with Iacob, Few and euill are her daies. Zimri was a king, yet it lasted but ſeuen daies, and then he burned himſelfe aliue; ſo time was glorious but ſeuen daies, and then he burned himſelfe aliue; ſo time was glorious but ſeuen daies, and then it fell into flames of woe, that euery childe of time may weepe with Ieruſalem, Lament. 4. 16. and ſay, The crowne of our head is fallen, woe now vnto vs that we haue ſinned. If I may be ſo bold with your Lordſhip to ſtand a little on the miſeries of the world, and to picke out here and there a conſideration or an example

from ancient historie, whereunto your Lordſhip as vnto all other good learning haue deuoted your ſelfe; I knowe that you will eaſily ſay with that princely-wiſeſt-Salomon, that all is but vanitie and vexation of ſpirite, and much commend the ſorrowes and teares of Heraclitus, who neuer laughed; and of Serapion, who euer weeped; the one for the world, the other for Caſſianus. his ſinnes. If now your Honour aske me of the ſtate of the world, or the whole life of man liuing in the world, what opinion I euer hold concerning the ſame, I muſt anſwer you, that it is the houſe of mourning, and not one commeth thither, but in all the partes of his life and profeſſion he may truly ſay,

                  Quiſquis non cauſas mille doloris habet;
               
that he was borne in ſorrow, and liueth in ſorrow, and dieth in greefe, and is buried in lamentation, though afterward he liue in glorie; for ante mortem nemo beatus. The world conſiſteth of two ſorts of men, of good men and euill: good men doe euer ſorrow, for the worlde is their hell; and euill men ſhoulde euer ſorrow, becauſe God is their enimie: the one for the affliction which they feele, the other for the iudgement which they feare; yea verily weeping ſeemeth ſo naturall in our ſinfull ſtate, that ioy conſtraineth men to weepe. For ſo we reade of Ioſeph when he ſaw his brethren, and met with his father; and of Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, when the Seuentie interpreters had Ioſeph. de antiq. lib. 12. finiſhed the Bible, and deliuered it to him, he wept for ioy abundantly. If we turne our eies to pitie the eſtate of the distreſſed, although our ſelues haue not tasted of aduerſitie; yet this pitie if it be true pitie, will enforce vs to greefe. When Xerxes had his Herod. lib. 7. infinite huge armie in the fielde before him, and tooke a view thereof, he could not refraine from weeping to ſee the miſerie of mankinde. When Scipio had ſet Carthage on fire, and ſawe the Sabel. Enn. lib. 9. Enn. 5. flames there of ſoaring vp to the cloudes, although he was their enemie, yet the teares trickled downe his cheekes to beholde their ruine. When Titus beſieged Ieruſalem, and ſawe euery Ioſeph. lib. 7. cap. 24. day the infinite number of dead bodies throwne ouer the wals into the ditches, which famiſhed in the citie, whereby he knewe

their ſurpaſſing calamitie, whereof himſelfe was the cauſe; yet in compaſſion of their estate, he could not behold them but with waterie eies. To goe yet farther in the affections, if men be angrie they will eaſily mourne, as Christ did ouer Ieruſalem: and thus you may beholde, how ioy, and loue, and hatred, and pitie, and anger, and deſire doe call men to mourning. Mourning and lamentation are ſo needefull, that God hath made euery creature fit for the ſame. The heauens haue their cloudes, the earth hath his riuers and fountaines, the beastes haue their roarings and howlings, and the hard marble ſtones ſend foorth their fountaine teares. Againe, if we looke into the cauſes, as we haue looked into the affections, we ſhall perceiue that the ſame cauſes haue cauſed much mourning, which pretended much reioycing. Some will thinke that men hauing fine wits, and hauing attained great knowledge being good Polititians, the world will neuer frowne on them, & time ſhal neuer lament them: but you know it is far otherwiſe; for one ſaith too truly, that the best clerks haue the worſt fortunes. For Socrates died in priſon; another by ſwallowing Stobaeus ſer. 96 of a raw fiſh; Aeſchilus was brained with a tile; Sophocles periſhed with a bunch of grapes; the dogs tore Euripides in peeces; Homer was famiſhed, Ariſtotle drowned, and Glaucus an excellent Phiſitian was put to death by Alexander (and as Plutarch ſaith) was crucified: would not this make a man to mourne to ſee ſuch rare wits haue ſuch hard haps, and may not Time well lament her vnwoorthineſſe, becauſe ſhe may not nurſe ſuch children? Surely the Prophets haue for the most part taſted of this cup, and violence hath brought them to their latter ende. But peraduenture although the world doe frowne vpon ſchollers, yet it laugheth vpon other, for kings and ſouldiers liue in the world without all want. But they are much deceiued; Saul was a king, yet he ſlew himſelfe; Caeſar was a king, but he was ſlaine in the Senate; Valens was an Emperour, yet flying to a ſhepherds Fulg. lib. 1. 2. cottage was burned therin; Vigellius lost his eies; Claudius Herminianus was eaten with woormes, as Herod was; Cypr. aduerſ. Demetr. 
               Seuerus for very griefe did poyſon himſelfe, as Annibal did: and one ſaid well; if the people knew but the least part of a Princes

cares, they would thinke the cloth of ſtate woorſe then a ruſſet coate. And for ſoldiers or men most excellent in armes, they are destinated to labour while they conquer and get fame, and to mourne being diſcountenaunced ready for death. Therefore warre, ſaid Auguſtine, Malis videtur voluptas, bonis neceſſitas. 
               Aug. de Ciuit. lib. 7. cap. 11. Sab. lib. 4. Ennead. 6. 
               Pompey had three ſeuerall triumphes into Rome, yet what was his ende? Sylla and Marius what notable things did they, and whom did they not ouercome? yet they became priuate, and came home by weeping croſſe. All the liues of Greekes and Romanes in Plutarch will testifie the hard hap of martiall men, and who is he that can abstaine from teares, to heare or read of that noble and Christian Beliſarius, who after thirtie yeeres ſeruice to his Lord and Emperour, had both his eies put out for his reward? Yet rich men if they be priuate, or haue but a little authoritie, may be thought to lead the beſt liues, and not to be lamented: Surely most of all, for of them it is ſaid most truely,

                  Quaerere vt abſumant, abſumpta requirere certant,
                  At
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ipſae vitijs ſunt alimenta vices.
               
               Craſſus a rich Romane for his wealth was beheaded by Surenas. 
               Plutarch. Boeth. lib. 8. 
               Beda doth often ſhew and lament the riches, riot, expence, ſecurity, & eaſe of the Britons, declaring that all theſe things did but fat thē vp againſt the day of ſlaughter. He was not far amiſſe that ſaid, that Princes must be vſed as fire; for it is not ſafe to be neere it, nor yet good to be too farre from it. And I would that all rich men would euer remember that fearefull ſaying of our Sauiour, How hardly ſhall a man that hath riches enter into the kingdome of heauen: It is eaſier for a gable to goe thorough the eie of a needle, &c. The raigne of Salomon was a moſt peaceable time, and ſo happie as neuer was in Iſraell; yet the people had many inſufferable burdens, ſo that without diſcontents none can liue. Ariſtides was hated for his iustice, Antonius ſurnamed Philoſophus an Emperour, becauſe he would draw all things to the exact rule of learning, was accuſed to execute tyrannie vnder pretence of Philoſophie; and no maruell, for Christ was called a deceiuer though he wrought miracles: thus are good

endeuours croſſed. To goe yet farther and to looke into the life of man, the ſame thing which doth make it commendable, doth make it lamentable: Beautie is a great grace to men or women; yet Abſolon, Vaſthi, King Aſſuerus his Queene, Bethſabe, Lucrece, Cleopatra, and many other, as the wife of Conſtantine whom he burned, haue beene vndone by theſe things wherby God aduanced them. Children are like Oliue-plants, whoſe fruits make their parents faces cheerefull: yet it is too true Vide, patriproles luctus vſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   quo creet: fooliſh children are Eurip. heauines to their parents. Plutarch telleth vs that one Iphis ſaw at one time buried his two ſonnes and a daughter. Iacob was Plut. de amore much troubled with his ſonnes, and ſo was Samuel and Dauid, and many other: ſo that as their mothers weepe in their birth; ſo their fathers weepe in their bringing vp. But the ſorrow that parents endure by their children is lamentably ſet foorth in this example. One Bochna a woman hauing two ſonnes, leauing the greater in her houſe, tooke the leſſer in her hande to a riuer ſide Duditius de cometis. neer hir dwelling, and ſitting by the water ſhe heard her elder ſon to crie: ſhe haſtened into her houſe leauing the yoong one behind her, and comming in, ſhe found that her ſonne had thruſt a knife into himſelfe and lay on the earth drawing his last breath: the tender mother ſeeing the bleeding child, pulled out the knife and the child died, which ſhe must needs behold with a heart readie to breake for ſorrow: and hauing layd it foorth, went to fetch in the childe which ſhe had left by the riuer ſide to comfort herſelfe in him; but when ſhe came, ſhe found the waters had carried him away and drowned him: oh, then ſhee tare herſelfe, neuer ceaſing her violent outcries, til ſhe had made an end of her owne life. Theſe with a thouſande other examples and conſiderations to mitigate the loue of life, and to encreaſe repentance, I could eaſilie produce to ſhewe the ruines of time, as a reaſon of this my labour: Which in most humble manner I offer vnto your Lordſhip, as the conſcience of your former honourable fauour towards me doth binde me aeternally to ſtudie by all meanes poſſible to ſignifie my thankefulneſſe vnto your Honor, the meane of my preferment; being deſirous that all good men into whoſe handes

theſe my poore labours ſhall come, ſhould account themſelues beholding vnto your Lordſhip, for that your fauour gaue encouragement and meanes vnto me for the better penning and publiſhing heereof. Wherefore, my humble ſuite is, that your Honor would vouchſafe the patronage hereof, being aſſured that more learned then my ſelfe will accept my good will, and good men will helpe me with their praiers to God; vnto whoſe ſweete aeternall fauour I commend your Honor: that you may liue long, to the benefite of your countrey, the aduancement of your Honor, the comfort of learning, and aboue all, to his glorie, who ſhall glorifie you in the heauens. And thus crauing pardon for my boldneſſe, I humblie take my leaue remaining
            
               Your Lordſhips moſt bounden,
EDW. TOPSELL.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Times Lamentation.
            
               
                  THis mournful Prophet Ioel ſent from The time of this propheſie the Lorde vnto the Iewes onely, at that time when Hoſeah propheſied vnto the ten tribes (as it is thought) giueth that whole nation of the people, moſt lamentable ſignes of ſorrowfull plagues, and imminent dangers hanging ouer their heads. For the condition of this people began to be like the eſtate of a deſperate ſicke man, whoſe health being waſted by continuall diſeaſes, the Phyſicians ſurceaſe to adminiſter medicines, and leaue him to be lamented by his friendes, that their waterie eies and ſorrowfull ſoules, may either ſpeedily worke the recouerie of his health, or elſe religiouſly adorne his carcaſe for the graue: Euen ſo the prophet beginneth where nature faileth, that whereas the ſinnes of this people could not be purged by plentie, nor the ſores of their ſoules be cured by mercie, he commeth foorth like a mourner with ſad geſtures and dolefull ſpeeches, either to turne them from their euils, or elſe to lament them to their funerals. His words be few becauſe his teares be many, and his Sermons ſhort becauſe they tell of ſorrowes.
               This is therefore my purpoſe ſo farre foorth to expound The ſcope of this labour. this propheſie, as is requiſite for the preſent times: for ſeeing there is too pleaſant an harmony in the ſinnes of Iudah and England, it ſhall not be amiſſe to follow the example of the Spirite of God, either to marre the muſicke by theſe mournfull ditties, or elſe to bring theſe inſtruments oft

euill out oftune, that the ſtrings of their ſinnes may be vntwiſted by the teares of their ſoules. The prophet by his owne example teacheth, and by his continuall Sermons exhorteth the people to lament their dangers that now were hanging ouer their countrie.
               The Spirite of God deliuereth this meſſage in theſe two partes. The firſt concerneth the nation of the Iewes God The diuiſion of this propheſie. his deere people, in the two firſt chapters: and the other part concerneth their deadly enimies, which is deliuered in the thirde chapter. That part which concerneth the Iewes, containeth moſt fearefull and forcible reaſons to moue their rebellious harts: as firſt a particular rehearſal of thoſe iudgements that now were comming, which is in the firſt chapter and vnto the eighteenth verſe of the ſecond. Secondly, moſt ſweete promiſes of large liberalitie, if yet (though ſentence of deſtruction were pronounced) they would receiue the pardon: before the iudgements is ſet the ſtile of the prophet, or the inſcription of the whole booke contained in the three firſt verſes; wherein he deſcribeth the ſumme of the propheſie, by calling it the word of the Lord: Firſt by ſhewing the miniſtering cauſe thereof, namely, The word of the Lord which came to Ioel the ſonne of Pethuel; verſe the firſt. Secondly, the ſubiect or perſons whom it concerned in the two next verſes, by moſt excellent exhortatiōs firſt of hearing, where he noteth the perſons, namely, the elders and all the inhabitants of the land; and then the thing it ſelfe, whether they euer heard of the like, in the ſecond verſe: Heare ye this O elders, and harken ye all inhabitants of the land, whether ſuch a thing hath beene in your daies, or yet in the daies of your fathers, &c. The other exhortation is to perſwade them not to ſilence the propheſie, but to tell and declare it firſt to their children preſent. Secondly, that they ſhewe likewiſe the ſame to other ages following, which the prophet expreſſeth in theſe words, in the third verſe, ſaying, Tell you your children of it, and let your children ſhew to their children, and their children to another

generation. Thus much for the diuiſion, now to the wordes and expoſition.
               Ioel. verſe 1. The word of the Lord which came to Ioel the 
                  Cap. 1. vers. 1. 
                  ſonne of Pethuel. Theſe words of the prophet are thus much in effect, This ſelfe ſame propheſie which hereafter followeth is the very word of God, which he himſelfe ſent to the people by the miniſterie of Ioel the ſonne of Pethuel, where we obſerue theſe doctrines following. Firſt, that the ſermons The prophets ſermons are the Lordes owne words. of the prophets are the ſermons of the Lorde himſelfe: for ſo ſaith this ſcripture, that Ioels propheſie is the word of God. In Nehemiah the ninth chapter, and the thirtieth verſe, in that ſweete confeſsion which the Leuites made vnto God in the behalfe of that whole people, thus they ſay, Thou didst forbeare them many yeeres, and proteſtedst among them by thy ſpirite euen by the hands of their prophets, but they would not heare: Euen thus they confeſſe their rebellion after they had been well whipped with ſeuentie yeeres captiuitie, they had taken foorth this leſſon, that thoſe deſpiſed ſermons which once they ſpurned with their ſhooes, and trod vpon with their feete, were now manifeſtly declared to be the very word of God. Wherein no doubt they ſhewe and teſtifie vnto vs, that the truth of ſcriptures in the mouthes of Preachers, will then be acknowledged, when men haue been well nurtured in the ſchoole of aduerſitie, in ſo much that euen theſe wordes which now are but like the dreames of phrentick men, will then become as deere vnto vs as the oracles of heauen. Oh how ſtubborne is the conceite of our hard harts, which will not be taught till they ſmart, nor yet be inſtructed till they be corrected. Shall the ſeruant ſay he hath no maſter, except euery day he puniſh his faults? or the ſonne denie his owne father, becauſe in lenitie and fatherly pitie he beareth with his lewdneſſe? Yet our miſerable times are ſuch wherein men thinke preaching to be vaine, except in perſecution; and reading to be needleſſe, except in calamitie; and praier to be friuolous, except in their ſicknes. But bid

theſe wretches to the banket of afflictions, wherein they may be throughly ſcourged with temporall miſeries, as the proud perſons to ſhame, the Atheiſts to death, the ſwearer to the ſlaughter, the drunkard to famine, the gentleman to pouertie, and the theefe to the halter: then they will crie as lowde as hungrie lions, that the ſcriptures which they neglected, the prophets whom they reuiled, the ſermons which they contemned, and the words of preachers which they diſobeied, are the actes of parliament made by God himſelfe; like theſe Iewes, which now were humble after they had been in Babylon. In the ſecond Epiſtle of Peter, cap. 1. verſ. 21. the holy Ghoſt alſo witneſſeth, that Holy men of God ſpake as they were mooued by the holy Ghost. What is that but plainly to auerre, that not the preachers but the ſpirit that ſpeaketh in the preachers. This alſo is confirmed by waightie and ſpecial arguments or reaſons drawne from the very word it ſelfe. Firſt in Numbers the two and twentieth chapter and eighteenth verſe, where Balaam telleth Reaſon 1. the ſeruants of Balaack that if he would giue him his houſe full of golde, he cannot goe beyond the word of the Lord to doe more or leſſe. If then ſuch ſorcerers and diabolicall perſons in the cauſe of God, can ſpeake nothing but what he ſuggeſteth, much more the prophets and heauenly preachers can vtter nothing but what the holy Ghoſt inſpireth. Againe the prophets and true miniſters of God for the words ſake only 2 aduenture their ſtates and hazard their liues. 1. Kings. cap. 22. verſ. 14. 27. which they would not nor could not except vpō ſure ground of heauenly warrant: Who would (except deſperate mad men) vndoe themſelues and ſuffer moſt intolerable torments for rebuking of ſinne; vnleſſe they were caried by an ouerruling power, euen as Ionah to Niniueth, or Micheah to Ahab, to eate the bread ofſorrow, and drinke the cup of death, that when they might ioyfully ſolace themſelues among their friendes, or quetly reſt in their poore habitations, they are ſorowfully vexed by their cruell enimies, hauing the ſtinking priſon for their eaſeleſſe

harbour. I grant that heathen men haue for vaine deuiſes endured many torments, & Popiſh Ieſuits neglecting their owne liues, & their princes mercy, haue & do daily imbrace the gallowes, but their ſufferings are for matters cleane contrary to the worde of truth: and therefore with Tertullian it may better be ſaide to bee deſperate preſumption, then Chriſtian perſecution, and the diuels ſouldiers rather then the Lords martyrs. Wherein let vs with teares of brine lament our humane miſerie, that thus caſteth it ſelfe away from worldly comfort and heauenly ioyes, vpon bare and weake groundes of vncertaine ſeruing of God. Howe ſtrong are the deluſions of ſubtill Sathan, which hath bewitched the mindes of men ſo farre, that they haue alſo offered their yoong children and tender babes through violent flames for the diuels ſacrifice: could not their weeping eies and crying teares, procure no pittie in their hard harted parents: No, no, where ſuperſtition ſitteth iudge, neither nature nor reaſon may dare to pleade the cauſe. This is the diuels cunning to bewitch his members, (imitating the true ſeruants of God) to endure death. Augustine ſaid well, Mendacium ex veritate & ſuperstitio religionem imitatur. Lies come of truth, and ſuperſtition taketh Religion for a patterne: yet for all this lies are not truth, ſuperſtition is not religion, nor the torments which deſperate men for euill cauſes endure, ſhall euer make good mens ſufferings to be leſſe regarded. The ſheepe muſt not leaue off her skin becauſe ſomtimes the wolfe commeth in her likeneſſe, nor we muſt leſſe eſteeme the martyrs paines, bicauſe the diuels ſouldiers likewiſe die for his ſake: by theſe two reaſons it is euident that the prophets ſermons are the Lords ſermons. Nowe let vs make ſome godly vſes of this doctrine. The firſt generall exhortation which we make Vſe 1. heereof is that ſentence of the Apoſtle. 1. Theſſ. 5. 20. Deſpiſe not propheſying. That is, now it hath been cleerely prooued that the prophets ſpeeches are the oracles of God, be not ſo beaſtly as ſwine, to tread thoſe precious pearles of

deuine wiſedome in the filthie dregs and ſtinking myre of your vaine diſpleaſures: It being apparant that God his miniſters ſpeake no more without his ſpirit then the conduit runneth without his fountaines ſprings, thoſe diſgracing words which many vſe of the ſpirituall exerciſes, ſome at their table, others in their cloſſets, many at the tauerns, and moſt in their houſes, are nothing elſe but meere reuilings and ſpitefull raylings againſt the ſpirit of God. Sometimes the preachers want eloquence to ſmooth the itching eares of gallant perſons; ſometimes they want learning to feede the curious mindes of vaine religion bablers; ſometimes they want wealth to maintaine their countenance with outward brauerie; and ſometime they want manners to make them companions to the gentle ſort. And euerie one of theſe thinke his ſermons and labours in God his church to be nothing worth where he ſpieth but one want, which his vaine conceite deſired. I like not this ſermon ſaith one bicauſe he wanted words: it was a ſilly peece of worke ſaith another, bicauſe it was not bombaſted with the ſayings of Fathers, and he ſeldome or neuer confuted the papiſts: another ſaith that the preacher was but a poore beggerly fellowe, and therefore it is no matter what hee ſay, none of the great men would haue ſaide ſo much: and others ſaide, he hath more learning then wit, more zeale then behauiour, and his confident wordes are impudent ſpeeches, vnto all theſe I ſay, Deſpiſe not propheſying. See you not howe the diuell driueth you to condemne all for want of one, and to a generall neglect, for a particular deſire: ſhall the ſpirite of God be blamed becauſe euery mans humour is not ſatisfied? God forbid that ſuch iniquitie ſhould lodge among the profeſſours of religion: that thoſe ſermons which diſpleaſe ſome ſhould be deſpiſed of ſo many: there is no pearle which all men will praiſe, there is no garden ſo pleaſant but ſome will diſlike it, nor anie houſe ſo commodious but ſome will diſpraiſe it: ſhall wee caſt away pearles, plowe vp gardens, and race downe houſes,

bicauſe all men are not pleaſed? No verily, no more ſhall propheſying, preaching, praying, and exhorting be reiected, although euery mans idle diſpoſition be not anſwered. Oh miſerable and lamentable daies wherein men come to the congregation like buyers to a faire, and they all crie it is naught it is naught, though the Lordes wares be freely ſolde, yet who will buie them at his hands? The more plentifully they are offered, the more ſcornefully they are reiected: for looke vpon thoſe places where the miniſterie hath beene of longeſt ſtanding, and greateſt practiſe, where paſtors according to the Lords owne hart are planted, where the voice of the worde ſoundeth at leaſt euerie Sabbaoth day: I ſay, looke there euen as narrowly as Ezechiel looked ouer Ieruſalem, and you ſhal finde them more ignorant in knowledge, more lewde in liuing, more obſtinate in wordes, and more diſobedient in deedes, then other people are. Euen thus the diuell laboureth painfully, where the Lord ſpeaketh abundantly, that he may maliciouſly condemne, where the Lord woulde mercifully ſaue; inſomuch that the Lord may ſay to the congregations of England, as he once ſaide to the aſſembly of Iſrael. Ierem. 6. verſ. 10 Vnto whom ſhall I ſpeake and admoniſh? that they may heare: behold their eares are vncircumciſed they cannot harken, behold the worde of the Lorde is vnto them as a reproch. And where the worde of the Lorde can haue no being, the wrath of the Lord will take vp the lodging: therefore we may ſay as the prophet ſpeaketh. Abak. 1. 5. Behold yee deſpiſers and woonder and vaniſh away, for I worke a worke in your daies, a worke which you will not beleeue though a man declare it. Conſider this yee ſcornefull hearers among vs, that God ſhall puniſh your contempt with infidelitie; and although myracles ſhould be wrought to conuert you, yet they ſhall not profite you, euen the myracles of Egypt, till yee be vtterly conſumed, you which with leſſe deuotion ſerue the Lord then your pleaſures, with leſſe diligence followe the Church then the tauerne, with more delight exerciſe vanitie

then religion; with more labour occupie your trades of life, then the words of life; euen you I meane are the deſpiſers of heauenly pearles for earthly traſh, which neuer are pleaſed with the ſeruants of Chriſt. It is your condemnation that ſleepeth not, whoſe conſcience can pretend no excuſe at the day of all daies, that either yee wanted preachers, or leaſure, or abilitie, or time, or meanes, to beleeue thoſe heauenly oracles. Behold this yee deſpiſers, and repent, ſhewe your ſorrowe by your amendement, and redeeme the time by diligence heereafter. If the Lorde vtter his voice the earth is mooued, and the mountaines tremble, Pſal. 29. Mooue therefore your harts, you rebellious ſort, from the world to god, from ignorance to knowledge, and from diſobedience to faith: ſtirre vp your reſty bodies and idle limmes, and go from ſtrength to ſtrength, till you come to the Lords mountaine: let not feare of ſickneſſe, dread of pouertie, loue of pleaſures, deſire of profit, drawe you from heauen, but draw neere vnto God, and hee will draw neere vnto you: The gates of heauen are open, enter you therein. Secondly another vſe we may adde heereunto, Vſe 2. is that exhortation of the Apoſtle. 1. Cor. 14. 1. Aboue all other gifts deſire propheſie: what was more admirable, then healing of ſicke perſons? or more commendable, then to ſpeake ſtrange toongs? or more glorious, then to worke myracles? or more neceſſarie, then to diſcerne ſpirits? yet aboue all theſe ſaith Paul, rather deſire Propheſie. Neither is it maruell that ſo great an honour is beſtowed on ſo noble a gift, becauſe the Prophets ſpeeches are the Lords ſermons. Then my beloued as for the merchandiſe of gold, men endure the longeſt traficke, the ſharpeſt pains, and greateſt charges, euen ſo for the obtaining of propheſie (whether it be to preach or heare preachers) ſuſtaine (my bowels in the Lord Ieſus) the rougheſt waies, the longeſt ſtudies, the wearieſt iournies, the coldeſt daies, the hotteſt threats, and deareſt coſt, for euen for theſe ſhall you receiue many thouſand times more comforts

in this world, and ioyes in the world to come. But oh my deerely beloued in the Lord, I may complaine of the neglect of preaching and propheſiyng as Ieremie did of Ieruſalem Lament. 1. How doth that citie remaine ſolitarie that was full of people, ſhe is as a widow: ſhe that was great among the nations, and princeſſe among the prouinces is made tributarie. Euen ſo weepe you chaſte doues of the Lord, and you ſolitarie Pellicans profeſſours of the truth, take you vp this Lamentation and ſay, how doe thoſe loftie cities which are builded on the Lords hill (the miniſters of the word) remaine deſolate? for there is none that come vnto them, to buy their heauenly wares, preaching of the vulgar and greateſt ſort is counted meere babling, the glorious gifts of the ſpirit, are as little as dreamers fits, and many peraduenture in ſome one man haue ſome delight, like to a ſtrange muſe wrought in a male contented minde, by a conſort of Muſicke, but what ſinnes will they forſake at his requeſt? Surely as many as did Herod at the preaching of Iohn Baptiſt; nay rather farewell friendſhip then welcome repentance, though they like ſuch a preacher well, yet they loue their pleaſures better. Hereby may we of the miniſterie try our owne friends and manifeſt the Lords followers, if we meekely reprooue their follies, which will beare vs in hand they loue and like vs well. As for example, if they be of the gentle ſort, tell them of their vaine expences; if of the meaner, tell them of their carnall minds; if of the pooreſt, tell them of their ignorance; if the braueſt, ſhew them of their pride; if the learnedſt, declare to them their vaine glorie, and finally if the nobleſt, bid them beware of deſpiſing the Gospell; if they will abide theſe blowes and turne you the other cheeke alſo, then account him for a Dauid, or elſe reiect him for a Herod. Oh how is the world altered from following preaching, and propheſie! in the pureſt age of the church, their greateſt glorie was in the miniſtery; ſince that time euen in our owne memorie, how would the people of the countrey flocke to follow

preaching, but now euen in our daies (my beloued) we our ſelues haue liued to ſee the preachers mocked, as Eliſhah was; the ſame people which once woulde ſeeme to care for nothing ſaue Chriſt, the more are the preachers the fewer are the hearers: Euen the Sabaothes of the Lorde are polluted with all manner of villanies, and vanities, as boldly as if the Goſpels ſounde had neuer beene ſhewed among vs. Euen the princeſſe of all profeſsions, I meane Diuinitie, & the Queene of al ſciences the preaching of the worde, is become the vileſt in ſhew, the pooreſt in practiſe, the meaneſt in requeſt, and the greateſt in ſlauerie. The word of the Lord that came to loel the ſonne of Pethuell. That is to ſay, which he ſent or ſpake vnto Ioel the ſonne of Pethuell. In old time God ſpake diuers and many waies ſaith the Scripture. Heb. 1. 1. to our fathers by the Prophets, & them I finde principally to be theſe firſt, by viſion as to Salomon 2. Chro. 1. 7. ſecondly by dreames as Moſes ſaieth. Deut. 1. 2. 6. and ſo he ſpake to Ioſeph Mat. 1. 20. Thirdly by plaine face to face as hee did to Moſes. Fourthly by Angels Act. 8. 26. and laſtly by ſecret inſtinct or motion of the ſpirit Luke 2. 27. and in this manner it is moſt likely the prophet Ioel receiued this propheſie. Out of this we obſerue this doctrine, that if God ſend not his worde among vs we our ſelues euen the greateſt among vs could or would not apprehend it. For this cauſe the Scripture calleth it the If God did not ſend his word, none would aske for it. 
                  word that came to Ioell: meaning that then it came vnto him, when he thought leaſt of ſuch ſtrange euents & terrible iudgements, which he had giuen him in commiſsion to denounce to his countrey men. And the truth hereof may appeare by many teſtimonies of the word of God. In that ſinfull eſtate wherein all Iſraell ſtood in the time of Eſay the prophet, the Lord cried out Eſay 6. 8. Whom ſhall I ſend vnto them? as if there were none that would offer themſelues to this buſines. And in the propheſie of Ieremie, the Lord many times complaineth, that he himſelfe intended this buſines earely and late, morning and euening, to ſend his prophets

vnto them for their conuerſion. In other places where he bewaileth the deſtruction of his people he aſsigneth this for the cauſe, The Prophets ran, but I ſent them not, neither did they teach my ordinances. So that if there be any forwardnes in the preachers and miniſters that way, to goe on their meſſage before they receiue their arrand, it rather deſtroyeth then ſaueth, curſeth then bleſſeth, ſcattereth then gathereth, the flocke of God togither. Indeede when the Lord ſendeth any he giueth them before hande the knowledge of his word, ſo that they only which are apt and willing to teach, are to be accompted the Lords miniſters and no others. Euen as the Lord gaue either more talents or fewer to euerie one of his ſeruants, and we read not any called his ſeruant but he which had a talent at the leaſt: euen ſo in the miniſterie, where is not ſome ſufficiencie to diſcharge that function, I can neuer ſay he was of the Lords ſending. Therfore we muſt know that the great ſtore of godly preachers and miniſters of the word that abound in our daies in moſt corners of our countrey (I would to God I could ſay in all) were not either for deſire of liuing, or glorious eſtimation, or any wordly cauſe aduaunced to the churches ſeruice: but the Lord who hath indued their minds with knowledge, their hearts with courage, their toongs with vtterance, and themſelues with his ſpirit and word, euen he, aboue, hath choſen them to be ſouldiers in his wars, againſt Sathans kingdome, and by the voice of his word like canon ſhot, to batter downe the caſtles of darkenes. The reaſons hereof are manifeſt: firſt becauſe that Reaſ. 1. mans nature, in it ſelfe abhorreth nothing more then God his ſeruices. Exo. 3. 11. 12, 13. when Moſes was called by the Lord to carie his name before Pharoh, and the children of Iſraell, how many delayes did he make, and how many ſhifts did he inuent, to exempt himſelfe from this heauenly meſſage: ſometime he wanted toong, ſometime ſtrength, and ſometime authoritie; now one while hee feared the king, another while the people; and although the Lord

wrought miracles for him, yet would he gladly auoide it. Secondly it is apparant, that when the people were in 2 greateſt extremitie and moſt of all felt the heauie hand of the wrath of God, there was no calamitie that touched them ſo neerely or preſſed them ſo deadly as this, to thinke they had no Prophets left, to inquire of the word of the Lord. For as a ſhippe in the midſt of the ſea toſſed too and fro amongſt ten thouſand waues, being full of paſſengers, without either pilote or mariner, is in extreme hazard of drowning, bicauſe they haue none to ſound the bottomes, for to throw foorth their anchor, to ſtaie them in the ſtormes, or when the calme commeth, they haue not one among them to direct them to the ſhore: euen ſo when the floudes of troubles ſhall threaten the ouerthrow of any particular church or nation, they hauing no preachers or prophets among them, who ſhould perſwade them to patience, during their aduerſitie, and to caſt out the anchor of their hope during their danger, or hauing eſcaped thoſe fierie and fearefull troubles, yet who but the miniſters of God, ſhall inſtruct them in righteouſneſſe, and direct them to heauen? In the raigne of Ioſiah, although his daies were happie, through peace, and his ſubiects ioyfull through a good king and religious nobles: yet this was the glory of his kingdome, that there was one Huldah a Propheteſſe, the wife of Shallum, that tolde him his owne proſperitie, bicauſe his hart melted at the voice of God his worde; and alſo that there is one Helkijah a prieſt, 2. Kings. 22. that gaue him the law of his God: ſo are we happie through long enioyed peace being ſhadowed vnder the wings of a mercifull Prince, and religious Magiſtrates, yet this is the glorie of our nation that many Prophets and Preachers haue offered vnto vs the verie word of God, the which if it were wanting, all were worth nothing, therefore if God build not, who can reare? If he ſend not, who can proſper? If he ſpeake not, who can propheſie? and if he diminiſh the number of his ſeruants, the

preachers, we may complaine in our miſeries as the Iewes did, There is not one Prophet more left, and yet remaine comfortleſſe. The vſes which we will briefly make here of are theſe. Firſt the ſame which our Sauiour Chriſt teacheth vs vpon this doctrine. Mat. 9. 28. Pray (ſaith he) the Lord of the 
                  Vſe 1. 
                  vineyard that he would thruſt foorth labourers into his haruest. There is no more Chriſtian exerciſe or neceſſarie practiſe, then with vnfeined ſoules to deſire at the handes of him, who ruleth all with his hand, that in times of ignorance and neglect of heauenly worſhip when the corne is ripe and fit to be gathered into the Lords barne, that he would haue pitie vpon his wandring, ſheepe, and care of his planted corne euen the worke of his owne handes, and not ſuffer them to be caſt away for want of inſtruction. Oh, howe would it and doth it grieue a chriſtian ſoule to conſider, that the image of God himſelfe ſhould be loſt which ſhineth ſo beautifully in euerie one of mankind: pray therefore my beloued in the Lord, for hereby onely ſhall you performe a worke acceptable to God, becauſe you are humbled, beneficiall to the church, becauſe you aske for her labourers, comfortable to your ſelues, becauſe you tender your brethrens ſoules, and ioyfull to the verie angels for the conuerſion of ſinners. The ruler of the temple Mat. 9. 18. hauing but his daughter ſicke and diſeaſed, yet came to our Sauiour and entreated him for her health, which he performed and ſhe recouered. Let vs therefore in pitie of many thouſand ſons and daughters of the world come to the courts of the Lords houſe, within the cloſets of our owne ſoules and deſire with feeling and earneſt prayers, the Lord Ieſus that he would ſhewe, and ſhine forth his truth, by his word in the mouthes of many more miniſters of peace to conuert many moe ſinners vnto righteouſnes, to turne the hearts of fathers to their children, of mothers to their daughters, of princes to their ſubiects, and of the nations to their God. There is not any one point that proueth more ſubſtantially to a mans ſoule that hee loueth

Chriſt vnfaynedly, then this, the practiſe of it to pray for the increaſe of heauenly paſtors: Euen as in the world nothing is ſo commendable as the workes of mercie, as to feede the famiſhed, to cloath the naked, to deliuer the impriſoned, and to acquite him that is wrongfully condemned; ſo in the church of God there is no grace like to the gift of the miniſterie, the ſtarued are fed by them with the bread of life, the naked are cloathed by them with the garments of a Sauiour, they which lye faſt bound in the verie dungeons of hell and the priſons of darkenes are deliuered by them, into the glorious libertie of the ſonnes of God, and euen they which were condemned to temporall miſeries and eternall calamities are acquited, diſcharged, and releaſed by their meſſage. Let vs all therefore ſay vnto the Lord: Lord increaſe the number of painefull preachers. And if 2 we ought to pray for them, how damnable is their eſtate that pray vpon them: if it be the higheſt ſeruice of God to promote them, then is it the higheſt ſeruice of the diuell to perſecute them. If they be bleſſed where the word is preached and beleeued, then are they accurſed where it is not heard nor receiued. If Chriſt blamed his diſciples that would haue had him to blame them that caſt deuils out in his name, then are they to bee blamed which will vpon euerie light and eaſie occaſion labour to the vttermoſt to ſtop the mouthes of Gods ſeruants, to diſcourage the people from hearing, the olde men from inſtructing, the yoong men from ſtudying, the children from learning, the women from asking, & the ſeruants frō obeying the word of God. Therefore if we haue any care of the Lords ſeruice, any compaſsion of them that are tyrannouſly oppreſſed, any conſcience of the ſoules of men, then pray for the peace, and number of the preachers. For as when the teeth are fallen out of the mouth, the life is hardly nouriſhed, and quickly turnd: Euen ſo when the miniſters which are the teeth of the church, to grinde the word vnto them, are remooued; then followeth the graue and ſepulchre of the

Lords family. To Ioel the ſonne of Pethuell: heerein is no hardnes, and euerie one may eaſily perceiue the meaning hereof, for the prophet nameth himſelfe and alſo declareth his parentage, and it is very like that his father was a man of good eſtimation, that the Prophet thus barely without any further addition prefixeth his name to this propheſie. We obſerue out of this deſcription of the miniſtring cauſe of this prophſie: this doctrine, that God preferreth the ſeruice of men before the ſeruice of angels in the building of Men preferred before angels in the preaching of the word. the church, he rather choſeth and appointeth that his heauenly & immaculate word, ſhould be manifeſted by earthly and ſinfull men then by celeſtiall & holy angels Act. 1. 8. The Lord Ieſus maketh this his ordinance that his diſciples ſhall witnes the redemption in Ieruſalem, Iudea and Samaria and the vttermost parts of the earth. Euen the ſame Lord which not long before told them that he had the angels at commaund, now rather vſeth the helpe and miniſterie of men. Men would thinke it a ſtrange proceeding that he which is cracked in credit, and as it were one prooued periured, ſhoulde come afterwardes in a triall of death and life, whereas they which are neuer detected of the like enormities ſhall be excluded. But God his thoughts are not like to mens thoughts, nor his waies as mens waies, the weakeſt things of God are ſtronger then the ſtrongeſt of men, and he choſeth the deſpiſed caſtawaies to confound the mightie; he looketh on a begger and regardeth not a prince; the angels lie in the chaines of darkneſſe when men are aduanced to their places in heauen. Euen this doctrine you may reade in the 1. Cor. 4. 9. where the Apoſtle teacheth that we are appointed vnto the miniſterie as men are condemned to death, that we might be made a gazing ſtocke to the worlde and to angels and to men: ſhewing vnto vs that the very angels are beholders of the labours of the miniſterie, being preſent by the appointment of God at the aſſemblies of his ſaints, that they might be witneſſes of our labours vnto God, as we are of Chriſtes

ſufferings vnto the world. The reaſons of this doctrine may be eaſilie gathered out of the worde of God, whereof this Reaſ. 1. may be one, that as our redemption was to be wrought onely in the nature of man not of angels, no more was the preaching of the ſaide redemption to be declared by angels or any other creature ſaue onely man. This reaſon the apoſtle ſeemeth to vſe, 2. Cor. 5. 18. when he ſaith, All things are of God which hath reconciled vs vnto himſelfe by Ieſus Christ, and hath giuen vnto vs the miniſterie of reconciliation: where he maketh our reconciliation made by the man Ieſus Chriſt to be the ground or beginning, or commiſsion of the miniſterie, for without Chriſt, and without reconciliation there is no miniſterie. And this ſerueth moſt highly to commend vnto vs the dignitie of the miniſterie of the Goſpell, which is as it were the trumpet of peace and pardon vnto the godly to ſounde vnto them thoſe victories which they haue obteined againſt the kingdomes of darknes, and vnto Chriſt to proclaime his royall maieſtie ouer all the kingdomes of the worlde, inſomuch as thoſe which labour againſt the preaching of the Goſpell, as all the Romiſh Religion-bond-ſlaues do, they bid war vnto the king of glory, and as our ſauiour tolde Paul, Act. 9. They kicke against the pricke, and procure their owne paines: Then it is manifeſt that Chriſt is no where more exalted then where hee is daily and continually preached, ſo is hee no where more denied then where his word is ſilenced, his miniſters baniſhed, his members afflicted, and all good exerciſes idly and careleſly frequented: Then let vs that are the miniſters and profeſſors of the Goſpell gather this comfort to our ſelues, that we are the ſoules and perſons which haue glorified his maieſtie in this world, by telling and teaching, hearing and ſtudying the praiſes of him who is bleſſed and praiſed for euermore, Amen. Secondly another reaſon of 2 this doctrine, why the Lorde hath committed the diſpenſation of his worde rather to men then to angels or anie other creature is this: becauſe none can be ſo neerely touched

with the feeling of humane infirmities as men can be; who knoweth a mans hart ſauing a mā? If they preach, they ſpeake by experience; if they exhort, they do it as if they were exhorted. And this was one cauſe wherfore Chriſt became man, that he might taſte of our infirmities. Heb. 4. 15. For my beloued, when a man ſeeth his own fleſh weeping, wil he not weep alſo? if he ſee his owne fleſh afflicted, wil not he be compaſsionate toward that? if a man ſhould ſee a father preaching to his ſonne, a brother to his brother, a husband to his wife, or one kinſman to another, would not this mooue him more to ſee his deereſt friend ſpending this labour vpon him, then if a ſtranger whoſe face he neuer ſaw ſhould perſwade him? Yes verily: euen ſo the Lord to mooue vs more earneſtly to the obedience of his ſon, hath made choiſe of ſuch diſpenſers of his myſteries, as we know to be men like our ſelues, feeling our paines, deſiring our pleaſures, wiſhing our welfare, lamenting our loſſes, and abhorring our ſinnes: to this intent that when we ſee them ſpeake vnto vs in the name of God, we ſhoulde thus preſently reaſon with our ſelues. This is a man like my ſelf, I am addicted naturally to fulfill my luſtes, to enlarge my profits, to reuenge my malice, to care for no pleaſure but paſtime, to feare no diſpleaſure but the worldes; but theſe men (although men) haue denied their luſtes, and are become contemptible to the worlde; they ſpeake the worde of God boldly, and feare no mans perſon, they bring themſelues to pouertie, their names to ignominie, their liues to ſhame, and their friendes to hate them. What ſhoulde be the cauſe of all this? either they haue no wit, or we haue no zeale, they are not bleſſed, or we are vngodly: Reaſon thus with your ſelues: then will it come to your mindes that ſurely for your ſakes, euen for the peoples ſakes are the miniſters made fooles, that they might be wiſe; the preachers poore, that they might be rich; and the prophets deſpiſed, that the flocke might be honorable. 1. Cor. 5. 10. Therefore my beloued when you ſee vs earneſt in rebuking

of ſinne, or exhorting to righteouſnes, that then we ſpeak with feeling of thoſe dangers that threaten deſtruction to all, cōming vnto you as the Syrians came to the king of Iſraell with the halters about their neckes to mooue him to pittie them: or rather we come vnto you as the prophet came to Ahab, 1. King. 20. 35. willingly offering our ſides to be gored, and our bodies to be wounded, that our bloud may be your ſorrow, by the ſight of our wounds you may come to the feeling of your ſinnes, by the paines we take in this worlde you may conſider what are the plagues of the world to come. Surely if we make but a calfe to cry in the field, all the beaſts come roaring & running vnto it to ſuccour it: how much more ought men of better vnderſtā
                  ding then beaſtes, hearing their owne kinred and friends crying vnto them the vengeance of God, with all ſpeed to runne to the preachers to knowe the cauſe of their complaint, and crie with the Iayler, Men and brethren what ſhal I do to be ſaued? Be not ſo rude as beaſtes, be not woorſe then bullockes. The vſes which naturally ariſe out of this Vſe 1. doctrine are theſe: firſt we ought not leſſe to eſteeme of the miniſters of the worde being ſinfull men, then if they were more honorable creatures. The Apoſtle Paul, Gal. 4. 14. expreſſeth the ſincere affectiō which the people ought to bear towards their paſtors, whē he witneſſeth that they receiued him as an angell of God, teſtifying vnto them their great fall, which once thought euery worde of his mouth to be a deuine oracle, and that his perſon was more then a man; but nowe the worlde was turned with them, they being bewitched with the falſe Apoſtles, for at once they had forſaken their faith towards God, and their reuerence toward the preacher. The diuell is ſubtill, and knoweth very well that ſo long as the miniſters credite raigneth, his kingdome decreaſeth; and therefore where he cannot at the firſt ouerthrow the doctrine, there he laboureth to bring the prophet into diſgrace. But hearken (my beloued) I beſeech you a while, and ſhut your eares

againſt the diuels accuſations. If you will euer liue vnder the winges of the Goſpell, you muſt euer loue the feete of God his miniſters: ſo long as theſe Galathians bore this minde towardes their Apoſtle, their faith was glorious, their church was famous, their liues were godly, and their endes were happy: but when they accounted the Lordes meſſenger but as a man, when they thought him worthy no more then a common perſon; although they would once haue plucked out their eies to haue done him good, then followed and fell vpon them, like haileſtones vpon the Canaanites, hereſies, to diſquiet them; diuiſions to moleſt them; ignorance to condemne them; and the wrath of God to conſume them. Looke to it my beloued, the contempt of preachers, of miniſters, and ſeruants of the Lorde hath already wrought many ſtrange effectes among vs. Thoſe reuerend fathers of our church, which haue brought vs out of Babylon, as Moſes and Aaron brought the Iſraelites out of Egypt, whereof ſome haue ſealed vp our ſafetie with their owne blood; others haue waſted their health and wealth in defence of our religion, ſtate, and profeſsion; and many yet liuing holding great places in the Church of England, hauing onely for the Goſpell and the Lords Ieruſalem, endured many ſtrange conflictes and vnknowen troubles: theſe I ſay, euen by the railing libels of counterfaite and vnknowne Chriſtians, haue beene laide open to the view offoes and friends, both by truthes and vntruthes, if it were poſsible to the vtter ruine of learning, extreme ſorrow of many good men, and euerlaſting diſgrace of the miniſterie: As Origen was woont to ſay, Sicut omne bonum ab eccleſia prouenit, ſic omne malum ab eccleſia egreditur; As al goodneſſe commeth from the church, ſo all euill commeth from the church: ſo I feare that the Lorde may ſay to the miniſterie, as to Iſraell, O Iſrael, thy destruction is of thy ſelfe, but in me is thy ſaluation. The miniſterie hath been lamentably diuided, and for this cauſe euen by baſe perſons, they haue beene and are ſcornfully reuiled; we our ſelues haue

wrought our diſcredit, but the Lord is our comfort. The ignorance of many ſilly and dumbe fellowes diſgraceth the learned, the pride of many lofty preachers diſcrediteth the humble, the couetouſneſſe of many encroching parſons ouerthroweth the liberall minded; and finally the negligence of many noble and excellent men in their charges, giueth a deadly diſcouragement to the painfull. But yet theſe are the faultes of the perſons, not of the places, and a perſonall action dieth with the perſon: therefore my beloued pray vnto the Lord for diſcerning ſpirites, that you may liue by the line of the word, and not by the lines of many: although we ſhould forſake the Lord by our falles, yet doe not you caſt away your ſelues by our example. Maintaine the name and credit of euery one, whoſe miniſterie the Lorde vſeth in gouerning and inſtructing his Church; ſtand not vpon titles, for they which labour well are woorthy of double honour: regarde not garments, for Iustine Martyr preached Chriſt in the attire of a heathen philoſopher: looke not too much vpon their faultes, for euen amongſt the Apoſtles there wanted not diuiſions: eſteeme them as the miniſters of God, which watch when you ſleepe, labour when you reſt, faſt when you feaſt, and pray for the ſaluation of your ſoules when you are ſporting in pleaſures. Your ſoules then lye open to the diuell when you are growne in diſlike of your paſtors: for if the man diſpleaſeth, we cannot like of the doctrine. If our countreymen the Lords flocke can once againe ioine with the preachers and promoters of the Goſpell, then ſhall Atheiſme be baniſhed, Poperie aſhamed, hypocriſie diſcouered, diuiſions ended, and truth ſhall flouriſh out of our nation.
               Secondly, another vſe we may profitably make heereof, which is this, that exhortation of the Apoſtle Philip. 2. 29. 2 ſpeaking of Epaphroditus, a faithfull miniſter of God, whom he ſendeth vnto them, Receiue him (ſaith he) therefore in the Lord with all gladneſſe, and make much of ſuch: we muſt open our houſes and churches with reioycing ſpirits, when

we ſee the embaſſadours of peace comming vnto vs, and account moſt pretiouſly of them who trauel with the Lords meſſage for our good. Wee reade that the Shunamite to entertaine Eliſhah built him a chamber, that when he came that way he might viſite their familie: how much more ioyfull ought we to bee to entertaine the meſſengers of better things then Eliſhah brought. It was a great commendation of the Iewiſh women that followed our Sauiour vp and downe, that they miniſtred vnto him: but moſt lamentable it is, that in our daies the miniſters and preachers haue almoſt as ſlender entertainment, as Chriſt himſelfe had among the Samaritans. Their houſes be too great, their liuings be too large, their reuenues (ſay ſome clawbacks) will ſuffice a good knight, or a worſhipfull gentleman: and why may not a good miniſter be allowed as well as a good magiſtrate? or a man of learning dwel in as faire a houſe as a lawyer? Indeede our houſes in your conceite are too great for vs, and in our harts we thanke God that they are too little for you; wee ſee many miniſteries and parſonages defaced but none built, many gathered but none ſowed: we are receiued very ioyfully of great numbers, where they hope to haue any gaines by vs, and their purpoſe being obtained, then they bid a fig for the parſon. Oh, this is the ſinne of many gentlemen, that they will neuer or ſeldome allow the fourth part of that, which of dutie they owe vnto vs; but will wage the cuſtomes at the lawe, to giue nothing to the Lord. Who ſeeth not that theſe men woulde haue offered if they had liued among the Iewes, ſurely I thinke burnt offerings and peace offerings ſhould haue diſcontinued, and the Lord muſt haue thought him beholding vnto them, if they gaue him one for a thouſand. And for our miniſterie and preaching, I dare ſay it was not leſſe regarded (except perſecution) one hundred yeere a goe then now it is. If gentlemen or noble men receiue their tithes, the people are well contented; but if the preachers take them, it greeueth them deadly: belike

becauſe they goe to the right owners. And thus the world make much of vs, our liuings are diminiſhed, our labours are neglected, our preſence deſpiſed. They account their pariſhes the happieſt, where is no preaching miniſterie, no controlling of ſinners, no fighting with the diuell, no conſcience of religion. O miſerable times! O miſerable manners! they had rather goe with muſicke to the gallowes, then with mourning to a ſermon: they chooſe rather to goe ſinging to hell, then weeping to heauen: curſed are they which ſpeake euill of the way of righteouſneſſe, and ſay to the prophets depart from vs. The Lorde ſhall come with ſpeede to render vengeance to them that receiue him not.
            
            
               The ſecond Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 2.
                  Heare this yee elders.
               
               IN theſe wordes the Prophet declareth the ſecond part of the deſcription of this booke, namely, the ſubiect thereof, that is, the perſons whom it concerneth: and the wordes are thus much in effect, You that are the elders and gouernors of the people, heare the worde of the Lord, and all you which are the inhabitants of the land of Iudea, the Lords inheritance hearken you alſo hereunto, and tell me whether you euer heard the like in your daies, or in the daies of your fathers which went before you. Out The miniſters muſt call on the people to heare. of theſe words obſerue theſe doctrines following; firſt that the prophets and miniſters of God muſt call vpon the people to heare the word: for you ſee in the entry of this propheſie, the prophet crieth to the people to giue audience to his ſermons. And indeed this is a moſt neceſſarie obſeruation to be kept as an entrance, to call the peoples minds at the beginning, and as a remembrance to ſtirre them vp in the midſt, and a concluſion to admoniſh them in the end. For this cauſe alſo the prophet Iſa. cap. 1. verſ. 2. thinking

that if men would not giue an eare to his ſermons, yet he would not want audience, calleth in this ſort. Heare O ye heauens, hearken O earth: ſhewing that if men will be ſo deafe at the crie of the Lords miniſters, as not to lend them their eares to their preaching; yet the heauens and the earth ſhall tremble at their word giuing obedience to their heauenly voices, the dumbe creatures ſhal condemne ſuch intollerable rebellion. In the booke of the Apoſtles Act. cap. 13. ver. 16. We may read when Paul and Barnabas came to Antiochia, being entreated on the Saboth day to giue ſome words of exhortation to the people, Paul ſtanding vp and beckning with his hand called vnto them ſaying, Men and brethren hearken. The people in moſt places are buſied in vaine ſpeculations, when the peacher is moſt diligent in opening the word of truth, ſome are drouſie when their hearts ſhould be waking to heare what God wil ſay concerning them, others are ſcraping in the churches with their feete ſuperſtitiouſly conceited, when they heare but the name of (Ieſus) mentioned; and yet they wil ſweare by him and make no bones at all: againe, others are wearie thinking euerie minute an hower till the preacher be out of the pulpit, and many ſhew the whole congregation their backes by departing out of the church: All theſe let the preachers call with the voice of Trumpets, Heare the word of the Lord, put away your vanities, rouze vp your drowſines, take pleaſure in godlines, ſtaye your diſquietnes, and continue your preſence in the Lords aſſemblies: know you not that the ſtones you tread on, the heauens you gaze on, the earth you walke on, and the wordes that we preach vnto you, ſhall all come againſt you like witneſſes and tell the Lord your diſobedience, therefore we often ſay in our ſermons, Heare this men and brethren. The reaſons of this doctrine may euidently be gathered Reaſon 1. out of the word of God, and the firſt is the practiſe of the Lord himſelfe, Pſal. 81. 8. beſide many other places in the ſcripture where the Lord calleth vpon the people before

he declare his minde vnto them, for audience and attention ſaying. Heare O my people and I will ſpeake, hearken O Iſraell and I will teſtifie vnto thee. What ſhall it auaile if we bring the toongs of angels into the congregations, & none or few wil lend vs their eares? Although I eaſily graunt our perſwaſiōs enter as deeply into the wals of the churches as into the eares & hearts of moſt of our hearers, euen in this we are like theſe Iſraelites, that if the Lord himſelfe ſhould come at one time (as here he did) & cry, Heare O my people of England: yet it is much to be feared that at another time he might come and crye vnto vs: Oh, that my people of England would haue heard me, as to them he doth in the latter ende of the Pſalme. Secondly, another reaſon of this doctrine is this, bicauſe by hearing commeth faith, Rom. 10. 2 17. Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God: ſo that if the hearing of the preachers beget faith in the hearers, who ſhall more fitly or may more conueniently crie vnto them in their ſermon time to heare this point of faith diligently, to marke this doctrine carefully, to lay vp this leſſon aduiſedly, and remember this exhortation continually, then the preachers themſelues which are the midwiues of their faith. Oh, how wonderfully doth this doctrine condemne this faithleſſe age wherein we liue; for if faith come by hearing and hearing by the word of God, whence haue they their faith that come ſo ſeldome to our ſermons? Doth not this argue forcibly that their faith is as litle as their hearing, & therefore ſaluation is as little as their faith. How wil they anſwer this argument now before men and afterward before the ſonne of God, that they which heare not beleeue not, they which beleeue not are cōdemned alreadie, and they which are in ſuch damnable eſtate, it is not their reuenues of thouſands, their pallaces and houſes of glorie, the garments of brauerie, their prouiſion of delicates, their gentle friends, their ſoft beds, their hungry hounds, their rauening haukes, their pampered horſes, and their retinues of ſeruants, that can fray the deuill from taking away their

ſoules. Is not this pitie that ſuch glorious gentlemen ſhould be caſt away, for not hearing a ſeely preachers ſermons, being otherwiſe learned in the toongs, skilfull in the artes, excellent in the lawes, eloquent in ſpeeches, valorous in war, and comely in ſtature? Surely I beleeue Paul was deceiued when he ſaid, Faith came by hearing and hearing by the word of God. What an impudent blaſphemie were this, to ſay that Ladies and gentlewomen, on whoſe faces the ſunne is not good inough to looke, whoſe legges muſt not walke on the ground, but either keepe aloft in their bowers, or take the ayer in their coaches, whoſe hands muſt touch nothing but either chaines of pearle, cloath of golde embrodered, and fine needle wrought garments; that theſe beautifull ſtars (I ſay) ſhould come downe from their nicenes and learne faith at the mouth of preachers? Yet farther, muſt our gallant youthes and proper ſeruing then, whoſe heads are hanged with haire, as if they would fright away both Chriſt and his miniſters from the place where they ſtand, come frō the tauerns, from gaming—houſes, from the play—houſes, frō the Ale—houſes, from the whoore—houſes, and from al their diſports, to be ratled vp for their follies by preaching, & forſake their faſhiōs of the world to be new faſhioned in their minds, that in ſtead of infidelitie (wherwith the moſt of that crew are infected) they may haue faith engraffed in them by hearing the Goſpell, leaſt as they conſume their purſes, they condemne their ſoules, neither can robbe for more ſoules as they do for more purſes? Then will you ſay beloued, you haue ploughed in vaine vpon the rocke: but better let vanitie be vanitie then preaching be vanitie, better let gameſters be deceiued then Apoſtles be falſified, and better let Lordes and Ladies, Gentlewomen and ſeruingmen, and all the route which be contrary minded to this doctrine, periſh and depart from their pleaſures, then that the ſonne of God, the church of God and the miniſters of God ſhould depart from the truth. It is no blaſphemie to ſay with Paul, It pleaſed God through preaching to ſaue them

that beleeue: Therefore no preaching, no ſaluation: or with Iohn, He that heareth vs not, is not of God: Therefore they which ſtop their eares when they ſhoulde heare the preachers, ſhall heare againſt their wils, Go yee curſed into the fire of hell. Nowe let vs come and ſee what particular vſes the holy Ghoſt maketh of this doctrine in other places of Scripture. And let that generall exhortation of our Sauiour Matth. 13. 9. be the firſt, when he ſaith; He that hath an 
                  Vſe 1. 
                  eare to heare let him heare. And this is as if our Lord had ſaide: the Goſpell of ſaluation is of ſuch waight that it concerneth all the people of the worlde: by the preaching thereof, the gray headed, the yoong men, the tender women, and the little children may and muſt receiue ſome profite; old men muſt bee prepared to the graue, yoong muſt be ſtrengthened to fight with their pleaſures, women muſt be gouerned like the daughters of righteouſnes, and children inſtructed in the worke of redemption. The king muſt heare as Dauid did: the noble man muſt heare as Obadiah did: the gentleman muſt heare as Sergius Paulus did: the ladie muſt heare as Esther did: the yeoman muſt heare as Eliſha his hoſt did: the labourer muſt heare as Apollos did: the women muſt heare as Marie did: and the little children muſt heare as they did, which when they ſawe Chriſt cried; Oſanna in the higheſt. For euery one that hath an eare to heare muſt lende the ſame to the worde of God. The Goſpell of Chriſt is not like other profeſsions, that when they haue moſt followers, one marreth anothers trade; but when all men (if it were poſsible) ſhall be ioyned to the Lorde in the profeſsion of the truth, then is the glory thereof greater then the brightneſſe of the ſunne. Therefore my beloued, rouſe vp your heauie and hanging downe ſences, and conſider with your ſelues, that if the Lorde hath giuen you your eies to ſee withall, your hands to worke withall, your toongs to ſpeake withal, your feete to walke withall, then thinke alſo that he hath giuen you your eares to heare his worde withall. And if they

which haue eares to heare muſt heare, what, ſhall they not forfaite their eares for not hearing? Truely if the forging and counterfaiting of a noble mans ſeale, or of a peece of euidence, be by the lawes of man moſt woorthily deemed to be puniſhed with cutting off their eares, bicauſe it bringeth harme to a common wealth: then alſo it may eaſily followe that in like caſe they deſerue the looſing of their eares which will not lend them to the Lords preacher. This I ſpeake not to make any ciuill conſtitution, but comparing ſinne with ſinne, I would gladly manifeſt the great euil that hangeth on their neckes, which haue their elbowes as ready to heare as their eares. Moſt lamentable it is to conſider that if they were all deafe, that will not heare our ſermons, what a deafe world would this quickly prooue. O my beloued brethren! know you not that hearing is the ſence of obedience, and therefore you cannot iuſtifie your ſelues to obey, vnleſſe you teſtifie that you will heare God his miniſters: If he were accurſed that layeth a ſtumbling blocke before the blinde, then are they alſo accurſed which ſtop their eares againſt the Lords ordinance. Was it not a heynous thing to remooue but a land—marke which our elders planted, and therefore much more heynous is it to remooue hearing God his word from our eares which the Lord himſelfe hath planted. Come therefore my beloued, and as you would be called Chriſtians, ſo fulfill the minde of Chriſt; for as the vine branche is good for nothing, but to beare grapes: euen ſo the eares of man are but combrances into vs in moſt matters except in hearing the worde of God: in the world they are too long, in the Lord they are too little, therfore for amending of our follies, let vs apply our eares to heare while we can heare, leaſt it be too late when we would. Secondly, we make another vſe thereof, that ſeeing the miniſters of God muſt call vpon 2 the people to heare the word, it is alſo requiſite to ſhew you the true way for the ſauing hearing of the Lords truth: for in one and the ſame maner of preaching there is not one

and the ſame manner of hearing, therefore the holy Ghoſt ſpeaketh by the author of the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes cap. 4. ver. 2. Vnto vs was the Goſpell preached as alſo vnto them, but the word that they heard profited them not, bicauſe it was not mixed with faith in thoſe that heard it: where we may learne if men and women heare the word of God with ſuch diligence as the deareſt ſeruants of the Lord doe, yet are they many times neuer the better, and he giueth the reaſon thereof, bicauſe they do not mingle it with faith. There are ſome ſeeds ſo ſmal and of that nature, that when the gardiner will ſowe them he muſt firſt take vp a great deale of earth, and cruſhing it very ſmall doth mingle it with his ſeed, and then caſteth it into the earth and it proſpereth exceedingly: euen ſo (deerely beloued) if you mingle not the pure earth of a ſound faith with the ſeed of the Lordes word, you ſhall neuer receiue any profit by our preaching. And this is the verie cauſe that the Goſpell groweth not, mens hearts tremble not, and their liues amend not, becauſe they bring minds full of infidelitie vnto the congregations. The cloſe Papiſt ſaith to himſelfe, I will heare this preacher, but I will beleeue nothing that he vttereth contrary to my firſt receiued ſuperſtition: the proude man ſaith to himſelfe, all the ſermons in the world ſhall neuer humble me: the couetous man he ſaith, for all their preaching and telling me that I ſhall neuer enter into the kingdome of heauen, yet I will not beleeue them if Chriſt himſelfe ſay ſo: the ruffians will not forſake their vanities for any inſtruction: the common people ſay we preach but for our liuings, and God forbid that all ſhould be true which the ſcripture and preachers tell vs: goe forwarde I beſeech you in all other ſinnes, and you ſhall finde but a verie ſmall number that ſay, I beleeued and therefore I heard. The medicine to purge out all theſe corruptions is a true faith, the which if either you leaue at home, or loſe it by the way, the labour is all loſt that you take therein. Oh how lamentable and damnable a ſinne is infidelitie! when the

iudgements of God are not beleeued and the mercies of God are abuſed. But this greeueth all godly hearts to the quicke, that euen in our daies and times there ſhould be ſuch, that as a godly father ſaith, are armed with the name of good chriſtians, & yet fight againſt the faith of true beleeuers. Looke vpon it in time, leaſt as death followeth ſicknes through want of phiſicke, ſo the death of your ſoules follow their ſickenes through want of faith. Beleeue, ſaith Chriſt, and al things are poſsible; the dead haue beene raiſed by faith, the ſicke haue beene releeued by faith, the mountaines may be remooued by faith, and the diuell himſelfe is droue away by faith: therefore bring faith with you vnto the hearing of the ſermons, the ſcriptures are the Lords wordes, and they are ſet to ſale by the preaching of the miniſters, themſelues beeing his factors, faith muſt buye them as money doth, or bee exchanged for them as one thing is for another; for there is no crediting vpon wordes, no obligations vpon dayes, that can get them from vs, but preſent payment of a liuely faith. Therefore if any will knowe howe to heare the Goſpell with profit, and to enioy it with comfort, let him bring faith with him, that the worde deliuered may bee ſealed for truth, and ſinnes beeing reprooued may bee receiued for truth, and ſuffer no ſtarting holes of infidelitie to carrie our ſoules from the rocke of God his truth, into the ſea of heatheniſh ſecuritie, or endleſſe aduerſitie. O yee elders. That is, you gouernours of the people, whom the Lord hath honoured with long life, and the world The greateſt men ſhould be the greateſt profeſſors. with great authoritie. And from hence we note this doctrine, that the moſt honourable muſt moſt of all giue eare to the worde of God, whether that honour bee in the Church as the miniſters, or in the common wealth as the magiſtrates, or in the familie as the father thereof, or in the warres as the generall thereof; all theſe beeing exalted aboue other, haue alſo a charge aboue other, that euerie one walke worthie of his profeſsion,

which is onely by ſtudying and hearing the word of the Lord. The Lord ſo commandeth Deut. 17. 19. That the king himſelfe ſhall cauſe to be wrote a booke for him of the lawe, that he keepe it with him and read therein all the daies of his life. Thoſe which haue the greateſt charge muſt vſe the greateſt labour to diſcharge their places, as none could be iudges in Iſraell till the Lord had giuen them of the ſpirit of Moſes; ſo none can ſincerely execute their duetie that the world may be ſatisfied, the Lord may be glorified, and their owne ſoules comforted, vnleſſe they receiue of the ſpirit of God, and by the miniſterie of the word is the ſpirit deliuered. Gal. 3. 2. Hearken therefore you rulers of the Lordes people, that which excelleth all glorie, being richer then all wealth, and wiſer then all learning, euen the ſpirit of God may be receiued when the word of God is deliuered: Oh how are they deceiued that thinke the miniſterie a baſe profeſsion, not meete for any, but for the poore to liue by, for the lame, & disfigured, for yonger brothers, for bankerupt, for ſeruingmen, for blunt-headed-ſchollers, and ſuch as can be good in nothing. How are they alſo deceiued that thinke it not an exerciſe fit for noble men and perſons of eſtate, knights, and gentlemen, and ſuch great ones which haue the world at their wils, and the countrey at their pleaſures: ſhall theſe ſay they, make themſelues drudges to the Goſpell? ſchollers to the preachers? and goe on pilgrimage to a publike ſermon? Yea all theſe muſt reſigne their crownes of maieſtie, their gownes of nobility, their ſwords of chiualrie, and their eſtimation of gentrie, vnto the voice of the bleſſed ſpirit of God, ſpeaking in the ſcriptures and preaching in his miniſters. And if theſe muſt bend their knees, we muſt bow our bodies to the earth, and put our necke vnder the yoke of Chriſt Ieſus, that he may lift vp our head & liues to the participation of glorie. The Lord that bindeth kings in chaines, and nobles in fetters of Iron, and maketh the mountaines to cleaue in ſunder at his roaring, willeth and commandeth vs from heauen to heare

his ſon: and it ſhal ſo come to paſſe that the ſoule ſhal be cut off from the Lords people, that hath not kiſſed the prince of glorie, and commeth not to offer obedience and ſeruice to his royall Lord, who is able to caſt him body and ſoule into fire euerlaſting. Let vs therefore ſtudy to enter into the courts where the Goſpell of Chriſt ſoundeth and reigneth, leaſt we fall away from grace and glorie after the euill example of thoſe long agoe condemned infidels and reprobated apoſtataes, which gaue their eares to falſhood, their toongs to blaſphemie, their liues to vanitie, their bodies to luxurie, and their ſoules to euerlaſting miſerie. Let not the graye haires of old men, the great wealth of rich men, the worſhip of Magiſtrates, nor the honour of gouernement, draw away our hearts from the hearing of this meſſage, which being hid from vs, maketh vs curſed caſtawaies, but being declared vnto vs, regenerateth vs to the hope of eternall happines. The reaſons of this doctrine are alſo eaſily Reaſon 1. gathered out of the word of God. Firſt the ſame which Samuel vſeth in his firſt booke cap. 12. ver. 14. at the annointing or crowning of their new king Saule to perſwade them, and their king to the diligent hearing of the word and reuerent feare of God, he vſeth this as a reaſon, That then they ſhall be the people of the Lord God. As if Samuel had ſaid vnto them, you know that this is the glorie of our nation, that we alone are the ſelected band and choſen ſoldiers to fight the Lords battles; and this is an honour againſt all the world beſide, that they ſeruing Idoles and worſhipping diuels, we ſerue the Lord of hoſtes: if therefore you will indeed be the Lords people, you muſt in truth heare the Lords word: what could be ſaid more forcibly to mooue a rebellious nation to a quiet ſubmiſsion? And this being the badge and liuerie of the Church of God, we may be bold to ſay openly and defend confidently, that they which heare not the Goſpell as now it is preached in our Engliſh nation, are none of the true followers of his heauenly maieſtie: Euen all whether they be the archenimies of Chriſt

the Papiſts, or the new ſectary of Recuſants, the Browniſts, or the vaine religion bablers, the Newters or the priuy haters of the preachers, the carnall and time ſeruing profeſſours, theſe ſhall goe to the place from whence they came, & there to be tormented world without end. It is not cold and idle hearing that maketh vs the people of God, but a ſincere and diligent frequenting the place where his perſon dwelleth. We muſt not be contented to be the Lords retayners, but we muſt ſue to be made his houſhold ſeruants. The Apoſtle Peter in his firſt epiſtle cap. 2. ver. 5. calleth vs all that profeſſe the Lord Ieſus, a ſpirituall priesthood: now this was the office in old time of a prieſt euery day to appeare at the altar, and their very lodging was in the Temple; therefore muſt we come often to the Lords houſe and deſire to dwell in his tabernacle, that we may euermore heare and ſpeake his worde. The ſecond reaſon 2 of this doctrine is taken from the continuall courſe of the Iudgements of God: All Egypt was plagued becauſe they heard not the worde of God, euen their king loſt his eldeſt ſonne, and afterwarde he himſelfe for the ſame follie was drowned and ſwallowed vp of the ſea. The noble man which would not beleeue and harken to the voice of the prophet, when he told him of the great and ſudden cheapnes of corne, anſwered him that it was impoſsible, except the windowes of heauen ſhoulde bee opened; but he ſawe it accompliſhed, and for his infidelitie was troden to death by the people. Reade the whole booke of God, and you ſhal euery where plainly perceiue, that for diſobedience to God his worde, and contempt of his meſſengers, Kings haue been depoſed, and Queenes haue beene puniſhed; Lords, Ladies, Magiſtrates and ſubiectes, old men and children, haue taſted of the deadly cup of the Lords heauie wrath. Lay vp this in your harts (my bowels in the Lorde) happy are they which auoide danger by the fals of other men. Oh that the teares of our countrymen couldewaſh away the guilt of this ſinne; for our

ſcore is growne ſo great by our long continued credit, that we haue made no conſcience to pay the Lord his owne: and we haue vrgent cauſe to conſider, and alſo to feare, leaſt the Lord ſue the extremitie of the lawe vpon vs, and neuer ſpare till we haue paide the vttermoſt farthing, and felt the full weight of his hande, and ſpent euery drop of bloud in ſoule and body for the notorious contempt of his moſt glorious Goſpel. There is no ſacrifice to be compared to the hearing of the Lords worde, and therefore the neglect thereof in whomſoeuer, is moſt fearefull, moſt deadly, moſt damnable. The vſes which offer themſelues vnto vs Vſe 1. out of this doctrine are theſe; firſt that the ancient and great men muſt ſuffer the words of the Lords miniſters patiently, and for this cauſe the Apoſtle willeth vs, Tit. 2. 2. To exhort the elders to ſoberneſſe and faith. There be two things which ſhould ſhine as bright in age and authoritie, as the eies do in the heads of ſtrong yoong men, that ſee and be ſeene of others, and yet ſee not themſelues; euen ſo ought ſobrietie and faith to offer themſelues vnto the view of all perſons, where the graie haires appeere like the buddes of an almond tree, whereby the aged may ſee and correct the follies of youth, and yoong men may ſee their example to be drawne in loue with their liues; but they themſelues ought not to be proud for that honour which the Lord hath beſtowed vpon them. Oh how vnhappie is that time when olde men and great men are as wanton as children, and as faithles as thoſe which neuer knewe God? Wo bee to that lande whoſe Prince is a childe, ſaith Salomon. Meaning that the whole countrey is diſtreſſed where the gouerners thereof haue as little ſtay as children, or as little faith as children. In our daies if the Lords miniſters which keepe the ſoules of our countrymen, ſhall in meekeneſſe admoniſh old men; they tell them they are but boyes to themſelues, and they knew what religion was before they were borne, not knowing their antiquitie cannot preiudice the ſpirite of the Lord, or not conſidering what our ſauiour

ſaide to the labourers in the vineyard; They which were first ſhall be last, and they which were last ſhall bee first. Others thinke, that if they beare an office in the common wealth, no man may dare to counſell them in the Lorde; they themſelues thinke they are iniured, and their friends thinke they are diſgraced, if the word of exhortation paſſe vpon them: ſhall I, ſay they, being a gentleman well deſcended, well inſtructed, of ſo many hundred poundes reuenues, bee in as much ſlauerie to this preaching as the poore artificer? But vnto theſe we may anſwere, that if their natures or offices exempt them from ſermons, they alſo exempt them from ſaluation: For it pleaſed God through the fooliſhnes of preaching to ſaue them that beleeue. What is a Principes cum ad limen delubri veniunt, proinde ſunt atque priuati. King better then a farmer? a noble man better then an artificer? a gentleman better then a plowman? and a magiſtrate better then a ſubiect, without true religion and obedience to the goſpel? Surely nothing, for now whether had you rather bee poore Iacob bowing to the earth alone, or rich Eſau attended with fowre hundred men; whether had you rather bee Pharaoh or Moſes; Ieroboam or the prophet; Ziakijah or Ieremie; the rich man or Lazarus; Pilate or Christ; Herod or Iohn Baptist; the Apoſtles or the high Prieſts; ſtagger not heereat, but ſhew your conſciences whether of theſe you woulde be, you cannot bee both, therefore chooſe one. The way to heauen is narrowe, and we being clothed with our owne conceites can neuer enter in, there is too little roome for both: we cannot beare the yoke of Chriſt and the worlde at one time, the leaſt of both requireth a whole man. Therefore you my beloued fathers, beare with the voice of vs your yoongers, for when we exhort you, it is not done in our name, but in his who is the ancient of daies, elder then the oldeſt, wiſer then the wiſeſt, ſtronger then the ſtrongeſt, and yoonger then the yoongeſt, who is euery day borne in his members. It is not vs, but him that you heare, who knoweth your harts, ſeeth your liues, and ſhall condemne your incredulitie. The Lord

told the rebellious Iſraelites when they refuſed Moſes and Aaron, that it was not againſt them but him, that they had murmured and refuſed; ſo it is not our youth, it is not our frailtie, it is not our weaknes that you blame, for if wee were not miniſters, you woulde loue vs the better for it: but it is againſt the Lorde that you ſtriue. Oh ſtaie your toongs before they go too farre; God which daſheth in peeces yoong infants, careth not for your gray haires, your ſwordes auaile not againſt him, neither can your reuenues redeeme your ſoules. Secondly, we may make this 2 one vſe of this. That forſomuch as the Elders and Magiſtrates muſt aboue others vſe the hearing of the worde of God, what is their eſtate which are negligent in this action and the eſtate of their gouernment, the eſtate of their families, and eſtate of their children? Surely moſt dangerous aboue others, for as when they performe this they are noted through a whole countrey, and thereby they growe famous; ſo the neglect hereof is ſpred farre, and thereby they growe infamous. For this cauſe hath the holy Ghoſt left vs in his word ſundry examples, where light and graceleſſe fathers haue brought their lewde and godleſſe children with themſelues to deſtruction: Looke on Elie 1. Sam. 3. 12. and Saul and Haman, Eſth. 8. 13. who was the deſtruction of the fathers but themſelues, and who was the deſtruction of the children but the fathers. If Helie had harkened to God, and corrected his ſonnes, the Arke had not been taken, the Philiſtines had not preuailed, his ſonnes had not been killed, and he had ſaued his owne necke from breaking. Oh conſider this, I beſeech you my reuerende and gray headed fathers, your age ſhall not diſcharge you: this man wanted but two yeeres of an hundred yeere olde, he was prieſt and iudge of Iſraell, yet when he forgat himſelfe he forgot the Lord alſo; then had hee no pitie of his yeeres, no mercie on his children, and no compaſsion of his owne life. Samuel tolde Saul that there was no ſacrifice like to the hearing of the worde of God; then if you will offer

the beſt ſacrifice, heare the word of God. The Lord you ſee which made the eares, requireth but the eares againe: why ſhould you bring your children into the curſe out of the couenant? why ſhould you driue the Lord to reiect you, as he did Saul, becauſe you heare not his word? Are you the fathers of our bodies? be alſo I beſeech you, the fathers of our faith, the authors of our profeſsion, and the enſamples of our obedience As Eſau cried to Iſaack bleſſe me my father, ſo we crie vnto you to bleſſe our countrey, to bleſſe your owne poſteritie, and to bleſſe the liues of them whoſe ſoules you haue in your handes. Let the elders among vs know for a certaintie, that if they heare vs not, though wee bee yoong that ſpeake vnto them, yet wee will vſe them as the woman did the wicked iudge, ouercome them by importunitie. And let euery man knowe his dutie, euen to pray that their fathers, and maſters, and magiſtrates, and gouernours, may bee as willing to grace the Goſpell with their preſence, as they are to defende it by their policie: ſurely we can hardly imbrace that, which we ſee the chiefe commanders to neglect. But yet I beſeech you for your owne ſoules, and for our liues, for the children borne and vnborne, and for the generall comfort of our whole countrey, fulfill that heauenly voice Matt. 17. 4. Heare the heauenly ſonne of God.
            
            
               The third Sermon.
               
                  Harken ye all inhabitants of the land, whether ſuch a thing hath beene in your daies, or yet in the daies of your fathers.
               
               
                  ALl the inhabitants: By theſe words we obſerue this None muſt liue in the Church, vnleſſe they outwardly bee ſubiect to the Goſpell. doctrine; that there muſt not any liue in the church of God, but ſuch as doe and will at the leaſt outwardly humble themſelues to the miniſterie of the word: the church of God is the company of ſelected ſaints, choſen before all worlds to the worſhip of God; and if they be

choſen from the contemners, as good wheate is from the chaffe, then muſt they not endure the hazarding of their ſoules by harbouring the children of diſobedience. Wee may reade in Nehem. 8. 2. that when he brought foorth the lawe of God, Ezra read it before the congregation both of men and women, and all that could vnderstand it. And in the next verſe he addeth, that he read it in the ſtreetes, and all the people harkened to the booke of the law. As in the common wealth there is a lawe which euery one vndergoeth, vnleſſe they be wearie of life, ſo in the church of God this is a lawe, Let him that hath eares to heare heare, except he will bee baniſhed from the land of the righteous, and cut off from the body of Chriſt: Surely as the Apoſtle ſaide, Woe is me if I preach not the Goſpell. So muſt all the miniſters of the Lorde euery day ſound alowde to their people, woe be vnto you if you heare not the Goſpell. The reaſons of this doctrine Reaſon 1. may thus be gathered out of the word of truth. Firſt that which Moſes hath recorded Gen. 17. 14. where the Lorde wil not haue any to be of Abrahams familie, but they which would bee circumciſed; and if any would not receiue this wounde (as our Sauiour calleth it) in the fleſh, the Lorde commanded him to be cut off from his people: Nowe wee knowe that the church is the familie of Abraham, who was made the father of all the faithfull, that they being made partakers of his beleefe, ſhoulde alſo be partakers of his obedience. There is not a prince or a noble man, or a learned man, or a rich man, or a preacher, or any baſe perſon among the common people, but hee may challenge this priuilege, if he beleeue in the Lord of glorie, that he is the ſonne of promiſe as Iſaac was, and therefore the ſonne of Abraham as Iſaac was. All are not the children of promiſe that heare and are borne vnder the preaching of the Goſpell; but there are Iſmaelites alſo which haue outwardly the badge of a true ſonne, though they bee but baſtarde Chriſtians: yet olde Abraham ready for the graue muſt be circumciſed before he die, and yoong Iſmaell if he will euer

be bleſſed of God muſt be circumciſed, although he were heire apparant to the land of Canaan (for as yet Abraham had no other ſonne) and the ſhepherdes, the neatherdes, the ſeruingmen, and euery kitchin-boy receiue the ſigne, or elſe be baniſhed from their maſters tents: Euen ſo muſt the hoare headed father, the greene headed yoong man, the wanton youth, the ſimple plow-man, the gallant ruffian, and the poore turne-ſpit, be preſent and obedient to the voice of the miniſter. Many I graunt of the better ſort, thinke their dutie diſcharged, if in their owne perſons they learne to knowe the Lord, and for their families they let them doe as they liſt: but you muſt remember that this was the commendation that Abraham receiued of God, That hee woulde teach his children after him, Geneſ. 18. 17. and therefore if you will bee Abrahams ſonnes, teach that to your families which you haue learned your ſelues. Oh how lamentable is it to ſee & conſider of a great number, that ſet as good faces on the Goſpell as the beſt, when on the Lords own day ſome ſend their ſeruants many miles iourney, & ſuffer ſilly perſons to waite in their kitchins, (I mean cōtinually) as if there were none that had any ſoules but thoſe that are called the rulers of families. We may ſay of them as Bernard ſaide of the church cōmitted to careles clergie men, O miſerandam ſponſam talibus creditā paranimphis: O miſerable ſoules lead by ſuch bridegromes which keepe them for to ſerue the luſtes of their owne bellies, & haue no care to marrie thē to the Lord. Take you heed you that haue the wealth of the world, & ſearch and rake in the ſinkes of your houſes, in the ſtables of your horſes, in the ſtaules of your oxen, and in the harts of your ſeruants, that you may bring ſoules into the kingdome of heauen: a pearle taken out of the dung is as good as that which is hoarded vp in a princes treaſurie; and a ſimple ſoule ſaued from the walking of horſes, or turning of ſpits, is as glorious to the Lorde as he that ruleth in the throne. Another reaſon for the çonfirmation of this doctrine our ſauiour 2
                  
giueth, Iohn. 10. 26, 27. There are none that heare not Christ which beleeue in Christ; and there are none the ſheepe of Chriſt, but thoſe that heare the voice of Christ: meaning that at that time when he was liuing in the worlde, and preaching to the Iewes they could not be his flocke, that came not at the call of the Goſpell: and when he ſhould be dead and taken from the earth, they ſhoulde not bee reckoned for the lambes of his church, which flocked not to the cries and ſermons of the preachers. So that in one word he ſetteth vs downe thus much, that they are none of the Lordes which are not hearers of his worde: Therefore one ſaide well; Eccleſiae non iungitur qui ab Euangelio ſeparatur: Hee which is ſeparated through ignorance or idlenes from the Goſpell, is alſo through infidelitie parted from the church: for they which heare not Chriſt are none of his. The weight of this reaſon muſt be put into the balance of euery ones hart, and let him reaſon thus with himſelfe; My poore ſeruant, my drudge, my ſimple ſlaue, my maid, my cooke, and euery one of my familie, they knowe nothing of the Goſpell, but ſome voices that there is a Sauiour, and a Chriſt, that they muſt come once in a yeere, or peraduenture once in ſeauen yeere, and receiue the Lords Supper, and neuer know or thinke more of it: they are diligent to me, they worke when I play, they runne when I ride, they watch when I ſleepe, they fare hard when I feaſt, and they finde me all things, keeping nothing to themſelues, onely indeede through my buſines they come not at the church except very ſeldome; they know little more then infants, they haue beene baptized when they were yoong, they may follow any religion, or rather ſuperſtition; their obedience is ſo little to the Scriptures, yea they hardly can tell me whether there be any Scripture, whether the holie Ghoſt had any hande therein or no: if I will let them plaie on the Sundaies according to their pleaſures, the popes profeſsion, the Turkiſh religion, the Infidels practiſe and all heretikes opinions may be ſected in them. But what

ſhall become of their ſoules? Surely it greeueth vs that ſuch diligent and faithfull ſeruants ſhoulde after a miſerable and ſlauiſh life, haue a mercileſſe and a curſed death: Yet Chriſtes words are generall; they are none of his that heare not his voice and follow not his call. O conſider this you wealthy and poore people of this lande, thinke on the miſerable condition of theſe your owne fleſh, and fly from that terrible danger which threatneth your ſoules horror, all, (yea) euery mothers childe muſt be preſent when the worde is preached, bicauſe this trieth vs whether we bee aſhamed of Chriſt or no. When Dauid was abſent from Saules court, the king preſently miſſed him, and asked after him, for his place was voide: In like maner, if we be abſent from the aſſemblies of the faithfull, the king of heauen and earth, ſeeth our roomes be emptie, and calleth for our preſence. Let this therefore perſwade vs, that we ceaſe not hearing the Lordes word, and following his heauenly call, leaſt of ſheepe we become goates wanton and wilde; and ſo when the generall appeering ſhall be, the Lorde ſeparate the goates from the ſheepe, and ſende them to euerlaſting perdition. The vſes which may ariſe from this doctrine are theſe: firſt, that ſharpe ſentence of our Sauiour, Vſer 
                  Mark. 10. 14. Suffer little children to come to me and forbid them not: for vnto ſuch belong the kingdome of heauen: The well minded people deſiring the bleſsing of Chriſt to reſt vpon them, their poſteritie brought their little babes to be touched by our Sauiours hande; the which thing was reprooued and forbidden by the diſciples, and therefore they were rebuked and reprehended by Chriſt. There is none though they be as yoong as babes, as ſimple as children, as weake as women, as baſe as ſeruants, or as bonde as apprentices, but if at the ordinarie times of preaching, I meane the Sabbaoth, they will trauell to the Lords houſe and there ſpend their time, they muſt not be reſtrained, they muſt not be forbidden. I am not ignorant of the vaine and wicked authoritie which ſome chalenge to haue ouer

their families, thinking that their duties are diſcharged, although their ſeruants be wandring from the Lorde about their idle buſines; and ſeruants thinke themſelues ſatisfied bicauſe their maſters who haue rule ouer their bodies, command them thereunto: And thus men croſſe one line of their reckoning, and leaue a whole ſheete behinde; and race out the condition, letting the obligation ſtande; they heape vp one ſinne vpon another, and while they mende one breach in a chriſtian life, they make two more. For by this meanes it commeth to paſſe, that maſters thinke it lawfull to buſie their ſeruants, whom they hire for their money at al times when any ſmal occaſion offereth it ſelfe, ſending them on meſſages, in keeping them at home to waite on themſelues; and in ſauing an houre or two, or three, to worke in the weeke daies, they make bolde with the Lorde, and giue them leaue on the Sabbaoth daies to viſite their friendes. Doe we not thinke that the miniſters of God may haue their actions of maintenance againſt ſuch careleſſe maſters, which beare out their ſeruants and themſelues contrarie to the law of God, whereby their owne hearts are hardened, their neighbours offended, the glorious worke of the miniſter deſpiſed, the heauenly voice of the Goſpell neglected, and themſelues with their ſeruants in danger both body and ſoule to be damned? May we not call for the law (if not of man yet of God) to turne away theſe euils from vs? But Oh lamentable maners in this latter ende of the world, which regardeth as little the voice of Chriſt, as wiſe men do the noiſe of yoong children. Againe ſometime the ſeruants are of godly diſpoſition, and would willingly vſe the libertie of Chriſtians, to goe as the Iſraelites did and ſacrifice to the Lord; but then commeth one or other, and many times their parents and gouernours of their owne mother wit forbiddiding them to vſe it, encreaſing as Pharaoh did the meaſure of their workes, and forbidding them to come neare vnto Chriſt, as theſe diſciples did theſe yoong children: yet know I beſeech

you that that maſter that forbiddeth is in more bondage then he which is forbidden, and hee were better be an humble ſeruant, then ſuch a proud and preſumptuous maſter; and if he receiue not the kingdome of God as his ſeruant, he ſhall neuer enter therein. If he labour not for the meate which neuer periſheth; if he runne not for the price which neuer endeth; if he ſtudie not for the knowledge which alway laſteth, and if he obtaine not that faith which commeth by hearing of the word preached, but alſo keepeth other from entring, whether they be his ſeruants, or his ſonnes, or his daughters, or his wife, or his friends, or himſelfe, the ſentence is long agoe denounced, that he is the leaſt in the kingdome of God. It is an heynous offence to draw away a man, though it be but a ſeruant from obeying the warrant of a magiſtrate, and much more if he wiſh him to withdraw his allegeance: in like caſe is your eſtate which by your owne ſecuritie, driue other men to forſake God, leading the blinde vpon the ſtumbling blockes, making them beleeue that the fire cannot burne, and though they pearce their bodies with ſwords, yet they ſhall not hurt them. Secondly, another vſe hereof ſhal be that ſaying 2 of the Lord himſelfe, Pſal. 95. 7. 8. To day if you heare his voice harden not your hearts. The neglect of the word proceedeth of the hardnes of our hearts, and therefore the Lord biddeth vs not to harden our hearts if we will heare his word. What a world of hard hearts are now a daies, if they be all hard hearts which will not be preſent at the miniſterie of the Goſpell. The ſea is but a ſoft and ſlender ſubſtance, yet it bringeth foorth many hard ſtones: euen ſo the weake nature of man engendreth many hard hearts. This is moſt ſtrange to ſee the tendereſt place to be the hardeſt, euen the heart which will die if it be but pricked with a needle: but as the heart doth helpe all places of a diſeaſed body, and it ſelfe it cannot helpe; ſo when this feſtering ſore of old corrupted conſciences, and ignorant diſpoſitions inuadeth the mindes of men, a thouſand to one,

but they giue him mortall woundes, for then cannot the minde helpe it ſelfe: Therefore aboue all euils beware of hard hearts, the ground being hard will not let the pureſt ſeede grow in it, and the heart being hard will not ſuffer the immortall ſeede of the Lords word to grow therein: it choaketh all pitie, and condemneth all pietie. Come therfore to heare the worde of God, but bring melting hearts thereunto, otherwiſe you ſhall ſtill remaine the enimies of the truth, for hee that gathereth not with it ſcattereth abroad. The prieſts and ſcribes and Phariſes were preſent at the moſt of our Sauiours ſermons, yet they reaped no benefit thereby, bicauſe their hearts were not touched in the preſence of God: no more ſhall many thouſands be comforted by the preachers voices, bicauſe their hearts are in their barnes, when they ſhould be in the Churches, and their eies are ſhut, when they ſhould behold the miniſters. Many imagine that they preach beſt which can mooue the people to teares, and their hearts to be pricked whoſe eies fall a weeping; yet this is not alway an infallible token of a good paſtour or an humble ſoule: the hard marble ſtones do ſometimes ſweate out teares abundantly, and yet they are neuer the ſofter; euen ſo may many weepe and howle for their ſins, & be pricked with the word of God burſting out in lamentation, and yet remaine reprobates ſtill. But let vs breake vp the fallow ground of our hearts, let vs keepe them in continuall moiſture, that whenſoeuer the word ſhall be caſt into them, it may grow effectually. It is a fearfull thing to receiue the graces of God in vaine, which they do that without all reuerence and carefulnes, come vnaduiſedly without former preparation to the hearing of the worde of God: that which is raſhly heard is quickly forgotten; and that which is vnreuerently receiued, is preſently deſpiſed, but of this matter we haue already ſpoken. Fourthly, when he biddeth them to aske their fathers, he thereby willeth vs to call to our mindes thoſe things which haue beene done long agoe, the noble and wonderfull

works of God are not ſo ſlenderly to be regarded, that we thinke on no more then wee ſee, and conſider nothing but that which we feele. But what the Lord doth, it ſtandeth God his works muſt be perpetually remembred. for euer, and therefore is to be recorded in all generations, read the 104. 5. 6. Pſalmes throughout, where the holy Ghoſt gathereth togither the ſum or rehearſall of the Lords benefits, and chargeth oftentimes that we ſhoulde teach them to our children, and that we thinke vpon them to doe them for euermore. The reaſons of this Reaſon 1. doctrine may bee theſe: Firſt becauſe as the Apoſtle ſaith, Rom. 15. 4. Whatſoeuer is written in foretime is written for our learning, that wee through patience may haue hope: God of his eternall goodneſſe and wiſedome hath ſo prouided, that the principall and excellent workes of his iuſtice are by himſelfe recorded for times ſucceeding, and ſo plainly engrauen, that as he ſpeaketh by the prophet Abacuck, He which runneth may reade them, and theſe (ſaith the Apoſtle) are written for our inſtruction. It is a worlde to ſee how men forget the workes and worde of God: they make no account of Adams curſe, becauſe it was in the beginning; and ſmall reckoning of the flood, becauſe it was in the olde world; and they little eſteeme Ieruſalems deſtruction, becauſe it was, ſay they, before our time: and thus they waſh away all feare of iudgements and loue of God. So that if we warne them of wantonneſſe, by the example of the olde world, we are not ſo laſciuious, ſay they: if wee exhort them to holineſſe, by the example of Abraham, Moſes, Dauid, Zacharias, and the Apoſtles, then they tell vs, their examples pertaine not vnto them, for then there was more faith ſtirring in the worlde then now there is; and lay what wee can vnto them, yet they haue one way or other to eſcape: And all becauſe they thinke that the Lords works are like to muſitians labour, which cauſeth men to daunce ſo long as they heare it and no longer, or an almanacke that laſteth but a yeere; ſo they thinke that the ancient workes and former actions of the

Almighty haue no farther vſe, but for the preſent time wherein they were performed: But if they thinke ſo, they will in the ende gaine nothing by the bargaine. It was an olde worke of God to make the beaſtes ſubiect to man, and ſhould they not be ſo now? it was an ancient worke of God to make the rainebowe in the cloude, that the worlde might neuer bee deſtroyed as it was, haue wee no benefite by this woonder? Chriſt our Sauiour died long before we were borne, and doth it not pertaine vnto vs? then haue we made a wrong match, if all theſe be not true; but they are all certaine and euermore to bee remembred. Therefore our wantonneſſe, our wickedneſſe, our idleneſſe, our infidelitie, our beaſtlineſſe, and our ſecuritie, if they be not amended by the examples of the ſcriptures, they ſhall be condemned by the enſamples of the ſcriptures. You ancient fathers, which haue liued long, ſeene much, and heard the woonders in old time, meditate them in your mindes, and deliuer them to your poſteritie: euen as you woulde haue vs to continue your names becauſe you are our fathers, ſo doe you remember the works of God, for he is the father to vs all. Secondly, another reaſon of this doctrine 2 is this, becauſe the rehearſall of theſe workes of God, done before our time either vnwritten or eſpecially recorded in the word, doe terrifie our proud harts when we heare them declared vnto vs. The church of Corinth being happy by the Apoſtles preaching, grew inſolent in diuiſions, looſe in opinions, and intolerable in manners: the Apoſtle to remedie this 1. Cor. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8. verſ. bringeth in the tragedie of the Iſraelites deſtruction, ſhewing them how for the like offences thouſands and ten thouſands periſhed in diſpleaſure, to terrifie and humble them by theſe woonderfull works of God, that they might knowe howſoeuer they were not yet executed, yet they were as guiltie of condemnation as thoſe that were deſtroyed. Dauid ſaith of himſelfe Pſal. 119. 120. that the hearing of the Lordes iudgement wrought feare in his ſoule, and trembling in

his body: And therefore wee may many times reade and heare the ſtorie of wars, wherein as in a glaſſe we may behold the miſeries of our liues, to ſee princes maſſacred, noble men murdered, & the common people butchered, like bullocks in a ſlaughter houſe. Let vs often rehearſe the ſtorie of famines and robberies, wherein we may ſee the vncertaintie of our wealth, to ſee our houſes burned, our barnes emptied, our eſtates impoueriſhed, our liues famiſhed, our children left breathleſſe, and our wiues left comfortles. Let vs often meditate on the diſeaſes of our bodies, to mitigate our pleaſures, to ſee how ſome haue died ſodainely, other haue liued ſo long in ſickenes that their friends forſooke them, their phiſitions gaue them ouer, and the ſtinking ſauours of their owne bodies haue taken away their liues. Let Traitors thinke on Achitophell, rebels on Abſolon, proud perſons on Haman, corrupt iudges on Samuell ſonnes, idle miniſters on Eli, wicked magiſtrates on Shebna, fornicators on Zimry, couetous perſons on Achan, diſobedient perſons on Ionah, prophaners of the ſabaoth on the ſticke gatherer, ſwearers on the Aegyptian Iſraelite, and deſpiſers of the Goſpell miniſtery, ſacraments, and all true religion, on Simon Magus; and the Lord graunt that their puniſhment may be our amendment. The vſes which ariſe from this doctrine are theſe firſt, ſeeing that we muſt Vſe 1. often call to remembrance the old wonders in times before paſſed declared to the world, then let vs as often meditate on our owne particular liues which we haue ſpent & lead in our former daies, as the ſcripture exhorteth Heb. 10. 32. Call to your remembrance the daies that are paſſed. Let vs looke throughout all the yeeres of our life and make as diligent a ſearch, as the woman in the Goſpell did for her money, and begin at our birth and firſt being in the world, in infancie behold our weakenes, and God his kindnes; in youth looke on our wantonnes, & the Lords bountifulnes; in ripe age viewe our wickednes, and the Lords long ſuffering; and in olde age marke our vnthankfulnes, and the

Lords pardon. Call to remembrance the daies that are paſſed: in infancie we could not ſerue God, in youth we cared not for God, in ripe yeeres we did not feare him, in our old age we did not know him: in our infancie we were more helpleſſe then all creatures, in youth we were more graceleſſe then beaſtes, in our middle age more fooliſh then godly, and in olde age more deſperate then reformed: in infancie wee euer cryed; in youth wee euer feared; in our middle age we liued in care; and our olde age ſpent in ſorrow: in our infancie our wants which we could not expreſſe made vs miſerable; in our youth the rod ſcourged vs; in our ripe age the world diſquieted vs; and in our old age the graue which we coulde not auoide tormented vs: woulde not theſe conſiderations offer long diſcourſes to tame our wildeneſſe, to reforme our prophanenes, and to ouercome our vnrulineſſe? might I not hereby take occaſion like a deuine philoſopher to paint out the miſerie of mankinde, to cauſe all mens eies to bewaile infants in their cradles, boies in their ſchooles, yoong men in their pleaſures, and old men to their graues? might not I heere ſtirre vp your affections, to ſhewe you the vnhappie condition of a bare naturall life, babes to be brained; children to be curſed; yoong men to fall by the ſworde; women to be rauiſhed; and olde men to be without all honour and pittie murdered? ſurely in theſe we are of al men moſt miſerable. But now ſeeing I haue ſearched the regiſter and records of nature, let me alſo ſhewe you how you ſhall looke on the court-rolles of grace, and begin with that ſaying of the Apoſtle, Epheſ. 2. 11. Wherefore remember that you were in times past Gentiles in the fleſh, and called vncircumciſion, that you were without Christ, aliants from Iſraell, ſtrangers from the promiſe, without hope and without God in this worlde: Heere you may ſearch for your ſeuerall eſtates, and admit you haue all naturall benefites attendant, when you are yoong, pleaſure; when you are youthfull, riches; when you are ſtrong, quietnes; and wiſedome, when you are olde;

what are theſe to a condemned ſoule? Take a theefe appointed to the gallowes, and before he go to execution let the king cal him ſonne, let him be apparelled with ſilke, let him haue a chaine on his necke, bracelets on his armes, bring him into your treaſurie of abundance of golde and ſiluer, bid him take his fill: carrie him to moſt delicate fare, and bid him eate cheerefully, and ſtrike vp moſt pleaſant muſicke, bid him be merrie, but tell him anone he muſt be hanged; how ioyfull would his hart be at all this pleaſure, when he knoweth preſently after his chaine ſhall be changed into a halter, his garments to a winding ſheete, his carcaſe to wormes meate, his throne into a gallowes, his ſeruants into executioners, and his money taken all from him before he can ſpend a penie: euen ſo are the beſt of vs all by nature condemned, and we finde no comfort in our parentage, or pleaſure in our wealth, or profite in our clothing, or benefit in our meat, or ioy in our bodies ſo long as we know that after a little while al theſe ſhal be forgotten, and we in deſtruction. Now remember what you are without grace that is by nature: wrath is our father, heathens are our brethren, or rather diuels, vncircumciſion is our garment; that is a peece of rawe cloth vnfulled, which openeth it ſelfe to euery winde and ſtorme: Chriſt the Sauiour is our enimie, and we perſecute him and crucifie him: the Saints of God we regarde not; the promiſes of God we know not, our hope is vanitie, and our God is iniquitie. Call to your remembrance the houres, the daies, the weekes, the monethes, and the yeeres of your life; thinke euermore on that mercie and that power that in the ruffe of all this iniquitie forbeareth, forewarneth, and forgiueth you. Thinke thus with your ſelues, I was a helhounde, I was a heathen, the tyger is better then my parentage, and the ſerpent then my education; I was naked without grace, and not able to buy it: the Lord that ſolde it was my enimie, and I durſt not aske vpon credite. Howe many enormities haue I runne into againſt my God, which the

Lord foreſeeing hath forgiuen; the curſe of my nature he hath remooued; the euill of my conuerſation he hath remitted; the emptines of my ſoule, he hath repleniſhed; and the ſentence of my condemnation hath he recalled. Thus hath the Lorde dealt with my life, when I was ſinfull, he was mercifull; when I blaſphemed, he bleſſed; when I made warre againſt him, hee made peace with me; hee tooke my blowes on both cheekes; he gaue me his coate and his cloake; and to conclude, when I walked through the valley of the ſhadowe of death, his rodde and his ſtaffe was my comfort: therefore now will I giue my life for his; my body for his garment; my bloud for his blowes; my ſoule for his ſake; and my whole perſon, wealth, honour, dignitie, labour and leaſure for his ſaluation. Secondlie, 2 another vſe we may make of recording time paſt, and the ſeueral works of God with his particular iudgments, is the ſame which the prophet Dauid maketh, Pſalm. 8. which is this, after the rehearſall of the glorious workes of God, he compareth man with them, and ſaith; Lord, what is man that thou art mindfull of him, or the ſonne of man that thou viſitest him? Euen ſo when we ſee and heare of the great workes of God vpon others, lay them to your ſelues by particular application to your ſoules, and reckon them vp in order for your furtherance. Little Canaan tolde his father of his grandfathers drunkennes and nakednes, and he was accurſed and all his poſteritie: But I haue in my youth done many thouſand greater ſins, & yet the Lord doth ſtil bleſſe me; was the Lord too rigorous againſt him, or too partiall with me, that he all his life long wore ſuch a badge, as alſo diſgraceth all his progenie; but he laieth not to my charge the follies of my youth? Moſes and Aaron, bicauſe they once diſtruſted the hande of God they were neuer ſuffered to enter into Canaan: but I not once onely, but many hundred times haue diſtruſted his promiſe, denied his worde, and forſaken his truth; why do I liue ſo long in the lande of promiſe? when more righteous then my ſelfe

coulde not ſet their foote therein. Ananias and Saphira kept backe but a part of their owne to ſerue them in aduerſitie, and denying the ſame, were ſodainly ſlaine by the Lord: but I haue kept backe not mine, but the Lordes, from the Lorde, and haue lied not once to the holy Ghoſt but many times; and yet I liue, my credite not impeached, my profeſsion is not blamed, my life is not ſhortened, and my daies are not ended. Oh, beholde the ſeueritie of God towards theſe that fell, but the mercy of God towardes me that ſtandeth: And thus may we ſay of nations and whole people, why was Egypt deſtroyed, and Iſraell ſaued? why were the Canaanites caſt out, and the Iſraelites planted in? why was Edom made tributarie to Iacob? Babylon to Perſia? Perſia to Graecia? Ireland to England? Surely, ſurely, we might haue beene the ſlaues, and they the Lordes; we the bondmen, and they the freemen. Euil wars might haue beene in our daies, as it was in our fathers, and that which was greateſt poperie or hereſie, or hetheniſme might haue beene profeſſed in theſe our times as it was long agoe. Thinke therefore my beloued, how many bonds of obedience the Lorde hath bounde vs in: and conſider what had beene our hap, if we had beene thoſe children that were ripped out of their mothers bellies; if we had beene thoſe yoong men that periſhed in battell; if we had beene thoſe women that eate their babes to ſaue their liues: and finally, how much more are we bound vnto God that we were not Infidels, Pagans, & Papiſts, haeretikes, Atheiſtes, or any other kinde of curſed men. Let vs alſo ſay with the prophet, Pſal. 147. vlt. With euery nation hath he not dealt thus. Let therefore euermore the worde of God bee in our mouthes, the praiſes of God be in our hearts, the Goſpell in our liues, and by howe much more we haue taſted of the Lords goodnes aboue other, ſo much more let him taſte of our thankefulnes aboue other.
            
            
               
               The fourth Sermon.
               
                  And tell you your children of it, and let your children ſhewe to their children, and their children to another generation.
               
               NOw the prophet hauing bidde them to enquire of their forefathers, alſo willeth them to tell this wonder to them that ſhall come after, namely, to their children, with this commandement alſo, that they in time to come being made parents ſhoulde likewiſe declare this vnto their poſteritie. Where firſt of all the prophet giueth vs this doctrine, that it is the dutie of fathers, that if anie notable and woorthie worke of God happen in their daies, to ſhew the ſame vnto their children, for the wordes are, tell your children, &c. Euen this doth the Lorde warne the Iſraelites, Exod. 13. 14. to ſhew the wonders in Egypt vnto We muſt tell our children what God hath done in our daies. their poſteritie, and peculiarly at the eating of the paſſeouer. For in truth, this care and conſcience of godlie parents is the verie conduit pipe or kings highway whereby all religion, all feare of God, and the vniforme profeſsion of the truth is preſerued. By this meanes came Moſes to be a fit and able writer of the Scriptures, although hee handle matters done two thouſand yeeres before he ſawe the worlde, he had no recordes nor writings to helpe him, but that truth which deſcended as it were by propagation from father to ſonne vnto his daies, which began to be corrupt, the holy Ghoſt approoued, and Moſes recorded. Therefore the learned haue obſerued that in ſeauen generations it came to Moſes: Adam, ſay they, taught the Hiſtorie of the creation and fall of man with other thinges to Methuſaleth; Methuſaleth told them to Sem; Sem ſhewed them to Iacob; Iacob to Kohath; Kohath to Amram; and Amram to Moſes. And in this ſort was this noble ſtory of Geneſis with viſions, places, and perſons deliuered from hande to hande, from father to ſonne, and from one generation to another, that the wordes and workes of God

might be euerlaſtingly remembred. This ſheweth how by the carefulnes of parents the pure knowledge of God was maintained, and the true worſhip of God continued: Then euery father of a familie was a magiſtrate to puniſh; a prophet to inſtruct; a prince to gouerne his owne houſhould: Then was there no writing, but much religion; few bookes, but many faithfull harts; all ſtudied in vnitie to preſerue vnfained veritie. But in Moſes time the church grewe to a nation, and therefore although as Ierome ſaith it were, Maior numero, yet it was Minor virtute, the number of profeſſors grew to be greater, yet the zeale and power of godlineſſe grewe to be leſſer: And therefore nowe was it to be put in writing, or elſe all had beene cleane forgotten; for the harts of men began to be deceitfull, and the words of God coulde not ſafely lodge in the breſts of all, and therefore coulde not eaſilie and effectually bee conueied from one to another. The Lorde firſt of all wrote his lawe, then grewe the church to another gouernment, more generall then before, wherein the prieſtes did publikely care for the ſeruice of God, and ſoules of the people, and euery father and maſter priuately for himſelfe and his familie: and euermore this is to bee remembred, that the children praied to the God of their Fathers, meaning the ſame God whome their Fathers taught them to ſerue. And this beloued, putteth vs in minde what manner of men fathers and maſters ought to bee, euen ſuch as are able to commend the true worſhippe of God vnto others: for ſithence the worſhip of God became publique and generall, the priuate neglect of this dutie in the gouernours of families, hath wrought the poyſon of all mankind, and the vndoing of all religion. For now the common ſort thinke that they muſt not pray but in a church; that they are not bound to teach others, but the whole charge dependeth on the miniſter; that the preachers and not the people muſt learne the word: and finally it maketh no matter for their faith and manners, if their paſtours and

teachers haue the knowledge of the Goſpell. Oh lamentable men! Oh lamentable maners! which onely is to be imputed vnto this neglect of parents duety. By this onely gentiliſme and heatheniſme grow: for if Noahs ſonnes had taught that to their children which they learned of their father, the world had not beene wearied with many diueliſh Idolatries: if Dauids children had ſerued that God which Dauid taught them, their throne had continued as long as heauen and earth endured: neither had ſo many women beene husbandleſſe, ſo many children beene motherles, ſo many old men beene helples, and ſo many of all ſorts, and degrees beene vtterly deſtitute of all worldly eaſe and heauenly bliſſe; the decay of their faith wrought the deſtruction of their blood: If Chriſtians had taught that religion to their children, which they receiued without all corruption from Chriſt and his Apoſtles, ſo many countries had not been conquered, ſo many cities had not beene laide euen with the earth, ſo many famous churches had not beene buried in obliuion, popery had not ſo much preuailed, Mahomet had not ſo long proſpered, wicked ceremonies had not raigned in the place of holy truth, and where now is the ſynagogue of Sathan, there had beene the Temple of our Sauiour. And I feare me beloued, leaſt this parents faulte bring foorth once againe the childrens folly, and then oh then, will the diuels banner aduance it ſelfe againſt Chriſts ſtandard, and ſo that when the Lord ſhall come he ſhall finde no faith on the earth. Looke to this you fathers of our bodies, and let not the blood of our ſoules cry vengeance againſt the parents of our liues: teach vs what you haue learned, & charge vs on your bleſſing, and God his bleſſing as we will anſwere before the Iudge of men and angels, to ſaue the ſoules of our children by the precepts of your doctrine. The reaſons of this doctrine Reaſon 1. may be theſe, firſt bicauſe as Dauid witneſſeth that the workes of God are great and ought to be ſought out of all that loue them: So that this is an argument of vnfeined

affection and true loue to the workes of God, when with diligence we obſerue them, and with conſcience we declare them: and alſo it is an aſſurance of ſincere pietie and reuerence towards God, when as the ſame prophet ſpeaketh, all the day long we meditate on his iudgements and ſpeake his praiſes. This loue of men to the workes of God is then prooued and approoued when they teach them to thoſe whoſe liues are in their hands; and alſo it is the playneſt token of true loue to your children, when you keepe no part of the counſell of God from them, which you know your ſelues. For the Lords doings are of that maieſtie and authoritie, that by them tender hearts are nouriſhed, wauering harts confirmed, and ſtubburne mindes are perſwaded. Your kindeſt friends will be more kinde vnto you, when you ſhew them the kindnes of the Lord; and your deadly foes will be more afraide of you when they ſhall ſee and heare the workes of God in your mouth, and the word of God in your hands. Therefore my beloued in the Lord Ieſus, ſeeing we haue no more plainer way to know the Lord then by his workes, then haue we alſo no ſurer token that we loue the Lord, then when we loue his doings: Let vs ſeeke them in the cradles of our childhoode, and the beds of our old age, making as much of the Lords iudgements, as we doe of our children, whom we deſire to leaue behind vs to the ende of the world; euen ſo let vs leaue the Lords works in remembrance for euermore. Secondly, another reaſon of this doctrine is declared by Salomon, Eccleſ. 3. 14. That what God doth it ſtandeth for euer, that men might feare 
                  2 
                  before him. The workes of God are affected, not as the ground is ploughed which ſerueth one for one ſeaſon, but as the earth was eſtabliſhed which ſtandeth for euer. The Lord in euery age accompliſheth many wonderful things, and different the one from the other, that men might feare him for his iudgements, and honor him for his power: And therefore being not willing at all times to make triall and ſhewe of his omnipotencie, hee willeth vs to remember

the things that are done, vnleſſe we would haue him once againe open the fountaines of waters, that the whole world might be deſtroyed, or once againe raine fire and brimſtone from heauen to confound vs as he did the Sodomites, or once againe bring a vniuerſall darknes ouer our land as he did ouer the land of Iudea: or elſe once againe ſuffer our fathers to be burned, our goods to be rauened, our wiues to be ſhamed, and our ſelues to be murthered for his ſake, as ſome haue bin before vs. Therefore by how much more eaſie it is for our hearts to conſider thoſe things, then for our eies to behold them: ſo much more carefull let vs be to inſtruct others by word of mouth, leaſt we our ſelues & our poſterity feele in ful meaſure that heauy hand of his wrath: & then Oh then lamentable is our caſe, when we ſhall not feare God as a father, but dread him as a Iudge, wee cannot pray vnto him as a Sauiour, but behaue our ſelues like bondſlaues in his preſence: When it ſhall be ſaid, you haue had no pleaſure in his workes, therefore I will haue no delight in your ſoules. The vſes which ariſefrom this doctrine are theſe; firſt, the ſame which Moſes once did after he had brought Iſraell out of Aegypt, and afterward Vſe 1, the whole company of Martirs are ſaid to make, Apoc. 15. 3 Great are thy works (ſay they) O Lord almighty, iuſt & right are thy waies O king of Saints. That is with the conſideration of God his mighty power ioine alſo the confeſsion of his euer bleſſed iuſtice. You O fathers of our times, teach vs this doctrine by your ſeueral obſeruatiōs during al the life of your pilgrimage, that you may ſay the Lord is iuſt in all his waies, & holy in al his works. Euen this fruit reape & take of this floriſhng tree, that you alſo may be able to tell vs, in this we foūd the Lord to be merciful, & in that work we receiued a due triall of his iuſtice. And freely my beloued in this point of doctrine I might profitably ſpēd many words, to ſhew & teach you with what maner recital of his doings, the Lord is pleaſed: it is no more auaileable for vs to confeſſe that hughe armies of ſouldiers were diſcomfited by the Lord,

except we alſo know and acknowledge the ende, wherefore the Lord did the ſame, then in old time it was for Pharaoh to ſigh vnder the burden of God his workes being therewith oppreſſed, and not conſidering the due ende of the ſame: his hand doth not warne vs, nor his power amend vs, when either we ſee or heare it without holy conſideration of the end of the iudgement. And this ſelfe ſame vſe muſt we make, when we heare or read of the woonders of auncient time, that we can ſay, behold the puniſhment of ſinne, the reward of godlines, the power of the almightie, and the iuſtice of the euerliuing God. In the ſcriptures the holy Ghoſt in euery hiſtorie ſheweth this vſe, although not in plaine words, yet in eaſie manner to be obſerued: That Caine was curſed being the heire apparant of all the world, and notwithſtanding his large birthright he ſhould be a vagabond on the earth, was not this a great woonder? But why came this to paſſe? Firſt becauſe he was looſe in the ſeruice of God, and afterward murdered his innocent brother: marke you then the fals of many princes, ſuch as be recorded in ſcripture, and out of ſcripture, and you ſhall ſee for their vnſufferable wickednes and intollerable tyranny they were deſtroyed. That Sampſon killed himſelfe and ſo many thouſand Philiſtines; was not this a wonderfull work of God? But why was this effected? I graunt that by this he was a figúre of Chriſt, which by his owne death ouercame his enimies: but the Philiſtines might learne hereby, that the Lord wil be reuenged for the wrongs done to his ſaints. In like manner read and runne ouer the volumes of T. Liuius, the writings of Tacitus, the bookes of Arrianus, the hiſtories of Italy, Fraunce, Germany, England, and al Chronicles, wherein any worthie or memorable thing may be noted: yea the very fables of Poets, and you ſhall therein obſerue the variable puniſhment of ſin for the ſeuerall tranſgreſſions of princes and people. And if we may come neerer to our owne times, conſider how much blood hath beene ſpilt in Fraunce and the lowe-Countries, we cannot onely ſay it

was the Lords doings, & it is maruellous in our eies; but we may ſay this came to paſſe for the crueltie of the one, if not for the drunkennes of the other. But why ſhould I trauell ouer the ſeas for ſtrange things? when our owne countrey yeeldeth more worthie workes of God then all chriſtendome beſides. What is more woonderfull that ſo great a people, ſo noble perſonages, ſo large dominions, and ſo many forraine nations ſhould be gouerned, preſerued, & defended by one woman Prince? Let me now aske you O Elders, was there euer the like in your daies, or in the daies of your fathers before you? Was there euer ſuch peace in this land ſince it was a land? till we flocked to the preaching of the Goſpell at the call of one glorious and godly Prince; aske your fathers of this, and tell vs if euer there were the like. Was there euer ſo hughe a nauie ſo eaſily diſperſed as the Spaniſh fleete was? comming with purpoſe to inuade vs, and yet neuer could ſet foote on our land, till they were brought priſoners, and yet with ſmaller forces they haue made France to bleed, and Flanders to ake. Was there euer ſo many wicked attempts confounded, ſo many treaſons reuealed, ſo many wicked perſons executed, and ſo many good men preſerued, as hath beene in her maieſties happie raigne? Aske your fathers if euer they knew the like, and we will tell our children, and they ſhall tell their children, and their children ſhall ſhew another generation, that our times were happie, our liues were bleſſed, our profeſsions were godly, and our countrey was glorious, witneſſed and prooued by thus many workes of God. Our Prince raigneth, our people obeyeth, our forces are increaſed, our enimies are confounded, our afflictions are ended, our peace is continued, our religion is magnified, our land is fruitfull, our lawes are equall, our quarrell is lawfull, and therefore hearken al ages what the Lord hath done for England. Secondly, another vſe we muſt obſerue in the narration of the 2 Lords iudgements is this which Dauid maketh, Pſal. 119. 46. I will declare thy iudgements before kings and will not bee

aſhamed. That is, the deedes and wordes of the almightie muſt worke ſo powerfully in the preachers thereof, that no rebukes, no ſcornes, no mockes, nor any ſhame be taken for the vtterance of them. We liue in a contrarie time to Dauids affection, for many are ſo modeſt in any good actions, that all godly companions and holy exerciſes doe ſhame their eſtates, and abaſe their callings; but in euill enterpriſes they are as immodeſt as brute beaſtes, thinking it no ſcorne nor diſparagement to them, to brag of their blaſphemies, to tell of their whooredoms, to ſport themſelues with their drunkenneſſe, and to play with the diuell himſelfe. And this is too too common in our times, wherein gentlemen and rich men are aſhamed to haue ſo much as a bible in their houſes, or at any time to ſhew a good and friendly face to a preacher of the worde, or to miniſter any occaſion to talke of religion, leaſt ſay they, we be accounted fooles: yea they make fooles of them in the world, that follow not euery faſhion of apparell, vſe not euery inuention of idleneſſe, and conforme not themſelues to the maners of the moſt, although they be moſt wicked. This rauening and greedy appetite to ſinne, muſt alſo kindle the fire of our zeale, that the wicked be not more deſperate in their ſinnes, then the godly be reſolute in their holineſſe. Let vs neuer be aſhamed of the power of God, although in aduauncing there of we detract ſomewhat from the noble enterpriſes of men. Let vs giue vnto the inſtruments that which is theirs, and vnto God that which is his: let vs not glory in our ſhame, but be aſhamed of our ſinnes, and with the three children at Babylon againſt princes and potentates, euen with the hazarde of our liues witneſſe the power of God, that they may be aſhamed of their doings. Another doctrine which we may obſerue out of theſe words, wherein the fathers are ſo ſeuerally commanded to ſhew their children the works Be carefull what we commit to poſteritie. of God, is this: That we muſt euermore bee carefull what we commit to poſteritie, if the credit of men muſt bee regarded

what they vtter one to another, & one of another while they are liuing togither, whē as the truth may be proued, and the lie may be conuinced; much more muſt they be carefull what they deliuer to poſteritie, as it were in their laſt teſtament lying on their death-bed, that ſo the liues which they haue lead, may be commended for their fidelitie, or the ſoules which they haue expired muſt bee condemned for their iniquitie. Of this matter there is a famous hiſtorie in Ioſ. 22. 10, 11, 12. verſes, and ſo foorth to the ende of the chapter: when as Iſraell was planted in Canaan, hauing long before by Moſes receiued a commaundement that they ſhould make no altars nor aſſemblies of worſhip in all their land, but where the Lord gaue them commandement ſo to doe: The Rubenites, the Gadites, and the halfe tribe of Manaſſeh being ſeated on this ſide Iordan in the land of Sihon and Og; contrarie to this commaundement as it ſeemed, builded an altar Ioſhua being yet aliue. This good man with all the Ancients of Iſraell, fearing this miſchiefe, & doubting if they put vp this contempt, al religion would ſoon be forgotten, & in ſhort time in another age, the ſacred deitie would be idolatrouſly denied: firſt they determined a warre againſt them, but after better cōſultation they ſent Phinehas & ten princes of Iſrael in ambaſſage vnto thē, to know the cauſe why they built that altar: they anſwered that they built this altar for a patterne of that other which was in Shiloh, leaſt in time to come all that generation being dead, their children ſhould be denied to be of the Lords flocke, and therefore to haue no portion nor part in Iſraell: and therefore was this altar not built for ſacrifice, nor for burnt offerings, but ſhould be a witneſſe to their poſteritie, that although they were poſſeſſed of the lande beyonde Iordan; yet they were of Iſraels ſeede, & God his inheritance. Which anſwere ſatisfied the meſſengers, & being declared to their brethrē, pacified Iſraell. Heere may you ſee on both ſides, an honorable care for the children vnborne: Iſrael would not permit another

ſacrificing altar, leaſt poſteritie ſhoulde be drawne from God, and Ruben woulde yet make an altar, leaſt their children ſhoulde be reiected out of the Lordes couenant. Iſraell aduentured his labour to ſaue his progenie, and Ruben offered his life to ſaue his poſteritie. Would God our Iſrael were as iealous of their children, and that our brethren were as carefull of their profeſsion; then ſhould not ſo manie preſidents of euill like Ieroboams ſinnes, and Balaams counſell be ſuffered to ſtande, and offered to other ages: Then ſhoulde not houſes of ſinne be erected, as Theaters of play-houſes, which gaine more perſons to the diuel then the churches can ſoules to the Lorde: Then ſhoulde it not be ſaide, That the fathers haue eaten ſowre grapes, and the childrens teeth are ſet on edge: Then ſhould the arguments of Papiſts and other idolators be eaſilie anſwered, when they obiect as Laban did, that they worſhip their fathers Gods, and followe the follies of their predeceſſours. The longer a ſickneſſe groweth, it waxeth more incurable: and the longer our wickednes ſtandeth, and the farther we ſuffer our vices to ſtretch, they waxe the more vnrecouerable, inſomuch as in other ages they will ſweare by idols, violate Sabbaoths, rent in ſunder religion, make no conſcience of haereſie, and embrace atheiſme, by law and arguments, becauſe we haue ſported our liues in this manner of vanities. But remember as Balaams curſe was renewed vpon him fourteene hundred yeeres after he was dead; bicauſe other followed his ſin: ſo ſhall our bodies & ſoules be condemned to more intollerable torments, bicauſe the looſenes of our liues will breed the loſſe of them that come heereafter. And this doctrine hath good reaſon to eſtabliſh the ſame out of the worde of God; firſt, bicauſe there is Reaſon 1. No impiety but it will find ſome followers. not any monument ſo laſciuious, or opinion ſo wicked, or worke ſo abhominable, but ſome, if not many will embrace the ſame: the which thing, the Apoſtle Peter in his ſecond Epiſtle, ſecond chapter, firſt and ſecond verſes declareth vnto vs. Wherby we may obſerue the dangerous condition

of men, which wil ſubmit themſelues vnto euery kind of diueliſh ſlauerie rather then to godlines: we reade in the Scriptures that ſo ſoone as Core and his companie inurmured, that three hundred families followed his ill example: We read of an Egyptian in the Actes of the Apoſtles, and one Theudas, who by their rebellion drewe great multitudes to finall perdition: We haue learned by eccleſiaſticall ſtories that the impietie of Simon Magus, who woulde be worſhipped as God, had ten thouſandes of fauorites: that the apoſtaſie of Iulian drew infinite companies to hel: and for poperie which is a corruption of all religion, what nation in this weſt ende of the worlde receiued not the ſame? euen as once all the eaſterne countries were generally infected with Arrianiſme, and after they were reclaimed from that, they embraced the errors of Neſtorius and Eutyches. But Peter ſaith, the damnation of ſuch perſons ſleepeth not, but was prepared long ago, as we may ſee by thoſe lamentable examples of the eaſterne churches, which for the moſt part are either ſubiect to the barbarous Turke, or elſe the ſlaues of ſome heathen prince or other, where remaine not ſo much as the ſtones of their temples, much leſſe the remembrance of any religion: and the Lord grant that the like iudgement fall not vpon the weſt. Another reaſon of this doctrine may be this, that if there haue beene any fault in the fathers, it may be amended in 2 the children, and this the worde of God maketh Pſalm. 78. 8. 9. it is moſt dangerous to corrupt the poſteritie, for it is like to the poiſon put into meate before men ſhall eate thereof; we muſt alwaies ſtudie to leaue the worſhip of God purer to them which ſucceede vs then we founde it. And therefore we muſt greatly regarde, if we haue at anie time gone awry from the marke, that we charge our children to beware thereof: for as their ſinnes are accounted our ſinnes bicauſe we reclaimed them not; ſo their righteouſnes ſhall be accounted ours, if we aduertiſe them thereof. If this be the commendation of all humane artes and

worldly trades, that each one leaueth more skill, and greater perfection behinde him then at the beginning hee founde: why ſhoulde it not then ſo fall out in heauenlie workes, that euery father for his ſonne; euery paſtour for his people; euery captaine for his countrey; and euerie doctor for religion, ſhoulde leaue more then was before? Surely how great an abhomination is it to ſee all worldly things growe better and better; but all ſpirituall things to waxe woorſe and woorſe, that we ſhoulde be better Philoſophers ſince Plato; better Phiſitions ſince Galen; better husbandmen ſince Virgill; and better Poets ſince Homer: but religion and ſanctification being wrote by God himſelfe, and all the Prophets and Diſciples of Chriſt: yet is it in woorſe eſtate then it was in the beginning: It ſhould be as golde which is more fined by comming through manie furnaces, but it is like (not of it ſelfe) to the riuer Nylus, which the farther it floweth, the more dirt and draffe it draweth with it; ſo euerie man patcheth and peeceth the worſhip of God, that fathers leaue it woorſer then they founde it. The vſes which ariſe from this doctrine, as they are founde in the worde of God are theſe; firſt ſeeing wee Vſe 1. muſt be ſo carefull what we commende to our poſteritie; firſt that we leaue not any practiſe or preſident behinde vs which we haue not learned of the Lord, Deut. 24. 8, 9. If in the leproſie men ought to be ſo carefull where they were aſſured of apparant danger, that not in any thing they muſt forget the Lords ordinance, or adde any more to his commandement, vpon paine of ſo heauie diſpleaſure of his highnes; then muſt all the world be carefull alſo to frame their actions according to the worde, which dooing, they ſhall not deceiue, nor be deceiued. And firſt of all we muſt beware of falſe and fooliſh propheſies, which being but the dreames of many brainſicke perſons, haue bewitched the hearts of men that heard them, and ſeduced the liues of ſome that receiued them: and we may reade both in the booke of God, and out of the Scripture, that princes and

countries haue been deſtroyed thereby. Many of the learneder ſort are much affected with the propheſies of the Sibilles, Methodius and others; many of the popiſh ſort are continually contemplatours of the oracles of Briget, and other papiſtical and monaſtical dreames; but aboue all the ſimple and vulgar people imagine that there is no Scripture like to Merlins propheſie. If I ſhoulde ſtande in the ſpecialties to ſhew you when, where, and wherein the vnſtable & new fangled minds haue bin deceiued, I ſhould rather feed the curious then fill the righteous. This ſhall be ſufficient to admoniſh vs, that wee neither preſume to make our names famous by this meanes by giuing errours, nor yet be ſo baſe minded as to embrace and receiue the ſame for truth, whoſoeuer hee be that vttereth it: becauſe Peter telleth vs, 2. Pet. 2. 1. That there ſhal be falſe prophets in the church, whō we muſt beware, leaſt we fall with them into the ſame perdition. Others there are alſo which regard neither propheſie nor religion, or any other ſpirituall exerciſe, either feigned or vnfeigned, but giue their whole liues and trauaile to an vnſatiable deſire of gaine, to gather landes and lordſhips by right or wrong, and to leaue great ſtore of wealth to their poſteritie: let theſe men bee alſo warned if they woulde bee warned, that they commit not the gaine of vngodlineſſe, the wages of vnrighteouſneſſe, and the Lordes portion for their inheritance. For ſurely as our Sauiour ſpeaketh Matth. 15. 13. Euery plant not planted by his father ſhall be pulled vp againe. Their houſes ſhall bee ruinous, their poſteritie infamous, their poſſeſsions troubleſome, and ſtrangers ſhall inherite their labours. But in our daies alſo there is another wicked and wretched preſident for poſteritie to be lamented, that ſo many in this golden age of Chriſtes Goſpell are tickled with vaine conceites, accounting their glorie if they can prooue the founders of new ſectes, whereby religion is defamed; or penne ſome idle toyes for hiſtrionicall plaiers, whereby many good ſoules are endangered. There are few

or no Italian follies, Spaniſh inuentions, or French-faynedwanton-volumes, but in our daies for the times ſucceeding they are taught to ſpeake Engliſh, I thinke for this purpoſe, that now whiles religion ruleth, it might bee troubled by them, and when chriſtianitie is remooued, by their meanes iniquitie may be enthronized. I haue read many of them, and conſidered of them too long, & I muſt freely confeſſe that they be the voices forerunning and preparing a way for Atheiſme, idolatrie, heatheniſme, or any kind of impietie: And therfore all good Chriſtians ſhould do with them as the Epheſians did Actes 19. 19. with their bookes; for I proteſt vnto you either you muſt forſake God or them. Secondly, wee muſt make one vſe more of this doctrine, which is this: Seeing we muſt be carefull for poſteritie that 2 we ſuffer nothing to paſſe from vs or by vs to them, that ſauoureth of iniquitie: let vs alſo liuing in theſe times like to the daies of Chriſt, follow the example of Chriſt, which is to pray for them which ſhall come after, Luc. 22. 31, 32. where he telleth his diſciples that he hath prayed for them, that although ſathan ſhould haue them in his fanne to winnow them as a man cleaneth wheate, yet ſhould not they faile: ſo likewiſe Iohn 17. Chriſt praieth for all them which ſhould beleeue in his name to the worldes ende. Now my beloued brethren, if you conſider the cauſes why Chriſt did not onely procure the welfare of his children while he was liuing, but alſo praied for their ſinceritie when hee ſhould be dead, you ſhall alſo finde that we haue all as great cauſe to pray for our children, as then our Sauiour had for his diſciples. One was becauſe as we heard that they lay open to the malice of the diuell, who would trie his vttermoſt, either to make them denie him, or to die for him: So my deere brethren, the malice of ſathan is as hote againſt vs, as euer it was againſt them: if he could he would turne our countrie into ſeas, our people into diuels, our meate into ſerpents, our drinke into poyſon, our profeſsion into Atheiſme, our pleaſure into hell: And will he thinke you, be

more fauourable to our poſteritie? No, no, aſſure your ſelues if he may or might worke his will, he would make them as poore as beggers, as miſerable as Iob in aduerſitie, and as deſperate as Iudas, to make their owne handes to bee their owne murtherers: hee woulde feede the dogs with their blood, the birds with their fleſh, the rauens with their bowels, the infidels with their landes, the Atheiſts with their houſes, and damnation with their ſoules: pray therefore with teares and zeale that the grones of your hart may preſerue the fruites of your bodies. Another cauſe why Chriſt praied for the diſciples, and the poſteritie of the Church to the worldes ende was this, Ioh. 17. 21. that there might bee a vnitie betwixt God and Chriſt and his members, and conſidering this vnitie the vnbeleeuing worlde might be reclaimed. Would not this vnitie doe well alſo betwixt vs and our poſteritie, that there might bee like father like ſonne, like mother like daughter; Chriſtians by regeneration and Chriſtians by generation, that our religion might abide with our names and our inheritance, and that wee might bee ioyned in the affinitie of ſoules, as we are in conſanguinitie of bodies. But oh wretched men or wicked ſathan, the oke feedeth okes, the vine vines, the oliue oliues, the beaſtes engender their kindes, and the fiſhes multiplie their like, onely righteous men breede vnrighteous impes, and their fruite is not pleaſant till they bee graffed. Why ſhould not good men haue good ſonnes as good ſeedes bring good corne? the queſtion is eaſily anſwered, though with ſorrow conſidered. Religion goeth not by propagation but by adoption; they beget ſuch children as themſelues were begotten, that is, the ſonnes of wrath, for whome we muſt pray without ceaſing, weepe without comfort, and watch without wearineſſe, that they may be made the ſonnes of righteouſneſſe.
            
            
               
               The fifth Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 4.
                  That which is left of the palmer worme hath the graſhopper eaten, and the reſidue of the graſhopper hath the canker worme eaten, and the reſidue of the canker worme hath the caterpiller eaten.
               
               NOw we haue by the mercifull aſsiſtance of diuine grace finiſhed the preface of this propheſie, let vs alſo with the ſame power enter vpon the propheſie it ſelfe. We ſhewed you at the beginning that from this fourth verſe vnto the twelfth of the ſecond chapter, is vttered by the prophet thoſe iudgements, which are threatened by the Lord. In declaring whereof he obſerueth this order: Firſt in this fourth verſe he ſheweth the inſtrumentall cauſe or beginners of their miſerie, vnder God; and afterward by exhortations and ſundry amplifications he deſcribeth before their eies, the force of theſe hurtfull creatures, bred and brought foorth onely for the deſtruction of theſe Iewiſh people. The inſtrumentall cauſes are named to be theſe fower, the Palmer-worme, the Graſhopper, the Canker-worme, and the Caterpiller; ſmall creatures comming with great force to inuade this countrey. And this is that which made the Prophet ſo cry and call to the people for audience and attention, that ſo woonderfull a matter ſhould be effected: not onely as Eſay ſaith, that a woman ſhould compaſſe a man; but that a flocke of little wormes ſhould ouerthrow a whole nation: and theſe beaſts ſhould come ſucceſsiuely the one after the other, that whoſoeuer eſcaped the firſt, ſhould be taken by the laſt; and that which was not touched by the former, might be conſumed by the latter. And it may ſeeme that the foundation of their ouerthrow was wrought by a famine: for we muſt not imagine that at the firſt, theſe beaſts ſet vpon men; but began with their fruits, with their corne, their vines, their

trees, and their ſtore, to caſt downe thoſe caſtles of confidence which they had raiſed vp in the abundance of their belly-cheere. In like manner if it were lawfull for me to compare vs with them, and to weigh the euent of our times by that which we feare, and not by that which we feele, might not all godly minds iuſtly doubt, that whereas there is and hath beene ſo great an harmony in the tranſgreſsions of both people, and ſuch a conſent in both our calamities, that they are both begun with famine, the continuance and the end ſhould alſo reſemble theirs. I propheſie not what ſhal be, but what may be: I cannot ſay certainely, that as their land was waſted, their ſtores conſumed; their corne accurſed, and their richeſt men impoueriſhed: ſo ſhall ours be: or that as they had their ſacrifices ſtayed, their temple emptied, their law remooued, their chiefe glorie, the outward worſhip of God vtterly forſaken; ſo ſhal ours be: or that as they were at one inſtant time lamenting their loſſes, weeping for their miſeries, and ſhedding abundance of teares to ſee their owne bodies famiſhed, their owne children periſhed, and the graueſt perſons among them to be pitifully tormented, hauing their houſes filled with cries of people, their ſtreetes ſwarming with dead corpſes, and their fields and woods ringing with roaring and bellowing of beaſts; ſo ſhal ours be, no not ſo, but ſo may ours be, & the Lord graunt that this as we feele be not the beginning of ſorrowes: for verily I perſwade my ſelfe, that our countrey which hath receiued great heapes of benefits as the Iewes had, and hath rewarded with great heapes of ſinnes as the Iewes did, ſhall alſo (if not ſhortly) be finally ouerthrowen with great plentie of iudgements, as the Iewes were. But now let vs returne to the words, and herein looke for ſome doctrines which may edifie vs and admoniſh vs, for of the other matter we ſhall haue fitter occaſion to ſpeake hereafter. Then here we haue the prophet after his crie, making his proclamation in the name of the higheſt king of heauen and earth, telling them and vs that there ſhoulde

come an infinite number of palmer-wormes to deuoure their fruits; and that which they touched not ſhould the Graſhopper deuoure; and that which the graſhopper left, ſhould the canker-worme poiſon; and that which the canker-worme poyſoned not, ſhould the Caterpiller conſume, that by a quaternion of ſucceſsiue ſpoilers, they might be made to feele that which they were not willing to heare. But ſome will ſay, this was a ſmall matter for the prophet to preach on, thinketh he that we haue no other buſines then to heare a tale of Graſhoppers and Canker-wormes, which leape in euery medow and hang on euery leafe; or doth he imagine that we are ſuch weake hearted ſouldiers, and faint hearted perſons, that we ſhould be terrified with a muſter of fraybugs, and little wormes of an inch long: indeed theſe are matters to fray children, and not olde men; and therefore he muſt either tell vs of weightier matters, or elſe ſilence his toong from ſuch trifles? And yet if any think thus in theſe daies as they were neuer more readie to take exception againſt the preachers, I might anſwere them, that they are not trifles which the Lord hath treaſured in his word, neither are they recorded onely to feare children, but alſo to terrifie, yea, and condemne old men. We muſt not weigh them in the ballance of naturall reaſon, but lay them to a ſound ſpirituall iudgement, and we ſhall finde them more heauy then moūtaines, which we deemed lighter then feathers. The waies of God are not like the waies of men, Firſt of all we muſt know, and remember vnto you that theſe fower kinde of beaſts had euery one his yeere to worke the hurt that the Lord had aſsigned him to doe, wherin they multiplied exceedingly, and preuailed mightily; in ſo much as no induſtrie of man could counteruaile their forces. By this we obſerue that there is a ſpeciall A ſpeciall iudgement to increaſe hurtfull beaſtes. iudgement of God when hurtfull creatures are increaſed: If either the flies or the wormes, or any ſmall beaſts ariſe aboue their vſual number; thē know for a certain that theſe little beaſts are infallible tokens of the Lords wrath, Pſal.
                  
105. 34. The Pſalmiſt deſcribing vnto vs the woonderfull workers of God which he wrought for his church, ſaith, He ſpake & there came Graſhoppers and Caterpillers innumerable: ſo likewiſe the Prophets Ieremy and Ezechiell among the grand and inuincible plagues of God, reckon this for one, the growing or multiplying of noyſome beaſtes. For the Lord which is infinitely wiſe, is able infinite waies to manifeſt that deuine power of his maieſtie, whereby once hee created all things of nothing, and euery day ſheweth vs our ſins by changing his good creatures into hurtfull deſtroyers, making the earth to pine vs, the heauens to burne vs, the aire to benum vs, and the ſilly beaſts to annoy vs. The Reaſon 1. reaſons of this doctrine are theſe, Firſt becauſe the Lord by theſe meanes doth not onely admoniſh vs all of our tranſgreſsions, but eſpecially puniſheth vs for our ſingular rebellion, Exod. 10. 4. 5. Among all theſe plagues which were wrought in Aegypt to puniſh hard harted Pharaoh and the blinde minded Egyptians, the Lorde in great number ſendeth graſhoppers, that prince and people might bee brought to deſtruction. And ſurely if the Lorde haue ſo many meanes to reuenge the cauſe of his Saints, that hee maketh bruite beaſtes the executioners of his wrath; then let vs learne neuer to moleſt any in whome any graces of God appeere; for then ſhall wee bring an heauie houſe of wrath vpon our heads. Another reaſon of this doctrine is, 2 becauſe that hee ſometimes ſendeth and multiplieth plentifullie his good wholeſome creatures to the deſtruction of them that receiue them: and if the good creatures of God be ſent that he may more freely take vengeance by them vpon our iniquities; much more when the noiſome hurtfull beaſtes are increaſed doth he powre out his wrath and execute his anger. We may reade Numb. 11. 31, 33. that the Lorde brought abundance of quailes vpon the tents of Iſraell, but withall, he ſent leannes into their ſoule, and his wrath came vpon them while the meate was in their mouthes, that the luſtes of their mindes coſt them the

bloud of their bodies; and although they ſeemed to haue a great bleſsing, yet it turned to a heauie curſe: In like maner they are not alwaies the happieſt perſons which haue all things at their wiſh; nor yet is it alwaies a good thing to be aduanced to the higheſt roomes as Haman was; to eate of the daintieſt meate as the rich man did; to be clothed with the ſofteſt raiment as the courtiers are; to haue the poore bowing to our perſons; the worlde woondring at our wealth; and the voices of all men to commende our workes: For notwithſtanding all theſe, the ſoule may be poore, naked, comfortleſſe, and deſpiſed in the eies of the Lorde; and what ſhall it profite vs to winne the whole worlde, and looſe our owne ſoules? Let not pouertie diſmaie vs, for that was on Chriſt; let not riches aduance vs, for they were on Herod; let not aduerſitie trouble vs, for good men profeſſe it; and let not proſperitie reioice vs, for euill men enioy it. Now let vs make ſome vſes of this doctrine, which may either ſtrengthen our faith, or amende our liues: Therefore firſt of all the Lord ſhewing how manie iudgements he had powred vpon the Iſraelites, Amos, 4. 9. telleth them the vſe of all, which was, that they ſhould be cōuerted vnto his maieſty: ſo that as Dauid ſaith, He maketh his angels his ministers: in like maner Amos might ſay, Vſe 1. He maketh the beaſtes of the earth to preach repentance vnto men. For it is moſt requiſite that when men become beaſtes in their liues, drowning al reaſon within them, then ſhould beaſtes like themſelues in reaſon (though not in bodie) come vnto them to reprooue their follie; whoſe blowes ſhould breake their harts, that woulde not turne them at the preaching of men. Now then the whole courſe of nature and naturall things do remember vs, and helpe vs to worſhip the Lorde: for if they bee ſubiect to vs, and ſerue to our vſes, they tell vs that we muſt be ſubiect to God, & ſerue in his vineyard; if they rebel againſt vs & annoy vs with their preſence, they preach repentance to our liues, & conuerſion to our ſoules: whither then ſhall we go

from the preſence of the Lorde? If we burie our ſins in the earth, as the wicked ſeruant did his talent, yet we muſt bring them foorth againe to receiue our condemnation; if we keepe them in ſecret, yet the birdes of the aire ſhall reueale them; if we neglect them and not regard them, the lyons of the woode ſhall requite them; if we diſſemble them, the Lord himſelfe in flaming fire ſhall diſcloſe them; and if we continue in them, the little woormes, the ſeelie graſhoppers, and the ſimple creeping creatures ſhall reuenge them. But wee in our daies haue not much taſted of this fourth plague, which is the multiplying hurtfull beaſtes; I meane our lande hath not been giuen to the locuſts, and our labours haue not beene ſpoiled by the caterpillers; yet we are more troubled with more hurtfull beaſts, I ſay in the ſimilitude of men, ſuch beaſts as wander not in the fields, but lodge in our houſes, being more vnreaſonable then the palmer-wormes, and more vnreſiſtable then all the heards of canker-wormes. The godly may cry out with Dauid, the fat buls of Baſhan did roare vpon me, and with the Apoſtle, that they fight with beaſtes in the likenes of men; and yet Dauid neither feared the buls, nor the Apoſtle fought with beaſtes indeed. But ſuch beaſts as haue al reaſon againſt reaſon, and no reaſon to any religion, are ſwarming almoſt in euery corner of England: we may as eaſily perſwade the oxe to eat no graſſe, the birds to eate no corne, the lyons to ſeeke no pray, & the lambe to refuſe the pap of his dame, as reclaime this kinde of beaſts from their euill kind of ſins. Deafe adders they are, they wil not heare, wittie and politike foxes, they will not be taken; vipers without feeling the ſorrowes of others; wanton kine euer kicking againſt the poore; ſtately lyons rauening whatſoeuer liketh them; greedy beares byting al that com nigh them; ſleepy dogs profiting no body, and what ſhall I ſay more? They depriued themſelues of all kind of humanitie; therefore let theſe great beaſts mooue vs ſeeing we haue no feare of little beaſts. Theſe ſleepe in our boſomes,

eate at our tables, gather vp our profits, and conſume God his benefits: Let theſe I ſay make vs innocent, watchfull, warie, diligent, obedient, meeke, gratious, and zealous in religion, that either our liues may conuert them, or their beaſtlineſſe amende vs. Another vſe of this doctrine 2 is this, that as God can vſe and alſo doth theſe his creatures to bee reuenged on his aduerſaries; ſo alſo hee will and can doe the ſame to the benefite of his choſen. He vſed the rauens to feede Eliah, 1. King. 17. 6. and wee know that al theſe noiſome creatures which deuoured and deſtroyed the cattle & people of Egypt, neither deuoured or deſtroyed man or beaſt among the Iſraelites. The viper a hurtfull beaſt, yet it could not harme Paul, Act. 28. 5. when it hung vpon his hande: What ſhall we now ſay my deere brethren, to commend the large liberalitie of our God, to conuince the intolerable ingratitude of our ſoules? The angels waite on vs aboue to keepe the heauens from ouerwhelming vs, the creatures attend on vs beneath, to make the earth to yeeld vs maintenance: oh how ſhall they want any thing that leade a godly life, yet who doth depend on the Lordes promiſe, or who doth make conſcience of the Lords liberalitie? We are like to the Iewes which Nebuzaradan left in Ieruſalem with the Samaritans, ſeeing the ſerpents deſtroying the Samaritans, ſparing them yet ſtill, they continued in their idolatrie: ſo although we ſee and heare our neighbours, our countreymen, or any other nation to be waſted and we preſerued; to be famiſhed, wee ſuſtained; to be weakened, and wee ſtrengthened; to be puniſhed, when we go ſcot-free; yet ſtill we ſerue our pleaſures, we blaſpheme the Goſpell, we prophane the Sabbaoth, and we diſhonour the almightie: although he hath not dealt with any nation as he hath dealt with vs; yet we care not for his creatures, we loue not his truth, we forſake not our ſins, we embrace not his feare, & we haue no reſolution for our owne ſaluation: the Lord for his mercy turne our harts. Another doctrine we may obſerue

out of this verſe, which is this, that euerie light and Euery little beaſt can ouercome the welfare of man. little creature can trouble & ouercome the welfare ofmen: Why did not the Lorde raine downe fire from heauen to conſume their fielde of corne, or to burne vp their fruitefull gardens; or why did he not ſende his angels immediately from heauen to weede out the wicked from the land, and ſo to haue made an ende at the very firſt of theſe Iewiſh calamities? This he might haue done, although he did it not; but rather ſendeth creeping wormes to ouerthrowe a great nation, which is to mans reaſon as if one ſparke of fire were ſent to burne vp the whole ſea. Wee reade Act. 12. 23. that Herod by his flatterers was magnified to be a God, the which thing pleaſed the wretch too well, for ſhortly after it coſt him bloude and life, to ſhewe himſelfe and his fauorites that he was but a man: for it was ſaide that he was eaten and deuoured of wormes. O woorthie example of ſo woorthie impietie, which wearing the crowne but of an earthly kingdome, would alſo be aduanced to an heauenly regiment: therefore he receiued the greater condemnation. Where were his Phiſicians, coulde not they purge away the euill which did eate vp the kings hart? where were his ſeruants which woulde doe all things for him, and now could not they deliuer him from little wormes? nay what did this newe made God if hee were but a god of flies, could not he comfort and cure himſelfe? No, no, the darte was too deepe, the wound was too great, and the diſeaſe too deſperate: but he in the midſt of theſe his torments hauing his heart eaten, and the wormes crawling out of his body, with intollerable anguiſh cryed out, Ecce me, inquit, qui vobis Deus videor, nanc finem viuendi facere cogor neceſſariò. 
                  Behold your Godwhich is enforced to die: Let all proude perſons be warned by the example of Herod; eſpecially great men, who thinke themſelues if not better, yet equall to the ſonne of God, the king of heauen and earth; leaſt they be puniſhed after the example of Herod. The flies did trouble and terriblie moleſt the whole lande of Egypt: thinke alwaies the Lorde can eaſily turne our meate into

wormes; our drinke into flies; our bloud into lice; our garments into ſerpents; and our ioyfull friends into ſpoyling beaſts. We are not ſo high, but there is one aboue vs; we are not ſo lowe, but there are ſome beneath vs; we are not ſo wiſe, but the Lorde is within vs; neither are wee ſo noble, but his highnes can confound vs. And this doctrine Reaſon 1. hath good reaſons, beſide lamentable experience, whereon it may be grounded, the weakeſt things of God are far ſtronger then the ſtrongeſt of man. 1. Cor. 1. 25. 27. and by the weake thinges of this worlde will he confounde the ſtrong: the which although it be ſpoken in another ſence then it is heere alleaged, yet doth it ſerue alſo to this purpoſe, to ſhewe vnto vs that the Lord will for his glory ouercome by the weaker forces. And it is moſt true that a little beaſt with his wrath is as forcible to deſtroy vs as a mightie ſerpent; and the fall of a feather vpon our heads, although they were garded with a helmet of proofe, yet ſhoulde it through his indignation be as heauy as a mill—ſtone to daſh out the braines of the proudeſt. Hee which made theſe things is not tied to his owne workes, but when hee will he can alter light into darknes, turne the lande into the ſea, the mountaines into valleyes, and make iron to ſwim when lighter matters ſhall ſinke. Nowe good men muſt euer be mightily comforted with the conſideration of this heauenly power: this made the men of Babylon to offer their bloud to the fierie flaming furnace: this made the woorthie Gideon with a fewe perſons to aduenture the ouerthrow of many thouſandes: this encouraged Eliſha, being beſieged with an huge army of Syrians: and therefore this muſt force vs to die, in perſecution to fight for the Lordes truth, to pray where we ſee no helpe, to profeſſe his name though we looſe the ſweeteſt pleaſures of this life.
               The vſes which offer themſelues vnto our conſideration are theſe: firſt, that it teach vs to thinke moſt humbly and Vſe 1. moſt baſely of our ſelues, as Dauid that noble king that euer was did, Pſal. 22. 6. I am a worme (ſaith he) and no man,

euen the ofscouring of men: Seeing the baſeſt creatures of the world are able ſo eaſily to deſtroy vs, what can be better ſigne of our humilitie, then as Dauid doth, to call our ſelues by their names? Abraham talking with God called himſelfe duſt and aſhes, ſuch as lie vnder foote to bee troden vpon by euery one; and Dauid giueth himſelfe a name which none hath done before him, and very few after him, by taking on him the title of a ſillie creeping worme engendred of the dirt, fed onely with earth, and the loweſt of all kinde of beaſtes: would God the ſpirite of mildneſſe could driue away the ſpirite of ſtatelineſſe, which raigneth in thoſe which are many thouſande degrees inferiour to Dauid. Let them imagine through the wrath of God that the haires of their head were turned to liuing creatures, which were an eaſie thing with God, and yet would it not make them humble: how if the intrals and bowels of their body were changed into wormes, as Herods was, ſhould not this neither? Oh, yes; but ſeldome times will you ſay, are theſe things wrought: I graunt it ſo indeede, but much ſeldomer are men amēded by hearing of them in other, or feeling them in themſelues. Tarry not to conuert I beſeech you, till theſe wonders be wrought againe: tempt not the Lord of heauen and earth, with deferring the day of repentance. For bee you aſſured, that contemning the riches of his grace, and abuſing the patience of his long ſuffering, while his word and Goſpell is preached, and not beleeued; he will verifie that propheſie vpon you, that was long agoe pronounced, Reuel. 19. 17. vpon the enimies of Chriſtes Goſpell: Come ye foules of the heauen to the great ſupper of the great God, that yee may eate the fleſh of kings and captaines, and mighty men, of horſes and riders, offree and bond, of ſmall and great: Oh then will it be too late to caſt away pleaſures, to curſe your delaies, to imbrace the Goſpell, and to crie peace when the ſword of God is dipped in blood. Another vſe hereof may be this, that ſeeing 2 the greateſt and ſtrongeſt creatures were by nature and

creation ſubiect to man: now not onely they but alſo all other both great and ſmall through our tranſgreſsions, are become either our enimies, or elſe our conquerors. This muſt teach vs how odious and abhominable a thing is ſinne and wickedneſſe in the preſence of the eternall God, and his vnreaſonable creatures: it was forbidden by God, it was condemned by angels, it is reuenged by beaſtes, and puniſhed by diuels: it droue Adam from paradiſe, it kept Moſes from Canaan, it deſtroyed the inhabitants of Ieruſalem, and hath excluded infinite thouſandes from the kingdome of heauen. It was committed by the blood of ſoules, it was redeemed by the life of Chriſt, it was reprooued by the death of martyrs, and yet it is maintained by the practiſe of multitudes: Oh whoſe hart is not diuided to ſee ſuch a monſter more made of than all good things, which was hatched by the diuell, and fed by the life of ſoules, and yet raigneth that it may winne millions of ſoules to condemnation. Shall reaſonable men reſcue it, when vnreaſonable beaſtes fight againſt it? euery creature in his kinde cries vengeance againſt it. It made the angels damnable, it made the world abhominable, it maketh the beaſtes corruptible, and it maketh men miſerable: Miſerable I ſay by birth, for they are borne in it; miſerable by life, for they are vexed with it: and moſt miſerable by death, for they are curſed with it. We haue already heard that the ſinnes of Egypt were puniſhed and reuenged by lice, and the ſinnes of Herod were requited by wormes, and vnto theſe adde the ſinne of the prophet that reprooued Ieroboam, 1. Reg. 13. 24. which was rewarded by a lion; Thus doth the earth crie woe vnto it, for it curſed her; thus doth the heauens hate it, for it deſtroyeth her children; thus doth the ſtarres fight againſt it, becauſe it dazeleth their light; and thus doe wilde beaſtes warre againſt it, becauſe it encreaſeth their grones. Oh, then let not vs men bring vp that mōſter, & hatch vp the coccatrices egs, which ſo ſoone as it is deliuered and conceiued, it giueth our liues

mortall woundes. If wicked Herod in ſlaying the children of Bethleem, thinking thereby to ſlay Chriſt, did not refraine his crueltie from his owne houſhold, but alſo put his owne ſonnes to death, leaſt they ſhould afterward trouble him for his kingdome: how much more ought we (not to imitate his crueltie, but his policie) to bridle our natures, to chaine our affections, to ſubdue our luſtes, to conquer our deſires, and to forſake our pleaſures, that we might bathe the ſword of God his lawe in the blood of our owne ſinnes; ſeeing if it liue we muſt die, and if it die we ſhall liue. It commeth vnto vs with the Sirens ſong, it embraceth vs friendly as Ioab did Abner, but while it ſaluteth vs with one hand, it ſtabbeth vs with the other. It promiſeth vs faire as Iael did to Siſera, and it giueth vs milke in ſteede of water; it ſerueth vs in plate, it clotheth vs in purple, it lodgeth vs in eaſe, but in the end it ſlaieth our ſoules, as ſhe did Siſera: it maketh much of vs as the high prieſts did of Iudas, it maketh vs gentlemen of raſcals, it maketh vs rich men of beggers, it maketh vs companions of princes, it deliuereth vs when others are endangered, but in the ende it tieth the halter to our necks, and maketh ſpeede for our execution: it ſerueth vs as the harlot did the yoong man, Prouerb. 7. it kiſſeth vs, it flattereth vs, it pleaſeth vs, and it promiſeth vs all ſugred ioyes, but yet it draweth vs as the oxe is drawen to the ſlaughter: it biddeth vs take our eaſe, followe paſtimes, auoide preaching, loue not the prophets, come not at the churches, and forget all manner of godlineſſe; but in the ende it ſerueth vs as a noble man doth his olde ſpannell, commending ſome to the gallowes, ſome to the priſons, ſome to noyſome ſickneſſe, ſome to pouertie, ſome to ſlauerie, ſome to madneſſe, ſome to vntimely death, and ſome to vnmercifull hell. Therefore heare and follow Salomons counſell, Prou. 7. 24. Heare O my children, let not your hearts decline to her waies and walke not in her pathes, for ſhe cauſeth many to fall downe wounded, and ſtrong men are ſlaine by her; her houſe is the way vnto

the graue which goeth downe to the chambers of death.
            
            
               The ſixth Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 5.
                  Awake O yee drunkards, and weepe and howle O yee drinkers of wine, becauſe of the new wine, for it ſhall be pulled from your mouth.
               
               NOw we are to handle the exhortations of the prophet made and grounded on the premiſed calamitie. The which exhortations for our more orderly and formall proceeding, I will thus diuide: ſome of them concerne the miſerable ouerthrowe of their countrey by famine, whereunto they are prepared by the prophets ſermons, and theſe are in this firſt chapter, and to the twelfth verſe of the ſecond chapter: the other generally ſtirre them vp vnto repentance, from the twelfth to the eighteenth. The firſt of theſe, whereby the inhabitants of the land are admoniſhed & prepared for the iudgement, is either for the people as in ver. 5. 8. 11. or for the cleargie or miniſterie, as in the 13. of the firſt chapter, & the firſt of the ſecond chapter. That part which is directed to the people, is by ſpeciall names & notes of perſons deſcribed, which are of two ſorts, either for their manners, as drunkards, ver. 5. or for their occupation or trade of life, as husbandmen, ver. 11. And alſo theſe exhortations haue their ſeueral reaſons to mooue the people withall, as in this we haue in hand he moueth the drunkards, either to awake or to lament, ver. 5. 8. Vpon theſe cauſes, the firſt concerne themſelues, vnto the nienth; and from the nienth to the eleuenth, they concerne the Lord. That which mooueth them for themſelues, is firſt of all their penury and want, ver. 5. their pleaſures and plentie ſhould be pulled from their mouths. Secondly, in regard of the meanes how this ſhould be effected, which he deſcribeth metaphorically, by comparing the little beaſts to a mighty nation, ver. 6. whoſe power is there alſo deſcribed, & in the 7. ver. the worke which he ſhould worke, that the vines and

figge trees, the moſt pleaſant, profitable and neceſſarie plants of their countrey ſhould be vtterly ſubuerted. And this we will by the mercifull aſsiſtance of God his holy ſpirit firſt of all handle. Firſt of all the prophet calleth vpon thoſe drunkardes to awake, for we know that much drinking bringeth much ſleeping; and therefore before the prophet could ſpeake vnto this kinde of perſons, he calleth vpon them to awake from their wine, and to rouze vp themſelues from the ſoft bed of their eaſie, or rather beaſtlie ſinnes. And out of this we may behold how ſweet is the ſinne of drunkennes, euen as ſweet as ſleepe is to the wearie body. Againe, here we may note how dangerous is the ſinne of drunkennes, that raigning in the bodies of men, their mindes cannot be inſtructed, their follies cannot be reprooued, and their liues cannot be amended: for they are alwaies ſleepie and drouzie, ſo that nothing can enter into their hearts, ſo long as the loue of drinke raigneth in their mouthes, and many other waies I could vrge this ſimilitude or metaphor of the prophet, but I omit them becauſe they are well and worthily declared by other. This therefore will I obſerue out of this worde Awake, that if men be not If the preachers awake vs not, we ſhall ſleepe till we bee deſtroyed. reclaimed by the preaching of God his worde, they ſhall ſuddenly be deſtroied by the comming of his iudgements. Awake, ſaith the prophet, as if in other words he had declared his meaning, you ſinners, you gluttons, you drunkards, you vnmercifull men, which are taking moſt delightfull pleaſure in your ſeuerall iniquities. You are lulled a ſleepe by them, but lift vp your eies with ſpeed if you be not ſpeedily remoued ere euery you thinke therof, you ſhall be ſuddenly cōfounded. The prophet Dauid, Pſal. 58. 5. 7. 8 telleth vs, that thoſe which will not be rebuked by the prophets are like to the deafe adder, which will not be caſt out by the charmer: and therfore he plainly telleth them that they ſhould conſume as the Iſe doth, and that they ſhould melt away as a ſnaile in her owne ſhell, that they ſhould be ouerthrowne as quickly as a fire of ſmall thornes, that they

ſhould be like the vntimely fruit of a woman, and that they ſhould as ſpeedily periſh as an arrow flieth out of a bowe: this ſelfe ſame wiſedome threatens to her diſobedient and incredulous children, Pro. 1. 27. that ſeeing ſhe had called, but none had anſwered; therefore their feare ſhould come like ſudden deſolation, and their deſtruction like a whirle winde. There is not any thing among vs but ſerueth for ſome vſe, and the want therof is noyſome vnto vs; the day for labour, the night for reſt, the winter for ploughing, the ſommer for reaping, and ſo the worde of God is ſent to awake vs before iudgement, leaſt iudgement ſhould deſtroye vs. The old world would not be awaked by Noah, and therefore they were drowned: the Sodomites would not be awaked by Lot, and therefore they were burned: the Iſraelites would not be awaked by Ieremie, and therefore they were captiuated: the Iewes would not be awaked by Chriſt, and therefore they were deſtroyed: the Corinthians would not be awaked by Paul, therfore they were ſpoiled by the heathen: the inhabitants of Conſtantinople would not be awaked by Chryſoſtome, and then the Barbarous Turke deuoured them: and our countreymen of England will not be awaked by the preachers, therefore famine, warres, plagues, and ſickeneſſes are ſeiſed vpon vs to ouerthrow vs. Oh if euer we will, let vs now looke vpon it: there is not one among vs, but will cry againſt an open and notorious witch, burne her, burne her, ſhee were not worthy to liue, but againſt the open rebels againſt the word of God, which as Samuell told Saule, is equall or as damnable before God and all good men, as is witchcraft; yet we ſay nothing thereunto, yea rather as Auguſtine ſaith moſt heauenly: He is accompted a publique enimy, who is diſpleaſed with theſe kinde of coniurations, and him do the multitude turne out of audience, diſplace out of reuerence, and (if they durſt) deſtroy him from among the liuing. Oh my deare brethren, what wil be the end of theſe miſchiefs, God his maieſtie is alreadie reuiled, Chriſt his ſonne is alreadie

denied, the diuell their enimie is alreadie embraced, the Goſpell our ſaluation is already deſpiſed, the church of God our moſt deare mother is already weakned, the preachers of truth our moſt painefull watchmen are already defaced, and will not the iudgements of God come alſo ſpeedily to take vengeance vpon ſo manifold contempts, and ſo abhominable rebellions; yet let vs at leaſt receiue this for truth, that if yet we be not awakened, we ſhortly ſhall be confounded. The reaſons of this doctrine are manifeſt, Reaſon 1. Firſt becauſe as Salomon ſaith, that the proſperitie of fooles ſhall ſlay them: that is euen the meate which wicked men eate, the clothes that couer them, the friends that flatter them, the profeſsions that enrich them; and the pleaſures that reioice them, ſhal turne God his word from them, and them from euerlaſting comfort. Oh lamentable miſerie, or miſerable follie! that we ſhould all of vs be ſo bewitched with our wealth, which is a moſt mercifull and liberall bleſſing of God, that we ſhould be all rather payred then amended thereby; ſuch is the ſtate of them that be rich to themſelues and not to God. Let vs then take heede to the moſt certaine worde of God, to bee inſtructed by it; to the moſt holy voice of preachers, to be reclaimed by them; and to the moſt terrible iudgements of God whenſoeuer they bee vttered, that we be not condemned by them: for if we embrace and beleeue not the former, we ſhall be embraced and corrected by the latter. Secondly, another reaſon heereof doth Dauid giue, Pſal. 73. 27. That all thoſe which withdrawe themſelues from 2 God ſhall periſh, and thoſe which haue not the worde of God haue not God, neither any comfortable feeling of his preſence, but rather a fearefull looking for of vengeance. Oh how terrible and dangerous is the condition of all papiſticall and carnall Recuſants, which do willingly abſent themſelues from our aſſemblies! what doe they elſe but withdraw themſelues from the Lorde, and worke out their owne condemnation? and therefore heauie is their caſe,

which as Eſay ſaith, 5. 24. As the fire deuoureth the ſtubble, and the chaffe is conſumed of the flame, ſo their roote ſhal be as rottennes, and their budde ſhall riſe vp like duſt, becauſe they haue caſt off the lawe of the Lorde of hoſtes, and contemned the word of the holy one of Iſraell. But for vs which haue already giuen vp our names to the Lorde, let vs with Dauid Pſal. 73. 28. drawe neere vnto our God, that our zeale in preaching, our labour in hearing, our feeling in praying, and our ioy in all manner of reuerence to the holy Goſpell of Chriſt, may euer ariſe higher and higher, to the intent that we alſo may declare his works vnto other, rather then in lamentable rebellion be made examples of his feueritie. But now let vs come and ſee the vſes of this doctrine, as they are left in the holy worde of God; and this may be one, that ſeeing only in the word of God is the Vſe 1. foreknowledge of hurt, and the continuance of our peace: oh, then let vs beware of whatſoeuer that ſhall endeuour, or any way be able to pull vs away from the ſame. Our Sauiour himſelfe hauing preached a long and ſweete fermon vnto his Diſciples to arme them againſt troubles, and to forewarne them againſt corruptions, ſhutteth it vp with this exhortation, Luk 21. 34. Let not your harts be ouercome with ſurfeiting and drunkennes, and cares of this life, and ſo that day ſhoulde come vpon you at vnawares: whereby the whole church of God are likewiſe taught, that the diuell ſhoulde mightily labour by theſe inſtruments of drunkenneſſe and worldly care, to burie the worde of God, and to blot out if it were poſsible the very names of the elect from the booke of God: and when were theſe daies if nowe they be not? Shall we looke vpon the families of all our lande, the very ſpeciall and diſtinct perſons therein, we ſhal find very fewe that are not infected with one of theſe poiſons: Drunkennes hath baniſhed all religion; inuaded the houſes of court and countrie; and already made the heauens to weepe, the earth to faſt, the beaſtes to pine, the poore to famiſh, the enimies of God to reioice, the ſaints of Chriſt to be ſorrowfull,

and the ſoules of many to be vtterly deſtroied. The cares of this life haue alſo ſo farre preuailed, that hell may ſeeme to be enlarged; and the diuell with golden apples hath raiſed vp contention in all kingdomes, and by this meanes gained infinite poſſeſsions. Some haue all their minds on warres, thinking it long till they be at the ſpoiles of their enimie: do theſe men either thinke vpon the word of God, which is, or the day of God which ſhall be? No, no, the cares of this life haue ouercome their harts: ſome are too noble, ſom are too baſe; ſome are too rich, ſome are too poore; ſome are too learned, and ſome are too ignorant: thus by one way or other many are ouerthrowne. But yet let vs not be hindered from preaching, or diſcouraged from hearing, let vs not want the meanes to obtaine life eternall, and much more let vs not refuſe the ſame being offered. If the Niniuites had not repented when Ionah preached, within fortie daies had Niniueh been deſtroyed: oh happie Niniueh, that thus was warned by the preaching of one: yea rather bleſſed be our God that woulde not ſuffer a citie to periſh, before he had called them by his prophet. But howe bleſſed are we that haue had many prophets and preachers, and yet haue not repented in ſackcloth and aſhes: yea although the worlde be hardned with preaching, and ſay, where is the promiſe of his comming? where is the deſtruction that you haue propheſied? where are the deſolations that ſo many preachers haue threatened? Yet take heede, although the cocke crowe at midnight, yea many times before the day, will you ſay therefore it will neuer be light: ſo although wee haue a great while agoe, and yet continue to crie and call on you to awake before danger come, bee aſſured it will come as the morning ſtar after the nightlie darknes. Oh, then let vs ariſe; put on your clothes, trauaile to the Lordes houſe, and hearken euery one what he will enforme vs to amend vs, or inſtruct vs to forewarne vs. Another vſe heereof we 2 may make for the conuerſion of them that are yet hardned

in their ſinnes: then the prophet hath taught vs, that our whole conuerſion and ſafetie dependeth on the word of God in the mouthes of the miniſters, and we haue learned to watch ouer our liues, that none ſteale away the ſame from vs. But yet we haue nothing to ſaie to them that are no drunkards, no couetous miſers, no open and prophane perſons, nor yet deſpiſers of the miniſterie and meanes of reconciliation: but rather louing vnto them, and yet for all this make no conſcience to knowe God out of his worde, or to doubt of many maine points of ſaluation, or to diſport themſelues in vaine and vnſeemely mirth, and ſuch like, euen vnto them I ſay with Paul, 1. Cor. 15. 34. Awake to liue righteouſly and ſinne not. You haue liued indeed as Herod that honored Iohn Baptist; as Pilate that thought Chriſt a good man; as the Iewes that followed him from towne to towne; but what change hath there beene of your liues ſince you knew theſe things: if there be none, as there can be none as yet; then let Paul and Ioel crie vnto you, Awake to liue righteouſly. I may ſay vnto theſe men as Chriſt ſaid to the Lawyer, that they are not farre from the kingdome of God, they are aſleepe, but not heauily aſleepe; and they may ſay of themſelues as Agrippa ſaide of himſelfe, that they are almoſt perſwaded to be Chriſtians, but not altogither. Yet one thing more wanteth my beloued, not the ſelling of your houſes, nor the diſtribution of your goods, nor the reliefe of the poore, nor the chaſtening of your bodies; but the baniſhing of your vaine pleaſures, the ouerruling of your affections, the crucifying of your luſtes, the putting from you your ignorance, your paſtimes, your oathes, your tabling, your dicing, your gaming, and all your coſt and time that is euill ſpent. You haue indeede made a good beginning, but alſo I wiſh you to make a good ending; you haue caſt the diuell out of the hall of your harts, oh caſt him out alſo from the parlour; you haue thruſt his head out of your mindes, ſuffer not therefore his feete to remaine within you. Is it

as ſweete as ſleepe vnto you to do as yee do, beware leaſt it be as bitter as gall vnto you to receiue as you haue done; therefore awake my brethren, and caſt off the couerlets of your euill, forſake the ſheetes of iniquitie, and leape out of the ſoft bed of ſelfe-pleaſing delights: put on the garments of righteouſnes, embrace the croſſe of chriſtianitie, and breake the neck of all your pleaſures, as Sampſon did of his enimies. The Lorde biddeth vs awake to iudgement, the Goſpell biddeth vs awake to righteouſnes; the church biddeth vs awake to ſobernes; the preachers bidde vs awake to holines; the creatures bid vs awake to obedience; the earth biddeth vs awake to fruitfulnes; and the heauens from an high bid vs to awake either to ſaluation, or elſe ſleepe to condemnation: ſhall we haue more neede yet to be awaked? Oh no, let vs ariſe quickly as the church doth, Cant. 3. 2. and ſeeke that we may finde grace, pray that we may obtaine faith, and knocke at the gates of mercy that they may be opened, leaſt if we ſlumber anie longer we be vtterly excluded. Another obſeruation out of this verſe may be this, that ſeeing the prophet doth eſpecially and by name call vpon the drunkards, which are beaſtly men, or men like beaſts, aduertiſing them in the firſt place aboue others, to looke to the maine chance as the prouerbe is, hee doth thereby teach vs, that thoſe Such as are our ſins, ſuch ſhall be our wants. which aboue others miſpende the good creatures of God, ſhal alſo aboue others be tormented with their want; drunkards are cōſumers fo corne, neglecters of time, prodigal in their purſes, fooles in their heads, diſcloſers of ſecrets, and deuourers of god his benefits; therfore the prophet telleth them, they ſhall lament in miſerie, and periſh in aduerſitie. We know that the firſt follie that euer was wrought by mankinde, was wrought by a woman: and therefore women ſithence are euermore accurſed more then men, their bodies weaker, their ſtomacks tenderer, their paines greater; their liues more ſlauiſh, and their mindes more ſeruile. Who was more merrie then Naball at his drunken

feaſtes; and yet who died more miſerable then Nabal? Who were more laſciuious then Sodom, and who was more accurſed then Sodom; who liued more deliciouſly then the Giants of the old world, & yet who periſhed more generally and decaied more ſodainly? who were more gorgeous then the women of Ieruſalem, Eſay 3. 17. 24. 25. which lauiſhed out their wealth in brauerie, and beautified their bodies in pride, but in aduerſitie who were more puniſhed then they, their ſecrets were opened, their beautie withered, their bodies vncouered, their garments torne, their heads balde, their feete bare, and ſackcloth in ſteede of ſattin? Moſt miſerable are the abuſers of meate or drinke, garments and health, riches and friendſhip; for vnto whom much is giuen, of them ſhal much be required. If the Lorde ſhoulde ſuffer of his bleſſed iuſtice, this dearth and famine to continue, they which haue had greateſt plentie, being alwaies filled and clothed with the beſt, woulde bee more cruelly vexed then the poorer people, who haue beene taught by long experience, to content their hungrie ſtomackes with pinching, and ſcantie morſels. So that heerein you ſhall finde a moſt comfortable benefite of abſtinence from meate, and temperance in meate; they teach vs to abounde, and they teach vs to want, they preſerue vs in health, and prepare vs againſt aduerſitie. Hearken vnto this you belly gods that worſhip your tables, and pray to your kitchins: and do you alſo that ſit all the day at tauerns and alehouſes, lende your eares to this leſſon, that your wicked cuſtome and companie drawe not your liues into moſt fearefull extremitie: Conſider before hande what were your miſerie if the ſtreames were dried vp, the cellers were emptied, and the corne fieldes deſolate wilderneſſes, that you coulde not be ſatisfied abroad, nor yet contented within; what releefe could you finde to pacifie your greedy appetite? would you then be contented when you haue no other remedie? that is not thankes woorthie: will you pray for your fleſh pots as the Iſraelites

did? that were to worke out ſpeedily your owne condemnation: will you then turne to the Lorde and confeſſe your gluttonie? but ſuch conuerſions are ſeldome vnfeigned; will you patiently endure intollerable famine? oh but that you are not able, but will rather eate of the fleſh of your owne bodies, and drinke of the loathſomnes of your owne waters: Therefore either nowe ſpare your riot that you may be prepared to want; or elſe fill vp your bodies with all manner of luxurie, that you may be confounded with all manner of penurie. The reaſons of this doctrine may Reaſon 1. be theſe: firſt, bicauſe this kinde of men ſhall want their God and cheefeſt felicitie, when the drunkards want their pots, the gluttons their belly cheere, the proud men their brauerie, and the idle perſons their eaſe, Phil. 3. 19. Some perſons there are that are ſo farre beſotted with their liues, that they make as the Apoſtle ſaith, Their God to be their bellie; and in another place he telleth vs what ſhall bee the eſtate of theſe daies wherein we liue, That men ſhal be louers of pleaſures more then louers of God. Oh wretched time that hatched ſuch monſters, or rather wretched men bewitched with ſuch pleaſures! what will ſome ſaie, the Apoſtle neuer heard, nor any other preacher can euer prooue, that euer a man was ſo fooliſh as to make his belly his god, or ſo faithleſſe as to ſaie hee loued his pleaſures aboue his God. Indeed I grant at the common law we can hardly prooue it, but in the ſpirituall lawe we can eaſilie ſhewe it: we weigh not the word but the practiſe of men, and if you finde a man (for euery one muſt ſearch himſelfe) that hath beſtowed more on his belly then he can affoorde to the church, and poore members of God, that robbeth and ſpoileth the church liuinges that hee may entertaine noble gueſtes, and keepe a liberall houſe; or that raketh by extortion and vnlawfull meanes from his poore tenants, that he may braue it out in London, and exceede voluptuouſly at home, in the meane ſeaſon not regarding religion, nor obeying the admonition of a good conſcience,

nor the Goſpel of God, I ſay ſuch a man hath his belly for his god, whatſoeuer outward profeſsion he make to the contrarie. Againe, if men doe not ſpend more time in pleaſures then in praying, preaching, and hearing God his word, but omit the time thereunto appointed, and admit other vanities into the place thereof, which almoſt all the yoong men of England doe, I ſay alſo that theſe men loue their pleaſures more then God. Then hearken to your doome you deſpiſers, and be aſhamed or elſe confounded, that the earth which is not yours but the Lordes earth, ſhould beare vp ſuch rebels from the pit of hell. See wee not the preachers of God his word, how our congregations are leſſened, how our ſermons are mocked, how our doctrine is derided, and how our exhortations (nay not ours but the Lords) are ſcoffingly refuſed. See we not gentlemen and their families at their eaſe, when they ſhould bee labouring in the Lords vineyard; Lawyers in their ſtudies, when they ſhould be in the churches; merchants in their counting houſes, when they are wanting at ſermons; ruffians at tauernes, yoong men at dauncing ſchooles, huſbandmen at drinking feaſtes, though heauen and earth cry againſt it. And the feare of a mortall man preuaileth more then the loue of the immortall God: and yet for all this men wil ſay they loue God aboue all, and their neighbours as themſelues, when they doe not, nor can doe any of them both. Then doth it neceſſarily follow, that if you want theſe things, you want your God; and therefore they ſhall leaue you in moſt miſerable aduerſitie. Another reaſon of this 2 doctrine is, that which Dauid giueth Pſal. 17. 14. They haue no portion, but in this life; they can haue no comfort of the graces of the Lords children, ſo that when they are perplexed and weaned from theſe things, they are more vexed then other men. This is the iuſt iudgement of God, that where men haue moſt of al ſet their hart, there aboue others they ſhould receiue their hurt. Now my deere brethren, take vp a taſte of this foode which I haue prepared

for your ſoules, and luſt not after the wilde Doe, when the tame kid may ſerue your turne. Vſe I beſeech you, theſe plaine and eaſie doctrines, to ſhew vs the miſerie of our times wherein we liue, and of their liues among whome we liue: We are altogether ſet on eating and drinking, as if our ſoules delighted in wine, or ſhould be ſaued by meate; wee regarde not the want which the poore endure, wee thinke not on the hand which is ready to ſtrike vs, and we feare not the calamitie which doth alreadie compaſſe vs. Make not your belly your God, and take not your portion in this life onely: knowe you that a good Chriſtian cannot come to heauen, but by often faſting and continuall watchfulneſſe: and ſee you not how little this was practiſed, till the dearth came and put vs in minde hereof; now then let vs redeeme the time that we haue euill ſpent, and ſpare that meate for the poore, which we may ſaue for our ſelues. We haue long liued by bread, but now let vs liue by the word of God, let vs I beſeech you, caſt off our carnall deſires, and take no reſt in our owne houſes with Vrijah, till the Lords people be in quietneſſe: let this preuaile with vs, that looke how much comfort we take in abuſing theſe, ſo much diſcomfort ſhall we finde by forſaking them. The vſes which offer themſelues out of this doctrine are theſe: firſt, that the confidence which the wicked raiſe vp to Vſe 1. themſelues in the things of this life, ſhall bee their vtter ouerthrowe, Iſai. 20 5, 6. that whereas Egypt and Ethiopia were the comfort of Iſraell, contrarie to the expreſſe commandement of God, the Lorde threateneth to captiuate theſe nations, and to deſtroy the people in their owne expectation, that both the comfort and comforters ſhould be at once confounded. Euen ſo doth he in like manner in theſe daies, where men leane more on the weake ſtaffe of meate and drinke, then on the ſtrong rocke of God his word, he breaketh the ſtaffe in peeces, and maketh the flitters to pearſe through our owne harts. This is the rewarde of belly-gods, that their ioyes are remooued, their

hope is decayed, their conſolation confoundeth them, and the want of thoſe things wherein they moſt delighted, ſhal procure them moſt eaſeleſſe paine, becauſe they moſt corrupted them. The rich glutton which exceeded in delicious fare, and in all abundance of wines and pleaſant drinks, was tormented without all pitie for want of water. The prodigall ſonne, who lauiſhed out riotouſly his fathers legacy, like our Engliſh ſpend-thriftes at tables, at drinking, at whooring, at gaming, in brauerie of apparell, horſes, houndes and delicates: was conſtrained for his office to be a ſwineheard, for his meate to want that which his beaſtes were fed with, for his brauerie to bee baſely and beggarly araied, and his whole felicitie was turned into moſt lamentable, yet due deſerued miſerie. Harken therefore vnto me my brethren, and heare me when I tell you the iſſues of your pleaſures: If you be aged, thinke what were your ſorrowe, that if thoſe riches, which in youth you laboured for with your hands, to comfort you withall when you ſhould be olde, ſhould be ſuddenly taken from you, then may you ſay, my yoonger yeeres I conſumed in vanitie, and elder daies muſt periſh in pouertie. If you be yoong men, conſider with your owne harts, that if the libertie you tooke ſhould be abridged, the paſtimes you plaied ſhould cauſe you ſo many ſtripes, and your youthfull daies ſhoulde bee turned into languiſhing infirmities: would not this amaze you to feele it, and diſcomfort you to conſider it? Yes, yes, my beloued, when your riches are the coles, your deſires are the fire, your pleaſures are the bellowes, and your owne liues are the irons to be burned in this miſerable miſerie. I delighted, ſhall one ſay, in hunting, and nowe the beaſts deuoure me: I delighted in dauncing, but now my woonted mirth is turned into helliſh yelling: I delighted in drinking, but my cuppes are emptie, and the naturall heate of my ſtomacke deuoureth my body like a fire; I delighted in ſtealing, but now doth the world rob me of my life, & the diuel of my ſoule: I delighted in whooring,

but alas my diſeaſes are become loathſome to God and man: I delighted in ſlandering and hurting other, but my lyes are recompenſed with my owne life: I was a ſwearer, but the Lords wounds which I blaſphemed haue witneſſed my death: I was a coniurer, the diuell hath me: I deſired large fields, but now haue I loſt mine owne. And thus ſhall all ſinners come to their endes, as Eſau which louing hunting, by his loue loſt his bleſsing. Another vſe ariſing 2 from the ſame doctrine ſhall be this, that ſeeing we which be moſt abuſers of the Lords benefits, ſhall by their want be moſt of all puniſhed: let vs before this time of aduerſitie come, humble our ſoules and amende our ſinnes, as the prophet calleth vpon Babylon many yeeres before ſhee was deſtroyed, Iſa. 47. 1. 23. Come downe and ſit in the duſt, O virgin, daughter Babell, ſit on the ground; for there is no throne O daughter of the Chaldeans, for thou ſhalt no more be called tender and delicate. So my beloued, come you downe now while you heare me calling vnto you, and while this wrath is but comming vpon you: you haue euery one aduanced a throne for your ſinnes to ſit on, but pull it downe, or elſe it ſhall defile your ſoules. Yet there is time, turne you from your euils, you drunkards to ſobernes, you wantons to modeſtie, you ſwearers to pitie, you idle ones to diligence, you rich men to humility, you gentlemen to religion, you women to righteouſnes, you yoong men to learning, you old men to praying, and you poore men to patience: turne turne I ſay before this aduerſitie, that either your chaunge may change the Lords meaning, or vſe may eaſe the rigour of your puniſhment. Come downe I beſeech you, take vp your croſſe and follow Ieſus Chriſt: let temperance rule you, let religion perſwade you, let your Sauiour win you, let his miniſters warne you, let the earth ſpeake vnto you, and be yee all conuerted, or elſe continue in your delights, and ceaſe not to offend God which hateth your liues, or the church which wiſheth your wealth, or the poor which pray for your peace, or the earth

which threatneth want, or the diuell that gapeth for your ſoules. Howle allye drinkers of wine: Now the prophet telleth theſe drunkards when they were awaked what they ſhould do, not go to their feaſtes againe, or to the vomits againe, or to the tauerns, or to the ale-houſes, or to their mirth: but he biddeth them go to the houſe of mourning. Weepe ſaith the prophet and howle: that is, as if he had ſaid, lay away your pleaſures, and baniſh all euill companions; drinke vp your teares as wine, and eate your ſorrowes as bread: for a ſudden calamitie is come vpon you; the meate that is in your hand ſhall not come into your belly, and your mouths ſhall be weaned from ſucking and ſwilling in of ſtrong drinke. From hence when the prophet biddeth them to weepe, I might note vnto you the nature, or rather an inſeparable companion of true repentance, which is a mournfull heart and a weeping countenance, which doth not onely ſorrow for the fault, but as it were waſh away the ſinnes of the ſoule: for the teares which we weepe in this life do ſhew our vncleannes, which if they were able they would cleanſe away. Teares are ſaid to be the blood of the ſoule, becauſe they proceede of a wounded and ſorrowfull ſpirit; and therefore let not deſperate ruffians and carnall perſons, thinke that the ſighes, and groanes, and wiſhes of their hard hearts, can goe for payment in the Lords preſence, or that the bare miſliking and leauing of their old ſinnes, is true repentance: for as the wound cannot be healed, but the partie ſhall be payned; ſo the life cannot be amended, except teares or true ſorrow be expreſſed. But I will come nearer to my purpoſe, for I cannot ſtande on euery worde; and therefore I will onely note that which is fitteſt and of greateſt neceſsitie.
            
            
               
               The ſeuenth Sermon.
               IN the next place he biddeth them to howle, which is an action properly belonging to wolues, and is metaphorically applied vnto theſe drunkards, for they are both deuourers; the one of lambes, the other of corne; both are beaſtes, the one in nature, the other in likenes: and ſeeing they haue reioiſed like beaſts; now alſo he biddeth them to lament like beaſts. And therefore ſeeing I ſeldome find this word Howle, but it is applied vnto beaſts or wicked men: I therefore note hereby that the vngodly comming Vngodly men very beaſtes in aduerſitie. into aduerſitie are like to the brutiſh and vnreaſonable creatures. They ſorrow without hope, they weepe without comfort, they howle without praier, and they haue their wits and their eaſe taken away at once; if they be merry, it is for their wealth; if they be heauy, it is for their want: So that then we may ſay iuſtly of them, as Paule ſaid of ſome Epheſians, they are beaſts in the likenes of men: the prophet Dauid telleth vs, Pſal. 49. 20. That man being in honour continueth not, but becommeth like beaſtes that periſh. The wicked being in honour are inconſtantly ſeated, that ſerueth for their glorie: but they are like the beaſts that periſh, that ſheweth their miſerie: in proſperitie, they are vncertaine; in their aduerſitie, they are vnhappie: when they are lifted vp, they will be more then men; but when they are thruſt downe, they are founde equall to beaſts. The prophet Iſay, cap. 16. ver. 7. propheſying the deſtruction of Moab, becauſe of their pride, arrogancie, indignation, and lyes, telleth them as this Ioell doth, that Moab ſhall howle vnto Moab: and euery one ſhall howle: for the foundation of Kirhareſeth ſhall yee morne, and yet they ſhall be ſtriken. Will a man ſpare a woulfe although he cry bitterly? No, no, for he knoweth he will rauen againe: ſo God will not ſpare the wicked, although they howle mournfully, for he knoweth they will

ſinne againe. Looke vpon this you deſperate wicked perſons and wretched bondſlaues of Sathan, heere may you ſee what you will do when the Lords hand is vpon you, will you then turne vnto him when hee is turned from you? or will you then remember him when your owne memorie is remooued? thinke you then to haue power to praie, or any hearts to hope in Chriſt, when your reaſon and heart is taken from you? thinke vpon it (I beſeech you) before hande, for elſe you vndoe your owne ſoules, inſomuch as when the water floudes of trouble come vpon you as the iuſt vengeance for your liues, then you be filled with eaſeleſſe yelling, beaſtly howling, vnmercifull ſuffering, intollerable complaining, and no manner of relieuing; then ſhall you finde that they which refuſe knowledge & inſtruction and correction in mercy, ſhall feele the ſame in iudgement; and you ſhall wiſh that you had endured any torment to be releaſed of your preſent deſperation. The reaſons heere of are plaine: firſt becauſe Reaſon 1. they cannot vnderſtande iudgement, Prou. 28. 5. If they bee croſſed in their affaires and caſt downe in their liues, they know not that then they are arraigned before the iudgement ſeate of God, which maketh them as farre without all naturall reaſon, as they were before without all ſpirituall religion. Dauid ſaide of them that the Lordes iudgements are farre aboue the ſight of the wicked, and therefore ſaith hee doe they defie all their enimies: alas ſeelie ſoules, they thinke that other mens harmes doe not warne them, and that the Lord will neuer call them to account for their follies. They imagine if they pleaſe themſelues they diſpleaſe not God, and thinke if the hardeſt fall vpon them that euer can come, yet their eſtate is better then other mens. But my beloued, ſaue your ſoules (I beſeech you) out of Sathans clawes: he draweth you on with deceitfull perſwaſions, telling you that in aduerſitie you ſhall be like other men; in the meane ſeaſon your eies are blinded that you cannot ſee howe heauie the iudgements

of God lie vpon you, purpoſing to take you at aduantage in extremitie; that in ſicknes he will make you raging; in famine he will bring you to blaſphemie; in warres he will make your deſperation, & that which is worſt of al, in death hee will bring you to endleſſe condemnation. Therefore thinke (I beſeech you) with your ſelues, and reioice not like beaſtes, and then ſhal you mourne like beaſtes: learne the courſe and cauſes of the Lordes iudgements that you may neuer feele the want of a peaceable and bolde conſcience. Another reaſon is this, bicauſe this is onely the prerogatiue 2 of the Lordes children in aduerſitie, to keepe their ſoules by patience, Luk. 21. 19. Rom. 5. 3. and therefore the Lord will not giue his childrens meate vnto dogges, nor yet caſt ſuch a pearle before ſuch ſwine: Where there is a diſsimilitude of ioy, there is alſo a diſsimilitude of ſorrow; but betwixt the good and bad there is no likenes of their mirth, and therefore there ſhall be no likenes of their woe: they are proud when we are poore; they are many when we are fewe; they are merrie when we are ſorrie; they are glorious when we ſeeme comfortleſſe, and therefore when we are relecued they are diſtreſſed. God is our comfort, but it is their comfort if there were no God: the diuell is our enimie, but their father; hell is our bondſlaue, but their hangman. We reioice as if we reioiced not, but they reioice as if they were borne for nothing elſe: we ſorrowe as if we wept not; but they haue their eies weeping in life, their harts weeping in death, and their ſoules weeping in hell. Thinke nowe my beloued, that this is our time of lamentation, and this is our lamentation of time, to ſee men weeping that ſhould reioice, men reioicing that ſhould lament: Woe be vnto them, for they haue their conſolation. Therefore if once the worlde turne with the wicked, then ſhall happines be like iſe, their pleaſure like a ſommer dewe, their friends ſhall forſake them, their feare ſhall poſſeſſe them, and their miſerie ſhall ouercome them. Seeing therefore this is the caſe of the wicked, that know not nor

feare not God, hence ariſeth this moſt aſſured and fearefull, and yet comfortable vſe to be knowne: that ſuch as is Vſe 1. the life of the wicked, ſuch ſhal be their end, Amo▪
                   4. 1, 2, 3. The prophet in the ſaide place calling vpon the heads and rich men of Iſraell by the name of the kine of Baſhan, that fedde in the mountaine of Samaria, telleth them that the Lorde hath ſworne, that ſeeing they behaued themſelues like beaſtes, he woulde alſo vſe them like beaſtes: for the thornes ſhould ſtifle them, and their poſteritie ſhoulde be taken with fiſh-hookes, and they ſhoulde go out of the gaps and breaches forwarde like kine, and they ſhal be caſt headlong out of the pallaces. And theſe kinde of beaſtes are the oppreſſors of the poore, the deuourers of meate and drinke, the neglecters and deſpiſers of the Lords worſhip, and ſuch as prophane the Lordes ſacrifices with their owne inuentions, verſ. 1. 4. 5. Conſider nowe if euer there were mo beaſtes in Iſraell then are in England. O lamentable world, wilt thou euer proceed to prouoke the Lordes wrath, to oppreſſe thy owne fleſh, to ſpill the life of thy owne brother, and to ſhed the bloud of thy owne ſoule: doſt thou not yet knowe that if thou delight in curſing, thou ſhalt receiue curſing, and bicauſe thou loueſt not bleſsing, it ſhall be farre from thee? Yea I will adde this alſo, thinkeſt thou not that thy cruell life ſhall haue a cruell death? and thy mercileſſe hart ſhall receiue a mercileſſe plague? doth not the ſcripture ſay, That the ſame meaſure ſhal be heaped on thee that thou didſt powre vpon other? Haſt thou lead all thy life in ſwearing, and doſt thou thinke thou ſhalt die with bleſsing? haſt thou walked wantonly, paſſed the time pleaſantly, pampered vp thy owne bodie delicately, conſumed thy ſtrength lecherouſly, waſted thy wealth prodigally, deſpiſed the miniſterie wickedly, frequented euill companie ioyfully, vſed all maner of gaming greedily, and wilt thou hope for all this to die the death of the righteous, and to make a bleſſed latter ende? Then is it not true (which is moſt true) that ſuch as men ſowe

ſuch ſhall they reape; and if their life be the ſeaſon, their death is the harueſt. Oh that I coulde perſwade you to liue well, as you perſwade your ſelues to die well; then ſhoulde your times bee happie, your liues be godly, and all our endes bee bleſſed. Therefore on the other ſide, wee that are in league with the Lorde of glorie, howe happie is our caſe, ſeeing as wee liue, ſo ſhall wee die; our wearied bodies ſhall reſt in his kingdome, our ſorrowfull ſoules ſhall bee refreſhed in his kingdome, our wounds ſhall be healed in heauen, our teares ſhall be wiped from our eies, our liues ſhall be disburdened of ſlaunders: and to conclude, ſeeing we being aliue are buried with Chriſt by our profeſsion, wee ſhall alſo at our death be raiſed vp with Chriſt to his euerlaſting poſseſsion. Secondly, 2 another vſe which doth ariſe from this point is this, that ſeeing the wicked are ſo beaſtly in their ſorrowes, and ſo deſperate in their afflictions, that ſometimes wickedneſſe is rewarded in this life, though not alwaies; for their comfortleſſe eſtate, is the iuſt puniſhment of their wretchleſſe behauiour. We haue manifold examples hereof in the ſacred worde of God: who was more cruell then Adoni-bezek, who cut off the thumbes and toes of ſeuentie kings, and afterward by the Lords commandement he was ſo ſerued himſelfe? Iudg. 1. 6, 7. Who was more proud then Nabuchadnezzar? yet in this life was his vnderſtanding taken from him, and he driuen to eate his meate with brute beaſtes. Tzedechias, which burned the booke of God, was taken by his enimies, had his children ſlaine before his face, and afterward had his owne eies put out, and died at Babylon. Herod that wicked wretch was eaten of wormes, Ananias and Saphira were ſlaine by the Lord himſelfe, with a great many of like terrible iudgements of God, of which you may read both in the ſcriptures, and in the writings of other. There are a viperous broode among vs, which are not aſhamed openly to profeſſe, that they care not ſo much for the pains in another life, if they may eſcape the plagues

of this life that is preſent, and notwithſtanding they feare the puniſhment of their ſinnes ſhoulde bee executed on them in this life to their open ſhame, and in the life to come to their vtter deſtruction; yet they will neuer bee amended by Goſpel or iudgemen: t let ſuch perſons thinke what ſhall be their danger, if they continue in this wicked opinion and wretched life. For aſſuredly as Dauid once ſaide, ſo will we euer ſay, that the ſame which the wicked feareth ſhall come vpon them: why ſhouldeſt thou bee more aſhamed to be puniſhed before a few of thy friends in this life, then to bee laide open to the full vnto all the world at the latter day? Learne therefore to purge thy hands and hart from ſinnes wherein thou dwelleſt, and when they ſhall bee burned thou ſhalt bee ſaued: thinke that thou art not better then thoſe which are already named, and therefore thou maiſt be hanged with; Abſolon, be ſtoned with Achan, be curſed with Canaan, be brained with Abimelech, bee eaten with dogs as Iezabel was, bee ſlaine with the sword as Adoniah was, and finally fall from the top of honour to the bottome of ignominie, as Haman did. Becauſe of the newe wine. This is the cauſe why hee biddeth the drunkards and drinkers to awake, becauſe they ſhould looſe that which they beſt loued: your newe wine that is ſo ſweete to your mouthes, wherein you dwell day and night, ſhall bee taken from you. And in this the prophet noteth vnto vs the whole corruption of carnall and wicked men, that if they be ioyfull, or if they be ſorrowfull, it is onely for the things of this life preſent: when Wicked men onely merry and ſorie for wordly things. their barnes and ſtorehouſes are filled, their fieldes clad with cattell, their names exalted with worldly honour, then they ſtrike vp the ioyfulleſt muſicke to their harts that they can inuent: but when their wealth decreaſeth, or ſickneſſe taketh them, or the famine vexeth them, or the rumors of bloodie and deadly warre diſquieteth them, then are they heauie, then onely are they ſorrowfull, Reu. 18. 9, 10, 11. Luc. 17. 27. Hoſe. 7. 14. They account it a ſpeciall

madneſſe to mourne for the affliction of Ioſeph, that is, to weepe for their owne ſinnes, for the perſecution of the Lords flocke, for the decreaſe of the faithfull, and contempt of the Goſpell: alſo they thinke it a meere follie, for men to reioice at the hearing of a ſermon, or the reproouing of ſinne, or the planting of a preaching miniſter, and the remoouing of a cypher, or the eſtabliſhing of religion. But let them knowe it is a thing accurſed, to reioice for vanitie, and not for godlineſſe; to weepe more for the loſſe of a father, or the want of bread, or the feeling of ſickneſſe, then for the famine of God his worde, or the death of a faithfull man. The reaſons for confirmation hereof may be Reaſon 1. theſe, becauſe onely in theſe temporall and worldly things they place the reſt of their ſoules, Luc. 15. 19. The rich man hauing new builded his barnes, reaped his corne, and filled his ſtorehouſes, biddeth his ſoule to take her eaſe, for he had ſtore ynough for many yeeres: we maruell then that the loſſe of theſe things goeth ſo neere them, when with them they looſe the very health of their ſoules. What ſhall wee ſay to the greedy cormorants, which to gather wealth as this man did, repoſing therein the hope of their health, while vnlawfully they would ſaue their ſoules, vnrighteouſly they condemne them: Oh, let them alſo beware, which being the outwarde profeſſors of the Goſpell, yet neuer make an ende to encroach more liuing. I cannot ſay they, hope to be ſaued by them; but I may be bolde to ſay, that they much diſtaine the glorie of God, while they aduaunce their names they endanger their ſoules. Secondly, another reaſon is, becauſe the loue of theſe carnall 2 commodities baniſheth away the loue of God, 1. Ioh. 2. 16. How ſhal men which haue denied God, and are become idolaters, as all worldly men are, Epheſ. 5. 5. care for any religion, or reioice for any goodneſſe, yea rather lament it; or how ſhall they lament any euill, but rather reioyce in it; becauſe they are voide of all goodneſſe themſelues? A godly father ſaide of them in this ſort, that they account

that euill, which doth not make them euill, as famines, ſickneſſe, and other calamities; but for ſwearing, drunkennes, whooredome, and other vices they call them not euils. They are not aſhamed while they praiſe good things, themſelues to be euill: and they thinke it a greater diſgrace, to haue a ragged towne, a thatched houſe, an vnhanſome legge, or a poore eſtate, then to haue an ill life. This ſaid hee long agoe, and now with teares I may ſay it againe, that men in our times, through the want of religion, which through abundance they haue loathed, and rebellion they haue vomited vp: feare no God, but the enimy: loue no knowledge, but their law euidence; and they care for no health, but bodily medicines: and thus they weepe when they ſhould reioice, and reioice when they ſhould weepe. The vſes which ariſe from this doctrine are theſe: Firſt, that theſe carnall mindes, and men ſhall neuer Vſe 1. be eaſed in their carnall ſorrowes, or comforted in their worldly comforts. Therefore Iames ſaid, cap. 4. 2, 3. Ye luſt and haue not, ye enuie and haue indignation, and cannot obtaine: you fight and warre, and get nothing be cauſe you aske not: you aske and receiue not, bicauſe you aske amiſſe, that you might conſume it on your luſtes. Wherein the heauenly Apoſtle hath ſet out to the full the nature of al worldly wiſhers, & carnal criers, wherin theſe things I be ſeech you to obſerue moſt diligently: Firſt, that this is the nature of wicked mē in their praiers being in diſtreſſe, that they enuie and haue indignation euen at God himſelfe, thinking that he doth them great iniurie thus to diſquiet their eaſe, and to trouble them with want: Oh fearefull condition of wicked men, that their very praiers are nothing elſe but murmuring againſt the Almightie. Secondly, he noteth the verie cauſe why the wicked craue any thing at the hand of their creator, that (ſaith he) they might beſtow it on their luſtes. And ſurely I am much afraid that the feigned praiers of a great number in this time of dearth and famine, haue had the like inward motion; which is the

cauſe that the Lord regardeth not our praiers, and remooueth not his iudgements. Thinke not therefore that euer your cries for corne, for bread, for meate, for plentie, for cheapnes, and for comfort ſhall take any effect: although you fill the aire with your outcries, or the earth with your teares, vntill your carnall mindes be baniſhed; your enuying ſpirits be humbled; your vniuſt and vnlawfull ſuites be ſilenced: yea vntill you haue more regard to your ſoules then to your bodies; to the Goſpell, then to the corne fields; and to the glorie of God, aboue wife or children, life or ſaluation. Another vſe belonging to this doctrine, our Sauiour giueth Mat. 6. 31. 32. Take no thought, ſaith he, 2 
                  what you ſhal eat, or what you ſhall drinke, or wherwithal you ſhal be cloathed; for after theſe things ſeek the Gentiles, & your heauenly father knoweth that you haue neede of thoſe things: but ſeeke you firſt the kingdome of God, and the righteouſnes thereof, and all theſe things ſhal be miniſtred vnto you. Here may we learne the medicine for our ſicknes, the ſupply of our want, & the comfort of our diſtreſſe, who ſhall bid vs mourn becauſe we haue no meate? Indeed it is to be lamented; yet Chriſt ſaith, take no thought for it; thou art a poore man; ſo was he: thou haſt a familie; ſo had he: thou liueſt by thy labour; ſo did he: thou liueſt in times of ſcarſitie, ſo did he. Then he ſpeaketh by experience, ſorrow not for thy want, he was the ſonne of God, ſo art thou: it was his meate to do his fathers will; ſo let it be thine: Say not as the woman did to Eliah, we will eate this and then die; but rather we will endure this and then die. The Goſpell is my meate, the ſonne of God is my cloathing, and the kingdome of heauen is my inheritance: ſhall I luſt after other meate, or deſire a woollen garment, and wiſh for a worldly inheritance? No, no, heauen is all things, there is for me and my children: Chriſt is all things▪ he will cloath me and my children: and the Goſpell is all things, it ſhall feed me and my family: my ſoule ſhall eate my body, my body ſhall not deuoure my ſoule. Thus let vs comfort the poore members

of Chriſt that want, and encourage one another, in diſtreſſe againſt diſtruſt: let vs weep with them that weepe, and mourne with them that mourne, that we may reioice with them that ſhall reioice in the kingdome of heauen. For it ſhal be pulled from your mouth. Hauing awaked theſe perſons by calling, and troubled them with mourning, leaſt they ſhould eſteeme the matter lightly, that their ſinne could be waſhed away with teares; he telleth them plainly that the wine ſhal be pulled from their mouth: and this he doth in my iudgement to driue them to a deeper conſcience of their ſinnes, and conſideration of the Lordes wrath. So that he may ſeeme thus to ſay vnto them, it is alreadie decreed, that your euill ſhall not be turned away, therefore lament your calamitie. And from hence we may note, that all the feigned repentance, & vncōfortable cries No mercie procured by feigned and worldly ſorrowe. of the wicked ſhall neuer turne away the wrath of God from them. So doth the holy Ghoſt declare, Heb. 12. 17. Gen. 27. 38. when Eſau with abundance of weeping cried out for the bleſsing, yet he could not obtaine it. Wherein there appeereth their endleſſe miſery, that their teares ſhal be no more accepted of God, then are the cries of a beaſt in the hand of a butcher. The Lord knoweth that they are not humbled for his ſake, but for their owne; and were it not more for the fear of their own miſery, then of his iudgements, they would neuer take his name in their mouthes, except to blaſpheme him. The Lord can and will ſhewe himſelfe froward with them that are froward, Pſal. 18. and haue as deafe eares at their cries as euer they had at our ſermons: he will be as merciles vnto them, as euer they were to their brethren: no children which ſeeme innocent, no women which ſeeme penitent, no olde men which ſeeme religious, no yoong men which ſeeme glorious, nor any bloode which ſeemeth precious, ſhall remooue their paines, and reuerſe his ſentence. And this doth the holie Ghoſt alwaies perſwade vnto the wicked, bicauſe hee telleth them in other places, as Prou. 15. 8. Mich.
                  
6. 7. That their ſacrifices are abhomination vnto him; Reaſon 1. and if they woulde giue him the fruite of their bodies for the ſinne of their ſoules, yet will he not be mercifull vnto them. What did the Lord in outward ſhewe better accept then ſacrifice, and what coulde outwardly ſhew greater obedience then with Abraham to offer vp their owne children: yet it being done of a wicked man or womon, all were woorth nothing? Secondly, the Lorde hath appointed 2. a time wherein he woulde haue our conuerſion performed, which being paſſed, there can bee no redemption, Pſalm. 95. 7. Cant. 5. 6. To day if you will heare his voice, then harden not your harts: the fruitleſſe tree in the Goſpell had a time wherein it ſhould beare fruite, which being omitted, without all mercy is hewed downe. Therefore haue you alſo a time, in the which if you be conuerted, then ſhal your death be deare in the ſight of the Lord: but if you neglect this time, your bloud ſhall be vile in his preſence. But when will you ſay is this time, and how ſhall we knowe it? Surely, if a man in his laſt teſtament giue a legacie of money to his ſonne or ſeruant, and name not the time of the payment, the lawe doth adiudge it to bee due at the death of the teſtatour: ſo the Lorde hauing ſet no time in his teſtament when thou ſhalt repent, either in yoong or in olde age, in the day or in the night; he thereby teacheth vs that euery day, yea euery minute is appointed for our repentance, till we haue repented: therefore how much we liue without conuerſion, ſo much we looſe; and euerie day calleth vpon vs to fulfill our fathers teſtament, except we be baſtards. Seeing now that the caſe of wicked men is ſo pitiles at the Lords hande, let vs ſee what exhortations we may gather from hence for our inſtruction: and firſt of all let vs take that which our Sauiour hath left, Luk. 13. 24. V ſe 1. Striue ſaith he, to enter in at the ſtraite gate, for the time ſhall come that many ſhall ſtriue and not be able to enter. Labour (I beſeech you) for Religion; for the knowledge of the Goſpell; for obedience to the miniſterie, that your

proſperitie may be continued; and your aduerſitie may be relieued? What a ſhame is it for men of wealth & woorth, to be ſhut out of a noble mans gates? or rather what a ſhame is it that the teares and ſute of a ſonne being in priſon or beggerly, ſhall not mooue his owne parents to clemencie? ſo ſhall it be with you when you ſhall haue mercy ſhut againſt you, bicauſe you cared not for the bloude of Chriſt; and you ſhall haue your owne father by creation not once acknowledge you to be childrē, or pitty your calamity, bicauſe you diſobeied him: therfore now ſtriue, that then you may enter; now obey, that then you may be receiued; now humble your ſelues, that then you may be lift vp; & let this prouoke you like an iron grate vnto the embracing of the fear of God. Preſume not on the Lords mercie, deſpaire not of your owne eſtates, ſay not it is too ſoon, for that is impietie, yea, the houre now is: thinke not it is too late, for that is blaſphemie, but if now thou canſt enter, now alſo thou ſhalt be receiued. Another vſe heerof doth the Lorde himſelfe make, Eſay 17 13. That euen the ſame 2 things wherein we truſted being in proſperitie, ſhall (if they can) deliuer vs vp when we are in aduerſitie: when thou crieſt ſaith the Lorde, the things that thou haſt gathered togither ſhall deliuer thee, but the winde ſhall take them away; vanitie ſhall pull them away; but he that truſteth in me ſhall inherite the lande and poſſeſſe my holie mountain. The Lord mocketh and derideth at the wicked men, as if he ſhould ſay vnto them in this ſorte: you olde men, you haue gathered many fables; you yong men, you haue hoarded many paſtimes; you women, you haue laid vp many trifles; you rich men haue encroched many purchaſes; you noble men haue encreaſed your wordly honor: now call to theſe your gods in ſicknes, in famine, in warre, in pouertie, in miſerie, in death; but I will blow them from you, they cannot helpe you: you ſhall onely knowe, that they which haue relied on my bleſsing, beleeued in my promiſe, delighted in my truth, they onely ſhall haue the

earth for their poſſeſsion, and the heauens for their inheritance. How fooliſh are men that ſeeke not for theſe things before hande, that knowe not that in their wealth they chooſe for their life which they muſt abide and cannot auoide when they are in diſtreſſe, either godlineſſe which procureth their worldly ignominie, and their heauenlie glorie, or elſe wickednes and vnlawfull riches, that cauſeth their worldly maieſtie, but their euerlaſting miſerie.
            
            
               The eight Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 6.
                  For a nation commeth vpon my land, mightie and without number: whoſe teeth are like the teeth of a lyon, and he hath the iawes of a great lyon.
               
               NOw the Prophet commeth to his metaphoricall alluſions, whereby ſometimes hee mooueth the people, ſomtimes he deſcribeth the perſons, which are the workers of this calamitie, as in this verſ. where hee reſembleth the beaſtes to a nation, as he doth the Piſmires and conies, Prou. 30. 25. 26. Then he ſheweth for the terrour of the people howe they are armed to deſtroy, euen as lyons with their greedie iawes and ſharpe teeth, which teare in ſunder whomſoeuer they meete: neither ſhall they onely execute this malice vpon men, but they ſhall take vengeance on the vines and figge trees, ſtripping off the barke, breaking downe the branches, and deuour the fruit and the body togither. From hence we may No reſiſting of the Lords iudgement. firſt of all note, ſeeing he maketh theſe beaſtes infinite in number, mightie in power, and a nation for pollicie and vnitie, that it is in vaine to reſiſt the iudgements of God ſeeme they neuer ſo ſmall: What coulde bee more baſe then to threaten the Iewes, which had ſo many cities, ſo many caſtles, ſo many corne fieldes, ſo many ſtore-houſes, and ſo many inhabitants to be deſtroied by a few graſhoppers and caterpillers, which a man may treade on the

ground; or phiſicke or naturall meanes may driue away: yet wee ſee in this place the ſpirite of God ſo dealeth and armeth them with ſufficient power to diſmay and deuoure all things. Shall we nowe ſaie that anie iudgement of God is ſmall and of no reckoning, when hee can make the vnarmed wormes to wearie the harniſhed ſouldiours? No verily, for he hath ſet his iudgements, ſome in the heauens, ſome in the earth, ſome in the aire, and ſome in the waters, that euery where we might be driuen from rebellion, and drawne from diſobedience. We may ſee in the heauens ſometimes darkneſſe, who can remedie it? we may feele in the earth barrenneſſe, who can redreſſe it? we may ſmel in the aire loathſomnes, who can purge it? and a little billowe of the waters can ouerwhelme vs, who then can ſaue vs? For this cauſe Salomon Prou. 27. 12. called him a foole, that running againſt iudgement deſtroyed himſelfe. Oh ſaith he, in ſickneſſe why ſhould I repent, I hope the phyſician can remedie this, and ſo delaieth till it be too late. If he be poore, then ſaith he, I will take of other mens goodes, and they ſhall maintaine me, and conſidereth not that the gallowes are at hand: Nay that which is woorſe, they ſee the iudgements of God againſt idle teachers, vnfruitfull hearers, vncleane liuers, and intolerable blaſphemers, and yet they cannot hide themſelues from it. Oh my deere brethren, we haue many iudgements in our lande, and how doe men reſiſt them? the husbandman by plowing, the gentlemen by fining, the rich men by gayning, and almoſt euery one by vngodly flattering: therefore I beſeech you, let vs no longer be hardened, for we doe ſtriue againſt the ſtreame, and bid warre againſt the almightie; if there be any meanes to eſcape them, it is by yeelding, or elſe aſſuredly we ſhall neuer bee eaſed. Let vs then ſet our harts at reſt, and neuer wage battell againſt the Euerlaſting: Reaſon 1. for he as we may reade Iob. 34. 20. and 29. 37. can eaſily without all might deſtroy the ſtrongeſt, catch the wiſeſt, ouerturne the ſwifteſt, and confound the nobleſt:

why doe we then take a contrarie courſe, as Balaam did, which the Lorde hath not hitherto bleſſed? It is not in our labour to releeue vs, or in the earth to redreſſe vs; it is not in our repentance or ſubmiſsion, but principally in the mercie of God to deliuer vs. Then I beſeech and entreate by your morning and euening praier, that our harts may be plowed, and then ſhall our barnes and garners be filled. Againe, why ſhould we delay to worke our owne reconciliation, 2 who is able to abide the angrie countenance of the Lord? for the Pſalmiſt ſaith, If his wrath bee kindled but a little, then bleſſed are they that truſt in him. Oh, how infinite is his mercie towards vs, which haue ſo long felt his iudgements, and yet hath not his wrath beene kindled. I may feare, and all that haue any ſoules may feare, that all this time the coles of our tranſgreſsions are in gathering together, and ſhortly will the Lords wrath ſet them on fire, and then who ſhall not bee burned? This is euident that wee reſiſt the iudgements of God, becauſe we ſeeke not a truce with him: And therefore looke ſhortly to be ſerued as the Iewes were, to haue our flies turned into lions, our wormes into beaſtes, our friendes into foes, and theſe ſmall euils which already we haue, ſhall be growen vnſufferable. The Vſe 1. vſes which ariſe from hence, is firſt the ſame that Elihu Iobs friend maketh, Iob. 37. 24. when he had reckoned vp the wonderfull iudgements and works of God, he thus concludeth, Let men therefore feare before him, for he regardeth none that are wiſe in their owne conceites: Wherein he teacheth vs, that although the Lord worketh ſtrangely in the world, and yet forbeareth to deſtroy vs, it is becauſe that thereby we ſhould learne to feare him: for in the feare of God is all religion, and aſſurance of ſaluation. Dauid ſaith, it is the beginning of wiſedome: Peter telleth vs, it is the continuance of our adoption: and Paul ſaith, it is the ende of our profeſsion, when he biddeth vs to finiſh vp our ſaluation with feare and trembling. Then my beloued, let vs feare God, for ſo the word of God exhorteth, and the Lord

commandeth, and the worlde and courſe of nature teacheth, Feare him not as a iudge, for then thou ſhalt bee condemned; feare him not as a ſeruant, for then thou ſhalt be puniſhed; but feare him as a father, and then thou ſhalt be deliuered. But ſome waxe deſperate, through feeling of the Lords iudgements, and others are hardened, becauſe they haue ſeene others taken, and themſelues eſcaped: and in our times although we haue ſo many cauſes to feare him (oh fearefull times wherein is ſo little feare?) we may feare this one thing, leaſt as it falleth out with a ſicke man a little before his ende, he hath a lightening of his paines, ſo that he feeleth himſelfe voide of pangs, and then preſently dieth: ſo now hauing ſo little feare after ſo long feare, we be ſuddenly deſtroied. But ſome will ſay, if wee knew that the Lorde had ſent it, and not appointed any meanes to redreſſe, then we would reſt contented, and in the meane time we cannot chooſe but labour to be eaſed by ſome way or other. I graunt if the Lord ſhould ſounde from heauen vnto you, or ſend an angell to reprooue your rebellion, then it is like you would giue ouer; but why are you not contented to knowe this by his word, that it is the puniſhing of your ſinnes, and till you doe away your ſinnes, he will not doe away his iudgements. Well ſaide Elihu, Iob. 33. 13, 14. Why doſt thou ſtriue againſt God, for he doth not giue account of all his matters: for God ſpeaketh once or twice, and man ſeeth it not, then he openeth the eares of men by their corrections which he had ſealed, that hee might turne them from their euill, hide their pride, and keepe their ſoule from the pit. So long therefore as we are not admoniſhed by once or twiſe, wee regarde not till we bee chaſtened, and then like wretches murmur at our paines, enuie at our ſufferings, and rebell at his iudgements: wee open that which he would couer, that is our pride, and we deſtroy that he would ſaue, that is our ſoules; then ſhall his weakeſt inſtruments worke our greateſt calamitie.
               
                  
                  To make my vine waste, and to pill off the barke of my figge 
                  Verſ. 7. 
                  tree, to make it bare, and to cast it downe, that the branches thereof be made white. Now the Prophet telleth them where this nation ſhould conquere, that is, among the vines and figge trees, which were very common in Iudea, being the ſuſtentation of the poore, and the delight of the wealthie: and theſe ſhould all be broken, all bee barren, and all bee withered and left fruitleſſe. From hence we may obſerue this doctrine, that the fruites of the earth are deſtroied for Fruits faile for mans ſinne. the ſinne of man: what had theſe vines offended, that they ſhould be waſted? or what had the figge trees ſinned, that they ſhould be broken downe? Surely nothing, but the men that vſed, or rather abuſed them, were the onely cauſe that the iuice was dried, and their ſweeteneſſe denied them. For this cauſe ſaid the ſpirite of God by Dauid, Pſal. 107 34. A fruitfull land maketh he barren for the ſinnes of them that dwell therein. This is a iudgement worth the noting, that we might knowe how to amende our land when it cannot yeelde her increaſe, which is to compaſſe it with our ſorrowfull harts, and water it with the teares of our eies: And this may ſerue for euidence in our times, againſt them that thinke all is in good order, and there needeth no farther reformation. Yes verily, the earth it ſelfe crieth out for a reformation, for ſhe may ſay as Naomi ſaide to her friends, I went out full, but I returned emptie: or as Iacob ſaide to his ſonnes, You haue robbed me of my children: it is wee that haue incloſed great fruit in a little ſtorehouſe, for our ſinnes haue blaſted it, and the earth is made barren. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: becauſe there is nothing Reaſon 1. that will ſo mooue vs as want will, and therefore we are puniſhed with that which goeth neereſt vnto vs. Nehem. 5. 3. 4. The want of corne made the people to ſell away their houſes, and their lands, yea their owne children they ſolde to buy them bread: what woulde haue made them thus ſeruile but famine, or what would haue greeued them ſo farre as this? And this ſelfeſame complaint haue many among vs taken

vp, being ready if any would giue them any money, to ſell their owne children. May not this admoniſh vs, that our land aboundeth with iniquitie, that is thus filled with the miſerie of the poore? yes verily, and if it bee not ſpeedily preuented, the richeſt and wealthieſt ſhall feele it as well as the baſeſt. The prouerbe is almoſt verified in famine, which was woont to be in warre, that the great men make the warres, and the poore men beare the blowes: ſo the rich mens ſinnes haue made the dearth, but the poore men liues abide the death. Another reaſon hereof may be this, becauſe by this meanes the beſt and the greateſt 2 come into miſerie as well as the ſmalleſt, not ſo ſoone I graunt, but in continuance of time it is effected. Iere. 14. 3. The noblest ſend their ſeruants for water, but alas they returne emptie, and couer their maisters heads with ſhame. Therefore let vs learne what ſhall bee the pinching eſtate of the poore, when the nobleſt men thus wring; and how are the ſeruants plagued, when the maiſters are thus famiſhed. Looke vpon it my deere brethren, for not one of you ſhall eſcape it, if this calamitie continue: your iewels ſhall bee woorth nothing, your pearle ſhall periſh with you, your money which you haue gotten by oppreſsing the poore, ſhall rather afflict you then comfort you. You haue as it were in ſport began to make a dearth, and it maketh you laugh inwardly, to ſee the coine come ſo faſt into your cofers: beware leaſt the Lord turne it into good earneſt, and laugh as hartily at you, to ſee the ſoules goe out of your bodies. The vſes which we muſt make of this doctrine are theſe: the firſt is the ſame which the prophet exhorteth Vſe 1. vnto, Hag. 1. 5. That euery one of vs conſider our waies, ſince the continuance of this famine came vpon vs. Conſider you rich men whether you haue not ſcored vp many ſins, that might cauſe this miſerie: conſider O yee poorer ſort, whether you haue not added many vnthankfulneſſes, that thus are reuenged with want. Conſider O you drunkardes and belly—gods, whether your appetites haue not

brought this ſcarcitie, and your fulneſſe this emptineſſe: thinke with your ſelues O yoong men, if it be not likely that your coſtly pleaſures and chargeable paſtimes haue cried for a penurie on the earth, and a deere reckoning on the Lords benefites. If you finde theſe things, then begin a new conſideration, and thinke with your ſelues, whether the earth crie not for vengeance, and the Lords miniſters for repentance. Take vp a lamentation, and ſay with our ſelues, O Lord, it is we and our fathers houſe that haue cauſed thy heauie hand to be powred vpon vs; for our ſakes haue many poore men laboured, many women ſorrowed, and many children periſhed; we haue their blood vpon vs, and thou maiſt iuſtly require it at our hands: but pardon thou our ſinnes, increaſe thou our repentance, remooue thou thy iudgements, and multiplie the fruites of the earth: So ſhall you not ſatisfie the iniuries done, but the expectation of your brethren, and the crie of the poore that are yet liuing. For aſſuredly, if you helpe not to beare this burden in your bodies, you ſhall weare it in your ſoules: and if you faſt not with vs in this life, you ſhall famiſh without vs in the life to come. Cōſider (I beſeech you) your waies, auoide that enimie, that by your often ſinning would deſtroy both body and ſoule. Oh our dearth may be perpetuall, our griefe is immortall, your paines ſhall be eternall, your liberalitie but temporall, your want (if any want) but externall; but your and our ioyes ſhall be continuall: therefore conſider how long we haue ſinned, how little we haue amended, how much we haue tranſgreſſed, and how ſoone wee may bee confounded. Amende euery man one, then ſhall families be ſaued; amend families, and then ſhall villages bee bleſſed; amende villages, then ſhall cities be cleanſed; amende cities, then ſhall countries bee ſanctified; amende countries, and then ſhall the whole world be conuerted, For the world conſiſteth of countries, countries of cities, cities of villages, villages of families, families of ſeuerall perſons: therefore if ſeuerall perſons

will amende, then all the worlde ſhall be amended. Another z vſe which we may make heereof ſhall be this, to imitate the example of the godly Iewes, Ezr. 10. 9. that is, that we weepe and tremble for the raines and vnſeaſonable ſhowers, which haue brought vpon vs this lamentable and miſerable dearth: for our wet and waterie weeping times, are moſt like vnto them. They were in danger of the enimie, who watched but the opportunitie to ouerrun them: ſo may we alſo feare that our enimies, which are many within vs, and mightie without vs in other countries, by theſe times of opportunity ſhal likewiſe aduenture to ouercome vs. They were in danger to haue their raines continued, and their dearth increaſed; and ſo alſo are we: for as yet we haue noted and found the waters, ſometimes at the bankes, ſometimes ouer the ſhoares, ſomtimes in the plaine fields, and ſometimes beating downe the goodly planted corne, turning the wheat into dirt, and making dung of that which ſhould be bread. Therefore lament (I beſeech you) and tremble euery ſoule among vs, in our houſes talking, in our ſtreetes walking, in our congregations praying, and in our meates eating and drinking. Let vs make our hearts ſorrowfull, our teares plentifull, our liues pitifull, that the Lord may be mercifull. Let vs weepe, that the heauens may reioice; let vs plough our hearts, that our fieldes may be fruitfull; let vs caſt away our ſinnes, that wee may carrie in our ſtores; let vs weed our liues, that we may reap our corne: finally, in vs it lieth to recouer our plenty, therefore pray with Dauid, Pſal. 144. 12, 13. that our oxen may be ſtrong, our ſheepe may encreaſe thouſands, our children may be godly, our garners may be filled, our ſtreetes may be ioyfull, and our whole nation may be thankefull.
            
            
               
               The nienth Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 8.
                  Mourne like a virgin girded with ſackcloth, for the husband of her youth.
               
               THis is the ſecond exhortation, wherein the prophet teacheth them by a familiar example how they ought to weepe, euen as a virgin lately married, or contracted mourneth for her husband, who dieth before they haue filled their hearts with loue; ſo the words are an exhortation, groūded on a ſimilitude of mourning in ſackcloth for the dead; for ſo it appeareth was the auncient cuſtome of lamentation. From this ſimilitude we may obſerue We muſt as earneſtly affect heauenly things, as earthly. firſt in this allegorie this doctrine, that our affections in heauenly things muſt be as paſsionate, and at the leaſt be as earneſt, as they are in earthly things. For thus the prophet calleth vnto them, mourne now as bitterly, and humble your ſoules as vnfeinedly as a yoong woman doth for the death of her firſt loue. This our Sauiour prooueth, Luk. 16. to verſ. 13. in the parable of the falſe and vniuſt ſteward, how he diſchargeth his office and prouideth for hereafter, willing vs to be ſo wiſe in the heauenly matters, as we are in the earthly. So that haſt thou rode long iourneys for thy profit? then thou muſt do the like for the Lord: haſt thou ſpent liberally on thy wife, children, haukes, hounds, and other vanities? then thou muſt doe the like for the Lord: haſt thou watched many nights at cardes, dice, dauncing, and dalliance? thou muſt do as much in prayer: haſt thou faſted many houres for phiſick? thou muſt do as much for deuotion: haſt thou wept bitterly and wouldeſt not be comforted for many daies and nights togither, for thy wife, thy children, thy parents, thy brothers or any other? thou muſt doe as much for thy ſinnes, or elſe as thou haſt loſt thy friends; ſo ſhalt thou looſe thy ſoule: and to conclude, thou muſt as zealouſly thirſt after the bloode of Chriſt, as euer thou luſtedſt after thy meate and drinke for thy body, or as a chaſed hart for the water, or elſe thou

canſt hardly be ſaued. The reaſons of this doctrine may eaſily be rendered, although in truth it needeth no reaſon Firſt, if we be not as earneſt in heauenly, as we are in earthly Reaſon 1. things; then may we be well ſaid to bee thoſe curſed wretches, which were propheſied of long agoe, 2. Tim. 3. 4. Louers of pleaſures more then louers of God. What canſt thou or dareſt thouſay, O wicked man, that thou loueſt God aboue all, and thy neighbour as thy ſelfe, (for this ſay the ignorant ſort is as much as all the preachers in the world can tell them) when thou wilt do more for thy earthly maſter, and go farther for thy whoore, and deale more liberally amongſt drunkards, and labour more painefully for a worldly trade, and humane arte or ſcience, then thou wilt for God, for the goſpell, for the poore, and for religiō: ſo thou maiſt perſwade thy ſelfe, but neuer any wiſe man will beleeue thee. Secōdly, if we giue not as much zeale to our ſoules, as we do greedines to our bodies; then as Paule ſaith Rom. 7. 5. wee are ſtill in the fleſh, and the motions 2 of ſinne ſhall bring foorth fruit vnto death. Now if you accompt no diſgrace to haue your fleſh for your God, your motions of ſinne for your profeſsion, and the condemnation of your ſoules for your reward; then go on ſtill and fill vp your meaſure to the brim: and dare the Lorde to his face, not caring for his maieſtie. No my beloued, I will not ſuffer you to go this way to heauen, as God would not ſuffer the Iſraelites to go the eaſieſt way into Canaan, but you muſt go another way farther about and ſafer for your paſſage. Although you would raze your names out of the booke of life, as Moſes would (though not for zeale, but for pleaſure) yet you muſt not be ſuffered: but rather ſay with Peter, 1. Pet. 4. 23. Hence forward as much time as we ſhall liue in the fleſh, let vs liue after the will of God, and not after the luſtes of men: for it is ſufficient for vs that we haue ſpēt the time paſt of our liues, walking in the luſts of the Gentiles, in wantonnes, drunkennes, luſtes, gluttony, drinkings, and abhominable idolatries. From hence

we firſt learne that which Paul hath taught vs, Rom. 6. 19. Vſe 1. that as we haue giuen our members to be the ſeruants of ſin vnto vnrighteouſnes: ſo now we muſt giue them to be the ſeruants of holines vnto righteouſnes. Now let vs ſtir vp all the parts of our ſoules and bodies vnto Chriſtian conuerſion; our feet muſt run in it, our hands muſt worke in it, our eies muſt ſee in it, our eares muſt hear it, our taſte muſt delight in it, our affections muſt meditate in it, our hearts muſt conceiue it, our memories muſt remember it, & our whole man muſt be ſpent in it: we muſt walke ſoberly, we muſt worke righteouſly, we muſt behold chaſtely, we muſt heare diligently, we muſt ſauour it pleaſantly, we muſt thinke on it holily, we muſt receiue it reuerently, and we muſt remember it perpetually. Giue vp your members (I beſeech you) vnto righteouſnes: Was thy mouth made for eating and drinking, and not to ſpeake the Lords praiſe? was thy heart made for the world, and thy witte to make good and thriftie bargaines, or rather for the embracing of heauenly Chriſt? were thy handes made to play at tables, to write well, & to fight for the defence of the bodie, and not to work good works againſt the world to come? were thy feete created to dance a fine galliard, or leape a long iumpe, or runne a long race, and not rather to walke to ſermons, to carrie thee to priſons, & to beare thee to the chambers of ſicke perſons? thou art much deceiued if thou thinke not thus. Therfore now ſtudy with thy ſelf how many parts the Lord hath giuen thee aboue many other, (not only creatures) but men alſo; for ſom are blind, lame, deaf, dumbe, weake, ſicke, lunatike, fooliſh, and many other waies croſſed; but thou ſhalt finde with thy ſelfe that thou haſt all which they want, therefore aboue them, yea aboue thy ſelfe, vſe all thy parts in one ſeruice of God or other, whereby his name may get glory and thy ſoule ſaluation. Another thing we may learne from hence, that now our affections bee ſet on heauenly things, Col. 1, 2. and the 2 rather bicauſe Chriſt our Sauiour is there, whom we dailie

looke for to appeere for our deliuerance. Indeede ſuch is our bodily eſtate, that wee can neuer watch ouer all our parts, neither is it neceſſarie or requiſite that we ſhoulde beſtowe altogither ſo much time in praying, and hearing, and trauailing to godly aſſemblies, as we do in the worldly buſines, and the naturall works of this life, ſuch as is eating, ſleeping, and ſuch like, yea it is impoſsible for vs ſo to doe: But our affections muſt be raiſed vp continually to heauen in all our actions of the worlde, that whether we eate or drinke, laugh or weepe, watch or ſleepe, worke or reſt, we may ſtill be the Lords: therefore haue we neede to chooſe out ſome part of our time, euery day to be emploied in this heauenly buſines, and not to be omitted for friend or foe, ſicknes or health, idleneſſe or buſineſſe, ſleepe or worke, wherein we may daily ſhewe and continue our ſoules, in the Lordes preſence. Religion is the foode of the ſoule, therefore we neede not be alway eating, the ſcriptures are the teſtament of our father, therefore we neede not alway be looking in them, but vſe them for our aſſurance. By praier we talke with God as with a friend; but if wee alway conferre with a friend, and neuer ceaſe, we ſhall be tedious to our ſelues, and odious to our friendes: and yet wee muſt often eate, and often reade, and often pray, that wee may encreaſe our knowledge, remember our duties, and continue in friendſhip and fauour with the Lorde of heauen. Another thing which wee may obſerue in theſe wordes is this, that it is lawfull and not contrarie to the rule of truth to make a moderate lamentation of the dead, as the apoſtle ſaith, 1. Cor. 15. Phil. 2. 29. For I thinke it an vnnatural Lamentation for the dead not vnlawful. and Stoicall affection not to be at all inooued, or not to ſhewe any outwarde ſorrow for thoſe whom we loued being aliue. The reaſons thereof may be theſe; firſt, bicauſe many times they be taken away for our hurt that be aliue, Reaſon 1. 
                  Eſay 57. 12. therefore in lamenting their loſſe we bewaile our owne liues. Secondly, the Lorde ſheweth it to bee a 2. great curſe, not to be lamented being dead, Ierem. 22. 18,

19. And therefore if it bee a bleſsing added to a good and religious life, I thinke it neceſſarie that we be not vnnaturall to kindred, vnkind to friends, and vnfriendly to neighbours, to haue our eies drie, or at the leaſt our harts merrie at their departure. I might adde that death is a puniſhment of ſinne, euen in the moſt righteous, and therefore it deſerueth ſome lamentation, vnleſſe wee will reioice in our owne execution. But this matter needeth not the blotting of much matter to vpholde it; I would God there were not many thouſandes more vnnaturall and vnlawfull abuſes among vs then this is, although this bee too much. We muſt learne therefore, although it be lawfull for vs to lament, yet to remember the exhortation of the Apoſtle 1. Theſſ. 4. 14. That we mourne not as men without hope; Vſe 1. that is, that we abuſe not a lawfull thing by making it vnlawfull, as if wee our ſelues had our hope buried with the dead, and therefore deſpaire altogither of any other ſuch benefits from God. Againe, let vs alſo remember that 2 which Chriſt ſaith to the women, Luk. 23. 28. That wee weepe not ſo much for them that be going or gone out of the world, as we do for our own ſinfull liues. And if we look well to this matter, we ſhall finde wee haue a great manie friendes dead, whom let vs lament that our pittifull teares may raiſe them vp to a righteous life. The meate offering 
                  
                     Vers. 9. 
                  and the drinke offering is cut off from the houſe of the Lorde, the prieſtes the Lords miniſters mourne. Nowe the Prophet goeth to ſhewe more reaſons to induce theſe people to a generall mourning: firſt, bicauſe the worſhip of God is violated by reaſon of the famine, and their brethren the Lordes miniſters are in mourning: yea, the earth it ſelfe mourneth, for both corne and oyle and wine haue failed. And therefore firſt of all in the cohaerence of this reaſon with the former exhortation, that they ſhoulde mourne bicauſe the meate offering and drinke offering are cut off from the houſe of God; that is, the ordinarie worſhip of God is abated and aboliſhed: the prophet doth thereby

teach vs, that hee cannot bee a true and vnfeigned godlie man; nay he is not woorthie to liue in the Lordes flocke He cannot feare God that ſorroweth not when religion faileth. that ſorroweth not the neglect of the Lordes ſeruice, whether it bee by famines, warres, or ſicknes, or idlenes, although the laſt deſerueth rather to bee puniſhed then to be lamented. We may read this practiſe of or in the Iſraelites, 1. Sam. 7. 2. When they wanted the arke of God without which they coulde not ſacrifice, they lamented it greeuouſly, for it was abſent from them twentie yeeres: And this is the thing which will trie whether there be any ſparke of grace within vs, to behold thoſe times when Religiō goeth backward, declining as the ſun doth toward the euening: What hart of flint will not then ſhed abundance of teares? when there is no foode for the ſoule, nor inſtruction for the minde, to ſee the churches emptied, the pulpits defaced, the faithfull ſcattered, and all exerciſes and meetings for religion vtterly aboliſhed. Looke on it my deere brethren I beſeech you, we may ſorrow as Nehemiah did, bicauſe men do willingly ſuffer the Lordes building to decay: euen in our time may we ſee the congregations thin with hearers, and true deuotion colde with profeſſours: in many places preaching is put out, and pratling entreth in the roome thereof. O howe wearie are the people of preaching, in all places they are hardly gathered to the churches; being preſent they are as hardly kept in their places; but when they are gone they vomite vp againe whatſoeuer they haue heard: Wee may ſay of them with Auguſtine, Comlines is couered, ſhame is opened; euill getteth many beholders, but goodnes hath very hardly any hearers. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe, bicauſe in that time the Lorde ſheweth himſelfe to be an enimie, Reaſon 1. 
                  Lamen. 2. 5, 8. And who is he that will not ſorrow, knowing that the Lorde is his enimie; would he euer fall out ſo farre with his owne people, as to ſuffer his owne glorie to bee darkened? were it not bicauſe he hath kindled his wrath againſt them: euen as a Lorde in this worlde taketh from

his ſeruant his office, his cogniſance, and in the end turneth him out of his dores bicauſe he hath diſpleaſed him; ſo dealeth the Lorde with vs when he maketh men colde in his ſeruice, and wearie of his Goſpell. O my beloued, nowe I feare, is the Lord an enimie vnto vs when hee ſuffereth ſuch abuſes, and abuſers of his goodnes to liue among vs. Poperie beginneth againe to growe ioyfully out of the earth in the Lordes fieldes; Atheiſme priuily ſtretcheth his ſelfe as the Iuie doth about the Oke: the miniſterie groweth careles, the people waxeth wanton; the rich men are idle; and the poore men are ignorant of the Lords ſeruice: Are not theſe ſufficient tokens that the Lord beginneth to be an enimie vnto England? O mourne therefore as a virgin girded with ſackcloth for the husbande of her youth. See we not how the worlde winneth vpon the poſſeſsions of the church, if we haue a vnitie, then bringeth he in ſecuritie; if there be diuiſions, then brocheth hee manie blaſphemous hereſies; if we agree among our ſelues, he maketh the world to hate vs; if we pleaſe the worlde, our own brethren ſuſpect vs; if we haue great gifts, then are we enuied; if we haue but ſmal gifts, then are we deſpiſed; and thus with nothing are all men pleaſed, & the Lords buſines is ſtill deferred. Surely this will make the Lord fall out with vs, & be our enimie, for euerie one thinketh that his owne diſlike is reaſon enough to be abſent from the Lords preſence: And if there be anie that loue the Lorde Ieſus, let them before hande ſorrow that his ſecond comming ſhall finde no faith on the earth. Let vs therefore caſt downe our ſelues as the Apoſtle wiſheth vs, Iam. 4. 9. Endure afflictions, Vſe 1. and weepe, and ſorrow; let your laughter be turned into heauines, and your ioy into mourning; nowe is the time as Ieremie ſaid, that we giue glorie to the Lorde before he bring darknes, or euer our feete ſtumble in the darke mountaines. Let vs beholde as in a watch towre this enimie of the church marching neere at hande readie to fight againſt our ſaluation, to poiſon our faith, to aboliſh

the Scriptures, to ſilence the preachers, to diſtract the people, and to roote vp againe that foundation which the Lorde hath builded. This let both princes and people, clergie and temporaltie lament with all ſpeede, and without all ceaſing: that the bane of Religion is alreadie receiued, and the foundation of darkenes is alreadie laide, the workemen of iniquitie are building vpon it: we cannot hinder, but we will pray againſt it; we cannot roote it vp, but we wil ſet the fire of the Lords word to burne it; we cannot deface it, yet we will lament it. Mourne O yee elders, that your poſteritie ſhall be thus endangered, that in your daies you haue ſeene the Lorde a friende, and an enimie to vs, that you haue ſuffered the decay of that which all the worlde can neuer builde, that you haue ſo laboured to builde your owne houſes and names, and haue rooted vp the walles of the church. Weepe O yoong men for your ſelues, and for your ſoules: for your liues ſhall ſmart for your pleaſures; and I am afraide that the bloude of your harts muſt clenſe the wickednes of your times. Crie out O children, that you are deputed to haue but the reuerſions of the truth, which your elders deuoured, and leaue you nothing but pay thoſe debtes which they owe for their iniquities. The meate offeringe; All the offerings which were ſacrificed in the olde lawe did betoken Chriſt to be ſacrificed for vs, vnto the which there was to be added as the Lorde commanded, Numb. 15. 4, 5, 6. a meate offering of fine meale and oyle, and a drinke offering of wine, without which there was no offering, no ſacrifice,: ſo that in this place when he ſaith the meat offering and drinke offering are cut off from the houſe of God, he meaneth by one part the whole worſhip of God to be intermitted. Frō whence God will puniſh ſinne although hee take away his owne worſhip. we may note this, that God hath ſo great regard to puniſh ſinne, that rather then it ſhall eſcape ſcot free, he will diſcontinue his owne worſhip. More plainly men know that ſo long as they keepe the worſhip of God and the pure outward profeſsion of true religion, no great nor generall

change of ſtate or iudgement of God ſhal ouerturne them; therefore the Lorde will take away his worde, his worſhip, his truth from among them, which are the charets of Iſrael, and the garde of the church, that he may more freely take vengeance of our ſinnes. Thus may we read he dealt with Iſraell. Pſal. 78. 60. Lam. 2. 16. Now conſider I beſeech you, what refuge can we haue againſt the Lorde, or what ſhield to couer our ſinnes: why? you will ſaie the Lords mercie; but how if mercie haue beene offered, and be refuſed? and ſo the date thereof for our good be expired. Yet you will ſaie his mercie endureth for euer: but I may anſwere you that hee ſo little regardeth mercy to men, and ſeruice to himſelfe at ſometimes, that he taketh away all ſigne of his fauour, all tokens of his preſence, all comfort of his word, and commoditie by his worſhip, and ſo let vs feare in England, leaſt we be ſo ſerued, and rather ruled: and leaſt the time come that we may ſay, heere ſtood a church, there was the Goſpell preached, once we might ſafely profeſſe the word of God, but now we are excluded. The reaſons of this may be theſe: firſt, becauſe the people Reaſon 1. ſo long as they ſay, the temple of the Lord, the Goſpell of the Lorde, ſo long they are obſtinate in their ſinnes, and wilfull in all manner of wickedneſſe, Iere. 7. 4, 3. And for this cauſe to take away their ſhroude, that they might caſt away their vaine confidence, the Lorde ſpareth not his owne worſhip, to ſhew vnto vs, that he alſo will not ſpare our liues. This might be vrged to the vttermoſt for theſe our times, wherein there are few that will crie, the temple or the Goſpell, but amongſt thoſe few which vrge the bare name of religion and reformation, how many are there that liue riotouſly, and walke licentiouſly, pitifully tronbling the world with their luſtes, and the church of God with their workes: but let vs beware leaſt both they and others cannot ſay the temple, but that we had religion in England. Secondly, another reaſon may be this, becauſe 2 we take not the true courſe and lawfull way, to keepe the

worſhip of God among vs. Rom. 9. 32. The Iewes (ſaith the Apoſtle) haue ſtumbled, and loſt the law of righteouſneſſe, becauſe they ſought it not by faith: ſo when the Goſpell ſhall be offered, as to the Iewes, being not rightly receiued it is againe withdrawen, that they may ſay it was once among vs. I feare me my beloued, that we haue reſiſted the lawe of righteouſneſſe this way, as much or woorſe then the Iewes, for we haue intreaties of peace, euery one ſpeaketh and writeth what he pleaſeth, whereby ſome are ſtumbled, many are hindred, and others are diſcouraged; and what remaineth but that all ſhould be vtterly turned out of the way. Now let vs come to ſome vſe of this doctrine: will the Lord ſo puniſh vs to take away his worde, his worſhip, Vſe 1. and his Goſpell from among vs? Verily ſome will ſay, that is our deſire; we ſhall followe our pleaſures more freely, delight in our ſinnes more ſweetely, and ſaue much money which we impart to religion. Stay a little, I pray you, how if a famine come and remooue it, as here it was? or how if the ſword come and driue it from you, as it hath in other places? thinke you then to be ſo well eaſed of the Goſpell, when you ſhall goe from a ſweete church to a ſtinking priſon, and in ſteede of a preachers reproofe, you ſhall endure an executioners rod. Nay but take this with you, whenſoeuer the Lordes worſhip is intermitted, your liues ſhall not laſt; and if they doe, you ſhall wiſh rather to die. Ierem. 6. 21. I will ſaith the Lord, lay ſtumbling blockes before you, the father and the ſonne ſhall fall, the neighbour and the friend ſhall periſh. Here is the calamitie which commeth by the remoouing of the Lordes worſhip: it coſteth much blood, it bringeth much woe, it curſeth many ſoules, it ſhaketh the world, darkeneth the ſunne, it troubleth the waters, it maketh God mercileſſe, it maketh men helpleſſe, it maketh the church comfortleſſe: the preſent times ſmart for it, the next age weepeth for it, but the laſt daies ſhall anſwere for it: the liuing ſhall be troubled, the dead ſhall be defiled, and they which are vnborne ſhall repent it; and

to conclude, if euer wee liue to ſee the Lordes worde and worſhip taken from vs, we ſhall haue a hell of the worlde, a wilderneſſe of the church, crueltie in ſteede of curteſie, beaſtlineſſe in ſteed of humanitie, and all impietie in ſteede of chriſtianitie. From the houſe of God. That is, from the publike place appointed for the worſhip of God. What then, might ſome ſay? if we cannot in the church, then we will in our houſes, and we can ſerue God as hartily in our parlors, as we can in the temples: yet for all this (if it could be ſo) the prophet complaineth that it is ſo, I meane that the Lords houſe is vnfrequented. From hence note this, A great iudgement to ſee the publike vſe of religion violated. that it is a greeuous iudgement of God, when the place dedicated to his ſeruice is not vſed thereto, but lieth either waſte, or elſe otherwiſe applied. If men come not to the churches, as the Lorde appointed, being in proſperitie, it calleth for vengeance; but in aduerſitie it betokeneth a iudgement. Pſal. 74. 8. Reuel. 2. 5. The Lord threateneth the church of Epheſus, to take away the candleſticke from them, whereby he ſheweth the laſt and greateſt plague that can come vpon a citie, which is the laying waſte their congregations. The which thing I would to God I coulde driue into their harts, which make as much account of the churches as they doe of the tauernes, and are as diligent to come vnto them, as the theeues to the priſons. Alas my brethren, what harme haue you receiued by following the Lords courtes, and aſſemblies of the ſaintes? that your preſence forſaketh them; your ſoules forſweareth them, and your liues are more ſtrangers therein then Dauid was at Achis, or the Pope now in England: is it a iudgement to come and not to finde them, and not a plague neither to come nor to finde them? Thinke you not being gentlemen and wealthie men, whoſe deuotion will not abide a ſhowre of raine, that if you miſſed but a childe of your owne in your houſe, that you could endure it, and not bee ſorrowfull? how then ſhall the Lorde endure your obſtinate and rebellious abſence? ſeeing hee loueth it more

deerely then a woman doth her ſonne, and therefore tendereth our preſence moſt fatherly: Beware leaſt it be ſaide of you, they went out from vs, becauſe they were not of vs, and they that gather not with vs ſcatter abroad. The reaſons Reaſon 1. of this doctrine may be theſe: becauſe then the name of the Lord is forgotten, Deut. 32. 18. It cannot be, but out of ſight out of minde, as the common prouerbe goeth, and therefore when the churches are not frequented, and there is no publike remembrance of the Lords works, the Lordes name muſt needes be forgotten. We haue (I graunt) ſome profit by our priuate aſſemblies, our families; but if once the publike places be neglected, then farewell all religion. Praieſt thou in thy family, do ſo in the church; inſtruct thou thy family, bring them alſo to the preachers: haſt thou a little church in thy houſhold? ioyne them alſo to the great church in the congregation, that there they may learne the woonderfull workes of God: for when preachers are baniſhed, churches are emptied, congregations raſed, hearing deſpiſed, the places dedicated to the Lords worſhip violate, keepe what order thou canſt in thy family, yet will religion & chriſtianity be ſoone forgotten. Another reaſon of this doctrine may be this, becauſe when theſe publique 2 meetings & places be barred vp, then there appeareth no church of God, Deut. 12. 5. 1. King 8. 29. What a calamitie is it to ſee the ſunne darkened, the earth couered with water, and the moone with clouds? So is it when the face of the church cannot be ſeene in the congregation, whereby men may learne how odious is their ſinne which keepe away themſelues, and their ſeruants from publique praying and preaching: What do they elſe but obſcure, and put out the very church of God: they diſgrace their owne mother, and forſake their fellow members, by putting out themſelues from our meetings? How ſhall we accompt them of the church which com not to the church, or rather how ſhal we ſay that they are God his children, when they darken the ſpouſe of Chriſt, and giue occaſion to the common

enimy of ſaluation to reioice againſt the godly, and aduance his banners aboue our caſtles. The vſes which Vſe 1. we muſt make of this doctrine are theſe: Firſt, ſeeing it is a moſt grieuous plague of God to haue the churches voide of his ſeruice, then let vs runne and flocke with all diligence, vnto the cōgregation of the ſaints, the meetings of the godly, Iſa. 2. 2, 3. This is the moſt aſſured token of the church of God, when the people come togither to heare the word: and this is a comfortable argument to a mans owne ſoule, that in this life he was ioyned to the church militant; and therefore they ſhall be of the church triumphant. Oh how can they looke euer to come into the heauens, which in this life neuer come into the temples, nor outwardly obey the Goſpell! Therefore if euer you will come into ioy, and enter into euerlaſting pleaſures, aſcend vp to the houſe of God, there dwelleth the Lord, you may ſee him; there ſoundeth his word, you may heare it; there is giuen the ſpirit, you may receiue it; there are gathered the godly, you may be with them; and there beginneth ſaluation, you may obtaine it. If you be high, ſtoope downe to it; if you be baſe, ariſe vp to it; if you be rich, ride to it; if you be ſtrong, walke to it; if you be lame, be carried to it; if you be blinde, be leade to it; if you be ſicke, long to be in it; and if you be old, euen there deſire to die. Runne (I beſeech you) with ſpeed, goe with ioy, labour with pleaſure, and deſire with zeale to be ioyned to your Sauiour. They which forſake it, God will forſake them; they which deſpiſe it, God will deſpiſe them; they which embrace it, God will receiue them. Let not any thing (I beſeech you) keepe you from the churches, ſeeing you would haue nothing keepe you from heauen. Liue with the church, pray with the church, ſuffer with the church, and die with the church. As all the angels appeare before God in heauen; ſo muſt all the ſaints appeare before him in earth: they which are miſſed, are excluded; they which are preſent, ſhall be bleſſed. Another vſe which we muſt make of this 2
                  
doctrine, may be this, that it ſhall be good for vs, not only to viſite the church; but to continue in the aſſemblies with all diligence. Euerlaſting is the commendation of Anna, Luk. 2. 37. which continued in the temple ſeruing God day and night: and ſo wee read Act. 20. 7. that the church continued hearing of Paul till midnight. It is a thing moſt ſtrange to ſee men, not onely negligent to come to the church; but alſo being preſent, they are impudent to depart out of the church: and who are theſe, but thoſe which come ſeldome there; for by reaſon therof they haue leaſt taſte of ſpirituall hunger, and ſo are ſoone wearie of ſpirituall foode. Abide therefore in the congregation, for there is alway ſomething behinde woorth the learning; & when all is done, yet tarrie for the bleſsing, as the people did for Zacharie, Luk. 1. 21. Come (I ſay) with a continued diligence, and omit not one time, eſpecially vnto that church whereof thou art a member, whenſoeuer praier or preaching calleth for thee. Be aſſured of this, the oftner thou commeſt, the more thou delighteſt: and the more thou art abſent, the leſſe ſhall be thy comfort. If thou wouldeſt ſay with Dauid, O Lord, how ſweete is thy word vnto my mouth; thou muſt alſo firſt ſing with him, all the day long is my ſtudy therein. If woe belong to the Paſtor that preacheth not the word, then alſo damnation belongeth to the people that heare not the worde. By vſe thou ſhalt thinke a day too little for a ſermon, and a yeere too little for a praier. By continuance thy hard heart will be ſoftened, and thy wicked life conuerted. A woman married to a ſtranger by familiar and daily conuerſation, groweth into great loue, where was great diſlike: ſo ſhall thy ſoule being married to our aſſemblies which it abhorreth, in time to come delight in them moſt cheerefully, which it loathed moſt wickedly. The prieſts the Lords miniſters mourne. The better to perſwade the people to lamentation, hee bringeth in the miniſters to moane them; ſhewing that their paſtors and ſpirituall fathers were alreadie in teares,

for this calamity; and therfore alſo they muſt follow them. By this we may note, that the miniſters are alwaies the firſt that come into danger. If there be afflictions, they are The miniſters are the firſt in any danger. firſt apprehended; if there be famines, they are firſt oppreſſed; and if there be warres, they are moſt ſpitefully handeled. There were ſeuen thouſand good men in Iſrael: but the prophets they were ſlaine, and Eliah being left aboue all other, was moſt of all endangered, 1. King 19. 10. 11. There were many faithfull ſoules in Iewrie, at Chriſts paſsion; but him alone and his Apoſtles did the Iewes perſecute & crucifie. So that hereby we may appeare to be of all men moſt miſerable. The world doth much enuie our honor, our liuing, and our eſtimation, and our names; inſomuch as there is not any which hath not beene, either enriched by our demeſnes, or conuerted by our ſermons: but they holde vs in exceeding hatred. Well in this wee will ſaie with Ieremie, This is our portion and we will beare it. By this then let them knowe which are entred into our calling, or purpoſe to put on a preachers gowne, that his life muſt be full of danger; his danger full of crueltie, and he alwaies the foremoſt in any trouble: I will (ſaide the Lord) make you to be hated of all men for my names ſake. Wouldeſt thou bee a miniſter of the Goſpell, thou deſireſt a woorthie worke: Knowe then, if thou liue in peace, thou ſhalt bee enuied; if in warre, thou ſhalt be derided; if thou be rich, the world will murmure at thee; but if thou bee poore, then it will tread vpon thee: Thinkeſt thou to liue eaſilie, thou deceiueſt thy ſelfe; thinkeſt thou to liue in mens fauour, thou deceiueſt thy ſoule: hopeſt thou for maintenance, beware of flatterie; lookeſt thou for friendſhip, thou ſhalt receiue enimitie. Thou muſt bee a ſeruant to ſeruantes, thou muſt bee a ſlaue to baſe mindes, and an open marke for wicked toongs. Thy owne ſhall be withholden; thy doctrine vpbraided; and thy life, liue thou neuer ſo warilie ſhal be endited. Wilt thou pleaſe men, thou ſhalt diſpleaſe God; wilt

thou pleaſe God, thou muſt diſpleaſe men; if thou ſpeake, thou ſhalt bee controuled; if thou bee ſilent, thou muſt be reproched; if the worlde laugh on thee, the Lord will laugh at thee; if it frowne, then thou art firſt in danger. The reaſons why this ſhould be ſo, are theſe: firſt, bicauſe in them the Lorde doth puniſh the whole people, Zech. 
                  Reaſon 1. 13. 7. I will ſtrike the ſhepherd, and the ſheepe ſhall be ſcattered: If the paſtors be good, they are troubled for their people; if they bee euill, they are troubled for themſelues. A good man was woont to ſay, that of all creatures a good miniſter was the beſt, and a bad miniſter the woorſt: Therefore they are ſometime troubled for the peoples cauſe, yea ſometime by the people, as Chriſt died for the people, and yet was put to death by the people: And the cauſe is good, for if the paſtor let any people periſh, their ſoules muſt bee required at his hande; ſo if a good paſtor be moleſted of a bad people, not his worde but his bloude ſhall be reuenged on them. So then we are not alway ſued for our own debts, & impriſoned for our owne obligations, but being pledges & hoſtages, or rather ſureties for other, for their cauſe, that is, for our peoples cauſe are we tormē
                  ted. Againe, how fearful are thoſe places to be conſidered, where it may bee ſaide as it was of Rachels children: that preachers and good paſtors were and are not: you ſhall haue ſome gentleman or ruffian, or carnall companion, reioicing that he was the meanes to ſende their prieſt packing, and to depriue their paſtor of his liuing: So did Rabſakeh bragge of his crueltie, as theſe wicked and damnable wretches of their impietie: they haue brought the bloude of the Lordes prophets vpon their owne heades, and the heade of their neighbours, and let them aſſure themſelues it will be reuenged. Another reaſon of this doctrine may be this, bicauſe if there be any perplexitie, God doth want his honour, and then the miniſters are filled with danger. If 2 men be ſicke, for vs they ſend, whereby contagion we are infected; if men be impriſoned they come not at vs; if they

be ſouldiers they ſerue the campe and not the Lorde; ſo that as Augustine ſaide, they cannot be the ouerthrowers of a citie, except firſt they ouerthrow all ciuilitie: So that when the Lord is abridged of his right, we muſt not accoūt it ſtrange to be abridged of our libertie; we are not better then our fathers, yea then our Sauiour, who being beſt of al was taken before his diſciples, as wee muſt bee before our flocke. The vſes which come from this doctrine are theſe; firſt that wee thinke not that they alone which beare the Vſe 1. place of God before his people, to inform them in the way of godlines ſhal liue in this danger, or that thoſe poople are moſt miſerable which endure moſt aduerſities: but as the prophet ſpeaketh Ier. 25. 29. If God plague the citie or perſon by whom his name is called vpon, howe ſhall other men thinke to goe free? nay, rather then that ſhould be ſo, his ſword (ſaith the prophet) ſhal deſtroy al the inhabitants of the earth. Thinke not that your eſtate who are gentlemen or rich men, or ſecular men, or peraduenture carnall men for all this, is better then the ſpirituall mans calling; if it go not well with vs, how can it euer long continue well with you? no verilie; no more then when the captaine wanteth his pay, the ſouldiers are well ſatisfied. Looke vpon the whole courſe of the world, & you ſhal find them to be moſt wretched that are moſt ſecure; & moſt damnable that liue in ſmalleſt danger. Moſt wicked Iulianiſtes ſcoffe at the miniſterie bicauſe they are contemned of the greater ſort, and they ſay, they muſt laie load on the cleargie, bicauſe they teach other men to be patient: but if this were a good reaſon, then might ſeruants ſet their maſters to labour bicauſe they exhort them to diligence. Howe vniuſt is it that wee which are borne to miſerie for the peoples ſake, & for the Lordes ſake, ſhoulde haue our miſerie to bee encreaſed as it were by our owne children whom wee haue foſtered in the church? Go on you ſcoffers and moſt accurſed Atheiſts, when we are in ſorrow, yee liue in ioy; when wee are reuiled, you are regarded; when we are impoueriſhed, you

are enriched; and therefore when we are in danger, you ſhall be in damnation. Another vſe which we muſt make heereof is this, that we muſt not auoide the miniſterie bicauſe it is full of danger, no more then men auoide the ſea 2 bicauſe it is full of rockes; or elſe abandon husbandrie bicauſe it is full of labour. The crowne of a good miniſter is ineſtimable, as Paul ſheweth 2. Timoth. 4. 8. From hence foorth there is laide vp for mee a crowne of righteouſneſſe, which the Lorde the iuſt iudge will giue vnto me: If men will weare and winne this crowne, they muſt firſt fight that good fight which the Apoſtle ſpeaketh of in the former verſes. So that nowe let vs reaſon our caſe in this manner; wee are of all men moſt miſerable, our bodies are weake, our ſtudies are tedious, our labours are greeuous, our liues are odious, our welfare is dangerous, and before all wee goe to the wall: Who would bee a miniſter to endure all theſe? Nobles will ſcorne him, the gentrie will abaſe him, rich men will enuie him, and the poore muſt ſpeake againſt them: he muſt eate their leauings, he muſt weare that they refuſe, he muſt abide that which they offer, and hee muſt mourne when they are ioyfull. Oh be not diſcouraged, but come into the Lords harueſt ſpeedily, thy health ſhall be encreaſed, thy paines ſhall be well paied, thy pouertie ſhall be enriched, and thy reprochfull ignominie ſhall be turned into crowns of glorie: thy teares ſhall be ſweeter then wine, thy want ſhall be more tolerable then wealth, thy labour ſhall bee more eaſie then pleaſure, and thy death ſhall be more acceptable then life: feare not to take vpon thee a miniſters calling, euill words are but winde, euill men are but chaffe, euill wealth is but ruſt, euill ioy is but ſinne, and another calling is but baſe. Chriſt triumpheth in thee, 2. Cor. 2. 14. thou ſhalt reioice in thy flocke, 1. Theſſ. 2. 19. and the world ſhall be ſubdued by thy word, Ierem. 1. 19, 20. the actes of God ſhall be in our mouth, and a two edged ſworde in our handes, to pronounce ſentence againſt kings, and iudgement againſt angels.
            
            
               
               The tenth Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 10.
                  The field is waſted: the land mourneth: for the corne is destroyed: the new wine is dried vp, and the oyle is decayed.
               
               NOw the prophet ſheweth the cauſe of that doctrine in the former verſe, why the worſhip of God was laide waſte, becauſe the field is waſted, and the land mourneth that it is barren; the corne, wine, and oyle are all deſtroied. The which thing being ſo, out of this verſe we firſt of all note, that God giueth vs theſe fruites of the earth to worſhip his maieſtie therewithall, Pſal. 67. 6, 7. So that God giueth fruits of the earth for his worſhip. men muſt turne themſelues, and looke vpon all the creatures of God, which will tell them to their face they muſt ſerue God the better for them: what groweth in thy field which ſingeth not this ſong, the naturall herbe, the planted corne, graſſe growing, foode for cattell, and all other things teach vs more earneſtly to ſerue the Lorde. And for this cauſe ought we onely to poſſeſſe them, for aſſuredly if men doe couet after much lande and many fieldes, and plant much corne and many fruites, onely that themſelues may haue much to ſerue them being aliue, and leaue much for their children being dead, they are thoſe that the Lorde threateneth a woe vnto by the prophet. They haue not theſe things for the Lorde, but theſe things haue ſeiſed on their harts for the diuell: vſe therefore thy wealth not to liue in pleaſure, but in religion; not in pride, but in godlineſſe; not in honour of men, but in the croſſe of Chriſt. And as an olde man hath his ſtaffe to ſtay him from falling, becauſe he is weake: ſo doe thou poſſeſſe thoſe to put thee in minde of the maker: Becauſe thou art forgetfull, let thine inheritance remember thee of heauen; let thy purchaſe remember thee of regeneration; let thy fruites remember thee of thy life; let thy harueſt remember thee of thy

death; let thy ſtore remember thy ſoule, and let all remember thy poore brother. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: firſt, becauſe the moſt prophane and wicked Reaſon 1. idolaters, Iere. 4. 17, 18, 19. thinke that the onely cauſe of multiplying the fruites of the earth, is for the worſhip of God; and therefore who but Atheiſts can denie the ſame vnto him, for he onely it is that maketh them to growe, and bleſſeth all our ſtores: and therefore moſt vnthankfull wretches are wee, if for all we ſhould render him none againe. And this is much to be feared, that the little regard which is had hereof in our land, is the onely cauſe why our former yeeres haue brought forth no greater plentie: for if we generally regarde the multitude, we ſhall finde that thoſe which haue the greateſt fieldes, the largeſt barnes, the wideſt patrimonies, and moſt ſtore of riches, haue and do make moſt bolde with the Lord, and come leaſt into his preſence. Another reaſon of this doctrine may be this: becauſe theſe benefites are the promiſed bleſsings to them 2 that loue him, Deut. 28. 1, 2, 3. which ought euermore to put vs in minde of our loue to God, that we might loue him more and more, and ſo receiue of him more and more abundantly: let vs I beſeech you, conſider our eſtate, and not fall away from our firſt loue; for ſeeing we haue had in former times greater plentie then now we haue, let vs knowe for certaintie, that our ſtore is leſſe, becauſe our loue is leſſe. When the Goſpell came firſt among vs, how ioyfully did we followe it, and how diligently heare it, in ſo much as the preachers being but few, we would haue giuen them our owne eies (if it had beene poſsible) to doe them good; but now we are as wearie of them as the Iſraelites were of Moſes, when they would haue ſtoned him: and therefore then were we filled with loue, and with plentie; but now we are emptied of godly care, and plagued with mortall want. The vſes which ariſe from the conſideration Vſe 1. of this point are theſe: firſt, that we deſire of the Lorde to haue pitie and care for our lande which is waſted, and to

caſt his eies to our poore and penurious time offamine and dearth. Deut. 11. 12. For alas our miſerie groweth ſo great and incurable euery day more & more, that we haue great cauſe to feare leaſt his long ſuffering turne into wrath, and our pinching famine into death. Who hath beene caſt downe throughly not for a day, but for a yeere in this occaſion? ſurely few or none, and therefore is the Lorde as a ſtranger among vs, and as one that tarrieth but for a night. O my deere brethren, let vs at the length yet learne the true and right way to remedie our euill, and to encreaſe againe the fruites of the earth; how haue our paſtures beene drowned, our medowes ouerflowed, our corne blaſted, and our tilled lande made barren, inſomuch as we may ſee, or might not long ſince haue ſeene, how the hils and mountaines wept foorth whole ſtreames of water for their barrenneſſe: Let vs followe their example, and be ruled by their line to doe the like for it, as it hath done for vs. It is not we ſee in the planter or in the waterer, but in the Lorde that giueth encreaſe of him; let vs entreate this bleſsing that his hande may bee ſtaied in time before all bee left deſtitute, and the face of our countrey like the lande of Sodom; let vs labour in praier as we haue done in tillage; let vs beſtowe as much coſt in ſupplication to pacifie our glorious God, as we haue done in husbandrie to amende our barren lande: if he ſay but the worde, all ſhall bee remedied. Oh, let vs powre foorth wordes, and liues, and harts, and ſoules, that this may bee remooued. Another vſe heereof: ſeeing theſe creatures, as great crops of corne, large fieldes, and other 2 things, muſt onely ſerue vs that wee may ſerue God, then how fearefull a thing is it to abuſe any of theſe, whereby both the worſhip and workmanſhip of God are defaced, therfore the holy Ghoſt admoniſheth Rom. 14. 20. that we deſtroy not the work of God for meates ſake. Some ſurfet in their abundance to their death, other disfigure the good ſhape of their bodies through pride and vanitie, ſuch as

are yoong gallants and gentlewomen, and the more they haue receiued, the more they haue abuſed; ſome in their eaſe and idlenes are growne like tunnes in compaſſe, being vnfit for labour, vnprofitable to any goodnes, and vnwoorthy of any bleſsinges. The labouring mans eſtate is much to be commended, though it be poore yet it is happie: he is an image of Adam created to worke, he is an image of God created in righteouſnes, and the image of Chriſt created for calamitie, his health is maintained by labour, his bodie is refreſhed with reſt, his minde is renewed with religion, and his life is ſtudious of the Lordes worſhip: his hungry morſels make him more thankefull to God then the great delicates of the rich; his bare bread and water or ſmall drinke giue him more healthie nouriſhment, then the fowles and dainties of the other; his life is wearied with labour, his minde is prepared for God, and his ſoule is readie for reſt: Let vs all liue in this trauaile that we may die in this manner, let vs keepe vnder our bodies and luſtes, as we refraine a yoong colte, and let moe bridles of abſtinencie and ſinceritie curbe ſhorter all our pleaſure and vanitie. Another doctrine which we may gather out of this verſe, may be this, that ſeeing the creatures of God We cannot perfectly without ſin ſerue God in this life. do call vpon vs to worſhip him, and therefore they be helpers vnto vs therein, wee gather that our worſhip of God in this life cannot poſsiblie bee abſolute and perfect: that wee ſhoulde bee alway like affected and obſerue time, place, order and zeale in our religion; for heere wee ſee that the worſhip of God was violated, bicauſe the fruites of the earth ceaſed; our knowledge is obſcured by naturall ignorance, our time is omitted through ſorrow, ſickenes, care, and worldly buſines; our harts are hindered through feare, loue, ioy, pleaſure, vanitie, and temptation, and a thouſand other waies ſhall wee finde that all we can doe in the Lordes ſeruice is but in part as Paul prooueth, 1. Cor. 13. 9, 10. How wicked are the bragges of them that boaſt of their vprightnes, whereby they ſerue the Lorde,

thinking that there is nothing but of themſelues they bee able to performe it. But wee muſt know that the greateſt doctor, the learnedeſt preacher, and the painfulleſt hearer cannot comprehende, or teach, or learne whatſoeuer is requiſite to our ſaluation, no not the whole church of God togither: ſo that if you looke vpon all that is to be done of a faithfull man, you ſhall finde many vnwilling and ineuitable ſlippes and falles in the pureſt obedience of all men. The church of God hath felt and complained of this miſerie in all ages: that ſhe coulde neither doe as ſhe woulde, nor performe what ſhe ought to the Lordes obedience. For if we be rich and neuer ſo godly, then wealth hindreth vs; if wee be poore, want oppreſſeth vs; if wee be magiſtrates, gouernmēt doth let vs; & if we be ſeruants, worldly obedience doth ſtaie vs. So that as it cannot be, but that in the pureſt corne there will growe ſome weedes, ſo in our holieſt worſhip of God, there will appeere ſome wantes: Dauid coulde not worſhip when he was at Gath, and the ſaints of God although they haue willing mindes, want powre and meanes to accompliſh their deſire. And therefore let vs not bragge, but confeſſe as our Sauiour ſaith in the Goſpel: when we haue preached our whole life long, & praied with neuer ſo entire affection, and laboured with neuer ſo great diligence in the kingdome, that wee are vnprofitable ſeruants, hauing left moe things behinde which we ought to haue done. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: firſt, bicauſe that we ſhoulde neuer leaue of labour Reaſon 1. more, and to encreaſe farther and farther ſo long as wee liue in this worlde, as the Apoſtle ſaide of himſelfe, Phil. 3. 13. The which leſſon I woulde to God were oftener learned, and better followed in our daies, wherein men thinke if they haue done a little ſeruice on the Sabbaoth day, they holde themſelues contented for the whole weeke following; and hauing gotten a little knowledge of the common profeſsion, they are ſatisfied and trauaile for no more. Oh howe ſtrange is it that men are neuer ſatisfied, and

haue their fill of any thing, ſaue onely of religion, the which preſently cloyeth them, bicauſe they thinke it is no part of their dutie to beſtowe their daily labour in ſome part of godlineſſe. I knowe this doctrine will pleaſe them well; that no man can worſhip God perfectly, and therefore they will worſhip him ſparingly and coldly: But they muſt knowe that there is not any man, which hath his perfect health, and yet he liueth and mooueth and groweth in ſtature; ſo there is not any mans religion abſolute, yet it muſt ſtriue & labour for perfection, as a ſicke man doth for health. Another reaſon of this doctrine is this, that conſidering 2 our imperfection, through the ſinne of our natures, we ſhould more earneſtly deſire to bee with Chriſt, Philip. 1. 23. for he that is wearie and cannot goe as hee woulde, yet he hath this in his wiſh, to deſire the perfection of the worſhip of God. Whereby we may note that there is not any thing that may mooue vs to loue the being in the world, the world it ſelfe wil hate thee, if thou be a Chriſtian why ſhouldeſt thou deſire to liue therein? thou canſt not knowe the maieſtie of God, thou ſhalt not feele the loue of Chriſt, and thou canſt not enioy the end of the faith. If thou wouldeſt haue the wiſh of Dauid, to liue and to declare the works of God, yet it ſhall be better to die that thou maieſt liue in the glorie of God. In this life thou art ſometimes ſicke, carefull, heauie, hated, oppreſſed, enuied, and haſt but a little comfort of God, becauſe thou canſt not profeſſe him but a little, therefore deſire the other, where friendes and ioies, and health, and loue, and peace, and comfort ſhall be euerlaſting, and they worſhip moſt abſolute without ſinne or ceaſing. The vſes which ariſe of this doctrine are theſe: Vſe 1. firſt, that although we can neuer be abſolute in this life in God his worſhip, but we ſhal haue as many lets as we haue howres, yet let vs not ceaſe to lament them, and to deſire their abſence: when Dauid had beene long abſent from the place of the Lords ſeruice, he cried out, ſaying: How long ſhall I dwell with Meſech, and be conſtrained to abide in the

tents of Kedar? why might not Dauid thinke that it was not his fault but his enimies rage, that did conſtraine him to that neglect, becauſe he was baniſhed from his people? Indeede it is apparant, he knew it well enough, yet leaſt he ſhould be contented with his miſerie, he calleth to God for a remedie: ſo although we dwell in ſinne, and liue in a thouſand wants of bodies and ſoules, becauſe they cannot be remooued in this life, yet let vs not reſt contented herewith, but lament this miſchiefe: that we muſt ſo doe, and deſire a ſpeedie releaſe. Art thou lodged in thy chamber through ſickneſſe, or baniſhed from the companie of the faithfull through perſecution, or kept away by impriſonment, or hindered by hard parents or maiſters, or moleſted through pinching pouertie? all which thou canſt not auoide, yet that the Lord may knowe, and that thy ſoule may liue, deſire to bee eaſed of this burden. Thinke not that thou ſhalt bee excuſed, if thou canſt not come and worſhip as thou oughteſt, but will the thing thou canſt not performe, and thinke it long till thy bondage be at libertie, thy want be ſupplied, and thy ſoule remooued from thy bodie, that thou maiſt ſee God, and loue him, and liue with him, and praiſe him for euer and euer. Art thou a Chriſtian, and haſt thou not greater cauſe to wiſh for heauen, then Dauid had for Ieruſalem? and if you haue, then pray with as great zeale, that thy will may be turned into action, thy lets into helpes, thy wants into ſupplies, thy ſoule into pietie, and all thy worſhip into ſinceritie. Another 2 vſe may be this, that men doe not any thing the leſſe eſteeme of the worſhip of God, becauſe they haue hearde that it is but temporall. O this were accurſed that a ſicke man ſhould be leſſe regarded becauſe he is ſicke, and not rather be the more attended! ſhall a ſonne deſpiſe his owne father becauſe he is poore? this were iniquitie; and ſo is it a greater abhomination, that men ſhould leſſe ſerue the Lord, becauſe the greateſt meaſure is imperfect. Although Dauid might not builde the temple, yet he prouided

wherewithall to do it: and ſo although thou canſt not loue God as thou wouldeſt, and as thou oughteſt; yet loue him as thou canſt, and as farre as thou art able: be not diſcouraged, becauſe thou art not able to goe through with religion; for if thou haue any religion, knowe thou that the leaſt things of God are greater then the greateſt of the world; and the weakeſt things of God are ſtronger then the ſtrongeſt of men. Honour them that haue the giftes of God in them, although they be imperfect; for who deſpiſeth a craſed peece of gold? or who throweth out of doores a broken ſiluer pot? and therefore who but a mad man would lightly regarde the ſmall graces of God in men? But alas, it is the miſerie of our time, wherein religion is meaſured by wealth, and deuotion by outward ſhewes, and the giftes of the ſpirite by worldly profeſsions; ſo that if men liue neuer ſo vprightly, and yet be poore; or teach neuer ſo diligently, and yet be not famous; and pray neuer ſo feruently, and yet be not a flatterer; or write neuer ſo excellently, and yet reprooue ſinne: he is no more accounted then a baſe and common profeſſour. Men will not ſtudie religion, becauſe they ſay the doctors can neuer knowe all things, and therefore they will knowe nothing: but if none ſhould ſtudie phiſicke, but he that would cure all diſeaſes; ſickneſſe would quickly ouerthrowe vs: and if men follow not religion, becauſe they cannot know euerie myſterie, the diuell will ſpeedily ouercome their ſoules.
               
                  Be ye aſhamed O ye husbandmen: howle O ye vine dreſſers, for the wheate and for the barly, becauſe the haruest of the field 
                  Verſ. 11. 
                  is periſhed. Now he commeth to the particular perſons that dreſſeth the earth, and the fruites thereof, bidding them to bee aſhamed to ſee their cunning faile, their labour loſt, their price receiued in vaine, becauſe all was deſtroied whereabout they were imploied. From hence we may The miniſters muſt exhort all men. note, that ſeeing the prophet calleth to theſe husbandmen, it is our dutie that are of the miniſterie to ſpeake the word and rebuke ſinne, and exhort euery kinde of profeſſion

vnto religion: The princes, the nobles, the rich, the poore, the husbandmen, the artificers, and the ſeruingmen, and the gentlemen muſt all be exhorted, and rebuked by the voice of a preacher. And this was the moſt ſingular comfort that Paul receiued by his labour, Actes 20. 31. That they all coulde beare him witneſſe, that hee had not ceaſed daye nor night, to admoniſh euery man of life eternall: wherein wee ſee that the paines of a miniſter are infinite, that muſt not feare any mans perſon, nor ſpare any mans profeſsion, nor loue any mans ſinnes, nor bee ſilent at any mans iniuries, nor bee controuled for any iuſt offence by him rebuked. Looke I ſay, to the labours of watchmen in the Lordes houſe, hee warneth them by chiding ſaith Aug. he inſtructeth them by preaching, he prepareth them by admonition, he hath a calling from God to warrant him, from the word to enconrage him, from the ſpirit to inflame him, and from his conſcience to comfort him. He muſt rebuke the rage of great men, the folly of old men, the vanitie of yoong men, the deceit of crafts men, the trade of husbandmen, the idlenes of ſeruingmen, the wantonnes of women, and the ſinnes of all men, that by wounding them with the word of God, both they and he might eſcape the iudgement of God.
               The reaſons of this doctrine may bee theſe, Firſt becauſe Reaſon 1. as Paul ſaith in the forenamed place, ver. 26. 27. that by this means they are free from the blood of all men: And we know that the blood of a poore husbandman, will ſtaine as much as the blood of the greateſt prince in the world. But euermore when I haue occaſion to talke of the bloode of men which is committed to the preachers, and ſhall bee againe required at our hands: me thinkes that the blood and life, and hearts and ſoules ſhould tremble hereat: the miniſter for his charge, the people for their danger. The captaine doth anſwere for the body of a man, the factor for his maſters wealth, the ſcholler for his learning, the man for his ſeruice, and the noble man for his princes affaires: but

the miniſter muſt anſwere for the peoples ſinnes. Againe, what is the danger to keepe thy ſoule? is it not committed to a man? hath it not all the diuels in hell to lay ſiege vnto it? and yet wil not men come to their paſtors to haue their ſoules fed being hungrie; nor yet cured being ſicke; nor yet ſalued, being wounded; nor yet defended, being beſieged; nor yet to be ſaued, although they be like to bee damned. Another reaſon of this is becauſe our commiſsion muſt ſtretch it ſelfe as far as Chriſtes redemption, who is an aduocate for all men, that is, for all ſorts of men: and therefore it is moſt requiſite that we ſpeake to all kinds of men, that ſo they may come to the knowledge of redemption. Wouldeſt thou then be exempted from comming to ſermons? then thou muſt alſo be exempted from comming to ſaluation. Is it hard vnto thee and intolerable, that the word of God ſhall reſtraine thy pleaſures? then ſhall it be harder for thee to haue the blood of Chriſt to annoint thy ſoule from hell. Would not all men come to the kingdom of heauen? then wil I open vnto them the gate of the Lord, and tell you that obedience to the miniſterie is the way, and the righteous will enter therein. The vſes which come of this doctrine are theſe: Firſt, ſeeing that all men Vſe 1. muſt receiue the word of the miniſter, that the miniſters flatter not the people, and conceale not the iudgements of God from their ſinnes, Prou. 24. 24. 25. The Lord promiſed pleaſure to them that rebuked the ſinne of the wicked, and the bleſsing of goodnes ſhall bee vpon them. What is the hope of the Lords workman, we haue already declared. But now let me exhort and be exhorted vnto this neceſſarie doctrine: I know that ſince the world grew to a multitude, and the church to a monarchie, the great men haue euer enuied the rebukers of ſinne, I meane the miniſterie, bicauſe they liued in greater ſinnes themſelues: and this is the cauſe why reproofes are ſo hardly endured; that although we ſpeake but generally againſt a particular ſinne, yet ſome or other who is gauled with the conſcience

thereof, will accuſe vs for ayming at him, and peraduenture threaten vs mortall hatred: this was not ſo in the primitiue church, 1. Cor. 14. 24. 25. but rather men obeyed gladly, then threatned maliciouſly; but ſo it is in our church, and therefore are the miniſtery afraid in many places to preach the word, leaſt they ſhould offend. But harken my deere brethren, feare them not, for it ſhal come on vs that the Lord threatned Ieremie: If we ſpare his word, he will confounde vs in their preſence. What is there in them that we ſhould feare? they are but men in nature, ſo are we; they are many in number, ſo are we; they haue the world, we haue the word: they touch but our names or our bodies, our ſoules are the Lords: they cannot accuſe vs iuſtly of ſinne, but themſelues; they cannot worke their will, but the Lords will; their wrath is nothing to the Lordes wrath; ſhall we ſilence the word, becauſe they loue it not? Beloued, haue not mens perſons in admiration: the word of God is not bound though we be impriſoned; that cannot be hurt, though we be blamed; our ſoules cannot be touched, though our bodies be martyred. Let vs wiſh with Luther that God would make vs woorthie to die for his word. Another vſe of this doctrine, is that the people 2 of all ſorts muſt heare the worde of the miniſter: let them take heed that they beare the rebukes of ſin for the Lord. Hoſ. 4. 4. cōplaineth of the deſperate eſtate of the people; for he ſaide, they rebuked the prophet. This is the ſin of England, for there are among vs that will teach wiſe men, and themſelues being fooles; they will controule learned men, themſelues being ignorant; they will ſohoole preachers, yet they cannot heare; they will rule magiſtrates, themſelues being ſubiects; and they will ſeeme to doe all things, being able to doe nothing. But this is the point woorthie to be ſtoode vpon, they will reprooue the miniſter of the Goſpell: If they ſuſpect vs, they condemne vs; if there be but an vncertaine rumour, they make it a certaine ſclander; ſo that our life, our liuings, our doctrine,

our calling, and all our preaching is contemned by them: Our life to be idle, our liuings to be too great, our doctrine to be ſuſpitious, our calling to be burdenſome, and our preaching to be onely for a worldly reſpect. Oh incurable, vndurable miſchiefe! why do men at once ſet Chriſt to ſchoole, teach God to be wiſe, refuſe the Goſpels gouernment, and chooſe the tyranny of ſinne? Why do they rebuke vs? and yet thinke they do well: if the rod of magiſtrates light on vs for our ſinnes, let vs abide it; but to let euery drunkard and ruffian, and ſeruingman, and euery baſe companion to crow againſt the Goſpell and our calling, let vs neuer abide. They hate vs becauſe they loue ſinne; they loue liberty, becauſe they abhorre diſcipline; they regard not the miniſtery, becauſe they regard not God; and therefore looke for a preſent and ſpeedie calamitie: for ſince that baſe fellowes became miniſters, baſe fellowes haue regarded none: ſo that now we may preach out our hearts, and pray out our ſoules, and weepe out our eies; yet we ſhall receiue nothing but ſcoffes and ſcornes, rebuke and ſcander, for our labor. Weepe and howle: hauing bidden them to be aſhamed, now he biddeth them to bee ſorrowfull: for well hee knew that their hope and health was loſt when their corne and fruites were deſtroyed, wherein they truſted more then in GOD. And from The outward worſhip of God doth good vnto all. hence wee may obſerue, that if the worſhippe of God bee once decaied, there is not any ſo deſperately wicked or diſſolute, but he ſhall ſmart for them; we may ſay, Eſay 9. 10, 11, 12. That the wicked make great bragges, if they were depriued of preaching the word: they ſay they would turne brickes into hewen ſtone, and tymber into Cedar trees: but the Lorde telleth them that their enimies ſhall beſet them, and he will cut off both honorable and taile. So is the courſe of his iudgement, that when hee hath taken away his worſhip, which is a helmet of proofe to keepe his wrath from vs, then he ſendeth greateſt calamitie, when we thinke we ſhall liue in greateſt ſecuritie.

The filthie Sodomites thought that they were well when Lot was gone from among them, but there followed preſently fire and brimſtone from heauen. By this our gallants may perceiue, that if the Goſpell be in the wrath of God tranſlated from our countrey, their brauerie and pride, and wealth, and proſperitie ſhall be ouerturned into perpetuall miſerie. They thinke it a burden intollerable to liue vnder the checke heereof: but let them know that the little finger of humane tyrannie, ſhall bee heauier on them then the loines and body of all chriſtianitie. Oh, how do men deceiue themſelues with ſweete promiſes of great and incredible eaſe, which they ſhall reape by the abaſing of the miniſterie, by the decay of good men, and the abandoning of all goodnes, when they ſhall haue libertie to commit any kinde of ſinne. O miſerable wretches (ſaith one) to whom it is lawfull to do wickedly! ſurely you ſhall come out of a little brooke and runne headlong into the maine ſea. The reaſon of this doctrine is Reaſon 1. this, bicauſe the wicked ſhoulde knowe that all goodneſſe which they receiue, is for the Goſpels and godly mens ſake, Prou. 11. 11. there is not any thing in the worlde which the godly haue not a title vnto, inſomuch as all the wicked men are but vſurpers of the goods and landes, and wealth and dignities they enioy, ſo long as a godly man is liuing. The worlde is a bodie, religion is the ſoule thereof, which being remooued is dead and fit for nothing. The worlde is a building, and the worſhip is the pillar & poſtes thereof, which being remooued it muſt needes fall, as the houſe wherein Sampſon ſlewe the Philiſtines: So that it is moſt plaine, that when our knowledge is turned to ignorance, and the preachers of the worde of God ceaſe to ſpeake in the name of God, and when the Goſpell is baniſhed from our lande, and there bee a free libertie to doe what they liſt: then I ſaie will the heauens threaten deſtruction, the mindes of men ſhall be made blinde, their vnderſtanding ſhall bee taken from them, and they ſhall

liue as other people do without God his word, to be ſlaues to their enimies, drudges to their labours, beaſtes in their liues, enimies to God, haters of good things, and diuels by their death. The vſes which commeth from this doctrine, is firſt of all, that wee labour with ſpeede to amende Vſe 1. thoſe things which are amiſſe among vs: for elſe that iudgement which the Lorde once threatened to the Epheſian church, Reuel. 2. 5. ſhall take holde, namely, that the Lord will take away his candleſticke from vs: if the light bee gone, we ſhal liue in darknes; if the word be gone, we ſhall liue in blindnes; if God his worſhip be taken from vs, wee ſhall die in miſerie. This onely is the meate, which if wee want will conſume vs: it is a ſworde, and if it bee not in our handes it will wounde vs; it is a ſcepter, which if the king of heauen holde not foorth, we ſhall be condemned: Feare the want of the Lords worſhip, for if it goe from vs, then he will depart; if he depart, then our proſperitie will ceaſe, and there ſhall not be a man aliue which will not deſire to die. Conſider I beſeech you, if you haue enioyed great poſſeſsions, & goodly landes, faire houſes, & many friends, delicate liues, and many children; but in one night thy aduerſarie ſtealeth away thy euidence whereby thou holdeſt thy lande, and then thou art turned out of poſſeſsion, thy landes are taken from thee, thy friendes forſake thee, thy children crie on thee, and thou bee conſtrained either to harde labour or vnlawfull beggerie; how wouldeſt thou take it, but wiſh for a thouſande deathes to bee deliuered from this ſhame: So ſhall it bee with thee in the Goſpell, which is the euidence of thy peace, thy health, thy landes, thy ioy, and the kingdome of heauen; the which being taken from thee, thou canſt neuer enioy any of theſe: then thou ſhalt weepe without comfort, ſorrowe without hope, liue without ioy, die without peace, and be damned without mercie. Oh, whoſe heart is not cleaued aſunder to thinke vpon the danger of his ſoule? Loue the Goſpell, that it may tarrie with vs; beleeue it, that we may liue in it; receiue

it, that we may reioice in it; profeſſe it, that we may die in it, profeſſe I ſaie, for his owne ſake and for nothing elſe: let thy eies ſee it, thy eare heare it, thy toong ſpeake it, thy heart regard it, thy feete walke in it, that thy hande may worke in it thy owne ſaluation. Let vs amende that which is amiſſe, and repent leaſt all be taken from vs, leaſt our enimies reioice in our houſes, leaſt our women lament in the ſtreets, our children cry in the fields, our old men lie in the graues, and all men die in deſperation. Let vs therefore to auoide all this miſchiefe receiue that exhortation, 1. Theſſ. 2. 12. that euery one that nowe liueth in our Engliſh dominion, in the daies of our moſt peaceable Salomon: Walke woorthy of this vocation whereunto they are called. If the Lorde ſhoulde require any great thing of vs, ought we not to doe it, ſeeing wee owe vnto him our owne ſelues, much more ought we to walke like chriſtians, ſeeing we profeſſe chriſtianitie. Walke we muſt, and not ſtande ſtill as the idle doe, we muſt be woorthy of our places, and not onely fill the roome as an image doth at a feaſt, as our carnall Goſpellers do: and called we muſt be, and not refuſe to come, as the greateſt part in our age doth. The Goſpell is the ſunne, let vs looke on it; it is the wedding garment, let vs weare it; it is the day, let vs worke in it; it is the ſalte of the worlde, let vs taſte it; it is the way to ſaluation, let vs trauaile in it; it is the life of all thinges, let vs liue in it. Oh therefore you which are called, refuſe not to come; you which are liuing, lengthen your daies: you which can ſee, beholde the miſeries of your ioy; and you which haue legges to walke withall, bodies to liue withall; ſpace to returne; time to repent; leaſure to practiſe; ſoules to ſaue, or any grace of God within you; walke woorthie of ſaluation. You muſt not walke as other doe, for Chriſt is our patterne: you muſt not walke as the moſt doe, for the flocke of God is little; you muſt not walke as you haue done, for you muſt bee newe creatures: Walke in knowledge, for that will make you wiſe;

walke in faith, for that will make you zealous; walke in loue, that will make you Chriſtians; walke in cleanneſſe, that will make you ſaints; and walke in patience, for that will giue you the Lords kingdome. Be ſhod with preparation of the Goſpell of peace, and let your ſtrength bee encreaſed to goe on, from ſtep to ſtep, from vertue to vertue, from teare to teare, from trouble to trouble, from day to day, and from the death of this life, to the life of this death, for the Lords praiſe in his truth to our ioy in his kingdome.
            
            
               The eleuenth Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 12.
                  The vine is dried vp, and the figge tree is decaied: the pomegranate tree, and the apple tree, euen all the trees of the field are withered: ſurely the ioy is withered away from the ſonnes of men.
               
               THe prophet oftentimes, as we may ſee, telleth them one thing, the deſtruction and ouerthrowe of the fruits of their land, in the ſame words: and therfore groundeth ſtill the ſame exhortation, bidding them weepe and howle, mourne and lament, as if either he tooke pleaſure to ſing ſuch mournefull ſongs, or elſe to ſhewe vnto them that the ſorrowes of their harts muſt recouer the plentie of the land. And in dwelling thus long in the Lords iudgements, and their repentance, he teacheth vs how neceſſarie a thing it is to ſtand long on a good text, and neuer to be wearie of a good matter, although it be bitter to the taſte of our harts. It is a common thing in the word of God to repeate one thing often; and therefore Paul deſireth of the Corinthians, that it ſhould not be greeuous to heare the ſame things often: for we are of this nature, that many things we vnderſtand not, many things we remember not, ſometimes we giue that to a naturall cauſe, which belongeth to a diuine iudgement, and moſt times we little regarde

the heauenly oracles; for all theſe often repetitions are moſt neceſſarie. And let vs with often repetition, ioine ſome ſhew of earneſt affection, as Paul doth Phil. 3. 18. where he ſaith, of thoſe things I haue tolde you often, and now tell you weeping, &c. Many words, and many repetitions without notes of ſingular paſsion, are or at leaſt may ſeeme to bee friuolous; and therefore let this be the exerciſe of religious minds, when they are driuen to vſe againe thoſe admonitions which they once vſed, that their words ſhew their meaning, their iterations teſtifie their earneſtneſſe, and ſignes of griefe and ſorrowe expreſſe their affection: thus this prophet hath told his minde by word, and vrged the matter by repetition, and confirmed the thing by outward tokens. In this 12. verſe he bringeth in al other things which groweth on the earth, when hee nameth all the trees of the fielde, and more eſpecially the apple tree, the pomegranate tree, and the palme tree: whereby hee noteth, that not onely thoſe creatures which were good for nouriſhment were taken away, that the people ſhould haue no refuge in worldly confidence; but alſo that the outward ornaments of the earth, as the ground-growinggraſſe, the tall ſpringing-trees, which ſerued for comfort onely were deſtroied. Whereby in generall we obſerue: that there is not any thing ſo glorious or ſo comfortable, which the Lord hath created in the world, but for the ſinne of man he will deſtroy the ſame, as the prophet ſheweth at No creature but for same it ſhall be deſtroyed. large, Zeph. 1. 13, 17. If the earth were all golde, and the graſſe were all pearle, and the trees were all ſiluer, the fieldes were full of corne; yet would not the Lord ſpare any for all this. Oh my deere brethren, it is not the growing corne, nor the ſpringing graſſe, nor the goodly trees, nor the ſtately towers, nor the walled cities, nor the pleaſant apples, or the beautifull abundance of the world, that can ſtay the wrath of God from falling on vs; the horſe ſaueth not in battell, the armour defendeth not in fight, and riches cannot redeeme a ſoule: God which made all is not mooued

with any thing ſaue onely with righteouſneſſe and obedience, and to take vengeance of our diſobedience he ouerturneth and ouerthroweth all. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: firſt, becauſe he ſetteth more by his Reaſon 1. word then by all the works of his hands, Matt. 24. 35. the works of God can but ſhew him, but the word of God teacheth vs to come to him: and therefore ſeeing he careth for our ſaluation more then for the preſeruation of any of his creatures, he will not ſpare them becauſe they ſhew his glorie, or giue vs nouriſhment, but all things ſhall be confounded for the ſinne of man. Another reaſon is, becauſe for ſinne he ſpared not the angels, 2. Pet. 2. 4. and therefore 2 he will not ſpare the leſſer creatures: for the angels are the moſt glorious creatures of the world, who ſinning againſt God in the beginning, were caſt downe from heauen into eternall torments. Oh this ſhould much terrifie vs, which are lower then the angels, viler then the creatures, and more woorthie of death then all the works of God are of corruption: that al the world for our ſinne and ſake ſhould be euery day in danger of deſtruction. And ſeeing the angels being in heauen, found no place of mercie but preſent baniſhment and euerlaſting fire, how ſhould we come into heauen with our ſinnes, or thinke to eſcape on the earth? ſeeing the Lorde is as powerfull and wrathfull beneath among men, as he is aboue among angels. The vſes which ariſe from this doctrine are theſe: firſt, as we might hereby Vſe 1. gather an excellent argument to enforce the irefull wrath of God: ſo may we alſo learne by this, how miſerable is the eſtate of worldy men, which truſt in the things of this life, which ſhall be all deſtroied. Deut. 28. 52, 63. What do men that ſatisfie their luſtes, that gather their wealth, that enlarge their dominions, and other worldly things, as building of faire houſes, leauing monuments of their names to poſteritie? but heape vp a great deale of dry wood for the wrath of God to conſume them. Take them from their deſire, you take them from their god; pul them from their

profits, and you pull them from heauen: but the wealth which they haue gained ſhoulde ſerue their turnes, and their poſterities in this life, and afterward bee conſumed. This were but a tolerable eſtate, and to be endured: but alas the ruſt of that which they hoorded, the crie of that they miſgayned, the riot of that which they haue wickedly conſumed ſhall torment their liues in another worlde. Why doeſt thou worſhip thy goods in louing them more then God, bicauſe thou thinkeſt on thē more then on him? and why doſt thou trauaile for this worlde and the thinges thereof, with ſo inſatiable and greedy deſire? for if thou gaine them, thou gaineſt more burthens to thy life, and more woe to thy ſoule; if thou haue them, thou canſt not long keepe them; for death will part them and thee in ſunder, or vengeance will take them out of thy handes. Oh tell me I beſeech you, which care for your parts and portions in this life, what benefite haue you by louing them? nothing but feare to looſe them: what profite commeth by enioying them? nothing but labour to keep thē: what hurt is there by wanting them? nothing but a poore life and a peaceable death: the loue of theſe is the loſſe of heauen, and the lacke of theſe is the loue of God. Another vſe 2 which euerie one euen the wicked muſt make heereof, is the ſame which the Lorde exhorteth the Edomites vnto, Eſay 21. 14. Seeing their vines, and fruits, and corne, and all other things ſhall come to an ende, and be taken awaie with the wrath of God: therefore let euery one that hath them, giue them to the thirſtie for drinke, to the hungrie for meate, to the naked for cloth, and to the poore for maintenance. Oh, conſider what is our dutie, while as yet there is a little corne, and comfort to our lande; and deale with it as one woulde deale with his owne body, for anone it ſhall be taken by violence: therefore nowe beſtowe for deuotion, if wee tarrie but a little, vengeance will take them and vs: therefore let charitie diſpende them, what what are they but earth? if we deliuer not them, to earth

ſhall they come againe: Now they haue force to ſuccour our liues, and if we ſpende them not well, anone they will haue powre to ſubuert and condemne our ſoules.
               
                  Howe is ioy withered from the ſonnes of men: Nowe hee complaineth what this want hath wrought, when he ſaith; that ioy is withered away as mowen graſſe doth from his greeneneſſe; ſo this from the ſonnes of men, that is, the people of the lande: For we cannot bee ignorant that of all times of the yeere, there was moſt ſweete ſinging and pleaſant ſporting at the time of harueſt, as we reade Eſay 9. 5. bicauſe that then were the fruits reaped, and comfort receiued of men; but when theſe were deſtroyed, their vines had no grapes, their trees had no apples, and their fieldes had no corne: then I ſay was their mirth laide aſide into moſt ſolitarie and ſorrowfull mourning. By theſe words Worldly ſorrow a fearefull thing. note that the want of worldly comfort, and the feeling of worldly and carnall ſorrowe is a great and fearefull iudgement of God, Deut. 28. 63. If men ſee no ioy in their children, or comfort in their poſſeſsions, or profite by their labour, but in all theſe they are made more heauie and ſolitarie; and the Lorde taketh from them a cheerefull countenance; nay, if the fruites of the earth bee deſtroied, (as heere they were) ſo that there be none, euen then I ſay, although there be none occaſion of ioy but all of ſorrowe to be tormented with griefe, bicauſe we haue not to ſupplie our liues, is fearefull in the ſight of God. We cannot (I grant) but ſorrow, when we haue none occaſion ofioy: but yet we ought to make our griefe a godly ſorrowe, and the feare of famine to be the feare of condemnation: for this ſhoulde we weepe, that howſoeuer theſe thinges goe with vs in this life, the other may be certaine in the life to come. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe; Firſt, bicauſe it cauſeth death. 2. Cor. 7. 7. 10. Worldly ſorrow cauſeth death: Reaſon 1. for as the fire waſteth the woode, and the ſunne conſumeth the froſt, ſo doth carnall care eate vp the life of man. Somtimes theſe ſorrowfull worldlings are raging with enuie,

ſometimes ouercome with malice, and many times at their wits ende through couetouſneſſe: ſo that the beautifull waxe pale therwith, the luſtie and ſtrong man is weakned, they which were pleaſant are heauie, and they which ſeemed godly are made wicked. This worldly ſorrowe made Achitophell that wiſe man to hang himſelfe; and Saule that ſtrong man to kill himſelfe; and Zimrie that wicked king to burne himſelfe: for the Lorde ſuffered many to fall into it, that they might deſpaire of his mercie, and be excluded from his kingdome. Oh therefore, whoſoeuer will ſhewe any care of his owne ſoule, or any account of Chriſtes woundes, let him meddle little in worldly buſineſſe: keepe in the boundes of thy vocation, and range not into much dealing, and many trades and occupations, for thou doſt but thruſt thy ſoule into danger: and a thouſande to one but thou wilt repent in teares & bloud, thy ouerreaching policie. Another reaſon of this doctrine 2 is, bicauſe it is a deere, and not the leaſt bleſsing of God, to reioyce in thy poſſeſsions, be they ſmall or great, Eccle. 5. 8. and therefore, it is not the leaſt curſe of God to be troubled and tormoiled therewith. What beaſt being in a good paſture doth not reioyce in it; or what birde hauing but a twigge to ſit on, doth not ſing in the ſunny mornings of the ſpring? and wilt thou being a man or woman bee woorſe then birde or beaſt? not to reioyce in the bleſsings of God towardes thee. Augustine telleth of one Paulinus, that when hee had loſt all his goods, hee was ſo farre from being ſorrowfull, that this was his praier, O Lord thou knowest where all my goods are treaſured: Take not then to heart euery worldly croſſe; art thou a husbandman, and haſt loſt thy corne? art thou a merchant, and haſt ſuffered ſhipwracke? art thou a trauailer, and haſt beene ſpoiled by robbers? art thou a widowe, and haſt loſt both husbande and wealth? yet take not ſorrowe to thy hart, ſleepe from thy eies, peace from thy life, beautie from thy face, nor comfort from thy ſoule. From hence wee learne to make

many profitable vſes, whereof this may be one, that ſeeing Veſ 1. worldly and carnall ſorrowe is ſuch a wofull iudgement of God, therefore moſt miſerable is the eſtate of worldly wicked men: if they pray in it they cannot be heard, Eſay 16. 12. If they will embrace the Goſpell, the worlde will not let them, and therefore this ſorrowe doth torment them, Luk. 18. 23. Oh, where wil they now become? Good men being ſorrowfull are comforted by praier, Lamen. 5. but euill men although they vſe the ſame wordes, and lift vp their voices and weepe, and woulde teare their heartes out of their breaſtes, and giue as much to God for ioy, as the diuell would haue giuen Chriſt for worſhip; yet their worme ſhall euer gnaw them, and ioy ſhall neuer come at thē: though they change their mindes as Laban did Iacobs wages, to encreaſe his flocke; yet ſhall they ſtill decreaſe, and not preuaile as Labans did; if they thinke as the Syrians did, that the hilles be not for them, and therefore they will deſcend into the valleyes, there euen there alſo ſhall they be deſtroied. Conſider this I beſeech you, who in this world minde nothing but ioy, and feare nothing but ſorrow, and thinke that your feare ſhall come vpon you. Doe you imagine that your wealth ſhall continue your mirth? no, no, ſaid Salomon, that is but vanitie and vexation of ſpirite: or doe you ſuppoſe that your harts are Stoicall, made of ſtones, and therefore nothing ſhall diſmay you, but you will take all things without griefe? oh conſider that God ſhall bring this iudgement vpon you for other ſinnes: there is no counſell againſt the almightie. What will you nowe do? and where can you hide your ſelues, that God may not finde you? cannot he which made a hard rocke a running ſtreame, ſtrike alſo your harde harts, and make your liues and eies as full of teares and ſorrowes, as the wilderneſſe flowes full of water? Yes, yes, with no labour ſhall he, and will he plague your liues, encreaſe your pangs, multiplie your ſorrowes, caſt downe your comforts: and therefore caſt away your euill conditions. Another vſe may be this,

that we take no thought or vexing care for the things of this life. Luc. 12. 23, 34. Our Sauiour Chriſt which was the richeſt that euer was, became the pooreſt that euer coulde bee; and therefore giueth this counſell, that wee take not thought for foode or raiment: who ſhould take care if the poore take not care? and yet our Sauiour a poore man, biddeth both poore and rich, not to vexe themſelues for theſe earthly commodities. Relie therefore vpon the word of our Sauiour, I am ſure thou wilt truſt him, when he ſaid, I came to ſaue ſinners: and thou wilt beleeue him when he ſaid, he was the ſonne of God; therefore doe not diſtruſt him in his promiſe, but take no thought for thy life, eſpecially ſuch a care as ſhould bee a hinderance vnto thee in thy ſpirituall duties. Why doſt thou labour when thou ſhouldeſt pray? why doſt thou trauell when thou ſhouldeſt heare? why doeſt thou wearie thy bodie, when thou ſhouldeſt reſt thy ſoule in the ſweete armes and woundes of a mercifull Sauiour? If God doe but breath on thy labour, it conſumeth it; if he curſe the worke of thy hands it vaniſheth; and when it is gone, where is thy labour and trauell, and worke and ioy, and comfort and hope, but all in the fire. Followe therefore thy labour with godlineſſe, and follow godlineſſe with labour, ioyne theſe two together, as Simeon and Iudah ioined to driue the Canaanites out of the lande, Iudg. 1. 7, 8. and ſo ſhall not Canaan but heauen be thy ſure reſting rode and euer abiding inheritance. Let not rich men lay vp too much, and buy and ſell all for gaines: why you haue learned a meane in religion, and will you neuer learne a meane in riches? oh that your riches were godlineſſe, and godlineſſe your riches, that your labour which is now but loſt, might bee beſtowed on that foode and wealth, and land and life which neuer ſhall end. Another doctrine which ariſeth out of theſe wordes, when hee ſaith that ioy is parted or withered from the ſonnes of men is this, whereby hee giueth them to vnderſtand, that thoſe which will not humble themſelues, ſhall

be humbled whether they will or no. The nature of man If we humble not our wils, God will humble them againſt our will. being plentifully ſtored with all manner of benefites, neuer thinketh of a day of vengeance, but imagineth that his peaceable eſtate ſhall bee for euer: therefore the Lord willing to ſhewe vs our vaine hope, and tranſitorie fading pleaſures, taketh away from vs thoſe comfortes which wee were woont to receiue by the vſe of his bleſſings, and changeth our merrie daies into ſorrowfull deſtinies. We haue a notable example hereof in Dan. 5. 3, 6, 22, 23. Belſhazzar that proude Babylonian king, cared not for the miſerable captiuitie wherein he detained the people of Iſrael, there was no conſcience of his ſinne, no pitie on his priſoners, no feare of the Lordes maieſtie, no thought of true humilitie, but all to maintaine the pride of a prince; and therefore harken what befell him. At that time when he was at his banket, in the middeſt of his ruffe with all earthly delights, the hand of God appeered, and wrote on the wall the ſentence of his depriuation; and this was becauſe hee had not humbled himſelfe before in the time of his proſperitie; and then followed a fearefull hart, a ſorrowfull ſoule, an vnquiet minde, and a miſerable ende: Euen ſo if we caſt not downe our ſelues before aduerſitie come, trouble ſhall come and caſt downe vs. Harken vnto this you rich men and women, in this world; ſay not to your ſelues, that you will be merrie while you may; but rather be ſorrie while you may be ioyfull: nowe faſt while you haue abundance; now pray while you are in health; now weepe while God may be entreated; and now afflict your ſoules while your comfort remaineth: for ſurely if you continue in your pleaſant poſſeſsions and worldly diſports, will you nill you the Lord will humble you. And were you not better to weepe for your ſinnes in your proſperitie, then to weepe in aduerſitie for the loſſe of children, of goods, or health, or houſes, or wiues, or husbandes, or friends, or libertie, or foode, or raiment, or death, and not be comforted: remember what the prophet heere ſaith,

that ioy ſhall be withered from you in the daies of worldly aduerſitie. The reaſons of this doctrine may bee theſe: Reaſon 1. firſt, becauſe they are not moued at the troubles of others, Amos. 6. 6. If men looke to themſelues they ſhall ſee that their eſtate is neuer ſo ſecure, but that there is left vnto them one iuſt cauſe or other to lament bitterly; yet if they finde none in themſelues, let them looke on other, and mourne for the affliction of Ioſeph: The church of God is neuer freed from inward and outward troubles, and therefore euer hath occaſion of inwarde or outwarde lamentation. Now ſeeing that we ſhould mourne with them that mourne, let vs weepe with the ſaintes of God that ſuffer (although wee ſuffer not,) that being made partakers of their afflictions, we may alſo bee made partakers of their glorie. It is a token of an vnmercifull hart, that doth not looke on the crie of a beaſt, and helpe an vnreaſonable creature from his oppreſſour: howe much more vnmercifull are wicked men, which will not bee mooued at the lamentable teares of godly men? He that ſtoppeth his eare at the crie of the poore, ſhall crie himſelfe and not be heard: In like maner thoſe which will not be humbled for their owne ſinnes & dangers belonging to them, nor for the pittifull oppreſsion of good and godly men, they ſhall come into vnauoidable miſchiefes, bicauſe they were not mooued in proſperitie: for the righteous (ſaith Salomon) ſhall come out of trouble; but the wicked ſhall come in his ſteade. Another reaſon is becauſe men which 2 haue fat and hard harts, do not onely liue in their pride; but alſo deſire to draw other into miſerie, Pſal. 137. 2. 8. The Edomites that reioyced, and encreaſed the calamitie of the people of God, are deſtinated to eternall and moſt aſſured aduerſities: wherein we may ſee that if men do not winne themſelues to the church, they ioyne themſelues to the enimies: if they take not part with the repentant, they take part with the vnrepentant: For if we be not poſſeſſed with goodnes, of neceſsitie wee muſt bee profeſſed in euill. Oh

therefore ſeeing we cannot walke in any meane betwixt faith and infidelitie, religion and Atheiſme; let vs ſpeedily reſort to the bande and army of Ieſus Chriſt: for if he finde vs not among his ſouldiers, he will take vs for his enimies, although we fight not againſt him; and if we ioine not with the armie of God, the diuell will take vs vp for to be of the companie of accurſed creatures. The vſes which ariſe from this doctrine are theſe, firſt let vs iudge our ſelues, that wee Vſe 1. be not iudged of the Lord, 1. Cor. 11. 31. If our eſtate be ſo miſerable that we cannot auoide iudgement; yet the Lord hath ſhewed vs a meane to mitigate our extremitie: if we be but our owne iudges. Abigaijl by condemning her husbands hardnes, pacified Dauids wrath, and ſaued her whole family from the ſword of vengeance: And the Syrians by putting halters on their necks, & comming willingly to the king of Iſraell, ſaued all their liues. Oh with whom haue we to do, with meeke king Dauid, or with mercifull Ahab? No, no, but with the father of vs all, who is king of heauen and earth, whoſe loue towarde vs is more tender then the loue of a mother, and more ſure then the faith of a friende, and more kinde then the bande of the married. Let vs therefore be Abigaijles, by offering our liues and our wealth, accuſing our ſelues and our natures vnto the Lord of hoſtes: and then will he bleſſe vs as Dauid bleſſed Abigaile, yea and marrie vs to his owne ſelfe. Ariſe out of your reſting places, and goe with ful ſtore to appeaſe the wrath of God: if you ſtay till he come vnto you, what ſhall be your ende? Oh what ſhall be your deſtruction? Now accuſe your birth (though it be noble) as ſtayned with ſinne, accuſe your life (though it be chriſtian) as defiled with the diuell, accuſe your wordes (though they be humble) as ſauouring of euill, and condemne your workes (though they haue beene charitable) as deſiring death eternall. Iudge your ſelues worthie of all ſhame, becauſe of pride; accompt your ſelues woorthie of all ſorrow, becauſe of mirth: eſteeme your ſelues leſſe then all creatures, becauſe

of death; and profeſſe your ſelues woorſe then all men, becauſe of ſinne. Say of your nature that it is Sathans bondſlaue: ſay of your beautie, that it is the glaſſe of iniquitie: ſay of your ſtrength, that it is the power to euill: ſay of your youth, that it is the time of ſorrow: ſay of your wealth, they are the prouokers of licentiouſnes; and ſay of the world, it is the bed of danger. What ſhall I ſay more vnto you? Was not Chriſt made accurſed for vs? that we might know that we are curſed for our ſelues. Then think how your eies are curſed beholding vanitie; your eares are curſed, hearing falſhood; your toongs are curſed, ſpeaking lies; your legges are curſed, running to euill; your armes curſed, touching pleaſures; your children curſed, borne in ſinne: yea thinke all accurſed, that your ſoules be not curſed in another world. Another vſe of this doctrine may 2 ſerue to reprooue their ſecuritie, that thinke it is lawfull for them to be mery while they may, and neuer to enter into the houſe of mourning, till their mirth and ioy departeth from them; and from hence it commeth, that they put far away from them the day of wrath. Amo. 6. 3. Children are ſuffered to be wanton becauſe their yeeres are tender: youth is permitted to bee licentious, becauſe their age is luſtie: rich men are mooued with vanitie, becauſe it is their portion: poore men accuſtomed with folly, becauſe they liue in want; and old men drowned in one kinde of ſuperſtition or other, becauſe they are neere their graues. Oh would not this grieue the heart of man, to ſee ſo many, ſo great, ſo aged, ſo wealthie, ſo tender to abhorre all mortification, and the ſorrowfull way to life; but to embrance all condemnation, and the ioyfull high way to hell fire. Know you not that eaſe ſlayeth the fooliſh, and the reſtie oxe is prepared for the ſlaughter? why then do you thirſt ſtill for more pleaſure, and hunger after more vanitie? Man muſt not liue by bread onely, which maketh him full fedde, and thorough fat; but by the word of God which maketh him many times to faſt, being ſweeter then his meate, and many

times to be leane, being ſafer then his health. Who is he that accounteth not abſtinence a God preſeruatiue for health, and labour an earneſt procurer of a good life: euen ſo there is none, but muſt thinke that it is moſt neceſſarie for health, and moſt wholeſome for life many times; yea, (if it can be) moſt times to caſt away ioy, to put away paſtime, to depart from mirth, to ſtop thy eares from muſick, and thy heart from laughter, giuing ouer fooliſh and vnlawfull ieſting, merie and pleaſant friends and companions, and ſo enter into a deepe conſideration of thy ſinnes, and dangers and troubles, and life and death, that it may worke an exceeding lamentation for all thy ſinnes. Remember Moſes, which forſooke the court of all Pharaohs diſports, to liue among his poore brethren, which daily laboured in making bricke, gathering ſtaw, and bearing many a heauy burthen: and ſo if we ſhould be exerciſed in a voluntarie and willing ſubmiſsion vnto teares and weeping, ſorrowes and lamenting croſſes, and enduring afflictions; we ſhall kill the hearts of many ſinnes, and ſtop the breath of many euils, and auoide the danger of many troubles. Better it is, ſaith Peter, to ſuffer for well dooings, then for euill: now when in the feare of God we chaſtice our ſelues, we ſuffer for well doing; but if we tarrie till famine, or warre, or ſickenes, or pouertie, or age, or death, then we ſuffer for our ſins; as a thiefe, or murtherer for his robbing and killing.
            
            
               The twelfth Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 13.
                  Girde your ſelues and lament, yee priestes: howle yee miniſters of the altar, &c.
               
               THe exhortations to the people being finiſhed, the prophet goeth on to the prieſtes and giueth them a ſpeciall direction, how to behaue themſelues in this time of dearth and famine. And this part as hath bin alreadie

declared, is contayned in this chap. and in the ſecond wherein he putteth thē in mind of their duties, which may be reduced to theſe generall heads, & particular members. Firſt, he exhorteth them to a farther humiliation, & giueth reaſon for the ſame, verſ. 13. as that they ſhould be girded with ſackcloth vnto lamentation: Secondly, that they ſhould bee all night long in ſorrowing for the ſame, afterward in this chapter he biddeth them ſanctifie a faſt, verſ. 14. and in the ſecond chapter, verſ. 1. he biddeth them ſhew the people their woefull danger. For the faſt he telleth them how it ſhould bee ſolemnized, namely with all the people in the houſe of God: Secondly, with praier, and the forme or example to pray by, is deſcribed, verſ. 15. and ſo to the end of the chapter. Firſt, when he calleth vnto the prieſts to be farther humbled, whom alreadie he had ſaid to be mourning and lamenting for this matter, verſ. 9. hee thereby giueth vs to vnderſtand, that there are none ſo forward in any good action, but they haue neede of a farther None ſo for ward in religion, but they may be exhorted farther. prouocation, and may receiue good inſtruction, to proceed in their godly enterpriſe. For this cauſe the Apoſtle, 2. Peter 1. 12. telleth the faithfull in his time, that he would neuer be negligent to put them in minde of their duetie, although they had knowledge and were confirmed in the truth. The which thing may reprooue many in our daies, which will not abide any wholeſome word of exhortation: eſpecially there are in the miniſterie, thoſe which hauing rare gifts and great learning, and therefore deſpiſe both men and meanes, which ſhall any way put them in minde of their duetie; thinking it a diſgrace to their perſons if any of the inferiour ſort ſhall note vnto them their ſlips and infirmities. But Peter had more modeſtie which eaſily yeelded to the reproofe of Paul. Would God that men were as much aſhamed to commit euill or omit goodnes, as they are to be blamed for any default: and it were to bee wiſhed that they would as hardly abide the temptation of their enimie the diuell; as they will the reprehenſion of

their moſt chriſtian friends. Againe, we haue many which haue a little ſhew of religion, and an vnprofitable forme of ſeruing God, the which thinke all knowledge is lapped in their braines, and all holines practiſed in their liues; and therefore they deſpiſe ſermons and preachers, reading and hearing, conuerſion and repentance, and will ſay flatly they haue enough alreadie, and therefore will receiue no more. Againſt thoſe let the exhortation of this Prophet, and the example of theſe prieſts preuaile; that they may both either ſhame them for their folly, or reclaime them for their ſtubbornnes. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe, Firſt Reaſon 1. becauſe it is a true token, that we are the Lords when we are exhorted to farther righteouſnes, Ioh. 15. 3. ſo that on the other ſide it is a fearefull ſigne that wee are none of his, when we ſtop our eares and harden our hearts, againſt the exhortations of the godly miniſters: wherfore let them which with Peter and Iohn would haue heauen to be on the earth, and make a dwelling for their faith on a worldly mount, inſtead of heauēly Sion: let them I ſay, know that as the deſire of the apoſtles could not be performed in this life ſo in this life although they haue clymed vp neuer ſo great hils of knowledge, and ſecret hidden myſteries, and haue ſeene the graces of God as plainely, as they ſawe Elias and Moſes: yet muſt they come downe againe, and labour to goe further before they come to heauen. But me thinkes the earneſt conſideration of this point, ſhould make vs all more earneſtly to thirſt after our ſpirituall gaine of godlines, and neuer to giue ouer till all our vices are remooued, all our vncleannes purged, and all our wickednes forgotten. Doe we not ſee how the earth after one ſhowre of raine, thirſteth for another? and ſo following euery yeere; euen ſo exhortations and reprehenſions are like ſhowres of raine, to make our hearts to beare fruit: the which wee ſhould deſire for the loue of more holines, as the earth deſireth for the encreaſe of more fruitfulnes. Another reaſon 2 is, becauſe it is a notable aſſurance vnto a mans ſoule

when he beareth exhortation, & increaſeth in knowledge, that he hath taſted of the goodnes and grace of God, 1. Pet. 2. 3. A yoong childe taſting his mothers milke, groweth thereby: a ſicke man taſting his phiſitions potion, is ſtrengthened thereby, and deſireth more phiſicke, and more meat; and therefore if wee can deſire to bee more righteous, more holy, more faithfull, more zealous, and more carefull of good things: we may be aſſured that our ſoules are in good and perfect health. But alas how many faile herein which taſte, but finde no reliſh in the graces of God, and ſuffer the moſt wholeſome foode of their ſoules to periſh in their ſtomacks: they had rather eate the graſſe of their own gathering, then the meat of the Lords prouiding. Stolne bread is ſwete vnto them, that is, that which is forbidden them they delight in; but that which is commaunded and allowed them, they cannot away with: they loue better to liue in one forbidden ſinne, then to liue in a thouſand commanded and authorized vertues. From this doctrine we may make theſe vſes, Firſt ſeeing there is none ſo holy and ſo good in this world, but he hath neede of more holines and goodnes: then it followeth that it is a moſt Vſe 1. wretched thing to goe backeward, and to ceaſe from being righteous; for this cauſe the bleſſed ſeruant of God exhorted, Reuel. 22, 11. Let him which is righteous be righteous ſtill; ſhew therefore if thou haue euer obtayned any mercie of God in the knowledge of the Goſpell, retaine the ſame for euermore. If euer thou haddeſt any diſlike of prophanneſſe, any hatred of euill, any conſcience of goodnes, and any deſire of mortification; that thou diddeſt euer abhor vaine ſports, fooliſh words, wicked works, vnprofitable members, godles companions, and truthleſſe ſuperſtitions, continue ſo minded for euermore: but as thou haſt beene iuſt, ſo abide righteous. The ſheepe once blacke or white, neuer chaungeth colour; the veſſell once ſeaſoned, neuer looſeth ſweetnes; and the ſoule once ſanctified, neuer forſaketh holines. Be not vnſauourie ſalt, be

not vnſtedfaſt winde, be not a fooliſh builder, and be not a curſed backeſlider. Call not the truth once beloued, into queſtion, but fight for it as for life: receiue not the filthines once baniſhed, but flye from it as from death. Loue not that ſinne which once thou hatedſt, leaſt all other ſinnes become ſuiters for thy ſoule. Goe out of vanitie and ignorance, and hypocriſie, and ſecuritie, as Lot went out of Sodome, and neuer looke ſo much as backe vpon them. Deſtroy vtterly the citie and dwelling of Sathan in thy ſoule, as Ioſhua deſtroyed Ierico, and curſe them that builde it againe: follow all the examples of all the godly; Paule once conuerted, neuer reuoked; Peter once ſtrengthened, neuer more halted; Oneſimus once reconciled to his maſter, neuer ranne from him any more. And ſo ſeeing thou canſt ſay I haue heard ſermons, I haue loued prayer, I haue harboured the ſaintes, I haue hated dauncing, tabling, carding, vſuring, ſwearing, lying, ſtealing, and all other abhominations: oh wallow not againe in that filthy mire but continue righteous to the end. Alas, alas, as the eies of man cannot weepe enough, for the backeſliders; ſo the toong of man cannot ſpeake enough of their accurſed apoſtaſie: ſome fall to pouertie, ſome to ſecuritie, ſome to vanitie, ſome to open impiety, ſom into hereſie, ſome into ſchiſme, ſome into the world, ſome into the fleſh, and all of theſe into hel: and thus they goe away as Gedeons ſouldiers which were at the firſt 21000. but in the end they were but 300. Might Rahel weepe bicauſe Herod kilde her children, and may not the church weepe becauſe the diuell killeth her children? Well, woe be to him for his malice, and woe be to them for their backſliding. Secondly, ſeeing wee all 2 neede encouragement vnto good things, let vs not onely bee exhorted but aſſured, that the preſence of God ſhall aſsiſt vs. When Zerubabel and Iehoſhua were ſtirred by the prophet to finiſh the temple of God, the Lorde promiſed his preſence to aſsiſt them, Hag. 2. 5. and his ſpirite to remaine with them: Now marke who are exhorted, but the

prince or chiefe gouernour, and the prieſt or chiefe biſhop, and all the people of the land: let vs not therefore feare to enter into a farther reformation of our ſelues, and doubt nothing but the Lord ſhall finiſh our buildings. We are not Babel and the builders thereof, what neede wee feare confuſion? we are not Saul, what neede we deſpaire of victorie? we are not Achitophel, we will not diſtruſt our counſell: we are not Iudas, why ſhould we vndoe our ſelues for our ſinnes? If we haue deferred our repentance and amendment, and ran away from God as Ionah did, yet being called againe, let vs goe boldly to the Niniueh of our owne ſoules, and preach the fearefull curſe of God againſt ſinne. The Lord came to Abraham in the plaine of Mamre ſitting in his tent, and there promiſed him a ſonne: why ſhould we not be perſwaded, that when we are in meditating on any goodneſſe, and louing any rightcouſneſſe, and aduenturing any holy buſineſſe, but the Lorde will come vnto vs and promiſe vs life eternall. Therefore my deere brethren and ſiſters, aduenture farre for the religion of your ſoules, and knowe that he ſhall goe with you to helpe you to your wiſh: feare not any power, for he is omnipotent; nor any enimie, for he is your ſhield; nor any ſubtiltie, for he is your wiſedome; nor any want, for he is your ſufficiencie; nor any conſtancie, for hee neuer changeth; nor any death, for he is your life. Beleeue that you cannot conceiue, vnderſtand that you cannot ſee, beare that burden which he giueth you, abide that ſorrow that he ſendeth you, and practiſe that goſpell which hee hath taught you. Pray for repentance, and faith, and knowledge, and zeale, and obedience, and holineſſe, and life eternall: for the Lord is in thine owne ſoule, and feare not, he will giue it thee. Girde your ſelues. Againe out of theſe wordes, wherein the prophet biddeth the prieſtes to be girded to lamentation, that is, to be throughly prepared, and to put on ſackcloth, that is, all outward and inward teſtimonie of ſorrow, and to lie all night before the Lord, that is, to endure

any paine and labour to be reconciled to God. Out of the which I might note as many doctrines as words: as firſt that vpon good counſell and godly meditation, men muſt come to lament their miſeries before God; not raſhly nor rauingly, nor furiouſly, but with a godly preparation. Againe, that the miniſters in any common danger muſt more earneſtly be humbled then any other. Againe, ſeeing he calleth for ſuch ſorrow and ſuch continuance thereof, he thereby noteth, that if God be once angrie, we muſt vſe all meanes that can bee found to appeaſe him, though it coſt our ſweeteſt health, and our deereſt blood. But I will ſpecially All muſt be throughly humbled in a common praier for a common miſerie. obſerue this doctrine, that all both miniſter and people when they come to entreate for the remoouing of the Lord hand, muſt be ſure that they be throughly humbled, Nehem. 1. 4. their cauſe muſt be well pondered and weighed, their mindes muſt bee well prepared and perſwaded, their liues muſt be moſt zealouſly reformed, and their continuance in their humiliation muſt be moſt inſtantly and inuiolably obſerued. I haue obſerued a great defect in the humiliation of many in the time of our late calamities of famine, and warre, and plague, when we were caſt downe before the Lord. For men would come to theſe exerciſes, from tauernes and alehouſes, from ſhops & other buſines, no otherwiſe prepared then at another common time: againe, the notes of their pride in apparell, and all brauerie & fond expences they brought with them, and came more like plaiers then mourners into the Lords houſe; and alſo they were quickly wearie, for ſome would neuer tarrie till the end: and other if they once came, they neuer came more. And ſurely theſe were too euident ſignes, that wee were not throughly humbled; and therefore no maruell though the plague preuailed on ſo many, and the famine hath continued ſo long. Oh that therefore this exhortation of the prophet might worke a newe and often remembrance of vnfained humilitie before the Lord, when wee euer meete againe about the like occaſion: and this I

would haue practiſed both in priuate and publike humiliation. The reaſons that may mooue vs vnto this dutie to be throughly humbled, are theſe: firſt, becauſe the Lorde Reaſon 1. will not looke on our aduerſitie, without this perfect and abſolute contrition. Iſa. 58. 3. for he then eſpecially looketh to the inwarde diſpoſition of euery ſoule, to ſee who they be which tremble at his word and iudgements; and they which then will not nor cannot, there is little hope of grace and goodneſſe in them. The heathen king of Niniueh and all his ſubiects had that conſcience, when the Lord ſounded their deſtruction by the prophet Ionah; Ahab mourned when he heard the words of Elijah the prophet; and when God ſpeaketh to the Aſſyrians and Moabites, he biddeth them come downe into the duſt and aſhes to lament their miſeries. Alas why doe I rehearſe either precepts or examples to mooue men vnto this which they would not doe, for if their owne liues and bloud, and ſoules will not prouoke them hereunto, other mens waies will not perſwade them: yet let them thus conſider, that it will greeue them more to looſe this their counterfeite humilitie, as the Iewes doe in the forenamed place, when they ſhall ſay, we faſted, we praied, we trauelled, and we deſired to iuſtifie our ſoules; and yet their faſt ſhall be as vanitie, their praier abhomination, and their comming into the Lords preſence, like his which had no wedding garment, and therefore was hee, and ſo ſhall they bee caſt into vtter darkneſſe. Another reaſon is this, becauſe that thoſe iudgements which call for this humiliation, muſt teach vs righteouſneſſe, 2 
                  Eſa. 26. 9. and ſo we encreaſe in righteouſneſſe, as we exceede in humilitie; and for this cauſe we muſt know, that the more religion a man hath, the more humble he is, and the more hee ſaith hee encreaſeth in goodneſſe, the more he muſt ſtudie to ſhew it outwardly. As for thoſe which thinke they ſerue God well enough, when they neither pray with their toongs, nor bende with their knees, nor vncouer their heads, nor mooue out of their houſes, I

leaue them to their fancies, & let euery beaſt & bird of the aire confute their fancies: for the Lord which hath aſsigned euery member his office, will haue euery one to execute it himſelfe. The vſes which offer themſelues by the Vſe 1. conſideration of this point, are theſe, ſeeing we muſt bee throughly humbled, therefore let vs auoide all manner of idleneſſe in this worſhip of God, Iam. 2. 19. when we are once perſwaded of this point, we ſhall not onely lende an eare to this buſineſſe, but thinke all time too little that we ſpend not herein. The poore ſaintes of God in that forenamed place, crie in the night watches, as theſe prieſtes which lay all night in lamentation: and ſo when the feare of the Lords wrath and the conſcience of our owne dangers doe once meete together, then there is not any thing that will bee ſo acceptable to vs as praier. This feare will driue from vs our ſleepe, as the windes driue away the cloudes, the ſicke man will ſit vp, the olde man will holde vp his hands, the weake man will ſtand for his life, the woman will weepe without ceaſing, and euery one ſo touched will auoide all worldly actions; then will, or rather then muſt the rich man forſake his counting houſe, the farmer leaue his plough, the ſeruant auoide his reſt, the labourer neglect his meate, and the drowſie perſon hold vp his eies. All the Apoſtles ſlept till the high prieſtes ſeruants came to take our Sauiour, but then they awaked & fled for their liues; but why did they not wake before in praier, that thē they might haue ſlept without danger? oh let vs therefore come both great & ſmall, to appeere in the Lords preſence with al diligence: let not any long iourney, any lack of prouiſion, any loue of eaſe, any loſſe of health make vs idle. Riſe early to praier, watch late to lament, ſleepe little, that thou maiſt ſpende the more time to gaine thy ſoules health. In the day we labour for our bodies, in the night let vs labour for our ſoules. My ſoule (ſaith Dauid) thinketh on thee in the night watches: and ſo let our ſoules thinke on the Lord, when other thinke on their reſt and their pleaſure. Another

vſe which commeth by this conſideration is this, that 2 ſeeing we muſt be throughly humbled, or not at all, let vs take for our example the paterne of them that mourne for the dead, as the prophet exhorteth, Ierem. 6. 26. How many are the teares of them which looſe their louing huſbands, their tender children, and their loyal friendes; Iacob for feare of this ſaid before hand, it woulde make his hoare head goe downe into the graue. But ſo ſlight is the mourning of many among vs, that they neither wette their cheekes for their ſinnes, nor yet would willingly depart with this life, for the enioying of the life to come. Surely this is woorthy to be noted in them which earneſtly lament the dead, that they deſire to be with them; ſo let vs deſire to be free of this feare of death and ſinne, with the death of our ſinnes and liues: let vs ſo bitterly bewaile our time, as we may be moſt willing to change our life, for no other cauſe then to ceaſe from ſinne. The Iſraelites bewailed Moſes thirtie daies together, and let vs with great and long continuance, mourne not for Moſes who is in heauen, but for our ſelues who would be in heauen. When Naomy bid her daughters Ruth and Orpah goe backe into Moab, they wept at her words: if they were ſo vnwilling to liue in Moab, and to depart with Naomi; why are not wee as vnwilling to liue in this world, and to depart with Chriſt, ſeeing he is our head, and we his members; we muſt goe to him, and he may not come to vs? let vs therefore by his example endure many ſorrowes and great dangers, that we may be more willing to leaue this life. The theefe incloſed in the priſon ceaſeth from ſtealing; and when wee are cloſed in iaile of many griefes, and clogged with the irons of many croſſes, then let vs know that we ceaſe from many externall and internall abhominations. Yee miniſters of my God. In this that hee calleth the prieſtes which ſerued at the altar, the miniſters of God: he thereby giueth Miniſters are onely the Lords ſeruants. vs to vnderſtand whoſe poſſeſsion are the miniſters, namely and onely the Lords, Num. 3. 12. The Lord challengeth

the tribe of Leui to himſelfe, to be his peculiar and royall prieſthood: and the Apoſtle willeth the Corinthians that they ſhould ſo thinke of him, as of the miniſter of God, and diſpoſer of the ſecrets of his kingdome: and therefore writing to the Galathians, hee telleth them hee is not by man, nor by the will of man, but of God. Once in ſteede of the appointed miniſterie were the firſt borne of euery familie, and they ſacrificed and none elſe; but they altered, and it came to one tribe, and they alſo were abrogated; and ſo it came to men approoued in the church, who are deemed the ſpeciall portion of the Lord in this world. And ſurely if the ſeruants of Salomon, were bleſſed that hearde his wiſedome, and waited in his court, they are much more bleſſed which waite in the Lords houſe, and heare and ſee the ſecrets of the kingdome of heauen. It is therefore a moſt fearefull thing to aduance any vnto this to bee the Lords ſeruant, who is not woorthy to ſit in the chaire of Moſes; and there is no reaſon why they ſhoulde miniſter in the church which are not woorthie to be the porters of the doore. Surely the prophanenes of many in theſe places is ſo great and ſo damnable, that beſides the iniuries done to Chriſt, many run headlong into hell, thorough the euill example of their paſtours. The Lords ſeruants followe their maiſter in holineſſe, and not the world in lewdneſſe; they looke to the ſoules, but theſe waite for the fleeces; they preach vpon conſcience, theſe doe it for faſhion; they preach onely the truth, but theſe bring the fire of poetrie, philoſophie, and ſuch like to the altar of God: to conclude, they bee the helpers vnto faith, but theſe quench their owne giftes, and keepe other from pure knowledge. The Reaſon 1. reaſons are theſe, becauſe the whole life of the miniſter muſt be onely exerciſed in ſpirituall & heauenly matters, Act. 6. 2. 4. The apoſtles would conſent to nothing which was not conſonant to their miniſterie, or that might any waies hinder the ſame: And for this cauſe the Lord hath ſo prouided, that they ſhould be exempted from all worldly

buſineſſe, and receiue their maintenance from other, not onely for themſelues, but for their children and families. The which thing conſidered would aduertiſe a number of vs, that wee which warre ſhould not entangle our ſelues with the things of this life; we ſhould neuer giue ouer our ſeruice, for that is nothing elſe but to forſake God; wee muſt neuer cauſe our ſinnes to make vs be thruſt out of the miniſterie, for that will exclude vs from heauen: wee muſt neuer bee idle and vnprofitable ſeruants in our miniſterie, for that will worke our curſe; and wee muſt neuer be wearie of our places, for that will weaken and leſſen our giftes. But alas once there might come no raſor on the miniſters heads, but now adaies heads and beards and all are powled: if wee ſhoulde not nowe looke to our owne maintenance, wee might ſoone want ſuſtenaunce, and our children are eaſily ſuffered to begge, though their parents haue well deſerued of the Church of God. Another reaſon is, becauſe none may offer them any violence, 2 but the Lorde accounteth it his owne, Exod. 16. 8. and hee ſaith by the prophet Dauid, Touch not mine annointed, and doe my prophets no harme. How deſperate is the caſe of all men, who are daily by wordes and deedes reuiling the miniſters of the goſpell, and thinke themſelues happy if they can giue a prieſt a deadly blowe by their enuenomed toong. Truely I will ſay our owne ſinnes were the cauſe of all this; yet if the kiſſe of Iudas was ſo mortally puniſhed, theſe mens (not kiſſes, but wounds, not with lips but with toongs and hands) ſhall neuer eſcape vnrewarded: for as by their toongs they haue killed vs, ſo the Lord with his toong ſhall condemne them. From hence let vs of the miniſterie learne our dutie, which Vſe 1. is, ſeeing we are the Lordes owne ſeruants, let vs labour to preſent euerie man perfect in Ieſus Chriſt, Col. 1. 28. there is no ſeruant, but he deſireth not onely to do much worke, but that hee may preſent it faire and beautifull to his maſters viewe: this is our labour to bring many ſoules and

ſaints to the Lorde of glory. Abraham ſending his ſeruant to fetch a wife for Iſaac his ſonne, he brought him godlie and beautifull Rebecah: wee are the Lordes ſeruants, and wee are ſent to fetch a wife for Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God; oh let vs be as faithfull vnto God the father, and to Ieſus Chriſt, as that ſeruant was to Abraham and Iſaac; let vs doe our meſſage with diligence, let vs execute our charge with praier, let vs giue them the golden bracelets of God his truth, and let vs with all ſpeede and haſte returne againe to him that ſent vs. When Iacobs ſonnes went into Egypt, Iudah promiſed him to bring Beniamin againe, if he woulde let him go, or elſe he ſhoulde ſlaie his owne two ſonnes; and ſo if wee bring not againe to the Lorde his beloued children, he will ſlaie our bodies and ſoules for euer and euer, for at our hands will he require them. Come on therefore my deere and holy annointed brethren, we haue the leading of God his children, wee haue the keeping of Chriſts Queene, we haue the tillage of the Lords corne, we haue the vſe of the Lords treaſure, & we haue the price of our Sauiours bloud: if we looſe his childrē, he wil ſlay ours; if we defile his wife, he wil curſe vs; if we neglect his husbā
                  dry, he will ſpoile ours; if we waſte his treaſure, he wil ſel vs to perpetuall bondage; and if we ſpill our Sauiours bloud, he ſhall condemne our bloud, body, and ſoule. Oh therfore let vs be inſtāt in preaching, holy in liuing, earneſt in praier, zealous in exhortatiō, & careful in admonition; inſtructing the children, correcting the youth, and comforting the aged: that as Iacob returned with many more ſoules out of Syria into Canaan, then hee brought; ſo may wee come with many ſoules out of this world into the world to come. Another vſe ſhall be for the people, that conſidering wee 2 be the Lordes owne ſeruants, and therefore open and ſhut the priuie chamber doore which leadeth vnto him, and to vs is committed the building of the church: then as the Apoſtle exhorteth you Epheſ. 4. 11, 14. that ye giue heed to them whom the Lorde ſendeth you for ſpirituall guides:

direct not your praiers to Angels and ſaints in heauen, for they haue not the keeping of the Lordes workes; but the miniſters which be aliue are the priuie counſellers to the Lordes maieſtie, whom if you will not beleeue, neither can you beleeue, though an angell come from heauen vnto you. And therefore as all the people were wonte to waite for the comming out of the prieſt, that hee might bleſſe them; ſo do you all euermore, waite for the bleſsing, and mercy, and grace, and counſell, and loue of God to come from them to you. As the Lorde turneth the bloude of a woman into milke for the nouriſhment of hir childe, ſo doth hee turne our wordes, and gifts, and knowledge, and learning, and ſtudie, and life to be the nouriſhment of you his church. Come to vs for comfort and inſtruction, and edification, and ſaluation; you are the Lordes houſholde, we are his ſtewards, come to vs for your meate of ſoule, and wages of life. When Adam came againe to God hee receiued the promiſe of life; when the creatures came to Noahs arke, hee kept them from the floude; when the Egyptians came to Ioſeph, he ſaued them from famine; and when the people came to heare Chriſt preach, he relieued their fainting: Come you likewiſe to the miniſterie, they will giue you the promiſes, open vnto you the kingdome, deliuer you the corne, and ſatisfie your ſoules moſt plentifully, that you ſhall neuer faint till you come to the euerlaſting abiding place. Except the prieſtes had ſtoode in the riuer of Iorden, the children of Iſraell coulde neuer haue paſſed ouer: euen ſo wee ſtande in the troubles of this world, to keepe them from you, elſe you ſhoulde neuer come into Canaan: Oh therefore come while wee ſtande and beare the Lordes arke, or elſe the waters of hereſie and Atheiſme will come againe: and then farewell your hope, your health, and your ſaluation.
            
            
               
               The xiij. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſe. 14.
                  Sanctifie a fast: call a ſolemne aſſemblie: gather the elders and all the inhabitants of the lande into the houſe of the Lorde your God, and crie vnto the Lorde.
               
               THat is, call and prepare a faſt, to the which ſome may ſay; that they might well enough faſt, ſeeing their meat & corne was alreadie withered, and they had more need to ſeek to ſaue their liues, then to go to faſt & to endanger themſelues farther. Vnto which I anſwere, that the forenamed calamitie was but prophetically foretold: & therefore as yet there was not ſuch want, but only it ſhoulde bee if they repented not. Hee biddeth them prepare a faſt, that is, a general humiliation for all the people, wherein ſhoulde bee nothing but mourning and abſtinence, and this kinde of faſt is a great and good part of the worſhip of God. Eſay 58. 13. Therefore from hence wee obſerue that God taketh occaſion by threatning of his wrath againſt vs, to mooue vs to worſhip him more earneſtly, ſo wee may ſee Iudg. 20. 26, 27. when the Iſraelites God by threatning wrath mooueth vs to his worſhip. in a good cauſe, had beene ouercome of the Beniamites, and loſt the liues of many braue men, it mooued them againe to goe to humble themſelues before the Lorde, with faſting and bitter weeping, and lamentation. And ſurely this ſeemeth to be the continual courſe of the Lords dooing in the church, that as the grounde is plowed that it might yeelde more fruite: ſo the church is afflicted that it may giue him more worſhip. Wee are for the moſt part like the diſciples which knew not howe to faſt, or to afflict themſelues till Chriſt was taken from them, and then they faſted, Mark. 2. 20. So when wee are either generallie moleſted, or particularly endangered; howe doe we cleaue to the churches, and turne ouer the bibles, and runne ouer

the worde? but in times of more eaſe wee are more idle, and take libertie of ſinning, when wee feele the greateſt liberalitie of our Sauiour. If wee haue no other cauſe to reioice in our pouertie, and ſickneſſe, and infamie, and danger, and hunger, and famme, and all our tribulation, then this that we are by them better fitted for the Lordes ſeruice; yet let this make vs clap our harts and hands that we may any waie glorifie our creator. And as the Iſraelites were as willing to fight with the Canaanites, as to poſſeſſe their lande: ſo let vs bee as willing to fight with manie troubles, as to poſſeſſe many pleaſures. The reaſons of Reaſon 1. this doctrine are theſe, bicauſe ſuch kinde of miſeries lamented by ſuch kinde of worſhip, doth turne away our captiuitie, and appeaſe the Lordes wrath, Lament. 2. 14. and therefore wee may take great comfort in the forewarning of our miſeries, ſeeing we may be prepared therby againſt all danger to auoide all wrath; if the Lorde did not by the miniſterie of his worde humble vs, we ſhoulde euer be ſubiect to mortall confuſion, and immortall condemnation. But ſo hee ordereth all things in his church, that as the ouerflowing Nilus maketh the earth more fertill; ſo the floudes of troubles going ouer the bodies and liues of his members, maketh them more peaceable: once the diſeaſe purged, the bodie is well quieted, and once the pride of our ſinne and natures ſcoured and rubbed awaie, the ſoule is more ſtrengthened. Another reaſon is bicauſe 2 that the Lorde will haue that thinge worke the good of his church, which worketh the deſperation of infidels, for wicked men in their troubles are at their wits ende, as wee may ſee Mich. 4. 5. ſo was it in Cain and Edom, and the Egyptians, and Saule, and Herod, which all periſhed through affliction. The nature of the wicked is like iron which will neuer ſwimme though it be neuer ſo little, except it be nailed to ſome woode or other ſubſtance: ſo the wicked being baniſhed from the godly they fall downe and ſticke faſt in an vnreſiſtable mire of afflictions: ſo that

wee may ſee, as the croſſe of Chriſt was the life of the church, but the death of the diuell; ſo are many other croſſes the life of the Lordes deare children, but the death of his deſpitefull enimies. The vſes which come from this Vſe 1. doctrine are theſe: Firſt, ſeeing wee are by our affections ſtirred vp to ſerue the Lorde, let vs keepe our ſoules in continuall chaſtiſement, that we may continually be mindfull of the Lordes ſeruice, 1. Peter 4. 7. Thoſe which lie in garriſons although they ſeldome fight, yet euery day they diſcipline and traine their ſouldiers; ſo although wee ſeldome lie vnder great danger of exceeding ſlaughter, yet let vs continue our ſoules in correction and obedience. If Dauid had alway vſed this, he had not ſo eaſilie forgotten himſelfe, and brought Vrijah to death, and himſelfe into filthie adulterie: Euen ſo the want of this priuate chaſtiſement, and continuall afflicting of our ſoules for our ſinnes maketh vs wanton in wealth, proude in proſperitie, preſumptuous in health, and often ſubiect to ſathans temptations. Afflictions may rightly bee compared to a hedge, which hath thornes on both ſides, ſo that that which is within cannot come out, and that which is without cannot come in: in like manner when our liues are hedged with troubles, the good thinges which are in our ſoules cannot goe out of vs, and the euill thinges which are without vs cannot come into vs. Weepe often for thy ſins that thou maieſt alway bee ſorrowfull, pray often for thy amendement, that thou maieſt ſtill bee penitent. Thinke manie times on thy later ende, that thou maieſt neuer bee arrogant, ſo ſhalt thou ſaue thy ſelfe from many euils, and gaine thy conſcience great peace, and procure thy ſoule euerlaſting bleſſednes: for if this life bee contrary to the life to come, then it followeth that as there ſhall bee neuer ceaſing ioy, for the ceaſing of ſinne; ſo heere ought to be a neuer ending ſorrow for the continuance of ſinne. Another vſe which commeth of this doctrine is, ſeeing our euils make vs more fit to ſerue God, then is it a miſerable thing

to be made more vnfit to ſerue him through tribulations, when mens harts die in them for feare of the Lordes hand, as Nabals did when he feared Dauids comming: or when men growe deſperate ſeeking vnlawfull meanes to be rid of their miſeries, as the Iewes did, Eſay 30. 16. and therefore the Lorde threatneth them that they ſhall flie as they determined, and they ſhall ride on horſes as they appointed, but their enimies ſhoulde ride faſter to ouertake and ouerthrowe them. I haue obſerued the conſtitution of many men, and I founde them like the ſeafaring marriners, whoſe life is a continuall death; and yet they are more open contemners, and more obſtinate enimies to all manner of goodnes then are other men: and ſo thoſe whoſe eſtate is pooreſt, whoſe liues are moſt ſlauiſh, hauing the priſons for their dwellings, and continuallie deſtitute of meate and all kinde of neceſſaries, none more wicked then theſe, or more careleſſe of any good thing. But to let thoſe paſſe, there are many that haue eſcaped dangerous ſicknes, pyning famine, the fearefull hande of warre and cruell death, which ſeemed before their eies vnauoidable; and yet remaine deſperately wicked ſtill, and runne to their owne vomit and wallow in their loathſome myre of ſinne; theſe are they which are at a league with death and couenant with hell, they hope to eſcape as well as other, and while they be in the world why ſhould they not liue merrily, although they goe to hell for it afterwarde. Seeing they are ſo careleſſe of their owne welfare, who ſhoulde take care for them; and ſeeing the fearefull hande of God will not winne them, the labour of vs his miniſters ſhall neuer perſwade them. Out of this verſ. I might obſerue vnto you that the paſtours are not to proclaime faſtings without ſingular warrant either from God himſelfe, or elſe from them that ought to direct them heerein. Againe, I might obſerue that the people muſt come at the voice or call of their ſpirituall fathers, and paſtours; alſo that publique faſting ought to be done in the

publike congregation, for that time being. But wee will proceede to the next wordes, where the prophet telleth them what they ſhoulde doe nowe when they were aſſembled togither in the faſt, that is, they muſt cry on the Lorde, meaning they ſhoulde humble themſelues by praier. And from hence obſerue that faſting is nothing Faſting nothing worth without praier. woorth without praier, Eſay 58. 3. Luke 18. 11. The common people doe imagine that when they ceaſe from eating, and puniſh their bodies with a daies abſtinence, that they doe vnto God high ſeruice. Indeed it is lawfull for the preſeruation of their health ſo to doe, but for a diuine ſeruice or worke of religion, they muſt not account it. But this cuſtome ſprang vp from the perſwaſion of poperie, which doe not onely account this kinde of abſtinence a meritorious worke; but alſo if men eate not fleſh, although they aboūd in al other delicates, with great ſtore of daintie wines and ſtrong drinke; yet doe they obſerue a druine faſt to the Lorde, although they neuer make anie conſcience of praier, and doe not ſo much as bleſſe their meate and drinke they receiue. Therefore let all good Chriſtians bee carefull to auoide in their faſts, ignorance and ſuperſtition, and let them either ioine praier with their faſting, or elſe neuer reckon it for a worke of religion. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: Firſt, bicauſe God doth not except vs for meate, 1. Cor. 8. 8. that is, with the Reaſon 1. Lorde if wee eate or eate not, wee haue neither the more or leſſe, and therefore bare abſtinence is not any part of religion. But if the ordinarie taking of our meates and drink muſt be ſanctified by praier, which is a meere ciuill thing, then much more the not receiuing either of meate and drinke for a religious cauſe muſt be conſecrated by praier. One ſaide well, that thoſe which place any part of God his ſeruice in their meate, they doe verie neere make their bellie their God: Yet though meate and drinke doth not make vs either the better or the woorſe to God warde; yet we muſt remember that heerby is not giuen vs any liberty

to liue in gluttonie or drunkennes, no more then to ſterue and pine vp our ſoules voluntarilie, but hee meaneth in the moderate vſe or neglect heer
                     ••
                  f. Another reaſon is, 2 bicauſe God neuer commanded any ſuch faſt, nor allowed it, as wee may ſee in all the courſe of the Scriptures: where euermore there was ioyned with faſting publike and moſt earneſt praier and lamentation, why then ſhoulde wee vſe that in the Lordes ſeruice which hee neuer ſpake of; and why ſhould we frame that of our ſelues, which he reprobateth? truely euery plant which he hath not planted, ſhall be pulled vp by the rootes, and therefore in vaine ſhould we worſhip him, following the traditions of men: liue in the obedience of the Goſpell, for that ſhall bring vs to life; and whatſoeuer we do more we either performe for curioſitie, to finde fault with that which is done; or elſe for vanitie to ſearch into that which is forbidden. From hence let vs learne to lead moſt chriſtian liues which Vſe 1. is to ſerue the Lord with faſtings and praiers, after the example of the ancient godly beloued ſaints of God, as Anna, Luk. 2. 37. and the Apoſtle Paul, 2. Cor. 11. 27 both men and women haue liued in this kind of abſtinence, and religious ſeruice of God. But alas we haue among vs thouſands which would thinke they receiued great iniurie, if they be not accounted as good chriſtians as Paul and Anna, which neuer in all their life did ſo much as faſt and pray one whole day togither in their priuate houſes. I cannot tell what nimblenes and ioyfulnes, they finde in themſelues to the ſeruice of God: but I am ſure that there haue beene, and now are others of another iudgement, which without this exerciſe of praier and faſting, grow many times heauie and ſo dull in the practiſe of their profeſsion, that they thinke that the ſpirit of God is departed from them. And when they haue renewed this exerciſe, they finde themſelues againe more ripe and ſharpe and readie in any kinde of goodnes. Alas, what practiſe of repentance is there in them, that are ſtrangers in this action? it is a ſimple ſorrow

for ſinne, that taketh not away one daies ſtomacke from meate, and cauſeth not the ſoule to hunger more after reconciliation, then after a worldly recreation. Therefore faſt often and pray much, ſo ſhalt thou be like the godly, neuer be wearie of this practise, except thou be wearie of chriſtianitie: and as thy ſinnes encreaſe, ſo let thy mortification bee enlarged, that thou maiſt make more caſtles in thy ſoule to defende thee, then the diuell doth engines to annoy thee. Another vſe is, that wee abſent not our ſelues from thoſe ſolemne and appointed kinde of faſts, 1. 2 
                  Sam. 7. 6. all Iſraell came to obſerue this before the Lord in Mizpeh, and ſo continued till Samuel ſent them home againe. If euer it be needfull that the congregation ſhould be great, then it is moſt requiſite to be enlarged, when occaſion of lamentation is offered: that as many mens voices made the Lord to ſpare the Niniuites; ſo many may cauſe him to reuerſe his iudgements from vs. For truely as in war againſt an enimie hauing muaded our countrey, we are ingenerall to lift vp our handes againſt him to driue him from vs: ſo ought we being endangered by the hande of God to put on euerie one his complete armour of righteouſnes, that euery mans heart and voice may be lifted vp to ſtay his heauy hand from vs. How do men neglect this thing which thinke it in vaine to ſerue God, and therefore though they know other men to be moſt buſie in lamenting for their calamities; yet they forſake not their tauerns, their ſhops, their counting houſes, their husbandries, their marriages, and other their paltries: when as the ſworde is as neere them as their garments, yet they dread not the ſame: and ſo as before they neglected the graces of God; ſo now they abuſe the long ſuffering of God, making their latter ende woorſe then their beginning, like the old world which would not beleeue, though they ſaw Noah enter into the arke, and ſo the flood came and deſtroyed them all: and ſo ſhall it doe with thoſe except God enlarge his mercies and they caſt away their ſtubburnnes.
               
                  
                  Alas, alas, for the day of the Lord is at hand, and it commeth 
                  Verſ. 15. 
                  as a destruction from the Almightie. Now are we come to the praier, which by the mercifull aſsiſtance of God his heauenly ſpirit we will moſt briefly and effectually handle: Firſt therefore, the method which the holy prophet vſeth, is to be obſerued; wherein he lamenteth generally, verſ 15. and then particularly the meanes or cauſes of their deſtruction. In this verſe he generally toucheth all the calamitie, when he calleth it the day of the Lord, the dread and conſcience whereof maketh him moſt yearnefully and pitifully to crie out, Alas, alas. Where firſt of all commeth to our conſideration this doctrine, that good men do ſorrow and Good men mourne before iudgement commeth. mourne for the Lords iudgement before it commeth: as this Prophet which ſayeth the cauſe of his teares to bee this, becauſe the day of the Lord is at hand: ſo we may read did Eliſhah, 2. King 8. 10. when Hazael came vnto him and he had annointed him king of Syria, it is ſaid that he wept; and Hazael asked him why he wept: to whom he anſwered, bicauſe it grieued him to thinke what he ſhould do to Iſraell; for hee ſhould ſet their ſtrong cities on fire, and ſlay their yoong men with the ſword, and daſh their infants againſt the ſtones, and rende in peeces their women with childe. Was not this a ſufficient medicine to looke on, and to make a heart of braſſe to burſt foorth into many teares? For I thinke none conſidering ſuch a deſtruction in his countrey, but he will weepe for it bitterly. It is enough many thinke, to ſigh when they be ſore, and then to weepe when they bee in paine; and why ſhould they torment themſelues before they feele the miſerie? Yea rather why doſt thou reaſon thus againſt thy God? Thinke on the daies of miſerie that are comming, and doe as theſe prophets, breake foorth into abundance of lamentation: to thinke how our towres ſhall be plough lands; our treaſures ſhall be in other mens coffers; our coaſtly buildings be razed in an inſtant; our riuers ſhall runne with blood; our children ſhall be the pray of ſouldiers, and our wiues bee

moſt cruelly murthered. Oh that men before theſe daies could lament for the ſame; yea although their eies ſhould neuer ſee it, yet let them weepe for them that ſhal feele it. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: firſt, becauſe they Reaſon 1. reape this profit by the forewarning of God, Iere. 4. 18 19. if God of his great goodnes open the deſtruction of any people or citie to any of his welbeloued ſonnes; they are preſently aſtoniſhed men and ſwallowed vp in many ſorrowes: but wicked men although they bee neuer ſo often admoniſhed, yet they remaine wicked and obſtinate ſtill. Oh what a bleſsing is a ſoft and beleeuing heart, which doth not onely receiue the wordes of God for truth, but is preſently affected as if they felt the iudgements! When Elijah had told Ahab of God his vengeance againſt him; then Ahab wept and faſted, and the Lord ſpared him his time: ſo I doubt not but there be many which hauing heard the trumpe of God his iudgement in the mouthes of the Lords preachers, they haue wept bitterly, and I thinke the Lord will ſpare vs for their time: but take heed leaſt the godly be deminiſhed, and no man conſider it, leaſt our deſtruction be the more ſudden; and lift vp more voices of weepings at the voices of preachers, that more time may bee graunted vs to be freed from vengeance. Another reaſon is, becauſe good men although they bee aſſured of themſelues; 2 yet it grieueth them to thinke how the wicked ſhal be deſtroyed, Luke 19. 41. Our Sauiour there weepeth for Ieruſalem, which ſhould be laide euen with the ground. A good man is euer mercifull euen to the moſt vile and wretchedſt creatures in the world; and therefore it goeth to their harts to heare and ſee, conſider and thinke vpon, how heapes and multitudes of men ſhall go to confuſion. Some would thinke that it is no reaſon to ſorrowe for other men, but rather let other men ſorow for themſelues. But Samuel, whoſe teares and praiers came many times before the Lorde for Saule, will anſwere them, and inſtruct them to be carefull for other mens ſaluation: as Ioab appointed his

armie, that if he were too weake, Abiſhai ſhould helpe him; and if Abiſhai were too weake, Ioab woulde helpe him: ſo muſt we labour to helpe one another which ſeeme weake, although we know ſome ſhall go to wracke. The vſes that Vſe 1. offer thēſelues to our conſideration out of this doctrine are theſe: Firſt, ſeeing that it is the part of a good man to ſorrow at the foreknowledge of any calamity, let vs receiue that exhortation of the Lord, Ier. 6. 8. that we be inſtructed whē the Lord threateneth vs, or elſe as he there ſaith; His ſoule ſhal depart from vs & leaue vs deſolate as a land that none inhabiteth. And I would to God my countrey men of England would learne this inſtructiō at the mouth of God, that whereas there is none of graue or greene yeeres but they haue had many tokens, and heard many thunderbolts of wrath drawn from the neuer vncertaine word of God, and from the extraordinarie courſe of manifolde iudgements which we haue felt theſe late yeres, that now we being inuited to this mourning feaſt, we al com, & not one ſtay behind. Oh therfore receiue this inſtructiō, before the lords ſoule go away from our nation: I bid you not leaue of your callings, nor caſt away your garments, nor put away your welth, nor forſake your life; but caſt away vaine mirth, idle talke, wicked hope, & wretched behauiour: leaue your ſins to the diuel frō whence they came; & giue thy ſoule to the Lord frō whence it came. Eliſha did but require of Naaman to go into the riuer ſeuen times & he ſhuld be clean, which his ſeruants tolde him was but a ſmall thing: ſo we require you but to waſh your ſouls with the water of your eies, and you ſhal be as free from death as Naaman was from the leproſie. But why ſhould I need to inſtruct you, are you not minded like Ieremie, that of himſelfe deſired riuers of teares to weep for his people: ſo be you not backward, but of your own accord, ſo that you may pleſe the lord, deſire that you were al teares to lamēt throughly the miſeries of the world. Oh lament with ſpeed & tarrie not, or elſe it wil be too late whē you ſhal ſee before your eies the litle infants quartred;

the aged perſons mangled; the cruell heathens aduanced; the poore chriſtians dying; the aire thundering; the earth quaking vnder you; and the cloudes rayning downe fire and vengeance. Another vſe is this, that we be ſo minded 2 at the hearing of the Lordes iudgements, as if they were preſently to be executed: It was a great fault in the Iſraelites, that whenſoeuer the prophet ſpake any thing to them, they preſently thought and ſaide; this ſhall not bee yet, it will be a good while before it come to paſſe, and we neede not care, for wee may bee dead and gone out of the way ere this bee fulfilled, Ezech. 12. 27. 28. but the Lorde rebuketh that follie, and biddeth the prophet tell them that it ſhall bee ſhortly performed. And ſo the like rage poſſeſſeth the heades and braines of many in our daies, which although they knowe that it is true that is tolde them of a deſtruction; yet euery one thinketh it ſhall not be this yeere, nor in our Queenes daies, nor ſo long as the Goſpell remaineth, and therefore they will poſſeſſe al their vanity, rather then be humbled. But this ought not to beſo; yea rather haſten out of this ſecuritie as Lot out of Sodom, and the Iſraelites out of Egypt: that thou maieſt eſcape it whenſoeuer it commeth. It is better with the wiſe virgines to be readie an houre or two, or three too ſoone, then with the fooliſh to tarrie a quarter of an howre too late. Therefore admit the danger bee not as yet, yet bicauſe wee are nowe warned, let vs now be prepared: ſhall we not make as great account of the Lords louing mercie, as of our owne health? yes, yes, my beloued, and therefore let vs ariſe to lamentation, bicauſe the Lord calleth for it, although there were no danger following after. But wee are like the diſciples which coulde not watch but ſleepe, euen then when Chriſt was in moſt danger, although our Sauiour did manie times awake them, till at length the enimie came vpon them, and they were all driuen to forſake Chriſt: ſo I praie God our like ſecuritie bee not with the like danger awakened; for I feare if the mercifull voice of a Sauiour

will not mooue vs, the terrible crie, and ſwordes of enimies will amaze vs. As a destruction: In theſe wordes is the general cauſe of the lamentation deſcribed, bicauſe the Lords wrath is kindled to make a deſtruction: Wherein there is to bee noted, that nothing doth ſo much feare and terrifie good men, as the anger of God, Deuter. 9. 17, 18. When Moſes perceiued that God was angrie, hee fell Nothing feareth good men ſo much as the wrath of God. downe flat on his face and beſought God, neither eating nor drinking for fortie daies and nights togither: was not their feare great that made this good man to aduenture his life by ſo long faſting, and his ſoule by deſiring to bee razed out of the booke of life? yes verily, for the anger of the Lord mooued him more, then if he had ſeene all the worlde on fire about his eares. But carnall Goſpellers and careleſſe Atheiſts, as they thinke it a farre more leſſe matter to pleaſe God then to pleaſe man: ſo they deeme it a leſſe matter to haue God angry with them, then the prince or ſome great rich men that may hinder their worldly eſtimation. Alas, alas, if Saule were fearefull to a thouſande, Dauid was to tenne thouſande; and if worldly men may a little terrifie the fleſh, the God of the worlde may infinitelie plague the ſpirite. Therefore put on this affection, that we may knowe what to thinke of the wrath of God: if the anger of a prince be the meſſenger of death, much more is the wrath of God the herauld of condemnation. When Aſſuerus was angrie, preſently Hamans face was couered, and he carried to execution; woulde not Haman giue all his poſſeſsions to haue retained the fauour of the king: ſo likewiſe, aduenture any thing rather then to ſtirre vp the coales of the Lordes wrath, by which thou thy ſelfe and all thy neighbours ſhall be burned without mercy. Oh therefore ſtudie to knowe howe to auoide his diſpleaſure, and to retaine his louing countenance, and let not the loue of any ſinne ſo bewitch thee, that thou procure his vengeance in working thy deſire. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: Reaſon 1. Firſt, bicauſe none can bee an interceſſour or a friende to

God being angrie. 1. Sam. 2. 25. that is, there is not anie mortall man that can doe any ſuch a pleaſure as to ſtaie the Lords wrath from falling on him, or that may bee able to ſtande in the gap of the Lordes wrath. The which conſideration might moſt effectually admoniſh all our preſumptuous companions, which thinke that the Lord is pinned to their ſleeues; imagining him to be ſuch a childe as might bee loſt with an apple and wonne with a trifle againe: but they ſhall finde it a farre more heauie matter, when no offers of gold, no intreaties offriends, no teares of greefe; no nor yet the fruit or blood of their bodies ſhal pacifie or recompence him for their ſins. This ought to make vs account highly of the mediation & interceſsiō of Chriſt, and not to tread vnder our feete his glorious blood ſhedding, after we be once reconciled. Another reaſon is, becauſe it is a moſt fearefull thing to fall into the handes of 2 the liuing God, Heb. 10. 31. ſuch a fearefull thing as paſſeth all vnderſtanding, and therefore who but mad men will run too farre into this danger. Although Dauid choſe rather to fall into the hands of God then men, becauſe he was well aſſured, the iudgement was but a fatherly correction, and not a reuenging puniſhment; yet we muſt know that he knew that it would bee but a corporall or bodily death: but we are not aſſured of halfe ſo much, yea happie were we if the wrath of God did but reach to our bodies, and that he would be ſatisfied for our ſinnes; if we loſt our children, and wealth, and friendes, and health, and life; or that if we could endure all worldly tortures to bring vs to death, therewith he would bee contented: but it is yet a more fearefull thing, when we are ſubiect to all theſe; and more alſo to leade an endleſſe and eaſeleſſe life, in the euer burning and neuer dying flames of hell. The vſes which wee muſt make of this doctrine are theſe: firſt, that wee Vse 1. learne to feare none of them that kill the body, but onely him that is able to caſt both bodie and ſoule into the fire of hell, Mat. 10. 28. But I know euerie one will ſubſcribe vnto

me, and ſay that they feare him aboue all, when as this feare is ſuch a weake dampe, that it putteth not foorth any ſinnes; and it holdeth as much godlineſſe in their harts, as a ſieue will holde water in the open aire. Moſes was afraide of a ſerpent, and it made him run away: what feare is this that poſſeſſeth our goſpellers mindes, that will not cauſe them to be as much afraide of the ſting of ſinne, as Moſes was of the ſting of the ſerpent? Ioſeph ſaide, for the feare of God he could not commit follie with his lady: and if the feare of God had any rooting in your harts, you could not leade ſuch licentious liues as you doe. The Iſraelites were afraide to ſacrifice a ſheepe in Egypt, becauſe it was abhomination to the Egyptians: but you are not afraide to offer your filthy, deadly, and abhominable luſtes to the Lord, although they be abhomination to his maieſtie; yea although there bee an vnmeaſurable iudgement hanging ouer your heads. Therefore feare the Lord that muſt rule you, and the iudge that muſt trie you, and the ſauiour that muſt keepe you; or elſe you ſhall feele the deadly paine that ſhall torment you. The poore woman that came before Salomon, would rather depart with her childe to her neighbour, then ſuffer it to be diuided in ſunder: but how much more deere it is to haue your ſoules cut in ſunder, & feare you not this? Therefore with all ſpeede looke vnto the Lorde as humbly as petitioners; pray vnto him, as mournfully as priſoners; tremble at him, as fearfully as the hill of Sinai; fall downe before him, as lowe as Daniel; melt at his anger, as the waxe before the ſunne. Another vſe is, that we alway keepe our confidence in the Lord, for if his wrath be but a little kindled, then are they bleſſed that put their truſt in him, Pſal. 2. 11. Balaam feared God, yet becauſe his faith and confidence was not in the Lord, he was ſlaine among the other enimies of God: therefore let me now take occaſion to exhort all your harts to a ſure confidence in the Lorde, becauſe his wrath ſhall neuer touch thoſe which put their truſt in him. It is ſaide, Pſal. 99. 4. that

                  Moſes and Aaron and Samuel put their truſt in God, and he deliuered them. This was ſuch a truſt as was exerciſed with all Chriſtian vertues, the which you muſt ioyne with them, or elſe you cannot enioy it: Forſake your ſelues, imbrace the Lord, loue not the worlde, and deſire Chriſtes kingdome, and then you truſt in the Lorde; confirme your harts with patience, beautifie your minds with knowledge, reforme your affections by repentance, and amende your liues by the whole Goſpell of God; and then ſhall the Lord ſay you haue truſted in him. Oh then bleſſed ſhall you be, for although the world be drowned, you ſhall bee ſaued; although the citie be burned, you ſhall bee deliuered; although the people be captiuated, you ſhall be enlarged; and although the earth be curſed, yet you ſhall be bleſſed. If ſickneſſe weare thy body, and anguiſh vexe thy ſoule, and trouble oppreſſe thy life, and loſſes catch away thy goodes, and enimies ſpoile thy children, and death doe ende thy daies: yet ſhall not the wrath of God conſume thy ioyes. What wouldeſt thou haue more? if God hate thee not, hee loueth thee; if hee loue thee, he will keepe thee; if he keepe thee, danger ſhall not oppreſſe thee; if thou be not oppreſſed, then art thou bleſſed; and if thou be bleſſed, be ſure thou ſhalt be ſaued.
            
            
               The xiiij. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 16.
                  And ioy and gladneſſe is cut off from the houſe of our God.
               
               COncerning the former words of this verſe we haue ſpoken in the verſe before: and now to the next following, where the prophet telleth them, or rather the Lord, that now men could take no delight, nor ioy in the outward ſeruice of his maieſtie: which was a moſt lamentable thing when one ſhould come into the houſe of God, where was woont to be moſt ſweete melodie in the

harts and voices of men, like vnto another paradiſe: now he ſhould finde it full of teares, and cries, and yelling, and ſorrowes, and euery one aſhamed to ſhewe his face for griefe, this doth the prophet offer to the conſideration of God. Whereby we will note this, that the ſeruice of God muſt be performed with ioy and delight, Deut. 16. 11. I meane the ordinarie ſeruice and worſhip of God: But in The ſeruice of God to be performed with ioy. our daies we may almoſt complaine as this prophet doth, that ioy is parted from the houſe of our God, men come almoſt as willingly to the churches, as ſome goe to execution, and tarrie as ioyfully before the preacher to heare the ſermon, as other doe before the iudge to heare the ſentence. When we are at our praier, they are at their books; when we are at our preaching, they are at their ſleepe; when we are at our pſalmes, they are in the tauernes. Maruell you not to ſee the ioy of theſe men in the worſhip of God, vnto whome the church is a iaile, the miniſter is a keeper, the Lord is a iudge, themſelues are the priſoners, and their zeales are as ioyfull to them as little eaſe: yet for all this we will reioice in the Lorde our God, and account one day ſpent in his courtes better then a thouſande ſpent elſe where. And as Dauid reioyced to ſee other men goe, ſo will we reioice when our number is increaſed, when our voices are aduaunced, and our Lord Ieſus magnified. The Reaſon 1. reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: firſt, becauſe this ioy in the ſeruice of God is a token of the preſence of God his ſpirite in the harts of men, Rom. 14. 17. ſo on the other ſide when men are lumpiſh and heauie in this worſhip and heauenly buſineſſe, it is a token they like not the matter, but are hindered and blinded by the ſpirit of malice. Shall we then ſay that they are all giuen to the diuell, who haue not beene baptiſed into the Lords ſpirit, and poſſeſſed with a delight in the Lordes ſeruice? then muſt wee ſay that all hard harted miſers, wicked minded ruffians, fickle brained yoonglings, and wind-wauering women, which had rather be playing with their loues, or their children, or elſe be diſporting

in brauerie and wantonneſſe, or bee mumbling a few Paternoſters of old angels, or new ſtuffed barnes, then yeeld their eares, their hart, their ſoule, their minde, and their whole man to the Lordes moſt needefull and bleſſed buſineſſe: oh wretched men thus poſſeſſed by thoſe that rather ought to be poſſeſſed by them! Another reaſon is, becauſe this delight in this worke is the very ende and 2 fruite of the goſpell. 1. Iohn. 1. 4. My brethren (ſaith Iohn) I write vnto you that your ioy may be full: that is, that you may reioice in all things, as in meate, for there is the Lords hand; in apparell, for there is his prouidence; in health, for there is his goodneſſe; in ſickneſſe, for there is his mercie; in your houſes, for they are his tabernacles; and in his church, for there is his ſeruice. A pagan, a heathen, an infidell, a Iew, a papiſt, or any other enimie of Chriſt, can come to our aſſemblies, and with a minde readie to vomite vp whatſoeuer they heare, attende to their greefe, what is there done, as many among vs doe, and yet be neuer the better: therefore bee you better then theſe, and let your righteouſneſſes exceede theirs, or elſe you ſhall neuer reioice in his euerlaſting kingdome. The vſes which come of this doctrine are theſe: firſt, that whatſoeuer we doe in Vſe 1. the Lords houſe, let vs do it cheerefully, & of an vpright and peaceable minde, that we ſay of our ſelues, as Dauid, and Chriſt of them, Pſal. 69. 9. The zeale of thy houſe hath eaten mee vp: ſo of zeale let vs doe euery thing that wee doe; for as reaſon muſt meaſure all matters in humane and worldly affaires, ſo muſt zeale ſeaſon all things in ſpirituall and diuine matters. Zeale is like the loue of Iacob to Rahel; it thinketh no froſt too cold, nor any raine too dangerous, nor any ſnowe too great, nor any heate ſo vehement, nor any ſunne ſo parching, but he endureth it for the loue of a woman. What, ſhall Iacob loue a faire face, better then a Chriſtian loues a glorious Sauiour? oh no, no, but let our loue be deerer then the loue of a woman: and let vs all ſay, and that all with Marie the mother of Chriſt, My ſoule

reioiceth in God my Sauiour. But oh where and of whome ſhall I complaine, that haue not beene eaten vp with zeale, no nor bitten therewith, or that which is leſſe, it hath not licked their ſoules, nor kiſſed their liues: that is, they haue neither beene iealous nor zealous for the Lorde of hoſtes ſake? for themſelues, they care not what God is; for other, they care not what their ſoules bee; and for all, they care not what hell ſhall be; they are not earneſtly righteous, nor obſtinately wicked, but openly indifferent, and that is no body in religion: they mourne not when other ſorrow; they reioice not when other laugh; they ſtirre not when other are mooued, and they feele not when other are afflicted. How zealous I beſeech you, are they, when they haue beene colde in the heate of the day, and neuer ſweate one drop in the worke of Chriſt, or wept one teare in the cauſe of Chriſt. Another vſe is this, that ſeeing we muſt be 2 carefull to worſhip God with ioy, let vs then pray for the peace of the church, whereby there may be no mourning within our pallaces, Pſal. 122. 6. I graunt our ſacrifices to God are as acceptable when our reioicing is baniſhed in any common aduerſitie, when wee humble our ſelues by praier and faſting, as when in times of greater proſperitie and ſecuritie, we are lifted vp with thankeſgiuing; yet this is better for the church, and equall to the Lord. Therefore let vs moſt carefully commend Ieruſalems peace, and euerie member thereof to the Lords tuition: pray for it with an earneſt deſire (I ſay) to obtaine, and an vnwearied labour till thou haſt atchieued. To abate but Dauids thirſt, three of his men aduentured their liues, being but onely to ſatisfie the kings minde: who was Dauid, but a member of the church? and therefore if they would doe ſo much for one, let vs doe more for all the church together, that her thirſt may be ſatified, and her eaſe be procured. Oh therefore how happie is our age wherein we liue! for the church hath peace abundantly, and our baſeſt things are become very honourable: the blood which other haue ſhed for

the ſame, doe we enioy, and they by filthie priſons haue purchaſed for vs, moſt pleaſant houſes: O England, be not wearie of thy well doing, leaſt the Lord be wearie of thee; be not vnthankfull for thy peace, leaſt the bond there of be ſtrooke in ſunder; be not proud of thy benefites, leaſt thou be ſtripped of thy ornaments; be not ſecure in thy glorie, leaſt thou be ſtirred vp to greater labour: but pray, the father with the ſonne, the mother with the daughter, the lorde with the ſeruant, the miſtreſſe with the maide, the maiſter with the familie, the rich with the poore, and men with women and little children, peace be within our wals, and proſperitie within our dwellings.
               
                  The ſeede is rotten vnder the clods: the garners are deſtroied: the barnes are broken downe, for the corne is withered. It ſeemeth Verſ. 17. that theſe men being ſomewhat touched with want one 
                     •
                  eere, yet they comforted vp themſelues with their husbandrie and tillage, thinking the next yeere woulde make amends for all: like as we haue ſeene in our lande theſe times of dearth, for men haue yeere by yeere ſowed and plowed, looſing both ſeede and crop notwithſtanding all their labour, as theſe husbandmen here doe, thinking that whether God will or not, they will make things cheaper and plentie againe, but all is in vaine: For if they ſowe, it rotteth in the ground, if they keepe, the houſes fall vpon it; if they eate, they ſpende their ſtore; and if they ſpende, then will ſhortly their liues be ended. By theſe wordes we may obſerue, that it is in vaine by any naturall meanes to No naturall meanes to reſiſt the Lords power. ſeeke to doe away the Lords hande. Hag. 1. 6. The people of Iſrael being in ſome perplexitie, they ſowed, and eared, and planted, and laboured to bee releeued, but alas the prophet telleth them, that he waſted their ſeede, he bloweth on their ſtore, and the labourer putteth his wages into a broken bagge. What, had hee no pittie on the poore labouring man, that worketh for a groate or ſixe pence a day? but hee muſt conſume that alſo, yea verily: for the Lorde muſt bee ſerued as well by the poore countrie man

as the rich citizen: and therefore curſeth as well the gettings of the one, as the gaines of the other. But what ſhall I ſay vnto you, ſhall I bid you not till the earth, or not ſowe your corne? no verily, but plow vp your harts, and caſt in the ſeede of regeneration; and then plow vp your land, and caſt in your ſeede of ſuſtentation. How ſhal the corne grow in your fields, when vertue will not growe in your ſoules? Therefore labour not in vaine, it is not in all our plowing or planting, or ſowing, or reaping, or working, to helpe our ſelues, but in the Lords bleſsings: who will then bleſſe the earth, when we haue waſhed away the curſe of our ſoules by repentance; for nature cannot helpe no more then Balaam coulde curſe. The reaſons of this doctrine are Reaſon 1. theſe: bicauſe nature it ſelfe, as a creature of God is ſubiect to the curſe of God, as wee may ſee in all the ſtorie of Egypt, and alſo Iſay 28. 22. where the Lorde threatneth to bring a conſumption vpon the whole earth; meaning the whole courſe of nature: that hee can as eaſilie curſe them as it were by ſickneſſe, as men are vndone by conſumption. And verily I thinke, when I looke into the ſpecials, I ſee as Dauid ſaith; All thinges come to an ende, but the lawe of God is exceeding large: The heauens waxe olde, the earth groweth barren, the golde is but duſt; the pearles come to nothing; and all creatures ſaith Paul are ſubiect to vanitie. What is then the ſtudie of nature, but the ſtudie of vanitie? Yea how vainely are their daies ſpent which are alwaies in the bellie of Philoſophie and Poetrie, and humanitie, not thinking diuinitie to bee woorthie of their fine wits, which they ſay is the refuge of fooles? but if their ſtudie bee vaine, then are their wits vaine: and therefore of them it may bee ſaide; in ſeeking to become wiſe they are made fooles, Rom. 1. Another reaſon is, bicauſe 2 there is no other way to life, but conuerſion to the Lorde, Hoſ. 5. 15. Heere is the remedie for our landes, to make the earth furitfull; not in dunging and compaſsing it, but if wee can turne our ſelues to God, then let vs caſt

from vs our pleaſant ſinnes to rot in the earth, and water our newe ſowed corne with teares of our eies: Then ſhall the earth yeelde hir increaſe, and God euen our God ſhall giue vs his bleſſing. Balaams aſſe woulde not goe for all his beating, til Balaam had ſpoken with God and promiſed more obedience: euen ſo the earth will not bee fruitefull for all our cutting of it, and mending it, and poking it, vntill we be returned vn to the Lorde, and confeſſe our follies, and promiſe a newe life. Oh, let husbandmen heare this, and learne to liue heereafter; or elſe their worſhip is like to the ſacrifice of Cain, which the Lorde refuſed. The vſes which we muſt make of this doctrine are theſe; Firſt, that we put no truſt or confidence in any earthly or worldly things: for ſeeing theſe cannot deliuer vs from any little iudgement, then let vs learne to truſt in the Lords powre, Eſay 31. 1. It is but follie to truſt in kings, for they are but men; it is but ſinne to truſt in caſtles, for they are but earth and ſtones; it is but madnes to truſt in multitudes, for they are but fleſh; and it is but idolatrie to truſt in wealth, for it is but vanitie: therefore it muſt needes bee beſt to truſt in the Lord. Art thou afflicted, praie vnto him; art thou diſtreſſed, runne vnto him; art thou in danger, looke vnto him; and art thou a liuing ſoule, let him bee thy ſtrength and thy defender? The heauens cannot bende to helpe, the earth cannot riſe to ſuccour thee; the waters cannot flowe to receiue, and the cloudes cannot fall to couer thee. But heere is thy helpe, the Lorde can bowe the heauens and com to thee, & exalt the earth to reſcue thee; open the way for the waters to ſaue thee, and let the cloudes come downe to take thee into heauen, as once he did Chriſt, and at the latter day ſhall doe all his elect. Oh therefore caſt not away the hope of your calling, thy chriſtian profeſsion, thy holie religion, and thy hope of ſaluation, for prince or magiſtrate, friende or father, heauen or earth, man or angell; much leſſe be not terrified by any enimies which come with fire and ſworde to worke thy deſolation:

Craue not their helpe, truſt not in their ſtrength, feare not their rage, and diſtruſt not thy God: but in warre let him fight for thee; in ſicknes let him heale thee; in famine let him feede thee; and in death he ſhall receiue thee; for it is better to truſt in God, then to put confidence in princes. Another vſe is this, ſeeing wee cannot auoide any of the 2 Lordes iudgements by nature or naturall meanes, then it alſo followeth that wee cannot eſcape out of that great iudgement of condemnation by any naturall vertue or worldly meanes: but wee muſt all by nature remaine the children of wrath, Epheſ. 2. 3. Whereby wee muſt take occaſion to lament not onely the weakenes, but alſo the filthineſſe of our nature; which bringeth into the worlde that euill which it cannot auoide. Oh how much are wee bounde to our bleſſed Sauiour that hath deliuered vs from the wrath to come! I might alſo out of this verſe note vnto you, that God his wrath ſhall not onely extende to the liues of men, or thoſe thinges which concerne their neceſſarie maintenance in this worlde, but alſo to euerie part of their poſſeſsions as this prophet ſpeaketh, euen their barns and houſes, as we may ſee Eſay. 6. 11. Luke 21. 4. 5. And good reaſon, for as worldly men for their owne pleaſures do pul down many times both houſes & barnes, as we may ſee of the worldly man in the Goſpell, Luke 12. ſo may the Lorde for his pleaſure doe the like. Againe, theſe thinges do make vs to be proude, euen our buildings and aedifices, as wee may ſee in Nebuchadnezzar, and alſo Iehoijakim, Ierem. 21. 16. And therefore let vs knowe that the Lord in his iuſt iudgement will caſt downe all theſe as hee ſaith, Amos 3. 14. 15. And if he left not one ſtone vpon another where the temple ſtoode; much leſſe will he ſuffer houſes of extortion & oppreſsion, and gaming, and whooring, and other filthines to haue any place to ſtande in. Againe, ſeeing we may heere ſee what are our worldly buildinges; let vs learne to laie vp our treaſures in heauen, which ſhall neuer bee deſtroied, and lay a good foundation againſt the

worlde to come.
               
                  How did the beastes mourne? the heardes of cattle pine away, bicauſe they haue no pastures, and the flockes of ſheepe are deſtroied. 
                  Verſ. 18. Nowe he commeth to the moſt pittifull out crie of other creatures, for as the corne coulde not growe, no more coulde the graſſe, and one miſery doth not commonly come alone; and if wee well looke vnto this matter, wee ſhal finde great matter lie hid here in. For it cannot be that beaſtes ſhoulde be faultie or ſinfull before the Lorde, why then (although guiltles) are they thus tormented? & why did not the people make a hand with them, to eate them? and ſo to ſaue their liues that waies. Vvnto which I anſwere, that the people would not kil all their tame beaſts, bicauſe ſome they muſt keepe for ſtore, other for their labour, and manie for offering; which although it now ceaſed, by reaſon of the wante of corne, yet they hoped would ſhortlie come to paſſe againe as appeereth by their tillage. As for the other, the beaſtes are puniſhed for mans cauſe which is the doctrine of this verſe, 1. Sam. 15. 3. Zep. 1. 3. euen for our ſakes are they pined, and fatted, beaten and bruſed, becauſe of the ſinnes which we haue committed: All the The beaſtes puniſhed for our ſakes. men in the world could not beare their owne plague; but the innocent and harmeleſſe beaſtes muſt helpe out with the matter. The conſideration of this may ſhew vnto vs, the verie originall of the rebellion of ſome beaſtes. For there was not alway eminitie betwixt man ſerpents, and lyons and beares, and wolfes and tygers, and ſuch like; for at the firſt they were all ſubiect: but now in reuenge of their miſeries which for our ſakes they endure, they kill and ſpoile, and teare vs in peeces where euer they meete vs; yea the beare as we know will eſpecially ayme at the woman with childe, that they may rende the yoong babe out of the mothers wombe, and ſo ſlay it before it be able to hurt: and I would God we could vſe the ſame wiſedome in the ſlaughter of our ſinnes to cut them off while they be yoong. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe, becauſe Reaſon 1.
                  
they are ſubiect to vanitie, Rom. 8. 20. vnder hope for the deliuerance: for the which they all haue a certaine voice in their kinde knowen to the Lord, whereby they deſire a finall reſtitution. And verily if this be a reaſon why they ſhould deſire a deliuerance, becauſe ſome of them ſhall remaine immortall: it ought much more to ſtirre vp the minds of chriſtians, becauſe (not ſome) but all of them ſhal for euer liue with God: And ſurely if the children of tho bride chamber deſire the marriage day; much more ought the bridegroome and bride themſelues. Againe, ſeeing beaſts lament their vanitie becauſe of corruption: howe much more woorſe then beaſts are wicked and prophane men, which will not lament their iniquitie, becauſe of condemnation: and alſo how vily are ſome bewitched by the craft of the diuell which forget, and call into queſtion another life, when as the verie bruit beaſts by nature acknowledge the ſame. Another reaſon is, becauſe this doth moſt 2 notably aggrauate the ſinne of man, and might humble them throughly for the ſame, Ios. 6. 17. 21. for would not I pray you, this ſtrike any man to the heart, to heare all the beaſts of the field togither, as the buls bellowing, the oxen lowing, the calues bleating, the lyons roaring, the wolfes howling, the dogs barking, the horſes neighing, the Aſſes braying, the beares crying, and ſo all other in their kinde and out of kinde, calling in the eares of God for vengeance againſt man? This will ſurely amaze the ſtrongeſt, and diſmay the mightieſt; and therefore it wil driue men to weigh their ſinnes diligently: for God knowing that our deafnes wuld be ſo great, that the voice of mā ſhould not be heard, hath made euery beaſt and bird, yea the very thunder to awake vs. The vſes which come of this doctrine are theſe, Vſe 1. firſt, that we fall into a particular cauſe why this mutinie of creatures and outcries of all beaſts ſhould be ſent, which the prophet teacheth vs, Hoſe. 4. 2. 3. to be ſwearing, and lying, and ſtealing, and killing, and whooring, and ſuch like: for which things, he ſaith, ſhall come a generall mourning of

man and beaſtes. Surely wee haue as great cauſe to feare this helliſh yelling, and confuſion, as euer had any nation in the world: for ſwearing is counted brauerie; lying, policy; ſtealing, honeſt ſhifting; killing, manhood and valour; and whooring a pleaſant paſtime. And thus blood toucheth blood: for the poore haue mourned at home and abroade, by famine and warre; and the rich ſhall follow after, when all the confuſion ſhall follow them. Againe, let vs learne to pitie the poore creatures of God, which for our ſakes are 2 thus endangered, liuing vnder tedious labour, and dying vnder the cruell butcher, Ion. 4. 11. The Lord ſpared them and Niniueh for their ſakes. Mercie is a thing much loued of the Lord: and ſurely we are to vſe it, not onely towards our beaſts in their labour, that we tire not them too much; but alſo in their meate that we feede them ſufficiently: for in this place we ſee they will complaine. Yea moreouer let vs not be too vnmercifull in their ſlaughter, and kill not for wantonnes, the old and yoong. And alſo I cannot ſee how it ſhould be lawfull to ſet them togither by the eares, as beares, and buls, and dogs, and ſuch like, ſeeing they rent one another for our ſinnes: and therefore none can make ſport of their fighting, but they alſo make ſport of ſinning. Againe out of this verſe, where the cattle are ſaide to mourne, we may note that famine is the greateſt puniſhment of ſinne in this life; for other calamities they feele not and care not for: and for this do the godly ſo confeſſe Lam. 4. 9. that better is the eſtate of them that die by the Famine the greateſt puniſhment. Reaſon 1. ſword, then of thoſe that periſh by famine: and they giue reaſons thereof. Firſt becauſe all other puniſhments are not ſo tedious, but they are diſpatched in an inſtant: onely famine is like hell, where euery part is pained, a man being alway dying and yet neuer dead. Againe by famine God 2 ſtriketh and taketh away the fruits of the earth, which hee doth not in other things although men and cattle periſh; yet who rageth againſt other creatures? The vſes which we Vſe 1. might make of this if we would ſtand in it, are theſe: Firſt

that we learne how neere we are to a famine, for the Lord threatneth Ezch. 4. 16. that he will bring a famine, and make them eate their bread by weight, and drinke their water by meaſure, and do both in griefe: and ſurely this is the verie caſe of the poore, for they haue day by day had an ounce or two, or three of bread, and men remaine vnmercifull. Againe, let vs at the verie beginning of our dearth turne vnto the Lord, or elſe the Lord ſhall withhold 2 all things from vs, Amos. 4. 6. Let him not complaine of vs as he did of that people; that notwithſtanding many iudgments, yet they would not turne vnto him: for if famine be ſo extreme, that men and beaſtes and all creatures periſh thereat; oh turne thy ſoule vnto the Lord thy God, for why ſhould we work the death of men, the deſtruction of beaſts and the deſolation of all the fruits of the earth?
            
            
               The xv. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 19.
                  O Lord to thee will I crie: for the fire hath deuoured the paſtures of the wildernes, and the flame hath burnt vp all the trees of the fields.
               
               NOw the Prophet commeth to his particular complaint and praier grounded vpon good reaſons and calling vpon the name of God: for in the former verſe we heard onely a complaint without mention of the Lords name, and now ſeeing hee bringeth in a praier alſo: we muſt note that we euer adde praiers to our complaints, Ioſ. 7. 7, 8, 9. Mich. 7. 6, 7. art thou grieued for the Ad de praier to our complaints. ſinnes of other men, or for the miſeries of the world, and doſt breake foorth into wordes for the ſame? Then turne thy complaint into praier, or elſe it is but a murmuring againſt God, as we may ſee in Moſes and Aaron: for it is by praier we make our ſorrowfull hearts knowen to God, and can enter into the Lords priuie chamber. This duety alſo we may ſee neglected in our time, for men were neuer

more apt to complaine of the hardnes of the time; of the wickednes of the world; of the want of corne; of the feare of warre; of the power of the rich; and of the proſperitie of the proude: but they are but words, for they turne not themſelues to praier, to ſhew God of the matter as they ought to do. Know therefore my deere brethren, that God hath left vs in this world, as he left Iobs ſeruants, for ſtill one of them came to tell his maſter what had happened: ſo we muſt often vſe to pray and to complaine on our ſelues, and on other men: for if we confeſſe our ſins God is faithfull, that hee will pardon them; but if wee iudge not our ſelues, wee ſhall bee iudged of GOD. The reaſons Reaſon 1. of this doctrine are theſe: firſt, becauſe God forgetteth not the complaintes of the poore, Pſal. 9. 11. 12. meaning of them that pray vnto him, otherwiſe hee remembreth no more the poore mans enuie, then the rich mans quarrell; therefore let this ſtirre vs vp, to make our complaint in praier, as we reade Ezechiah did, Iſa. 37. when Rabſakeh had blaſphemed on the name of God. Oh that men were as ready to pray as they bee to complaine, for they can eaſily multiply many words to accuſe other men, and they might as eaſily finde wordes and matter to complaine vnto God: for as an inferiour ſubiect muſt alway ſue to his prince by petition, ſo muſt wee alway make knowen all our deſires vnto God by ſupplication. Againe, when men doe onely complaine of this or that want without 2 praier, they tempt God, as wee may ſee Num. 11. 4. Therefore if we will obtaine any thing at the Lords hande to our good, let vs aske by praier: for although we murmur for raine and drouth, and peace and wealth, and ſuch like, and God giue it to vs as he gaue the Iſraelites quailes; yet we were better want it, for it ſhall in the end turne to our diſcomfort, as theirs did. Let vs from hence learne to aske of God without murmuring or grudging at our owne Vſe 1. eſtate, or the Lords hand, Hoſ. 7. 14, 15. for the Lorde will complaine as faſt on vs, as we complaine to him. Haſt thou

any ſuite to the Lord, that thou wouldeſt obtaine of him? ſay not, oh that I had ſuch a thing; or thus, thou O God, maiſt giue me ſuch a benefite; or thus, ſurely if God doe not heare me, I would I had neuer beene borne; or thus, if God bee able let him doe this for mee: for all this is but tempting and mocking of the Lordes power and mercie: But goe to the Lorde with all humilitie, caſt downe thy knees and hart, tell him of thy vnwoorthineſſe, and accuſe thy ſelfe throughly; remember him of his promiſes in the goſpell, for that muſt bee the foundation of praier; then open thy wants, and deſire ſuch a remedie as God himſelfe ſhall like of; and laſtly, praiſe him for all thy former benefites, and then if thou want thy will, it ſhall be moſt good for thee: if thou obtaine thy wil, thanke him hartily againe; and vſe it for the Lordes glorie. Another vſe is this, that if 2 complainers without praying be odious in the Lords ſight, although the cauſe bee indifferent, then much more are thoſe that neuer pray but for vnlawfull and filthie things, that they might beſtowe them on their luſtes, as the Apoſtle ſaith, Iam. 4. 2, 3. They deſire health of body, to wallowe in vanitie; they craue many children, to hoorde vp euill gotten goodes, and to rob the poore; they pray for riches, that they may raigne ouer other men at their pleaſure, and liue in ſinne without controllment; they aske for marriages to abuſe them in luſt, and finally they pollute all things that come in their hands or harts: in their outwarde profeſsion they doe but ſerue the time, and therefore their inward conſtitution cannot bee very holy. I am perſwaded that a great ſort would be aſhamed, to let men heare thoſe things that they continually and immodeſtly deſire in the preſence of God. Aske therefore but with wiſedome, enioy thine owne with thankeſgiuing; praiſe God for all things, and thinke thy ſelfe happie whether thou liue or die. Againe, I might alſo note out of this verſe, how afflictions and ſorrowes doe teach men to pray moſt ſeruently, as we may ſee in Abimelech, Gen. 21. 17. and in Dauid, Pſal.
                  
119. 67. and the reaſon is, firſt, becauſe then men beginne to feele their ſinnes, 1. Sam. 7. 6. for in truth our conſciences are all ſo guiltie, that if we haue but our finger ake, we preſently conceiue it was for ſome notable ſinne or other. And for the truth of this we may finde it in many wicked rebels iuſtified; which will then moſt lamentably bewaile their ſinnes, when indeede they feele the heauie hande of God vpon them, and be either in trouble of life, or in danger of death: but this is with them but momentanie, and like a ſommer deaw; but with the godly it is perpetuall, for they being once ſpurred, will trauell the better all the day following. Againe, as our afflictions are increaſed, ſo are our ſorrowes, for the hart ſeemeth to bee pearſed with them, Lam. 1. 22. let vs therefore in our afflictions not onely pray for our ſelues in our owne perſons, but alſo entreate of other to pray for vs, as we ſee the Iſraelites did, 1. Sam. 7. 8. for if we be once perſwaded of the benefite of praier, we will neuer ceaſe to ſtirre vp our ſelues and others thereunto: we ſhall be minded as Paul was, that would haue the whole church of Theſſalonica to pray for him, 2. Theſ. 5. 2. for praier will make men more greedie then golde will. Againe, let vs thinke that afflictions ſhall not onely make the humble and gentle minded man to yeelde, but alſo the moſt ſtubborne and ſtrongeſt in the world. Boaſt not your ſelues againſt the leaſt affliction that can be, for as the ſoft raine will lay along the rankeſt corne, ſo ſlender troubles will bring to the earth the moſt obſtinate ſinners. O Lord, to thee will I crie. When the prophet ſaith, that he will crie vnto God, he noteth vnto vs, that in praier we muſt vſe the moſt earneſt and ardent affection that may be; for crying is the voice of children or yoong creatures, whereby all All our affections muſt be pitifully affected in prayer. men are mooued to pitie them. Therefore when we come into the Lords preſence, we are to ſtirre and mooue affections to the vttermoſt, not with childe-like behauiour, but with childe-like ſinceritie and feeling, as we may ſee in the godly, Lam. 1. 20. where they deſire God to behold them,

becauſe they bee troubled, their bowels are ſwelled, and their hart is turned vpſide downe, meaning that they were ſo paſsionate, that their inward partes were woonderfully mooued. And this condemneth the colde affection of thouſands in our daies, which haue as much feeling in their praier, as they haue in their dreames, and knowe as well how to remooue a mountaine, as how to mooue the Lords minde toward them, ſo colde are their thoughts, ſo weake are their deſires, ſo wilde are their wordes, and ſo many be their wants in praier, that I thinke verily when they haue praied, they finde themſelues as much fitter for the Lordes ſeruice, as a ſtone is for building being rubbed ouer with a little oile: I warrant you their harts are not turned vpſide downe, yea I would their liues were turned, but I feare they will firſt bee ouerturned. They will make more ſuite in better words for a dinner, they being hungrie, then for the Lords ſpirit, or any other meanes for ſaluation. Their voices in praier are like vnborne children, crie they cannot, much leſſe ſpeake any thing, no not ſo much as to ſay Amen when others haue praied before them. The reaſons of Reaſon 1. this doctrine are theſe: becauſe hee careth not for meane and weake wordes, but for ſtrong and fearefull paſsions, Iſa. 29. 13. for the Lorde being highly to be feared, will eſpecially be then feared ardently, when men ſpeake vnto him by praier. Moſes fell on his face when hee praied to him, and ſo did Elijah, for it is vnpoſsible but a man of fleſh and blood ſhoulde tremble when hee thinketh on God, much more when he praieth to God; for then doth the ſpirit helpe a man more to ſee into the ſecret of his maieſtie then at other times. Yet fearefull is it to ſee how men in our daies thinke to carrie away the matter with wordes, perſwading themſelues that their bare preſence and outwarde dwelling among the church, where now and then they heare God ſpoken of, and heare a few praiers in the publike place, although their harts honour not the one, nor confeſſe the other; yet are they as good religious men

as any in the world: but let them knowe that they be as good Chriſtians as the Samaritanes were right Iſraelites. Another reaſon is, becauſe that an acceptable ſacrifice to God is a broken and contrite hart, Pſal. 51. 17. and therefore when we offer to the Lorde our praiers, let vs be ſure that our hartes bee broken aſunder, for as there was no beaſt ſacrificed but his body and ſhoulders were parted; ſo no man can be offered to God but his hart muſt be diuided in ſunder, that is, he muſt be moſt paſsionately affected at the Lords houſe, and moſt lamentably tormented for his owne ſinnes, & moſt pitifully opened for the Lords mercy, & moſt earneſtly deſire the building vp again of the ſame. The vſes which we muſt make of this thing are theſe; Firſt, Vſe 1. let vs not iudge euill or raſhly of them that are mooued earneſtly, and labour effectually in prayer, 1. Sam. 1. 14. 16. When Annah praied before the Lorde, bicauſe hir lips went and not hir voice, Eli tolde hir ſhee was drunke: but ſhe anſwered, no, for ſhe was a woman of a bitter ſoule. In like manner, the power and working of the ſpirit in the praier of many, through their continuance, wordes and geſtures, is moſt wickedly mocked, and moſt ſhamefully blaſphemed of the malicious ſort, who are able to ſaie as much in their praiers as the olde maſſe-prieſtes coulde when they wanted their owne bookes. And for this cauſe without the ſpirit of God they ſpeake euill of the things of the ſpirite, terming our earneſtnes in praier to be rauing, our zeale to be follie, our continuance to be a heape of idle deſires, our teares to be hypocriſie, our ſweate to bee chafing, and our forwardnes and willingnes thereunto to be pride and ambition, with a number the like, as I haue heard, which are now opened in the ſtages, where all good geſtures are moſt wickedly derided. Well, well, Eli was not ſo raſh nor prophane, but bleſſed Annah when ſhe had tolde him hir minde, and yet for all that hee ended his life with the breach of his necke. Howe can it be but the Lorde ſhall more mercileſlie bring theſe to confuſion? we

may aske this kinde of monſters as Eſay did ſome in his daies: vpon whom haue you ieſted, and againſt whom haue you opened your mouthes? ſurclie againſt him that made both toong and mouth, and ſhall trie it out. As there are many giftes in the ſpirite of God; ſo are there manie waies to expreſſe the power of them, and as euerie one hath his gift, ſo hath hee his geſture to open and vnfoulde the ſame. Another vſe of this doctrine is for our ſingular 2 comfort, that ſeeing according to our feeling in praier, ſo is the Lorde affected towarde vs: when wee are bitter hee maketh vs ſweete; when we are heauie he maketh vs ioyfull; when we are caſt downe, hee raiſeth vs vp; and when we are moſt deſtitute and deſperate, he commeth with all ſpeede as a mother to hir childe when it crieth loudeſt. What are our ſorrowes but many voices to cry vnto God, and as a godly martyr hauing receiued manie woundes in his bodie whereby the bloude iſſued foorth abundantlie, thanked his tormentors bicauſe hee had as many mouthes more to praiſe his God, as hee had woundes in his fleſh: much more occaſion haue wee to thanke our Sauiour, that by ſending ſo many ſorrowes into our harts, hath prouided for vs many friendes to entreate his mercy for vs. Therefore feare not my deere brethren and ſiſters for any aduerſitie, as when the battle is hotteſt, the victorie is neereſt; ſo when your miſeries are greateſt, your deliuerance is at hande. Of this we haue often ſpoken before, and ſo alſo of the other part of the verſe following where the prophet yeeldeth the reaſon of his praier, bicauſe the greene paſtures were deuoured, and the greattrees were burned vp: teaching vs that which before we touched, that when famine commeth, there is nothing free from the ſame, but it feeleth the ſmart if it haue any life at all. And againe, the vnmercifulneſſe of it is noted when hee compareth it to fire and flame; the fire burneth lowe, that is the graſſe of the earth, and the flame reacheth high euen to the trees of the fielde.
               
                  
                  The beaſtes of the fielde crie alſo vnto thee: for the riuers of waters are dried vp: and the fire hath deuoured the pastures of 
                  Verſe. 20. 
                  the wilderneſſe. Nowe once againe the prophet rehearſeth the crie and lamentation of the beaſts, where I might note, that ſeeing the beaſtes crie vnto God and to none elſe: how much woorſe are thoſe then beaſts which either neuer cry, or elſe crie to other then God. But this is worthie our conſideration, that he ſaith, the beaſtes crie vnto him: noting vnto vs that God regardeth the verie crie and voice of dumbe and brutiſh creatures, and therefore the Scripture ſaith Pſalm. 104. 27. That God openeth his hande and giueth them meate in due ſeaſon: And ſurely as God is moſt wonderfull in all his workes, ſo is he moſt humble and gentle to all his creatures, not diſdaining with his owne hande to feede the baſeſt ſwine or beaſt in the worlde. But howe vnlike are they to God which doe not heare the voice of (dumbe beaſtes) no not of ſpeaking ſoules, and liuing men; and if they doe, yet their hands muſt not come neere them, but either they muſt take it vp on the grounde, or God heareth the voice of beaſts. Reaſon 1. elſe receiue of their abridgers, I meane their ſeruants. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe; Firſt, bicauſe God hath created them, Gen. 2. 2. And for this cauſe before that euer he made beaſtes, he made all the graſſe and herbes of the fielde to be readie for them, ſo kinde and conſtante is their nature, that they neuer forget their creator; but we ſhall finde moe men then are beaſtes that haue long agoe loſt all their knowledge and grace, and image of God, calling into queſtion whether there be a god or not. Oh curſed creatures, oh feareful times, that bringeth foorth ſome men like men, and ſome men like beaſtes, and ſome men like monſters: which are in bodies men, in manners beaſts, and in mindes woorſe then any creatures, yea then diuels, for they acknowledge and feare God. Another reaſon is, bicauſe men ſhoulde haue a taſte of the excellencie of the 2 Lordes mercy which ſaueth both man and beaſt. Pſal. 36. 6. 7. As for mans ſake they were ſubiect to vanitie; ſo for

mans ſake they are receiued into tuitiō again, the one was don for his ſin, the other was for his inſtruction, that as the hainouſnes of his ſin did bring mo into danger beſide himſelf, wherby he might deſpaire: ſo the greatnes of the Lords mercy might bring mo into fauour againe beſide himſelfe, wherby he might be comforted. And thus we may ſee how for our ſakes is the rod of vengeance, and the ſtaffe of mercie: for our example ſome are killed, ſome are burned, ſome are hewed, and ſome are damned: and for vs againe, we may ſee the angels are maintayned, the world is lengthened, many good men haue beene preſerued, and many bruit beaſts are continually maintayned. The vſes which Vſe 1. come from hence are theſe, Firſt that we fall not into any deſpaire of God his goodnes toward vs, either for our ſoules or bodies, Mat. 6. 25, 26. where our Sauiour biddeth vs to looke to the lyllies and to the yoong rauens, for whom the Lord taketh care: and verily euery haire on a good mans head, is more woorth then all the beaſts of the world; therefore let vs perſwade our ſelues, that ſeeing God heareth their crie, he will not denie our praier: and ſeeing hee looketh on their mourning, he will not deſpiſe our teares: and ſeeing he regardeth their life, he will not caſt away our ſoules: he that commandeth vs to be mercifull vnto them, hath alſo bound himſelfe to be mercifull vnto vs: therefore let vs be aſſured that we are more woorth then the beaſts in the arke, or all the creatures in the world. But alas why do I tell men of their woorth? for they know it too well, or of the Lords mercie, for they are too proude of it? Surely becauſe as Bathſheba teacheth Salomon, Prou. 31. 4, 5. not to be giuen to exceſſe, or to be wonne with vanitie becauſe he was a king, that is a worthie man in the world: ſo I would teach men by telling them their woorth to auoide from their filthie abhominations. What ſhall gold do in the dirt, or pearle in a ſwines trough, or money in a mad
                     •
                  ans pu
                     •
                  ſe, or authoritie in the hand of fooles? o
                     〈…〉
                   that we haue all vnder vs, and yet be 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
honor is it to vs to be more worth then al creatures, to haue the Lord for our creator, and his mercies when we entreat them, if in the meane ſeaſon we be not godly? then ſhal the beſt become woorſt, and at the latter ende, wee ſhall wiſh we had beene woorſt of all. In the next words he telleth vs how the riuers of waters are dried, and how the little countrey cottages wherein poore men & cattle were foſtered, were burnt vp; both very woonderfull (that the one) I meane the waters ſhould looſe their ſpring, which ſeeme to haue an euerlaſting aſſurance of perpetuitie: But alas what can be perpetual when God altereth; what can continue when he diſſolueth it? ſurely nothing, for he bēdeth the heauens, melteth the earth, emptieth the ſea; & therefore may eaſily drie vp the little land-brookes. Therefore as on the earth is the ſafeſt going, becauſe it is loweſt; ſo in pouertie is the beſt eſtate, becauſe it hath nothing. Once there were no riuers, and ſo ſometimes are not, and one day ſhall ceaſe to be againe; ſo once men had nothing, now in their richeſt eſtate they haue but little, and one day they muſt forgo all. But when he ſaith that the little cottages are burned vp, wee may note, that there is not any thing ſo ſmall or ſo vile, but the hand of God will finde it out, Amos. 9. Poore men thinke becauſe they be poore, that God neither regardeth their well doing, nor thinketh on their euill: but they muſt be of another minde; for as fire burneth vp all that ſtandeth againſt it, ſo doth the wrath of God meete with all that is againſt his lawe. God is in the citie, and in the wood, and in the village, and in the corne-field, and in the wilderneſſe, and on the ſea: he noteth thy doings in thy pallace, and in thy houſe, and in thy barne, and in thy labour, and in thy cottage, and in thy ſhip; euen as Chriſt ſawe Nathaniel when he was vnder the figtree. Surely the buildings of ſtone are too high to ſtand long, the buildings of wood are too weake; for the little lowe tabernacle with cordes tied togither ſhall come to an end. And thus we ſee that fire ſhall be the ende of all:

as it was the end of Sodom, ſo was it of Zeboijm; and as of them, ſo was it of the poore ſhepherds tents; and as of theſe tents, ſo ſhall it bee of heauen and earth. Thus much for this firſt chapter.
            
            
               The xvj. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Chap. 2. V. 1.
                  Blow the trumpet in Zion, and ſhowt in my holy mountaine: let all the inhabitants of the lande tremble: for the day of the Lord is come, for it is at hand.
               
               
                  IT hath beene ſhewed, that the beginning of this chapter vnto the end of the 11. verſe, was the continuance of the former iudgements ſpoken of in the firſt chapter: ſo that this verſe belongeth to the charge of the miniſters and people, wherein the miniſters are firſt exhorted to ſound the trumpet; and ſecondly the people are bid to tremble, becauſe the day of the Lords wrath is at hand. Concerning this blowing of the trumpet, wee may reade the right vſe and firſt inſtitution thereof, Numb. 10. Firſt it was The vſe of the trumpets in olde time. vſed for aſſembling the congregation; ſecondly, for the remouing of the campe; and laſtly, when they went foorth to warre, becauſe the people might bee had in remembrance before God. Although it be hard to ſhew whether in this diſcourſe following the prophet meaneth the comming of the beaſtes before named, or the comming of the Aſſyrians their enimies; yet the matter is not ſo neceſſarie, as that we ſhould ſpende much time therein, nor ſo difficult, but it may bee decided: and therefore I thinke that here is onely meant the comming of the noyſome beaſtes, becauſe the deſcription following is ſet foorth by ſimilitudes taken from warre, and not by flat and euident propoſitions; the which courſe the Lorde doth take in other

places, when he noteth an inuaſion, as in Ierem. 50. In this place wee muſt firſt of all handle the blowing of the trumpet, which was the prieſtes office; and the cauſe thereof was, to put them in minde of a danger; for the people were now aſſembled, and had neede to be terrified to the vttermoſt to make them humble, as we may ſee the effect, Amos. 3. 6. for the trumpet might bee hearde farre and neere, as an alarme among vs. Wherefore wee may gather I The miniſters muſt ſhew all dangers. from hence, that it is the miniſters dutie to ſhewe the people of the Lordes wrath, and the danger which they are ſubiect vnto for the ſame, Ezech. 33. 2, 3, 4. if they ſound not the trumpet, the people cannot be prepared, and then ſhall they endure a double condemnation: they beare the Lords arke, when they ſtand, al muſt ſtand; and when they goe, all muſt goe: and if they ſound the trumpet, and tell the dangers, onely the diſobedient come to deſtruction. And thus wee may ſee how the hardeſt burthens and moſt dangerous, are laide on the miniſters backes, for if they preach men will not beleeue them, and then they are perſecuted: if they preach not, God will forſake them, and then they are damned: being alſo ſubiect to all thoſe dangers which themſelues doe threaten, the which thing might diſcourage men from that holy function; but that the Lorde commandeth vs and enforceth vs thereunto. And I woulde God that all the croſſes and dangers which waite like pages or rather like iailers vpon the miniſters office, coulde bee ſufficient to denie a paſſage or entrance vnto the vnlearned and vaine headed perſons, whereby for euer they might bee excluded from our callings: but of this matter ſufficient hath beene ſaide alreadie. The reaſons are theſe; Firſt, bicauſe God openeth to them either ordinarily or extraordinarilie his purpoſe Reaſon 1. which hee will doe in his church: for there hath not beene any great calamitie in the worlde, but the Lord giueth knowledge thereof before it commeth, ſo that his preachers might bee beleeued, and deſtruction auoided.

Secondly, they are the mouth of God to the church, and of the church to God, Matth. 18. 20. and therefore what they ſounde, God ſoundeth; what they binde, God bindeth; and what they diſcharge, God ſetteth at libertie: yet ſo, as their actions muſt bee guided by the Scriptures, if they will haue God to confirme them. The vſes which wee are Vſe 1. to make of this doctrine are theſe; Firſt, that wee doe not onely teach the iudgements; but ioyne with our doctrine an outwarde teſtimonie of their feare, and a practiſe, that may ſerue as a patterne for the people to repent by: Miniſters muſt mooue affections. ſo the Lorde teacheth Ezech. 21. 6. 7. where the prophet is commanded to mourne bitterly, as a man that mourneth for the paine of the raines. And the cauſe followeth, that when the people ſhoulde aske him, hee might tell them that he mourned, bicauſe euery heart ſhoulde melt, and euery minde ſhoulde fainte, and euery hande ſhoulde bee weake, and euery knee ſhoulde fall away like water: and what heart of ſtone or deſperate minde coulde ſee his teares, and heare his wordes, and yet refraine from weeping? It hath beene alreadie ſhewed that the example of the paſtour is the beſt way to perſwade the people, and wee knowe by lamentable experience, that where the preacher liueth ill, his life doth more hurt, then his preaching doth good. Therefore my deere brethren, when wee haue cauſe to threaten any iudgement of God, let vs ſo temper our bodies as if wee felt it within vs, as Ieremie did, when hee cried out, My bellie, my bellie; as if the calamitie had alreadie ſeiſed vpon vs. Let vs preach earneſtlie; let vs liue zealouſlie; and let our wordes and teares be heard in the pulpet, and our praiers and feare in priuate communication; and full often let vs vrge and conſtraine our affections, that by manie paſsions as it were by many water drops, the hardeſt heart of ſtone may be pierced thorough. But it greeueth our hart that many preachers in many places, when they haue taught moſt ſingularly on the Sabbaoth day, ſo ſoone as the doore is ſhut,

ſome goe to tabling, ſome to carding, ſome to ſhooting, ſome to bowling, and ſome to banquetting; which maketh the people thinke, they did but mocke them in the pulpit. Another vſe which commeth by this doctrine is this, that Vſe 2. when wee haue ſo preached, and ſo liued, then may wee aſſure our ſoules of moſt excellent comfort, as the Apoſtle doth Act. 18. 6. ſaie, nowe are wee free from the bloud of all men; ſo that a good conſcience is the reward of a good preacher, which is a greater benefite then any Biſhopricke or preferment of the worlde, when a man may reioice of his labours. So that let euery preacher keepe this ioy, and defile not his conſcience: for the conſcience of a learned man once ſtained and corrupted, ſeldome or neuer is quieted againe. Looke vpon Eli his conſcience, and vpon the prophet which came to Ieroboam, who was ſlaine by a lyon; and vpon Ionah when hee was caſt into the ſea; and vpon Iudas the moſt wretch that euer was borne, when hee had betraied innocent bloude. I coulde bring manie examples out of other writers, if I ſhoulde not be tedious: but of my owne knowledge I ſpeake, that I haue ſeene ſome in the miniſterie endued with rare giftes, and excellent learning, vſing great diligence in their places; yet being giuen ouer through naturall infirmitie, their daies haue beene very fewe and very bitter: therefore maintaine thy conſcience with loſſe of life and liuing; for it is an eaſier matter to beare all the reproches of the worlde, then one of thy owne heart: for it will turne the ſworde of God in thy owne hande, and cauſe it to wounde thy ſelfe; neither ſhalt thou bee able to auoide it. I grant that men of other callings haue no ſuch dangerous ſlips: therfore looke to thy ſoule, for the diuell in dazeling thy light darkneth al thy people, and by making thy owne conſcience to accuſe thee, he will make good men to forſake thee, the worlde to wonder at thee, & the ſpirit of God to depart from thee. Sion my holy mountaine. Sion was the hill whereupon the temple was builded; for the which cauſe it is called the

Holy mountaine of God, bicauſe thither came all the tribes to do ſeruice and ſacrifice to the Lord: & therefore ſometime it ſignifieth the church of God and all the members thereof, as Pſal. 51. By theſe words I might note, that although the miniſters haue a priuate and a publique charge to warne the people: yet they muſt haue a more ſpeciall regard to the publique place, Col. 4. 16. Isa. 66. 6. The reaſons are, Firſt, bicauſe Chriſt is alway preſent in the congregation, Reaſons. The publique miniſterie to be regarded principally 
                  Mat. 18. 20. and therefore if they haue any loue to their Sauiour, there they muſt heare and ſee him. Againe in the publique miniſterie of the worde is giuen the holy Ghoſt, Gal. 3. 2. ſo that if men would haue the pledge of their eternall inheritance, thither they muſt reſort where he is freely offered without money: yea, let them come from ſtrength to ſtrength, that is, be thy ſtrength little or much, vſe the ſame to come to the church of God, there is no more diſpenſation for weakenes then for health; and therefore if thou wilt ſhew thy obedience and thy zeale to ſaluation, then come when thy health and ſtrength is moſt endangered, for then will it bee like the poore widowes mite, moſt acceptable to God. If thou be a gentleman? vſe the helpe of thy horſes and men: if a woman? take the helpe of thy husband: if thou be poore? craue thy neighbours hand, as he did which was ſicke of the palſie, Mat. 9. 2. If thou be a ſeruant? take ſo much the leſſe pleaſure, to heare a ſermon; for in ſo doing thou ſhalt pleaſe the Lord, and not diſprofit thy maiſter. Againe deſpiſe not the voice of him that ſpeaketh, Heb. 12. 25. for God which ſpeaketh in vs is a conſuming fire: there was neuer angell that ſpake, but the contempt of his words was ſeuerely puniſhed; and Zacharie becauſe hee did a little doubt of the angels meſſage, loſt his toong till his child was circumciſed. The miniſters of God are called angels, Reuel. 2. 1. and therefore if thou beleeue them not, then feare the loſſe of thy eares, or thy toong, or thy hands, or thy heart: but if thou contemne them and dally with them wantonly or

deſpitefully: oh, feare the loſſe of body and ſoule for euer and euer! but of theſe things we haue often times before ſpoken. Againe, if the voice of a trumpet could awake the Iewes and turne them to the Lord, how is it that men, and voices, and Chriſt, and Goſpell cannot awake the men of our times? the trumpet was blowen very ſeldome, but the word is euery day and euery where preached, and yet are not men prepared. Nay verily, a trumpet in the ſtreets ſhall haue moe followers then a ſermon in the temples, and as Michab ſaith, cap. 2. 11. new wine and ſtrong drinke do make men riſe early, and goe late to bed that they may be filled therewith: but yet the wine of the Lords truth cannot preuaile; and therefore the wine of his wrath muſt make them drunken vnto death. But in this that he biddeth the inhabitants to tremble at the ſound of a trumpet, we are taught, that we muſt ſtand before the Lord with feare and trembling, Ier. 6. 10. Ezr. 10. 9, but in our daies How we muſt behaue our ſelues in churches. men quake in the congregation, as ſteeples in the ſea: they are ready to laugh at that which ſhould make them ſorrow, and to loath that which they ſhould long after. He is now accounted a milke-ſop that will weepe when he heareth ſinne reprooued, and a very coward that feareth any euill, yea though it bee eternall condemnation. It is fearfull to conſider, that the preſence of God ſhaketh the whole world and the power of his worde maketh the deſerts to tremble, and yet ſillie men (and in compariſon of thoſe, like cornes of ſand) wil not ſhake nor tremble, nor feare for any of all theſe. And aboue all, this miſchiefe is to be conſidered, that the longer we liue in the world, the leſſe feare of God, or terrour of iudgement increaſeth: olde men grow careleſſe through age: yoong men grow diſſolute through pleaſure: children waxe wanton through euill education: and almoſt all men waxe woorſe and woorſe. What is the church more regarded, then an ale-houſe? or a preacher more eſteemed then an idoll? or a ſaint more honoured then a diuell? or religion more loued then Atheiſine? or

the kingdome of heauen more longed after, then an earthly inheritance? No, no, truth yeeldeth to falſhood, charity to enuie, quietnes to contention, ſobrietie to intemperancie, law to vnrighteouſnes, faith to policie, and chriſtianitie to infidelity. Helpe O you ſaints of the Lord to lament this miſchiefe, although we cannot amend it. Put to your teares and your praiers, that they may ſound before God, ſeeing GOD cannot any longer bee heard among men. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: firſt, becauſe God Reaſon 1. dwelleth in them that tremble at his word, Iſa. 66. 2. And againe, this feare and trembling is a moſt manifeſt ſigne 2 of the power of the worde, Heb. 4. 12. ſo that where this trembling is wanting, there can bee no true deuotion, whatſoeuer diligence bee vſed, becauſe the word cannot haue any free paſſage in our ſoules: For as a childe careth not for his maiſter whome he feareth not, ſo a man careth not for the goſpell when hee trembleth not: Yea on the other ſide, wee rebell againſt the wiſedome of God, and ſpurne his word with our feete, when we ſuffer it not to go through our harts. We reade that Og and Sihon two great kings, would not ſuffer the people of Iſrael to goe through their countries; the which diſcurteſie coſt them their liues, their land and their ſubiects, and all becauſe they woulde not graunt a path-way: euen ſo, if we let not the worde of God pearſe cleane thorough vs, and quietly with curteſie giue it entertainment in our harts, he will take them by force, and giue vs to be a miſerable ſpoile to diuels. If Iudas had had any grace, when he heard our Sauiour curſe that man that ſhould betray him, hee woulde neuer haue gone farther, but let his action fall: but hee did as our hearers doe, heare his owne condemnation, and not beleeue it; and therefore they ſhall doe as he did, repent when it is too late, giuing their liues in ſtead of their eares, and their blood in ſtead of obedience: and yet alas, alas, all will not ſerue their turne. The vſes hereof are theſe: firſt, ſeeing Vſe 1. we muſt feare and tremble at the miniſterie of the worde,

then it followeth, that we ſhall be comforted thereby, for it is written, Bleſſed are they that mourne, for they ſhall be comforted: and thus the Lord aſſureth his people, Iſa. 66. 5. that for their feare he would giue them ſafetie, and for their trembling hee woulde giue them ioy, and their enimies ſhould be aſhamed at it. Therefore if you would feele the ſweete taſte of the word of God, and receiue the ioyfull newes of your ſaluation, then learne to tremble at the hearing thereof, and you ſhall like of it better, loue it deerer, heare it oftener, and leane to it more ſafer then euer you did. Againe, ſeeing we muſt heare the worde of God with feare and trembling, let vs alſo make an ende of our ſaluation 2 with feare and trembling, Philip. 2. 12. that is, feare not onely in the church, or when thou art neere vnto danger, but all thy life long, vntill thou haue made an end of thy ſaluatiō. For ſo long as thou feareſt, ſo long thou art in ſafetie; but when the world ſhall ſay peace, peace, and there be no feare of iudgement, then ſhall come their deſtruction: for as when he in the goſpell promiſed to himſelfe greateſt ſafetie in his riches, that night did they fetch away his ſoule; ſo when we ſay we haue done, it is finiſhed, I haue ſorrowed long ynough, I haue endured the croſſe of Chriſt thus many yeeres, and therefore now I will take my pleaſure; then ſhall our danger bee neereſt, and our woe bee greateſt: therefore let vs neuer ceaſe fearing till we be in heauen, as the ſhipmen neuer ceaſe watching till they bee in harbour. Oh, here is a Chriſtians triall, if other men vexe him, let him beare it; if he be free from other men, let him chaſtiſe himſelfe: Feare the Lorde, leaſt he be thy iudge; feare thy Sauiour, leaſt he prooue thy enimie; feare thy ſinnes, leaſt they ouermatch thee; and tremble at the word of God, leaſt it condemne thee.
               
                  A day of darkneſſe and obſcuritie, a day of cloudes and of 
                  Verſ. 2. 
                  blacknes, as the morning ſpread vpon the mountaines, ſo is there a great people and a mightie: there was none like it from the beginning, neither ſhall be any more after it vnto the yeeres of

many generations. A day of darkneſſe. Now the prophet proceedeth to deſcribe the great wrath of God in the furie of theſe ſmall beaſtes, which he doth firſt by conſideration of the qualitie of the day or time when they ſhould come: and ſecondly by the manner of their comming, taken from many reſemblances and ſimilitudes. For the time he deſcribeth it after the vſuall manner of the ſcriptures, which ſetteth foorth a ſorrowfull day of indgement, by darkneſſe, cloudes, and miſtes: ſecondly, he ſheweth the cauſe hereofto be the great and mighty people, meaning the locuſts and the reſidue; for he calleth them a people, as Salomon calleth the ants and the conies, Prou. 30. 25. and he ſaith they ſhal obſcure the light as the morning darknes, bicauſe their company ſhould bee ſo many, as we may reade they did in Egypt, Exo. 10. 15. And therefore he ſaith there was not the like from the beginning, meaning for a long ſeaſon, nor yet ſhould bee againe to many generations following. So that he telleth them that this was a fearful time, when all the heauens ſhould be couered with clouds, & the earth be darkened with an innumerable ſwarme of noiſom beaſts. Cōcerning the multiplying of theſe beaſts, we haue ſpoken in the former chapter. Firſt, when hee ſheweth them that the day of their trouble ſhoulde bee cloudie, gloomie, and full of darkenes: wee may learne that theſe Clouds and darkenes admoniſh vs of iudgement. thinges doe put vs in minde of the great wrath of God, Pſalm. 18. 11. For in truth thus the Lorde will haue it, that we ſhoulde bee feared from the heauens aboue vs, and from the earth beneath vs. It is reported for a great wonder, that wee in Englande ſeldome haue any daies wherein we ſee not many cloudes; whereas in other countries they ſee not any cloudes for manie monethes togither. Let vs therefore make this aduantage of our countries ſcituation, that on the day time when we beholde the cloudes, wee thinke vpon the great iudgement of God, whereby from the cloudes hee once rained downe a great floude that deſtroied the worlde; and howe one day in a cloude Chriſt

ſhall come to iudge both quicke and dead: Againe, by night let vs meditate on the light of heauen, that wee may eſcape that vtter darknes where ſhal be nothing but weeping and gnaſhing of teeth. The reaſons of this doctrine Reaſon 1. are theſe; Firſt, bicauſe this want of light was the firſt puniſhment that God inflicted on the Iewes for the death of Chriſt, Matth. 27. 45. the which thing made them much afraid: for they had darknes inſtead of light, to ſhew them that Chriſt which ſhould haue beene their light, was nowe made darkness vnto them, from whom they could receiue no ſight to walke to heauen. And ſurely if this outwarde and carnall darknes bee ſo terrible eſpecially in the daie time, then what is the inward and ſpirituall darknes in the mindes of men, whereby they are depriued of all light of God, all partaking of the ſpirite, and all the hope of the worlde to come? Oh woulde God this their perplexitie coulde prouoke their harde and vnbeleeuing hearts to forſake their damnable ſecuritie: this their darkneſſe is ſo groſſe, that other men feele it, yet they are ſo blinded that they cannot ſee it. Let vs therefore my deere brethen know, that God will leaue none without excuſe, but either the word or the world ſhall tell them their duties: and let vs learne to praiſe the Lord for couering the heauens with cloudes, Pſalm. 147. 8. that by this meanes not onelie watereth the earth, and maketh it fruitefull; but alſo admoniſheth the mindes of his children of a continuall preparation to iudgement. But in our times all theſe are nothing regarded, for ſignes & tokens, & remembrances of righteouſnes; yea, ſome knowe not ſo much as the vſe of the rainbowe in the cloudes: neuertheleſſe in the right vſe of God his creatures conſiſteth one great part of religion; ſo that this is the beſt kinde of Aſtrologie or Propheſie to bee made of the ſtarres, that they may direct vs to a holy life, and prepare vs for a bleſſed ende. Moreouer, by this that the Prophet ſaith, The like hath not beene ſeene, nor ſhall not 
                  2 
                  be in many generations, Wee may obſerue that God doth

verie ſeldome change the courſe of nature, and turne light into darknes; for nature being a rare worke of God, he ſeldome Nature ſeldome changed. Reaſon 1. vſeth his omnipotencie to alter and change the ſame ſince the foundations of the worlde were laide. The reaſons are theſe; Firſt, in regard of the Lordes owne promiſe, Geneſis 8. 21. For after the floud, he determineth neuer to drowne the world againe, and therefore he gaue the rainebowe to be a pledge thereof; and alſo that the continuall courſe of nature ſhoulde remaine for euer: Now the Lorde is faithfull and will remember his promiſe, or elſe we knowe that the worlde might manie times ſince haue beene deſtroied, for there hath beene more ſinne ſince the floude then euer was before: Since the floude haue ſprung idolatrie, the poiſon of the worlde, and many other abhominations, not knowen of in the firſt age, as wars, and Sodometrie, and ſuch other like; yet for his promiſe ſake hee forbeareth deſtruction. Another reaſon may be the ſame that Dauid vſeth, Pſalm. 119. 90. 91. That the continuance 2 of the earth and all thinges created doe witneſſe the perpetuitie of his worde. Therefore let vs by conſidering of this ſame knowe of a certaintie, that rather than any iot or title of the Lordes worde ſhoulde be brought to nothing, not onely the earth and all the courſe of nature ſhall bee altered, but alſo the heauens ſo high and ſo immutable bee vtterly changed and paſſe away as nothing: then alſo will not God ſpare his workmanſhip in the bodie of man, but to verifie and iuſtifie his worde, hee will bring manie to condemnation. Let vs not nowe thinke to eſcape the better or the longer, bicauſe nature ſhall continue, for without changing of nature can God eaſilie bring vs to deſtruction, as he coulde without breach of promiſe deſtroy all the Iewes; and of the ſtones of the ſtreete make newe children for Abraham: He can deſtroy as well in light as in darknes, as well in drought as in waters; as wel by meat, as by poyſon; as well by our own hands, as by the mouthes of lyons & tigers. All the earth was not parted when Corah
                  
was puniſhed; al the world was not afflicted when Samaria was famiſhed: but the Lord will heere and there picke out the men that tranſgreſſe his law, as he founde out Achan and the poſteritie of Saul committing the guiltie to death, and reſeruing the guiltleſſe for life. Againe, let vs feare how we endanger our ſelues to God, for in his wrath he forgetteth 2 that we be his worke, and will caſt vs off, although we were as neere vnto him as the ſignet on his right hande: Say not thou haſt beene a profeſſor, or a preacher, or a hearer, or a martyr, or a miracle-worker, through the power of God, for notwithſtanding this he wil ſay vnto thee, I know thee not, if thou be not conuerted. He caſteth much golde into the ſea; he bringeth great kings into ſlauerie; he taketh away plentie from whole countries, and daſheth in peeces many yoong infants: therefore thinke not thou, but he will be reuenged on thee for thy preſumption. Yea to puniſh the Iewes, he deſtroied his owne temple; and therefore he wi ſpare neither houſe, nor building, nor nation, nor perſon, but in his wrath he wil bring all to cōfuſion.
            
            
               The xvij. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 3.
                  A fire deuoureth before him, and behinde him a flame burneth vp: the land is as the garden of Eden before him, and behinde him as a deſolate wilderneſſe, ſo that nothing ſhall eſcape him.
               
               IN this verſe is contained the firſt ſimilitude, whereby the force of theſe beaſts are deſcribed, comparing their biting of the fruites to a fire: for after an herbe hath beene bitten with a locuſt, it will looke blacke like a cole. Again, he compareth the land before he touched it, to the garden of Eden, meaning the fruitfulleſt place in the world: but after the beaſtes had ouerrun it, it was like the moſt barren and forſaken wilderneſſe. Concerning the

compariſon of fire it hath beene ſpoken alreadie, and it noteth the vnmercifulneſſe of the deſtroier. But in this that he ſaith, before him the land is as Eden, and behinde him a wilderneſſe: we may obſerue, that there is not any 1 land ſo fruitfull, ſo fertill, and ſo pleaſant, but it is ſubiect to the curſe of God and to barrenneſſe. Gen. 3. 17. It is apparant in all the creatures of the worlde, what the ſinne of man hath wrought, how it deſtroied themſelues, corrupted their ſoules, annoied the beaſtes, defiled the aire, and brought the earth which was all good, and no part there of but very fruitfull, into brambles, and briers, and thiſtles, and thornes, and weakeneſſe and barrenneſſe, to be tilled without eaſe, kept with all labour, and reaped with little profit. And as we ſee in the beſt ground, ſo we may knowe it is in the beſt man, that he is alſo ſubiect to vanitie, curſe, and deſtruction, when the Lord ſhall in iudgement waigh their diſpoſition. And thus may euery husbandman that tilleth the earth, and euery other man that treadeth thereon, behold euery day with his bodily eies, how ſinne is puniſhed: and let vs feare, that as the vnfruitfull land is not onely curſed, but neere vnto burning; ſo their ſoules more vnfruitfull, are not onely curſed, but neere vnto condemnation. The reaſons hereof are manifeſt: firſt, becauſe the Lord in curſing the land deſtroieth the ſinners, Iſa. 15. 9, Reaſon 1. Againe, he will deſtroy the fruites of the earth, becauſe men doe breake his couenant: for when men doe breake 2 bargaine with God, the Lorde will make the earth to deceiue man; and looke what authoritie man hath ouer the earth, to plow, to cut, to drowne, to harrow, to dreſſe, and to burne it; ſo hath the Lord ouer man, to kill, to vexe, to trouble, to ſaue, and to condemne him at his pleaſure. Therefore looke as the earth doth looſe her fruitfulneſſe, ſo ſhall thy ſoule her bleſſedneſſe: and when thou ſeeſt thy good land become barren, beware leaſt thy life be alreadie made wicked: and know that the Lord ſetteth as little by a wicked man, although a man, as thou doſt by a

barren field, although it be a peece of land. Wherefore let Vſe 1. vs make that vſe that God teacheth Adam, Gen. 3. 9. that ſeeing the earth is become vnfruitfull, in the ſweate of our faces let vs get our liuing, that is, as euery mans ſinne is a cauſe why the earth is curſed, and ſo become barren; ſo let euery mans hande be a meanes whereby her fruit may be encreaſed, that ſhe and we may be both bleſſed. They are not woorthy of land, that labour not to amend it, and to make it fruitfull: for we may ſee that it is one part of our obedience ſince the fall of Adam, to labour in the earth for our liuing. It is a fault in many men which keepe the earth in barrenneſſe, and onely ſucke out the ſweete from that land which is good by nature; but we muſt knowe, as God tilleth euery mans hart to bring it to goodneſſe: ſo ought man to trie euerie kinde of ground, to bring it to fruitfulneſſe, like that good gardiner in the goſpell, which two or three yeeres together digged about his vnfruitfull tree. Againe, ſeeing the earth is curſed for our ſakes, let vs lament the barrenneſſe thereof, Iſa. 16. 9. for in ſo doing 2 wee ſorrowe moſt iuſtly for the puniſhment of our owne ſinnes.
               
                  The beholding of him is like the ſight of horſes, and like the horſemen, ſo ſhall they runne. In this next place he compareth Verſ. 4. them to horſes, bicauſe in battle they are moſt fierce as we may ſee, Iob 39. 20. Againe, hee compareth them to horſes for ſpeede, bicauſe as theſe are moſt ſwift in running, ſo are the other moſt ſpeedie in executing the Lordes wrath, Aba. 1. 8. Againe, the horſe is moſt terrible in battle, Reu. 9. 7. and ſo ſhall theſe bee. Heereby wee may obſerue that A guilty conſcience feareth puniſhment. the onely ſight of puniſhment before it bee felt doth wonderfully perplexe a guiltie conſcience, Reu. 1. 7. where it is ſaide, that when the worlde ſhall beholde Chriſt comming to iudgement, all the kindreds of the earth ſhal waile before him. The reaſons are; Firſt, bicauſe it is the reward Reaſon 1. of obſtinacie, Ierem. 15. 8. A guiltie conſcience quaketh at the wagging of a leafe, and euery little danger doth amaze

him. Againe, it is a moſt wicked thing to reioice at the 2 hurt of other men, either in worde or thought, Ezec. 26. 2. Therefore although wee finde ourſelues cleere, yet wee cannot chuſe but ſorrowe when it approcheth to other. Therfore let vs obſerue the times & to kensof euill, Matt. 
                  Vſe 1. 24. 33. that wee may alway liue in mourning, but eſpecially knowing ourfeare, wee may then ſorrowe moſt when danger is neereſt, that ſo wee may bee readie to ende our ſinnes by repentance, and to goe to heauen by affiictions. Againe, when wee ſee wicked men taken away and going 2 to deſtruction, let vs feare the ſearching iuſtice of God, Pſalm 52. 6. and ſay, Beholde the man that woulde not beleeue the Goſpell, nor bee ioyned to our congregation, nor forſake his pleaſures, but perſecute good men, and flatter euill men, and therefore nowe hath hee receiued his recompence. Oh, let the death of ſo manie traitours, ſo many theeues and murtherers, ſo many ſwearers and drunkardes, teach vs to feare as a little birde flying from the ſparrow-hauke; and rather let vs couer our ſelues in weedes and graſſe, or in ſome thinne and open tabernacle then to take the ayre of the ſunne or ſinne, and to abide in the carued and walled cities of the multitude.
               
                  Like the noiſe of chariots in the tops of the mountaines, ſo 
                  Verſ. 5. 
                  ſhall they leape: like the noiſe of a flame of fire that deuoureth the ſtubble, and as a mighty people prepared to the battle. Now he proceedeth to other ſimilitudes, wherein I will be ſhort bicauſe they all touch one thing, and the generall is alreadie deliuered. In this verſe he compareth the voice of their comming to the noiſe of chariots in the mountaines, which keepe a mightie ratling in time of warre; for chariots were vſed for great men going to warre, as wee may ſee in the hiſtorie of Siſera, Ahab, and Iehu. Againe, hee ſaith, They are like the flame that deuoureth the ſtubble: which maketh a kinde of ſodaine, hollowe, and fearefull noiſe. Againe, like a people prepared for warre, which come with all kinde of warlike inſtruments, and wofull

acclamations, the which I leaue to euerie mans ſeuerall conſideration: whereby they may note howe the Lord can cloth his ſmalleſt and baſeſt creatures, with infinite power and terror, to diſcomfort euery people in the worlde: Oh, how much more are the angels of wrath terrible, ſeeing the wormes of the earth are ſo fearfull! wherfore let vs not onely feare the inuaſion of Spaniardes or other enimies, nor yet ſerpents, lions, wolues, or wilde dogs: but alſo the ſeely flies and graſhoppers, and filthie lice, which in time of God his wrath ſhall haue power to deſtroy vs, Exod. 10. & 11.
               
                  Before his face ſhall the people tremble: all faces ſhall gather blacknes. The meaning oftheſe wordes are, that in the Verſ. 6. preſence of theſe beaſtes ſhall bee much trembling and feare: yea, they ſhall bee verie neere death: for blacknes betokeneth death. From hence wee may obſerue howe God maketh men at their wits ende before deſtruction, Ezech. 26. 16. They goe not to their ruines like ſheepe, but like ſwine; not like lambes, but like lions; not peaceablie but furiouſly. The reaſons are, bicauſe the feare of the wicked ſhall come vpon them, Prou. 10. 24. Secondly, Reaſon 1. God by this feare and trembling calleth them to repentance, Deut. 32. 21. So that if then they coulde bee as angrie 2 with their ſinnes, as they are with their enimies, and fight as chriſtianly with the diuell, as they doe manfullie againſt men; although they looſe the life of the bodie, yet they may keepe the life of the ſoule. Learne therefore to Vſe 1. feare God, and ſo thou ſhalt neuer feare euill, Pſal. 112. 1, 6. but thy minde ſhall bee peaceable in death, and not diſtracted. Againe, vſe thy ſelfe to mourning before hande, Ezechiel 21. 12. that when they come thou maieſt 2 more eaſilie endure them, and more happilie auoide them. Secondly, when he ſaith all faces ſhall gather blackenes: we may not onely ſee that the greateſt and ſtrongeſt man in the world can do nothing againſt the iudgement of God; but offer himſelfe to death, and his heart dieth within him

as a ſtone: but we may alſo ſee how wicked men in aduerſitie Wicked men deſperate in aduerſitie. become altogither deſperate, Iſa. 2. 19. they cry to the hils to ſaue them, to the mountaines to couer them, and to the rockes to hide them. And this will be then the boldnes, and courage of our gallant youthes, who in their pride threaten to fight with the diuell, and with their oaths will teare the Lord out of heauen, who thinke by their worſhipfull pedegrees to ſhame the kirks of Chriſt; and by their golden and ſilken brauery to dazle the glory of God: then, then, will theſe things little comfort them. But as all the Midianites ran away for the dreame of a barley-cake; ſo ſhall theſe runne, if they knew whither; and take, if they knew what; and truſt, if they wiſt in whom; and flie from the great wrath of God, if there were any refuge; but ſeeing none, they ſhall fall to the earth as the ſnow commeth from the cloudes. Oh, cannot you think of this to put away your ſinnes? for if you beare them with you, they will ſerue you as Iael ſerued Siſera, and ſtrike into your braines and hart the nailes of deadly poyſon: there can be no reſiſting; for they haue woon the fort. Yet in time, craue the helpe of ſome other to beſiege them, and to regaine a quiet conſcience; or elſe whenſoeuer any danger commeth, they will do with you, as the citizens of Samaria did with Achabs children, deliuer you to your enimies, and with their owne hands be your butchers, and ſo commend you to the diuels cuſtodie. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe, bicauſe Reaſon: 1. then they haue no hearts to remember what God hath done for them, Deut. 7. 18, 19. but thinke euermore this is for the ſinne, this for ſuch an adulterie, this is for my pride, this for my couetouſnes, this for my ſwearing, this for my contempt of preaching, and all ſhall be for my damnation. Againe, then ſhall they be ouerwhelmed with deſtruction, 2 1. Sam. 31. 4, 5. as Saul was, for knowing that his ſinne had made God depart from him, he ſlew himſelfe in the battle. If he had gone to a prophet when hee went to a witch, or had beleeued Samuel as wel being aliue, as he did the diuel

when Samuel was dead, his life had then beene ſpared; or if he had put off his ſinnes when hee put on his armour to goe to the battle; or then fell to prayer, when hee fell vpon his ſword, then had Saul eſcaped that day. But what could the bodie of Saul doe when his ſoule was ſo laden with ſin? for he knew that the Philiſtines muſt needes haue his life and the diuell his ſoule: in like manner will the enimie bewitch you when you are in aduerſitie; Therefore caſt Vſe 1. down your caſtles and defences for ſin as the Lord exhorteth, Hoſ. 10. 14. before the diuell make them inuincible. For as the raigne of Abimelech was the ſlaughter of Gedeons ſonnes, and the raigne of Athaliah was the ouerthrow of all the kings ſeede: ſo is it betwixt vs and our ſinnes, if they raigne, we muſt die; if we put them downe, we ſhall liue. Let vs therefore caſt them downe betimes; for as the Iſraelites did at the firſt ſpare the Canaanites, afterwarde they could neuer deſtroy them: ſo if at the firſt we dallie with our ſinnes, in the end they will grow vnreſiſtable. Oh that we might liue to ſay of our ſinnes, as Chriſt ſaid of the temple, that there might not one ſinne be left vpon another. Let vs bury our ſinnes as Ieremy ſaid Iehoijakim ſhould be buried Ierm. 22. 18, 19. that their deaths be not lamented, but let them be caſt out of our ſoules, as a dead aſſe is caſt out of a citie: for as a dead corps procureth nothing but wormes and ſtinke, and feedeth fowles: ſo our ſinnes cauſe nothing but woe and ſorrow, and feed diuels. Againe, let vs not onely caſt away our ſinnes in heart as many ſay 2 they haue done, but in words and works profeſſe and ſhew the ſame, Hoſ. 14. 3. for by our words we ſhall be ſaued, and by our words we ſhall be condemned. A repentant man is knowne by his confeſsion, as Rahabs houſe was knowne by the thred that was tied in her window, which cauſed her & all her kindred to be ſpared: and ſo if we would be ſpared at the great day of the Lord, let vs confeſſe our ſelues to be of his family. Many I know there be which thinke it ſufficient to leaue ſin, and neuer to make confeſsion thereof;

ſo alſo there be many that thinke it ſufficient to beleeue the Goſpell, although they neuer profeſſe it: but in my opinion the one and the other are both deceiued. For wee muſt not bee of Abrahams heart, and of Belials life; wee may not beare the ſoule of Dauid, and the ſhewe of Phariſees. Good king Iehoſhaphat being in ſhewe like wicked Ahab, was in danger to be ſlaine for Ahab: ſo are all thoſe in danger of death who haue inwardly good heartes, and outwardly euill liues. Confeſſe thy ſinnes, thy faith, thy God: thy ſinnes to thy brethren, thy faith to the church, and thy God to the whole worlde, that thou maieſt bee as farre from note of euill, as euer is light from the ſhewe of darknes.
            
            
               The xviij. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 7.
                  They ſhall runne like ſtrong men, and goe vp to the wall like men of warre, and euery one ſhall goe forwarde in his way, and they ſhall not ſtaie in their paths.
               
               NOwe the Prophet commeth to the laſt ſimilitude, wherein he compareth theſe deuourers to ſouldiours; for in truth there is not any miſchiefe like to the miſchiefe of warre, which is well termed the ſlaughter houſe of mankinde, and the hell of this worlde. And in this treatiſe following, I muſt enter into martiall affaires, that as I haue hitherto taught you to be chriſtians; ſo now I muſt inſtruct you to bee ſoldiours, and learne you the arte of warre. Wherein this Prophet toucheth two things: The firſt is the order of an armie, verſ. 7. 8. Secondly, the ouerthrowe or ſacking of the conquered. For the firſt, he noteth 1 The condition of ſoldiers. what manner of men ſouldiors ſhoulde be, namely, Strong men, Exod. 17. 10. For God hath ſo ordeined that all men haue their croſſes and callings to humble them. If thou be bee wiſe, thou art emploied in gouernment; if thou bee

ſtrong, thou art buſied in warre; if thou be weake, thou art tormented in want; if thou be a woman, thou art vnder ſubiection; if thou bee a foole, thou liueſt in contempt. Therefore thou which art a ſouldier, make this vſe of this point, that thou encreaſe thy ſtrength, and caſt away feare, 1 
                  Deuter. 31. 8, Vndoe not thy ſtrength by quarrelling or drinking, or watching, or faſting, or feaſting, or whooring; but keepe thy body in ſtrength to benefite thy countrey. Againe, make another vſe which the Lorde taught Ioſuah, 
                  2 the moſt noble captaine and ſouldier of the worlde, who had the leading of ſixe hundred thouſand men, and ouercame The exerciſe of a ſoldier. thirtie and one ſeuerall kinges in a little time; this exhortation is ſet downe, Ioſ. 1 8. That alway in warre thou looke to the worde of God: whether thy cauſe bee iuſt, thy heart bee willing, and thy calling be lawfull; whether thy handes ſtrike when God biddeth, and thy foote ſtande when God calleth: Looke to this I ſaie, and robbe not, kill not, and fight not but againſt a lawfull enimie. But alas, Ioſuah is dead, and al thoſe which ſawe his doings: now in warres, there is gaine in ſteade of godlines, courage in ſteade of equitie, bloudthirſtines in ſteade of valour, policie in ſteade of iuſtice, and you ſeldome ſee a ſouldier of any religion, and neuer praieth till he bee in danger of death. Another inſtruction ariſeth out of this verſe, when 2 Inſtitution in martiall affaires. the prophet ſaith, Like men of warre: whereby we obſerue, that ſouldiers ſhould bee diſciplined and inſtructed before they be ſent into wars, or elſe they cannot be like men of war. This benefite Dauid acknowledged that he receiued of God, Pſal. 18. 34. it is a dangerous matter to aduenture a whole army vpon yoong ſouldiers, and more dangerous it is to vndoe any through want of skill. The reaſon is, bicauſe men muſt not onely haue ſtrength, but wiſedome and cunning in their weapons, and ſometime vſe the ſtratagems of warre, where policie and experience is woorth tenne thouſand mens handes, as wee may ſee in Ioſuah, cap. 8, 4, 5, 6. and in the Iſraelites, Iudg. 20. Wherfore make

this vſe in thy warfare of this doctrine, howſoeuer thy cauſe be good, thy ſtrength be great, and thy experience much; yet neuer fight til thou haue cōmended the victorie to God, 2. Sam. 10. 12. for God is the warrior which daunteth euery enemy, and directeth euerie dart to the perſon appointed. Be not too bold as the Iſraelites were, Deut. 1. and were chaſed backe againe by the Amorites; but vſe deuotion to God and diſcretion in thy buſines: remember well that the ſword cannot cut except the Lord whet it; that thy arme cannot ſtrike, except God enable it; that the enimie will not flie except he diſcomfort him; and that victorie will not follow thee, except God be on thy ſide. Againe, if thou bee an able man for the warre both in ſtrength and skill, come willingly when thou art called, and refuſe not to fight in a good cauſe, although it bee againſt thy own brother: Yeeld obedience to them that ſhall teach thee: and as the captaine in the Goſpell ſaid, that his ſouldiers did as he bid them; ſo doe thou performe what thy generall or captaine commandeth, if it be lawful and poſsible. Thirdly, he noteth another duetie of martiall men, 3 Celeritie in a ſouldiour. which is this, that they performe their buſines with all celeritie and ſpeede, Ioſ. 8. 19. The reaſon is, becauſe it is the greateſt commendation of a ſouldier that can bee, to bee ſwift and of a ready diſpatch, Pſalm. 19. 5. 2. Sam. 2. 18. for as a ſluggiſh ſeruant, a heauie oxe, and a tyring horſe are verie diſcommendable: ſo a ſlowe and heauy ſouldiour is not tolerable. Gedeons armie was but three hundred, and their dexteritie was ſuch, that they ouerthrew an innumerable rabble of Midianites; and ſo ſhall ſouldiours prooue it verie aduantagious to ſurpriſe their enimie on a ſudden. But yet for all this truſt not too much in thy legges, or in the ſtrength of an horſe, Pſal. 147. 10. for they are but vaine things to ſaue a man. Aſahell coulde runne well, yet Abner ſlewe him: and therefore beware leaſt thou make thy owne agilitie to ouerthrowe thee.
               
                  
                  Neither ſhall one thrust another, but euery one ſhall walke in 
                  Verſ. 8. 
                  his path: and when they fall on the ſword, they ſhall not be wounded. In this verſe he expreſſeth other duties of ſouldiers, which they muſt obſerue in their aray, which are, firſt of all 1 Order in battle. that they keepe their places, and be not one hurtfull to an other. Iudg. 7. 16. 22. Achans gadding out of place was the loſſe of his owne life and of many moe. And therefore let them learne that exhortation of Moſes, Deut. 23. 19. to abſtaine from euill, eſpecially when they goe to warre. Secondly, let them, as it is here expreſſed, keepe themſelues 2 Souldiers muſt looke to themſelues. from wounding, although they fall on their enimies ſword, that is, let them looke to the matter, that they be not onely carefull to annoy the enimie, but alſo to defende themſelues: for it is an euill victorie which is purchaſed with the loſſe of many mens liues, and wee knowe that all Canaan was woon with the loſſe of a very few men. It is a great butcherie of men, to preſſe ſtill on the enimie, where there is no hope but of death: Therefore it is good for a ſouldier ſometime to looke to his ſafetie, as well by an vnwilling retire, as by a deſperate and a voluntarie march.
               
                  They ſhall run to and fro in the citie: they ſhall run vpon the wall: they ſhall climbe vp vpon the houſes, and enter in at the 
                  Verſ. 9. 
                  windowes like a theefe. Now we are come to the laſt part of this ſimilitude, wherein the victorie is reported, and the manner how the poore conquered are oppreſſed, ſhewing vnto vs, that as it is when a city or towne is ſacked, ſo ſhal it be when this iudgment ſhal be executed: for ſome ſhal flee to goe foorth, and ſome ſhall fight to come in; euery mans houſe ſhall be ſacked; great booties ſhall be obtained, and no ſpare ſhall bee made of any thing that can bee founde. Where we might note, that in the conqueſt or winning of 1 Confuſion in victorie. any citie or towne, there is a mightie confuſion, euerie one running to and fro for themſelues, they tread vpon the aged, vpon the women, vpon the children, and no eie doth ſo much as pitie them. But when he ſaith, they ſhall climbe ouer the wals, and creepe in at the windowes like a theefe, we are

taught that in warre they account not any thing vnlawfull All villanie made lawfull in warre. that is done to an enemie: the robbing of houſes, the rauiſhing of women, the killing of olde men, the braining of children, the burning of cities, the ſpoiling of corne, and the raſing downe of dwelling houſes, are accounted vertues: whereupon a Father ſaide well, Bellum malis videtur voluptas, bonis neceſſitas, euill men make a paſtime of warre, but good men accoūt it a hard neceſsitie. Wherin we may ſee one ſinne puniſhed by another; neglect of law in peace, is puniſhed by contempt of lawe in warre, for there is no lawe to bridle the conquerours. Oh, how happie is Englande! which neuer for theſe many yeeres hath hearde ſo much as a trumpet ſounded vnto warres; wee haue not ſeene the ſhaking of a ſpeare; wee haue had no leading into captiuitie, no complaining nor lamentation in our ſtreetes: But yet vnhappie, which in theſe peaceable times hath laide the foundation of hir owne woe, and ſcattered the ſeede of hir owne deſtruction. Let vs therefore Vſe 1. learne to continue our peace, if by any conditions of equitie and reaſon it may be obtained, Numb. 6. 26. were we not better in theſe times to buy our peace with gold & ſiluer, or other poſſeſsions, then to aduenture all that wee haue by giuing nothing? If the enimie come home to vs it is not ten ſubſidies that wil ſatisfie him: & why are men ſo wretched as to pinch at one or two? were you not better keepe them in doing abroad with your armour and money, then ſuffer them to come home and take away your wiues and children: what do I ſaie? take away: they will rauiſh them and you ſhall beholde it; they will ſlaie your children before your face; your houſes and landes they will either giue to ſtrangers, or ſet them on fire ouer your heades, and if any remaine aliue, they ſhall be made drudges & ſlaues, or priſoners and captiues. Therefore praie for the peace of Englande: vſe the meanes to keepe it; refuſe the waie to looſe it; let them proſper that loue it. For the keeping of our peace let God bee our gouernour; let the Goſpell

bee our lawe; let the ſaints dwell among vs; let the churches bee our courtes; let the preachers bee our counſellours; let religion be our exerciſe; let praiers be our weapons; let holines be our armour, and then ſhall the angels be our wals. Let vs builde our cities with loue; let vs plant our fieldes with truth, and then ſhall peace flouriſh in our lande. For the auoiding of the things that wil break off our peace, let vs baniſh Atheiſme and all manner of carnall profeſsion; let vs roote out all the weedes of ſinne from our harts; let vs waſh off al the ſpots of euill from our liues; let vs caſt downe all the caſtles of the diuell in our land; let vs driue away whoſoeuer worketh vnrighteouſneſſe; let vs abrogate all the counſels of wickedneſſe; let vs auoide ſedition, rebellion, and confuſion, and come from the ſea of infidelitie; and then ſhall all be peace, becauſe the God of peace dwelleth among vs.
               
                  Then ſhall the earth tremble before him, the heauens ſhall ſhake, the ſunne and moone ſhall be darke, and the ſtarres ſhall 
                  Verſ. 10. 
                  withdrawe their ſhining. After the former deſcription of the terrible calamitie, which theſe beaſtes ſhould bring to that nation, now he addeth theſe heauie tidings for their greater daunting and farther aſtoniſhment: for leaſt they ſhould thinke that all the former came to paſſe by naturall meanes, the Lord not directing it, or not regarding it; the prophet ioyneth theſe tokens of the Lords peculiar power to all the former iudgments: that they might know that as none but God could be the author of theſe, ſo none but his maieſtie coulde bee the ſender of them. Theſe heauenly ſignes, or rather ſignes in heauen, are deſcribed in the two next verſes; firſt, the ſhaking of the world; ſecondly, the darkening of the lights; and thirdly, the great and terrible thunders which ſhould then be heard: all which is ſupported by a ſtrong reaſon, verſ. 11. By this verſe we may firſt of all learne, that the extraordinarie ſignes of heauen are 1 Signes ſhew iudgements. the forerunners and moſt euident prophets of calamitie and deſtruction following. Iſa. 29. 6. God which woulde

haue all his iudgements not onely felt but feared, doth not let them come ſtealing on the world, as if he could not doe them againſt our will, or not hinder them againſt their nature, but proclaimeth them by manifold fearefull ſignes in heauen. The reaſons are, firſt, becauſe we ſhould knowe Reaſon 1. that the euill onely proceedeth from him, 2. Sam. 5. 24. it doth not any whit diſtaine the Lords honor to be a reuenger of ſinne vpon the bodies and ſoules of many thouſands, but rather it maketh for his glorie; for hee muſt iudge the world in righteouſneſſe. Another reaſon is, becauſe by this 2 meanes the Lorde doth moſt earneſtly affect good mens harts, and afflict the wicked, Ezech. 32. 9. for the ſight of terrible ſignes cannot chooſe but mooue the brute beaſtes of the earth, much more reaſonable men, who are more giuen to feare, becauſe they are more giuen to ſinne: and our Sauiour ſaith in the goſpell, that mens harts ſhall faile them, becauſe of the ſignes of heauen. The vſes are theſe: Vſe 1. firſt, let vs not be ſuperſtitious or heatheniſh in fearing the ſignes of heauen aboue the rule of faith, Ier. 10. 2. For alas what can any planet or any ſigne doe but by the Lordes aſsignement? and therefore in fearing it ſuperſtitiouſly we feare not God, we diſtruſt his prouidence, we reſtraine his power, and we caſt away our owne confidence and faith. It was a great ſigne in heauen when fire came downe and deſtroyed Sodom and Gomor, and all cities, cattel and paſtures of the plaine, Gen. 19. yet little Zoar was ſaued ſtanding among them, when all the reſidue were burning about it: therefore beware of the ſlauiſh feare of the ſignes of heauen, for it is the Lorde that gouerneth the ſtarres. Another vſe, as we are not to feare them too much, ſo wee 2 are not to regard them too little, but vſe them as promptors and furtherances to another life, Luk. 21. 28. when you ſee theſe (ſaith Chriſt) then lift vp your heads, and know that your redemption draweth neere. Be it therefore that the heauens be burning, the lights be darkening, the ſtars be falling, the earth be ſhaking, and the ayre be thundering:

yet feare it no more then the Iſraelites did in Egypt; but rather now thinke that the Lord will amaze ſinners, & erect his throne of righteouſnes to ſtand for euermore. This muſt much encourage vs in theſe our later daies, wher in euerie hower we looke for the accompliſhing of all the ſignes before Chriſts comming, and let vs watch for the appearing of our Sauiour, that we be not comfortles when other ſhall bee both witleſſe and faithles: but know that good men ſhall ſtand in the middeſt of all theſe terrours and fires, as the men did walke in the middeſt of the Babiloniſh furnace, and not haue one haire of our head diminiſhed. When he ſaith that the earth ſhall tremble, he noteth that earth—quakes are notable tokens of the Lordes 2 wrath, Pſal. 18. 7. we are not onely to impute it to the ayre ſhut vp in the furrowes of the earth, as in philoſophie Earth-quakes betoken God his anger. they do, but we muſt goe to the principall cauſe, which is the hand of God; and the finall cauſe which is to ſhew his wrath: for in his wrath ſaith the ſcripture, he caſteth downe whole mountaines. Oh, how terrible is this to conſider that the whole earth ſhould be ſhakē at the chiding of God? & yet man which is made of earth, and ſtandeth on earth, and liueth on earth, and ſhall returne to earth againe, will not ſhake or tremble for the ſame. I thinke there is more terrour in the dead bones in the graues, then in liuing bodies in their houſes. The reaſons hereofare theſe, becauſe the Reaſon 1. law of wrath was giuen in fire and earth-quakes, Exod. 19. 18. Heb. 12. 18. for God did then ſhew himſelfe moſt terrible when the mountaine ſeemed to burne, and there was nothing but curſing and death: for the law that then was giuen did condemne many millions, which now do know the ſame. Againe, earthquakes do commonly proceede 2 and goe before the alteration of religion, Reuel. 6. 12. for as when Iehu altered the idolatrie of Baal, the prophets and the God were both diſplaced: ſo when religion is altered, God is as it were diſplaced, and all his ſeruants perſecuted, which muſt of neceſsitie ſhew the heauie indignation of

God; for he will not haue his image defaced nor endure that his glorie ſhould be giuen to another. Let vs therefore learne, that if the ſtrong earth be not able to abide Vſe 1. the wrath of God, then much leſſe ſhal weake and ſinnefull men, Num. 16. 1. Againe, let vs learne to preach the word more earneſtly by the conſideration of earth-quakes. We 2 may read Amos 1. 2. that two yeere before the earth-quake, the Lord ſent him to propheſie, as it were to plant the minds of his church that they might haue liued without wauering. Now it is well knowen that wee haue had one great and terrible earth—quake in our times: would God it might ſo worke that the preachers would for that cauſe preach more diligently, and the people heare more attentiuely, leaſt it prooue vnto vs a token of the decay of religion. Truely as yet (bleſſed be God) religion is not altered, but it is much defaced; and God graunt that as the earth-quake at the death of Chriſt was the decreaſe of Iudaiſme and Paganiſme, but the increaſe of chriſtianitie: ſo, that in our time may worke the like effect, and may ſeale vnto vs the decay of Poperie and hereſie, but may aſſure vs of the continuance of veritie and pure religion. We might alſo note out of this verſe, that ſeeing the heauens and earth are afraide of him: therefore the moſt guiltles creatures of God cannot abide his anger. But this we will deferre vnto the next chapter. Againe, in that the ſunne and moone are darkened: we may obſerue not onely, that God is the author of light and darkenes; but alſo that he will not let ſinners in his anger haue any benefit of them, Iſa. 13. 9, 10. The reaſons are, Firſt, becauſe they are enimies to good men and good things, Exod. 10. 22. Secondly, bicauſe they are aſhamed of the ſinnes of men, as we may ſee at Chriſts death, Matth. 27 45. Let vs therefore ſo glorifie God in our places, as theſe creatures do in theirs: for they are dark at his chiding, and they ſhine at his bidding; ſo let vs liue to praiſe him while he giueth life, and die to honour him when he ſendeth death.
               
                  
                  And the Lord ſhall vtter his voice before his hoſte: for his hoſte is very great: for he is ſtrong that doth his word: for the 
                  Verſe. 11. 
                  day of the Lord is great and verie terrible, and who can abide it? Hauing ſpoken of the darkning of the lights, & the ſhaking of the earth: now it followeth that we proceed to the vttering of the Lords voice, which ſignifieth thunder, Pſal. 29. 3. and moſt plainely, Pſalm. 18. 14. The Lorde thundred out of heauen, and the higheſt gaue his voice. By the conſideration of which phraſe wee are giuen to vnderſtande the infinite and vnſpeakable power of God, which hath ſo wonderfull and powerful a voice; the which when the Iſraelites heard Exod. 19. 20. they were not able to abide, and ſo deſired that Moſes ſhoulde ſpeake vnto them: euen ſo are we vnable to endure the ſame if the Lorde ſhoulde ſo ſpeake vnto vs; as we ſhoulde haue had no benefite by Chriſt except hee had taken vpon him the nature of man: ſo wee coulde not endure the powerfull worde of God if it were not offered by the toong of man. As the waies of God are not like the waies of men; ſo the voice of God is not like the voice of men: that is ſtronge, but this is weak; that is high, but this is lowe; that is fearefull, this is ſimple; that is terrible, this is eaſie. The people that coulde not abide Salomons gouernment, had a worſe then was Salomons, for they loſt their kinges and their God: euen ſo, when wee can no longer abide the voice of man, then let vs looke for the fearefull thunderclaps of heauen: wherefore heare the wordes of God in the mouthes of men, or elſe you ſhall feare and tremble, and melt at it in the ſtroke of the ayre. Againe, the prophet Dauid Pſalm. 29. 11. maketh another vſe of thunder, telling vs that for the power thereof, euery one in his temple doe ſpeake his praiſe. It is a wicked and damnable opinion of the multitude that the diuel can raiſe thunder: whereas we are to account it onely in the Lordes power, Iob 38. 25. although the diuell can doe much, yet is hee but weake, and his power reſtrained: therefore wee need no more feare his power in the time of thunder then

in the cleereſt ſun—ſhine day; but rather let vs praiſe the Lorde for his power, who is ſo woonderfull in all his works. Againe, if thunder be the voice of God, why do the papiſts in the time of thunder ring their bels to ſtaie it, as if it were an vnholie thing? ſurely it well be commeth them, for ſeeing they will not heare God in the Scriptures, they wil not heare him in the cloudes: if wee oppoſe Scripture to them, they ſay wee ſpeake as heretikes; if the Lorde ſende thunder, then they ſay there is a diuell abroade. Oh blaſphemous mouthes and hearts! that are ſo ſimple, and yet ſo great; great in blaſphemous hereſie, and ſimple in true diuinitie. Againe, when the prophet ſaith that he will vtter his voice before his hoſte, for his hoſte is very great: hee meaneth the noiſome beaſtes that hee ſhoulde ſende like an hoſte of men, as hath beene alreadie ſhewed. Whereby 1 Creatures enimies one to another. we are taught that euery creature ſince ſinne entred into the worlde is become an enimie one to another, like to the enimies in warre, Pſal. 105. 34. The great birdes are enimies to the ſmall, the great fiſhes to the little, the great beaſtes to the inferiour; and ſo are the great men to the little ones: the oxe cannot abide the lyon; the ſheepe cannot endure the woolfe; the foxe will not tarrie with the goate; the horſe will not dwell with the Beare; the Hart will not attende the hounde; and many moe liue in hatred one with another, but moſt of them al are enimies to man. The reaſons are theſe; Firſt, as man deſtroyed his owne nature, Reaſon 1. ſo God deſtroieth or rather altereth the nature of all other things. Secondly, God will ſurely be knowne that hee giueth power to the ſpoile, Amos 5. 9. What can an enimie doe in warre, or a theefe by the high way ſide, or a beaſt that deuoureth man, ſurely nothing but by the working hand of God? for the diuels themſelues are vnder his correction. One lion deſtroied a prophet, 1. Kinges 13. yet we know that Daniel was caſt among a denne of lions, and had no hurt at all; ſurely it was the Lorde that opened the mouth of the one, and muzled the iawes of the other. Let

vs therefore knowe that whenſoeuer either man or beaſt Vſe 1. ſhall annoy vs, that it commeth of God, Iob. 1. 4. When Shemei curſed Dauid, Dauid woulde not haue him puniſhed, bicauſe ſaide hee, The Lorde hath bid him curſe: and ſo if wee be bitten by any beaſtes, or ſtung by any ſerpent, or haunted by any foules, or oppreſſed by any enimies, let vs then thinke with our ſelues, this hath the Lord done to vs, and praie for the remiſsion of ſins. This doctrine wil take away al reuenge againſt man for any iniurie, when we ſhal bee perſwaded, that God by them doth fatherlie correct vs. Againe, let vs thinke with our ſelues how many waies the Lorde hath to correct vs for our ſinnes: the angels 2 are about vs, when God biddeth them they ſtrike, the beaſtes are among vs, when hee commandeth they diſcomfort vs, the flies and wormes ouercome vs, wee are enimies one to another, and one wound and kill another as Cain did Abel; yea we cannot truſt our owne hands, for feare they deſtroy vs, as we ſee in Saul, Achitophel, and Iudas: and when all this is done, there are ready all the diuels in hell to torment vs. Now who would loue his life? nay, who would loue his ſinnes? that bring with them vpon him ſuch an euerlaſting and intolerable hatred. Againe, when he ſaith, that he is ſtrong that doth his word, he meaneth him that doth his commandement: whereby we are taught, that euery creature hath power giuen him to doe that which God aſsigneth him, 1. King. 17. 4. The rauens at the commandement of God fed Elijah morning and euening with bread and meate, and ſo euery one when he biddeth them goe, they goe; when hee biddeth them come, they come. The reaſon is: firſt, becauſe they waite vpon Reaſon 1. God, Pſal. 145. 15. ſecondly, they worſhip their creator, Reu. 5. 14. and ſo we may learne that God neuer aduaunceth any, but he giueth them giftes to performe their callings. When he ſaith that the day of God is great, and who can 
                  The wrath of God intollerable. Reaſon 1. 
                  abide it? he thereby teacheth vs, that the wrath of God is intolerable, Deut. 9. 18. 19. The reaſons are, becauſe there

is no way to flie frō his preſence, Amos 5. 18, 19. Secondly, there can be no mediator in wrath, Ier. 15. 1, 2. By which we are taught, how ineſtimable is the benefit of redemptiō 
                  2 by Ieſus Chriſt, who hath deliuered vs frō wrath to come. 1. Theſ. 1. 10. Chriſt hath deliuered vs from that wrath that condemned the angels, that ſhooke the heauens, that rendeth the earth, that killeth the beaſts, and that tormenteth the wicked. Oh, what had our eſtate been without a Sauiour? but this, to vndergoe the intolerable wrath of God, which burneth more then any fire, which paineth more thē any death, which ſmarteth more thē any torture, which taſteth worſe then any bitterneſſe, & ſmelleth worſe then any filthineſſe, where a man and a diuel ſhould for euermore be yoked togither: this wrath hath Chriſt pacified, & from this damnation hath he redeemed vs: But now if thou ſinne againe, & make no account of the blood of Chriſt, the wrath ſhall be ſeuen times hotter, and thou ſeuen times more the childe of hell. Againe, ſeeing this is the eſtate of the damned, 
                     
                        •
                     . how wretched is their eſtate, which liue in danger therof euery hower of life; being aliue they haue no peace, and being dead they haue no eaſe: they are borne in filthines, they liue in wickednes, they die in wretchedneſſe, and damnation is their graue; where the fire is their cradle, the diuels are their nurſes, the Lord is their enemie, endleſſe torments are their reſt, & wrath without remedie is their meate. Oh let this make good men deſire to forſake this life; and let it make euill men long to forſake their ſinnes: for their pleaſurable life ſhall end in inſufferable woes.
            
            
               The xix. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 12.
                  Therefore alſo now ſaith the Lord, Turne you vnto me with all your harts, with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.
               
               NOw at the length by the mercifull aſsiſtance of the holy Ghoſt haue wee finiſhed the firſt part of our firſt diuiſion, and are come vnto the laſt; wherein

the people are exhorted to repentance. In this treatiſe following, firſt of all the prophet ſheweth them the manner of their repentance, 12. 13. verſes: and ſecondly, ſetteth downe certaine reaſons to perſwade them thereunto. The manner of their repentance is either in action or in affection, and it reſpecteth both the people and the prieſtes: In affection, as conuerſion in hart, and renting thereof: in action, as weeping, faſting, and mourning. The reaſons to mooue them hereunto are two: firſt, in reſpect of his nature, verſ. 13. then of his works, verſ. 14. That part which concerneth the prieſtes doth ſhew vs firſt, how they ſhould ſtirre vp the people: and ſecondly, how they ſhould pray, verſ. 15, 16, 17, thus much for the diuiſion.
               In this, that after all the before expreſſed iudgements, the prophet nowe at the length commeth with the flat 1 No iudgement without the word worketh repentance. commandement and worde of God, to cauſe them to bee conuerted: Wee are firſt of all taught, that except God giue the preaching of his worde with his heauie iudgements, men can neuer bee amended by them, Amos 4. 6, 7, 8. Let him thunder omnipotently, let him ſhake the earth terribly, let him darken the light fearefully, let him curſe the world iuſtly, and multiply his puniſhments abundantly; yet all this without the word of God cannot conuert a ſoule. All this is plaine in the forenamed place of Amos, wherein God telleth the people, that he had giuen them ſcarceneſſe of bread and no raine, inſomuch as two or three cities wandered vp and downe to drinke water: hee ſent blaſtings, and mildeawes, and great ſtore of peſtilence, the yong men lay murdred, their horſes were taken away, and noiſom ſtinks & ſmels infected them, & yet ſtill God complained that they had not turned vnto him: & then he biddeth them be prepared to meete their maker: So that it is euident that no croſſe or iudgement can work repentance. The experience hereof is to be ſeen in our times, wherein haue been as great ſignes and as many woonders as in any place of the worlde beſide: great thunders, feareful earth-quakes,

terrible darknes, mortal peſtilence, pining famines, & yet who is conuerted by thē? great men are made richer, mean men are made poorer, poore men are made beggers, & yet who conſidereth this? The waters haue drowned vs, the wars haue deuoured vs, & want hath afflicted vs: and yet ſtill we are as heard harted, as wickedly affected, and as ſtiffenecked as euer wee were; inſomuch as, if the whole world were in an vprore, & our whole land vpon hir death bed, well we might complaine, but hardly repent. The reaſons Reaſon 1. of this doctrine may be theſe; Firſt, bicauſe the Lord ſendeth iudgements to take reuenge, and not to worke repentance, Deuter. 32. 41. The halter is not put on the the eues necke to conuert him, but to puniſh him, as Agar was expelled out of Abrahams houſe, not to reclaime hir, The end of Gods iudgements. but to torment hir. And here we may learne the end of all the Lordes iudgements, which is to take vengeance on our euill liues: what is our eſtate? ſeeing wee are vnder the reuenging hande of God; one while our deſires are plagued, another while our appetites are moleſted, and continually is our life threatened with a longer calamitie. But ſome will ſaie, ſhall wee not bee repentant during our croſſes and aduerſitie? Oh, yes my deere brethren, for we haue the worde as well as the rod, and therefore we muſt be inſtructed by the one as wee are corrected by the other: our puniſhment is a light vengeance; but our profeſsion is a great comfort: yet we are but as it were led to execution, and therefore wee muſt repent with ſpeede before death catch our ſoules, as dearth hath done our bodies. Another reaſon is, bicauſe the word is of more force then any iudgement 2 whatſoeuer, for the conuerſion of a ſinner is a worke of more value then the deſtruction of a worlde: man was loſt by an apple, but it coſt more to redeeme their ſoules. Is not my worde like fire and like a hammer that breaketh the ſtone? Ierem. 23. 29. and the worde of God is life, and liuely in operation, Heb. 4. 10. ſharper then a ſworde, lighter then the ſunne, and heauier then the earth. The which

thing doth mightily magnifie the worde preached, and the publike miniſterie thereof, being attended by the angels, accompanied with the ſpirit, and reuerenced in the church. The angell was honorable that ſlew ſo many thouſands of Saneheribs armie, Eſay 37. for it was a great iudgement; but the miniſterie of the worde hath droue more diuels out of the worlde then it ſlewe or draue Aſsyrians out of Iſraell. And heereby let vs learne what account we are to Vſe 1. make of the worde of God: Wee feare drowning in the ſeas, burning on the lande, robbing in our iourneies, and euery ioint in our body is ſubiect to many eaſeleſſe paines: but let vs more earneſtly feare the worde of God; for thoſe hurt vs when wee feele them and ſee them, but this will harme vs when wee, neither feele norſee it; they afflict vs, but this inſtructeth vs; they puniſh vs, but this doth acquite vs; they bring vs the heauie newes of condemnation, but this bringeth the glad newes of life euerlaſting. By iudgements we are blinded, but by the Goſpell we are enlightened; by iudgements wee are endangered, by the Goſpell we are defended: and to conclude, they threaten our liues, but the worde threatneth our ſoules. Make much of the word in thy health, for beleeue me, ſicknes cannot ſo prepare thee for the Lorde as the worde can: bee conuerted by it, for thou ſeeſt all other meanes faile, for miracles doe make vs woonder, and this maketh vs repent: therefore either make this thy ioy, or God ſhall make them thy ſorrowe. What then? will ſome ſay, this is a ſtrange doctrine, do not ſorrowes and earthquakes and other fearefull 2 thinges turne vs to the Lorde? then we will not make any account of theſe thinges. To whom I anſwere, that if they doe ſo, they doe that which will vndoo them: ſhall the ſcholler neuercare for the rod bicauſe it cannot teach him but correct him, and ſhall wee ſet light by the Lordes iudgementes bicauſe they cannot conuert vs? no, no, they muſt keepe vs in obedience although they cannot beget vs to obedience; they muſt reforme vs, although they cannot

turne vs. Dauid ſaid Pſal. 119. when I ſee thy iudgements, I am aſtonied and afraide; and ſo muſt all the elect children of God vſe the iudgements of God, to continue them in the feare of God, and to keepe their natures from being ouerproude: Yea let vs tremble and quake as the earth doth, let vs weepe and mourne as the aire doth, when wee ſee the wrath of God; the ſunne cannot then ſhewe her face, ſhe is ſo dazeled with his brightneſſe, how ſhall men farre inferiour to her in glorie, bee careleſſe of his anger? And although I haue ſaid, that we are but yet leading vnto execution, let vs yet feare moſt greeuouſly leaſt the wrath of God be encreaſed on vs; for wee knowe not how ſoone we ſhall be conſumed, with what calamities we ſhall bee troubled, and with what maner of death we ſhall be crucified. Therfore let vs feare the works of God, that we neede not feele them; let vs be warned by them, that we be not confounded by them; and aboue all things, let vs caſt away that prophanenes that calleth for heauen and earth to take vengeance on vs. Secondly, we may obſerue in 2 this verſe, when hee ſaith, thus ſaith the Lord: that if the Lorde worke not repentance in vs we ſhall neuer haue it while the world ſtandeth: we may weepe out our eies, rip vp our breaſtes, rend aſunder our harts, and ſatisfie for our iniuries; but if the Lord worke not repentance in vs, then all is loſt. For this cauſe 2. Tim. 2. 25. Paul inſtructeth him with meekenes, to inſtruct thoſe which were cōtrarie minded, waiting if at any time God would giue them repentance vnto life. Indeede I graunt that men may haue a kinde of repentance as Iudas had, Matt. 27. 6. when hee ſawe Chriſt condemned, hee repented, and went and hung vp himſelfe; but to haue repentance vnto life, Act. 11. 18. as the church ſpeaketh, it is a ſpeciall and woorthy worke of God. And in theſe daies may this point be very profitably vrged, wherein men are ſo careleſſe in liuing, and ſo wretched in ſinning, as if repentance were pinned on their ſleeues, or lay in their pockets to pull out and in at their

pleaſure: but let them beware & be warned, that if they wil be ſaued, they muſt ſeeke it at the hands of God. Is repentance ſo eaſie, that you can haue it at your wiſh? indeede you may haue it, but you cannot doe it. Imagine in thy preſence a man or woman poſſeſſed with a diuel; trie thy cunning, & caſt him forth. I know your anſwer; you wil ſay you cannot, becauſe you can worke no miracles: & ſo agame ſay I, that you cannot haue repentance of your ſelues; for it is a caſting of the diuel out of your ſouls, the which none can do but by the finger of God. Repentance is not to wring out a teare, or to breath out a ſigh, or to lift vp an ey vnto heauē, or to ſay, I am ſorrie for my ſins; but it muſt fil all a mans life with weeping, & ſighing, & praying, & cōfeſsing, & amending, the which commeth frō God only. The firſt reaſon of this doctrine is, becauſe with repentance goeth remiſsiō of Reaſon 1. ſins, Act. 5. 31. & therefore we may as wel ſay, that they can pardō their own ſins, as they ſay they can repent whē they liſt. And this muſt needs mightily diſcourage vs frō ſinning, ſeeing we may cōmit that in one minute, which we can neuer claw off ſo long as we liue. Again, how ſweet is this conſideration, that remiſsion of ſins is ioined with repentance. We knowe what great & vile ſinnes we haue committed; but we knowe not will ſome ſay, how, or when they were pardoned. Vnto whom I anſwere, that they haue beene ſo long pardoned as they haue repented: and they haue as many witneſſes and ſeales of their remiſsion, as they haue weeping teares, ſighing ſobs, and wounded affections for them in the preſence of God. Another reaſon is, as it is the worke of God to harden mens harts, Iohn. 12. 40. ſo it 2 muſt needes be the worke of God to ſoften the hart: But ſome will ſay, how can the Lord puniſh men for not repenting, when he denieth them repentance? and how can he damne them for harde hearts, when hee hath hardened them? I anſwere, an harde heart and an ill life doe not ſimply condemne a man, but delight in them and negligence to bee deliuered from them: good men are tormented

with hardneſſe of hart, but they lament it; euill men are perplexed with it, & they reioice in it. God is ſaide to make hard harts, but not euill harts, and ſo to make hard harts, that men may know and acknowledge, that ſoft harts come from his workehouſe; ſo then, God hardeneth, but men delight in it, and they are condemned not for ſin, but for delight in ſinne. Wouldeſt thou then knowe whether thy hart hath beene new wrought in the Lordes moulde? then looke and ſee how thou loueſt ſinne: but thou findeſt thy hart harde; then looke againe howe thou art pleaſed with this hardnes; if thou like it, thy hart is damnable, but if thou loath it, thy ſtate is tollerable. The firſt vſe wee are Vſe 1 to make of this doctrine is this, ſeeing the Lorde hath the working of repentance in vs, then let vs praie euerie day to his maieſtie for the ſame, Lament. 5. 21. So doe the faithfull when they ſay, Turne vs vnto thee O Lorde, and wee ſhall be turned, returne vs as of old. This is the dutie of all thoſe that haue any care of their ſoules health. Art thou heauie in thy heart, and feeleſt a dulnes in thy ſoule vnto goodnes, but a nimblenes vnto euill? when thou knoweſt thou doſt thoſe things which diſpleaſe the Lord, and trouble thy conſcience, then enter into thy ſoule and humble thy ſelfe by praier, lift vp thy voice to heauen, and ſpeake for thy conuerſion. Seeſt thou not the danger of life worſe then death, ſo long as thou liueſt in an vnrepentant ſtate? there is but a little aire twixt thee and death, there is but a little time twixt thee and hell. Repentance is the Lordes gift, and he giueth it to them that aske it. I dare be bolde to ſaie, that of all ſuites commenced before God, this was neuer denied: and if thou haue any minde to bee ſaued, praie that thou maieſt be conuerted. Art thou diſſolute in life, and reſolute in vanitie, yet hearing ſome ſermons of death, and fearing ſome iudgements for thy ſinnes, wouldeſt willingly wiſh that thou couldeſt doe better? and doſt thou ſometime wring out teares to ſee the preacher ſo earneſt, and yet by no meanes thou canſt reforme thy life?

then commune with thy ſoule, and praie to the Lorde, that thou maieſt ſo liue as hee hath taught, and ſo die as thou ſhalt wiſh. Praie I ſay, not onely in companie, but ſecretlie, not for a ſeaſon, but continually, not with an indifferent minde, but with an earneſt affection; and then I aſſure thee, drunkennes ſhall not drowne thee, couetouſnes ſhall not preuaile with thee, pride ſhall not deface thee, whoredom ſhall not vndoe thee, ſtealing ſhall not ſhame thee, the worlde ſhall not deceiue thee, nor the fleſh ſhall euer condemne thee. Another vſe is this, ſeeing wee muſt aske repentance of God, we muſt needes know our ſinnes before 2 we can repent them, Ierem, 3. 13. So then, if thou wouldeſt praie moſt earneſtly for thy conuerſion, and bring all thy euidence into the Lordes ſight that hee might pronounce ſentence on thy ſide, thou muſt not come with general words & ſay, I am a ſinner as other men are, I haue liued ſinfully as my neighbours haue done, and I knowe I haue offended thy maieſtie greeuouſly: But thou muſt knowe thy ſinnes, thou muſt account them to knowe the number ſo neere as thou canſt poſsible; thou muſt weigh them vprightly, & fee which were directly againſt God, and which were againſt thy neighbour; thou muſt aggrauate them mightilie, and make them as heinous as the greateſt; thou muſt condemne thy ſelfe, open thy whole ſoule, and abhor thy owne life. Then ſhalt thou knowe thy ſinnes, that their number is infinite, their rewarde is damnation, that their power is execrable, that their preſence is intollerable: Tell them as a couetousmā doth his ſiluer; look on them as the husbandman doth his furrowe, conſider them as the carrier doth his loade, condemne them as the iudge doth the theefe, pray againſt them as a marriner againſt a ſtorme, fight againſt them as a ſouldier againſt an enimie, accuſe them as a lawyer doth his aduerſarie, and forſake them as a lambe doth a lyon. Then ſhalt thou knowe that one ſinne is woorth a ſoule, that one drop of mercy is worth a world, and that true repentance hath winges to beare thee vp to

heauen. If the preacher tell thee thy ſinnes, then knowe them; if the lawe tell thee them, then remember them; if thy conſcience accuſe them, then repent them; if thy brother rebuke them, then euer after loue him; if the church reprooue, then yeelde vnto it; and if thy enimie caſt them at thee, yet receiue it, for this will make thee know them: and if thou know them, thou wilt pray againſt them; and if thou praie againſt them, thou wilt repent them. Turne you vnto me. By this ſentence wee may obſerue that God neuer regardeth any of our ſufferings or croſſes till wee be repentant: Or more plainly, be it that our houſes are burned, our children murthered, our inheritances remooued, and our owne liues tormented; yet all this doth not appeaſe his wrath except wee adde contrition, the which thing the prophet inſinuateth when hee maketh this concluſion vpon all the former iudgements; Therefore nowe ſaith the Lorde, turne vnto me, &c. As if hee had vſed more wordes ſaying: you O people haue had your land waſted with beaſtes, your liues pined with famine, your cattle mourning for foode, the heauens obſcured with darknes, God regardeth no ſorrowe but repentance. the earth quaking to trouble you, and terrible thunders roaring to diſquiet you; yet for all this is not the Lord contented with you, except you be repentant. The ſelfe-ſame thing may wee ſee Eſay 57, 3, 4, 5. where the Lorde telleth them that it was not their faſting and ſorrowes that he regarded, but their vnfeined conuerſion. As a father hauing an euill ſonne is not pleaſed with him bicauſe hee is whipped openly in the ſtreetes, or impriſoned, and ſo arraigned for his follie, except he bee repentant: euen ſo is it with the Lorde, hee regardeth not the puniſhment (ſaith Auguſtine) but the perſon that ſuffereth. It is not our ſufferings voluntarie or inuoluntarie, our ſicknes, warre, famine, pouertie, or bloud that can ſatisfie the Lord or ſaue our ſoules; inſomuch as after thou haſt endured harde fits, wicked ſlanders, wrongfull oppreſsions, many hungrie daies, manie ſharpe ſtripes, and many dangers of death: yet for all

this without the ornaments of a chriſtian, thou are neuer the neerer to God. Some will ſaie this is harde meate to be digeſted, that the Lorde is not pleaſed nor pacified although hee puniſh vs: why? are not all theſe ſufferinges the puniſhments of ſinne? and when wee are puniſhed heere, is not the Lorde too rigorous to puniſh vs alſo hereafter? I anſwere, wee ſuffer for our ſinnes, but not to ſatisfie for our ſinnes: for the rewarde of ſinne is death euerlaſting, and all miſeries which may bring vs to our ende. Therefore excuſe not your ſelues for pouertie or ſicknes, or famine, or labour, or ſlauerie, or ſeruice, or anie other croſſe, for a man may haue all this, and yet bee a caſt away. The firſt reaſon heereof is, Matth. 24. 8. That all the ſufferinges of this life are but the beginning of Reaſon 1. ſorrowes, they are not one quarter of that vengeance which the Lord will take for our ſinnes except we repent. Oh, conſider the intollerable hande of the Lordes wrath, which regardeth not our bloude, nor woulde looke on a burnt ſacrifice made of a whole nation, and yet regardeth the broken harts, & caſt down ſoules: what are the plagues in the worlde to come, and the wages of ſinne in another life, if heere wee may haue a pining ſicknes, a deſpiſed life, an eaſeleſſe heart, and an endleſſe feare; one man neuer lyeth in bed, another neuer eateth bread, another neuer liueth merrie day, ſom lie tormented in a burning fire, ſome bed-redden with the gout, ſome tormented with a collicke, ſome ſcalded to death, ſome cut in peeces inchmeale, ſome are put into furnaces of burning lead, and yet all theſe are but the beginning of ſorrowes and without repentance: if it were poſsible for one man to endure all, yet afterwarde he might goe to hell fire. Another reaſon is, bicauſe the ſufferings of this life are alike, common to 2 good and bad, vncircumciſed and the people of God, Ezec. 32. 28. Although God chaſten euerie one that hee loueth, yet he loueth not euery one that hee chaſteneth. Chriſt his beſt beloued was crucified, and yet beloued: but Herod
                  
was eaten with worms, & yet hated: ſhal we think that the eſtate of Herod was any whit better in another life, bicauſe his miſerie was begun in this life? no verilie: no more may wee extoll or accuſe thoſe which liue long or miſerable daies in this life. Ioſiah a good king, of whom God pronounceth that he ſhoulde be gathered to his fathers in peace, but yet hee was ſlaine in warres; and Ahab an euill king died alſo in warres, was his eſtate the better bicauſe he ended his life as a good man did? no, no, it had bin better for him he had neuer bin. Yet deſpaire not in thy afflictions, and preſume not to aduance worldly ſorrow into the place of godly ſorrowe, and make not thy calamities thy Chriſt to lift thee vp to heauen. Hauing learned that our Vſe 1. calamities will not cōmend vs to God, let vs do as the prophet here exhorteth, Turne vnto the Lord our God, Ier. 3. 1. Bloud cannot pacifie him, but water can; death cannot ſatisfie him, yet teares can; bodily plagues will not mooue him, but ſpiritual ſorrowes wil; vengeance ſtaieth him not, but repentance will alter him: Therefore turne vnto the Lorde. Shall not wee thinke my deere brethren, that all theſe iudgements which wee for theſe many yeeres haue endured, haue wrought mightily in them, and on them which were taken by them, and is there yet an ende of them, either in ſight or in hope? Haue not many ſouldiers fighting, & dying in their owne blood cried alowde in the eares of God? Haue not many houſes beene ſuddenly ſwept away with the peſtilence? Did not the Lord ſee it? and if hee ſawe it, why did hee not pitie it? and if hee pitied it, why did hee not ſtay it? haue not many hundreds in the firſt yeere of famine periſhed moſt miſerably for want of bread, whoſe cries muſt needs pearſe the heauens, and whoſe laſt gaſpes might mooue him to pitie; yet it hath continued ſome yeeres ſince? Then may wee ſee and ſay, if ſufferings coulde haue ſatisfied the Lorde, the blood of ſouldiers, the liues of citizens, the crie of poore men, and the feare of all men might already long agoe

haue pleaſed him: but he will neuer be altered till we bee altered. Therefore now let me remember you with Ioel, Turne vnto me ſaith the Lord, &c. Alas, alas, our health is turned into ſickneſſe, our liues into death, our plentie into famine, our peace into warres, our mirth into mourning, our ſtore into want, our people into periſhing, and our poore are turned into their graues; and yet we haue not turned vnto the Lorde: oh let vs turne before all be ouerturned. Let vs fill our chambers with mourning, rather then all our land be filled with howling; let vs pray for repentance; let vs ſue for repentance; let vs worke for repentance, and beſtowe all that we haue vpon repentance, or elſe vengeance will come and take all away. Another vſe is this, Rom. 8. 18. ſeeing God regardeth not our miſeries, 2 then it followeth that all our ſufferings are not woorthie of the life to come. Art thou good? then deſpiſe theſe worldly ſorowes, and hope for heauenly ioyes: art thou an euill man? then repent with ſpeede, leaſt thy intolerable euils be turned into intolerable woe. Wouldeſt thou by paine ſeeke aduauncement? they deſerue it not: wouldeſt thou by paine bee amended? then pray for repentance. Oh, how are we puniſhed in this life? nay rather how ſhall we be bleſſed in another life? Couldeſt thou which lieſt in ſome ſtrange torments, bee content to end thy life in ſorrowe, to ſpende thy good for eaſe, or to become any baſe ſeruant, that thou mighteſt be releaſed? are thy paines ſo great, ſo comfortleſſe, and ſo continuall? yet for all this be not diſquieted, be not diſcouraged, for anon thy ioyes may be farre more pleaſant and continuall. But why doe I ſpend time in vaine? feareſt thou any of thoſe euils which happen in the world; for thou canſt not but feare all: wherefore a Father ſaid, it is better to ſuffer one death, and ſo to die, then by liuing to feare all manner of deathes. Then I ſay, conſider with thy ſelfe whether is greater, thy ſorrowes, or thy comforts, thy body or the heauens, thy ſufferings, or the ioyes of the world to come; there ſhall famine

be baniſhed, warres ſhall be conquered, ſickneſſe ſhall bee cured, labour ſhall be ceaſed, pouertie be forgotten, enmitie ſhall be cooled, paines ſhall be remooued, teares ſhall be dried vp, and death it ſelfe be euerlaſtingly deſtroied: therefore ſuffer much to liue ſo, labour much to die ſo, and die in deſpite of death to raigne ſo. All the miſeries of this life are not worthie of this bleſſedneſſe, but there is not any man liuing that can endure the one halfe of them: therefore precious is the bountie of God, who giueth vs this glorie for his promiſe, not for our croſſes, nor yet for our vertues; for our croſſes are the deſerts of ſinnes, and our vertues are imperfect goodneſſe. Thirdly, in theſe 3 words we may obſerue the definition of repentance, namely, that it is a turning vnto the Lord: ſo that, ſo long as we are vnrepentant, ſo long we goe from the Lord. I might alſo make many words on the metaphor, turne, and not without profit, to ſhew you how our life is a iourney, our faith the legs whereon we walke, the ſcripture our guide, the church our companion, and heauen our waies end; ſeeing all is done elſewhere, I will not now ſtand vpon it. Onely in theſe words I will vrge this, that there is no repentance, Repentance is the conuerſion of the whole hart. except the whole hart be changed; it is not in good words, nor yet in an outwarde good practiſe, but in the motions and affections of the hart, 1. King. 8. 47, 48. for this cauſe our Sauiour biddeth firſt cleanſe that which is within, and then that which is without: As men doe firſt cleanſe the inſide of a veſſell (not the outſide) and then put goodneſſe therein; ſo muſt the hart, which is a veſſell, be firſt cleanſed, or elſe all is vaine which the hande doth, the mouth ſpeaketh, and the minde beleeueth. Thy memorie muſt bee turned, thy vnderſtanding, will, and affections muſt bee changed; thy memorie, by remembring God and his truth; thy vnderſtanding, by knowing God and his Goſpell; thy will, by beleeuing God and his promiſes; and thy affections, by louing, deſiring, meditating, and reioycing in and on heauenly things; and then is thy

whole hart conuerted. Some haue knowledge and vnderſtanding, but no ſounde faith, or ſweete loue; ſome againe loue, but they want knowledge: and ſo ſome haue a good will to the Goſpell, but they want memorie. For the amending of all this, follow my direction: conferre, and you ſhall haue memorie: read, and you ſhall haue knowledge: heare, and you ſhall haue faith: pray often, and you ſhal haue al good affections, all which muſt be done before you can be ſaued. The firſt reaſon hereofmay be this, becauſe no man can haue a perfect faith, without the totall Reaſon 1. conuerſion of the hart, Rom. 10. 9. and men can neuer liue well that beleeue not well, ſaith Auguſtine. If thou haue one part of thy heart with the Lord, bicauſe thou knoweſt the truth, thou haſt another part with the world in louing thy life; ſo in part thou beleeueſt God, and beleeueſt the diuell. Canſt thou brag of faith, when thy heart is diſtracted? louing and liking two contrarie maiſters: no verily, thou deceiueſt thy ſelfe, thou canſt not loue gold and beleeue in God: thou canſt not haunt thy pleaſures, and yet delight in the Goſpell: Therefore if thou wouldeſt haue a ſound faith, thou muſt firſt haue a ſound hart, conuert thy hart, and then thy faith will follow: if it bee thoroughly, thou ſhalt haue a perfect faith; but if thou doe it in part, then is it but a painted bodie, which can neither goe nor ſee. Another reaſon, becauſe regeneration maketh 2 the heart to bee one, Ierem. 32. 39. Indeede they which wander in wickednes, haue a hart and a hart; but when we come to the Lord, we muſt haue but one hart: for the hart is the man, wherein are treaſured all kind of vnderſtanding and knowledge: therefore it muſt not be halfe of fleſh, and halfe of ſtone, Ezech. 11. 19. but either all fleſh, or all ſtone: for he that is in part prophane, and in part a chriſtian, in very deede is no man. And for this cauſe is hypocriſie of all ſinnes moſt abhominable, which maketh a man no man diſſembling with God, the world and himſelfe: with God, in his hart; with the world, in his life; and with himſelfe,

in that he diſſembleth. Of all ſinners feweſt hypocrites are conuerted, and of all perſons are they moſt odious; and therefore hell is called the lake burning with fire and brimſtone prepared for hypocrites: vnleſſe then, we will liue as they liue, and die as they die, we muſt turne our whole hearts to the Lord. The vſes are theſe, Firſt that we draw Vſe 1. neere vnto the Lord with a pure hart, Heb. 10. 22. Puritie is ioyned with integritie: therefore when our hearts be pureſt, then are they fitteſt for the Lord. In olde time there

ſtraite ſteps to our feete, leaſt that which is halting be turned out of the way, Heb. 12. 12. 13. we are in great danger by prolonging our amendment to haue all marred and turned out of the way: therefore let vs awake ouer our ſoules that wee may ſaue thoſe parts which are vnſound; for there is not any man but hee hath ſome woundes and maymes in his ſoule, which muſt bee ſpeedilie cured; or elſe the longer they runne, the more miſerable they growe. It is a lamentable thing to ſee men to deferre their conuerſion, ſaying one yeere they will doe it next yeere, and the next ſeaſon they will plowe their harts, and ſowe it with the worde. It is alſo a thing dangerous to lodge but one night in a knowne ſinne, and therefore as the Apoſtle ſaide of anger, ſo we muſt of euerie other tranſgreſsion, Let not the Sunne goe downe thereon. Make ſpeede I beſeech you to amende your liues, to reclaime your hearts, to forſake your vanities, to renounce your errours, and to put away your pleaſures: for if your hart delight in any thing beſide God, it denieth God; if it keepe hir naturall corruption, and caſt it not foorth, it blaſphemeth God; if it delay to returne, it abuſeth his mercie, it deſpiſeth his grace, and condemneth it ſelfe. Say not ſaith Salomon, I will giue thee to morrowe, when thou maieſt to day. The whole time of this life is a time of repentance, and therefore looke howe much thereof wee ſpende not in repentance, ſo much we ſhall want to doe it in, which muſt euery day make vs neerer to the Lorde, or neerer to hell.
            
            
               The xx. Sermon.
               HAuing handled the exhortation vnto repentance, nowe let vs proceede to the manner thereof; With weepings, fastings, and mournings: the which Outward ſignes with inward repentance. wordes require a ſeuerall treatiſe. And firſt, in that they are commanded to weepe, we may obſerue, that with inwarde

repentance, there muſt be ioyned outwarde ſignes thereof, and in occaſion of greater and more forcible feeling of our ſinnes, wee ſhall wring out ſorrowes more abundantly. This thing is taught by the prophet Hoſ. 14. 3, 4. where hauing exhorted the Iſraelites to a newe life, hee biddeth them to take the wordes of repentance, and to make a publike profeſsion thereof. Peter repented, and it was with teares, for the Scripture ſaith, hee wept bitterly. The ſelfe ſame thing doe good men finde in themſelues at this day: for as where the bodie is wounded, there iſſueth foorth ſome bloude; ſo where repentance hath wounded the ſoule, there will follow ſome bloud, I meane the teares therof. Carnall men thinke they haue repented, if they ſay (God forgiue me, or I am ſorrie for it) although afterward they liue neuer ſo lewdly. Looke vpon thy life and ſee what gutters the teares haue made in thy face, which haue diſtilled from thy eies for thy ſinnes: looke alſo vpon the ſacrifices of thy lips, how lamentable thy praiers haue been before the Lord: account with thy ſelf where & when thou diddeſt offer them; for without praier thou couldeſt neuer be conuerted. It may be thou haſt not wept, by reaſon of ſome natural infirmity; but it muſt be, that thou haſt praied, or elſe it cannot be that thou haſt repented: Therefore let not any man deceiue himſelfe, & think that he hath repented, till his life be turned from the world, his minde from pleaſure, his face from ioye, and his bodie from deſire of ſinning. The firſt reaſon hereof may be this, becauſe Reaſon 1. the Lord hath redeemed vs, Iſa. 44. 22. that is, as the Lord hath ſhewed open tokens of his fauour toward vs: ſo we muſt ſhewe open tokens of our repentance towarde him. The which reaſon well conſidered will teach vs that there ought to bee as great loue in vs for our ſaluation, as was in Chriſt for our redemption: He cared not for his life that hee might ſaue vs, why then ſhould wee care for our owne liues, and ſpare our ſinnes? he ſhed his blood, and we ſent our follies: he gaue himſelfe for our ſinnes, and yet

we will not let him haue them. There is none that is ignorant of this, except he had repented, hee muſt haue periſhed: and therefore if thou repent not, thou muſt be damned. The Lord hath not beene carefull for thy ſoule that thou ſhouldeſt bee ſecure, but his loue muſt be a patterne for thee to loue thy ſelfe. All that he did was for thy ſoule, he was reproched, he was empoueriſhed, he was condemned, and crucified for it; that thou mighteſt endure all ſhame to repent them, all pouertie to preuent them, all iniuries to lament them, and all deaths to mortifie them. He walked many miles, watched many nights, faſted many daies, and endured many afflictions, that thou mighteſt labour much, watch carefully, abſtaine continually, and endure all ſorrowes to put away thy ſins. Another reaſon, bicauſe vnto outward tokens of repentance the Lord is readie 2 to giue remiſsion, Dan. 4. 23. when men ſatisfie their for iniuries, diſtribute their goods, weepe for their euils, and pray for pardon, then is the Lord moſt willing to ſeale a releaſe in the blood of his ſonne. For in truth there muſt be a change in al the parts of a mans life & poſſeſsions. When a ſicke man is recouered, he weareth not the ſame clothes, he vſeth not his old diet or apparell and reſt: ſo when our ſoules are recouered by repentance; then we cannot eate ſtolen bread, nor weare gorgeous apparell, nor ▪yet reſt in that wealth which wee vnlawfullie gayned, but all muſt bee turned into charitie and pietie. The firſt vſe of this doctrine is this, Iſa. 31. 6. ſeeing wee haue ſunke Vſe 1. deepe in rebellion, let vs turne againe vnto the Lorde from whome wee are fallen: as we were not aſhamed to ſinne, ſo let vs not be aſhamed to be conuerted. As couetous men care not for their names, ſo they may get wealth; and vncleane perſons little eſteeme their infamie, ſo they may fulfill their luſts; and as theeues make but a paſtime to rob and ſteale, if they may eſcape the gallowes: ſo let vs account it a farre leſſe diſcredit to confeſſe our faults in goodneſſe, then they doe to commit them in wickedneſſe.

Turne therefore as we haue ſinned: we haue many ſinnes, let vs ſhed many teares; we haue great ſinnes, let vs ſigh many ſorrowes; we haue long dwelt in them, let vs ſpeedily forſake them; we haue watched in ſinne, now let vs watch in praier; we haue loued ſinne, let vs embrace correction; we haue delighted in vanities, let vs reioice in teares. How can a man reioice in teares? verily vnto a good ſoule teares are more welcome then ioyes, and it reioiceth in tribulation, finding it more ſafe to bee waſhed with weeping, then to bee delighted in muſicke. There is not any man that hath felt the power of godlineſſe, that will denie this; and if he doe, let Dauid teach him, when he proteſteth that teares were his repast, when the enemies of God reproched him. Looke on thy ſoule weeping, as thou waſt woont to beholde thy pleaſure reioicing, and thinke that this is the Lordes great mercie towarde thee, which hath yet knocked at thy hart for amendment; loue the meanes which will make thee tender harted; delight in thoſe ſorrowes which will procure thy endleſſe ioyes; ſhed thy teares here, that hereafter thou maiſt be freed; lament in ſorrowes this life, that in another thou maiſt reioyce in comforts. Secondly, let vs not alway lie in ſorrowes, and 2 liue vnreformed, but follow the counſell of the prophet, Ier. 26. 13. to make our waies of euill good. When men are repentant, they enter into a new iourney▪ for as before they were ioyfully ſailing to hell, ſo now they are painfully trauelling to heauen: and ſeeing a good way is the wiſh of a traueller, let vs amend our waies, that we may haſten to our iourneyes ende. When thou haſt well drenched thy ſoule in ſorrowes, then proceede to reformation, and remooue thoſe blocks out of thy life, which would haue hindered thy paſſage into heauen. If thou haſt beene a drunkard, be now temperate; haſt thou been an Atheiſt? now feare God; if thou haue beene a ſwearer? vſe his name more reuerently: and as Paul ſaid of theeues, Let him that ſtole, ſteale no more; ſo ſay I of all notorious ſinners, let them

be ſo no more, but rather labour to doe good vnto other. By this we may ſee that repentance is not in ſhew, but in hart; not in hart, but in works; not in works, but in affections; not in affections, but in conuerſation. Some thinke they haue well repented, if they be a little ſorrowful; other thinke they are well reformed, if they be a little reclaimed, and wearie of theirvanities: but theſe men muſt knowe, that if good liues bee not ioyned with godly mindes, and reformed waies with weeping harts, neither the one nor the other ſhall profit them. Therefore now my deere brethren, let vs win the field from our ſinnes, and ouerthrowe the troupes of our pleaſures; let vs now conquere our deſires, and reforme all the abuſes of our liues, that wee may yeeld to the goſpell, liue in the church, eate at the Lordes table, and worke out our owne ſaluation with feare and trembling.
               In the ſecond place the Lord biddeth them to fast, that is, to abſtaine from all delights and deſire of meates, that 2 as they haue alreadie pined their ſoules with ſinning; ſo now they ſhould puniſh their bodies with faſting. And in In great calamities we muſt faſt priuately. this place the prophet ſpeaketh of priuate faſting: for as yet he is not come to the publike faſts, which muſt be directed by the cleargie-men, who onely had authoritie to proclaime them: of the which we haue ſpoken in the firſt chapter. In this place we may obſerue, that hainous offences and generall, muſt haue greeuous and generall lamentation. It is moſt requiſite, that when we haue any graund cauſe to craue at the Lords hand, we vſe moſt humble tokens of an inſtant and longing deſire, Iudg. 20. 26. The Iſraelites ouercome by the Beniamites, faſt and pray al the day till euening, and the day following they get the victorie, the which is a warrant for vs to doe the like, that wee may ſo ſlay our ſinnes, as they did their enimies. The which muſt inſtruct euerie man in his familie, during theſe times of vengeance, (wherein we haue no more power to be deliuered, then a woman in trauell to caſt foorth her childe)

that they abſtaine from glutting and deuouring the Lords benefites: For the Lord will not redreſſe our want, till wee haue generally lamented our miſerie: and we can no way better puniſh our bodies then by faſting, that the Lorde may be mooued to pitie vs, as he did Abraham, being willing to ſacrifice his ſonne, yet he reſtrained him. The firſt reaſon is this, bicauſe faſting maketh vs praie with more Reaſon 1. feeling affection, which our Sauiour inſinuated, Matth. 17. 21. when he ſaide that faſting and praier woulde heale the falling euill, and nothing elſe. Indeede, to ſhewe you howe men are affected in the time of their faſting, I can hardlie doe it except youfelt it: howe ſweete are their ſorrowes, howe earneſt are their praiers, howe ſtrong are their grones, and howe acceptable are their hearts vnto the Lorde: their teares are their drinke, their cares are their meate, their nakednes their brauerie, aſhes their beauty, humilitie their health: their eies are not drouzie, their mindes are not wearie, their handes are not filthie, and their cries are not eaſie. The Lorde accepteth their obedience, in doing that they are not able; and their faith, in beleeuing that they haue not in them; and their praiers, in deſiring that which is aboue them: then can men affoorde to die for God, that they may liue for euer for themſelues. Another reaſon is, bicauſe faſtes doe mightily mooue the 2 Lorde, and bleſſe the mourners, Ezra 8. 23. There was neuer any man that was thus humbled, and was not comforted: We our ſelues haue had the trial hereof not long ago, that great matters haue bin by this meanes effected: And ſurely, if it were more orderly practiſed, neither ſhoulde the Lordes cauſe bee ſo coldly profeſſed, nor our liues ſo fearefully plagued. Oh, this fulnes of bread hath wrought all manner of miſchiefe among vs; it maketh mens liues licentious, their manners monſtrous, their mindes wicked, and their names odious: The tauernes are fuller then the churches, the pantries better furniſhed then the chapples; the markets more adorned then any place is with religion;

men forget not the ſhambles, but their maker; and a ſtewarde or purueior, or cater, is more thought vpon then the miniſter. The firſt vſe heereof is this, that when the Vſe 1. Lorde is about to puniſh vs, wee can neuer bee humbled ſufficiently, no though wee laie open our ſinnes, ſetting our liues to ſhame, our health to ſicknes, our friends to hatred, our wealth to pouertie, or our brute beaſts to mourne with vs, Ion. 3. 8. Howe wilt thou nowe humble thy ſelfe to ſhewe thy penitent heart? when thou ſeeſt that all meanes to increaſe thy ſorrowe are little inough. Doe not thinke that this is ſufficient humilitie to come into the Lordes houſe, and there to vncouer thy head, and ſo ſit downe, rather as a iudge of repentance then a dooer of repentance, or falling downe on thy knee, ſpeaking a fewe colde praiers, or rather with a lukewarme deſire, doſt thou reſt therewithall contented, but God is not contented with it: nay rather vncouer thy heart with thy head, and let thy minde fall downe as lowe as thy knee. Strange is it to ſee, that men are not halfe ſo humble to God as they be to their ſuperiours. If I might teach thee to liue penitently, I woulde tell thee that thy life muſt be filled with feare, thy heart with ſorrowe, thy labours with griefe, thy comforts with mourning, and thy minde muſt euer be conſidering the Lordes preſence. Thou muſt ſuſpect thy meate, leaſt thou delight too much in it; thou muſt feare thy expences, leaſt thou offende charitie; thou muſt doubt of thy actions, leaſt they prooue hurtfull; thou muſt hinder thy naturall affection, leaſt it exceed meaſure; and looke that thy marriage-loue be not too much, leaſt you bee both endangered; thy labour muſt not bee continuall, thy ſleepe muſt not be too ordinarie; thy talke muſt not be too merrie, neither maieſt thou thinke thy ſelfe holy. Let the word be as a cocke to awak thee; let praier be as darknes to hinder thee; let the cogitation of thy ſinnes bee as ſorrowfull newes in thy eares to trouble thee; and then let wiſedome rule in thy worldly actions. A ſecond vſe is this, that 2
                  
if we account our ſelues of the Lords bride-chamber, let vs faſt when time & occaſion calleth vs thereunto, Mat. 9. 15. for if we faſt not, either we are no children, or no obedient children: If Vrijah would not reſt in his bed nor in his houſe, till Ioab & the Lords hoſtes were at reſt; then let vs my beloued (except we be woorſe then Hittites) faſt in want, & not reſt in trouble in theſe dangerous times, wherein there hath not bin a creature of God but it crieth, nor a childe of God but hee weepeth. I am afraide to ſay, that the bridegrome is taken from vs, although I am aſſured we haue deſerued it, & good men ſuſpect it. We haue as yet more practiſe of ioy then of ſorrow, although we haue more cauſe to weepe then to reioice: & thus we are merrie in our woe, & ſorrie in our ioy. Alas, alas, hard hearted men (if men, or rather vnreaſonable beaſts) which gather the woode, and blow the fire to burne themſelues withall. All time is become too little for pleaſure, & no time is little enough for holines: all coſtes goe to the kitchin, none to religion; ſo much eating & drinking, and ſo little faſting and praying, muſt needes drowne vp that little goodnes that men had gained by liuing amōg chriſtians, & til men can leaue their meat to ſerue the Lord, they can neuer leaue their ſins to ſaue their ſoules. Faſt I beſeech you, great men in their pallaces, rich men in their houſes, & poore men in their cottages: men with their ſeruantes, women with their maides, and parents with their children; for this kinde of euill will not bee caſt out but by prayer and faſting. The thirde 3 circumſtance of their repentance is mourning, whereby the Prophet teacheth vs that a ſorrowfull ſpirite doth accompanie a penitent hart, 2. Corint. 9. 10. for this cauſe Paul telleth vs that godly ſorrow worketh repentance not to be repented of, and Salomon, 1. King. 8. 35. calleth repentance the tribulation of the ſpirit. Men in our daies woonder at this tribulation, becauſe it is ſo ſeldome: for in deede if it were common, then it would ceaſe to be a woonder; but yet it is a greater woonder, that wee haue repentance ſo

much preached, and ſo little practiſed. But ſeeing repentance bringeth ſo much ſorrowe with it, it may notably comfort thoſe which are diſtreſſed in minde, liuing in torments of conſcience for the burden of ſinne: ſurely happy is their eſtate which are corrected with this rod, whereby they are freed from ſinne, deliuered from wrath, and reconciled to God. The medicine that worketh moſt forcibly cauſeth greateſt paine, and ſpeedieſt remedie; in like manner thoſe ſauing woundes of Chriſt, doe then moſt ſweetely wipe away our ſinnes, when our mindes are moſt roughly gawled with a pricking conſcience. And therefore they cannot be ſaide to haue repented, which affect nothing but pleaſure, and neuer in their life wept one teare for their ſinnes, or praied ſecretly for the diſtemper of their minds. This is a grounded and infallible rule, Without repentance there is no ſaluation; without ſorrow there is no repentance; without earneſt praier there is no godly ſorrow; and without feeling of the Lords wrath, there is no praier that pearſeth the skie, or mooueth the Lord. The firſt reaſon of this doctrine is this, becauſe there is no comming Reaſon 1. to our Sauiour till wee bee oppreſſed, Matt. 11. 28. Chriſt calleth not merrie harts, or thoſe that loue pleaſure and mirth; for this ſuiteth not with contrition: but then is our way open to our Sauiour, when our harts are as heauie as lead, and our affections like the voices of mourning women. And thus the Lord tempereth our eſtate, that when we are loſt in ourſelues, he findeth vs; when we are weake, he ſtrengtheneth vs; and when we are caſtawaies, hee receiueth vs. Oh how happy are our oppreſſions which driue vs to God, as the ſhipwracke droue Paul and his companions into Melitum: where by that meanes many ſoules were woon to God. Harken my deere brother, doſt thou ſorrowe that it is thy hap to endure greefe? nay reioice in thy ſorrow, that bringeth thee to Chriſt. Sorrow is a guide to leade thee; a broome to ſweepe thy paſſage, that nothing hinder thee: it is the key that openeth the gate of

Chriſtes mercie, and a ſure friende to ſue out thy pardon. Another reaſon is, becauſe Chriſt will not come but to ſuch 2 ſpirits, Luc. 19. 10. ſo that if thou wouldſt goe vp to Chriſt, thy ſorrow will lende thee wings; if thou wouldeſt haue Chriſt to deſcend to thee, thy ſorrowe will perſwade him: Chriſt is the phiſition of the minde, and he will not come till thy minde be ſicke. As in winter the moſt raine falleth; ſo in diſtreſſe of conſcience moſt comforts come downe: this doctrine bringeth great ioy of glad tidings which ſhal be to all harts, where godly ſorrow dwelleth. But let vs not Vſe 1. alway lament theſe ſorrowes, or reſt in the graues of our eaſeleſſe cares; but let our praiers be multiplied as our dangers are increaſed, ſo doe the godly Hoſ. 6. 1. Flie therefore to the Lord when thou feeleſt any ſmart in thy ſoule; and let not muſicall delights or pleaſant companions entiſe with conceites to baniſh this greefe; but let thy greefe be thy meate and drinke, and the meanes to ſtirre thee vp to praier. It is to be feared, that many haue beene either vtterly condemned, or deſperately endangered by vſing worldly medicines for theſe heauenly ſores: for ſo ſoone as their harts waxe heauie by reaſon of their ſinne, they call for worldly delights, which either driue them to deſperation, or harden them to condemnation. Drinke is good to the thirſtie, but it is dangerous to them that are ſicke of burning feauers; in like ſort vnto them that haue eaten poiſon: ſo mirth is good, but vſe it not to driue away godly ſorrow, but abide it patiently with praier and faſting. As thou ſeeſt thy ſinnes, ſo let the Lord heare thy praiers; and as thy greefe for them is increaſed, ſo let thy cries againſt them be multiplied. Thinke whome thou haſt offended, wherewithall thou art greeued, and how thou canſt be pacified. If thou be rich, let thy cloſet bee thy ſanctuarie; if thou be poore, let the woods and ſecret places be thy temple; if thou haue little knowledge, reſort to them that haue more; if thou be heauie and feeleſt no comfort, yet pray ſtill, and giue not ouer; for the ende ſhall bee bleſſed, although

the beginning bee deſolate. Againe, as Hoſeah 
                  Vſe 2. teacheth chap. 14. 5. let vs in our mourning take with vs the hope of pardon; or elſe a Chriſtian ſoule ſhoulde haue no more feeling then a deſperate wretch: for we may lawfully perſwade our ſelues, how ſharpe ſoeuer we feele our pangs and ſoule-fits, yet there is neuer taken from vs the hope of pardon; yea, if faith bee not vtterly couered, we may bee bolde to aſſure ourſelues of victorie. What then? how if hope and faith be buried, and we yeeld vnto death, denying the ſweete promiſes of Chriſt; is not this deſperation? no verily: for as there may bee life in the body, although men cannot perceiue it; ſo there may be in the ſoule, although none diſcerne it: for although Dauid ſaid, This is my death; yet he recouered both life and peace of conſcience. Therefore a contrite ſpirit is alway regarded of God; and if he euermore loue it in other, hee doth alſo like it in thee. Be patient, the ſame hand which made the wounde ſhall heale the greefe; and if thou feele a decay of grace, ſtirre vp thy ſelfe more earneſtly by calling on God, and hold faſt till the Lord come: Receiue good comfort in the middeſt of thy ſorrowes, as a watchman eſpying the dawning long before it bee light; although it be bitter in thy mouth, it ſhall bee ſweete after digeſtion, (and ſay) I will abide the Lords leiſure, I will drinke his potion; it is a cup, but not of deadly wine; I will receiue it for the purgation of my ſinne, although it make me ſicke.
            
            
               The xxj. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 13.
                  And rent your harts and not your garments, and turne to the Lord your God: for he is gracious and mercifull, ſlow to anger, and of great kindnes, and repenteth him of the euill.
               
               THeſe words are another part of the Prophets exhortation vnto repentance, wherein hee noteth the greateſt meaſure of Repentance, vnder this metaphor,

                  Rent your harts. Meaning the moſt extreme and comfortleſſe paines in the action thereof: not that indeed men ſhould rip vp their breaſts, and rend in twaine their harts; no more then when our Sauiour biddeth vs cut off the arme, or plucke out the eie that offendeth vs, wee ſhould diſmember our bodies for euery fall or ouerſight: But by the rending of the hearts, wee are taught that the paines of true repentance, exceede all other paines (death The paines of true repentance exceeds the paines of the fleſh. excepted) neither whipping of the body as the Ieſuites do, nor launcing it with kniues as the prieſts of Baal did, or pricking it with bodkins, or ſickenes, or famine, or trauaile, are comparable to repentance: for theſe may bee quickly eaſed by man, but the other cannot bee redreſſed but by God. Vpon this the godly Iſraelites pray, Iudg. 10. 15. that God would deliuer them (meaning from the terrours of their ſinne) and lay whatſoeuer pleaſed him vpon them beſides. The inſufferable wounds of a tormented minde are the onely paines which are like to the paines of hell; ſo that neither brimſtone nor fire commeth any thing ſo neer vnto it as this doth. Wherupon it was ſaid, that good men haue their hell in this life; meaning that the paines of repentance are ſo ſmart vnto them, that it differeth many times verie little from the plagues of the other life. Now (I beſeech you) that are godly, that haue long reſted in this reſtles harbour, to acknowledge with me the truth hereof: and you that haue perſwaded your ſelues, that not onely teares; but eaſie ſighing grones doe goe for payment of your ſinnes: Learne of me this one leſſon, that your minds muſt be more perplexed, and your hearts more inwardly vexed; not onely for a day, but for a longer time, yea, peraduenture a whole life, that you may ſing with all the godly, The paines of hell came about me. The firſt reaſon, bicauſe Reaſon 1. that repentance is the dreſsing of the ſoules wound: ſo that as the ſoule is more dangerous than the bodie; ſo the wound therein muſt needs be more painfull, then a wound in the fleſh: And for this cauſe are the miniſters charged

with the ſoules of men, Heb. 13. 17. becauſe they dreſſe not their woundes, and ſhew not their ſinnes that lie ſecret in their ſoules. The which account is now a daies little regarded of many miniſters', and leſſe of many people: one careth not for their ſinne, and the other regardeth not their ſoule; but the more they be, the more is the pitie, or rather the more ſhall be their iudgement: Neither let vs be amazed to heare of theſe vnſpeakable gripes of minde, for they crie continually in the eares of God for mercie, as a wound calleth for a ſalue. Another reaſon, becauſe in repentance men feele the wrath of God againſt ſinne, which 2 they doe not in other corporall plagues, Pſal. 74. 1. The wrath of God made our Sauiour to ſweate water and blood, which comming vpon men, although they cannot ſweate as he did, becauſe they cannot reſiſt as he did; yet they feele in themſelues ſuch terrible horrours, as amaze the ſtrong, and confound the weake: From hence it commeth that ſome in this extremitie, thinke that all that they do is for their condemnation, their meat, drinke, apparell, health, and libertie, are vnto many weake minds tokens of the Lords wrath. Indeed they which are burned with this iron, thinke that euery houſe will ouerwhelme them, and euerie leafe that falleth on the ground will hurt them; the noyſe of any thing doth trouble them, and a ſharpe worde almoſt killeth them. Terrible is a life lead vnder ſuch conflicts; for euery howre threatneth a thouſand deathes: the hart euer accuſeth; the memorie witneſſeth againſt it ſelfe; his owne reaſon condemneth him; and his continuall feare is his cruell tormentor. The firſt vſe. Let vs not be diſcouraged in theſe woefull torments; but take example by our Vſe 1. Sauiour Chriſt, who for the glorie that was ſet before him moſt patiently endured the greateſt croſſe. A hell thou muſt needs haue, thou canſt not eſchue it: therefore chuſe it in this world, where thou ſhalt finde mercie with God, comfort in his word, and ſolace in his church; in the world to come thou ſhalt haue none of theſe. Make heere thy

apprentiſhip vnto ſorrows, where thy friends may accompany thee, thy praiers may quiet thee, and thy ioyes may recompence thee. Why? art thou afraid that thou canſt not abide ſuch paines; then looke vnto God the author and finiſher of thy faith. Art thou in doubt to ſuffer ſhippewracke and deſpaire? then knowe that GOD tempteth none beyonde their power? Are thy friendes againſt thee? yet the Aungels are with thee. Loueſt thou not ſorrowes? then ſhalt thou neuer gaine ioyes: if thou wouldeſt haue learning, thou muſt endure the rodde; if thou wilt haue golde, thou muſt croſſe the ſeas; if thou wilt bee famous, thou muſt take much paines; and if thou wilt haue heauen, thou muſt winne it by repentance. Art thou yet afraide of thy ſelfe, and canſt not willingly vndergoe it? ſet before thee the paines of this life, and the plagues of the other life: theſe are temporall, thoſe are eternall; theſe are ſufferable, thoſe are intollerable; theſe are among men, thoſe among diuels; theſe come of loue, thoſe of wrath: and to conclude, God ſhall mittigate theſe, but hee will augment and aggrauate them. Howe canſt thou auoide death? no more canſt thou auoide hell: If thou wouldeſt neuer die, thou muſt neuer be borne; and if thou wouldeſt neuer repent, thou muſt neuer liue. Let repentance bee thy purgatorie; ſinnes, thy paines; ſorrowes thy tormentors, and ſaie with Elijah, Poure on more water, that God may the more be glorified in thy ſaluation. The ſecond vſe, is the ſame that Dauid maketh Pſalm. 31. 2 23. after hee had tolde of this great extremitie, and howe the Lord did ſet him at libertie, he calleth vpon al the godlie ſaying, Loue yee the Lorde, yee his ſaints: for he preſerueth the faithfull, and rewardeth abundantly the euill dooers. Hearken vnto this you ſorrowfull doues of the Lord: your cauſe is not wicked, your caſe is not deſperate, and your hope ſhall not be fruſtrate: for the Lorde will deliuer you. Is it not as eaſie for him to free you from ſinne, as from hell; and from ſorrowe, as from damnation? Yes verily, and therefore

loue the Lorde if you bee his ſaints. Loue him I ſaie, and hee ſhall loue you; nay, hee loued you firſt, and therefore loue him againe: Hee loueth you, for hee looketh ſtill vpon you; and doe you loue him by looking ſtil vnto him; hee loueth you and watcheth for your ſafetie; do you loue him & watch in his praiſes. Which of vs liuing that were born in his church, cannot ſay that the Lord hath wrought wonders for his annointed? Tell thy ſoule what the Lorde hath done for it; howe hee caſt out the diuell, and planted his ſpirite; howe hee freede it from wrath, and gaue it grace; how he gained it from vengeance, & gaue it repentance: Repentance I ſay, with waterie eies, leane bodie, mournefull minde, and miſerable wounded heart; and now for all this, thou liueſt in greater peace. Therfore loue yee the Lorde yee his ſaints: loue him as your huſbande, you are his wife; loue him as your father, you are his children: loue him as your God, you are his creatures; and loue him as your life, you are his ofspring. Labour for him you loue, pray to him you loue, thinke vpon him you loue, reioice in him you loue; and then die to liue with him you loue: thinke it long till you ſee him; thinke it little that you giue him; count it woe to forſake him; and count it bleſſednes to loue him. After hee had told them what they ſhoulde doe, nowe hee telleth them what they 2 ſhoulde not doe, namely, Not cut their garments. Wherein he rebuketh the follie raigning in their, and our times, when they vſed to rent their clothes: what careth the Lorde for a newe garment, agaie cloke, or a coſtly pearle: All theſe ſhall periſh, but he endureth for euer. And therefore rent not your garments onely: not meaning it to bee vnlawfull to ſhewe an outward token of ſorrowe, but hee blameth curioſitie and hypocriſie without inwarde ſinceritie; ſuch as was in the high prieſt when he heard Chriſt ſay hee was the ſonne of God, hee rent his garments. From hence we may gather, that outwarde holines is abhominable: Outward holines abhominable. All ſuch religion as is onely for faſhion, praying, and

receiuing the Sacraments, hearing of ſermons, and ſuch like for meere ſhewe and companie, Eſay 57. 3, 4. And if it bee lawfull to ſay that men are onely cyphers in religion, when they know little or nothing, and practiſe euill; then may wee ſaie that there are more cyphers then figures in our daies. You ſhall knowe them, bicauſe they come but nowe and then to church, where they fetch many a fained ſigh, and ſpeake many ignorant Amen: thinking that the worſhip of the Sabbaoth lieth in putting on their beſt apparrell; and yet ſimple ſoules, they are perſwaded they be as good chriſtians as can be of fleſh and bloud, and ſo they bee as Chriſtes diſciples were, when hee ſaide vnto them, O yee of little faith, how long ſhall I bee with you, how long ſhall I ſuffer you? and ſo wee may ſaie to them, howe long ſhall this ſimplicitie bee called chriſtianitie? and howe long ſhall faith giue place to opinion? and howe long ſhall euerie baſe perſon extoll vaine profeſsion againſt true Religion? Oh, I woulde they coulde bee brought vnto vs, that wee might caſt out this diuell from them. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: becauſe the Lorde Reaſon 1. trying the ſecret diſpoſition of euery hart, pronounceth, that he is wearie of ſuch fained worſhip, and that his ſoule abhorreth it, Iſai. 12. 13. what a matter is this? that our knee-praiers, our lip-labours, our Eaſter-communicants, our time-ſeruing hearers, and all of that broode, whoſe deuotion is as hot as Iacobs ſtone, ſhould wearie the Lord with their vaine petitions, their idle preſence, their outwarde reuerence, and their temporall obedience, that he abhorreth both them and theirs. Whoſe toong ſhall perſwade them of the truth hereof; verily if the prophet Iſay ſhould come from the immediate preſence of God, with his toong purified by a Seraphim; yet they would no more beleeue him then they doe vs, except they feele the ſmart of their idleneſſe. Another reaſon, becauſe God doth not regarde 2 temporall ſorrowe for ſinne, as wee may ſee in Eſau and Ahab; and therefore much leſſe that ſeruice which is but

temporall, and outwarde alſo. And although Ahab was ſpared for his fained repentance, yet it was but reſpited, and the iudgement came notwithſtanding: whereby we may ſee how vnwilling is our mercifull father to take vengeaunce of our ſinnes, if there appeere in vs any ſmall ſparkles of grace, or any remorſe for puniſhment. Let vs therefore learne that no viſor can deceiue God, and that there is no halting before him: it is not our lifted vp eies, our knocking of breaſtes, our ſighing, our whipping, our launcing, faſting and pining that can ſatisfie the Lords expectation, or miniſter any comfort vnto vs at the day of iudgement. Let vs learne from hence that exhortation Vſe 1. of the Apoſtle, Gal.. 6. 7. that we be not deceiued. The maine point of religion is this, that wee bee aſſured of life euerlaſting. What ſhall we be, if wee bee deceiued? if we haue gheſſes in ſteede of knowledge; wauering in ſteede of conſtancie; weakneſſe in ſteede of faith; darknes in ſteede of light, and vanitie in ſteede of diuinitie, what are we but deceiued? If we make Chriſt in our mouthes, religion in our eies, and mortification in a friday faſt, or Chriſtianitie to continue no longer then while we be in the churches: if we be not deceiued in this, then were neuer any deceiued. We deceiue our brethren with ſhadowes, our God with ſhewes, and our ſelues with ſinne; we deceiue our harts of knowledge, our liues of holineſſe, and our ſoules of meate, and life euerlaſting. Oh how doe men deceiue themſelues, and deceiue other! when in the meane ſeaſon the Lorde crieth out, Be not deceiued. What fooles are men to be ſo beſotted with follies, making hypocriſie their heauen, Sathan their God, and counterfeite religion their ſoules worſhip. The Lorde hath ſent ſtrong deluſion among men that they might be damned, which receiued not the loue of the truth: yea it is moſt equall that they ſhould be damned by falſhood, which would not be ruled by truth. Yet let vs take heede to our ſoules, that we deceiue them not, and mocke the Lord: for the caſe is dangerous if we conſider

it, and deſperate if we fall into it. We will ſing in voice, and we will ſing in ſpirite; euen ſo we will repent in hart, and repent in teares: let vs profeſſe with the mouth that wee may bee ſaued, and beleeue in the ſoule that we may bee iuſtified. Let vs alſo receiue the exhortation of the Lord, 2 
                  Iſa. 1. chap. that we waſh our ſelues from diſſimulation, and haue the euill thereof remoued from vs. The filth of this ſinne is ſo odious in the eies of God, that vntill it be ſcowred off, there is not any thing in vs that may ſatisfie his wrath, or pacifie his diſpleaſure: Therefore if either the feare of his highneſſe, or the regarde of our owne ſoules may any way mooue vs to amendment, let vs waſh away this abhominable filthineſſe. It is but a painted hew, the water will purge it; it is like ſnowe, the water will melt it; and it reſembleth hoare froſt which the water diſſolueth: but I meane not the water of the earth, but the blood of Chriſt; for that is the onely medicine againſt hypocriſie: Pray for it and thou ſhalt haue it, wherewithall if it be once waſhed, it ſhal neuer be defiled againe: Flatter not thy ſelfe, and reſt not in the ſhew of holineſſe, but reforme thy ſoule throughly. Of all ſickneſſe the falling euill is the worſt, for it maketh one ſeeme without life; and ſo of all euill hypocriſie is the worſt, for it maketh men liue as if there were no God: it defaceth good things, it denieth religion; for it maketh it to haue a harlots face: mens liues it defileth, and mens minds it corrupteth; therefore bring not ſuch a monſter into the Lords ſight, which altereth all thy proportion and lineaments, & disfigureth the glorious gifts of God. But of this thing we haue elſewhere ſpoken, and now it ſufficeth to touch it lightly. Lord your God. Now the prophet telleth 3 them to whome this conuerſion muſt bee made, that is to God, for whoſe ſake onely men muſt repent. From hence obſerue, that ſo long as wee are vnrepentant, wee erre and runne away from God, Pſalm. 119. 67. Vntill God called Adam, & ſo wrought repentance in him, he hid himſelfe from the ſight of God; and ſo doe all the poſteritie

of Adam flie from the Lorde, as Ionah did, vntill wee are Till we turne to God, we go from God. repentant: We abhorre his Goſpell, we deny his truth, we renounce all goodnes: ſo long as we are vnregenerate, we ſpeake euill of the things wee know not, and corrupt our ſelues in the things we knowe, Iud. 10. we eate in riot, wee ſleepe in pride, we walke in pleaſure, and liue in vnthankfulnes. Rich men aduaunce themſelues aboue other: poore men murmur againſt God: yoong men liue in open ſinne, and old men die in wicked ignorance; and all becauſe they are not repentant: Thus men wander, ſome one way, and ſome another, and few or none the right way. What maruell is it? to ſee ſo many abhominations ariſe in the world, ſeeing men run from the truth, that is Chriſt: forſake the light, that is the ſpirit; and die in miſerable death, becauſe they haue departed from the life, that is God. Oh, miſerable men that caſt themſelues into ſuch a ſea of euils! wherein the farther they wade, the deeper they are plunged, and the longer they go the harder they are reclaimed: and if at any time they ſtraine at any euill, it is not for loue of God, for him they haue forſaken; but it is for ſhame of the world, which they feare more then death. The firſt Reaſon 1. reaſon is, becauſe of our ſelues we haue no knowledge of ſaluation, neither can we inherite the kingdome of God, Matth. 18. 17. whereby it is euident how little wee are able to do in any good thing, but euery day waxe woorſe and woorſe: And this may ſerue vs for a notable and lamentable ſpectacle to behold our vile nature which draweth vs the farther from God, that it might drowne vs the deeper in condemnation. If wee haue nothing in vs but good nature, there is nothing in vs of God his grace: we are not building timber, but fire wood: it is repentance that chuſeth vs and ſquareth vs, and ioyneth vs to God. The Lord in this worke is the builder; the miniſters are the carpenters; the worde is the axe; the griefe of heart is the ſtroke; and regeneration maketh vs the frame: otherwiſe we are ſtones refuſed of the builder. Another reaſon, becauſe 2
                  
in our vnrepentant eſtate wee cannot pleaſe God, Rom. 8. 8. & ſeeing we cannot pleaſe him, we run from him, we forſake and denie him: This would make ones hart to melt, to conſider that all actions not grounded on a new life doe ſwarue from God. Some obiect, if God did not like them, they could not doe them: So may a thiefe, an adulterer, or rauiſher of women defend his iniquitie, but it will not goe for payment: for God ſuffereth you to follow your pleaſures againſt his pleaſure, that your pleaſures may taſte of euerlaſting paynes. Therefore labour for repentance, that you may be brought into the Lords ſheepefold, and be incorporated into his congregation, and ſaued by his deerely beloued ſonne: then ſhall your waies be altered, and your pleaſures ouerturned, and you ſhal pray with Chriſt; Not our will, but thy will O heauenly father bee done. Being in an vnrepentant eſtate wee runne away Vſe 1. from God; yet let vs looke backe on God, as Iſay exhorteth, Iſa. 45. 22. and then we ſhall be ſaued. If thou be running from God through a lewd life, giuing ouer thy ſelfe vnto libertie, yet looke backe vpon him often: the children of Iſrael if they were ſtoong by ſerpēts, by looking on the brazen ſerpent recouered preſently: And although the ſting of thy ſinne is greater then the ſting of adders; yet the Lord is mightier and wholeſomer then the brazen ſerpent: therefore looke vnto him if thou wilt be healed. Old Simeon ſo ſoone as he had ſeene Chriſt, preſently deſired to die for ioy: and Zacheus hauing but a minde to ſee him, was made that day a notable chriſtian. Looke often on the Lord, for by beholding him thou maiſt grow in loue with him: wiſh continually to be with him, as the Iewes which being captiues in Babell, yet made their praiers toward Ieruſalem. Eſau at the ſight of Iacob fell to weeping, & loued him the better euer after: ſo if thou wilt caſt thy eies to heauen & behold his glorie; & then looke vpon the world, and ſee his gouernment; then behold the earth, and conſider his benefits; learne his Goſpell, and note his truth;

and life thy eyes to Chriſt to marke his mercie: thou wilt ſurely turne the ſaile of thy wicked life, and come with the Sabaean Queene to worſhip in his church. Conſider his workes, for they defend thee: thinke vpon his iudgements, for they threaten thee: marke well his kindnes, for it maintaineth thee: and beleeue his worde, for it ſhall conuert thee: caſt but one of thy eies vpon the Lord, and thou ſhalt winne him: looke often vpon him, leaſt minde and eies be both blinded, and neuer ſee him more. Another 2 vſe, wee muſt lament the plague of our ſinnes raigning among vs, Iſa. 59. 9. 10. when the Prophet had ſhewed them their danger, he bringeth them in mourning on this wiſe: Therefore is iudgement farre from vs, neither doth iuſtice come neere vs: we waite for light, but loe it is darkenes: we grope for the wall like the blinde, & grope as one without eies: we ſtumble at the noone day, as in the twilight: we are in ſolitary places, as dead men: we roare allike beares, & mourn like doues, &c. Thus muſt men that are not yet regenerate re count their miſeries, after they heare them condemned by the word, ſaying vnto themſelues; Howe blinde are our eies that we cannot ſee the glorious light of the Goſpell; wee are quite forſaken of the Lorde, who keepeth vs from beleeuing of his truth; wee haue no power to performe the leaſt part of that Goſpell, to walke in any tollerable obedience, ſanctification goeth againſt the haire, and though we like it, yet wee cannot doe it; wee ſee that hee that refraineth from euill maketh himſelfe a praie: therefore let the Lord come and reforme our liues, and adorne our mindes with righteouſnes, that wee may bee deliuered from this ſlauerie of ſinne, let him turne the heartes of children to their fathers, and turne our courſe vnto himſelfe. Moreouer think what deadnes is in your ſoule, what ſinfulneſſe is in your life, and what wrath of God hangeth ouer your heads; for aſſuredly except you confeſſe in this ſort, you ſhall be confounded before you be conuerted. Let your harts be awaked betimes, that wrath ouertake you not, and let whatſoeuer

may further you to God, (although it be ſhame or iudgement, or nakednes, or pouertie, or death) bee moſt ſpeedily receiued.
            
            
               The xxij. Sermon.
               
                  YOur God. After all this preaching of repentance: nowe hee beginneth to comfort their diſtreſſed mindes, which coulde not but be grieued grieuouſlie, and therefore he putteth them in minde that the Lord is their Lorde and God. Howe may this bee? if he be theirs, then they are his: and will he ſuffer them to bee made a pray vnto brute beaſts, and to make the heauens to thunder their deſtruction? what comfort haue they by his ſeruice? or what pleaſure hath he in their cries? verie much; for ſometimes a tender nurſe and louing mother wil make hir childe weepe bitterly, that it may loue hir the better: ſo the Lorde to trie his owne, caſteth them into a bed of ſorrowes. From hence wee muſt gather, that in our greateſt calamitie and aduerſitie, God is our mercifull God. Artthou tormented with ſorrowe that it is bitter to thee In our greateſt miſerie we muſt account God very merciful to liue, and better for thee to die? or, art thou vexed with ſore ſicknes, and intollerable impriſonment? haſt thou no meat for thy ſelfe and thy tender babes? and ſeeſt thou a whole nation in an vprore? yet for all this acknowledge with Dauid, Pſalm. 22. 1. that God is thy God although thou ſeeme forſaken. Oh, ſweete mercy of a father, and glorious condition of a ſonne! whom no pouertie, no miſerie, no iniquitie can part in ſunder: though he chaſten vs, yet he loueth vs; though wee be helpeleſſe, yet hee remembreth vs; though we be in death, yet he ſaueth vs. God is euermore the father of his church, and of euery member therein; he ſcorneth not their parentage; he refuſeth not their pouerty; he regardeth their ſufferings, and deſweth their ſaluation: Let vs then ſay with Iob, that although hee ſlaie vs, yet we will truſt in him; death ſhall not driue vs in

ſunder, but conioyne vs togither. The reaſons are; Firſt, bicauſe in proſperitie he will bee knowne to maintaine vs, Reaſon 1. and in aduerſitie to comfort vs, Eſay 51. 12. If men would or coulde vndergoe all the former euils without comfort, then might they haue ſome colour torefuſe and diſtruſt God, but they are not able: neuer is any man at one time diſtreſſed in bodie, and diſtracted in minde; or oppreſſed outwardly and not comforted inwardly. If thy minde be heauie, thinke on the comforts of this life; if thy bodie bee vexed, then confider the quietnes of thy minde; if both be grauelled togither, then comfort thy ſelfe bicauſe thou liueſt: And ſo thou ſhalt ſee one ſtaffe to beate thee, and another to defende thee; one cauſe to puniſh thee, but a greater to comfort thee. Then denie not God although thy comfort ſeeme ſmall, for that begger were worthie of ſtripes which woulde raile on a gentleman, giuing him a grote which was able to giue him a crowne. Another reaſon: God hateth them that crie out againſt him, Ier. 12. 8. 2 Now how can we more blaſphemouſly crie againſt him, then when wee traitorouſly denie him? for if we acknowledge not him to be ours, then wee denie our ſelues to bee his, wherein wee ſhake off all obedience, and ſpit in his face. O conſider what a thing it is to make the Lorde to hate vs, the worlde will laugh at vs, the church will defie vs, the angels will not defende vs, but the diuell will haue vs; for he watcheth for the Lordes hatred as a rauen doth for a bullockes death or the butchers ſlaughter day. We cannot preuaile by complaining againſt God, for to whom ſhall wee appeale? therefore if we would preuaile, let vs complaine of our ſelues, that he may be iuſtified and we acquited. Let vs take heede that wee tempt not God in our miſeries, for hee will take vengeance of the ſinnes we Vſe 1. commit in aduerſitie, Ezech. 20. 15. The Iſraelites being in the wildernes without drinke, hauing the whole world to bee their enimies, their number being great and their miſeries being many; yet the Lord made their owne bloud

to waſh away their murmuring. And let not vs tempt the Lords power as they did; nor yet lightly eſteem theſe mercies we enioy, being wearie of patience, and grudging at our poore eſtate: neither let our weake wits or ſicke bodies excuſe our follies; for we ſee the Lord will plague vs with one miſerie after another. Some are of this minde that they thinke they may be borne withall, if they goe awrie in aduerſitie: as to lie, to ſweare, to ſteale, to be abſent willingly from ſermons, becauſe they bee poore, or lame, or ſicke, or light-witted; but they are farre deceiued, for it is not lawfull to doe euill, that they may be well. If a ſtubborne ſonne feeling his fathers rod ſhall reuile him, he will puniſh him the more; ſo God will puniſh vs the more if we abuſe him in our aduerſitie. Iob was more blamed for his vnaduiſed ſpeeches in the time of his trouble, then for all the vanities of his former life. Therefore my deere brethren, let vs be aduiſed how we murmur againſt the Lord, notwithſtanding our aduerſitie: for the Lord will not holde him guiltleſſe that preſumeth on his mercie, or deſpaireth of his goodneſſe: let not our wordes be ſtout againſt him, that we defie him, or too baſe that wee ſhould forget him. Another vſe: we knowe the Lord doth multiply our miſeries, 2 to the intent that we ſhould more earneſtly ſeeke after him, Hoſ. 5. 15. He giueth vs the more ſtripes, that wee ſhoulde giue him the more praiers: hee encreaſeth our ſharpe ſufferings, that we ſhould encreaſe our bitter weepings, and for this cauſe he puniſheth vs that he might bee knowen to be our God. What then? will ſome ſay, hath he no other meanes to manifeſt his iuriſdiction, and to challenge our liues to himſelfe, then by laying on a loade on our backes of intolerable miſeries. To whome I anſwere, that he hath moe meanes to worke it then any liuing are able to ſhew it; but this meanes liketh him beſt, eſpecially after men haue forſaken him. It is lawfull for him to cruſh their bones into powder, their fleſh into peeces, their blood into dung, and their liues into death, if it pleaſe him;

and moſt bleſſed is their eſtate that are thus aduaunced by him. Now then learne if thou haue taſted of the ſower cup of ſorrowe, to flie to God more ſpeedilie, and to entreate him more earneſtly. He hideth himſelfe, that we ſhoulde ſeeke him; he runneth from vs, that wee ſhould runne after him; hee caſteth vs off, that wee ſhould make account of him; he it is that bringeth vs into danger, that we might knowe he will deliuer vs out of danger: We are taught by experience, we are reclaimed by correction, wee are purged by his rod, and he taketh from vs our delight, that wee might come to him for delights. Let vs therefore goe out of our ſelues, much more out of our houſes to ſeeke his preſence which is euery where, his benefites which are generall, and our owne happineſſe in the valley of teares, neuer giuing ouer till wee haue found him whome our ſoule loueth. For he is gracious. Now we are come to the reaſons which the prophet vſeth, to perſwade him to repentance, which are ſet downe in this verſe and in the next: in this verſe taken from the adiuncts or properties of God; in the next, they are taken from his effects or works. His properties are deſcribed to be theſe fower, gracious, mercifull, long ſuffering, and repenting him of the euill: whereof euery one hath a ſingular waight to perſwade men to repentance. By the firſt hee meaneth, plentifull in giftes; by the ſeconde, readie to forgiue ſinners; by the thirde, waiting for their conuerſion by repentance; by the fourth, the changing of his iudgements threatened. So that the prophet might thus reaſon with them, Repent, O ye men of Iudea, for the Lord hath many bleſsings in ſtore, doe not looſe them; hee is moſt readie to pardon you, doe not refuſe it; for he hath and doth tarrie long for your amendment, abuſe not his patience; and it may be if you will repent, theſe lamentable miſeries ſhall be all reuoked. Againe, can you not repent? the Lord is gracious, he will helpe you with his ſpirite. Are you afraide it will be in vaine? noe, he is euermore entreated. Thinke you it is too late? that cannot bee, for he is

long ſuffering. Feare you that your land and liues ſhall bee yet deſtroied, his promiſes notwithſtanding? I tell you plainly, you ſhall no ſooner repent of your ſinnes, but hee will change his minde, and repent him of the euill.
               By the firſt word, gracious, let vs learne that all the ſpirituall 1 and temporall giftes of God do call vs to repentance, Deut. 4. 33, 38, 40 Repentance being a thing ſo needefull, as without it none can bee ſaued, the Lorde hath made as many preachers thereof, as he and all his creatures are. If Al creatures doe mooue vs to repentance. wee looke vp to him, wee ſee his grace, that putteth vs in minde of repentance; if we looke to his creatures, & marke for whom they were made, that is, for vs, then they ouercome vs; if how they were made, by the vnſpeakable power of God, then they diſmay vs; if we conſider their eſtate, ſometime ſeene, and ſomtime not ſeene, ſomtime pleaſant, and ſometime not pleaſant, ſometime glorious, and anon troubled; all this will teach vs to bee troubled for ſinne. Thou changeſt thy garments, then change thy life; thou ſeeſt the earth fruitfull abounding with many a pleaſant herbe, let not thy hart be barren, and ſtuffed with filthie & ſtinking ſins. Come to the ſpirituall gifts of God, & ſee how many preachers thou haſt to moue thee to repentance: it is the end of preaching, the fruit of hearing, & the motion of praier: the ſacraments ſignifie it; the Spirit worketh it; and the whole church of God liueth in it: the biſhop watcheth for it; the doctor teacheth for it; the worker of myracles doth witneſſe it; & the poore mans boxe doth prooue it. I cannot run ouer al, it is ſufficient that euery one do prooue it, & I would to God that any might preuaile. The reaſon, becauſe God woulde be neere vnto all that call vpon him, Reaſon 
                  Pſa. 145. 18. he wil cōpaſſe vs about with a world of witneſſes that they may draw vs to him, or elſe to accuſe our diſobedience, whom the heauēs could not win, or the earth admoniſh, or the church perſwade, or the ſpirite inſtruct, that all theſe which could not work our health, may further our death. And ſeeing in euery place theſe are manifeſt, in ſo

much as we deſpiſe all warnings of God and his creatures, it is moſt equall that we be pnniſhed with all torments of hell fire. Seeing all things are notes vnto vs of the Lords Vſe 1. fauour, then aſſuredly if men will ſhew any care to ſerue him, hee will neuer hide his face, or puniſh vs extremely, 2. Chron. 30. 9. Oh what a comfort is this to a troubled ſoule, to haue all the creatures of the world to witneſſe the Lords fauour! the birds flying, the beaſtes eating, the corne ſtanding, the graſſe growing, and the houſes ouer our heads are pledges vnto vs of the grace of God: Then turne thee and conſider not two or three, but euery one in their kinde, and thou ſhalt finde ineſtimable ioy. Why doe men complaine for want of grace? when all the world is ful of grace; it pearſeth the ſtones, it cleaueth the rocks, it ſhaketh the trees, it quickeneth the beaſtes, and it deſcendeth to the bottome of the earth; onely the ſoules of men are not capable thereof. Beginne now with thy ſelfe; ſet theſe creatures as iudge; arraigne thy ſoule as guiltie; bring foorth thy guiltie conſcience, and waite for the ſentence of condemnation. Oh, no, ſaue thy ſelfe from theſe frowarde inuentions. Turne I ſay a little, ſhew a willing minde, bring a ready hart, pray for an ounce of godly ſorrow, and let the world and the goſpell, the creatures and the ſpirite, the earth and the church, the angels and the beaſtes encreaſe the ſame; gather thou the wood, they will blowe the fire; thy care ſhall be augmented, as the widowes oile by Eliſhah, that thy debts ſhall be diſcharged, thy trouble ſhall be eaſed, thy life ſhall be amended, and thy ſoule ſhall be bleſſed. Seeing all the creatures of God doe remember vs of his grace, then let euery creature be deere and precious 2 vnto vs, Gen. 1. 31. as a pledge of his fauour; for the Lorde cōmendeth them all to be good: And if he which wrought them doe ſo, then much more ought wee for whoſe ſake they were created. Let vs then often meditate on the frame of the world, the bodies of men, the proportion of beaſtes, and the little greene leaues ſhall miniſter vnto vs much

inſtruction to reforme our liues: we ſhall finde not one of them made for themſelues, but all of them for one another, and eſpecially for vs. Wherefore it cannot bee, that we were borne for luxurie, riot, pleaſure, profite, ſorrowe, loue, ioy, or hatred: no not for the poſſeſsion of our ſelues, but for the poſſeſsion of the Lord. Conſider theſe things, and thou ſhalt finde all time too little not ſpent herein, and all ioy but vanitie that is not applied to this. When thou canſt not heare the worde, reade it; when thou canſt not reade, then meditate on it; when thou art wearie of meditation, then turne to the creatures, and ſolace thy ſelfe in them, as in a moſt pleaſant garden of many ſweet flowers; marke their diuerſitie, in colour ſtrange, in number infinite, in making contrarie, and yet in vſe all one, euen for thy ſake, that thou mighteſt be for the Lords glorie. Marke their growth, that thou maiſt growe ſo; and their death, for thou ſhalt die ſo; and their ſpring, for thou ſhalt ariſe in the ſommer of all pleaſures with them in the kingdome of heauen. Mercifull. The ſecond reaſon is taken from 2 the Lords mercie, and that therefore if they will repent, he will pardon. Wherein I might tell you many thinges woorth the learning, of the Lordes mercie, and ſhew you by many arguments, howe the ſcripture in many places doth expreſſe it, ſometime naturally, as to men and beaſts, Pſal. 36. 6. ſometime to good and bad, Mat. 5. to his church through Chriſt, Luc. 1. 78. and all theſe he meaneth in this place, when hee ſaith, that God is mercifull, not ſimply through Chriſt, whereby he ſaueth his church; but alſo through himſelfe, whereby he loueth al his creatures. From God his mercy muſt moue vs to repentance. hence obſerue, that the mercie of God muſt leade men to repentance, 1. Sam. 12. 24. The which is cleane contrary to the courſe of the worlde, which take it for a libertie of ſin, and make it not a neceſsitie to repentance: but a good childe is more afraid of a gentle and a kind father, then of a ſterne and ſeuere; and we if we be the children of God muſt be as much terrified from ſinne with the ſweete ſongs

of Sion, as with the loud thunder claps of Sinai, & be as ſubiect to the Lords cenſure in his ſweete mercies, as other in the fearfull curſes of the Law. Therefore let not our time of peace, our healthie bodies, our large poſſeſsions, our heaps of treaſure, our ſweete children, and all other mercies of God, make our harts fat; but let vs vſe all theſe to awake vs from ſinning, and to reſtraine vs from offending him that defendeth vs with them: yea, let vs weepe moe teares for hauing them, then for wanting them, that we may enioy the promiſes of this life and of the life to come. The firſt reaſon, becauſe they are mercifull which loue mercie, and therefore bleſſed, Matt. 5. 7. If we would ſee a token of our Reaſon 1. pitifull harts, then let vs thinke how the ſweete promiſes of the Goſpell haue pearced them. It is no wonder to ſee ſuch bloodie minds in Papiſts, becauſe they make ſmall account of the Lords mercie, teaching vs that men may ſatisfie for their ſinne: and for this cauſe they thirſt after blood for the breach of their canons. But yet let vs beware how we perſwade men to relie on the mercie of God; for they ſay wee teach men to truſt to mercie, and to liue vily: but let vs exhort one another in the Lord that we walke woorthie of his mercie, and vſe his abundant clemencie for a promptor vnto repentance. Another reaſon, becauſe God is more delighted with his mercie, then with our ſacrifice, 2 
                  Hoſ. 6. 6. and therefore ſo ought we to be: ſacrifice winneth him, therefore let mercie ouercome vs, euen thoſe mercies which we read in his word, and note in our liues, that wee may pull downe more and more vpon vs. Oh I feare, ſeeing of long time we haue had ſo little regard of mercie, and all of iudgement, now the thing wee were afraide of is come vpon vs, namely wrath; for we feele it in our liues & in our times, making many mens harts to tremble, and the bodies of ſome to die: Yet for all this, the time of mercie is not all ſpent; therefore let mercie draw vs vnto God, and the former and late receiued kindnes from him, bee as bands of ſteele to keepe vs in obedience. Seeing the mercies of Vſe 1.
                  
God muſt mooue vs to repentance; then (I beſeech you) let not our eares be deafe at his ſweete promiſes, leaſt the Lord complaine of vs, as he did of his owne time, Matth. 11. 19. that we are like to children, neither dauncing with them that ſing, nor weeping with them that mourne. Auſteritie is too hard for vs, and mercie is too ſoft: if wee preach the law, then men ſay we ſpeake of malice, of elſe giue iudgement vpon them; if we ſhew them libertie, that maketh them woorſe and woorſe; ſo that our times are like a thiefe, being in priſon he complaineth of crueltie, and being at libertie, runneth to robbing againe. The mercie of God is much called for; and being obtayned, is much abuſed: they make it a charter to ſinne, and thinke if they haue one pardon, all their villanie afterward is forgiuen. The deepe wounds of Chriſt doth not aſſwage their heat of ſin, but encreaſeth their deſire. O my deere brethren, if gentlenes will not winne, rigour moſt perſwade. You are the Lords ſchollers, learne you muſt, the rod is your tormentor, or elſe you ſhal be expelled his ſchoole. Make much of mercy, while you may haue mercie: for if the gate of mercy be ſhut, and the date expired; your teares ſhall be drops of blood, and your wounds, as windowes for your bones to looke thorough; your fleſh ſhall feede the fowles of the ayre, and your ſoules ſhall feele the torments of hell. Secondly, 2 ſeeing mercie muſt winne vs, let vs be mercifull as our heauenly father is mercifull, Luk. 6. 36. which is needfull to bee vrged in theſe hard times, wherein are many poore and many complaints: for if wee looke to haue mercie of God when we pray vnto him, let the poore find mercie in vs when they cry vpon vs. Be mercifull as our heanenly father is mercifull. His hand is euer giuing; his ſpirit is euer comforting; his mercie is euer pardoning, and his liberalitie is euer feeding; therefore giue thou to the poore, comfort the ſorrowfull, forgiue thy offenders, and let many hungrie ſoules feede on thy meate. Mercie is better then ſacrifice; hotter, then coales of fire; ſofter, then liquide oyle;

and ſweeter then pleaſant hony. Offer this ſacrifice, kindle this fire, touch this oyle, and eate this honie: thou ſhalt finde mercie in iudgement, in thy death-bed, in thy graue, and in thy reſurrection: it ſhall couer thee, as a garment; comfort thee, as a guide; carrie thee, as a mother; and crowne thee, as a king. God delighteth in it; Angels reioice at it; men looke for it; and bruite beaſtes loue it: Therefore with mercie delight thy creator; reioyce the Angels; and ſatisfie man and beaſt. And bee mercifull to men, to beaſtes, and to thy ſelfe; to man, for God requireth it; to beaſtes, for nature craueth it; and to thy ſelfe; for thy ſoule challengeth it: the firſt, is of charitie; the ſecond, of equitie; and the laſt, of pietie; therefore practiſe mercie, that chriſtian loue, godly kindnes, and glorious religion, may euermore maintaine thee. Of great kindneſſe and long ſuffering. This is another argument to perſwade them to repentance. By the which we may note, that God doth not alway take vengeance of God deferreth venge ance and why? ſinne ſo ſoone as it is committed, but winketh at it, and deferreth till we repent or growe incurable. This thing the Apoſtle noteth, Rom. 2. 4. that God by his bountifulneſſe and long ſuffering leadeth vs to repentance. Although for example ſake he ſlew Er, and Onan, & Vzzah, and Ananias, and Saphira, and many other in the verie act of ſinning: yet he doth not alway take this courſe: For fower hundred yeeres togither did hee beare with the abhominations of Canaan, Gen. 15. 18. Let not men thinke bicauſe they are not killed ſo ſoone as they haue blaſphemed or denied God, or committed adulterie, or prophaned the Sabbaoth or the like, that therefore their deedes ſhall go vnpuniſhed: no verily, for the longer before they reckon, the greater ſhall be their account, and the farther a man runneth backwarde, the farther hee leapeth forwarde: and ſo the longer that God forbeareth our ſinnes, the heauier ſhall bee his ſtroke, for wee ſhall beare double blame, the one, for breaking his lawe; the other, for

abuſing his patience. It were needfull for vs to conſider in our ſoules this ſingular fauour of God, that wee might vſe it as the prophet heere doth, to further our repentance; for let vs be well aſſured, if peace and long ſuffering doe not prepare vs for God, it will annoint vs for deſtruction. The firſt reaſon; bicauſe God will bee exalted in Reaſon 1. ſparing vs, Eſay 36. 18. The Lorde which is moſt excellent in all his workes, is moſt excellent in forbearing the malice of men; for who coulde endure to be denied plainely, reuiled openly, and blaſphemed boldly, ſaue onely the Lorde? or who coulde abide to ſee his workes reproched, his worde rebuked, and his liberalitie ſcorned, ſaue onely the Lorde? who filleth all in all, and beareth much with all, or elſe all woulde bee confounded. But this is ſufficient, that the prophet ſaith; he is exalted in ſparing vs, that is, it magnifieth his honour, while hee regardeth not his vengeance, nor his maieſtie, nor his wrath, nor his power, but his mercy, that his chiefe glory might be through clemencie. Another reaſon; bicauſe his chiefe deſire is, that not 2 one ſhoulde periſh, 1. Pet. 3. 9. So that, if men woulde or coulde laie holde on repentance, they ſhall finde ſufficient time to amende after they haue ſinned. So deare is the loue of God towardes vs his creatures, that for his part he omitteth not any dutie to recall vs: We haue the word for the meanes, his workes for our helpes, his mercies for our comfort, and his long ſuffering for the time of our conuerſion, ſo that all thinges are diſcharged on the Lordes part, and nothing on ours. In this ſaying of Peter, we muſt not vnderſtande, that any were damned contrarie to the Lordes will: but rather that hee is vnwilling thereunto; for a man may doe that vnwillingly, which is not contrarie to his will. Let vs not abuſe the long ſuffering of God, Vſe 1. and although he bee willing to ſpare, yet let not vs be willing to ſinne, Luk. 12. 46. If the euill ſeruant ſhall ſay in his heart, my maſter deferreth his comming, and ſhall begin to ſtrike his fellowes, and to eate and drinke with the drunken: the Lorde of that ſeruant ſhall come in a day that he

knoweth not, and giue him his portion with vnbeleeuers. O my beloued, we are thoſe ſeruants that haue ſecured our ſelues from wrath, and thinke ſtill it will not come yet. Looke on our manners, are they not drunken? looke on our faith, is it not idle? looke on our care, is it not vnprofitable? looke on our liues, and ſee if wee bite not oneanother; from the throne to the footeſtoole none can eſcape vs. Doe we not abuſe the patience of God, which ſhoulde make vs reſolute in repentance, and it maketh vs diſſolute in religion? Wee ſay with the wicked prieſtes, To morrowe ſhall bee as to daie; and much more: and with the heathen, Pſalm. 10. Truely the Lorde regardeth not, neither is there knowledge in the most high. O miſerable ſoules thus plagued that turne all thinges againſt themſelues! O let nothing delight vs, but the preſence of the Lord of hoſtes! who is come downe into our lande, and waiteth for our repentance: Let vs giue him our ſinnes we haue committed, and our liues we haue to ſpende, and our ſoules wee haue to ſaue, that he may ſpare our bloud and take our lamentation. Againe, let vs ſeeke the Lorde while he may bee 2 founde, and call vpon him while hee is neere at hande, Eſay 55. 6. ſeeing hee dwelleth among vs; and this is the time of long ſuffering: nowe let vs runne after him day and night as Obadiah did after Eliah, and neuer ceaſe ſeeking till we haue founde him. In ſeeking for the Lord we ought to haue a ſingle eie, a ſimple heart, a cleane hande, and a ſwift foote, that wee may eaſilie ſee him, earneſtly deſire him, ſpeedilie runne after him, and reuerentlie laie holde on him. Alas, alas, wee liue in an age wherein men will not trauaile to finde either God or grace, except it fall into their mouthes: if the Lorde lacke but one of his ſheepe, hee neuer ceaſeth till he haue founde him againe; but wee coulde abide to want him, if wee might enioy our pleaſures all the daies of our life. Seeke for him in his temple; goe to him in thy ſoule, and pray to him in heauen; for hee calleth vnto thee, ſaying, Open

vnto me, for the night hath watered my locks, &c. Seeke him as the Lorde doth his ſheepe, as the merchant did his pearle, as the woman did her grote, as the ſicke man doth his phiſition, and as the diſciples did Chriſt. Hee is in thy houſe, there ſeeke him; hee is in thy field, there ſeeke him; he is in thy cloſet, there ſeeke him; and he is in thy hart, there keepe him. His time is but ſhort; his departure will be ſudden; his patience will be wearie, and he will bee gone; onely he tarrieth a little: therefore if euer, nowe run out to follow him. And repenteth him of the euill. This is the laſt argument, whereby the prophet perſwadeth them to repent, becauſe God will repent the euill that he threatened: not that God indeede repenteth, by correcting of himſelfe; for that cannot be, ſeeing all his workes are yea and Amen, 2. Cor. 1. 20. he is alſo vnchangeable, and with him is no ſhadow of turning, Iam. 1. 17. although the world change, and the heauens waxe olde as a garment, yet the Lord abideth the ſame for euer, Pſal. 102. 18. but this is a phraſe according to our capacitie: for when wee change our mindes, we repent in a ſort; ſo when the Lord ſeemeth to alter his purpoſe, he ſheweth as if hee repented. Why then ſome will ſay? if the Lord alter his purpoſe, then hee changeth; and why did he here tell the people that all this miſerie ſhould come vpon them? and yet if they will, it ſhall not. Vnto which I anſwere, that the firſt purpoſe of God ſhall euer ſtand; for hee foreſeeth and decreeth the ende: but many times to trie our faith, and to ſhewe his loue, he propoundeth prophetically, that is, with condition of repentance, the ſame which hee will neuer doe. Howe then will you ſay, ſhall we knowe his pleaſure? verily if two things bee propounded, the one certaine, the other vncertaine, as here was repentance and iudgement; let vs take the firſt, and abide the laſt, that is, let vs embrace that which is certaine, and let the vncertaine goe free: Neither let vs be leſſe carefull to pleaſe God, becauſe his iudgements bee conditionall, but rather more careful to performe the condition,

leaſt we feele the obligation. God will repent him of the euill, that is, he will ſtay the euill that ſhall come vpon you. From hence let vs obſerue, that the Lord is vnwilling to take vengeance of our ſinnes. Ezech. 33. 11. As I liue, ſaith the Lord, I will not the death of a ſinner: he willeth it not; but he ſaith not, I decree it not, and if he decree it, I dare not ſay, hee doth it againſt his will: and if hee both will and decree it, I cannot ſay he dealeth vniuſtly; for we may ſee in the ſcriptures, that none can tell the reaſons of his will, or the cauſe of his decree, or excuſe the fall of man by the ordinance of God: this I onely touch by the way, for other haue more effectually laboured therein, to whom I referre you. And in this wee may ſee a notable teſtimonie of the loue of God, that he will rather ſilence his iuſtice then his mercie: and although we be at the very brinke of deſtruction, if we repent, he will repent. If the Lord did take any pleaſure in our harmes, why then did hee crucifie his ſonne? ſending abroad the miniſters with his ſcriptures, & warning vs before hand of our end. Theſe doe ſhew vs that he is as vnwilling to puniſh our faultes, as a father is to puniſh his ſonne. All this graunted, let vs not dreame of an immunitie, that we are vtterly exempted, and be at libertie to doe whatſoeuer pleaſeth vs: for although hee bee a tender father, yet hee is a wiſe father, and knoweth that correction is as needefull as inſtruction. It is no matter to vs if we be condemned either with the will, or without the will of God: for it commeth all to one ende, our plagues and paines are neuer the leſſe. The reaſon hereof, becauſe God hath a naturall loue to all his creatures, Pſal. 38. 6. the Reaſon. works of his hands are deere vnto him, and for the worke of creation, he loueth and ſpareth them. By this we may ſee as Ezech. 33. 12. if ye turne, all your tranſgreſsions ſhall Vſe 1. neuer remooue his fauour from you. What can bee more generall? then that all ſhall be forgotten: or more comfortable? then that not one ſinne ſhall bee remembred? and if they bee not remembred (ſaith Austen) they are not

imputed; and if they bee not imputed, they are pardoned. Bee not afraide to come to the Lorde; for thou ſeeſt hee will lay nothing to thy charge; his communing is for peace, and not for wrath, and his call is more for thy good then for his: bee not diſcomforted, becauſe thou haſt a guiltie crying conſcience, for thou ſeeſt that the Lorde is as vnwilling to ſtrike, as thou art to beare. But thou wilt ſay, that hee hath alreadie witneſſed thy deſtruction: yea, but I ſay, hee will repent him of the euill ſeeing thou repenteſt of thy ſinnes: his iudgements are conditionall, hee which gaue the worde can recall it, and who can ſaie? he doth not his word. Feare not I ſay, though thou be as neere to death as Iſaac was to be ſacrificed, for the Lorde hath an angell in heauen to ſaue thy life; & the godly ſhall come out of trouble, but the wicked ſhall come in his ſteade. Seeing the Lorde is vnwilling to take vengeance of our ſinnes, let vs bee as vnwilling to grieue 2 him with our ſinnes, that ſo wee may bee the children of the moſt high. For it cannot bee, but that hee is mightily grieued when wee fall into newe follies, in that hee is enforced to open once againe to vs the woundes of Chriſt, and let more bloude iſſue foorth out of the ſide of his mercy. Iacob was much offended with his two ſonnes, Simeon and Leui, Gen. 34. when they ſlewe the Sichemites, for ſaide he, you haue made my preſence to ſtinke in the ſight of this people: much more muſt the Lorde be offended with vs his ſonnes, being a more tender father then euer was Iacob, when we grieue him with our ſins: for we bring his glorious name into contempt, and religion into hatred. Once bee thus affected and aſſured that thou art the childe of God, then take part of the godly nature; loue all as hee doth, doe good to all as hee doth, repent of euill as he doth, and be as much afraide to ſinne, as hee is vnwilling to puniſh thee. He euer thinketh on thee, doe thou ſo on him; he euer watcheth for thy ſake, do thou ſo for his; & he euer worketh for thy profite, doe thou euer liue for his

praiſe: He woulde forgiue thee, if thou offend; and therefore although thou canſt offende, yet do not: he endureth griefe to ſaue thy health, and do thou endure tentation to ſaue his truth: hee coulde reuenge, yet doth not, that thou mighteſt learne not to followe what thy hart ſuggeſteth, and thy fleſh allureth.
            
            
               The xxiij. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 14.
                  Who knoweth, whether he will returne and repent, and leaue a bleſsing behinde him, euen a meate offring and a drinke offering vnto the Lord your God;
               
               THis verſ. containeth another reaſon taken from the works of God to mooue them to repentance, which is this, that God will ſpare them, and leaue ſomething for his owne ſeruice, although it be but a little. For I take not this queſtion for a ſimple affirmation, as in other places; but rather, if it pleaſe him, he may leaue an offring, and for any thing they knew to the contrarie hee woulde. From hence wee learne, that God concealeth from vs the Why wee know not the ende of our ſorrowes. iſſue of our ſorrowes, and the ende of our liues, that we may be kept in a continuall practiſe of repentance; as appeareth by Dauid, 2. Sam. 12. 23. Some are deſperate in their miſeries, bicauſe they know not howe or by what meanes they ſhall be deliuered from it: But good men, and good mindes muſt take another courſe, ſeeing they cannot know in theſe thinges the minde of the Lorde: nor as Salomon ſaith, who ſhall bee after them therefore; their watch and care ouer their liues muſt bee more continuall. This is a good leſſon for vs to marke, bicauſe our caſe is the verie ſame with the caſe of the Iewes; wee are threatened as they were, and we knowe no more then they did: Let vs therefore watch in repentance, that if our calamitie encreaſe, we may bee readie for the graue; and if it be reuerſed,

we may be readie for praiſe. Art thou deſirous to make profite of the thing thou knoweſt not? then be repentant; for death and life, ioy and ſorrowe, paine and eaſe, riches and pouertie, freedome and danger are both alike to a repentant man. The firſt reaſon; bicauſe by this meanes Reaſon 1. we are taught humilitie, Rom. 9. 20. bicauſe wee are not able to reaſon with God, or to plead againſt him; for we are in his hande, as clay in the hande of the potter. Where are all our gallant youthes, and luſtie minded perſons, whoſe heades are ſo full of knowledge, that they are able to teach the Apoſtles, and no maruaile, for it appeereth by their liues, bearing themſelues like Gods in the worlde. But looke on your mindes againe, you ſhall finde them ſtuffed with vanitie, and not filled with knowledge: if you knowe one thing you are ignorant of a thouſande. Therefore let this teach you, that your mindes are carnall, your liues bee ſenſuall, and your ſoules endangered except you thinke better of others, and baſer of your ſelues: Learne humility of thy ſelfe, thy body is earth, thy glory is earth, thy brauery is earth: and no maruaile, for gold is but earth. Why ſhouldeſt thou be lifted ſo high? canſt thou number thy ſinnes? or ſaue thy life, or tell when, or what death ſhall take thee away? caſt thy minde to the earth, for then it will looke vpwarde, for as yet it looketh downward and deceiueth it ſelfe. Another reaſon; No man can tell things to come. Eccl. 7. 2. 2 no not ſo much as the worke of an howre hence: therefore ſeeing we are aſſured of nothing but death, let death be our life, that is, let the death of our ſins be the life of our ſoules. But we can neuer ſlay them, but by repentance; and therefore euerie hower of our life to come, calleth for it at our hands: we know not when, therefore now is the time: we know not how, therefore this is the meane: we know not where, therefore this is the place. Youth biddeth vs repent; age biddeth vs repent; ſickenes biddeth vs repent: and all that is to come, calleth vs to amendment, becauſe we know not what is to come. From hence let vs learne to be contented Vſe 1.
                  
with that ordinarie and certaine knowledge which the Lord hath ſhewed vs in his worde (I meane) to make vs repentant. Paul telleth of himſelfe that he regarded to know nothing ſaue Ieſus Chriſt & him crucified, 1. Cor. 2. 2. the which hee learned from the Lord himſelfe. This was certaine that Chriſt was crucified, therefore oughtwe to learne the ſame: This is heauenly; this is comfortable; and this is glorious: heauenly, for God did it; comfortable, for it was for our ſinnes; and glorious, for neither man nor angell could do the like: and in this ſhort ſentence the Apoſtle hath lapped vp all religion. Wouldeſt thou knowe how to be ſaued? looke to the death of Chriſt. Wouldeſt thou know how to liue? looke on the croſſe of Chriſt: and wouldeſt thou know what to profeſſe? then conſider the ſorrowes of Chriſt. This is heauenly wiſedome, not knowen of the angels: this is worthie learning, not knowen to many learned kings and princes: and this is true felicitie not felt of euerie one; therefore Paul ſaid, I eſteeme to know nothing, but Chriſt and him crucified. It maketh no matter to be ignorant of thy owne death, if thou knowe the death of Chriſt: it skilleth not to know what ſhall bee, if thou know that he died for thee: if thou know him, his death will mortifie thee; his wounds will waſh thee, and his ſtripes will ſaue thee. He died, wilt not thou repent? He was condemned, wilt not thou be ſaued? He was crucified, wilt not thou be ſorrowful? Study not to liue, but to be leeue: care not what ſhal be after thee in this world, ſo thou be aſſured of the world to come. Thou knoweſt not what ſhall be to morrow, therefore repent to day: thou knoweſt not whether God will hereafter, therfore do it now; learne this leſſon ſpeedily: for as the Israelites could not gather Manna after the ſunne was riſen; ſo thou canſt not haue repentance after time is ouerpaſſed. Seeing God concealeth 2 many things from vs, therefore let not vs curiouſly enquire after ſecret and hid things, the which fault our Sauiour reprooueth in his diſciples, Act. 1. 7. In our times

there be many which buſie themſelues about idle and vnprofitable queſtions: as, whether they ſhall know one another in the next life: what God did before he made the world: whether Chriſt ſhould haue beene borne, if Adam had ſtoode in innocencie, and when or what time of the yeere ſhal be the latter day; of which queſtions the ſchoolmen abound. Againe, there be other that thinke themſelues verie chriſtianly buſied, if they let alone the ſtudie for knowledge, the practiſe of prayer, and the keeping of the morall law: yea, they are ignorant of the order of ſaluation: but they turne to & fro to find plat-formes of gouernment, to ſpeake againſt authoritie, to erect new ſtates, and to prie and enquire into the ſecret liues and ſinnes of men; vnto whom I ſay with our Sauiour, it is not for you to know theſe things. I might wearie you to tell the conceits of them, which take themſelues for wiſe men, and the dreames of the ſimpler ſort; vnto whom I ſay, you teach and learne the lighter points of the lawe, but iudgement, and knowledge, and ſanctification, you let alone. Amend this fault, for it is good to be ignorant of ſome things, and what the Lord ſaith not, beleeue not; what is not diſcloſed, enquire not; what cannot be prooued, receiue not: and what the Lord hath ſilenced, know thou not. A meate offering: we haue declared in the former chapter, that there was no ſacrifice, but there was a meat and drink offering annexed vnto it: for as the ſacrifice was for God, ſo was this for man. And herein the Prophet teacheth vs (ſeeing his deſire is not for continuance of plentie or reſtitution of aboundance; but for a meate offering and a drinke offering, which was a ſmall portion of meale, and oyle, and wine vſed in the ſeruice of God:) that we muſt rather impart our goods to the Lords worſhip, then to the maintenance of our owne liues, as Dauid did with the water of Bethleem, All things muſt be applied to religion. 2. Sam. 23. 16. 17. I ſay wee muſt haue more care to ſerue God, then to liue at eaſe; and we muſt rather want for our ſelues, then let religion go to the wall. This I may teach,

but I know there are few that haue any wealth, but had rather to depart with their profeſsion, church, temple, miniſterie, ſacrifice, goſpell, and God, then with the Sarephthian widow to giue their little to Elijah. I know what I ſpeake; I ſee much taken frō the Lord, but little giuen to him. Woe worth these lamentable times! wherein already wiſe men may ſee, that if want ſhoulde encreaſe, ſurely the name of God would be forgotten, vnles it were to be blaſphemed. Do we not ſee that a feaſt hath more gueſts then a ſermon? and a dinner more eaters then a church hath hearers? Doe you thinke that they would deſire but a meate offering for the Lords ſeruice? nay rather they will weepe if their bellies be not ſerued before the Lord: would they, which gaine their meate by the life and ſweat of other men, do as Dauid did, offer it to the Lorde? no no, we haue them among vs, which care not what paine and danger, and trouble they procure to other, ſo themſelues may eat the fleſh, & drinke the beſt. The firſt reaſon, becauſe it is the Lords portion that is allotted thereto, Numb. 18. 8. The Lord for the rent Reaſon 1. of all our goodes and lands, which we holde of him as our cheefe Lorde, hath reſerued but two partes, the one for the church, and the other for the poore; & if we pay not theſe we forfeit all; yea, more then all into the hands of his maieſtie. Grudge not therefore at the charges of the goſpel; for thouſeeſt how good thy farme is, how ſmal thy rent is, how large thy leaſe is, how few are thy couenants, and how eaſie to be kept: depart with it willingly, it is the Lords; ſhal not the maiſter be ſerued before the man? and ſhall not the Lord be paid? though our cofers ſay nay. O my brethren, pay him cheerefully, for you are bound by blood: you are in danger to looſe all, and that woorthily, if you giue not that little. Another reaſon: becauſe it is better to die in miſerie, then to liue in impietie; & therefore it is better to 2 liue godly with want, then wickedly with abundance. Pſal. 37. 16. A little thing that the righteous hath, is better then the great riches of the vngodly: Therefore ſerue the Lord before

thy life, and preferre his worſhip before thy appetite: let not diſtruſt hinder it, the Lorde hath ynough for thee; let not pouertie ſtay thee, for thou muſt liue by the worde as well as by bread: doe not refraine becauſe thou haſt little, for if thou hadſt much, he can ſcatter; and hauing little, he can multiplie it: Feare not want in age; doubt not of helpe in ſickneſſe; and deſpaire not of a ſupply, when all is ſpent, as God commanded thee. The firſt vſe: we muſt knowe Vſe 1. that God loueth that moſt deerely which we offer to him, with the hazard of our owne want: for this cauſe did our Sauiour ſo much commend the action of the poore widow Luc. 21. 4. before all the abundant offerings of the wealthy; ſaying that her two mites were more then all theirs, becauſe ſhe did it of meere loue to the Lord; but the other of ſuperfluitie: And we, if we haue any minde to the like commendation, let vs put on the like affection; although wee labour with our hands, watch aboue our howers, and faſt aboue our ordinarie, to giue the bread of our liues into the treaſurie of the Lorde. Neither ought wee to thinke, but that the Lord doth highly accept the willing and rich offerings of the wealthy, eſpecially if they reſerue it from vaine and proud expences. Oh how doth this magnifie religion, & the profeſſors therof? vnto the which they are more indebted then to their own liues: let vs offer this ſacrifice, for the Lord will take any thing at our hand in good part: ifit be little, becauſe we haue but little, he maketh much therof; if it be much, becauſe we haue much, he maketh more thereof: then ſay we all; If God doc thus accept, then will we giue it. Let vs not reaſon with him, as the woman of Samaria did, Iohn. 4. when hee asked for water, but let vs ſpeedily giue him his requeſt, as Rebecca did to Abrahams ſeruant, who asking but a little, yet ſhe gaue him more. Another vſe; let vs ſerue the Lord before our liues, for elſe 2 we make our ſelues gluttons, and feede our bellies: and the Apoſtle ſaith of this kinde, 1. Cor. 6. 15. Meate for the belly, and the belly for meate: but God ſhall deſtroy both it and them.
                  
Wilt thou ſpende all on thy belly, and nothing on the Lorde? thinkeſt thou that thou poſſeſſeſt all for thy ſelfe, and nothing for the Lorde? doeſt thou ſo liue to thy meate, and with thy meate, as if thou were onely borne for it, and that were onely made for thee? then ſurely take thou heede, for God ſhall deſtroy both it and thee. Giue therefore to him, and to his vſes in his church: if thou faile, thy ſtore ſhall faile; and if thou repent not, thy life ſhall periſh. Who was euer famiſhed for meate, that gaue it to the Lord? or begged for his bread, which ſpent it at the altar? or was empoueriſhed by maintaining religiō? ſurely none, but with them was the ſaying of Salomon performed, There is that giue and haue nothing the leſſe. Eate not I beſeech you, your deſtruction in your meat: and drinke not your damnation in your abundance: if you will ſaue your life, you ſhal loſe it, but if in this caſe for the Lords cauſe you wil lay downe your life, you ſhall finde it. If when wee haue but little we giue from our ſelues to the Lorde, we do as poore Iacob did, which ſent his ſtore into Egypt with his ſonnes, where was more ſtore: but through his little, hee gained both his ſonnes, he ſaued his owne life, and ſuſtained all his familie: ſo let not vs doubt or feare to beſtow on the Lord, for looke what wee looſe we ſowe for more encreaſe; what we giue, we ſhall gaine; and what in peaſure we diſpende, in paine we ſhall lament.
            
            
               The xxiiij. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 15. 16.
                  Blowe the trumpet in Sion, ſanctifie a fast, call a ſolemne aſſemblie: gather the people, ſanctifie the congregation: gather the elders, aſſemble the children, and thoſe that ſucke the breſts: let the bridegroome go foorth of his chamber, and the bride out of hir bride chamber.
               
               
                  
OF the blowing of the trumpet, wee haue ſpoken in the beginning of this chapter: ſo alſo we haue handled the proclaiming of a faſt, the calling of an aſſemblie, both of the people and of their elders; al which to ſtande vpon againe were but needleſſe. Therefore wee will to the next wordes, The yoong children, and them that ſucke the breasts: That is, euery one among you, from the leaſt to the moſt. Some will ſaie vnto me? what good can the ſucking children do in the Lordes ſeruice? I grant in ſight they cannot; but ſeeing Dauid ſaith, that the brute beaſtes do ſeeke their meate at God, which they doe not by praying or ſpeaking; ſo may Ioel aſsigne the yoong ſucking babes to want their meat, that with their mothers they might poure foorth moſt lamentable teares and terrible cries into the eares of the Lord; and for this cauſe to increaſe mourning doth the prophet inuite them to the faſt. From hence we may obſerue, that the wrath of God muſt Generall lamentation. bee appeaſed with a generall repentance: Olde men and babes, yoong men and maidens, rich and poore, prince and people muſt all bee humbled at the Lordes anger: as we may reade, Ion. 3. 8. Yea, the very cattle of the Niniuites were couered, with a mourning weede: wherein wee may ſee that it is no maruaile if the Lorde were ſo long angrie with vs, bicauſe we were not generally humbled. If parents haue repented, yet children haue not ſorrowed; if children mourne, parents haue beene diſſolute; if the old men were humbled, the yoong men rebelled: Therefore our miſery remaineth, bicauſe ſome remaine obſtinate. The reaſons; Reaſon 1. Firſt, bicauſe the Lord hath a quarrel againſt al ſexes, ages, degrees, and conditions of men, Ierem. 12. 12. the which ought to be a ſufficient cauſe to haue euery one to be humbled, and let not one eſcape. I muſe much, that many chriſtian parents haue ſo little regarde to their children, that they care not with what vanities and toies they delight and allure them, thinking they are not bounde to any exerciſe on Sabbaoth daies: nor that any oath or fooliſh

talke doth annoy them: But heere wee ſee not onelie thoſe which can ſpeake muſt practiſe religion; but alſo if they bee able to crie, let them feele the Lordes commandement. Some will thinke that theſe little children are innocent, and therefore neede no repentance: for it is a common ſaying, if it goe not well with children, howe ſhall it goe with olde men? meaning that children are without ſinne. Vnto which I anſwere, that they are ſinfull by nature, euen the heires of wrath, Eph. 2. 2. and if they were not, yet bicauſe God requireth it, who dare refuſe it? and the rather bicauſe the brute beaſtes are inuited thereto, which neither can nor euer ſhall ſinne. Another reaſon; bicauſe whoſoeuer doth not thus humble himſelfe, 2 ſhall be iudged of God, 1. Cor. 11. 31. We know it an vſuall thing in the worde of God, to ſpare neither man, woman, nor childe; and to take the ſucking babes, and to daſh their braines againſt the wall: If they be ſubiect to puniſhment, why not to religion? if to death, why not to the Lordes ſeruice? Therefore let all bee humbled, children, becauſe they are borne in ſinne; olde men, bicauſe they are weary of ſin; yoong men, bicauſe they liue in ſin; and ſtriplings, bicauſe they grow in ſin; or elſe ſhall euerie one die in condemnation. Let vs not therefore prouoke the Lord, 1. Cor. 10. 22. but conſider how fearefull it is to ſtirre a lion Vſe 1. from his den; or to meete a Beare robbed of hir whelpes; or to prouoke a prince to diſpleaſure; of which it is ſaide, That the anger of a king is the meſſenger of death: but I ſaie, if the Lorde, more fierce then a lyon, more raging then a Beare, and more powerfull then a prince, bee ſtirred vp to ſtrike vs; wee can hardely hurt him; hee can eaſilie deſtroie vs; wee can hardlie mooue him, but more hardly pacifie him. See you not that the newe borne babes ſhall repent it, yea, ſometime they feele it before they bee borne? Oh thinke vpon it, the blood of olde men, the ſtrength of yoong men, the beautie of women, and the loue of children, doe not alway mooue

him; and ſhall we then tempt him, to our and others euerlaſting deſtruction? in his wrath hee is an vnquenchable fire, an vnreſiſtable flood, an vnpacifiable iudge, and a deſtroyer of all that come in his way. But alas, with teares we may lament to ſee him prouoked euery day: who is ſo ſicke, that ſinneth not againſt him? who is ſo weake, that ſtriueth not with him? who is ſo vnwiſe, that pleadeth not with him? Looke with teares ouer all ſorts of men: the poore deſpiſe him; the lame run from him; the blinde come not at him; the dumbe ſpeake againſt him; the rich will not feare him, and the dead will not confeſſe him. By all meanes we prouoke his wrath, by tempting, by murmuring, by denying, by abuſing, and abaſing his glorie: We tempt him, in thinking he will pardon whatſoeuer we commit; we murmur, when wee haue not all our deſires; we denie him, when we eſteeme not his goſpell; we abuſe him, vſing our wealth to luxurie, and our meate to gluttonie; and wee abaſe him, when wee more feare a mortall mans diſpleaſure, then the wrath of the higheſt. When 2 we ſee the Lord being angrie, and ſo hardly pacified, let vs vſe all meanes to pleaſe him againe, although it bee with the hazard of our owne liues, as Moſes did Deut. 9. 18, 19. perceiuing the Lord to be mooued to wrath, he fell downe on his face to entreate him for his people, tarrying with him fortie daies and fortie nights, neither eating nor drinking: yea he deſired God to be pacified with his people, although he raſed his name out of the booke of life. What coulde bee done with greater zeale or more earneſt affection? the Lorde was angrie, who coulde appeaſe him but Moſes? and how could he be ſatisfied, but with offering his body to death through faſting, and his ſoule vnto condemnation? Marke it I beſeech you, that we al learne with more zeale to entreate the Lord to be turned towarde vs. Offer we muſt our bodies to pining, our members to tortures, our health to ſickneſſe, our wealth to pouertic, our pleaſure to paine, and our life to death, rather then the

wrath of God ſhoulde proceede vpon vs. Oh let vs come vnto the Lord, and offer him his whole man, to ſatisfie his mercies; neither be afraide to doe ſo, but put it in ſpeedie practiſe. Come to him, though thou be lame; run to him, though thou be blinde; pray to him, though thou be ſicke; and truſt in him, though thou be poore. Abide not one miſerie but all miſeries, that thou maiſt dwell with him: neither care for the rage of man; the want of maintenance; the loue of friends, or the feare of death: for if thou loue theſe more then him, thou art not woorthy of him.
               Hauing willed the ſucking babes to come to mourning, 2 he alſo inuiteth the new married folkes, bridegroomes and brides to leaue of their vſuall dalliance, and come among their neighbours to this ſorrowfull banket. From whence No lawfull action muſt hinder repentance. we obſerue, that wee muſt not in any thing, be it neuer ſo lawfull, hinder true repentance, or the profeſsion of godlineſſe. For there is nothing more honaurable then marriage; more lawfull then a wedding feaſt; more vſuall then pleaſant mirth; and more commendable then a ioyfull marriage day: but all theſe being hinderances vnto repentance, muſt bee laide aſide as a mourner doth his daily attire. Wee may reade Luc. 14. 21. how they were curſed that came not to the Lords feaſt, among whome there was one that had married a wife: it ſhall be no excuſe before the Lord, that they did but the courſe of the world, in vſing theſe things; it were better for vs to forſake our wiues, then to looſe our ſoules; to renounce our mirth, then to relinquiſh our liues; to deferre our pleaſure, then to depart from the Lord. Let this I beſeech you, be your care in the Lord, that you offend him not in the vſe of his creatures, neither let thoſe comforts which you receiue in wedlocke, in feaſting, in riches, in beautie, and the like, worke your euerlaſting diſcomfort in another worlde. Liue not in mirth, for then thou canſt not repent; reioice not in youth, for it is but vanitie; diſtruſt thy ioyes, for they are deceitfull; be not alway mourning, for thou canſt not be thankfull;

bee euer repentant, that thou maieſt bee faithfull. One reaſon heere of is giuen by the Lorde himſelfe, Ierem. 
                  Reaſon 1. 7. 34 bicauſe a deſolation ſhall come; and of all reaſons there is none more forcible then the rod of vengeance and deſolation: ſo that in this ſort might Ieremy and Ioel, and other the Lordes miniſters reaſon with the worlde. Laie away your mirth, let not the voice of muſicke, the day of marriage, the means of ioyfulneſſe, or the comfort of pleaſure, bee had, or heard among you; for a deſolation ſhall come: Drawe the childe from the breaſt; the elders from their eaſe; the married from their loue, and the people from their vanitie; for a deſolation commeth. Houſes ſhall be deſolate without inhabitants, parents ſhall be deſolate without children, cities ſhall be deſolate without citizens, and whole kingdomes ſhall bee deſolate without profeſſors: Therefore put away this ioy like an vnlawfull wife, & come againe to the Lord with much weeping, and reioice not in thy youth, or thy age, or thy wealth, or thy friends, or thy marriage. Another reaſon; bicauſe by this kinde of 2 mirth we growe to hardnes of hart, and neglect the wrath of God, Amos 6. 1, 5. It is much that men eſteeme not the faire promiſes and ſweete bleſsings of God: but yet it is more fearefull when they make light account of his heauy iudgements. Now if you marke who they be that care not for iudgement, you ſhall ſee that they are thoſe who eate in abundance, liue in pleaſure, enioying wealth and children at their will, and want is not knowne vnto them. Againe, poore people liuing in continuall ſcarſitie, and are content with ſimple allowance, hauing learned the feare of God, a ſhower of raine, and a cloudie day humbleth their knees to the earth, and lifteth their praiers to heauen. Let vs learne not to reioice in any vnlawfull manner, all Vſe 1. the time that the church of God is in aduerſitie, Pſal. 137. 2, 3, 4. Good men in captiuitie, commanded by their enimies to ſing one of the ſongs of Sion, refuſed it, bicauſe they were in a ſtrange lande: and ſo if we hope for mirth

and ioy in another worlde, let vs refuſe it as much as may be in this life preſent, for we be but ſtrangers and pilgrims on the earth. And verily, if wee conſider the matter well, we haue as many cauſes to lament, olde and yoong, married and vnmarried, as theſe people had to whom Ioell preached: Famine was threatned to them, but felt of vs; they were vnder the Babylonian gouernment, and we are ſubiect to the tyrannie of ſathan; they had abuſed manie benefites and prophets of God, and ſo haue we; they had reioiced in many worldly pleaſures and wicked paſtimes, and ſo haue we; they were warned to turne all into lamentation, and ſo muſt we be. Therefore if now you looke on the miſerie of our time, you ſhall finde it high time for all to be humbled: Let the elders beginne, the yoonger will followe; yea, the little children will crie for companie. Let vs all take vs to the houſes of mourning; olde men, bicauſe they haue ſeene good daies; yoong men, bicauſe they haue liued ill liues; and children, bicauſe they are appointed to fearefull deſtinies; parents, bicauſe they haue begotten ſinne; children, bicauſe they were borne in ſinne; rich men, bicauſe they haue gathered much; married folke, bicauſe they haue loued too much; and poore men, bicauſe theſe daies are but the beginning of ſorrows. Death calleth for the old, let them weepe; age calleth for the yoong, let them bee ſorrowfull; correction calleth for children, let them crie; warres call for ſtrong men, let them lament; and repentance calleth for all men, therfore let al mourne. But ſome will ſay, doe you condemne all mirth that is vſed in our times? and ſhall we liue, eate, drinke, marrie, and die in continuall ſorrow? then can we not account it anie benefite to liue in the world. To whom I anſwere, that this is no where commanded, that men ſhould ſo liue in continuall ſorrowe, but rather Eccl. 2. 24. Salomon ſaith, That it is the onely portion of a man to reioice in the things that God giueth him: for all men in health ſhall conceiue a naturall ioy by their eating & drinking, as Bohaz Ruth, 3. 7.

and Salomon ſaide, That wine maketh glad the heart of man: the which is lawefull for Chriſtians, and neceſſarie for health. Againe, there is another ioy which is ſpirituall and heauenlie, which is called the ioy of the holie Ghoſt, Rom. 14 17. This maketh all our afflictions ſeeme light and little to be regarded, Rom. 5. 7. and without this inward ioy, one can hardly be a chriſtian; the which is neuer loſt, though we endure neuer ſo many torments; yet in repentance it is darkned, and ſeemeth vtterly gone; howbeit it returneth againe with greater meaſure as the ſunne riſing. But whether naturall ioye bee loſt in repentance, it is hard to ſay: for ſometime a hart that is humbled hath no more ioy in meate and drinke, then a ſicke perſon. As for carnall ioies which are inuented by iniquitie, practiſed with greedines, and loued with too much affection; they are neither lawfull or neceſſarie for a chriſtian: and whoſoeuer receiueth any comfort by them, hee may iuſtly ſuſpect that his ſorrowe was not godly, but ſome other heauie conceit, which is eaſily remooued by company or ioy conceiued of pleaſure.
            
            
               The xxv. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 17.
                  Let the priests, the ministers of the Lorde, weepe betweene the porch and the altar: and let them ſay, Spare thy people ô Lord, and giue not thine heritage into reproch, that the heathen ſhould rule ouer them. Wherefore ſhould they ſay among the people, where is their God?
               
               NOw the prophet ſheweth vnto the prieſts how they muſt behaue themſelues, namely that they ſhould weepe: and hee telleth them the place, betwixt the porch and the altar, that is, in the vtter court where the people waited for the bleſsing after the ſacrifice. For the people

muſt now be gathered as we haue heard, and it was not lawfull for them to come within the precincts of the prieſts; wherefore the prieſtes muſt come foorth to them, and in their place and aſſembly make their lamentation. By the deſcription of this place for the prieſtes to weepe and pray in: we may note, that all the publike exerciſes of All the exerciſes of the miniſterie muſt be ſo done as they may be vnderſtoode. the miniſterie ought to be done in a place where the people may heare and ſee them; and for this cauſe are they commaunded to weepe betwixt the porch and the altar. So wee may read did Iehoſhaphat 2. Chro. 20. 5. when hee made prayer for the people againſt the children of Moab and Ammon. I thinke there is not any in their right mind, but they will confeſſe the neceſsitie hereof; except thoſe which care not whether they pray for or againſt themſelues, ſtanding aloofe in the Church as if they were afraid to heare what the preacher ſaith. Let men therefore labour not only to pray, but to come with diligence into the Lords houſe and publique place of praier, where they muſt beſtow thēſelues with ſuch care, as they may pray when the paſtor prayeth, and heare when the word is preached, that there be not one in a congregation, but hee may depart better inſtructed and better edified. The firſt reaſon: becauſe they can haue no knowledge of that which they heare not Reaſon 1. and vnderſtand not, 1. Cor. 14, 15, 16. alas it is a maruell to ſee, that ſo many haue ſo little regarde what is prayed or taught in the congregation, eſpecially the poorer ſort, who are thruſt behinde the doores in the greater aſſemblies; by which it commeth to paſſe that all that is taught is little regarded, and whatſoeuer is prayed for is coldly deſired: it is your duetie to preſſe into the middeſt of the aſſembly that you may hear & vnderſtand the myſteries of ſaluation: modeſtie in chuſing places is not to bee regarded, where danger followeth too much curteſie. Another reaſon: in a conuenient place of hearing our harts are more touched 2 and awaked by the word, Act. 1. 13, 14. there can bee no zeale in them, that cannot heare the voice of the preacher,

neither any reuerence to almightie God: and it is much better that they come not at all, or depart out of the church, then to ſit there without obedience to God, attention to the word, or profit to their owne ſoules. Let vs therefore ſo ſorte our ſelues in the congregation, where our eares may be beaten with an vnderſtanding ſounde, and our hearts bee touched with a heauenly power, that the coales of zeale may bee enflamed, and the light of knowledge may be kindeled. Therefore let this Vſe 1. bee the forme of a congregation, that the miniſter ſo ſpeake and the people ſo heare, that with one ſoule their praier may aſcende to heauen: and ſo wee may reade Acts. 4. 24. that the Apoſtles with one conſent lift vp their voices to God, and the place ſhooke where they were aſſembled: one ſpake and all agreed, their eares were attentiue to his wordes, and all their harts were lifted vp at once to the Lord. The which honourable practiſe commendeth a congregation, when as they being many, make but one man at praier; as the wheate-cornes being many, make but one loafe at table. Our Sauiour hath taught vs, that if two or three ſhall agree on any thing in earth, the ſame ſhall bee ſealed and confirmed in heauen. Agreement in battle getteth victorie; conſent in a common weale maketh peace; vnitie in muſicke maketh harmonie; and the fellowſhip in praier conquereth the diuell; getteth peace of conſcience, and ſoundeth ſweetely in the eares of God. Therefore if euerthou come into the place of any godly exerciſe, ioyne thy mouth & eares, and hand, and heart to theirs: when they are humbled, fall thou downe; when they are praying, praie with them; when they are hearing, heare with them; when they are ſinging, ſing with them; and when they are mourning, lamenth with them: If they ioine in petition to God, oh account it happineſſe for thee to ſubſcribe thy name; for they are bleſſed that are ioyned to the fellowſhip of the ſaints. Another vſe: if wee muſt ſeate our ſelues in moſt 2
                  
conuenient place to heare, then let vs alſo frequent the places of praier and religion. When the church was compelled to a riuers ſide, in ſteede of a cathedrall church, Act. 16. 15. Lydia the purple woman reſorted thither, and once ſhe had her hart opened, and conuerted to the Lord: In like manner let vs reſort to the churches, for at one time or other we may boldly aſſure our ſelues, that we ſhall receiue the pledge of life eternall. But in our daies men are ſo affected to this doctrine, that the diuell laugheth at it, and good men lament it: for either they come not at all, as the gheſtes which were bid to a wedding; or elſe they come without conſcience, as he did without a wedding garment; or elſe they are preſent without attention, as Eutyches that fell on ſleepe at Paules preaching; or elſe they depart out of our aſſemblies, as Iudas did from Chriſt when hee went to betray him. Standing times of praier in the church, ſome ſay are of Poperie, and in the houſe they are of other condemned for puritaniſme; ſo that godly praiers being the ſword of the ſpirite, are now growen ruſtie and dull, that few mens ſins, or liues, or harts are parted therewith. But my deere brethren, come to the times of praier, and binde your ſelues not onely publikely, but alſo priuately with ſeuere vowes, and pay them to the Lord: for ſo ſhall the fire of the ſpirite be kindled in you, the holy Ghoſt ſhall raigne in you, the ſaints ſhall be comforted by you, and you ſhall trie that all things are poſsible to a Chriſtian. Spare thy people. Now we are come to the praier which the prophet teacheth the prieſtes to make for the people, which is thus 1 much in effect: Wee haue no refuge, but to flie to thee O Lord; we are guiltie of the puniſhment, but yet thou maiſt ſtay thy hand, and ſpare our liues. Giue vs not ouer, wee pray thee, that our enemies reioice not ouer vs, and blaſpheme thy bleſſed name; we are the fields of thine owne inheritance, reuenge our cauſe from the handes of ſtrangers; oh ſpare vs that we may ſerue thee. Firſt out of the beginning of this praier we may note, that petitioners, and

thoſe which are ſuiters to the throne of grace, muſt alway pleade guiltie in the preſence of God. Luc. 18. 12, 13. The example of the Publican prooueth this, that the Lord loueth Our praiers muſt begin with confeſſion. vs better when we tell him of our follies, then when we ſhew him our vertues. The Lord which will ſeldome helpe, till there be no helpe but in his mercie, biddeth vs alway to condemne our ſelues; ſo that when wee thinke moſt baſely of our natures, and ſpeake moſt vilely (yet truly) of our liues, and confeſſe moſt bitterly againſt our ſelues, then are we moſt nigh to the end of our praiers. For this cauſe let vs meditate before praier, that we may ſufficiently waigh our miſeries, and more lamentably bewaile our wants, and more ardently pray for his mercie, that we may more comfortably enioy his fauour. The reaſons Reaſon 1. hereof: becauſe there is not one man liuing that can bee iuſtified before God, Pſal. 143. 1, 2. but euery man is an vnprofitable ſeruant: for which cauſe we muſt alway accuſe our ſins, and call for pardon at the Lords hand. This reaſon being knowen of the baſer and wickeder ſort, they imagine that they haue gained a ſufficient charter to continue in their euill: why (ſay they) the moſt righteous are guiltie in the Lords ſight; and what are we more? Doe what wee can, yet we ſhall ſinne; and we can but craue pardon of him for many as well as for few: but this is a wicked and an accurſed reaſon. For although the beſt fall into many enormities, yet ought not you to ſinne; good men fall into ſinne, but you dwell in ſinne; they are ſorrie for them, but you delight in them. Dauid ſinned, was therefore Abſolom or Achitophel vnpuniſhed? becauſe Peter denied his maiſter, might therefore Iudas betray him? or becauſe one man falleth into debt by ſickneſſe, may you therefore fall into debt through riot? if a ſound body doe now and then fall into ſickneſſe, then hee which hath a crazie body had neede to looke to himſelfe: ſo if men of ſound ſoules doe fall into euils, you which haue ſicke ſoules muſt bee much more carefull of your health. Another reaſon our Sauiour 2
                  
giueth, Luc. 18. 14. for the Lord reſiſteth the proude, and giueth grace to the humble and meeke; therefore ought wee to increaſe in the numbring of our ſinnes, that the Lord may aduance vs to the beholding of his mercie: Let vs be aſſured, if we pray without ſorrow, we doe but mocke the Lord; but if we ſorrow with earneſt praier, we prepare many ioyes for our ſoules. Firſt, let vs learne that our praiers muſt bee ardent and continuall in the eares of the Vſe 1. Lord, as the Iſraelites were, Iudg. 10. 3. to 13. for as we haue a continuall occaſion of ſinning, ſo we muſt take continuall occaſion of praying. Who is he, that hath beene but a little while in the practiſe of chriſtianitie, and hath not learned this leſſon, My ſinnes are euer in my ſight, too heauie a burden for me to beare? therefore as he which is vexed with a continuall want, laboureth in a continuall worke; and hee which hath a continuall ſickneſſe, turneth on euery ſide to finde eaſe: ſo muſt we which are euermore oppreſſed with ſinne, be euermore praying for helpe. As the greateſt burdens make the porters ſweate the greateſt drops; ſo will our ſinnes if we feele them, make vs ſweate drops of blood to be releaſed of them: therefore pray till thou be heard, and take for thy example the poore widow, which woulde neuer giue ouer till the iudge had righted her cauſe; neither doe thou ceaſe to pray til thy ſoule doe ceaſe to ſinne. Many pray through want, but not with want; and for grace, but not with grace; they are cold and not continuall in their ſuites. Who is ſo hard harted, ſeeing a poore man with as many ſores as his body can beare, running after him a mile or twaine, and begging but a penny, that coulde denie him? in like manner if wee ſhewe all our ſores and ſinnes and miſeries vnto the Lord continually, that when our voice is wearie, our harts may ſpeake; and when our harts are ſleepie, our wounds may crie for mercie; ſo that we may neither eate nor ſleepe, till we know our ſinnes be pardoned. Let vs neuer be afraide to come to the Lord, 2 notwithſtanding we finde our ſelues neuer ſo ſinful, Pſal. 9.

9, 10. although we bee neuer ſo poore in ſpirit, yet let vs know that ours is the kingdome of heauen. So that if thou reaſon with the diuell himſelfe, who will (if it be poſsible) deceiue thy ſoule, telling thee that thou art more vile then others, and therefore it is but follie for thee to call on God for mercie; yet ſay to thy ſoule, that the Lord neuer deſpiſeth the ſighings of the poore: although I haue ſinned, yet I haue ſorrowed; although I haue neglected grace, yet with the Lord there is more grace; be it, that I haue no goodneſſe in me, the more neede haue I to goe to God the author of goodneſſe. Men ſeeke not to the phiſition in health, but in ſickneſſe; and the more deſperate is their diſeaſe, the more ſpeedily they ſollicite him, and a good phiſition commeth quickly: ſo I want the health of my ſoule, and I ſee death ſtanding at the doore and knocking for me; therfore my praier ſhall goe to the Lord my phyſition, and I knowe that he will ſpeedily come vnto me. He abhorreth not my weakeneſſe; he hateth not my perſon; he willeth not my deſtruction; and therefore wil I pray for ſaluation: I am exceeding baſe, but he will bende to me; I am very poore, but he will giue mee the riches of the ſpirite; I am a ſinner, and he is a Sauiour, why ſhoulde I not goe vnto him, and fall downe lowe vpon his footeſtoole? for hee neuer deſpiſeth the ſighing of the contrite. Giue not thine heritage. That is, the people whom thou diddeſt take vnto thy ſelf aboue al the nations of the world: & from hence we may obſerue as in a ſingular metaphor, how deere the church is vnto God, Deut. 4. 20. euen as deere as any mans inheritance is to himſelfe: for indeed an inheritance doth very fitly reſemble and ſhadow out vnto vs the nature and condition of the church. Firſt, becauſe it is not woorth any thing, except a man do plant & ſow the ſame; and ſo is it in the church, wherin if the Lord plow not and ſow not, there can no good thing grow therein. Againe, an inheritance is ſometimes ſold away for the barrennes thereof; ſo when the church groweth ſecure and bringeth not foorth good

fruits, the Lord giueth it ouer for a ſeaſon to be ſpoyled by ſtrangers. Againe, if an inheritance will no way be amended, then is it accurſed and burned, Heb. 6. 8. ſo if no means will reclaime the world from their wicked life, then he accurſeth them and giueth them ouer to the fire of hell. Alſo as a man taketh ſingular comfort in his inheritance, ſo the Lord doth in his church: and as a man hedgeth and encloſeth his inheritance, to keepe it from being waſted; euen ſo the Lord hath ſet a brazen wall about his church, the which all the diuels in hell ſhall neuer be able to ouerthrow, but men and angels ſhall fight for their ſafegarde, and maugre ſinne and hell they ſhall endure as the earth doth, euen for euer and euer. The firſt reaſon: becauſe hee might powre his bleſsing on it, Eſa. 19. 25. for hee hauing many Reaſon 1. moſt excellent benefits in ſtore hath made choiſe of his church to powre foorth all that he hath thereupon: for whether we conſider the bleſsings of this life, or the benefits of the life to come, they are all ordained for the good of them that be godly. He is wiſe to inſtruct vs; he is mightie to defend vs; he is liberall to maintaine vs; & he is mercifull to receiue vs: for our ſakes were the heauens created, the earth eſtabliſhed; the waters remooued, and the fruits appointed: for our ſakes were the angels condemned, the ſonne of God crucified, and the age and yeeres of the world is plunged. Another reaſon: becauſe we ſhould be holy vnto him, Deut. 19. 2. Of all the creatures of this worlde, 2 there is none that can bee holy vnto the Lord ſaue onely mankinde, for they are the image of God: and if the lande whereupon Moſes ſtood was holy, much more is the land of our harts holy, whereupon the Lord himſelfe ſtandeth, for he raigneth in vs. And this is the cauſe why the Lorde hath made vs his inheritance that we ſhould ſerue him in holines and righteouſnes all the daies of our life: for the heauens are holy, whither wee are going: the angels are holy, with whom we ſhall dwell: the church is holy, wherein we liue: and therefore we muſt bee holy, or elſe we are

accurſed. Seeing we are the inheritance of God purchaſed by his ſonne, then let not any of vs liue to our ſelues, but to him that redeemed vs, 2. Cor. 5. 15. how many waies might I vrge this doctrine? that as the earth beareth not fruit for it ſelfe, but for vs; ſo ſhould not we eate the fruits of our owne labours, but offer them to the Lord. Our harts are the grounds; our bodies, are the hedges; God his law, is the plough; the worde, is the ſeede; and himſelfe, is the husbandman: Oh, let vs not be ploughed and planted in vaine; let vs not fruſtrate the Lords expectation, and our ſoules ſaluation. If we were but ſeruants, yet we ought to worke for our hire; but being his inheritance we muſt liue and die day and night to beare him fruit, wee cannot put him away, but he may put vs away: our fruits do not profit him, and yet the want of them will curſe vs. Let vs not be for the weedes of ſinne, nor for pleaſures to feede on, as bullockes do on paſture-land: but let vs bee his garden of ſweete flowers; his vineyard of fruitfull grapes; his field of fine planted wheat; and his poſſeſsion, for an euerlaſting inheritance. Let our words, be as gratious fruit; let our religion, be as pretious pearle; let our loue, be as rockes of golde; and let our bodies, bee as fruitfull garners; let vs bring him all for firſt fruits & tenthes, and offerings, and ſacrifices, that we may be his bleſſed land vnto the worlds end. Another vſe; ſeeing we are the Lords inheritance, we may ſee that the Lorde will be very hardly driuen to forſake vs, for he gaue a lawe, Numb. 27. that none ſhoulde ſell awaie their inheritance, but at the ende of fiftie yeeres, euery one ſhould reclaime thereunto. So that, if the Lord ſhall giue ouer his inheritance as hee did Iſraell, Hoſ. 5. 15. the caſe is very deſperate, but not perpetuall. A man that hath manie barren fieldes doth not preſently ſell them away; no more the Lorde, which hath many barren ſoules in the compaſſe of his church, doth preſently forſake them: but rather dreſſeth them by the miniſterie of the worde, that they may be made fruitefull. Oh, heare this you that

are in the Lordes folde; although he beare for a ſeaſon with your barren hearts, and ſuffer you manie yeeres to lie in reſt, thinking at the laſt you will bring him ſome profit: bring it foorth with ſpeede, or elſe knowe that the Lorde which redeemed you from hell, will once againe commit and bequeath you to condemnation as the fruitles fig tree was. Thinke not your ſelues happie that you liue ſo long before you bee called to beare; for verily, long agoe were you appointed and called to yeelde him his harueſt. If therfore you wil not ſtriue to yeeld it, thinke that God wil reape where he did not ſowe, and gather where he did not lende, and hee will tarrie no time; for the figge tree bore no fruit bicauſe the time of fruites was not come, yet was it reprobated: So if God come to thee, although thou neuer were able to yeelde him any commoditie; yet he will regarde himſelfe and not thee, his expectation and not thine, his glory and not thy welfare; for he which is hardlie prouoked, is more hardly pacified, neither ſparing in his rage, man, woman, beaſt, or angell. That the heathen. Theſe wordes containe another grounde of their praier, wherein they deſire that the Lorde woulde ſpare them, leaſt that by reaſon of famine they ſhoulde be driuen to the Lordes enimies for ſuccour: or elſe, they feared that when their ſcarſitie ſhoulde bee noiſed abroade, the heathen woulde come & conquer them. From hence we may obſerue, that Nothing more grieuous to good men then the regiment of the euill. there is not any thing more odious to godly mindes, then that the heathen, idolatrous men without religion, ſhould rule ouer them, Pſal. 74 4, 5. As it is vnnaturall and dangerous, that men ſhoulde bee ruled by beaſtes; ſheepe by woolues; and little birdes by the great hauke; euerie minute threatening to teare them in peeces: ſo is it when good men are driuen through want or warre, or loue or feare of life, to ſeeke harbour among the enimies of God. Well they know that their libertie is woorſe then impriſonment, and that the higheſt place of dignitie among the wicked, is inferior to the loweſt in the church of God, as

                  Dauid ſaide: I had rather keepe a dore in the houſe of God, then to dwell in the tents of wickednes. What pleaſure haue we of ſight liuing in darknes? or of health liuing in impriſonment; or of ſtrength liuing in bondage; or of meate liuing in ſickenes? and no more ſhall we haue of all worldly things, when we are in the lande of heathens. The firſt Reaſon 1. reaſon: bicauſe in the dominion of the wicked there is no conſcience of bloode, or care of equitie, Ezech. 22. 27. They turne their ſubiects to ſlauerie, their widowes to deſtruction, their children to beggerie, and they ſend heapes of dead carkeiſes at one time to the graue; they care not for religion, neither reſpect the king of heauen and earth: Although the ſtreetes flowe with bloode, and the liuing be not ſufficient to burie the dead; yet if they may raigne they care not: Life, and liuing, and honeſtie is nothing woorth among them: They denie God, perſecute his church, and burne his worde moſt wickedly; they regard not olde men, rauiſh women, and murther children villanouſlie: They take away houſes, landes, rentes, goods, patrimonies, and wiues from them that poſſeſſe them: and therefore there is no greater croſſe then to liue vnder the gouerment of a heathen. Another reaſon; bicauſe their 2 wickednes ſhall be a continuall heart-burning vnto them, 2. Pet. 2. 7. Pſalm. 120. 5. Their eares ſhall heare their blaſphemies; their eies ſhall ſee their idolatrie; and their liues ſhall feele their treacheries. All thinges ſhall bee lawfull among them ſaue goodnes, for nothing is lawfull that tendeth to godlines. Oh, how will this grieue a godly ſoule! to heare his Sauiour reuiled, true religion ſlandered, the godly to be hated, the worlde to bee loued, the diuell to bee worſhipped, and heauen to bee neglected. Hee muſt not ſpeake for feare of death; he muſt not pray but in ſecret; hee ſhall not dare to diſcloſe himſelfe; hee ſhall finde no neighbours, nor friends, nor followers, nor comfort among them. The firſt vſe; Let vs therefore forſake the fellowſhip Vſe 1. of vnbeleeuers, Eſay 52. 12. whoſe preſence is damnable;

whoſe liues are abhominable; whoſe profeſsion is execrable; and whoſe ende is condemnation: of theſe the worlde is filled, and yet we muſt auoide them. Let vs not bee defiled with their ſinnes, nor corrupted with their manners, nor allured with their pleaſures, but go out from the middeſt of them: They are hated of God, poſſeſſed of diuels, bewitched with vanities, and profeſſed miſcreants. Howe ſhall wee loue God and dwell among them? but either the anger of God, or the loue of the worlde, or the baite of luſtes, or the inchantments of vanities will drawe vs away. Oh, let vs take our ſelues to deſolate places, and rather dwell with the brute beaſtes then with theſe godles perſons: we cannot truſt them; we may not liue with them; we muſt flie from them, or elſe be condemned among thē: therefore put them from your houſes, and from your tables, and from your conference, and from your friendſhip. I knowe you woulde bee aſhamed to bee ſeene daily conuerſing with an open and ſhameleſſe harlot: therefore much more be aſhamed and forſake their company, whoſe liues are like beaſts; whoſe hearts are like heathens; whoſe faces are like harlots; and whoſe actions proceed of euill. I tell you, their waies do leade vnto death, and their lodgings are chambers of hell. Where is nowe their God? That is, either they are not the Lordes people that are thus afflicted, or elſe their God is no God that cannot deliuer them. From hence wee may gather, that it is the propertie of wicked men, if they get aduantage againſt a profeſſour of religion, then preſently they turne it againſt God himſelfe, and fall to reuiling his glorious maieſtie, Psal. 74. 10. So in our times, if any haue any ſmall profeſsion of religion, and doe fall into the handes of the worlde, then preſentlie they ſcoffe, and ſcorne, and laugh, and deride Chriſt, the Goſpell, religion, and all the followers thereof: If they happen to be poore, why? wil an atheiſt ſay, canſt thou not get thy liuing by hearing of Sermons? If they bee rich men Reaſon. their faults ſhall be aggrauated. The reaſon heereof is;

bicauſe they might be knowne to be not ſo much enimies to the godly, as to God himſelfe; like the Iewes that crucified Chriſt, Matth. 27. Let vs rather lament them that fall into their enimies handes, then reioice at their ſinnes and ouerthrowes; & let vs know that the Lord will ſurely take their cauſe into his owne hande, and ſeuerely puniſh ſuch intollerable blaſphemie as he did in Rabſakeh, and the king of Syria, Eſay 37. although their wordes bee great, their pride be infinite, their power glorious, their mindes ambitious, and their crueltie extreme; yet will, and ſhall the Lorde defende his name and truth, and children from all their blaſphemies; and this ſhall bee a cauſe of their more ſpeedy deſtruction.
            
            
               The xxvj. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 18.
                  Then will the Lorde be iealous ouer his people, and ſpare his land.
               
               NOw at the length by the mercifull aſsiſtance of the Almightie, are we come to the laſt part of this propheſie, wherein, as in the former wee haue heard the wonderfull troubles vpon the afflicted Iewes: ſo now we ſhall heare, the ſame ſpirite aſsiſting vs, the ſingular comforts and promiſes which the prophet maketh vnto them, vnto the ende of this propheſie. Theſe comforts are either the reſtitution of their owne abundance, in this whole chapter following: or the promiſe for the ouerthrow of their enimies in the laſt chapter: vnto themſelues in this chapter he promiſeth worldly benefits, vnto the 27. verſ. and ſpirituall benefites or graces from the 27. to the ende. The worldly bleſsings are of two ſortes: Firſt, that hee will ſpare them from farther vengeance, verſ. 18. Secondlie, that he will heape on them many benefites. In this verſ. he promiſeth to be iealous ouer his land and ſpare his people. Meaning that hee will watch ouer them with a reuenging hand, to annoy and deſtroy all thoſe that riſe againſt them:

For iealouſie ſignifieth an inordinate loue, tending to reuenge, Num. 25. 13. In this verſe conſidering the order which the prophet maketh in that he firſt exhorteth them to repentance & to praier, and ſo preſently deſcendeth to theſe ſweete promiſes following: wee may obſerue that ſo Repentance maketh vs fit for al benefits. ſoone as a man hath repented, ſo ſoone is he capable of the tender mercies of God. All this while wee haue heard of no mercie but iudgements, threatning and thundering moſt fearefull wrath: but now at length after ſome woorthie exhortations to repentance, commeth this cheerefull promiſe of mercie, to tell vs that we can no ſooner repent on earth, but the Lord will ſeale our remiſsion in heauen, Iob. 11. 14. 15. Naamans ſeruant told him that the Prophet bad him an eaſie thing, when hee ſaid, goe waſh and bee cleane; and therefore if he would not waſh he ſhould not be cleane: ſo is it but a ſhort commaundement that wee ſhould be repentant, and then be ſaued; therefore if men will not repent, it is no pitie if they be not ſaued. Oh, I would to God that they might goe out of this life as free from ſinne, as Naaman went out of Iſraell free from leproſie: but if the promiſes of God cannot be had without repentance, no more then a cable roape can goe through the eie of a needle, except it be ſpun as fine as any thread; then are they like to lye on the Lords owne hand, for there are but few that will buye them ſo deerely: rather had they paſſe a ſhort life without promiſes in the poſſeſsion of vanities, then lead a ſorrowfull life in the fruition of godlines; ſo that the contrarie ſhall bee ſaide to them, that heere the Prophet ſpeaketh: God will neuer bee iealous ouer them and ſpare their ſoules. The firſt reaſon: becauſe in repentance we mitigate the intolerable wrath of God, Ion 3. 3. that Reaſon 1. thing which the euerlaſting paines of hell cannot performe may be redreſſed by the ſorrowes of our harts, & the teares of our liues: for no blood, no money, no riches, no torments, nor any friends can appeaſe the Lords wrath; but a ſorrowfull perplexed ſpirit can doe away all. For as the ground is

fit for the ſeed when it is ploughed; ſo a heart is fit for the Lord when it is broken. By this we may ſee what is the folly of wicked men: for if by repentance good men eſcape damnation; then without repentance euill men ſhall poſſeſſe damnation. Tell me, haddeſt thou leifer be drunk one meale, and then faſt for euer after; or faſt at one meale, and then eate for all thy life following? Canſt thou not abide two or three blowes with a rod, to auoide ten thouſand with an iron ſcourage? or were thou not better haue thy nailes pared, then ſuffer thy fingers to be cut off; and rather ſuffer a little blood to be taken from thee, then let all thy life be loſt? ſo endure here mourning for an hower, rather then in hell for euer; and abide here the chaſtiſement of God his worde, rather then in hell the puniſhment of diuels: let thy life looſe all her ioy, rather then thy ſoule ſhould looſe her ſaluation. Another reaſon: becauſe it 2 worketh or bringeth life eternall, Act. 11. 28. now life eternall is all in all: he that can haue this, what matter is it? though his life be poore; his bodie be ſtarued; his name be odious; his miſeries be tedious; his libertie be cloſed vp in irons; his health be layed vp in ſickenes; and his friends be turned into mortall foes: what are all theſe, if a man be aſſured of heauen? ſurely lighter, then feathers; eaſier, then ſoft beds; and welcommer, then a long life. Nay rather, what are all things without life eternall; great liuings, daintie fare, many friends, obedient ſeruants, goodly houſes, eaſie daies, ſoft beds and long life, but as the pleaſant ſting of a ſerpent? which a while doth ſo tickle the veines and ſinewes of the bodie, that it delighteth euery member; but in the end it ſwelleth the body, poyſoneth the blood, breaketh the veines, and deſtroyeth the life: ſo are the goods of this life without the goods of the world to come. Let vs therefore make this vſe thereof, that if it be but to dwell in our land, let vs be repentant, Ierem. 25. 5. God will Vſe 1. not ſpare our land till we haue repented. Oh, how fearfull is it to thinke that we ſhould begge in Italy, or Spaine, or

Fraunce, when we may enioy our reuenewes in England? Let vs weepe at home, that we lament not in other lands: let vs ſorrow in our houſes, that we complaine not in forreine priſons. Now would the Lord feed vs with the fineſt flower, the ſweeteſt hony, the fatteſt oxen, and the beſt lambes in the flocke: Oh, why ſhould we abuſe all theſe? to be carried where wee ſhall want all ſuſtenance for life. Some men hold their landes by ſuite of law and continuall danger: let vs beſtow as much for repentance to hold ours, as they do to defend theirs. Let vs repent for our ſelues, for our poſſeſsions, for our wiues and children, and for our bodies and ſoules, or elſe all will be taken from vs. Another 2 vſe. God will neuer withdraw his mercy from a repentant man, Zech. 1. 3. and this was it that our Sauiour meant when he ſaid, that all things are poſsible to him that beleeueth; namely, that he ſhould begin, continue, and end well: Feare not the aſsiſtance of God in any trouble, or triall, or death, or affliction, if thou haue repented; for thou ſhalt hold out to the end. Repentance made Abraham to trauell longer and be well contented: it made the Iſraelites to waite for Chriſt, & it incouraged the Martyres to die for Chriſt: therfore if thou haue repented, thou maieſt boldly aſſure thy ſelf, that thou ſhalt haue patience in euery trouble, & zeale in all thy life, and comfort in any diſtreſſe, and abilitie for euery temptation, with power to abide death, and glorie to reward thy ſoule: For although thou maiſt ſlip after thou haſt repented, yet thou canſt not finally periſh; for all the ſinnes done after thy conuerſion, ſhall be euerlaſtingly ſilenced. I might alſo note out of this verſe, that God is more ready and willing to pardon vs, then we are to aske pardon, Rom. 10. 22. and therefore if we aske not, he will not onely be reuenged for our ſinnes, but alſo vpon vs for the ſinnes of our fathers, Iſa. 65. 7. Againe, let vs vpon this ground be bold to pray in hope and aſſurance: for as God 3 opened the iron gates for Peter to come foorth out of priſon; ſo hath he opened the gates of heauen, that our praiers

without al let may come vp before him. I might alſo obſerue in this verſe, that God doth ſomtime caſt off his owne people for a ſeaſo, that he may for euer caſt off the wicked, Ezec. 1. 15. as a iealous husband putteth off his wife, that he may for euer beware of his enimies; for a friend cannot be hid in proſperitie, nor an enimie in aduerſitie. The reaſons, bicauſe the wicked blaſpheme the iuſt, Ier. 30. 17. againe, or elſe we ſhould thinke that the wicked were happie, Pſa. 37. 1, 2, 3. therefore when once good men beginne to crie, then ſhall wicked men begin to fall, Iſa. 35. 4. and we may boldly deſire of God to turne his wrath from vs to them, Iſa. 51. 22, 23. that his enimies may feele his heauie hand.
               
                  Yea the Lord will anſwere and ſay vnto his people, Behold, I will ſend you corne, and wine, and oile, and you ſhall be ſatisfied 
                  Verſe. 19. 
                  therewith; and I will no more make you a reproch among the heathen. In this verſe and ſo forwarde to the 27. the prophet doth declare the ſpeciall worldly benefits, which God would giue to his people vpon their repentance: the firſt, that he will heare their praier, verſ. 19. and herein he promiſeth, firſt, to anſwere them by worde; ſecondly, to eaſe them. In this that the Lorde ſaith he will anſwere them: 1 we may note that God hath euermore a regarde to the praiers of the penitent, Ioh. 9. 31. howſoeuer hee ſhutteth his eares againſt ſinners, accounting of their praiers and God euer heard good mens praiers. teares as of abhomination, yet he maketh great reckoning of their deſires that are in league with him. The faithfull are as deere to the Lord as Eſther was to Aſſuerus, or Herodias daughter to Herod, who promiſed but one halfe of their kingdome vnto them; but the Lord hath freely promiſed a whole kingdome, if we will deſire the ſame. This muſt mightily ſtirre vs vp to praier; for if the Lord regarde vs when we pray, to bleſſe vs; then will he regarde vs when we pray not, to curſe vs. Who liueth in the world, but hee hath neede of many things: if he haue neede, he is blinde, if he ſee it not; if he ſee it, he is wilfull if he aske not; if hee aske, he is vnfaithfull, if he hope not to receiue. The reaſons:

firſt, becauſe penitent men haue felt pouertie, Pſal. 
                  Reaſon 1 79. 8. that is, they haue beene caſt downe ynough, and therefore they ſhall be raiſed vp againe. Againe, they delight 2 in God, and therefore will God delight in them, Iſa. 33. 6. for it cannot be that God ſhould loue that man or that ſoule, that hath no delight in his maieſtie. Therefore hereby ſhall men trie whether they be repentant, if ſo bee the meditation of God and his mercie, and their calling, and holineſſe, and his word, be ſweete and pleaſant in their mindes and mouthes. Firſt, as we tender our owne liues and welfare, ſo let vs pray vnto the Lord, Ier. 29. 12. for we Vſe 1. haue great neede to looke to our ſelues in this diſtreſſed eſtate of the world; and for ſo much as onely the Lorde is our keeper, how ſhall we commend our liues vnto him but by praier. Pray alway my deere brethren, as diligently as you labour; as feruently as you thirſt; as ordinarily as you eate; and as ioyfully as you ſleepe: pray I ſay, as a woman doth in trauell; as a ſicke man doth in his fits; as the mariners do in a ſtorme; and as a condemned man at the place of execution. Oh what would you not do, that you might liue? and therefore what ought you not to doe, that you might pray. Vnto praier there muſt be no compariſon in worldly things; all earthly things muſt giue place as we ſee in Daniel; ſleepe muſt be put off, as we ſee in Chriſt; and eaſe muſt be baniſhed, as we ſee in Dauid: and the Apoſtle willeth for praiers ſake, that married folks becom ſtrangers one to another: and therefore ſo let vs do for praier as we do for meate; for we neuer ceaſe from hunger till we be ſatiſfied: ſo let vs neuer ceaſe from praier till wee be glorified. Secondly in this verſ. when hee promiſeth Corne, and wine, 
                  2 All abundance to religion. 
                  and oyle: we may obſerue, that all abundance accompanieth and as it were waiteth vpon religion. So long as the worde raigneth, the church ſtandeth, and the Goſpell is obeied: ſo long wee neede not feare, for our fieldes ſhall abound with corne, & our land ſhal flow with plenty, Pſal. 81. 16. We haue had beſt experience of this thing in England;

for euer ſince the Goſpell had any footing among vs, and was publikely preached, and generally profeſſed, we were neuer in any generall diſtreſſe: but wee haue forgotten all ſorrowe; and I woulde God wee had not forgotten our peace and plentie giuer. But ſince we began to be wearie of the truth, that Diuines fell to wrangling, profeſſors to carnalitie, & hypocrites into Atheiſme; ſince that time we haue felt ſome want of corne, and ſome terrour of warre. Oh, that we coulde ſo continue in profeſsion, that we might dwell in the Lords fauour: ſo ſhould we bee euer fedde with the fineſt wheate, clothed with the warmeſt wooll, and defended by the greateſt angels; but ſeeing we begin to be wearie of our religion, God beginneth to bee wearie of his liberalitie: ſo that I verilie feare, till wee haue all repented, our corne and plentie ſhall not bee reſtored. The reaſons; Firſt, bicauſe by ſuch abundance Reaſon 1 the Lorde breaketh in peeces the fierie violence of wicked men, Pſalm. 37. 17. for they accuſe religion for a baſe and poore profeſsion: and therefore after a calamitie God giueth to his church greateſt plentie; as after a long raine, the ſunne ſhineth brighteſt. Another reaſon; becauſe 2 by ſuch plentie God cureth and healeth the miſerie of his people, Eſay 30. 28. which being fearefully afflicted through famine, are againe moſt ioyfully comforted through plentie: ſo that abundance is like a medicine or plaiſter, which with good aduiſe healeth and cureth; but through abuſe corrupteth and maketh the wounde more incurable. Firſt, then let vs deſire the ſpirite of God to be Vſe 1. powred on vs, and then ſhall the wildernes become fruitfull, and the barren earth be amended, Eſay 32. 15. The ſame ſpirit that maketh good harts, maketh glad fields, that which giueth ſtore of righteouſnes, giueth ſtore of foode and corne: And thus God giueth vnder one requeſt two benefits. For when we aske for grace, he giueth more alſo, as Salomon asking for wiſedome, obtained wiſedome and riches: or as Ruth deſiring to gleane after the reapers;

                  Boaz gaue hir leaue to gather among the ſheaues; and at length made hir ladie and miſtreſſe of all hee had. Seeke therefore the kingdome of God, and the righteouſneſſe thereof, and all other thinges, as godly children, obedient families, plentie of victuals, peace of life, length of daies, and glorie euerlaſting ſhall be heaped on thee. Againe, 2 if abundance followe the profeſsion of religion, then it is manifeſt, that when plentie faileth, religion alſo faileth, Ierem. 9. 12, 13. For as there can bee no preaching when there is no miniſter, ſo there can be no plentie when there is no profeſsing. Oh, this cutteth our nation to the quicke, for the Lorde by this dearth, doth auouch to our faces, that there is among vs as great decay of his church, as of corne, and the ſeede of the worde hath beene as much choaked and drowned in the hearts of men, as the ſeede of the earth hath beene choaked and drowned in the fieldes of men: and what remaineth? but as the Prophet ſaith, that the Lorde feede vs with wormewoode, and giue vs the bitterneſſe of gall to drinke. I feare greatly, if our miſerie continue, our religion will be cleane aboliſhed; and if our want be now redreſſed, we ſhall be ſhortly caſt into a bed of comfortles troubles; for as yet I cannot ſee any generall or continuall repentance in lamentation. Thirdly, when the Lorde promiſeth them to deliuer them from the reproch 3 of the heathen: we may note, that it is a great bleſſing of God to be deliuered from ſlander, Iob 5. 21. To liue without ſlander it is impoſsible, except wee coulde liue without ſinne: And therefore if at any time thou bee ſuſpected and defamed, praie vnto the Lorde to bee deliuered from it. The reaſons: Firſt, bicauſe life and death are Reaſon 1. in the power of the toong, Prouer. 28. 21. So then who can continue life, or bring death but God alone? Secondly, ſlanderous toongs doe hate them that are in affliction: that is, they will then more greeue them and belie them, bicauſe they thinke then will euery body beleeue them. Marke this thing well, and you ſhall ſee that it is the common

practiſe of this age. Let vs not open our eares to euerie Vſe 1. tale, or take heede, or aske what other men ſaie of vs, Eccle. 7. 23. for that will hurt vs. And let vs refraine our 2 toongs frō ſlander, or elſe we haue no religion, Iam. 1. 26.
            
            
               The xxvij. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſe. 20.
                  But I will remooue farre off from you the northren armie, and I will driue him into a lande barren and deſolate, with his face toward the east ſea, and his ende to the vtmost ſea: and his ſtinke ſhall come vp, and his corruption ſhall aſcende, becauſe he hath exalted him ſelfe to do this.
               
               AFter the promiſe of plentie, followeth the remoouing away of the Northren armie, which are the Locuſts, palmers, and the other noiſome beaſtes, who came by a northren winde, and therefore are called the Northren armie, whom hee will driue away into the wilderneſſe, where they ſhall all ſtarue and neuer come againe, with their face or forefront to the eaſt ſea; that is, the dead ſea, which lay eaſtwarde; ſo called, bicauſe neuer any fiſh coulde liue therein. And this is that ſea which now couereth all the lande of Sodom and Gomorhe, called the lake Aſphaltite. And his end to the vtmoſt ſea: That is, the great ſea, which is called the Mediterranean ſea. And his ſtinke ſhall aſcende: Meaning, there they ſhoulde lie vnburied, and their filthines aſcend, and remaine odious to God and men. From hence, when he ſaith that he wil driue away: 
                  God onelie driueth away hurtful things wee muſt note that it is onely the Lorde that muſt take away from vs all noiſome and hurtfull things, Deut. 32. 39. We haue touched this doctrine alreadie, when we ſhewed in the former chapter, that no iudgement can bee remooued by naturall meanes. The firſt reaſon; bicauſe by this Reaſon 1. meanes hee is knowne to be the God of the world, Exod. 7. 17. Againe, as his hand ſendeth euill, Amos 3. 7. ſo his 2
                  
hande muſt remooue euill, Eſay 49. 9. Let vs therefore learne howſoeuer wee bee annoied, to ſeeke for helpe of Vſe 1. God; and as we haue beene often admoniſhed, let the afflictions of the body, wring foorth the teares and praiers of the ſoule. Againe, ſeeing God will driue from vs all hurtfull thinges, let vs not feare the ſting of death, nor the power 2 of the graue, Hoſ. 13. 14. And if we beleeue that God ſhall raiſe vs vp from death to life, why ſhoulde we thinke that beaſtes or birdes, or afflictions ſhall euer preuaile againſt vs? It is the better for vs, that God alone doth this thing, and not our ſelues, for our power is often weakned, but his hande and ſtrength is alway mightie. Secondlie, when he bringeth in the wildernes and dead ſea, to receiue 2 theſe deuouring beaſtes: Hee teacheth vs that there is as good vſe of the barren as of the plowed lande; and of the ſea where nothing liueth, as of the ſea where all engender; for theſe are made to deſtroy, as the other are made to builde vp. Whereby we may ſee, that all the creatures of All things helpe God to deſtroy his enimies. the worlde doe helpe God againſt his enimies to performe his wrath, Ioſ 10. 12. The cloudes throwe downe ſtones, and the Sunne ſtoode ſtill a whole day till Ioſuah had diſcomfited all his enimies. The firſt reaſon: bicauſe they wil not helpe them that God perſecuteth, Eſay 15. 6. Dauid woulde not ſpare the men that ſlew Iſhboſeth his enimie: Reaſon 1. and much more will not the creatures ſpare or helpe them that are enimies to God. Againe, the day of wrath is a day of affliction, Eſay 22. 5. and therefore the creaatures 2 are afraide of iudgement themſelues: And as Iezabels meſſengers followed and turned after Iehu hir enimie: ſo all the creatures of God turne after him, when he is in war to deſtroy ſinners. Let vs therefore learne to Vſe 1. look vpon our creator, Eſay 17. 7. & that in this time, when time of repentance may be had. For as the inhabitants of Ceilah woulde haue betraied Dauid to Saul, that hee might ſlaie him; ſo woulde all the creatures of the Lorde deliuer and betraie vs vnto him (though more iuſtly) that he may

make an ende of vs. God is almoſt forgotten among men to be their creator, for they giue more reuerence to their parents then to him: therefore will the creatures forget vs, and deliuer vs vp for ſpies and enimies, as Ioſeph gaue Simeon his brother into priſon. Againe, let this generall 2 obedience of the creatures cauſe vs to walke more righteouſlie, Eſay 33. 15. 16. or elſe they will one day be reuenged, bicauſe wee haue cauſed them to bee ſubiected vnto vanitie. What a greeuous thing is it? that theſe dumbe creatures ſhoulde receiue when God giueth, and giue when God asketh, and obey when God commaundeth; and yet wee which haue more reaſon, are not mollified by the gifts of God, or warned by our workes to him, or pierced by his commandements: but of this inough elſe where. Becauſe he hath exalted. This is the reaſon why the Lord wil bring ſo ſharpe a puniſhment vpon them, becauſe they haue beene ſo bold as to afflict his people. But ſome may ſay vnto me, did not the Lord ſende theſe creatures to deſtroy? and if he ſent them, why doth he puniſh them? and if he ſent them not, how could they come in ſuch ſwarmes? to whom I anſwere that the Lord ſent them, and yet they exalted themſelues to do it. Whereby we may gather, that men ſhall not alway eſcape vnpuniſhed, although they performe that which God commanded: for God willed A man may offend God, in doing that which he willed. that Chriſt ſhould be crucified, but yet Iudas was neuertheleſſe eternally plagued, Act. 1. 18. if one man murther another, God will haue it ſo, or elſe it could not be; yet ſhal the murtherer ſuffer death iuſtly. God will haue good men in his church to be perſecuted, impriſoned, and martyred by the enimies: yet woe be to thoſe men and hands, that ſo handle and mangle their godly members. The firſt Reaſon 1. reaſon: becauſe in theſe actions men ſerue not God, but their owne will, Act. 13. 27. God decreeth it for one cauſe, but they doe it for another: as God would haue Chriſt deliuered for the ſinnes of the world, but Iudas betrayed him for thirtie peeces of ſiluer. God would haue Chriſt dye for

redemption, but the Iewes would put him to death for malice: and thus one and the ſame thing done for diuers cauſes doth not excuſe their malice, as we may note in the ſtorie of Ioſeph and his brethren. Againe, as they do it for 2 their owne pleaſure, ſo they attribute it to their owne power, Iſa. 10. 13. ſo wee ſhall finde many boaſting of their wickednes; how they haue played the tall fellowes in wounding, and killing, and whooring, and ſtealing, and endicting, and condemning, and accuſing other men, when themſelues are as guiltie of hell as the other were of death. Oh fearefull ſpectacle of humane infirmitie! that we may do that which God willeth to be done; and yet we cannot will as God would haue it done. No maruell if our life be ſo ſeparated from God, when our will cannot agree with our hand. Seeing we may be tranſgreſſors in doing that which God commandeth, eſpecially when we haue to doe Vſe 1. with the godly: let vs follow the counſell of Pilates wife, which was this, that we haue nothing to doe againſt iuſt men, for God will ſurely plague vs in the ende, Matth. 27. 19. Speake not againſt them, for it ſhall be rewarded; fight not againſt them, for thou ſhalt be conquered; ſpoile them not, for thou ſhalt be ſpoyled; and accuſe them not, for thou ſhalt be condemned. They are the eie of God, pricke them not; they are the Lordes annointed, touch them not; they are Chriſts members, hurt them not: for ſurely as Saul by ſtriuing againſt Dauid did ſpoyle himſelfe, and as Pharaoh by tyrannizing ouer the Iſraelites, did vndoe himſelfe and all his countrey; ſo ſhalt thou bring both nations and people, thy ſelfe, and all thy poſteritie into euerlaſting woe, if thou oppreſſe the profeſſors of religion. Remember if thou chaſtiſe them, thou art but the rod of God; which, when corrections be finiſhed is throwne into the fire: and euen as now Pilate wiſheth (though it be too late) that he had obeyed his wifes counſell; ſo ſhalt thou wiſh (if not too late) that thou haddeſt neuer medled againſt religion. Againe, let vs learne to frame our wils to 2
                  
God his will, and then ſhall our handes without treſpaſſe worke that which God commaundeth: and therefore doe nothing of malice, for that is of the diuel; do nothing of enuie, for that is of ſedition; do nothing raſhly, for that is folly; but do all things with loue, for there is God. If thou canſt do anything and not breake the bond of loue to God, or to thy neighbour, thou ſinneſt not; yea, although it ſeeme neuer ſo ſinfull in the ſight of man, for loue is the fulfilling of the law: ſo then ſo long as thou workeſt in loue, ſo long thou doeſt not offend God; and ſo long as thou doeſt not offend God, ſo long thou doeſt not tranſgreſſe the law.
               
                  Feare not ô land, but be glad and reioice, for the Lord will do 
                  Verſ. 21. 
                  mightie things. In this and in the verſes following the Prophet giueth them verie manie exhortations, grounded on the neuer failing promiſe of God: Firſt, generally in this verſe, and then more ſpecially in the verſes following. In this verſe, hee biddeth them not to feare: ſome will thinke that this exhortation is needles, for if they did not feare they could not beleeue his former threatnings. To whome I anſwere, that he meaneth they ſhould not diſtruſt the promiſes of God, notwithſtanding all the before named iudgements; and therefore preſently in this verſe he telleth them, that the Lord will doe for them mighty things. By this then we gather, that in all good men the promiſes of God muſt bee more powerfull then the feare of euill: more plainly thus, Art thou feared with ſickneſſe, with pouertie, with loſſe of children, and ſuch like dangers then? remember the promiſe of God which ſaith, that all ſhall worke to thy best, and that I will not faile thee 
                  The promiſes of God muſt euer preuaile with good men. 
                  nor thy ſeede, and ſuch like; and ſo let theſe promiſes more comfort thee then thy terrors doe diſmay thee: So our Sauiour comforted his diſciples, and in them all of vs, Luc. 12. 32. Feare not little flocke, it is your fathers will to giue you a kingdome; and Dauid ſaide well to this purpoſe, Though I walke in the valley of death I will not feare, for thy rod and thy ſtaffe they comfort me: ſo let vs ſay with him, though we liue

in feare of warre, and famine, and peſtilence, and diuell, and death, and hell; yet wee will not feare, becauſe God hath ſaid they ſhall not hurt vs. Ioſuah was neuer afraid to fight, becauſe God had ſaid, that he woulde fight for him; ſo let not vs be afraide to fight with ſinne, to liue in danger, to languiſh in priſon, and to pine away in famine; ſeeing wee haue the Lords owne promiſe, that none of theſe ſhall deſtroy vs, but amend vs. The firſt reaſon, becauſe his euerlaſting Reaſon 1. loue is the cauſe of his promiſe, and therefore it will performe his mercie, Ier. 31. 3 and if it be euerlaſting, then is the force thereof now as well, as when it was firſt made; and ſeeing it neuer was nor euer ſhal be repealed, therfore it ſhall as well ſtrengthen thy ſoule, as the ſoule of Noah, or Abraham, or Moſes, or Dauid, or Ieremie, or any other. Againe, euil things are alway cōditionally threatned, meaning, 2 if men repent not: as we may ſee in Dauid, Ahab, Niniueh, and many other; and therefore repentant men neede not feare any danger; for they are alway bleſſed, hauing the angels to defend them againſt the force of men, & Chriſt to fight for them againſt the rage of Sathan. Let Vſe 1. vs therefore learne to giue all diligence, that wee may bee ſure of the fauour of God, Pſa. 23. 6. And for this cauſe Peter biddeth vs giue all diligence to make our election ſure, meaning, that this is the greateſt worke of the world, that men ſhould be certaine of the promiſes of God. When we haue the promiſes, and cannot certainly yeeld vnto them, then are we like ſicke men, which haue good phiſicke, but cannot be perſwaded to take it, becauſe they thinke it will doe them no good: ſo wee thinke theſe promiſes vncertaine, and ſome they haue holpe, but ſome they failed. But we muſt know that the promiſes neuer failed, if the men were not vnfaithfull; for as men will not plant corrupt impes and graftes, ſo God will not make vnſtedfaſt promiſes: but as the ground doth many times alter a good plant that it groweth not; ſo men doe choke the promiſes that they helpe not. Therefore if God bid thee not feare, then

caſt away feare; if he bid thee not weepe, then ceaſe from teares; as when hee biddeth thee not kill, thou refraineſt from murder. The aſſurance of the Lordes fauour muſt growe by a continual practiſe of repentance, as the Apoſtle teacheth, when he ſaith, Patience worketh experience, Rom. 5. and therefore this benefite wee may reape by our often ſorrowes, that we may come with confidence to the throne of grace. Another vſe: ſeeing the promiſes of God muſt 2 be ſo auailable in vs, that they muſt expell all feare of euill, then let vs eſpecially bee armed with them againſt the feare of death, that euery one of vs may ſay with Iob. 13. 15. that although God ſlay vs, yet will we trust in him. What doth more trouble all the worlde, then doth the departure out of the world? for it maketh good men pray with Dauid, I will not die but liue; and it maketh euill men at their wits end, to thinke on the paines of death: therefore bleſſed is the remedie of the ſweete promiſes of God which enable vs againſt death. Daniel being once preſerued among the lions aliue, would neuer be afraide to be caſt among them againe; ſo we which once were not and now are, once were dead and now aliue; once were vnder the diuell, but now vnder Chriſt: let vs not, I ſay, feare the gates of death, or the ſorrowes of the graue. To whome doe I ſpeake, but to them that ſhall paſſe vnder the hande of death? therefore learne attentiuely what is deliuered: when thou beginneſt to drawe towarde the ſunne ſetting of thy life, I meane, thy death; then looke vpon al the promiſes of God which euer thou heardeſt at Sermons, or didſt read in the Scriptures, & laie them to thy ſoule, bidding it not to feare death, for the Lorde hath commanded thee not to feare it. But peraduenture it will replie vnto thee & ſay; the paine of death is intollerable, how can I but feare it? then tell it againe, that it is not ſo, for death hath loſt hir ſting, as the apoſtle ſaith, O death where is thy ſting? what is an adder, a viper, or a ſerpent, when they haue loſt their ſting? Surely euerie yoong childe may play with them and handle them. And as the

paines of a trauailing woman, do bring foorth a man child; ſo thy paine ſhall worke pleaſure, thy life ſhall bring death, thy ſorrowes ſhall gaine ioyes; thy friendes ſhall bee turned into ſaints; thy parents into angels; and thy gouernours into God himſelfe: If thou bee a woman, hee will be thy husband; if thou bee a man hee will be thy wife; and if thou be a ſeruant hee will bee thy Lorde. Oh, feare not death, but learne the promiſes of God, to comfort thee againſt it: and thinke what ſhall bee thy bleſſedneſſe? to forſake the worlde to goe to heauen; to forſake thy pouertie, to goe to riches; to forſake thy ſicknes, to go to health; to forſake thy friendes, to goe to God; and to forſake a liuing of houſe and lande, for a whole kingdome. Oh, truſt in God in life, that thou maieſt truſt in God in death; beleeue in Chriſt in health, that thou maieſt beleeue in him in ſickneſſe; praie vnto him in thy ioyes, that thou maieſt praie vnto him in thy ſorrowes. And be not afraide while thou art liuing of the power of man, that thou maieſt not be afraide when thou art dying of the power of death and condemnation. For God ſhall. Nowe hee giueth them the reaſon of this exhortation why they ſhoulde not feare; bicauſe the Lord would do mightie things for them: whereby wee may note, that the vnſpeakeable power of God ſhoulde make men to reioice, Eſay 14. 27. For what can better aſſure vs of his promiſes then this, that hee is able to performe them, and therefore as the godly comfort themſelues with this ſaying; The Lorde is king bee the earth neuer ſo vnpatient: ſo let vs lift vp our ſelues in comfort, in the kingdome, glorie, maieſtie, power, and mercie of God that hee can doe what hee will; and will doe what we praie for. The firſt reaſon: bicauſe for the godlies ſake hee worketh myracles, Exod. 15. 12. and therefore wee Reaſon 1. ought to reioice in his power. We may reade Marke 2. that for one myracle all the people gaue praiſe vnto God: Wee haue many myracles and woonders done for vs, and who is able to tell what God hath done for his ſoule; therefore

yet let thy heart reioice when thy toong is not able to expreſſe the power of God. Another reaſon: bicauſe nothing 2 can ſtande againſt the ſaluation of his elect, Pſal. 107. 14. For the ſea ſhall be emptied, the earth ſhall be remooued, the rockes ſhall be broken, and the heauens ſhall bow themſelues, that the power of God may be manifeſted, and his ſaints be ſaued. Let vs learne by conſideration of his Vſe 1. power to ſerue him more earneſtly as Dauid doth, Pſal. 118. 27. when he had tolde howe mightilie God deſtroied his enimies as a fire of thornes; then hee preſently addeth, Binde the ſacrifice with coardes vnto the hornes of the altar. As God is powerfull to ſaue, ſo is hee powerfull to deſtroy; and therefore bee afraide, leaſt, as hee is able to bleſſe thee, if thou doe well; ſo hee curſe thee if thou doe euill. Pilate woulde haue had Chriſt haue anſwered, bicauſe (he ſaide) hee had power to looſe him or to deliuer him; but hee was rebuked for his labour: let vs much more anſwere the Lorde, for hee hath abſolute power to doe with vs whatſoeuer he will. Againe, let vs learne by conſideration of the 2 power of God to beleeue in him more confidently as Abraham did, Rom. 4. 21. although hee ſawe no reaſon howe the promiſe of God ſhoulde be fulfilled (if Iſaac were ſacrificed) yet this did animate him that God was able to raiſe him from death to life: and ſo let vs bee obedient to the Lordes commandements when they are contrarie to al reaſon and nature. For God which ſeeth more then we ſee, can doe more then we can doe. Therefore feare not thy worldly ioy which is as deere to thee as euer was Iſaac to Abraham, for God can raiſe it out of the pits of deepeſt ſorrowe, into the throne of euerlaſting pleaſure.
            
            
               
               The xxviij. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 22
                  Be not afraid yee beaſts of the field: for the paſtures of the wildernes are greene: for the tree beareth her fruit, the fig-tree and the vine doe giue their force.
               
               HAuing finiſhed the generall exhortation, now followeth the ſpeciall, whereof this firſt is directed to the beaſts of the field bidding them not be afraide: for now the fruits are budded out of the earth; as they had already taſted of mans puniſhmēt which commeth by ſin; ſo now they ſhould taſte of mans bleſsing which commeth by repentance. We muſt not ſo take this ſpeech of the prophet as if the beaſts did or could vnderſtand, but by a vſuall figure of the ſcripture, whereby a perſon is fayned to do a thing that it cannot doe, as in that of Ieremie, Heare ô heauens, hearken ô earth, &c. For as God calleth things that are not as if they were: ſo he ſpeaketh to things that vnderſtand not, as if they did. From hence that the Prophet ſpeaketh to bruit beaſts, we may note, that it is the word of The worde of God gladdeth man and beaſt. God that gladdeth both man and beaſt, Gen. 1. 22. for when the word of comfort is withdrawen, then they mourn as we heard in the former chapter: but when it ſtandeth, then they reioice; and when it waineth, then they fal away. The firſt reaſon, becauſe they doe reuerence thereunto; now their reuerence proceedeth not of fear, but of nature, Reaſon 1. whereby the creature reioiceth in his creator, Iſa. 45. 21. Againe, their whole life doth depend thereon, Pſalm. 36. 6. and therefore their whole care, or rather their naturall incliation 2 is to glorifie their creator. Let vs alſo which are the creatures of God, partakers of their natures; as we haue a ſpirit, with the angels; ſence and fleſh, with the beaſts; life and motion, with trees; and ſolide ſubſtance, with the

ſtones: be glad and ioyfull with the earth, in much fruit; with the trees, in a quicke and growing obedience; with the beaſts, in a liuely ſence of the Lords grace; and with the angels, in an euerlaſting lauding of his maieſtie: or elſe he will take his word from vs, and giue it to them which wil beare more fruit; for although we be all deſtroyed, yet is God able of the ſtones of the ſtreet to make liuing ſoules to ſit with angels in his kingdome: and let vs caſt away all vncleannes, Iam. 1. 21. that with them we may be cleere of ſinne and readie for immortalitie. I might alſo in this verſe take occaſion to ſhew you how all the creatures of God reioyce in his benefits: the oxe, for the graſſe; the foule, for ſeeds; the fiſhes, for raine; the Bee, for the dew; the horſe, for the paſture; and the angels, for the conuerſion of men: therefore let man bee conuerted that hee abuſe not that which theſe honour, and deſpiſe not that which ſaueth vs all.
               
                  Be glad then ye children of Zion, and reioce in the Lord your 
                  Verſ. 23. 
                  God: for he hath giuen you the raine of righteouſnes, and he will cauſe to come downe for you the firſt raine, and the latter raine in the firſt moneth. This verſe containeth another ſpeciall exhortation to the members of the church vnder the name of Zion, as hath beene alreadie declared, bidding them alſo to reioice; for as there is a time to mourne, ſo there is a time to reioiſe. And the reaſons of their ioy are rehearſed: Firſt, becauſe as raine, ſo ſhould righteouſnes come downe vpon them, 23. Secondly, for fruitfulnes, which ſhould fill all their barnes: 24. and fully recompence their former loſſes: 25. and laſtly, that they ſhould comfortably eate thereof, verſ. 26. When he biddeth the children of Zion to be glad; we may note, that it is onely God that reioiceth God onely giueth ioies. our hearts, Eccl. 2. 24. for as before he had bid them rend in ſunder their hearts; ſo now he biddeth them to ſow them togither againe, and he himſelfe doth giue a plaiſter to make them whole for euermore. Thus worketh repentance; firſt, by teares, and then by ioyes; as a woman that

firſt groneth, and afterward laugheth with her child in hir armes; and like to old Iacob who went a long iourney into Egypt, to ſee his ſonne Ioſeph, and their firſt meeting was nothing but teares. The reaſon: becauſe God onely taketh away ſinne, Prou. 29. 6. therefore our ſinnes make vs Reaſon 1. ſorrowfull when they are wantied to vs, as a burthen to a horſes backe, and then they reioice vs, when they are taken from vs: but ſinnes are not onely burthens on our backes, but prickes in our ſides, and thornes in our eies, which keepe vs from all reſt, and hinder vs from all ſight of goodnes. They play with vs for a ſeaſon as the diuell ſeemeth to play with witches: but alas, in the end their mating faces are all turned into ſorrowfull woes.
               Another reaſon, becauſe God onely humbleth and raiſeth 2 Vſe 1. vp, and therefore he onely giueth ſorrow and ioy, Pſal. 51. 10. Let vs therefore knowe when we are heauie, that God hath laid his hand vpon vs, and feare his name, Pſal. 86. 10. and not ſeeke extraordinarie meanes, as Saul did by muſicke, to remooue from vs that dumpiſh greefe that preſſeth vs downe: but rather take the exhortation of Iames, when we be ſorrowfull to lift vp our ſelues in praier: for as thoſe which were ſtoong with ſerpents, muſt looke on the brazen ſerpent before they could bee whole; ſo muſt wee which are ſtoong with ſorrowe, looke to the Lorde which wrought our ſorrow, before we can reioice. Againe, let vs ſeeke for thoſe lawfull meanes in the creatures of God, 2 which may any way cauſe vs in the time of our ſorrowes, to lift vp our ſelues in praiſe to God, Pſal. 70. 5. There is not any creature, but it may put vs in minde of ſome benefite or other; ſo that ſo often as we behold the ſame, ſo often wee may reioice in the workmanſhip of our creator: and truly as it is a great fault not to mourne when God calleth for lamentation; ſo is it no leſſe fault not to reioice when God biddeth to reioice. Let vs therefore learne to be ſo affected, that by the plentifull hand of God we may be ſtirred vp to praiſe; but by withdrawing his benefites,

we may bee mooued to repentance. Againe, when hee 3 ſpeaketh to the church vnder the name of the children of Zion, we are taught that the members of the church muſt be as children, Matt. 18. 3. Children are euer growing, ſo muſt we in grace; children often hunger, ſo ought we after the foode of our ſoules; they take no care, but their parents prouide for them; no more ought we, for God careth for vs: their natures are pure, ſo muſt ours be; they haue ſeldome ſickneſſe, ſo ought wee ſeldome to ſinne. The Reaſon 1. reaſons are: firſt, becauſe children are without malice, 1. Cor. 14. 20. for he is no member of the church that is malicious, but a murderer; againe, children honour their parents; ſo ought the members of the church to honour their God, Mal. 1. 6. But alas malice hath deuoured the loue of man, and the honour of God, and we ſhall hardly finde one among a thouſand that is not maliciouſly bent againſt one or other. But let vs learne to leade our liues in feare, ſeeing Vſe 1. we are the children of God, 1. Pet. 1. 17. for elſe we may be children, but ſtubborne children, and ſuch as the Lorde will neuer acknowledge. Againe, let vs learne to doe the 2 will of our heauenly father, Matt. 21. 28. For not euery one that can ſay, Our father which art in heauen; or, Lord, Lord, Chriſt our Sauiour, and our redeemer, ſhal enter into the kingdome of heauen. Oh let vs be ſanctified; for this is the will of God, euen our ſanctification; for except wee doe that which he biddeth, and bring that which he calleth for, we ſhal come to confuſion as Babel did; wherein, when the builders called for ſtone, they brought morter; and when they called for morter, they brought bricke: ſo when we ſhould doe one thing, we doe another; and when God calleth for holineſſe, we run to prophaneneſſe. Againe, 3 when he biddeth them to reioice in the Lorde their God, we may note, that the ioy of good men is onely in God and ſpirituall things, Pſal. 53. 7. it is not in masking and mumming, Wherein good men reioice. piping and dauncing, marrying or monkering, eating or drinking, hawking or hunting, riding or running;

but in this, that God is theirs, and they are his; and this is the beſt part, which cannot be taken from them. The firſt reaſon: becauſe he looketh on the eſtate of the poore abiect, Reaſon 1. 
                  Iſa. 29. 19. but the world will not acknowledge a brother if he be in pouertie, or a friende if hee bee in danger. Againe, God openeth his moſt ſecret goodnes to his ſaints, 2 
                  Cant. 1. 4. bringing them into his cellars of wine, who can but reioice in him, that reioiceth in them? and who can withholde his hart from him, that gaue him hart and ſoule and life and all? For one benefite or good turne, Dauid tooke Abigaijl for his wife, but if we hauing ſo much kindneſſe from the Lorde doe refuſe him from being our huſband; let vs beware leaſt the wrath of God fall vpon vs, as the wrath of Dauid ſhoulde haue fell on Nabal, that hee would not leaue man, woman, or childe aliue of his poſteritie. Let vs not reioice in our workes, Luc. 10. 20. nor in the world which is but tranſitorie; nor in riot which is but labour; nor in riches, which are but vanitie; nor in eating, which is but neceſsitie; nor in garments, which are but ſhadowes of ſinne, nor in any thing but in God, who hath regiſtred our names in the kingdome of heauen. Let vs alſo reioice with Iohn Baptist, Ioh. 3. 29. That wee haue heard the voice of the bridegroome, that his Goſpell hath bin preached to vs, his graces haue bin poured on vs; his blood hath beene ſhedde for vs; his death hath redeemed vs; and that hee hath bought vs to ſerue him without feare all the daies of our life. The raine of righteouſneſſe. This is the firſt reaſon of his exhortation to ioy: for as before they had wanted fruites through want of raine; ſo they had wanted goodneſſe through want of grace: and nowe he promiſeth both, namely righteouſneſſe and fruitfulneſſe, for this raine of righteouſneſſe, doth ſignifie abundance of righteouſneſſe: wherein by the metaphor (raine) I might tell you from whence commeth grace, righteouſneſſe, iuſtification and ſanctification; from aboue as the raine doth, and many other waies I might vrge the figure;

but I reſt not in figures, I will goe to the plaine wordes. And ſeeing in the firſt place he promiſeth them the raine of righteouſneſſe; wee may note that religion and holineſſe Religion better for the church then riches. is better for the church then any riches, Prouerb. 28. 6. There is not any thing more needefull for a man then to liue vnder the winges of God; and there is not anie thing more needfull for him that liueth vnder the wings of God, that is, in his church, then the knowledge and practiſe of the pure worſhip of God. The paradice where Adam was; the riches of Salomon; the peace of Augustus Caeſar; the glorie of Dauid; or the pompe of Agrippa, are nothing ſo needfull for the church, as is preaching and hearing, and praying and weeping. Dauid was neuer farther from God, then when he was moſt at eaſe: The rich man was neuer ſo neere diſtreſſe as when his barnes were fulleſt: The Iſraelites were neuer in more danger then when they were pampered with quailes; and Noah was ſafer in the arke, then on the drie lande: And ſo are we all in better eſtate when the worlde thinketh vs to be miſerable, then when it iudgeth vs to be happie. The reaſons: Firſt, bicauſe the Reaſon 1. things of this life doe drowne vs in miſerable temptations, 1. Tim. 6. 9. but religion quieteth the minde, eſtabliſheth the conſcience, driueth away the diuell, cutteth off manie ſinnes, is readie for death, and is aſſured of ſaluation. Againe, all the good wee receiue by abundance is this; 2 that we ſhall haue no conſolation in the life to come, and therefore God hath better prouided for vs, that we ſhould liue here a little while in pouertie and euer after in glorie, rather then heere a little while in riches, and euer after in hell fire. Let vs therefore beſtowe all the labour wee Vſe 1. can that we may haue religion, and grow in graces, 1. Cor. 1. 5. thereon aduenture thy money, for thy merchandiſe ſhall bee warranted: If there bee any man that hath religion, buy ſome of him; if there be any meanes to obtaine it, vſe them earneſtly; if there bee any faire or mart where it may be bought, trauaile thither: The miniſters are the

men that haue it; praiers are the meanes to get it; and the church is the place where thou maieſt buie it: the perſons are noted, thou maieſt eaſilie finde them; the meanes are cheape, thou maieſt ſpeedily vſe them; the place is neere, thou maieſt quickly and often goe for thy ſtore. Oh, trauaile for righteouſneſſe, and grace, and holineſſe, for all theſe are ſolde togither. Bee not poore in religion, but rich, that thou maieſt rather bee able to giue then to receiue. As there be ſome very poore, and make no ſpare, for age or ſickneſſe: ſo there bee ſome which haue little or no religion, which onely take ſo much as will ſaue them from preſent danger of law or infidelitie, and neuer thinke what they ſhall doe when they come to their graues. Yet let theſe bee alſo warned, that they labour to be rich in religion, for a poore man may be rich in righteouſneſſe; and a rich man may be poore in goodneſſe. Againe, let rich men 2 eſpecially looke to themſelues, Iam. 5. 1. for they for the moſt part eſteeme more of gaine then of grace, and of a great gentleman though he be an infidell, then of a poore and true member of Chriſt. Let them remember how fewe good rich men are named in the Scriptures: and let them alway ſet before their eies that moſt dreadful ſaying of our Sauior; It is eaſier for agable to goe thorough the eie of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into heauen. Let them bee liberall to good vſes, courteous to euery chriſtian, ſparing in all expenſes, humble in all authoritie: not gorgeous, but clothed with Chriſt; not couetous, but open handed; not ambitious, but content with their place, and not infidels, but as farre exceede other in faith as they doe in wealth. He ſhall giue you the firſt raine. In thoſe countries they had ordinarily two raines in the yeere eſpecially deſired, wherof the firſt was moſt acceptable when they firſt ſowed their ſeede: and the latter raine was in the ſpring of the yeere, which is here called the firſt moneth, anſwering in ſome part to our March and Aprill, becauſe the world was made as it were in the ſpring of the yere. But in this that the Prophet

promiſeth them the firſt and the latter raine, we muſt obſerue that it is the Lord that ruleth the cloudes, giuing al The Lord ruleth the cloudes. ſeaſonable and vnſeaſonable weather, 1. King 18. 1. The reaſons are, bicauſe he will onely be knowen to bleſſe the workes of our hands, Deut. 28. 1. Againe, it is onely hee which decketh the heauens with clouds, Pſal. 147. 8. Let vs Vſe 1 therefore learne to feare the Lord by the conſideration of raine, Ierem. 5. 24. for hee reſerueth for vs the appointed weeks for harueſt. Me thinkes that euerie creature of God do ſo admoniſh vs of our duetie, that not ſo much as the little drops of raine, but they teach vs to feare him. Oh, that our ſoules could ſo thirſt for the mercie of God as the earth thirſteth for the water drops, or the grace of God might ſo fall from heauen on our hearts, as the raine doth iſſue from the cloudes on the ploughed land! Againe, 2 let vs ſeeke for the teſtimonie of the Lords fauour towards vs in them, Act. 14. 17. the Apoſtle ſheweth the raine of the clouds, the ſpring of the earth, and the encreaſe of temporal things, to be a ſufficient meanes, for the old world to haue ſearched for, and found out God; but yet they did not ſearch into it: and ſo is it now a good meanes for many ignorant ſoules to leade them to God at the firſt; if they conſider, the world continueth, the graſſe groweth, the corne increaſeth, & the raine falleth down from heauē, that by theſe, as it were by the croſſe-row of letters, they might com to greater knowledge in religion. When he ſaith, that their barnes ſhall be full of wheat, and their preſſes ſhall abound with oyle and wine; he noteth thereby, that their decaied houſes ſhall be builded againe, and their full ioy reſtored: And alſo that if God do once begin to do good to his people, hee neuer thinketh any thing too much that is beſtowed on them, if they be repentant.
            
            
               
               The xxix. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 25.
                  And I will render vnto you the yeeres that the graſhopper hath eaten, the caterpiller, and canker-woorme, and palmer-woorme, my great hoſte which I ſent among you.
               
               NOw he toucheth the reſtitution of their goods loſt in famine, telling them that all their former yeeres deuoured by the beaſts ſhall bee reſtored againe. By which we may note a woonderful example of the Lords kindnes, that he wil giue to the repentant whatſoeuer they haue loſt in trouble: It were enough for him, yea, more then he oweth vs, if he did onely eaſe our miſerie; yet is he We haue no loſſe by affliction. not contented therewith, but giueth vs as much as we deſire, and beyond our deſires as much as we loſt; ſo he dealt with Iob. cap. 42. 10. giuing him a thouſand for fiue hundred, ſixe for three, & fourteene for ſeuen. The firſt reaſon, Reaſon 1. becauſe he would haue none to be like him in mercie and liberalitie, Mich. 7. 18. Secondly, that the wicked may note a difference betwixt the iuſt and the vniuſt, Mal. 3. 2 18. therefore let not any thing in the worlde hinder thy conuerſion, Ierem. 7. 14. for thy ſinnes ſhall bee chaunged into much holines; thy pouertie into great wealth; thy ſorrow into double ioy; and thy ſhort life into twiſe ſo many daies. If thou hadſt little eaſe, now it ſhall be more; or little peace, it ſhall be increaſed; or little grace, it ſhall bee augmented; or little ioy, it ſhall be multiplied: and thus will God take away curſe and change it into bleſsing, and turne our puniſhment into pardon. Againe, let vs hereby Vſe. be inſtructed, that there ſhall neuer be any hinderance to the ioy of the Lords ſaints, Iſa. 40. 2, 3. the crooked ſhal be made ſtraight; the high ſhall be made low; the low ſhall be made high; the weake ſhall be made ſtrong; the ſicke

ſhall be made whole; the lame ſhall be made wel limmed; the ſorrowfull heart ſhall bee reioyſed; and the contrite ſoule ſhall be glorified: the great power of ſathan ſhall not hinder; the tyrannie of ſinne ſhall not preuaile; nor the ſpace twixt heauen and earth ſhall keepe vs from aſcending to ioies. Oh come on my brethren with hope and comfort, and beſtow your labour in the word more cheerefully, that our ſingle ſorrowes may receiue double ioyes.
               
                  So you ſhall eate and bee ſatisfied, and praiſe the name of the 
                  Verſ. 26. 
                  Lorde your God, that hath dealt maruellouſlie with you: and my people ſhall neuer bee aſhamed. Hauing ſignified vnto them their plentie, nowe hee granteth vnto them the free and lawfull vſe of euerie creature, telling them they ſhoulde eate and drinke them, and praiſe the name of God for them. When hee ſaith, They ſhall eate and bee ſatisfied: we may note a great bleſsing of God vpon meate temperately receiued, for it ſatisfieth vs, meaning it nouriſheth and maintaineth life, Hag. 1. 6. but when it is riotouſly and gluttonouſly deuoured, then men fall into ſickneſſe in ſteade of health; into raging in ſtead of quietneſſe: and this is the very cauſe why our affraies and quarrels are begunne at tauernes and alehouſes, and at great idoll and glutton feaſtes, bicauſe men receiue them not in moderation, but in exceſſe. The firſt reaſon: bicauſe meate ſo Reaſon 1. taken giueth ſtrength to the body, 1. Sam. 1427. Ionathan taſted but a drop of hony and his wearied body was ſtrengthened: and his eies almoſt blinde recouered their ſight. Another reaſon: becauſe meate thus taken cheereth the 2 Vſe 1. hart of man, Ruth 3. 7. Let vs therfore learn what a ſingular benefit it is to eat & be ſatisfied with the labours of our owne hande, Eccle. 5. 16. 17. for if the Lord ſhould breath thereon, then were our trauaile in the duſt: meate hath no life in it, and yet it keepeth life in vs; who is able to ſhewe the cauſe heereof, but the Lorde who knoweth all? and if this one bleſsing ſhoulde faile vs, although our poſſeſsions were as great as Salomons, yet they woulde not ſerue vs.

Againe, let euery man in his place gather this meate and 
                     
                        •
                     
                   comfort for his life, Eſay 62. 3. that ſo we may perfourme the olde commandement of God to Adam, that wee eate our meate in the ſweate of our faces. The Bees will not ſuffer one drone among them: and ſo let not vs ſuffer them that are careleſſe to prouide ſome thing whereby their dutie may be diſcharged to God, and their liues preſerued in the worlde. Secondly, he telleth them with what affection they ſhould receiue their meat; With praiſe and thankeſgiuing to God: Whereby wee may ſee one principall token of a temperate receiuer, in that hee can giue thankes to God for his meate, 1. Cor. 10. 25. but gluttons and belligods take their meate as Swine doe; although with more manners, yet with as little reuerence, ſitting downe to fill their bellies, and riſing vp to fulfill their pleaſures, and through immeaſurable fulnes, their teeth put their mouth to ſilence, and ſleepe falleth on them, that their harts doe not onely forget their feeder, but their maintainer alſo. The firſt reaſon: bicauſe it is a token they loue God, Deut. 12. 11. and they that loue neuer offend: for loue is the fulfilling Reaſon 1. of the lawe. Againe, meate is onely bleſſed vnto them that ioine thankeſgiuing with it, 1. Sam. 9. 13. So that 2 whatſoeuer is not thankfully receiued muſt needes be accurſed. And ſurely if Paul ſaide, he had rather neuer eate meate as long as hee liued, then eate to the offence of his brother: wee may more lawfully pine in famine, ſtarue in want, and periſh in diſtreſſe of meate, rather then God ſhoulde bee offended. Theeues which ſteale for meate, coſeners that deceiue for meate; beggers that counterfaite for meate; idle perſons that worke not for meate, and rich men that praie not for meate, can neuer bee thankefull for that which they eate, but all is accurſed vnto them. Let vs therefore for feare of the curſe, and eſpeciallie for conſcience of death, liue ſoberly in praier, in our eating and drinking, working and reſting, ſleeping and waking, bicauſe wee knowe not whether wee eate our laſt morſell,

as the Iſraelites which died with meate in their mouthes, or worke our laſt day-worke, as the poore man that was ſtoned for gathering ſtickes on the Sabbaoth; or ſleepe our laſt ſleepe, & neuer wake againe: Surely as Iacob ended his life when he had bleſſed his children; ſo ſhall we be happy if wee ende our liues, when we haue praiſed God. Againe, Vſe 2. let vs not tempt God for meate whatſoeuer diſtreſſe wee liue in, but ſeeke it humblie in praier, Pſal. 104. 27. that wee may eate more cheerefully, and bee aſſured that God will continue his bleſsings: for what ſhall it profite to feede our bodies to the full, and let our ſoules goe ſtarue and pine away to death? That the Lord hath. This clauſe is added vnto their praiſes at meate, becauſe then they ought to remember the Lordes benefits, the which thing ought to driue away all vaine and fooliſh tabletalke, wherein men ſilence the mercie of God, and praiſe the taſte of their meate, or the liberalitie of the feaſt-maker, alway thanking him, and neuer thinking on God; whereas they are bound to do both. We may note in theſe words, that God doth not onely vſe his ordinarie God vſeth ordinarie and extraordinary power to deliuer his church. power in the deliuerie of his church, but alſo his extraordinarie, whereby he worketh maruels and woonders, 1. Pet. 1. 5. for by the woonderfull power of God are we continued in our profeſsion, contained in the church, and preſerued to life eternall. God told Dauid, 2. Sam. 12. that if he had not done ynough for him, yet he would haue done much more for him; ſo that he hath not limited his power nor his mercie toward the faithfull. The reaſons: firſt, becauſe Reaſon 1. we ſhould knowe that we are ſaued through grace, and the great power of God, 1. Cor. 1. 18. as it is not a light matter to enioy a kingdome; ſo is it not a ſmall matter to climbe vp into heauen, but the vnſpeakable power of God muſt be vſed therein. Againe, the more power he vſeth in 2 his church, the more muſt be his glorie, Mark. 7. 17. and this is the cauſe, why all good men thinke they can neuer praiſe God ynough, although euery day they renewe

their thankeſgiuing: in heauen is the power of God moſt of all ſeene, and therefore there the angels and ſaintes doe nothing but praiſe the power of God. And therefore we Vſe 1. may hereby learne, that all miracles which God doth in the world, doe call vs to bee partakers of his kingdome, Matt. 12. 28. and if we refuſe them, and doe not come, the ſame power ſhall be vſed in our condemnation that is promiſed in our ſaluation. Neither let vs euer forget the works 2 which God doth for vs, Pſal. 106. 21, 22. but remember them in our meate, in our beds, in our labour, in our eaſe, in our watching, and in our reioicing, that our God may ſtill continue to doe them, as we doe ſtill perſeuere to remember them. Laſtly, in this verſe hee promiſeth, that they ſhould neuer be more aſhamed of any reproches. Whereby we may note, that religion doth not commit any thing that either we may be aſhamed of, or repent, 1. Cor. 15. 58. for our labour in religion is not in vaine. If any thorough the feare or commaundement of God ſhould ſlay their children as Abraham would, or deceiue their maiſters as Iacob did, or beguile their husbands as Rebecca did, or diſobey their princes as Moſes did, or murther their enimies as Sampſon did, or looſe their liues as Chriſt did; yet ſhall they neuer neede to repent any of them. Oh what a maruellous benefite hath a man by religion, which he cannot Religion neuer maketh aſhamed. haue by any other thing in the world! There is nothing in all the life of man, but wee may repent, except it bee the feare of God: We repent our words, our works, our expences, our gettings, our wanderings, our negligence, our diligence, our ſleepe, meate, and money and all: We are aſhamed of our thoughts, our to yes, trifles, plaies, childiſhneſſe, wantonneſſe, loue, hatred, luſt, pouertie, nakedneſſe, and the very parts of our body; but of no part of religion. Thou ſhalt neuer repent that thou forſookeſt the worlde, beleeuedſt in the Lord, mournedſt for thy ſinnes, ſtudiedſt in the ſcriptures, heardeſt the preachers, was obedient to the goſpell, praiedſt many howers, watched many nights, faſted

many daies, endured many troubles, and ſhalt die any death for the Lords ſake, ſeeing heauen is thy reſt: Nay rather we ſee many men in their death-beds wiſh with teares that they had hawked, and hunted, and plaied, and laboured, and loued, and hated much leſſe; for now in their ſickneſſe their ſinnes come on them, as the Philiſtines came on Sampſon when he had loſt his ſtrength, and carrie their poore ſoules into miſerable captiuitie. Oh wouldeſt thou neuer weepe, nor ſorrowe, nor wring thy hands for any worldly thing? then bee religious; and as peace was in Iſrael all Salomons raigne, ſo ſhall it be in thy ſoule all the while that religion raigneth. The firſt reaſon: becauſe Reaſon 1. religion is the wiſedome of God, Matt. 11. 19. 1. Cor. 1. 30. now this is the greateſt point of wiſedome to foreſee that they doe nothing which may hurt them: for this is true repentance, not to commit ſinne which muſt be repented; and it is religion that onely awaketh vs when wee are ſleepie, & ruleth vs when we are awaked: We neuer read that the children of Iſrael had any cauſe to repent their obedience all the while that they were in the wilderneſſe; no more ſhall we haue any cauſe to repent our obedience to the goſpell, which is our heauenly wiſedome. Another 2 reaſon: it is the power of God vnto ſaluation, Rom. 1. 16. Let vs therefore ſay with Dauid, 2. Sam. 6. 22. that for the Lord of hoſtes ſake and for religion, wee will yet be more Vſe 1. vaine, that is, howſoeuer the world account of vs and of our zeale in religion, yet we will aduenture their diſpleaſure farther; for all their mockes, and reproches, and by names, & ſlanders ſhall not diſmay vs, but we will go forwarde in our pretended courſe: And as Mical was curſed with barrenneſſe all hir life long, bicauſe ſhe mocked hir husband Dauid when he daunced before the Arke; ſo I praie God they be not as barren and voide of goodneſſe that mocke at the profeſſours of religion. Againe, let vs euermore 2 hearken to the Lorde ſpeaking in his worde, Ierem. 38. 20. for then wee ſhall not bee burned with heate, nor frozen

with colde, nor be aſhamed of our youth, or bee troubled with our age, or repent our birth, or curſe the daie that wee came into the worlde: for it ſhall ſhielde vs from all theſe miſchiefes. Oh, let vs open our eares to his wordes, that hee may open his eares to our praiers: for as the Iſraelites were neuer blamed ſo long as they followed the cloud, the pillar of ſmoke, & the Arke: ſo ſhalt thou neuer be blamed if thou looke vpward to the Lord, and ioyne thy ſelfe to the maine pillar of truth, the church of God, and followe the Arke which is the Goſpell borne by the miniſters; or elſe thou ſhalt weepe and crie, howle and repent at the laſt, when thou canſt not repent throughly.
               
                  Yee ſhall alſo knowe that I am in the middes of Iſraell, and that I am the Lorde your God and none other, and my people 
                  Verſ. 27. 
                  ſhall neuer be aſhamed. Nowe hee beginneth to follow the ſpirituall benefits from this verſ. to the ende of the chapter; promiſing them firſt his preſence, verſ. 27, 28, 29. then his power in the verſes to the ende. His preſence is promiſed, firſt in regarde of the particular knowledge of his fauour reſting among them, verſ. 27. And in the two next verſes, by the powring out of his ſpirit. And heereby we may firſt of all note, that the church of God which is Iſraell, hath the Lorde in hir continually, Matth. 28. 19. Although by diuine power God bee preſent euery where; God euermore in the church. yet is hee moſt preſent in the church in heauen and earth, there doth hee ſhewe more power, more mercy, more iudgement, more fauour, then in other places, I meane in that place where his Goſpell is profeſſed. The firſt reaſon: bicauſe in his church is his chiefe treaſure, Eſay 33. 6. Reaſon 1. And as Chriſt ſaide to vs, where our treaſures are, there are our harts: ſo the Lordes heart and ſoule is lodged in his church where are his treaſures, namely his feare, zeale, faith, knowledge, redemption, and the graces of the ſpirit, and I woulde God men did not caſt his treaſure before the ſwine of their filthie ſinnes. Another reaſon; bicauſe the 2 power of darknes ſhall not preuaile againſt it, Mat. 16. 18.

For as the ſunne doth breake awaie the cloudes, and the north—winde driue away the raine; ſo doth the preſence of God in his church, breake in peeces the ſtrength of diuels, and driue away the rage of ſinne: And truely, as when Lot went out of Sodom, the valley was deſtroied; ſo when God ſhall forſake his church, it ſhal come to ruine. Let vs learne Vſe 1. to glorifie the Lorde in the church, 1. Cor. 6. 20. for hee is not far off, but in the middeſt of vs. Againe, let vs alſo by the conſideration of his dwelling among vs, hold faſt our hope of truſt, Heb. 3: 6. that we be not confounded at the laſt. The preſence of Debora made Barac get the victorie againſt Siſera, and his nine hundred charets of iron; & let vs, not by the preſence of a woman or man, but God Almightie, put to flight all our ſinnes, and lead our pleaſures captiues, that they may neuer more offend the church of God. Secondly, 2 by this verſe wee muſt note, that it behooueth euerie member of the church to haue a particular knowledge of Euerie one muſt know how he is in Gods fauour. the Lordes fauour towarde him, not onely that God is, or that Chriſt died for the worlde; but that God is their God, and Chriſt is their redeemer, 2. Cor. 5. 11. So that as Eliſha woulde not forſake Elijah becauſe hee was his maſter; nor Ruth forſake Naomi becauſe ſhee was hir ſtepmother; nor Peter forſake Chriſt becauſe hee was his Sauiour; no more muſt wee forſake the Lorde, for hee is our maſter, our father, our Sauiour, and our God. In this one point is included all religion, for this is the ende of all profeſsion, that God may bee ours, and wee may bee his. The firſt Reaſon 1. reaſon; becauſe without this aſſurance of faith wee cannot pleaſe God, Heb. 11. 6. So that whatſoeuer we do for companie or cuſtome, or perſwaſion, or of vncertainty, doth not pleaſe almightie God. Againe, if wee knowe not that 2 GOD is in vs, then are wee reprobates, and then were it better for vs that wee had neuer ſo much as liued vnder the time of the Goſpell. Therefore let vs ſeeke the Lorde more ardently; for as the brethren of Ioſeph might not ſee his face anie more, except they

brought little Beniamin with them; ſo may not wee appeere before GOD except wee bring this perſwaſion with vs. Gedeon ſlewe fortie two thouſande, becauſe they coulde not rightly pronounce one worde; but the Lorde will ſlay many millions that cannot ſay, that hee is theirs. Oh learne to ſay vnto God (my father) as Iſaac did, that he may anſwere vnto thee, (my ſonne) as Abraham did. Againe, let vs open the way, that other men may come to the Lord as well as wee, Iſai. 26. 2. for God keepeth 2 not his kingdome to himſelfe, as Noah did not builde his arke for himſelfe, or Salomon his houſes for himſelfe, nor the Apoſtles poſſeſſed the ſpirite for themſelues onely; and ſo let vs not conceale the Lordes fauour to our ſelues onely: but tell them to our parents, our wiues, our children, our ſeruants, our friendes, and our neighbours; that they may bee ſigned by the ſame ſeale, and ſaued by the ſame grace. Thirdly, God will haue none other to bee knowen in Iſrael but himſelfe alone. Whereby wee are 3 We muſt not doubt of our religion. taught, not to ſtand in doubt, whom, where, whē, we ought to beleeue, feare, loue or worſhip: but onely and perfectly to relie on the Lord. 1. King. 18. 21. It is not good to halt betwixt two opinions, but either we muſt bee conſtant profeſſors, or obſtinate blaſphemers. I would they woulde conſider this that ſay, they know not whether to be papiſts or proteſtants, for both liue alike, and therefore both ſhall be ſaued alike: But they muſt knowe that Cham eſcaped the flood as well as Sem, but yet he eſcaped not damnation ſo eaſily; and ſo wicked profeſſors in this life doe many times as well as good; but death and iudgement ſhall trie the cauſe. The reaſons: firſt, becauſe the halting part is often turned out of the way, Heb. 12, 13. and indeede it is Reaſon 1. fearefull that alway euill doth ſurpaſſe goodneſſe, as weedes ouergrowe corne, and ſickneſſe ouer commeth health. Therefore let vs beware, leaſt when we doubt what is beſt we take the worſt, as Ieroboam did. Moreouer, while we doubt in religion, wee are carried away by the craftie 2
                  
deceit of men, Epheſ. 4. 14. For heretikes and euill men doe alway labour firſt to drawe vs into wauering, and then to bring vs into condemnation. Let vs then abide in that which we haue heard, 1. Ioh. 2. 24. for that which is firſt is truth, and that which is laſt is falſhood. Let vs not haue tickling and itching eares, ſuch as many in our daies haue, which like not our doctrine, our preachers, our praiers, our gouernment, our ſacraments, our people, and our prince: and what will they doe ſhortly, but fall in diſlike with our God, and all manner of religion. Let vs alſo learne to bee conſtant, 2. Tim. 3. 14. that we be not mooued from it; but as Ioab would not come out of the temple, but would die holding the altar by the hornes; ſo let vs die holding faſt by our altar Ieſus Chriſt: And that ſeeing we muſt die, let vs die in his armes, for his ſake, to his glorie, and our owne ſaluation.
            
            
               The xxx. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Vers. 28.
                  And afterward I will powre out my ſpirite vpon all fleſh, and your ſonnes and your daughters ſhall propheſie, your olde men ſhall dreame dreames, and your yoong men ſhall ſee viſions;
                  29
                  And alſo vpon your ſeruants and your maidens in thoſe daies will I powre our my ſpirite.
               
               THeſe two verſes containe the ſecond part of the ſpirituall benefits to be powred on them, namely, the ſpirite and the graces thereof; for when hee ſaith, that he will powre foorth his ſpirite, he meaneth not to diuide the holy Ghoſt into parcels: but by a vſuall figure of the ſcripture, hee putteth the ſpirite for the graces, becauſe whereſoeuer any one grace is, there is the holy Ghoſt, 1. Cor. 12. 6, 11. By this we may ſee that the olde fathers and the prophets had ſome knowledge of the Trinitie of perſons

in the Godhead: for not onely here but in many other places is mention made of the Spirit; and we knowe the name of ſonne is and was very familiar in the ſcriptures. Hee ſaith, he will powre out his Spirite, by a vſuall metaphor taken from water; becauſe the holy Ghoſt is reſembled to water, Heb. 10. 22. meaning alſo, that hee woulde giue it abundantly, in more plentifull manner then heeretofore; ſo that all this pertaineth properly to the kingdome of Chriſt, as Peter ſheweth, Act. 2. 17. and not to their returne from Babylon. By the cohaerence of this verſe with the former, where is promiſed knowledge, as is heere the holy Ghoſt: wee may note, that after God hath giuen vs knowledge, hee alſo will giue vs the holy Ghoſt, Act. 
                  After knowledge commeth the holie Ghoſt. 15. 8. ſo that there is not any one that can aſſure himſelfe that he knoweth God by the word preached, but he may alſo be aſſured that he is made the temple and dwelling houſe of the holy Ghoſt, Ioh. 1. 12. this is the onely rewarde in this world of the obedience to the Goſpell, that we haue the ſpirit dwelling in vs, and opening vnto vs the things of God. If the affaires of Potiphar were bleſſed becauſe he had Ioſeph in his houſe; much more bleſſed are the workes of a chriſtian, becauſe he hath the holy Ghoſt in his hart. Oh learne (I beſeech you) to know the Lord by the ſcriptures, for then ſhall you haue the Lord dwelling in you; for then ſhall not ſinne hurt you, nor the diuell annoy you; you ſhall not feare any danger, nor any death; for the ſpirit ſhal ſtill comfort you, and carrie your ſpirits into heauen. The reaſons: Firſt, becauſe we ſhould euermore haue him in our ſoules, Ioh. 14. 16. the Lord knoweth that wee haue a Reaſon 1. great deale of ſorrow to ſuffer in the world, and therefore he hath prouided for vs a comforter that may helpe vs to beare it: and they which care not for their profeſsion, care not for the ſpirit; and they which care not for the ſpirit, care not for the Lord. By which we may ſee how fearefull a thing it is to forſake the profeſsion of the Goſpel, for then the Lord forſaketh vs, ſeeing vs giue ouer his ſpirit: alſo the

Spirit of the Lord is fire, and if it purge vs not it will burne vs. Another reaſon; bicauſe it may perſwade vs that we 1 are in the truth, Ioh. 15. 26. for if our profeſsion were but barely gathered out of the ſcriptures by men, then might it be altered, as the miniſters thereof haue beene altered: but the ſpirit abideth for euer, and doth aſſure our hearts that this Goſpell, this faith, this hope, this obedience, and this kingdome, is the ſame that Chriſt taught, the ſaints beleeued, good men receiued, the diſciples liued, and all the faithfull haue obtained. So that if thou ſtand in faith and doſt peaceably enioy the profeſsion of religion, and knoweſt by the infallible word of God thou art in the way of ſaluation; then reioyce boldly, becauſe the holy Ghoſt is in thy heart, as Simeon did when he had Chriſt in his armes. But yet many haue peace in their harts thorough the diuel, which are in errour, in Poperie, in Mahometiſme, and Idolatrie, being perſwaded they are in the truth: but this perſwaſion is but counterfaite, like as the miracles of the Magitians in Egypt were but counterfaite to the miracles of Moſes; and therefore not euerie one that is perſwaded he is in the truth, is to bee thought to haue the holy Ghoſt; but onely they that are perſwaded by the ſcriptures, and relye vpon nothing in the world beſides. Let vs then Vſe 1. trie whether as yet we haue had the holy Ghoſt giuen vnto vs or not, for the Lord teacheth Iohn. 16. 8. when the holy Ghoſt is come, he will reprooue the world of ſinne, of righteouſnes, and of iudgement: of ſinne, becauſe they abound in it; of righteouſnes, becauſe they want it; and of iudgement, becauſe they feare it. Now ſearch thy ſoule whether thou haue beene reprooued for theſe things or not: for it wil ſpeake to thee when thou art alone, and it wil follow thee whither ſoeuer thou goeſt, and it will not ſuffer thee to reſt in any ſinnes; but at the firſt it will admoniſh thee gently, afterward it will call vpon thee with diligence earely and late, if thou amend not: It will make thy meate vnſauorie, and turne thy ſleepe into many feares; and then

if thou repent not, either it will vtterly forſake thee, or elſe lay loade on thee of moſt fearfull iudgements and terrible wrath of God; which will either turne thee into lamentation and great diſtreſſe of minde, or elſe into deſperation and vtter loſſe of ſoule. Oh, feare my deere brethren for the conſcience of theſe things, for it will worke moſt terribly in you: if you haue it, you liue in ſubiection; if you offend it, you liue in danger; and if you loſe it, you die in trouble. Therefore thou art happie, when thou art reprooued for ſinne; thou art more happie, when thou art inwardly ſcourged for thy faults; but thou art moſt happie, when thou art repentant in teares, and aſhes, & ſackcloth, and an infinite number of ſorrowes: ſo that hereby we ſee why God exempteth vs from the feare of hell, becauſe he keepeth vs vnder continuall correction of ſinne. Another 2 vſe: let vs aske for the holy Ghoſt when wee feele the want thereof, Luke 11. 13. for God will ſend him to thoſe that want him. Barren women aske for children, ſicke men for health, olde men for life, weake men for ſtrength, blinde men for ſight; and therefore let Chriſtians aske for the holy Ghoſt: For God will be as eaſily entreated for him as for the other; and he will giue vs more ioy then children, more comfort then health, more good then life, more benefite then ſtrength, more profit then ſight; and therefore let vs pray for him more earneſtly then for any other of theſe. If you aske how you ſhall pray for the holy Ghoſt, I anſwere, by the holy Ghoſt. But you will ſay, if you haue him already, you neede not pray for him: to which I anſwere; you muſt pray as ſicke men doe for life when they haue life; ſo when you haue a little feeling of the holy Ghoſt, pray that it may bee more, and that euery little ſparkle may be a flame, and all our weakneſſe turned into ſtrength. The perſons vpon whom this ſpirite is to bee powred are ſonnes and daughters, olde and yoong, men and women, free and bond; for of all theſe doth the church conſiſt: Whereby wee may obſerue, that there is not any

ſexe, or any man, but he is capable of the holy Ghoſt, and ſo of ſaluation. Iſa. 44. 3. The reaſons are: firſt, becauſe they haue receiued the hope of eternall life. Tit. 3. 7. ſecondly, the promiſes are general, and there is not any excluded. Therefore let vs learne not to greeue the holy Ghoſt, Ephe. 4. 30. nor to quench any motions of the ſpirit within vs: for the beginning of religion is like the blading of the corne, if it then bee bitten it neuer groweth more. Againe, let vs fight againſt the luſtes of the fleſh, Gal. 5. 17. for the ſpirite luſteth againſt the fleſh. There muſt bee a pitched field in euery mans ſoule; the ſoule is one fighter, and ſinnes are the other; the ſoule is aided by the ſpirite, and our ſinnes are aided by the fleſh: the weapons of the ſoule are ſpirituall, the word, the promiſes, faith, hope, loue, patience, and conſtancie; the weapons of ſinne are ignorance, luſtes, pleaſures, eaſe, profite, gaine, pride, ſelfeloue, and proſperitie: The meanes wherby they ſtrike are temptations; if the ſoule conquere, the ſinnes bleede abundance of teares; if ſinne conquere, the ſoule is quiet and bound in a ſoft bed of delight, that ſhe may liue in perpetuall impriſonment fed with all lothing of goodneſſe, and ſtarued with vaine ſhewes of foode, ſtuffed with ſweete poiſons of many wofull ſinnes, and ſo in the end breaketh in peeces, and falleth to eternall miſerie. This is a Chriſtians combate, one muſt needes die; the enemies cannot liue in league; the battell muſt needes be fought out, and therefore come prepared; the leſſe thou eateſt, the better thou ſhalt endure; the more thou watcheſt in praier, the more ſhall be thy aduantage. This battell is like the battell betwixt Dauid and Abſolon; for our owne ſinnes which wee haue begotten doe conſpire againſt vs: and as Dauid wept for Abſolon when he had gotten the field; ſo wee ſhall weepe for our ſinnes when we haue conquered them, and wiſh, that either they had not beene, or elſe that wee had not beene: therefore let vs haue the ſpirite on our ſides, that we may haue peace in our ſoules.
               
                  
Now follow the effects of the ſpirite; and the firſt is that they ſhall propheſie; the next, that they ſhoulde dreame 3 dreames, and ſee viſions: for theſe were accounted the moſt honourable works of the ſpirite before the comming of Chriſt, becauſe herein did the Lorde anſwere the demaunds of men, as we may ſee in Ioſeph, Matt. 1. 21. and in Zacharie, Luc. 1. And vnder theſe olde types doth the prophet ſignifie the abundant graces in the church, when euery one ſhoulde propheſie, that is, ſhoulde bee able to ſpeake the worde for the comfort and edification of his brother, and euery one ſhould ſee the counſels of God day and night by dreames and viſions and not bee afraide. Firſt, we may obſerue here, that none can propheſie but by the ſpirite of God, 1. Cor. 14. 29. It is not poſsible that any None propheſie, but by the ſpirite. ſhoulde open the worde of God and ſpeake to the comfort of them that heare him, but by inſpiration of the holy Ghoſt; therefore thoſe which ſpeake in the congregation, and are not able to edifie them that heare them, doe nothing leſſe then ſpeake by the holy Ghoſt, opening their barren wits to the woonder of the worlde. The Reaſon 1. reaſons: firſt, becauſe propheſie is an opening of the counſell of God, which none can doe but thoſe which haue the ſpirit of God, 1. Cor. 2. 11. Againe, it is the ſpirit of God 2 that openeth our harts and maketh vs able to anſwere the aduerſarie of our profeſsion; much more doth it helpe vs when we are to comfort the people of God in the congregation, Luke 21. 15. Let vs therefore in our preaching or propheſying learne to propheſie according to the proportion Vſe 1. of faith, Rom. 12. 6. for as it is a damnable thing before God vnder an oath to couer falſhood; ſo is it alike damnable thing vnder pretence of the ſpirit to teach hereſie and impietie. Againe, let vs learne to trie the ſpirits, 2 1. Iohn 5. 1. whether they be of God or not: for many falſe ſpirits are come into the world, bringing in againe popery, hereſie, idolatrie, and the monarchie of the diuel, the which I pray God for euer deſtroy. But in this that we ſaid that

the abundance of the ſpirit vnder the time of the kingdom of Chriſt, is ſhadowed foorth vnder theſe types of the olde teſtament; ſo that the kingdome of Chriſt conſiſteth of ſuch members as are heere deſcribed to bee poſſeſſed with They which labour not to propheſie do deface the kingdome of Chriſt. the ſpirit of God to propheſie and ſuch like. Whereby we learne that thoſe which auoide the miniſterie, and other ſpirituall functions, do as much as they can darken and deface the kingdome of Chriſt, Ioh. 5. 39. ſo that a continuall and an vnwearied ſtudie muſt be applyed vnto the ſame: there is no wit ſo fine, but herein it may be buſied; there is no profeſsion ſo needefull, but it muſt giue place to this. For Diuinitie is like Sara, and other arts and ſciences like Agar: and although humane arts haue conceiued with child, and gotten more followers then Diuinitie; yet they muſt know they are but handmaides, and muſt be ſubiect to their miſtreſſe. The reaſons: Firſt, becauſe the ignorance Reaſon 1. of the ſcriptures is the mother of all abhomination and errour, Matth. 22. 25. ſo that take away religion and Diuinitie, although their ſciences could make golde, yet they cannot ſtand. Secondly, in the profeſsion of faith and of religion conſiſteth the ground-worke and foundation 2 of the church, Matth. 16. 18. and therfore they which giue not themſelues hereunto, doe not onely pull downe the building of chriſtianitie; but raze downe the verie foundations thereof. I haue followed theſe things more at large in the beginning, and therefore I now touch them lightly. Let vs therefore exerciſe the commandements of God, and purge our impure liues by their rule, Pſalm. 119. 9. for ſo long as our eares are open to his word, our liues ſhal be couered from ſhame: as Ioas proſpered all the daies of Iehoijada; ſo ſhall we ſo long as the Goſpell and religion ruleth in our ſoules. Let vs take that which the angels brought, Act. 7. 53. for they brought the law, and in nothing are we ſo like the angels as in the ſtudie of Diuinitie: for they behold the face of God in heauen, and wee behold him in the ſcriptures. Thirdly, when he ſaith, 3
                  
that their ſonnes and their daughters ſhall propheſie; we may note that there are not any in the church too rich or too good for the ſtudie of diuinitie: Iſaie the Prophet was of None in the church too good for to ſtudie diuinitie. the kings ſeed; and Salomon the richeſt and wiſeſt king that euer was, would be called a preacher in his wiſeſt and beſt daies. Our gentlemen ſcorn this prieſtly trade, but ſet their ſonnes to marchandize, or to the lawe, or to one golden trade or other; but they ſet their ſonnes as much to Diuinitie as their daughters: yea, they thinke their whole family is diſgraced, if there bee any of their name a prieſt: for ſo they odiouſly terme vs, otherwiſe the name is too good for them or vs. The reaſons: Firſt, bicauſe bodily Reaſon 1. exerciſe profiteth little, but godlines is profitable to all, 1. Tim. 4. 8. One was woont to ſay, that the world was deſtroyed by three ſortes of men: by Lawyers, for they deſtroy mens goods; by Phiſitions, for they kill mens bodies; and by ignorant Diuines, for they damne mens ſoules: now verily I thinke that ſo it is with vs; for there was neuer more contention for wealth, or more coſt laide foorth on phiſicke, and neuer leſſe care for ſaluation. Such ignorant diuines haue marde all, whoſe heads are as full of learning, as a flint ſtone is of oyle, and their liues correſpondent to their knowledge; ſo that now adaies there is no difference betweene Aaron and the prieſts of Egypt, betwixt Nadab and Phinehas, betwixt Sadoc and Abiathar, betwixt Michaiah and Zidkijah, betwixt Ieremie and Shemaiah, betwixt Chriſt and the Phariſees, betwixt Peter and Simon, betwixt the Phiſition and the patient, betwixt Balaam and his Aſſe. Studie doth not commend a Diuine, but a noble mans letter, and an angell is more woorth then a preacher. Another reaſon: it will amend euery mans way, Pſal. 119. 9. Let therefore the word of God dwell 
                     
                        •
                     
                   among vs plentifully, Col. 3. 16. and let vs exerciſe the ſcriptures from our childhoode, 2. Tim. 3. 15. that ſo wee may haue God in our ſelues, religion in our hearts, and holines in our liues, that our auncients may teach better,

our youth may liue better, our children may learne better, that our houſes, our hearts, our liues, our fathers, our ſons, our daughters, may bee bleſſed. Fourthly, hee ſaith, 4 
                  Hee will powre foorth his ſpirite vppon their ſeruaunts and maidens: who in olde time were baſelie accounted of, eſpecially if they were not of their owne nation. From hence wee may note that it is the dutie of chriſtians Chriſtians muſt haue religious ſeruants. that liue in theſe times, ſince this Goſpell was fulfilled, to haue care to make their ſeruants religious, Prou. 14. 35. or elſe to make choiſe of ſuch when they want. A good chriſtian wil be alway a good ſeruant, and therefore if thou wouldeſt haue good ſeruants, make them good chriſtians: He is a better ſeruant that liueth well, then hee that laboureth well, for thinke not that hee will euer make conſcience of thy buſineſſe, that maketh not conſcience of the Lordes buſineſſe, Col. 3. 22. The reaſons; Firſt, becauſe Reaſon 1. thou maieſt ſafely giue all into his handes, as was in Ioſeph, Gen. 39. 8. Againe, hee may profit thy ſonnes, and 2 doe them more good then thou canſt, Prouerb. 17. 2. Therfore Vſe 1. let ſeruants bee handled like chriſtians, not like ſlaues, like men, and not like beaſtes, Leuit. 25. 39. They are your brethren, deſpiſe them not, 1. Timoth 6. 2. They are the Lordes free men, abuſe them not, 1 Cor. 7. 22. Command them no euill, offer them no wrong, hinder not their faith, torment not their liues, forſake them not in age, nouriſh them in ſickneſſe; pay them their hire, feede them ſufficiently, empaire not their credite, reuile them not, correct them for euill, commende them for godlineſſe, and be ſuch maſters to them, as Chriſt is to you. Againe, let ſeruants 2 make choiſe of chriſtian maiſters; not where they may haue moſt wages, but where they may haue moſt inſtruction; not where they may haue moſt eaſe, but moſt information, 1. Timot. 6. 6. You were better eate herbes with a godly maſter, then a fatte oxe with a wicked; you were better fare harde, and worke harde, where your ſoules may bee gouerned, then fare well and worke little, where your

ſoules are endangered. Be ſubiect to thy maſter, 1. Pet. 2. 18. Serue not an Atheiſt for any money; nor a papiſt for any meat; nor a neuter for any hire; nor a knowne hypocrite for any wages: but ſerue thy maſter, looke to his wealth, tranaile for his profite, miſpende not his ſubſtance, defende his credite, make much of his children, and praie for his ſaluation: Care not for eaſe, ſpende nothing in riot, carie no tales, keep within the houſe, and remember God in thy worke, that hee may remember thee in thy death; for as thou ſerueſt, thou ſhalt be ſerued againe.
            
            
               The xxxj. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 30.
                  And I will ſhew woonders in the heauens, and in the earth: blood and fire, and pillars of ſmoke.
                  31.
                  The ſunne ſhall bee turned into darkenes, and the moone into blood, before the great and terrible daie of the Lorde come.
                  32.
                  But whoſoeuer ſhall call on the name of the Lorde, ſhall bee ſaued: for in mount Sion and in Ieruſalem ſhall be deliuerance, as the Lord hath ſaide, and in the remnant whom the Lord ſhall call.
               
               NOw we are come to the laſt parte, namely, the manifeſtation of the power of God by great and fearfull ſignes in heauen; and ſecondly by giuing ſaluation to the faithfull. Concerning the great and feareful woonders, much hath already beene ſpoken, and nowe the leſſe ſhall ſuffice. For the interpretation take thus much: That when Chriſt is come and aſcended into heauen, and the worlde conuerted from infidelitie vnto him; then ſhall appeere manie extraordinarie tokens of the Lordes power, both in the heauens and in the earth, the lights ſhall bee moſt fearefully ecclipſed, being in ſhew turned into darkeneſſe and blood; the aire ſhall bee troubled;

and many terrible and ſtrange things ſhall be ſeene: So that heerein is deſcribed the conſtitution and euent of all thinges at the change of the worlde, when God ſhall come to take vengeance on his enimies, as it is in the chapter following. I will briefely touch euery thing that I purpoſe to handle in this verſ. Firſt, in that hee telleth vs of theſe fearefull woonders preſently to ſucceed, or rather to accompanie the preaching of the Goſpell, the powring foorth of the ſpirite and conuerſion of the worlde: we may learne that God will giue vs temporall calamities with ſpirituall benefits, Luk. 21. 9. So that there is no maruaile that in our times there haue been ſeene ſo many terrible things in heauen and earth, ſeeing the Goſpell hath beene preached vnto vs; for calamities make vs to beleeue it more willingly, Hoſ. 5. 15. And if the Goſpell bee not ſhadowed Reaſon in this trouble, and wee not ouerthrowne by them; then haue wee a notable triall of the Lordes promiſe towarde vs, Luk 21. 18. For as Gedeons fleece was drie when all the earth about it was wet; ſo ſhall we be ſafe when many ſhal be caſt down. Let vs learne to commit our ſoules vnto him, 1. Pet. 4. 19. that although the heauēs fall down & the earth Vſe 1. be remooued, the ſea be dried, and the light be darkened, yet we may poſſeſſe our ſoules, and our ſoules may poſſeſſe our Sauiour; for it is God that ſendeth woonders, & ruleth all ſignes: the ſame cloude did leade the Iſraelites to Canaan that brought other to deſtruction; & the ſame ſignes are for our ſaluation, which are for other mens condemnation. Secondly, when hee ſaith hee will ſet woonders in 2 heauen, wee are taught that God will manifeſt his wrath before it commeth, Rom. 10. 18. Heauen is in the ſight of God ſheweth his wrath before he doth it. all, and naturally we are inclined to looke vpward; ſo that whatſoeuer we there ſee, we know it commeth from God; and therefore there are the ſignes manifeſted, becauſe euery one might ſee them. The reaſons: firſt, becauſe wee Reaſon 1. may either confeſſe them, or be confounded by them, Iſai. 2. 18. Secondly, that the greateſt enimies of God may be 2
                  
ſtilled, Pſal. 8. 2. Therefore learne ſo ſoone as you ſee the Vſe 1. rod to feare him that ordained it, Mich. 6. 9. Againe, let vs make a good vſe of the ſignes that wee haue alreadie 2 ſeene, and not trie the Lords patience any longer, or tempt the power of God any more, Amos 5. 18. The wicked Iewes would haue had Chriſt ſhewe them a miracle when he was on the croſſe, and then they woulde beleeue him; but yet they were wicked: and ſo you which deſire more tokens of the Lords power, that you may be amended, are ſtill wicked; for if you cannot beleeue the liuing word, you ſhall not beleeue the dead miracles.
               Thirdly, when he ſaith that all theſe ſhall come before the great and terrible day of the Lord: we muſt note, that 3 all the woonders and ſignes in the aire muſt prepare vs to iudgement, Iſa. 29. 6. Oh how can the Lorde change vs, when he thus changeth the world; and how doth hee prouide for our ſafetie, and preach our repentance by all the woonders of heauen and earth? Darkneſſe putteth vs in minde of hell; fire putteth vs in minde of the latter day; blood putteth vs in minde of deſtruction; ſmoke doth admoniſh vs of the vanitie of our life: the earth would moue vs to repentance by remoouing her ſelfe; the light would couer our ſinnes in darkneſſe, by withdrawing it ſelfe; and the cloudes would call vs to heauen. Let vs learne to feare the power of God more earneſtly in his creatures, that if theſe ſtrange things come vpon vs, yet we may not forget our Sauiour, who ſhall come in the cloudes. But whoſoeuer. Leaſt wee ſhould thinke that theſe troubles ſhoulde ouerturne and ouercome all in the world, when there ſhall be no light but darkneſſe; no peace but thunders; no comfort but fires, nor any appeerance but wrath and iudgement: the prophet in theſe words telleth them, that then euen in thoſe moſt deſperate miſeries, God would remember to heare the praiers of his children; for the godly cannot chooſe but feare mightily, when they ſhould ſee all the world in an vprore, and heauen and earth roaring to their

deſtruction. Whereby I might note, that good men muſt endure the feare of thoſe euils which ſhall come on the world, Iſa. 33. 4. becauſe they loue their life too much, Pſal. 119. 108. and becauſe their whole life muſt bee mortified and mangled with many ſorrowes, Rom. 8. 36. yet let vs not ſo feare that we deſpaire, how neer ſoeuer we ſeeme to deſtruction, Isa. 41. 14. but be obedient as Noah was, Heb. 11. 7. though the waters and cries of all the world be as neere to vs as they were to him. Firſt, when he ſaith that all that 
                  1 
                  call on the name of the Lorde ſhall bee ſaued: we may note that ſaluation muſt bee praied for before we can haue it, Heb. 7. 25. Saluation commeth not as honour came on Dauid, which made him a king before hee thought on it; but it muſt come on vs as cleanneſſe and health came on Naaman, which he trauelled for, and praied for, and waſhed for ſeuen times in Iorden before he could be cleanſed. And as the poore Canaanitiſh woman entreated Chriſt a good while before he would graunt; ſo the Lord looketh that men ſhould entreate for ſaluation many daies, and nights, and times, with many teares, and ſighes, and grones, thorough many ſorrowes, and cares, and troubles, before they can be ſaued. The reaſons: firſt, becauſe ſaluation is the Reaſon 1. Lords, Pſal. 3. 8. and therefore it muſt be praied for: ſecondly, we muſt be ſaued by faith: now faith is no faith that praieth not for grace, Epheſ. 2. 8. Therefore as the olde fathers ſearched for ſaluation, 1. Pet. 1. 19. ſo doe thou; and as the woman did for her money, which neuer gaue ouer ſweeping and ſeeking till ſhe had found it: in like manner doe thou; but follow ſaluation as Iſaac followed Abraham vnto the place where he ſhould be ſacrificed. Secondly, when he ſaith that there ſhall bee deliuerance in Mount 2 Sion, wee may note, that God will euermore haue ſome Some of the Iewes ſhall euer be ſaued. among the people of the Iewes that ſhall be ſaued, Rom. 11. 15, 16, 26. ſo that, notwithſtanding their intolerable hardneſſe of hart, and great obſtinacie againſt the Goſpell, yet there are ſome beleeuers among them, and it may be

that there ſhall be a day, when they ſhall all beleeue in the Meſsiah: and I thinke verily that this is the very cauſe why they are reſerued aliue; for elſe in conſideration of that great villanie offered to our Sauiour Chriſt, with their infidelitie, and other notorious ſinnes, they had long agoe beene deſtroied, man, woman and childe. Thirdly, the prophet alleageth the proofe hereofwhen he ſaith, (as the 
                  3 
                  Lord hath ſaid) whereby we may note, that the promiſe of God his promiſe ſhall preſerue his church. God ſhall preſerue his church in what diſtreſſe ſoeuer it be, Heb. 13. 5. yea when heauen and earth ſhall be burned, they ſhall be preſerued. The reaſons: firſt, becauſe all the promiſes of God in him are Yea & Amen, 2. Cor. 1. 18. 20. Reaſon 1. they are not changeable but conſtant as it is already declared, becauſe he is mighty that doth his word. Againe, 2 life eternall is giuen by promiſe, Col. 3. 14. and if the promiſes neuer faile in that, no more they can in this. Therefore let vs through patience doe the will of God, and waite for the promiſe, Heb. 10. 26. and hauing once receiued it, let vs feare no euill nor any death, Gen. 32. 9, 10. Fourthly, 4 Few ſhall be ſaued. when he ſaith that ſaluation ſhall be to a remnant, and to as many as God ſhall call: we may note, that but a remant, that is, a very fewe ſhall bee ſaued, Luc. 13. 23. The reaſons: Reaſon 1. becauſe of the great hatred of God againſt ſinne, Rom. 5. 14. the which hatred ſhall cauſe the damnation of many thouſands. Secondly, the Lord will make but a ſhort account 2 Vſe 1. of all the earth, Rom. 9. 28. Therefore let euery one ſtudie to enter, although he knowe there be but few to be ſaued, that if it may be, he may be one of thoſe few, Luc. 13. 24. Againe, let vs knowe that except the Lord of his great mercie did keepe this remnant from the violence of ſinne 2 and ſathan, no not one ſhould or coulde euer come to life eternall, Iſai. 1. 9.
               Laſtly, when he ſaith, to as many as God ſhall call: wee 5 may note, that we muſt be called by the goſpell before we can be ſaued in the kingdome, Iude 5. But of theſe points I haue often already ſpoken in the former treatiſes, and

therefore I may the ſafer excuſe my breuitie; and the God of all mercie giue a bleſsing to all.
            
            
               The xxxij. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Chap. 3. Verſe. 1.
                  For beholde, in thoſe daies, and in that time, when I ſhall bring againe the captiuitie of Iudah and Ieruſalem.
               
               
                  THis thirde and laſt chapter of this Prophet Ioel, containeth a moſt lamentable deſtruction of mankind, namely of thoſe which were the ſworne enimies to the church of God: which cannot chooſe but mooue a heart of ſtone, to exceeding ſorrowe and abundant teares, to conſider that ſo manie braue men, ſtately kings, warrelike ſouldiers, honorable perſons, rich poſſeſſors, beautiful women, and innocent yoong children (as it may ſeeme) ſhoulde be violently driuen and drawen vnto the ſlaughter-houſe of woefull deſtruction. Oh, how may men forrowe, that they were ſo borne to bee enimies to God, and ſo liue that they hurt themſelues; and ſo ſhall die as they condemne their ſoules? for their bloode is woorſe then water, their fleſh is viler then dung, their heart is baſer then the earth, and they were onely created that they might be deſtroied. In the handling of this chapter we will obſerue this method: Firſt, the time when the enimies of the church ſhall be diſcuſſed; and ſecondly the manner. The time is ſet foorth in this verſ. to bee then when the Lorde ſhoulde bring againe the captiuitie of Iudah and Ieruſalem: that is, when he ſhoulde deliuer them from all manner of thraldome. For beholde: The prophet after the vſuall maner of the Scriptures, beginneth the matter with wordes of demonſtration and attention, and ſo telleth them of this

matter, as if it were alreadie in action; bidding them to beholde it, as we may ſee the like Eſay 24. 1. & 42. 1. Ierem. 51. 1. Matth. 24. 25. By which wordes wee may note, By the worde wee beholde what is to come after vs. the worde of God in prophets and preachers muſt teach vs to conſider, as well the things that are to come, as thoſe that are preſent, 2. Cor. 4. 18. Wee looke not (ſaith the Apoſtle) on the things that are ſeene, but on the things that are not ſeene. The voice of the Lordes worde muſt not be like the ſtroke of the muſition, which onely affecteth a man while hee heareth the ſounde: but it muſt bee like a Phiſitions potion which worketh in the bodie many daies after it is taken. But what doe I talke of daies? as Ionathan loued Dauid when he neither ſaw him nor hearde him, ſo muſt we loue the word of God and thinke thereon, when we neither ſee it nor heare it. The oxe careth for the pricke which preſently goreth him, but yet he neuer thinketh on the ſlaughter which is comming; the childe feareth the rod which hee ſeeth, but thinketh not on it when it is hidden; the ſheepe windeth from the ſtorme when it bloweth, but in calmer times it neuer remembreth: but God which hath made vs more excellent then oxen and ſheepe, and willeth vs to be more wiſe then children, hath giuen his worde that wee may know and feare the things that are to come. So that in this ſort thou muſt perſwade thy ſelfe; if thou heare the preacher tell of any plague, then thinke with thy ſelfe that thou now beholdeſt it a far off: & therefore it will certainly come. Beleeue the Lord and his prophets, ſaide Iehoſhaphat, and you ſhall proſper: but alas, our dull hearted hearers will beleeue no more then they ſee; will feare no more then they feele; nor bee righteous any longer then they are in affliction: Death is farre off, they care not for it; and the day of iudgement will be God knoweth when, and therefore if their time be ſo long, they thinke it will be neuer. Oh wretches! beholde preſentlie before your eies, how the Lorde commeth, how the ſword waſteth, howe the bloude runneth, howe vengeance encreaſeth,

howe Chriſt condemneth, and all thinges are ouerturned. If thou canſt ſo beholde the comming miſeries, and with teares lament them, as if they were preſent, thou ſhalt likewiſe by the worde of God ſo beholde the comming ioies of another life, & with hart reioice, as if now thou enioiedſt them: Therefore beholde iudgement, and terrour, and thunder, and fire and the ouerthrowe of all thinges, which one daie ſhall bee, that thou maieſt feare thy proude and ſinfull nature, and ſo behold mercie, the reſurrection, the life to come, the face of God, and the fellowſhip of Angels, that thou maieſt quietlie repoſe thy ſoule in the ſweete profeſsion of the Lordes Goſpell. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: firſt, becauſe they Reaſon 1. are baſe minded, if not beaſtly affected, which onely looke to the temporall things that they ſee, and not to the heauenly and eternal things, which they ſee not, as the Apoſtle in the before-named place ſaith; and therefore it is farre more honourable that thou ſhouldeſt beleeue the things that are to come when we heare them in the word, then the things that are paſt and preſent which our eies beholde. Againe, our Sauiour ſaith, Marc. 9. 23. that all 2 things are poſsible to him that beleeueth, which is verified in nothing more then in this: when we giue vp our whole harts to the things that are preached, and daily waite when they ſhall be performed. And if all things be poſsible, then is ſaluation and the ioyes of heauen poſsible for thee if thou canſt beleeue them, and ſo liue as thou maieſt obtaine them. The vſes which wee are to make of this Vſe 1. doctrine are theſe: firſt, ſeeing wee muſt be inſtructed by the word of God to behold the things that are to come, as if they were preſent; then let vs euermore bee faithfull: the which thing the Apoſtle teacheth vs, when hee ſaith, that wee ſtande by faith, Rom. 9. 23. ſo that as our bodies ſtand vpon our legs, ſo our ſoules ſtand vpon our faith. And if this be ſo; how many lame ſoules are there in the world? nay, they are not lame that neuer had legs, but thoſe that

had them, yet are they monſters; and ſuch monſters are faithleſſe and infidel men. If thy legs be ſicke, thou wilt goe to thy ſurgeon; and if thy faith be ſicke, goe to thy Sauiour: what comfort haſt thou of the worlde, if thou canſt not walke in the world; and what ioy hath thy ſoule if it haue no faith to walke in the ſcriptures? Stand by faith and fall not, beleeue ſoundly and ſtrongly; bring not a woodden leg, I meane a woodden faith, ſuch as men can make, but a true and ſubſtantiall faith, which the Lorde onely giueth. Let not any thing mooue thee, for all things are poſsible to the beleeuer: though the earth remooue, bee not thou afraide; though the heauens paſſe, yet the world ſhall not paſſe: beleeue all things; ſay not this will be long, or that will be late, or the other is doubtfull, or God is mercifull, his minde may alter, or the preachers are but men, they may be deceiued, or the iudgements be conditionall, they may be reuerſed; or the promiſes be vncertaine, they may be recalled. Oh beware of an infidell hart, Heb. 3. 12. and 2 depart not from the liuing God: Moſes becauſe hee did but once diſtruſt God, he could not enter into the land of Canaan; the gouernour that would not beleeue the prophet was trod to peeces; the princes which would not beleeue Ieremie were ſlaine by the Babylonians; and the ſoules which will not beleeue the preachers, ſhall be ouercome by diuels. Oh conſider how fearefull a thing it will be for you to ſay as the Iewes, Ezech. 33. v. vlt. ſurely there was a prophet among vs. Therefore as the husbandman looketh to the harueſt in the winter when the corne appeereth not; as the ſeruant thinketh on his wages long before it commeth; as the birde thinketh on her yoong ones long before ſhe breedeth; and the builder thinketh on his dwelling long before it be finiſhed: ſo doe you thinke on the ioyes and woes which ſhall bee long before they come. And account your ſelues the happieſt men aliue whome God warneth with his owne word, that you may auoid the day of deſtruction: for if you liued not vnder the check of the goſpell and the controulment of preachers, you might

goe as other barbarous nations doe blindfolded, that is, vnwitting and vnknowing, to the ſlaughter of your bodies, & the butcherie of your ſoules. Surely the Lord doth nothing but he reuealeth the ſame to his ſeruants the prophets; and therfore bleſſed are they that liue among them; but more bleſſed are they which heare them, beleeue thē, loue them, receiue them, & regarde them, becauſe God hath ſent thē. Secondly, in this verſ. we may obſerue when he ſaith, In 
                  2 Redemption muſt be certainly known. 
                  thoſe daies and in that time: that God wil haue the redemption and deliuerie of his ſaints, and church to bee moſt certaine and knowen; for vpon this occaſion doth the prophet double the note of the time, as it were noting both the day and the moneth: So as once hee tolde Abraham that his ſeede ſhoulde be a ſtranger in another land fowre hundred and thirtie yeeres, and no longer; to ſhewe vnto him, that they ſhoulde bee aſſuredly deliuered: So doth hee heere by this prophet (though not ſo preciſely) note the aſſurance of their redemption. The reaſons Reaſon 1. of this doctrine are theſe; Firſt, becauſe wee are not redeemed with any temporall, worldly, or earthly price, but by and with the moſt precious blood of Chriſt Ieſus, 1. Pet. 1. 18. Againe, another reaſon is, becauſe as the Apoſtle 2 Vſe 1. ſaith, 1. Timoth. 2. 6. that this was done in due time. The vſes which come of this doctrine are theſe; Firſt, ſeeing the Lorde will haue the redemption of his people to bee ſealed and certainly knowen; then let vs looke for that time, and that day, when Chriſt ſhal finally deliuer vs from the wrath to come, 1. Theſſ. 1. 10. What ſhoulde make good men to feare the latter day? their redemption is certaine, the Lorde is their Sauiour, the Sauiour is their head, their head is their brother, and vntill Chriſt come they are ſubiect to wrath, but when he is come they are deliuered from death. Againe, let vs receiue any pledge or token of 2 the Lordes loue and fauour towarde vs, which is ſhedde in our hearts by the holy Ghoſt, Rom. 5. 5. and ſeeing this is it, that we are certainly redeemed, and our ſoules health is not builded vpon peraduentures, but it is ſurely eſtabliſhed,

then let vs certainly perſwade our ſelues that God loueth vs with an euerlaſting loue. What will hee keepe from vs? that giueth vs his owne ſonne, and will kill him to acquite vs? If this perſwade vs not to bee penitent, and to loue God againe; then is not the loue of God, nor the bloude of Chriſt ſprinkled in our hearts. Naaman woulde haue giuen to Eliſha manie thouſande poundes, bicauſe the water of Iorden had clenſed his leproſie; what woulde he haue giuen if Eliſha had cured him by medicine? But Chriſt hath cured our ſoules and bodies by the riuer of his owne bloud, and by the loſſe of his owne life; then are we worthie to giue heart for heart, bloud for bloud, bodie for bodie, eie for eie, and life for life to him againe. Shall bring againe the captiuitie. The prophet vnder the name of 3 captiuitie doth vnderſtande all the miſeries of the people of God; for in captiuitie there is a concurrence or conſent of all manner of euils. For in truth, if there be any eſtate lamentable in the world, it is the eſtate of a captiue: He ſhall liue a common ſlaue, he ſhall euer be abridged of libertie; he ſhall weare the courſeſt; he ſhal eate the baſeſt; he ſhall lie the hardeſt; he ſhall labour the ſoreſt; and he ſhall liue the vnhappieſt: His correction ſhall bee fitter for a beaſt then a man; his pittie ſhall bee nothing; if hee bee ſicke, hee ſhall haue no attendance; and in this hee is woorſe then any priſoner, for hee muſt not begge for neceſsitie, but either liue with little, or elſe ſtarue: and the priſoner knoweth, that the iudge onely hath authority to take away his life; but a captiues life is in euery mans hande. So that when wee reade of the captiuitie of Iudah and Ieruſalem, wee muſt vnderſtande an intollerable miſchiefe to be fallen vpon them. For their countrie was all ſpoiled, their goodly houſes were razed to the earth; their ſtreetes ranne with blood of men, their women, wiues and virgins were moſt ſhamefully abuſed; they were caried from their owne countrey, kindred and acquaintance; they were ſolde like beaſtes, they were killed like ſheepe, they were kept like dogges, and they liued to ſee their children

ſolde away into other countries, whoſe ſweete faces they ſhoulde neuer ſee againe. Oh, that we in England could thinke with our ſelues what was the cauſe, why God did ſo lamentablie giue ouer his people to bee racked and ruled by others, which was the contempt of his worde: and wee may greatly feare the like puniſhment for the ſame ſinne among vs! Oh, my heart bleedeth to thinke what will be the eſtate of many, if a captiuitie ſhould come, their goods which they woulde not giue to the poore, ſhall bee taken by the enimie; the fire ſhall conſume their houſes; the ſworde ſhall deſtroy their liues; the luſt of men ſhall defile their gallant proude dames: and peraduenture their tender babes and gentle poſteritie ſhall be ſolde to be ſome galli-ſlaues, ſome kitchin-boies, ſome to draw the plow inſtead of oxen, with their backs bare for the ſcourge; ſome to be ſlaine before their eies, & many to be committed to the beaſts, to the waters, to the heathens, & to the infidels to be new nurtured in paganiſme. O Lorde keepe this day from England. But he telleth them that the Lord would deliuer thē out of this captiuity before they were in it, as God told Abraham of the deliuerie of his ſeede, before hee had any ſeed. By which we may obſerue, that God doth think vpon our deliuerance & redemption, before we be in miſerie. O God determineth the ende of good mens trouble before trouble. vnſpeakable mercie of God! which had ſo in his euerlaſting decree appointed, that his ſonne ſhould redeeme vs before the world was made: yea, before there was any to bee redeemed. He doth not make thee ſick, but firſt he hath made thee a medicine; he doth not take away thy children or thy goods, but firſt he thinketh a way how to reſtore them againe; he doth not ſtirre thee vp any enimie, but he hath appointed thee another friend: and as at the beginning he made euerie tree, and plant, and herbe, and fruite, before he made either man or beaſt which ſhould eate them; ſo he continually prouideth meat before hunger, eaſe before danger, light before darkenes, and ioy before ſorrow, as Ioſeph of Arimathea which made his toombe before he

was dead. The reaſons hereof are theſe: Firſt, becauſe he wil not haue his church to be in deſperation of deliuerance, Reaſon 1. 
                  Iſa. 10. 30. for our afflictions are called our burdens: now a burden is appointed to be taken off before it be layde on, and ſo our miſeries are appointed to be taken from vs before they be caſt vpon vs; for the rod of the wicked ſhal not alway reſt vpon the backes of the righteous: And therfore let none caſt in our teeth the miſerie of a chriſtian which ſeemeth to be borne for miſerie; but rather chriſtians are borne for immortalitie; for our ſhort enduring calamities are nothing woorthie the glorie which ſhall bee heaped vpon vs. Another reaſon is, becauſe that this is a 2 token of the Lords iuſt iudgement, 2. Theſſ. 1. 6, 7. The Lord which euerie way doth ſhew his mercie, will alſo declare the ſame in the chaſtiſing of his children: and therefore as in iuſtice he doth wound them for their ſins; ſo in iuſtice he firſt prouideth for their ſafetie, whereby we may know a ſingular comfort for them which are troubled in conſcience, and let them not much trouble themſelues to ſeeke for the meanes of their eaſe: for as Abraham did binde Iſaac to be ſacrificed, ſo he did vnbinde him againe; and in like ſort as God hath troubled thy ſoule, ſo he will giue it eaſe againe. The vſes which wee may make of Vſe 1. this doctrine are theſe: Firſt, letvs neuer deſpaire for any miſeries whatſoeuer, but ſtill hope, Iſa. 40. 2. for the Lorde hath alreadie numbred the daies of thy life, and of thy ſorrow, and of thy paine, and of thy affliction; therefore neuer care, for it will one day be ended. Oh, but thou wilt ſay, it will be ended, but it will be long firſt; therfore I feare I ſhall faint in ſuffering: but how canſt thou tell? it will be long: hath the Lord told thee ſo? then abide his pleaſure, although it be to thy paine: hath he not told thee ſo? then make not thy affliction longer or greater: God which made the okes ſubiect to the greateſt windes, hath giuen them the largeſt and deepeſt rootes to ſtay them vp withall: And if God do tempt thee with long calamitie, O happie

man art thou, for he tempteth none aboue their power: and if God load thy daies with ſickenes, or pouertie, or loſſes, or paines, or wounds, or infamie, or ſeruitude; yet know thou ſhalt be able to abide it, if God haue ſent it. Another 2 vſe is, that vnder our afflictions wee reioyce in hope, Rom. 12. 12. for what greater perſwaſion can wee haue to mooue vs hereunto then this, that the Lord hath alreadie determined the continuance thereof? Reioice therefore that thou art like vnto Chriſt, though thou bee vnlike to thy ſelfe: Know, that there is no darkenes, but it flieth from the ſunne; there is no poyſon, but it yeeldeth vnto medicine; there is no winter, but it is remooued by ſommer; and therefore there ſhall neuer come vnto thee any ſuch miſerie, but it ſhall be taken from thee. But ſome wil ſay, we may endure our aduerſitie, but we cannot reioice in the companie thereof: how ſhal we whet our hope and reioice vnder tribulation? My deere brethren, if you can beare it patiently you may eaſily reioice therein; for there is not required laughter to this ioy: but the inwarde peace of your ſoule, whereby you may know it ſhall turne to your good; and this you may haue although you lament with teares: therefore plucke vp your ſorrowfull mindes, and put away your mourning garments, for the time is at hand, that your eaſeles daies ſhall be turned into paineleſſe reſt, and your carefull prayers into the ioyfull poſſeſsion of life and glorie, and angels and ſaints, and God and Chriſt for euermore.
            
            
               The xxxiij. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 2.
                  I will alſo gather all nations, and will bring them downe into the valley of Iehoſhaphat, and will pleade with them there for my people, and for mine heritage Iſrael, whom they haue ſcattered among the nations, and parted my land.
               
               
                  
HAuing handled the time when the deſtruction of the churches enimies ſhould be, which was, when they were deliuered from their captiuitie: now it followeth, that we purſue the manner of their deſtruction in this and in the verſe following: and for our more orderly proceeding, we will firſt handle the cauſes of the Lords iudgement vpon them, and ſecondly the execution thereof: the cauſes expreſſed verſ. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And firſt, before the cauſes the prophet noteth theſe two things, their aſſemblie and the place thereof: their aſſemblie in theſe words, I will alſo gather, &c. the place he calleth the valley of Iehoſhaphat. When he ſaith that he will gather all nations, he doth giue The infinite power of God can at one time aſſemble the whole world. vs to vnderſtand his infinite power, that he can eaſily bring the whole world together: Pſal. 50. 2, 3. Dauid ſaith that he calleth them from the riſing of the ſunne, vnto the ſetting thereof; that as he could and did at the beginning create the whole worlde in one man: ſo can he at the latter end, bring them all together againe as one man. How can the theefe eſcape him, by riding? or the whooremonger, by keeping in a ſecret chamber? or the ſwearer, by creeping into a princes court? or a king, by lying in his ſtrongeſt holde? but as he brought all creatures to Adam that he might name them, and ſeuen of euery cleane beaſt to Noah that hee might ſaue them; ſo will hee bring all the worlde before his ſonne, that hee may iudge them. The reaſons are theſe: firſt, becauſe hee doth it by his angels, Reaſon 1. 
                  Matt. 24. 31. who are of infinite power and wiſedome, and celeritie, and diligence. One angell is ſtronger then all men, as appeereth by that angel which killed of Saneheribs armie in one night, an hundred foureſcore and fiue thouſand, Iſa. 37. 36. yet for all this power, we muſt not feare or worſhip the angels; for they are but our fellowe ſeruants, but rather let vs feare the creator of the angels: for if hee haue giuen ſo much glorie to his angels, oh how much hath he kept to himſelfe? and if he maketh them flames of fire,

himſelfe muſt needes be a conſuming fornace. Another 2 reaſon is this: becauſe all the worlde doe liue and mooue and haue their being in him, Act. 17. 28. and therefore he may as eaſily bring euery one to iudgement, as a man may lay his left hand in his right. Oh how might this terrifie a great ſort! which liuing in God, yet deny God, as Abſolon which woulde depoſe his owne father to make himſelfe king. The vſes which wee may make hereof are theſe: Vſe 1. firſt, that we auoide not, and doe not flie from the preſence of God, as Ionah did, Ion. 1. 3. for the Lorde will bring vs againe, as he did him. Whither wilt thou goe from the Allſeeing ſpirite of God? oh flie not from him; for there is no heauen ſo high, but he is higher; nor any earth ſo deepe, but he is deeper; nor any world ſo wide, but he is larger; nor any place ſo ſecret, but he can finde it out. Abide in his temple, for there is his preſence; and in his church, for there he dwelleth. Looke to him aboue, looke on him beneath, looke for him in the morning, and runne to him in the euening. Goe not out of the congregation, for then thou runneſt from him, but abide the Lordes leiſure for euermore. But how might I complaine on them that runne away from God? ſome runne from the faith; ſome from the ſermon; ſome from our praiers; ſome from our companie; and ſome are gadding abroad in ſtrange, popiſh, and paganiſh countries; ſome goe to tauernes, when they ſhould goe to churches; ſome to exerciſe of pleaſure; ſome are riding in the fields, when they ſhould be praying in the congregations; and ſome are at the beare-baiting or play houſes, when they ſhould ſerue the Lorde: oh monſtrous times that euer men liued in! and they account themſelues happie, that neuer come where any goodneſſe is. If God correct them, they are deſperate; if the lawe would puniſh them, they are obſtinate; if the preacher rebuke them, they are almoſt malice-mad. What doe theſe men, but flie from the preſence of God? for they will not goe to him, they will not pray to him, they will not liue with him, they

will not tarrie for him, they will not ſee him, they will not heare him, but they ſhall ſurely feele him. Although Tzedechiah would not abide the Babylonians but fled away by night; yet they ouertooke him, and brought him backe to their captaine, who put out his eies, and led him in chaines to Babylon: ſo although you flie from the Lorde, yet hee ſhall followe and gather you, bee your companie neuer ſo great, and depriue you of your beſt eſtate, and leade you in chaines to the diuels in hell: They are ſeparated from God; but you are worſe then diuels, for you ſeparate your ſelues from God; yet bee aſſured, you ſhall ſhortly trie, that it were better for you to followe Chriſt into the ſea, as Peter did, then to forſake him on the land, as Iudas did. Into the valley of Iehoſhaphat. Theſe wordes containe the place where the nations ſhoulde be gathered togither: the which I take not to bee any ſpeciall place, much leſſe the valley of Engedi, 2. Chron. 20. 2. where Iehoſhaphat by the helpe of God deſtroied the Ammonites, Moabites, and Edomites; but rather by alluſion to that place and battle, hee ſheweth what ſlaughter hee woulde make of his enimies. But this worde Iehoſhaphat, may bee taken as well appellatiuely as properly, & ſo it ſignifieth the iudgement of God: and therefore the valley of Iehoſhaphat ſhall ſignifie the place of God his iudgement, as afterwarde the valley of threſhing ſhall ſignifie the execution thereof. By the former words and by theſe we will obſerue, that the wicked ſhall bee drawen to iudgement whether they will The wicked ſhall be vnwillinglie drawne to iudgement. or not, Luke 23. 30. for God will gather them into the valley of iudgement: As there is no force in the corne to reſiſt the reaper, ſo ſhall there bee no reſiſtance in the wicked to auoide iudgement. And this thing of all other may mightilie a ſtoniſh all deceitfull and infidell hearts, which cannot abide to heare of iudgement; yet they ſhall be compelled to come to iudgement. Howe deſperate is their eſtate, when their conſcience ſhall bee more againſt them then all the worlde, and their helpes of nature ſhall

giue them ouer; and they left deſtitute of all hope, ſhall be deliuered into the hande of diuels: and ſurely they which ſcorne the companie of God his ſaints on the earth, are woorthie to bee torne by the teeth and clawes of diuels in hell. But haſt thou no grace to conſider this before hand, and to thinke with thy ſelfe howe thou ſhalt ſee an infinite companie of Angels driuing thee to iudgement, and then preſently all the diuels in hell haling thee to damnation? Be willing therefore to come to God in earth, that thou maieſt bee deſirous to goe to God in heauen: for bee aſſured, that if thou feare iudgement, and wiſheſt it might neuer be, thou art in a pitifull caſe, for thy conſcience doth alreadie condemne thee; and if thou deſpiſe iudgement, and watch not for it, thou art more retchleſſe, for thou reſiſteſt God: but if thou crie for the laſt day, and ſay, Come Lorde Ieſus, come quickly, thou art a happie man; for the Lorde is in thee, Chriſt hath clenſed thee, ſinne is dying in thee, thou loueſt God his kingdome, and therefore thou ſhalt poſſeſſe his kingdome. Oh, that we coulde willinglie ſubmit our hearts to the Goſpell, and then ſhoulde wee not vnwillingly offer our ſoules to iudgement! The reaſons Reaſon 1. of this doctrine are theſe: Firſt, becauſe they ſhall be compelled by the power of God, Matth. 26. 64. They which will not feele the power of God in ſauing them, ſhal feele it in condemning them: and therfore as the power of God made Pharaoh to yeeld to Moſes and Aaron; and made Siſera to yeelde to Deborah; and made Goliah to yeelde to Dauid; and made the temple to rende a ſunder when Chriſt was crucified, and the ſunne to looſe hir light, ſhall compell the wicked to the iudgement ſeate of God. Another reaſon is; bicauſe their hope for helpe or mercie 2 or pardon is but in vaine, Lam. 4. 17. And therefore although they woulde eſcape, yet their hope ſhall deceiue them: as the mother and wife of Siſera which told of the victorie, when in the ende it turned to their owne ouerthrow. I doe but briefly touch theſe things, bicauſe I haue

handled them more at large alreadie. The vſes which Vſe 1. ariſe from hence are theſe; Firſt, that wee come willinglie to the throne of grace, Rom. 5. 2. or elſe we ſhall be vnwillingly drawne to the throne of wrath. Come to all godlie exerciſes ioyfully; heare the Goſpell diligently; reade the ſcriptures zealouſly; loue the godly tenderly; and praie to the Lorde comfortablie: and then ſhalt thou come to grace, not to wrath; to glorie, not to ſhame; to life, not to death; to heauen, not to hell. Make no excuſes for thy abſence, admit no delaies for thy hinderance, ſuffer no temptations for thy allurement; and let not the wife of thy youth keepe thee from praier, and the throne of grace. Feare God more than loue the worlde; hate euill more than loue thy wife: Saie vnto all cumbrancers, awaie from mee, for I will keepe the Goſpell of my God: I had rather looſe my finger than my hande; my haire than my heade; my bodie than my ſoule, my friendes than my GOD. I will feare the Lorde before wrath, that I may reioice in iudgement. Againe, let vs learne to acknowledge and perſwade our ſelues of this terror of God, 2 2. Cor. 5. 11. for except wee conſider before hande howe the heauens ſhall be conſumed, howe the earth ſhall bee burned, howe the worlde ſhall bee ended, and howe the Lorde ſhall be manifeſted the Goſpell; will be but a weake worde, and an idle tale vnto vs: But if thou canſt beleeue the laſt iudgement, and with the eie of faith beholde it a farre off, and tremble at the ſecret meditation thereof, then thou maieſt eaſily feele the power of life vnto life, and happily forſake the ſentence of death. Therefore euermore remember iudgement at thy feaſt, in thy bed, on thy table, in the morning, at thy labour, before thy ſleepe, and with thy friendes, that thou and they be not of the kindreds of the earth, which ſhall waile and lament before the comming of Chriſt, Reuel. 1. 7. There will I pleade with them. Hauing finiſhed the gathering togither of the wicked into the place of iudgement; now

it remaineth that wee goe on to the cauſes of their deſtruction which the Lord heere openeth, as pleaders do in their courts at the law: and therefore he ſaith, that he will plead with them for his people, alluding to the manner of worldly iudgements: ſo that heere wee may ſee that the Lord is both iudge & counſellor for his church, which may greatly comfort vs, and diſcomfort our enimies: for the Lord who is to tally for vs, and eagerly againſt them, hath the whole law in his owne hand. But in this that he ſaith, All ſinnes ſhal be opened in iudgement. he will plead with them, we may note that God will open all the ſinnes of the wicked in iudgement, Eccleſ. 11. 9. For pleaders will not omit any thing which may diſcredit their aduerſarie, or the cauſe againſt which they ſpeake: yea, they will ſuſpect thoſe things which they cannot gaineſay, and condemne thoſe things very peremptorily which they can any way blemiſh. In like ſort, the Lord when he ſhall draw thee to iudgement, will there open all thy life, and tell thy ſecret whooredome, thy hidden theft, thy often blaſphemies, thy idle words, thy vaine expences, thy proud geſtures, thy idle worſhip, thy friend-pleaſing vanitie, and all thy hypocriſie. Thy charitie, he will defame with vaineglorie; thy prayers, hee will account abhomination; thy faſting, he will call diſſembling, and thy gentle nature ſhall be accounted a flattering vertue: All this will hee bring to iudgement; hee will prooue it by thy conſcience; he will condemne it by his Goſpell; and he will puniſh it by condemnation: oh, then ſhall thy faults be written in thy forehead that al may know them, and thy priuie doings blowen with a trumpet that all may heare them, and thy forſworne ſinnes opened by a crier, that all may loath them. Oh wretched wretches! which had rather abide this iudgement of God, then that which is in this life: but if thou haue any meanes to perſwade thy ſoule vnto goodnes, or to terrifie thy fleſh from euill; let this helpe it forward, that God ſhal open all thy faults at the day of iudgement, and diſcredit all thy vertues be they neuer ſo many, or neuer ſo glorious.

Thinke not that thy good deedes ſhall ouercome thy euil, but as one blemiſh disfigureth a whole bodie; ſo one ſinne will diſgrace a whole bodie of vertues. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe, becauſe the counſell of euerie hart ſhall Reaſon 1. then be manifeſted, whether it be good or euill, 1. Cor. 4, 5. and if the counſels of men be opened, much more their ſinnes. Another reaſon is, becauſe they are remembred before God, Reuel. 20. 12. and if all the ſinnes of the 2 wicked be in the Lords continuall ſight and remembrance, then ſhal they not be forgotten or couered when the number ſhall be rehearſed. And ſurely me thinkes that the conſcience of this matter ſhould mightily terrifie our natures from ſin, ſeeing that all our offences are continually in the Lords memorie. Some thinke that becauſe the time is long ſince they committed adulterie, or ſacriledge, or theft, or drunkennes, or idolatrie; now God hath forgotten it, and it ſhall neuer more be laide to their charge. But they muſt knowe that a thouſande yeeres, are with the Lorde as one day, ſeeing that is paſt as a watch in the night: and therfore the Lord doth as well remember their old committed ſinnes, as a watchman remembreth who came by him in the night; their childiſh vanitie, their youthful wantonnes, their ſinfull ſporting, their filthie reſting, their babiſh trifling, and their merrie paſtimes are freſh before the Lord, 1. Sam. 15. 1, 2, 3. The Lord telleth Samuel that he remembreth what Amalek did to Iſraell, Exod. 17. how he was the firſt that bid them to battle after they came out of Egypt: and therefore commandeth Saul to deſtroy them man, woman, and childe. This was many hundred yeeres after the acte committed, and the iniurie offered; yet God thinketh vpon it, although they had beene alreadie well puniſhed for it. And ſo doth he remember, how thou haſt oppreſſed the poore long ago, how many acres thou haſt encroched, how many pounds thou haſt gathered by vſurie, how many mens cattle thou haſt bought by extortion; and finally how often in thy yonger dayes thou were negligent to ſanctifie

the ſabbaoth. If thy ſinnes might fall from thy life, as thy teeth in age doe fall from thy mouth, thou were happie; or if thy life could be chaunged into holines, as thy old yeeres turne thy blacke haire into whitenes, bleſſed were thou: but alas thy ſtrength faileth, thy beautie fadeth, thy life weareth, thy hand weakeneth, thy blood dryeth, thy head chaungeth, and thy whole bodie ſtoopeth to the earth; yet thy wickednes remaineth vntouched and vnblaſted, as the Iuie which is thickeſt and greeneſt, when it hath killed and withered the great oake. The vſe which commeth Vſe. of this doctrine is the ſame that the moſt wiſe preacher that euer was taught vs, Eccleſ. 12. 13. That ſeeing God woulde bring euery ſecret worke into iudgement, therefore feare him and keepe his commaundements. Howe many waies wee are taught to feare the Lorde appeereth in the former ſermons; and therefore it were needleſſe to vrge this exhortation any farther in this place. But if we conſider that if it be ſuch a ſhame to endure the ſpeeches of friendes and enemies in this life for the faultes we haue committed; how much more ought wee to bluſh before the Lord with all the angels of heauen, and all the men that euer were, are, or ſhall be in the world, when at the latter day our faultes ſhall bee opened; when euery one ſhall hiſſe at our filthineſſe, and laugh at our wickedneſſe. Oh confeſſe thy ſelfe to a fewe in this world, rather then deferre to bee reuealed before all in the ende of the world. Thinke not that thy owne eſtate will be any thing more tolerable, becauſe all other men ſhall haue their faultes alſo ripped vp and repeated; for the more the worſe, a Iudge will bee more eaſily entreated for one then for twentie, and therefore God will be leſſe partiall, becauſe ſo many ſhall be found guiltie: feare not ſhame, but death; abſtaine not from ſinne for the worldes ſake, but for the Lords ſake; and let not other mens voices more appalle thee, then the ſentence of God. It hath beene heretofore and ſhall be hereafter more manifeſtly ſhewed, that God

doth no more ſpare a multitude then a man, or many then one: and therefore neuer flatter thy ſelfe in the matter, but onely vſe the time and theſe admonitions, that God may forget thy ſinnes, and then they ſhall bee forgiuen thee; and if they bee forgiuen, they ſhall not bee opened, but ſilenced at the latter day. For although we ſhall then heare of the murder that Cain did; of the mocking that Iſmael did; of the filthineſſe that Er and Onan did; of the rebellion of Abſolon, and the treaſon of Iudas: yet wee ſhall not heare of Noahs drunkenneſſe, or Lots inceſt, or Ioſephs oath, or Moſes vnfaithfulneſſe, or Dauids adulterie, or Peters deniall, or of any of the faultes of the elect; for their ſinnes ſhall remaine in the graue, when their bodies are raiſed vp to the ioy of another life.
            
            
               The xxxiiij. Sermon.
               
                  FOr my people. In theſe words we may obſerue, that God will iudge the world for the iniuries done to his church, and for nothing more, Pſal. 9. 17. for hee will God will adiudge the iniuries done to his church. then open the counſels thou haſt conceiued againſt the godly, how many ſtripes thou haſt giuen them; how many times thou haſt reuiled them; how many waies thou haſt oppreſſed them; how often thou haſt impriſoned them; and how many thou haſt murdered of them. He will aske thy poore neighbour howe thou didſt releeue him; howe often thou didſt lend him; how much vſurie thou tookeſt of him; how many times thou didſt harbour him; and with what affection of hart thou didſt embrace him. I graunt that he will open thy other ſinnes, and condemne thee for them: but yet the ſpeciall cauſe why he ſitteth in iudgement at the latter day with all the world before him, is, that he may make inquiſition for the blood of his ſaints, and iuſtifie his children whom the world condemned.
               The reaſons are, Firſt becauſe he is the life of the faithfull, Col. 3. 4. Secondly, becauſe this doth ſhew his righteouſnes, Reaſon 1. 2
                  
2. Theſſ. 1. 6, 7. when he doth acquite the faultleſſe, and condemne the guiltie. The vſes which wee may make Vſe 1. thereof are theſe: Firſt, that wee neuer grieue any of the ſaints of God, Pſal. 105. 15. when Iehu was to kill all the prophets of Baal, he bad them ſearch diligently for the ſeruants of God, and be ſure that there were not one among them to be hurt. This care ought men to haue of the leaſt and baſeſt in the church, that they prouoke them not to complaine vpon them to the Lord: for ſurely if the pooreſt member of Chriſt that liueth among vs, doe iuſtly complaine of the greateſt Lord and potentate of the world, vnto the God of heauen; it were better for that Lord that a milſtone were tyed about his necke, and he were caſt into the ſea. Againe, ſeeing it is ſo dangerous to offer any violence to any of the Lords children, let vs abide in the Lord Ieſus, Ioh. 2. 28. and then will he reuenge our cauſe; for hee cannot forget his owne ſtripes, and for his ſake are we buffeted & diſdained, and mocked, and reuiled, & perſecuted, & martyred: and therefore by him ſhall we be defended, & reuenged vpō them. If we be of the Lords body, we cannot hurt the Lords members: & therfore they which perſecute the church & ſpeak euil of the poore, are none of the Lords family. Whom they haue ſcattered amōg the nations. We haue alreadie ſhewed that one principall part of a captiuitie was the ſcattering and diſperſing abroad of the people into many countries, where they ſhoulde neuer gather ſtrength or hope to returne home againe. This is the firſt cauſe why the wicked are thus iudged, bicauſe they ſcattered abroad the ſeede of Iacob, that it might die and neuer growe; for ſo is the meaning of the word: Whereby wee may obſerue, that the wicked are neereſt to deſtruction Wicked men in their greateſt ioy neereſt to hell. when they moſt of all triumph ouer the godly, as heere we may ſee the firſt cauſe of their condemnation is the ſcattering of Iſraell. So the Lorde affirmeth by the prophet, Eſay 49. 25. that when the mightie were at the pray, and the tyrant at the ſpoile; then will the Lorde come and ſpoile

them, but deliuer his children. The lion and the Beare that Dauid ſlewe might haue eſcaped with pray and life, if they had not medled with Dauids lambes: and ſo the wicked might eſcape damnation if they coulde refraine from biting of the Lordes ſheepe. But ſeeing then they are at the brimme of deſtruction, when they are in the higheſt of their miſchiefe; O vnhappie men which die aſſoon as they conceiue pleaſure. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe, Reaſon 1. Firſt, bicauſe they helpe to aggrauate the euill vpon the poore ſaints of God, Zech. 1. 15. I did it a little, ſaith the Lorde, but thou didſt it much more: ſo they make our faults greater then they are, and giue vs more ſtripes then God hath appointed them; therefore doth the Lorde ſo ſuddenly deſtroy them. Beware how thou accuſe a good man, although thou doe it iuſtly, for if thou make it anie thing more, it ſhall redound to thy owne danger. Againe, when the poore and good men are moſt oppreſſed by the 2 wicked, then the Lord ariſeth to heare their crie, Pſal. 12. 5. and when he ariſeth he commeth with all wrath to recompence the iniurie. And as alreadie I haue warned, ſo I muſt againe and againe, make not a good man complaine on thee to God, for thy oppreſsion; for the Lorde hath more delight to reuenge the cauſe of one that is helpeleſſe and friendleſſe, then of ten thouſande that are able to defende their owne buſineſſe; and in my choiſe, I had rather be vniuſtlie accuſed of treaſon to my prince, then by a godlie man, to be iuſtly complained for iniurie vnto God. The vſes of this doctrine are theſe; Firſt, that we comfort our ſelues in the deſtruction of the wicked, Iſaie 62. 1. For although Vſe 1. wee are not to reioice at their ouerthrowe for our owne ſakes, yet for the Lordes cauſe, by whom they are ouerturned, we may lawfully and ioifully be comforted for their ende. For God doth then take them when they are in their deepeſt miſchiefe, and when they purpoſe to execute their moſt deadly malice. None can knowe it but God, bicauſe none ſhoulde haue the praiſe for their ouerthrowe

but God. Therefore it is a vile thing for any to lament the loſſe of wicked men the enimies of God; for their life is not to be deſired, that liue not for the benefite of the Lordes houſehold. Although Dauid lamented Saul and Abſolon, yet that maketh not againſt this doctrine; for Dauid lamented Saul becauſe he had vndone himſelfe, and loſt the glorie of the fielde: and Abſolon, bicauſe ſo kinde a father coulde not chuſe but be mooued for the vtter condemnation of the fruite of his loines. But this is moſt lamentable that euen in our daies there are yet ſome that lament the ouerthrow of God his enimies the Pope and Spaniſh forces, and it grieueth them that ſo many cardinals and mitred fathers, ſo many abbots, and ſhaueling friers are cleane driuen out of England; whereas, if theſe had continued, the Goſpell of Chriſt muſt haue beene baniſhed: As well might Moſes and all Iſraell lament the ouerthrow of Pharaoh and the Egyptians in the ſea (which they reioiced at) as theſe lament the ouerthrow of papiſts and poperie, for which they ſhoulde be thankefull: and I praie God giue vs ſhortly as good cauſe to reioice againſt all Atheiſts and idolaters. Another vſe is this, that wicked 2 men learne to knowe their owne danger; for woe bee vnto them that laugh, for they ſhall lament, Luke 6. 25. Bleſſe not thy ſelfe when euery one honoureth thee as they did Haman, for preſently hee fell to the gallowes: Exalt not thy ſelfe bicauſe others praiſe thee, as they did Herod; for by and by he was deuoured of wormes: fret not thy ſelfe becauſe others deſerue better then thou, as did Saul with Dauid, for hee fell into a lunacie: followe not anie man nor anie cauſe with a deſire to oppreſſe as Saneherib did, for the Angels of God deſtroied his hoſte, and his owne ſonnes made an ende of his life. And parted my lande. Another point of a captiuitie is the taking away of the lande from the poſſeſſors thereof; for we muſt not thinke that if the Lorde ſhoulde ſuffer an inuaſion, that men ſhoulde eſcape with a tribute, but rather their

houſes and lands ſhould be diſtributed to ſtrangers: Their demeſnes, their free-holdes, their mannors, their copieholds, their rents, their knights-fees, and all other their poſſeſsions ſhall bee quite and cleane taken from them, which the conquerors challenge by lawe of armes. But this is woorthy to be noted, that notwithſtanding this lawe of armes, God alleageth this parting of the land, and diſpoſſeſsing the ancient inheritors thereof, to be one cauſe why the wicked ſhould be iudged: they woon it in deede, but yet they are called to an account for it. By which we may obſerue, that it is not lawfull in warres ſo to triumph ouer the godly and their poſſeſsions, as it is ouer other men, Tzeph. 2. 8, 9. although the king of Syria had triumphed againſt Amath, Sepharuaim, Iua, and many other countries No lawfull triumph ouer the godly in warre. and kingdoms, and cities; yet when once he came to touch Ieruſalem, and to raile vpon Ezechiah, he and all his hoſt were quickly diſpatched: and in like ſort when the wicked come to deale tyrannouſly with the church of God, and put them to extremities, then doth the Lorde take their cauſe into his owne hand. The Spaniards boaſt of wonderfull countries, which they haue conquered among the ſilly heathen and barbarous Indians; which may well be ſo, but what haue they gotten in theſe partes of the world, which are the beloued Ieruſalem of the Lord? ſurely nothing but blowes; for here they looſe more men at the ſiege of a towne, then there in the conqueſt of a countrie: and therefore they may teach vs that ſuch barbarous crueltie as they haue vſed among the Indians, and ſuch tyrannie as they would haue practiſed in the Lowe-countries, muſt not bee offered to any Chriſtian nations: but rather as Dauid was glad that Abſolon his ſonne had loſt the fielde, yet was hee ſorrie that he was ſlaine; ſo muſt wee reioice if God giue a Chriſtian enemie into our hande, and yet be ſorrie if any blood beſhed, or any violence bee executed in his ouerthrowe. But I knowe ſome will ſay, how ſhall wee warre againſt the papiſts? may we not triumph with all manner

of warlike and lawfull ioy at their ouerthrowe, as we would doe againſt heathens? Surely I anſwere, we may ſo warre with them as with idolators, not with heathens, and ſo to triumph in their conqueſt as Iudah was woont againſt Iſrael, that is, being prouoked by them, to trie it to the vttermoſt, and to ſpare no perſon that is an aduerſarie; yet to ſuffer the remnants to enioy their countrie, if they will embrace the truth and forſake idolatrie. The reaſons of Reaſon 1. this doctrine are theſe: firſt, becauſe as men ſpoile the godly, ſo ſhall they bee ſpoiled againe, Ier. 30. 16. Againe, 2 good men are at peace in the land, and therefore it were crueltie to rage againſt the peaceable. And therefore make this account that God will reuenge the iniurie offered to his people, vpon the children and childrens children of them that were the workers thereof, Iſa. 13. 16. As Dauid commaunded Salomon, that he ſhould not ſuffer the hoare head of Ioab to go into the graue in peace, becauſe he had ſlaine two men more righteous then himſelfe in the time of peace; ſo God will not ſuffer them to come in peace to their graues, that haue had any hand againſt the righteous of the world. Learne therefore as the Prophet exhorteth, Vſe. 
                  Ierem 39. 12. that in warres or in any common ſlaughter, thou euer vſe gentlenes to them that thou ſhalt know haue liued godly: And therefore in all the warres betwixt Iudah and Iſraell, you ſhall neuer read of a prieſt or prophet of the Lord to be ſlaine, but they were ſlaine in the time of peace, when men were wearie of the word of God. Be a valiant ſouldier; but bee alſo a mercifull chriſtian, if any yeeld himſelfe, then giue not his life to thy ſword. Remember that glorie doth not onely dwell in fighting and killing, but in ouercomming; and if thou ouercome by any means or ſtratagems, thy conqueſt is neuer the leſſe. Spare them that pray for thee, for all chriſtians pray one for another: and as the King of Syria fought no more after he had ouercome Ahab, but let all Iſraell goe home in peace; ſo after thou haſt ouercome the principall actors and procurers

of the warre, then let the reſidue goe ſcotfree. Thinke alſo that the warres are mutable; and if they giue thee victorie at one time, yet they may let thee be conquered at another time; and therefore ſo ſpare as thou wouldeſt bee ſpared: and as Abner would haue perſwaded Aſahel, Ioabs brother to depart from him, becauſe he ſhould ſlay him, and then would Ioah be wroth with him: ſo if words may pacifie thy enimie, rather vſe them then weapons. And as I would haue thee deale in warres; ſo thou muſt deale in peace, that thou take not euerie aduantage againſt thy brother, but ſpare him, when thou haſt him in thy hand, whether it be in combate, or in ſuite at the law, or in complaint before a magiſtrate, or in any extremitie. Do thou nothing againſt him, but let the law do all; rather ſilence ſome bitter things, then inuent any new occaſions of ſtrife, and to the vttermoſt of thy endeuour, labour to buy peace although it coſt thee deerely, for whether thou winne or loſe, thou ſhalt be polluted by trouble.
            
            
               The xxxv. Sermon.
               
                  ANd they haue caſt lots. This is another cauſe why the Lord doth enter into ſo ſharpe a iudgement againſt the wicked, and that is as you ſee bicauſe they vſed them moſt vilely; and not onely them, but the holie ordinance of God, which is caſting of lots: So that they as it were plaied at dice for the people of God, they cared not who wonne them, nor howe they greeued them; for it coulde not chooſe but offend them to ſee the lottery made vpon them; which God had appointed for another vſe. But in this that they caſt lots for the people of God, and the lot beeing the verie ordinance of God, not to bee vſed in ſport or paſtime: wee may note that euill and ignorant men doe profane and abuſe euery thing, yea Euill men make good things euill. though in it ſelfe it be neuer ſo good, Tit. 1. 15. To euill men

and defiled, all thinges (ſaith the Apoſtle) are polluted: their toonges are adders ſpeares, their lips are inſtruments of guile, their handes worke iniquitie, and their feete runne to euill, and ſhed blood: and if they thus abuſe their naturall parts, what will they doe with the ſpirituall benefits? Oh, it greeueth my hart to tell you! for their praiers they vſe to curſe and banne them with whom they are angrie; their knowledge they abuſe to beguile and deceiue the ſimple and vnſtable ſoules; they will haue the Scriptures to couer their profaneneſſe; and when they be eſpied, they ſay they can approoue their ſinnes by holie warrant. Oh, damnable blaſphemie! they vſe their wits to cauill, their wealth to oppreſſe; their ſtrength to ſteale; their friendes to bolſter out their offences; and their naturall wiſedome to maintaine their vnnaturall blaſphemie; they are hungrie, to be gluttons; they are thirſty, to be drunkards; they are clothed, to be proud; they are honored, to be diſdainful; & they are wel borne, that they may liue ill vncontrolled: with a thouſand ſuch like enormities, which we may find in the cōtinual practiſe of the wicked: they abuſe their marriage for luſt; their children for couetouſneſſe; their offices for bribing; their miniſterie for reprehenſion; their lawe for delay of truth; the day for open euill; and the night for ſecret ſhame. If a good man fall into their hands they wil vſe him ſcurrilouſly, the holy worde of God either they deſpiſe or wreſt damnablie, the ordinances of God they profane wickedly, and the ſocietie of men they diſhonour ſhamefully; and yet ſtill they liue, and ſtill ſhall liue, that they may ſo abuſe death, as they haue abuſed life: that as they make life a time of ſinne, ſo they may finde death a day of deſtruction. The reaſons of this doctrine Reaſon 1. are theſe; Firſt, becauſe they are blinded of the diuell, 2. Corint. 4. 4. And therefore they cannot ſee ſo much as that which nature teacheth, for the diuell neuer ceaſeth to toule on a man till hee haue made him defie the grace of God, and to defile the nature of man. Another reaſon is, 2
                  
bicauſe ſuch is the poiſon of ſinne, that it defileth the very garments of a man, and the walles of a houſe, Iud. 23. wherefore it will worke more effectually in man, who is a more meete and apt ſubiect for the ſame. The vſes which come of this doctrine are theſe; Firſt, that we learne to diſcerne a man that is thus giuen ouer to abuſe verie lawfull thinges; woe be to them (ſaith the prophet) that Vſe 1. ſpeake euill of good, and good of euill, Iſai. 5. 20. For men in this eſtate will not ſticke to commende any kinde of filthineſſe, becauſe they woulde faine bring all vnto filthines. And if euer there were times of ſuch practiſe, nowe they are; for ſinne is become kinde, and religion turned away naked: We haue hereſie, and blaſphemie, and paganiſme, and bauderie committed to the preſſe, to bee commended in print; there is no Italian tale ſo ſcurrilous, or fable ſo odious, or action ſo abhominable, but ſome haue aduentured to defende the ſame: Plaies on the Sabbaoth are made lawfull; to be ſometime a companion of euill is good policie; whoredome with ſome is good phiſicke, and no man can be a good member in his countrey except hee thinke well of himſelfe: Honeſtie is foolerie, knauerie is commoditie, diſſembling is diſcretion, and idleneſſe is gentrie. Oh my ſoule, come not in their habitation! bearding of the miniſterie and clipping their liuings is but enimitie to poperie, racking of rents is good husbandrie, wicked ſcoffing is a token of a good wit, and common ieſting at God, ſcriptures, goodneſſe, and good men, is but ſolace. I tel you nothing but that I haue read in print, and heard with my eares. Gaming is as lawfull as labour, and money ſo gotten is well gotten. Men may be ſaued without preaching; and faith commeth not by hearing: papiſtes liue better then proteſtants, bicauſe they giue more to the poore; and the worlde will neuer bee well till the miniſters be turned to tenne poundes ſtipende and a cloake. Woe bee vnto them! for they followe the waie of Balaam, who for a little money woulde haue curſed the people of God:

And I praie GOD, either purge our times from theſe men, or take theſe monſters from among vs.
               
                  They haue giuen the child. Here is another cauſe of their condemnation; for that they had ſold a childe for a harlot: & harken, I beſeech you, if euer you heard of the like miſchiefe, or more baſe and beaſtly part of a man, then to take a young childe, well borne and godly brought vp, and to giue him for the price of a harlot. Harlots in thoſe times had a ſpeciall deſire vnto boies and young youthes, whome they bought and made eunuches: but this villanie to bee done to the Iewes the people of God, that their holy ſeede ſhoulde bee the hire of ſo vnholy buſineſſe, it coulde not chooſe but make the people that heard it, to rende their haires from their head. For it might be they had a farther reach in ſelling their children for a whoore, becauſe it was commaunded that the price of a harlot ſhould neuer come to the Lordes tabernacle, and therefore they gaue their children for this price, that for euer they might vndoe them. But whatſoeuer mooued them thereunto, they did it; and therefore we are herein giuen to vnderſtande, that wicked men ſet more by their luſt, then by any good man Wicked men eſteeme more of their owne luſt then of others life. in the world. A good man (ſaith Salomon, Prou. 29. 27.) is an abhomination to the wicked. They had rather haue a harlot then a Chriſtian, as Herod that cut off Iohn Baptiſts head to pleaſe his whoore, Mar. 6. Would or could a man haue beleeued this, if God himſelfe had not told vs of it? truely no, if we had ſeene it with our eies: yet ſuch, I feare me, we haue among vs, that if time ſhall ſerue them, they wil bee forwarde ynough to ſpende our goods, and conſume our liuings; and when they bee gone, they will ſell our wiues and children to harlots or heathens, or to any that will giue them any money for vs. O England, England, looke to thy welfare! Thy goodly men, thy braue women, thy ſweete children, and thy rich poſſeſsions will all fall to the handes of an enimie. What will they not doe to the olde, that thus deale with the young? to the parents, which thus vndoe

their children? Giue not your ſelues to too much marrying and marriages, as they did in the daies of Noah; for here you may ſee the price of the fruit of your bodie, begotten in ſinne, and giuen for ſinne; ſinne ſelleth them to ſathan, and men ſell them to harlots: that as they were borne in a bodie of ſinne; ſo they might bee brought vp in a ſchoole of filthineſſe. O wicked ſellers! O wretched buiers! O vnhappie wares, that are thus exchanged to fulfill beaſtlineſſe! The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: firſt, becauſe they are inceaſſable and vnſatisfiable in their Iuſtes, Reaſon 1. 2. Pet. 2. 14. and therefore they care not what they doe to performe their luſtes. Another reaſon is, becauſe they 2 are louers of pleaſures more then louers of God, 2. Tim. 3. 4. and ſuch haue wee in our daies, if loue may bee eſteemed by the worke as Maries was by her oile; for theſe are the latter daies of which Paul ſpeaketh. The vſes which we may make of this doctrine are theſe: firſt, that Vſe 1. we conſider the miſerable eſtate of theſe kinde of men, who as the Apoſtle ſaith, 2. Pet. 2. 13. ſhall receiue the wages for their pleaſure. And if Sichem, for rauiſhing of one woman, loſt his owne life, his fathers, and all his citizens, Gen. 34. what ſhall be the rewarde of theſe men, that haue defiled themſelues and many women? O dangerous euils that hang ouer their heads! And that which is ſaid againſt this pleaſure, may be ſaide againſt all other kindes of pleaſures, that they ſhall euery one receiue their rewarde: as Cain for his wrath was curſed; Laban for his oppreſsion was empoueriſhed; Dauid for his luſt was troubled by his owne ſonnes, and Ioſiah for his boldneſſe loſt his life: ſo ſhall euery one that taketh pleaſure in drunkenneſſe, or whooredome, or idleneſſe, or quarrelling, or murther, or brauerie, or belly-cheere, receiue the hire of all their pleaſures. Againe, let vs learne to make precious account of 2 the ſeede of the faithfull, and ſuffer them not to want any comfort; for God hath promiſed to be a friende to their friends, and an enemie to their enemies. Offer them no

violence, no not in their infancie, for Ioſeph who was ſolde by his brethren, was at length able to bee reuenged vpon them: And ſo it may come to paſſe, that as twigs come in time to be trees; ſo children come in time to be men, and then beware your olde iniuries bee not repaied by them; for that which is conceiued young, will hardly be remooued olde. I ſee in many places the poſteritie of good and godly men, yea of thoſe that haue ſuffered very much for the goſpels ſake, to be accoūted no better than vagabonds and roagues; and I feare that men woulde bee content to ſend them into the fartheſt parts of the world, and to ſell them to any Spaniard, papiſt, or infidel, rather than to help their eſtate, and keepe them according to their qualitie. And ſolde your girles for wine. This is another cauſe why the Lord dealeth thus rigorouſly with his enimies, bicauſe they had ſolde away the women children for cups of wine; which was as much among them, as a cup of drinke among vs. Whereby wee may note, that wicked men make no Wicked men ſet nothing by the godly. reckoning of the godly, Amos 8. 5. They ſell them for bread, and for olde ſhooes: And ſo wee may ſee the rich man in the Goſpell, that eſteemed more of his dogs, then of Lazarus, and ſo Nehe. 5. 3, 4, 5. the poore were driuen to ſell their children to ſlauerie for to buie them bread. Such hard hearted men were and ſhall be for euer, which make not any account of their poore brethren. The reaſons Reaſon 1. are; Firſt, becauſe they are vnmercifull, Pro. 21. 10. and therefore howe can they be mercifull to them whom they hate, ſeeing they are not mercifull to them whom they loue? Another reaſon is, becauſe they do not thinke good 2. men woorthy to liue, Ioh. 19. 15. and therefore they care not howe they abuſe them. The vſes which wee are to Vſe 1. make heereof are briefly theſe; Firſt, that wee giue not to wicked men any commendations, Prouerb. 24. 24. What is there in any vngodly man woorth the noting, except it bee ſinne? and ſhall wee commend any bodie for their ſinne? But I thinke that in our times either euery man is

righteous, and none are euill, or elſe many men are beſide the exhortation of the wiſe man. For there is not anie Vſurer, nor anie briber, nor any tyrant, nor any Atheiſt, nor any papiſt, nor any rich man, but they are all commended by one or other: No landlord ſo hard, no gentleman ſo leud, no miniſter ſo ignorant, no whoremonger ſo filthie, although he die of the French diſeaſe, but wee haue ſome epitaphes of his commendation, although they liued without praiſe, and died without repentance. Whereunto will the worlde come? and who will deſire to liue therein? if thou commend euill men, how canſt thou diſpraiſe euill? for euill doth not make the man, but the man maketh the euill. Yea, we haue of our noble and royall preachers, that will in a funerall ſermon tell of the good deedes of manie blaſphemers, and miſers, and couetous, and filthie, and ignorant, and gamſters; and I thinke for money, of witches and coniurers, and rebels, pronounce in the pulpet that they are in heauen: but beware, and bee as wiſe in ſaying that a man is ſaued, as thou wilt be warie in affirming that any is damned. Another vſe which we may make of this 2 doctrine, is the ſame that God asked of ſathan, Iob 1. 8. Whether hee had conſidered his ſeruant Iob: Inſinuating vnto vs, that we ought to weigh & meaſure the dignitie of a godly man, howe there is none like vnto him in all the worlde. And truely if wee did often call to our mindes the bleſsings that righteous men do bring vnto the world; we ſhould account them as happie that liue with them, as the Queene of Saba did thoſe which liued with Salomon: but ſince no man conſidereth either their life or their death as the Prophet ſpeaketh, men grow to ſo peruerſe & corrupt a iudgment concerning the world, that they thinke there is no difference betwixt the iuſt and the wicked. Sodom neuer knewe what a good man was, till the fire came; and the worlde will not knowe the benefite of a chriſtian, till Chriſt come to iudgement. But do not men conſider what righteous men are? yes verilie, for they trie them as the

diuell did Iob; they vexe them with many troubles, & load them with many euils, and offende them with manie outrages, and grieue them with many ſlanders: you ſhal heare in the open ſtreetes open reuiling of God his deere children; and now adaies there is not a plaie or an enterlude, but there are ſom ſcoffes at religion; many ſcornes at good chriſtians, and infinite abuſes offered to the preachers. What conſidering is this? but grieuing of the righteous ſpirite of the Lorde that dwelleth in them, and ſtudying howe to improoue their ſinnes to the vttermoſt. But it ſhall bee ſufficient for vs to know that the Lorde of glorie will not doe ſo vnto vs. And therefore be not diſcouraged my beloued brethren, golde is golde, although it lie in the dirt; and pearle is pearle, although it bee buried in a dunghill: ſo a chriſtian is a chriſtian, although he be trode vnder the feete of helhoundes, and be buried aliue in the companie of ſerpents. Conſider them that feare God, to honour them, not to vexe them; to helpe them, not to hurt them; to loue them, not to tempt them; to liue after them, not to accuſe them: Thinke they are the ſtarres that giue light in the night; they are captaines that are formoſt in ſeruice; they are the ſoules that ſhield others from danger. Nowe if there be no ſtarres, and no captaines, and no ſhieldes, howe ſhall we walke in the night of this worlde, or fight in the battle of Chriſt, or be ſaued from the fierie darts of ſathan?
            
            
               The xxxvj. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 4.
                  Yea, and what haue you to do with me, ô Tyrus and Zidon and all the coasts of Palestina? will yee render me a recompence? and if yee recompence me, ſwiftly and ſpeedily will I render your recompence vpon your head:
               
               
                  
THis verſe containeth a queſtion of the Lord vnto the neereſt enimies of the church, namely, the marchants of Tyrus and Zidon, inſinuating that they did all the before named villanie to the Iewes, as it were to wrecke their malice vpon God: and therefore he asketh them whether they wil recompence him; and if they do but once thinke ſo to do, then will he fully repay them home againe. And firſt of all wee may heere note, that it is in vaine to be angrie with God, for he ſaith, what haue you to Be not angrie with God. do with me, &c? and ſo the Lord chaſtiſeth Ionah, Ion. 4. 9. that he might learne not to repine againſt his creator. The world now adaies as they care little to pleaſe God: ſo they care leſſe to offend God; and like mad people, if their dooings be but a little croſſed, they ſweare & ſtare againſt God himſelfe: they like not his gouernment; ſometime he ſendeth too much drought; another time too much raine; another time they are angrie for the loſſe of their cattle; and moſt times for the reproofe of their ſinnes. So that thus they lye toſſed like an vnquiet ſea, fretting and foaming againſt God and heauen: but what haue they gayned by their repining? or what are they eaſed by their ſwearing? Surely nothing, but their wound is greater, and their ſore is made more incurable: learne therfore to be more quiet, and open not thy mouth againſt thy creator. If thy ſores be as thy haires, and thy paines be as thy thoughts, and thy wounds be as thy daies, and thy loſſes be as thy life; yet be not angrie with God, he is more inclined to our patience then to our wrath; for the patient ſpirit ſhall inherit the land. The reaſons hereof are theſe: Firſt, becauſe ſinne Reaſon 1. will ſlay vs as the Lord told Cain, Gen. 4. 7. Again, we cannot poſsibly be angrie or repine againſt God be it but the leaſt motion, but we ſhall ſinne againſt him. And therefore in 2 all extremities let euerie good chriſtian ſay with old Eli, it is the Lord, let him do what he wil; let him take my goods, for he gaue them; let him haue my children, for hee made

them; let him remooue my health, for he ſent it; let him chaunge my friends, for he wonne them; let him trouble my conſcience, for he can giue it peace; and let him take away my ſoule, for he can giue it ſaluation. The vſes Vſe 1. that we may make hereof are theſe: Firſt, that we waite patiently vpon the Lord, Pſal. 37. 7. & we ſhal ſee in the end our harts deſire, & cōmit our whole care to his protection, who is able & wil be willing to effect the ſame. Waite patiently, for there is no maſter ſo kinde, but hee hath ſome attendance of his ſeruant; and therefore how canſt thou be the ſeruant of God, if thou neuer attend vpon him? A good ſeruant of a willing minde doth obey his maiſter euen in thoſe things that are hard to be perfourmed: and ſo although it be hard for thee, yet endure the calamitie that ſomewhat preſſeth and oppreſſeth thee. Naamans ſeruants ſaid to him that the Prophet bid him but a ſmall thing, that was, waſh and be cleane, and then he waſhed and was cleanſed: and ſo I ſay vnto you, it is but a ſmall thing I exhorte you, waite and you ſhall be eaſed. Oh, that I might perſwade any ſicke man to waite for health, or any poore man to waite for reliefe, or any old man to waite for death, or any yoong man to waite for Chriſt, happie were I; but more happie were they, that ſo could be taught to be ſo cured. Waite in the morning for a bleſsing, and in the day for a comfort, and in the night for a light: in the morning, that thou maiſt worke; in the day, that thou maiſt continue; and in the night, that thou maiſt receiue thy reward: oh tarrie but a little while, and thou ſhalt ſee an end of all miſerie! Another vſe of this doctrine is this, that we take 2 heede how we by our wrath prouoke the wrath of the holy Ghoſt againſt vs, and ſo grieue the ſpirit by whom we are ſealed. We were farre better let our ſoules goe foorth of our bodies, then let the Spirit goe foorth of our ſoules: I meane it were better for vs to die then to liue without the holy Ghoſt. Yea let vs eate ſorrow as we eate meate, and grieue our conſciences rather then grieue the holy Ghoſt.

                  Dauids ſeruants were afraid to tell him of the death of his childe, becauſe it would grieue him: oh, therefore let vs be more afraid to grieue the Spirit of God, then they were to grieue the king of Iſraell! Now, if thy ſinnes be reprooued, amend them; if thy life be threatned, abide it; if thy goods be waſted, fret not at it; if thy enimies reioice at thee, bee not deſperate; if thou be offended, ſweare not raſhly; if thou be puniſhed, curſe not outwardly; and if thou be accuſed, yet anſwer not bitterly, & grieue not the ſpirit of promiſe. For ye haue taken my ſiluer and my gold. This is the fifth cauſe ſpecified in their enditement, for the which the Lord calleth them to iudgement, for that they ranſacked his temple, and tooke away all his golde and ſiluer which was appointed for his ſeruice, and carried into their idoll-temples, whatſoeuer was ordained for the performing of his worſhip. And firſt of all we may obſerue in this place, that What is once lawfully giuen to religion, may not be recalled. whatſoeuer hath been lawfully giuen, and appointed vnto the maintenance of religion, can neuer bee taken away againe: or elſe in vaine had the Lord blamed theſe infidels, for that in their lawfull conqueſt they had ſpoiled his temple alſo; and this ſelfeſame thing doe the godly complaine of, Pſal. 74. 6, 7. So that if any lands haue beene giuen, or any houſes haue beene builded, or any priuileges haue beene graunted, or any money haue beene deliuered for the furtherance of the Lordes worſhip, it is ſacrilege to transferre them violently, or couetouſly, or craftily to any other vſes. Oh how ſhall they be iudged that liue vpon the ſpoile of the church, and ſhare the Lords portion ſo neere and ſo narrow, that they haue made it too little to fit his glorie? Doe they not knowe that the Lorde ſhall call them to a reckoning for his ſiluer and his golde; and then, oh then, how deere wil their daintie fare, their ſilken ſuites, their veluet ſlippers, their french-hoods, their golden borders, and their blew-coate-hirelings coſt them, that they haue gained and maintained by the robberie of churches? The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: firſt, becauſe the Reaſon 1.
                  
goods of the church are holy things, 2. Chron. 20. 19. and therefore not to be prophaned; which is then done, when they are withdrawen from the Lords ſeruice. For certainly, although in ſubſtance the golde and treaſure of the church be the ſame that all other is of, as the water and the bread and wine in the ſacraments, in ſubſtance bee all one with other water, wine, and bread; yet in regarde of the vſe there is a difference; for they are made holy by dedication: and therefore as it were horrible villanie to abuſe the elements in the ſacraments; ſo is it execrable robberie to prophane the treaſure of the church. Another reaſon 2 is this, becauſe if it were not lawfull for Ananias and Saphira vnder pretence of religion to ſell their land, as if they would haue giuen it to the church, and yet kept away part thereof, Act. 5. 4. then is it much more vnlawfull to keepe away any part from the church which we neuer gaue, but it was rightly the churches poſſeſsion before wee were borne. And the vſes which may be made hereof may bee Vſe 1. theſe: firſt, that theſe church-robbers and ſacrilegious perſons knowe that the iudgement of God doth continually hang ouer their head, as often as euer they abuſe and take any of theſe hallowed and ſanctified treaſures, as it did ouer Belſhazzar, Dan. 5. 3, 5. who was then ſentenced to deſtruction, when he was drinking wine in the cups of the temple. And ſurely we were better weare camels haire for our garments, as Iohn Baptist did, and haue not a houſe to reſt our heads vpon, as Chriſt had not, and lappe vp our drinke, as Gedeons ſoldiers did out of the running ſtreame, then ſo to be clothed and lodged, and delicately nouriſhed with the goods of the church, and the curſe of the Lorde. What though ſome kings of Iudah did buy peace with them? and Dauid did eate of the ſhew-bread? yet they did it for neceſsitie to maintaine the common-wealth, and to preſerue life; and ſo verily I thinke may be done nowe. But bleſſed be God we neuer yet taſted of the like neceſſitie; and ſo long as there ſhall be one penny of money, or

one foote of land in the poſſeſsions of priuate men; ſo long muſt the treaſurie of the church be left vntouched. O yee gentlemen, and rich men, and vnhappie men! which haue filled your priuate cofers with the Apoſtles goods, whereas you ſhould haue laide your goodes at the Apoſtles feete: what will ye doe when the mouth of God ſhall pronounce your deſtruction for medling with his tithes and his offerings, and his ſacrifices, and his liuings, as the hand of God did Belſhazzars depriuation on the wall? ſurely, not your knees will bend, but your harts wil quake; not your countenance will change, but your conſcience wil tremble; not your loines wil be looſed, but your liues; & not your wealth ſhall be only deſtroied, but your ſoules & bodies for euer & euer. Secondly, we may obſerue out of this verſ. when he 2 ſaith, that they haue caried into their temples, his goodlie & pleaſant things: that God accounteth preciouſlie of the meanes of his worſhip, howe baſely ſoeuer the world and God taketh pleaſure in his worſhip. all worldlings doe iudge thereof, Leuit. 1. 2. for he calleth them his goodly and pleaſant things. The which thing I woulde haue moſt diligently obſerued, that wee may ſo thinke of the thinges of God, as the ſpirite of God doth deliuer them vnto vs: that we finde them goodlie as full of grace, and pleaſant as filled with delight, that we may all ſaie: Oh Lorde, howe ſweete are thy lawes vnto our hearts, yea ſweeter then honie to our mouthes? For carnall minded men, ſee no more grace in a church then in a tauerne, nor no more delight in a chriſtian then in a ruffian; nor eſteeme any whit better of a preacher then a crafteſman; or finde any more ſweeteneſſe in a ſermon then a plaie; or take any more delight in the Goſpell then in a little pedlars french. Oh, howe baſely are you minded, that cannot thinke better of the Lords matters! One of you thinke that there is great goodneſſe in an eare of wheate; another findeth great delight in a fielde flower; another ſporteth himſelfe with the ſmell of a roſe; but none of you can feele any pleaſure in that corne that bringeth

bread of life, or that flower that ſheweth the worke of life, or that roſe that offereth the ſmell of heauen. Laie away thy baſe thoughts of ſpirituall matters; and knowe that the church is the Lordes houſe, who is greater then a king; that the preachers are the Lordes ſtewardes, who are better then lordes; that the Goſpell is thy ſoules food, ſweeter than any iuncate; that a chriſtian is the Lordes friend, better than any rich man; that a ſermon is thy Sauiours praiſe, higher then any prince; and that the fellowſhip of ſaints is more woorth then the valour of knights. Thinke I ſaie, howe goodly and pleaſant are the wordes full of grace, the companie full of goodneſſe, the praiers full of ſweeteneſſe, the Pſalmes full of melodie, and the ſoules full of ſorrowe which are gathered togither before the Lorde in his church. The reaſons of this doctrine are Reaſon 1. theſe; Firſt, becauſe hee euermore regardeth what himſelfe hath appointed, Cant. 5. 1. His church is his garden, and therefore he hath planted euery flower growing therin: wherewithall hee cannot chuſe but bee highly delighted, as he was at the beginning when hee ſawe that all his workes were good. Another reaſon is, bicauſe he puniſheth 2 them ſeuerely that contemne any part of his ordinance, Heb. 2. 2. 1. Cor. 11. 30. and therefore he accounteth preciouſly of his worde which hee defendeth by his power, and of his poore ſaints whom hee maintaineth by his angels; and of his mercie which hee manifeſted in his ſonne; and of the neglect of his Goſpell which hee puniſheth by condemnation. Let vs therefore honour whom Vſe 1. God honoureth, Act. 10. 15. and that which God accounteth precious, let vs not caſt awaie as vile. Becauſe Aſſuerus honoured Haman, all the people of his kingdome did him reuerence; and therefore becauſe the Lorde thinketh well of the worde, and of the Sacraments, and of praier, and of preaching, and of hearing the Goſpell, let him bee a dead dogge that ſpeaketh againſt the ſame. But alas, alas, as Vaſthi would not come although the king

hir husband ſent for hir; ſo will not our Vasthies, men, women, olde and yoong, followe religion, and come to the Goſpell, although God our father, and Chriſt our husband ſend for them neuer ſo earneſtly: but ſhe was rewarded for hir diſobedience, and was diuorced from the king; and ſo I feare will bee the ende of verie many in our daies, to be put out of the Lordes fauour, and diuorced from the bleſſings of Chriſt. And again, let vs learne to put on our eies of faith, that wee may commend that which God commendeth; for except wee can beholde the workes of God, and the Goſpell of God with ſpirituall eies, it ſhall neuer bee goodly and pleaſant before vs: and caſt away the blockiſh dulneſſe that oppreſſeth your braines, like a drouzie nap in a ſhining daie, which will not ſuffer you to beholde the light with any comfort: But lift vp your eies as the children of light, that you may ſee the beautie of Chriſtes church, the riches of the Lords ſpirit, the treaſures of the Lordes ſaintes, the ornaments of a faithfull ſoule, and the glorie of another life.
               
                  The children alſo of Iudah, and the children of Ieruſalem 
                  Verſe. 6. 
                  haue ye ſold vnto the Grecians, that yee might ſend them farre from their border. This verſe contayneth the laſt cauſe of the Lordes iudgement vpon his enimies, for that they had ſold his ſeed and ſeruants vnto the heathen nations: with this policie, becauſe when they were carried far from their own countrey, they ſhould liue like ſlaues, without hope euer to returne home againe. Theſe Grecians to whom they ſolde the people of God were Gentiles or heathens, the poſteritie of Iauan the ſonne of Iaphet, who was the eldeſt ſonne of Noah. And in this that the Lorde now calleth them to a reckoning, becauſe they had ſolde away his people, although they were their captiues, vnto infidels: we may obſerue that it is not lawfull to commit the children of the beleeuers into the handes of vnbeleeuers. And for this cauſe it is reported, Gen. 12. 5. that when Abraham was commaunded by God to goe out of Haran

where all were fallen to idolatrie, into the promiſed lande of Canaan, he tooke with him Sarai his wife, and Lot his brothers ſonne, for he would not leaue him in the hands of Terah, Abrahams father, and Lot his grandfather, becauſe with the reſidue he then was fallen to idolatrie. And this Commit not the children of beleeuers to Infidels. example is a ſufficient proofe of the matter, to teach vs that we ſhould ſo loue the ſoules of the righteous ſeede, that we leaue them not reſident among the infidels or Atheiſts, or Papiſtes, or other prophane wretches; but to our owne coſt and labour redeeme them from the diuels tyranny. But in this we may lament, Firſt, that euen in our times we may ſee many of yeeres of diſcretion to runne away into papiſtical and heatheniſh warres, or elſe to ſauegarde themſelues vnder the liueries of them that are open enimies to the Goſpell: and many to binde and put their owne children the fruit of their bodie (which they ought to conſecrat to the Lord) into the education of moſt blaſphemous and abhominable Atheiſts: are not theſe as much to be complained vpon, as them whom the Lord heere condemneth for ſelling of Ieruſalems ſeed into the hands of the Grecians? Yea much more, for theſe ſold their enimies; but our men ſell themſelues and their children: theſe did it by the lawe of warre; but our men doe it contrarie to the lawe of God: theſe men in ſo doing did not ſinne againſt their knowledge; but our men in doing as they do, ſinne againſt their conſcience. O vnhappie parents! which deſtroy your children in Popiſh houſes: what are you inferiour to them that ſacrificed them to diuels? O vnhappie yoong men! which deſtroy your ſoules for the ſeruice of wicked men: why do you to gaine a gentlemans cogniſaunce, looſe your Sauiours crowne? I pray God open your eies, that you may come from them, or elſe you will be deſtroyed with them. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: Firſt, becauſe Reaſon 1. it is not lawfull to make marriages with infidels, heathens, papiſts, or Atheiſts, Deut. 7. 3. and if in an equall band we may not aduenture our ſonnes or our daughters; much

more may we not giue them ouer in an vnequal: if it be not lawfull to giue them in marriage, then is it not lawfull to ſell or giue them to ſlauerie or ſeruitude. The woorſer part is apt to ouercome the better: for if an infidell man do take a beleeuing woman, or an infidell woman a beleeuing husband, a thouſand to one but the infidell will perſwade the beleeuer, as wiſe king Salomon who was perſwaded to idolatrie by his wiues: And then I pray you, how will thoſe that are wicked maſters and gouernours compel and perſwade their poore deſpiſed ſeruants and captiues, hirelings and apprentices, vnto whatſoeuer iniquitie commeth in their braine? But peraduenture ſome will ſay, that when we be ouercharged with poore people, we are glad if wee finde any that will eaſe vs of our coſt; and we were better ſuffer our poore mens children to ſerue carnall men, and papiſts, and Atheiſts, then to keepe them in idlenes, or let them famiſh: to whom I anſwere, that God hath not ſo dealt with any in England, for there are meanes ſufficient to bring them vp with chriſtians, and not to ſuffer them to famiſh, if men would but ſtraine their abilitie a little to do good; but all is too little that is reſerued for the wanton poſteritie of the wealthie, and men chooſe rather that their vnthriftie children ſhould conſume all in leudnes which they haue got in miſerie, then that any portion ſhould goe foorth of their coffers to maintaine poore mens children, and ſo to put the leſſe in their inuentorie. Another reaſon to confirme this doctrine is this, that there is no part nor 2 communion betwixt the children of God and Belial, 2. Cor. 6. 15. and therefore to ſend or giue our children vnto Pagans, Atheiſts, and carnall godleſſe men to be by them inſtructed, is to ioyne light with darkenes, heauen with hell, ſaints with diuels, and God with Beliall. Oh what a confuſion is there now in the world? for ſeeing God doth yet ſuffer a few Papiſts among vs as hee ſuffered Philistims among the Iſraelites to trie them and prouoke them: now happie are they that can be in league with them, for they

haue good cheere, fat beeues, many great mannors, goodly rich farms, & they are able to pleaſure thē; but ſuch pleſure wil coſt more then a lawiers or a courtiers friendſhip: & althogh thou ſhouldſt cōuerſe with thē without al approuing of their ſuperſtitiō; yet thou oughtſt not at al, for God hath no felowſhip with thē. The vſes which ariſe frō this doctrin Vſe 1. are theſe: firſt, that by the former example of Abraham we haue ſingular care that al the childrē which are born amōg vs be godly & vertuouſly brought vp, & carefully prouided for, that they may do Chriſt ſom ſeruice in the cōmonwelth or church. And ſurely, as our ſauior ſaid, Ma. 18. that whoſoeuer doth offend one of thoſe litle ones that beleeue in him, it were better a milſtone were hanged about his neck, & he caſt into the ſea: but of al offences there is non ſo gret as to bequeath thē vnto their tuition that wil caſt away their ſoules; for men of corrupt cōſciences & wicked affections will cōpas heauē & earth to make any the childrē of dānatiō. Oh therfore, caſt not away the ſeed of the righteous, the childrē of Chriſtiās, & the price of the pretious blood of Chriſt! You haue made thē in their baptiſm whē they were yong to cōfeſſe Chriſt, now make thē not again to deny Chriſt; but if euer there be any poore mans child com to your prouiſiō, ſo ſet him forward & deal for his helth, that with the maintenāce of this life he may haue the aſſurāce of the life to com. Bind thē to none but to Chriſt; put thē to none but to chriſtians; ſel thē to nothing but to the goſpell; & leaue not young helpleſſe youths & maidens in the hands & cuſtodie of old cākred & wicked enemies of God. Another vſe: if it be not lawful to 2 cōmit the children of the righteous vnto the gouernmēt of the wicked, then is it not lawful for maſters & lords to keep their ſeruants from the true ſeruice of God. It was a wicked tyrannie of Pharaoh, Exod. 5. 3, 4. that he kept the children of Iſrael frō the ſeruice of God: & ſuch ſurely is the tyranny of them that will buſie their ſeruāts euen on the Lords day, rather than ſend them or ſuffer them to ſerue the Lord: oh think with your ſelues that Chriſt is your Lord and maſter, Eph. 6. 9. & therfore how will he take it at your hands to ſee

you thus afflict his free men? and how can you affoorde him your owne ſeruice, which will deny him your ſeruants? Rather follow the example of Ioſuah, and ſay that you and your houſhold will ſerue the Lord: and let there be as many Pharaohs as will be, yet they ſhall knowe one day that there is no crueltie more puniſhable then is the authoritie which is vſed againſt the Lords ſeruice. That you might ſend them farre from their border. That is, you haue a wicked policie to ſell away my people, becauſe you would neuer haue them come againe; but that you might for euer poſſeſſe their inheritances. By which we may obſerue, that it is a moſt wicked and vile thing to depriue any of their patrimonies or inheritances, and by violence and countenance to keepe them from them, Ezech. 22. 7. And the A wicked thing to ſpoile orphanes of patrimonies. reaſon is, becauſe the Lord nameth himſelfe to be a father of the fatherleſſe, Pſal. 68. 5. & therfore he that oppreſſeth them ſhall be oppreſſed by God, and they that take away their inheritance, how ſhall they looke for any inheritance in another life. Giue vnto them and take not from them, Deut. 24. 19. and augment their reuenues, rather then diminiſh them. Is God their father? who will not giue them: are they not brethren? who will oppreſſe them: are they not helpleſſe orphanes? who will hurt them. If we ſee but the ſonne of a meane gentleman, we are readie to gratifie him with the richeſt gifts we haue: and then let vs not be backward to helpe fatherleſſe children euen with our owne vnto their owne. Oh my deere brethren! it is the cauſe that belongeth to vs all, and therefore neuer ſuffer an orphane to be oppreſſed; for euen thy poſteritie may come to the like calamitie. God taketh more care for children then for oxen, or ſheepe, or birds, or beaſts, and he would not haue any to be oppreſſed: therefore be aſſured that he will not let thee goe vnpuniſhed if thou oppreſſe the fatherleſſe. Take not away their landes, which parents left them; take not away their goods, which God gaue them; take not away their libertie, which Chriſt hath gotten

them; and depriue them not of thoſe gifts, which nature hath bred in them. Some I know there are which make ſlaues and fooles of their wards and pupils, and deſire nothing more then to get all that they haue into their owne hands, whoſe bookes of account and bils of reckoning ſhal ſurely follow them to the Lordes iudgement: and they thinke they are verie charitable if they can get away any mans lands and liuings, & afterwards bring vp their heires in their kitchins to be ſcullions, or elſe at their ploughes or ſheep-folds, to be drudges and ſlaues all the daies of their life. O miſerable and wretched charity! to make them the ſeruants to their owne goods, and to pay their hire with their owne lands. Others wil coſen for lands, and extort al that they can, and then will make them their farmors, who were the owners, and thinke they doe them a pleaſure: and thus they threaten kindnes like lawyers and vſurers which pay themſelues with ours; and yet ſay, we are beholding to them.
            
            
               The xxxix. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 7.
                  Beholde, I will raiſe them vp out of the place where yee haue ſolde them; and will render your rewarde vpon your owne head.
               
               HAuing hitherto dealt with them, and opened their iniuries as it were in ſeuerall billes of enditement, which they offered to the church, hee nowe proceedeth to their condemnation. And firſt of all, he ſheweth them in this verſe, that their pollicie in oppreſsing his people, and ſelling them to ſtrangers ſo farre off, that they might neuer returne home againe, ſhall be vtterly void: for he will raiſe them vp againe, and will recompence the iniurie as if the enimie had preuailed; and therefore he biddeth them beholde it, bicauſe the wicked ſhall certainly ſee and perceiue that their counſels againſt the Lordes ſaints ſhall bee all in vaine, and to no purpoſe. But firſt of all we may

note when hee ſaith, that hee will raiſe them vp out of the place where they had ſolde them: that God will for euermore preſerue his church in the ſeede of the righteous, In the ſeed of the righteous ſhall good men be preſerued. 
                  Pſalm. 102. 28. So that although wee cannot ſay that this mans children, or that mans poſteritie ſhal continue in the church; yet wee may certainly beleeue, that the poſterity of righteous men ſhall bee the church for euermore; for God ſaith, he will raiſe them vp, yea if they were dead, as Abraham thought he woulde doe with his ſonne. Three ſeuerall times hath God in one man knit vp his church: Firſt, in Adam, who was a righteous man (although hee fell out of Paradiſe) and of him came all, both good and bad: Afterward he deſtroied the wicked, and in Noah one good man did he combine his church: but when his poſteritie fell to idolatrie, then in Abraham did he bleſſe the worlde. What if wee ſee many called to the faith, whoſe late parents were enimies to the Goſpel? yet we muſt know that they are deſcended from ſome that were godly, inſomuch as that we may boldly affirme, that there is not any righteous man in the world but he came from ſome parents that had beene godly, and ſo may hope that God will againe raiſe vp out of his ſeede (although many yeeres to come) ſome that ſhall bee ſaued. No doubt but Adam had ſome fruite in Cain, as Noah had in Cham; Abraham in Eſau; and Iacob in the ſonnes of his bondſeruants. And if this were not ſo, good men might doe well to leaue of from marrying: but God which hath determined the worlde, will haue vs in a continuall hope of good children, and a holy poſteritie; and therefore hath inſtituted marriage to continue as long as the worlde ſhall endure. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe; Firſt, becauſe the power of God Reaſon 1. ſhal vpholde them; and this was it that Iohn Baptist told the Phariſees, Matth. 3. 9. that God was able of the ſtones to raiſe vp children to Abraham. Againe, the gates of hell ſhall neuer preuaile againſt the church, Matth. 16. 18. 2 There is no enimie that men ought more to feare, then

ſinne, which is ment by the gates of hell; but yet ſinne ſhal not for euer preuaile againſt the ſeede of the righteous. We may ſee many times a yoong ſprout comming foorth of an olde ſtub which hath long been dead; and ſo we may conſider, that as Samuel came of the rebell Corah, who murmured againſt Moſes and Aaron, ſo ſhall there ſome good ſeede come from them who ſeemed to be dead and drowned in ſinne. But yet this muſt not make good men to ſet any thing lighter by their ſinnes becauſe God hath promiſed it ſhall not preuaile: but we muſt know that the promiſe is, that it ſhall not condemne the church, yet may God caſt thee out of the church, and there condemne thee, if thou abide in ſinne. Let vs therefore after the example Vſe 1. of Moſes, Exod. 32. 13. remember God of his promiſe when the church is in affliction, and feeleth his heauy wrath. For the promiſes of God are the pillers of the church, inſomuch as euerie member therein is called the childe of promiſe, Roman. 9. 8. Nowe then none can ſo forget the church of God as that hee ſhoulde forget himſelfe, for hee is borne by promiſe as that ſtandeth by promiſe. But it is no maruaile that the church of God ſo decreaſeth, that good mens children become wicked, and wicked mens iſſue multiplie, waxing woorſe and woorſe, becauſe there is not a Moſes left to remember the Lord of his promiſe. Manie are more afraide that their poſteritie will be too righteous rather then too profane, and therefore their mouthes are opened againſt Ieruſalem, becauſe they are opened againſt heauen. Yea good men are too looſe in this point, for they forget to remember the Lorde of his promiſe to continue his church; and therefore I feare, the Lorde forgetteth them in their progenie. Bleſſed was Abraham, Geneſ. 17. 18, 20. that he neuer gaue ouer to pray for Iſmaell, till God had promiſed to make him a mightie man; and therefore the church of God woulde bee much greater, and the poſteritie of the righteous much happier and godlier, if more often with Moſes wee remember

him to take awaie his wrath by continuing his church. Another vſe are wee taught, Ier. 32. 39. which is, that wee 2 likewiſe pray that our poſteritie may haue one and a ſingle hart, that they may dwell for euer in the preſence of God. We can no way ſo much benefite our poſteritie, as by praying for them; for then wee lay vp their treaſure in heauen before the Lord, making him the ouerſeer of our willes, and his kingdome their inheritance. So that as hee promiſed Dauid, that he ſhould neuer want a man to ſit on his throne, if they would continue in his couenant; ſo may euery righteous man aſſure himſelfe, that they ſhall neuer want poſteritie, if they continue in the Lords worſhip. As there is but one God, ſo men ſhould haue but one hart; and as there is but one heauen, ſo men ſhoulde haue but one ſoule: now the hart is one when it abideth in the worſhip of God; but when it wauereth, and is diſtracted into as many follies as affections, there is no hart at all: as it is all one to make mo gods, and to denie God; ſo is it all one to haue many harts and no hart. Therefore pray for thy children whom thou haſt nouriſhed in the worlde, that they may bee ſingle harted, and remaine before the Lorde for euer and euer; for ſurely if they multiply their harts, God wil remooue their graces. For as Ahab by ſeeking to winne Ramoth-Gilead loſt his owne life, becauſe he woulde encreaſe his territories; ſo ſhall wee looſe our owne ſoules if wee enlarge our harts for more vanitie. Remember that Ieruſalem was ſo built as it was at vnitie in it ſelfe: and ſo muſt euery member of Ieruſalem, that is, of the church, haue one hart in himſelfe, that his hart may fit the Lorde, and his ſoule may ſerue for heauen. Secondly, wee may obſerue in this verſe, that the policie of wicked men cannot Wicked mens policie cannot alway ſtand. alway preuaile againſt the good, Pſal. 124. 1, 2, 3. It was one of the wonders of the world, that euer the counſell of Achitophel was ſo ſoone confounded, that hee tooke againſt Dauid, but the Lords hand was in it; for ſeeing he had promiſed that Dauid ſhoulde raigne, was not wiſe

                  Achitophel a foole, that woulde aſſay to breake the couenant? and ſo were theſe gentiles in taking counſell againſt the Iewes to keepe them from euer returning to their countrie againe. The firſt reaſon: the Lord will purge Reaſon 1. iniquitie from his ſanctuarie, Dan. 8. 13, 14. and therefore he will not ſuffer iniquitie to ouerthrowe his ſanctuarie. For the policie of wicked men in the deſtruction of the godly is not ſo much againſt mankinde, as it is to burie for euer the worſhip and worſhippers of God. Would God that this reaſon might be well waighed of them, who are euermore corrupting the ſanctuarie of God, who broach all the deuiſes of the world to corrupt the goſpell. But as the Romaine Image ſtanding in the holy place was called the abhomination of deſolation; in like manner ſhall the imaginations of hereticall and proud men ſtanding in the church be called the abhominable deſolation of religion. Another reaſon, becauſe good men might not fall from 2 God by enduring their iniuries, Pſal. 125. 4. and therefore be aſſured, if God will make one of his owne ſaints worth a thouſand of his enimies, then will hee rather deſtroy their counſels, then want his worſhippers. The vſe is: let vs then Vſe 1. knowe that not all the counſell of men, nor all the policie of the diuell, nor all the power of the angels ſhall euer caſt downe the members of Chriſt. Apoc. 7. 3. Oh ſweete inſtruction for vs miſerable deemed wretches! when we neede not to feare all the engins and deuiſes of the diuell: if hee ſtirre vp princes, yet God is greater; if wiſe men, God is wiſer; if ſtrong men, Chriſt is ſtronger; and if learned men, yet God catcheth the learned. What ſhall I ſay more? all the diuels in hell cannot take away one ſoule from the Lord. They are bound, they cannot roue; they are muzled, they cannot rore; they are ruled, they cannot rage; and they are damned, they cannot hurt vs. Nay, they can neither hurt body nor ſoule; for the ſame that redeemed ſoules redeemed bodies, and preſerueth both: Therefore feare not death, that hath loſt his ſting, and feare not the

diuell that hath loſt his force. Another vſe: let this confidence 2 for our raiſing vp, out of miſerie into glorie; out of iniquitie into holineſſe; out of death into life, and quitteth vs from the wicked, ſtirre vp euery mans ſoule and hart to cleaue to the Lorde for euermore: for as Dinah was ſafe in her fathers houſe, and none could touch her; ſo ſhall we be ſafe in the Lords preſence, & none can hurt vs. Thirdly, by this verſe, when he laieth to their charge the ſelling of his people, that they might neuer return againe, which they coulde not bring to paſſe; but yet hee telleth them he woulde puniſh them: wee may note that God puniſheth our deuiſes and thoughts of euill, although they Thoughts to doe euill, like euill actions. proceede no farther, as if the thing had beene effected, and the ſinne perfected, Geneſ. 11. 4, 8. The builders of Babell thought to builde a tower to reach to heauen; but they coulde not preuaile, and yet God puniſhed their enterpriſe, by confounding their language: So that, imagine with thy ſelfe howe often thou haſt ſtollen by coueting; howe often thou haſt committed adulterie by luſting; and how often thou haſt deſerued actuall puniſhment, by mentall tranſgreſsing: wee doe therefore all of vs moſt iuſtlie ſuffer the danger of all kinde of deathes, becauſe we liue in the danger of all kinde of ſinne; neither is there anie man liuing but at one time or other hee hath luſted after euerie ſinne that he knewe, for if we knewe not ſinne, we ſhoulde not ſinne. And indeede theſe builders, and this building of Babel doth notablie deſcribe and decypher vnto vs the nature of ſinners and ſinne: for as Babell was built without God his conſent, ſo is ſinne: as the builders made the ſubſtance and frame thereof, of themſelues; ſo do wee of ſinne: As they did it to continue their names, that the floud ſhoulde no more ouerflowe them, not truſting to the former promiſes of God; ſo doe ſinners forſake God his promiſe, and for worldly cauſes fall into many follies. Againe, as they would build, neuer ceaſe building till they had brought it vp to heauen: ſo is the meaſure of ſin,

it woulde neuer ceaſe till it aſcended vp into the ſight of God, and filled all the ſpace betweene heauen and earth. And laſtly, as the building was not ſtaied, but by the confounding of their toongs; ſo ſhall not ſinne be ſtaied but by confounding the ſoules of men. The reaſons of this Reaſon 1. doctrine are theſe; Firſt, bicauſe they which conſent to ſinne (and goe no farther) are woorthie of death, Rom 1. 32. So that it is a greeuous thing to bee made priuie vnto any vnlawfull practiſes, and not to reueale and open the ſame. Secondly, our corrupt eſtate is ſuch, that our temptations 2 Vſe 1. doe drawe vs from God, Iam. 1. 14. The firſt vſe, Let vs follow the counſell of the prophet Iſa. 1. 16. That we take away the euill of our hearts. Men thinke it lawfull for them to range in conceit vpon any follie or ſinne, or luſt or treacherie whatſoeuer, and to plaie with the diuell in imagination, ſuffering his deluſions to tickle their delights, and delight their ſoules with an inwarde deſire onelie: But in truth this kinde of ſport is a moſt vnlawfull game, condemned by the Lordes owne ſtatute, when he biddeth vs to take away the euill of our harts; Clenſe your handes yee ſinners, and purge your hearts you wauering minded. the diuell firſt commeth into your hearts by doubting, then by entreatie or begging, then by delighting; when once hee delighteth, hee hath erected his throne in thy ſoule, and if thou labour not to caſt him out, he wil become vnreſiſtable. Dallie not with him as Samſon did with Delilah, for it will betray thee; truſt him not as Siſera did Iael, for it will deſtroy thee; deſire him not as Dauid did Bathſheba, for it will repent thee; chuſe him not as Lot did Sodom, for in the ende it will vexe thee. Remember that God which ſeeth thy hart will puniſh the ſinne of the hart, for in truth thy heart is the principall in euerie offence, and the bodie is but acceſſorie: Thy heart prouoketh thee to ſinne, as the high prieſtes prouoked Pilate to crucifie Chriſt; and thy bodie obeieth as Pilate did, while in the meane time thy conſcience giueth thee warning as Pilats
                  
wife did him: and therefore haue nothing to do with ſin, which is poiſon, with the knowledge of it, for it will infect thee, and purge thy ſoule from euill thoughts, as Ezechiah purged Iſraell from idolatrie. Fourthlie, when hee ſaith, that hee will render their recompence vpon 
                  What we doe to other, wee ſhal receiue of other. 
                  their owne head: Wee may note that the ſame meaſure which we offer vnto others ſhall be repayed to vs againe, Iſaie 33. As we ſmite with the ſword, ſo ſhall wee periſh with the ſword: & as we ſhed the blood of other, ſo ſhal we haue our owne blood ſhed againe. We know that as Ahab and Iezabell did cauſe Naboth to come to a violent death, and the dogs to licke his blood; ſo the dogs did licke vp their blood againe. And this falleth out with the moſt godly in the world, as we may ſee in Dauid, who tooke away the life and wife of Vrijah, he loſt his owne ſonnes, and eſcaped himſelfe verie narrowly; and in the end you know how his ſonne Abſolom lay with his wiues before all Iſraell. Therfore harken vnto this, my deerely belooued, that you neuer offer any other things to other, but the ſame that you would haue offered to you againe. Take what libertie thou wilt to offend other; to waſte their goods, to ſhame their liues, to open their ſinnes, to defile their wiues, to oppreſſe their goods, to harden thy heart againſt the poore, and to heape vp iniuries in the higheſt meaſure: for as Salomon ſaide, He that ſtoppeth his eare at the crie of other, ſhal cry himſelfe and not be heard: ſo ſhalt thou be offended, and waſted, and ſhamed, and opened, and defiled, and oppreſſed, and iniuried, and reuenged, as thou haſt deſerued. We ſee the king eſcaped not this law; and therefore thinke not thou, whether thou be rich, or wiſe, or great, or noble, or worſhipfull, or poore, or ſtrong, or weake, or yoong, or old, or learned, or ignoraunt: but as thou haſt reioyced in others harmes, ſo ſhall other in thine; as thou haſt defiled others wiues, ſo ſhall other thine; as thou haſt ſtollen other mens goods, ſo ſhall they ſteale thine; as thou haſt reproched other mens liues, ſo ſhall thine be; as thou haſt beene

pitiful to others, ſo thou ſhalt receiue pity: for this law ſhall neuer be broken, that whatſoeuer we do to other, we ſhall receiue of other againe. The reaſons: Firſt, becauſe this Reaſon. is the whole doctrine of the law and the prophets, Matth. 712 for ſurely there is not any thing that ſauoureth more of beaſtly tyranny, or leſſe of godly pietie, then to do that vnto other which we would not receiue of other: & therefore in the practiſe of religion betwixt man & man, let this ſerue inſtead of the golden rule, whereby the weake ſhall be neuer offended, or the poore bee euer oppreſſed, or the rich be euer enuied, or the godly be euer defamed. This will take away all bribing from officers, all tyrannie from princes, al pride from gentlemē, al couetouſnes from landlords, and all malice from enimies. Truely, truely, there was neuer precept giuen better for the church, for the common-wealth, or for the world: for the church, for it teacheth to ſaue ſoules, for who would looſe his owne: to the common-wealth, for it preſerueth life, for who would kill himſelfe: and to the world, for it keepeth humanitie, for who would become a beaſt? Let vs therefore learne Vſe. to forget iniuries, Leuit. 19. 18. for their remembrance prouoke vs to reuenge, and all reuenge is damnable before God. Oh, whoſe ſoule is not ſet on fire to embrace this doctrine, which I might follow with all the examples of the world? For who can abide to haue his owne blood ſhed, his owne body maymed, his owne children murthered, and his owne ſoule damned? therefore do not ſo to other, but write this law on the palme of thy hands that it may neuer be out of thy ſight. It will teach thee all religion, it wil ſaue thee from the ſtrife of toongs, the ſhame of fooles, the blame of good men, the furie of diuels, and the wrath of God: for if thou canſt beare the iniuries of thy brother, and not reuenge them; thou wilt alſo beare the afflictions which God ſendeth, and the ſorrow which good men endure, and not repine at it: but as Ioſeph hauing all his brethren that ſold him, yet did not hurt one of them; ſo doe thou not hurt any of them that hate thee.
            
            
               
               The xxxviij. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 8.
                  And I will ſell your ſonnes and your daughters into the hand of the children of Iudah, and they ſhall ſell them to the Sabeans, to a people farre off: for the Lord hath ſpokenat.
               
               HAuing ſhewed them, that he would doe vnto them as they had done vnto him and his people; that is, hee would take their ſonnes and daughters, and giue them into the hands of the children of Iudah whom they had ſpoiled, and the children of Iudah ſhould ſell them away to the Sabeans, who dwelt in the vtmoſt partes of Arabia, being great merchants, which ſhould likewiſe ſende them away into a very farre countrey, that ſo their owne policie might returne to their owne dammage. Wherby here commeth a queſtion to be handled, namely, whether it be lawfull for Chriſtians hauing conquered any nation their enimies, to ſell away their children whom they had taken priſoners, vnto heathens and infidels, as the Lord here ſaith, that the Iewes ſhould ſell them to the Sabeans who were infidels. Firſt, for the opening of this place, it was lawfull for the Iewes ſo to doe, becauſe they had the expreſſe commaundement of God, as it is here ſet downe: and if at the commaundement of God they muſt in their warres, kill man, woman and childe; much more at his commaundement may they ſell their priſoners to heathens. Secondly, wee muſt not make this place any rule or example for vs to imitate, but take it for a ſpeciall curſe vpon the enemies of the Iewes at this time, becauſe they ſhould ſell them as they had ſold theirs. Then to the queſtion, I thinke it not lawfull for vs to ſell any vnto heathens; yea though they be heathens and our enemies: The reaſons are theſe; firſt, Reaſon 1. becauſe Deut. 20. 11, 12. the Lord propoundeth an euerlaſting

lawe for warre, ſtanding vpon theſe conditions: firſt, that they offer peace; ſecondly, if they ouercome their enimies, then ſhall they make them their tributarie ſeruants, and not ſell them away; or if they refuſe peace being offered, then ſhall they deſtroy them all: ſo then, ſelling of men and women becommeth barbarous and heathen men, and not the children of God. Secondly, by ſelling away our enimies, wee doe not weaken the common enemie of our faith, but rather ſtrengthen him; for a bond-ſlaue can fight as well againſt the goſpell as a free man; therefore it is better to ſlay them outright, than to make a gaine of them vnto heathens or men of no faith. Thirdly, it is not lawfull to ſell them, becauſe it is an vnnaturall thing for one man to buie another, or to ſell another, as we may ſee in the hiſtorie of Ioſeph. Fourthly, they were better bee among vs, and bee the leaſt in our congregation, where they may poſsibly come to learne Ieſus Chriſt, than to be among heathens where Chriſt is hated: and ſo I cannot ſee how wee can waſh our hands cleane from the guilt of their damnation. So that now it appeereth, that men muſt looke eſpecially that they vndoe not thoſe whom the Lord hath commended to their ſafetie and preſeruation; beſides many other reaſons which I could adde vnto the former. And againe, by this verſe we may ſee how the children of the wicked beare their fathers faultes; for here are the ſonnes and daughters to bee ſolde: ſo may wee reade, Pſal. 127. 9. that they are bleſſed that reuenge the fathers crueltie on the children. Oh my deere brethren! let your tender babes procure pitie and pietie in your ſoules; for you ſee how their liues ſhall pay for your wrongs, and their butcherie for your tyrannie. It were an eaſier calamitie if the hand that ſinned ſhould onely be cut off; but wee ſee that if the right hand ſlay a man, the whole body muſt periſh thereby. It is a ſingular bleſsing of God to be deſcended of godly parents, yea the wicked brag thereof, Ioh. 8. 39. Matt. 3. 9. Therefore if you will make your poſteritie

happie and bleſſed; make your owne ſoules godly and your works holy. Let not your children be made ſlaues to the wicked, and bondſlaues to the diuell for your follie; but be you gentle, that they may liue; bee you patient, that they may be beloued; bee you honeſt, that they may bee honoured; and be you good to the godly, that they may poſſeſſe your reuenues.
               
                  Publiſh this among the Gentiles, prepare warre, wake vp the 
                  Verſ. 9. 
                  mightie men, let all the men of warre drawe neere and come vp. Nowe are wee come to the ſecond meanes, whereby the Lorde taketh vengeance on the enimies of his church, that is by warre; for as by warre they had waſted the Iewes, ſo by warre ſhoulde themſelues be confounded. In this warre we are to conſider, Firſt, the preparation thereof by ſouldiers, verſe 9. then the inſtruments or weapons, verſe 10. Secondly the execution in the verſes following. Firſt then in this verſe he calleth for the ſouldiers, and biddeth that the warre ſhoulde be proclaimed, and that all the men fitted thereunto ſhoulde come vp to fight. Whereby wee muſt firſt of all obſerue, that warre muſt bee proclaimed before it be waged, Ioſ. 22. 12. For it becommeth not anie Warre proclaimed beforehand. prince or great perſon ſo to deale with his enimies, that he ouercome them before they haue intelligence of him. The reaſon, Firſt, bicauſe peace muſt be firſt of all offered, Deuter. 20. 10. For warre, which is the ſlaughter of mankinde, Reaſon 1. muſt be the laſt meanes for princes to right and trie their iniuries. It muſt be taken in hande for neceſsitie, not for pleaſure; and it muſt bee executed with mercie, not with crueltie. Another reaſon, bicauſe victorie onely dependeth 2 on God, 2. Chron. 13. 12. and therefore wee muſt vſe all good meanes in the vndertaking thereof, leaſt beginning without the Lordes counſell, wee ende with his curſe, being guiltie of our own death, & others. Let vs not then in this latter age of the world fear any of the rumours Vſe 1. of warre, Mat. 24. 6. for the Lord of hoſtes is the great warriour, whoſe ſouldiers wee are; and if hee can vſe the roaring

of the diuell to driue vs from hell, then thinke alſo he will vſe the trumpets of warre to bring vs into heauen. Feare not I ſay all the rumours of warre in France, Flanders, Hungarie, Turkie, or in other places of the worlde; for if the wicked die in them it is for ſinne; if good men, by the puniſhment for ſinne, they kill ſinne; and all this ſhall promote the Goſpell and preſerue the church. Secondly, 2 when he biddeth to awake the mightie men, we may note that men of greateſt courage and valour are fit for the warres, 2. Sam. 10 9. But of this matter we haue ſpoken in the ſecond chapter. Againe, when he calleth them Souldiers muſt haue a calling from God. to draw neer and to come vp, we note that ſouldiers ſhould beware that they haue a calling from God, and a commandement from him to fight, 1. King. 22. 7. Iehoſhaphat woulde not fight with Ahab againſt the Syrians, till hee had inquired of the Lorde: and this wee may ſee in Dauid many times. For ſeeing warres are the cauſe of many mens death, let vs beware that we adde not curſe to curſe; like the king of Moab, who being ouercome by the Iſraelites, went home and ſacrificed his owne ſonne in the fire. The Reaſon 1. reaſons are; Firſt, becauſe they cannot proſper that waite not for the Lordes calling, Ioſ. 1. 17, 18. Secondly, he giueth 2 power to fight, Pſalm. 18. Let vs therefore bee ſo minded in warres, that wee neuer vndertake them when the Lorde diſalloweth them, Numb. 14. 44, 45. The Iſraelites fighting with the Amorites contrarie to the Lordes wil were ſlaine and driuen backe againe; whereas at other times they loſt not a man, but returned in victorie. Againe, let ſouldiers learne to keepe themſelues from euill, Deuter. 23. 9. For the battle or warfare is like a mans death-bed, and although a man haue made no conſcience all the time of his health, yet on his death-bed will he lie moſt deuout: ſo let deuotion and religion raigne in them that follow the warres, that euery mans death may be a ſermon of repentance vnto them: and let the trumpet admoniſh them of iudgement, and their continuall danger awake them, for

the Lordes comming. Oh that men of this life woulde ſo liue, that they might fight in leſſe danger, ouercome with ſmaller loſſe, liue with greater holineſſe, and die with greater honour: die I ſaie, to honour their countrey with their liues, and their Sauiour with their ſoules.
               
                  Breake your plow ſhares into ſwordes, and your ſithes into ſpeares: let the weake ſay I am ſtrong. Hauing handled Verſ. 10. the preſsing of the ſouldiers, now it followeth that we goe to the preparation of weapons in this verſe, where he biddeth them to take their tooles wherewith they husbande the earth, and turne them into the inſtruments of warre: whereby we may obſerue, that the warre which the faithfull Warre as needfull as husbandrie. haue againſt their enimies, is as needfull or more needfull then tillage of the earth, Gen. 14. 14, 15. Abraham to recouer againe Lot, tooke all his houſhold both ſhepherds and other, and followed the kings which lead him away captiue, and by a mayne battle ouerthrew them all. And ſurely many times, there is none but they may doe more good in the warre, then at the plow; and at the ſlaughter of men, then at the mowing of corne. If Abraham had not ſtirred preſently, all had beene loſt, and then woe had been Lot, which ſhould haue liued a priſoner, and forgot the God of Abraham: therefore better was it to leaue the ſheepe to the danger of the woolfe, and the earth to bee vntilled and ouergrowen with weeds, then to let any ſoules of God be captiuate by man, or bee taken away from the flocke and viſible church of God. The reaſons: Firſt, becauſe Reaſon 1. it is waged for the Lord and for the church, 2. Sam. 10. 12. now then it being ſometime a part of the Lords ſeruice, what worldly worke is there that muſt not yeelde vnto it? Yea, though it be as naturall as the tillage of the earth. Againe, then doth the Lord take vengeance of the ſinnes 2 of wicked men, whereupon they were accurſed by the prophet Ieremie that did the worke of the Lord negligently; meaning thoſe which did not execute the fulneſſe of his wrath vpon the wicked that he had giuen into their hands.

Therefore learne the neceſsitie of warre, and when thou Vſe 1. art called, then refraine not to come, Ioſ. 1. 14. to helpe thy brethren; for they are accurſed that follow not willingly the warre of God, Iudg. 5. 23. Deborah curſed Meroz, becauſe it did not helpe Barac againſt Siſera: and ſo are thoſe faint harted and white-liuered ſouldiers, who are afraide to looſe their life in the Lords quarrell. Some that are great, preſſe forwarde thoſe that are vnder them: other beeing lawfully called, buie out their calling with money, and ſo auoide the warre; ſubſtituting ſome one or other in their place, who peraduenture runneth away before the battle: Yea, if it be ſo neceſſarie, let them learne that God is ſometime as well ſerued by killing in the fielde, as at an other time by praying in the church; and it is better for them to leaue wife and children, to goe and fight againſt the Lords enemies, then to liue at home and follow their dayly labour. Let vs alſo learne to entreate the Lord to go forth 2 with our armies againſt our enimies, Pſal. 44. 9. for there is no policie like his preſence, no captaine like his direction, no power like his grace, no ſworde like his anger, no foe like his diſpleaſure, no ſhot like his breath, and no danger like his abſence. Oh therefore, if Barac would not goe except Deborah went with him, then goe not to the warre except the Lord goe with thee. The Iſraelites neuer loſt battle wherein Ioſuah was; and therefore neuer ſhall wee looſe the field if the Lord be on our ſide. Let his call command thee, his cauſe prouoke thee, his preſence arme thee, and then ſhall neuer foe hurt thee. Let him be thy captaine to go before, thy company to follow after, thy prouiſion to feed thy campe: let his lawes gouerne thy ſouldiers, & his preſence ſhal preſerue thee from danger. Oh, pray when thou goeſt, that he may guide thee; & when thou traineſt, that he may ſee thee; & whē thou fighteſt, that he may ſaue thee. Secondly, when he thus calleth vnto thē to turne their plowſhares into ſwords, and their ſiethes into ſpeares: we may note that it is a thing requiſite that euery one doe

prouide him weapons for the defence of his countrie: and Weapons needfull and lawfull for any chriſtian. therefore doth the ſpirite of God 1. Sam. 13. 23. account it a deteſtable policie of the Philiſtines, who tooke away all the ſmiths out of Iſraell, becauſe they woulde keepe the Iſraelites without weapon; for therein they were neuer able to trie their cauſe, and to auenge themſelues of their tyrannie. The reaſon: firſt, becauſe no man by the law of God is forbidden to defend himſelfe, although in his Reaſon. owne defence he kill his aduerſarie, yet coulde he not be blamed, becauſe the Lord had deliuered him into his hand. And in truth I thinke it a rare policie of the diuell in the mouthes of Anabaptiſts, denying Chriſtians to weare weapons, becauſe thereby the Turks and Pagans might come vpon vs vnarmed men, and ſo take away our liues and our profeſsion together: therefore I hold it as needefull for a man to weare weapon to defende himſelfe from wounds, as for a man to take phyſicke, to preſerue himſelfe from ſickneſſe. Let vs not ſpend more time herein then needeth, but let vs learne that we prouide the weapons of the ſpirit, Epheſ. 6. 11. Bee not armed againſt men, and vnarmed againſt the diuell; be as cunning to defend thy ſoule from hell, as thou wouldeſt bee to defende thy life from death. Seeſt thou not that a whole nation are ouercome without weapon; and ſo ſhalt thou be ouercome without the ſword of the ſpirite, the ſhield of faith, the helmet of ſaluation, and the darts of faithfull praiers to wounde the infernall foes. They are ſtronger, therefore thou muſt learne more cunning; they are wiſer, therfore thou muſt get more ſtrength; they are ſwifter, therefore thou muſt ſtrike more ſure; they are more dangerous, therefore thou muſt bee more zealous. Againe, when he biddeth the weake to ſay that they are ſtrong, he thereby teacheth vs, that we muſt not admit any excuſe to keepe vs from the battell, neither ſickneſſe, nor lameneſſe, nor pouertie, nor riches, nor youth, nor gentrie, nor weakeneſſe muſt excuſe men from fighting of the Lords battels; but rather the zeale to doe him ſeruice muſt

exceede and excell the want which oppreſſeth vs. Therefore learne from hence how thou oughteſt to liue in all thy waies that God looketh for at thy hand: no excuſe can be euer admitted; none can be exempted from religion, becauſe they are honourable; or from the goſpell, becauſe they are rich; or from ſermons, becauſe they are learned; or from the churches, becauſe they are tender; or from praier, becauſe they are ſicke; or from warre, becauſe they are weake: but the weake muſt ſay, I am ſtrong. Rather pray the more, and goe the farther, and heare the oftener, and obey the willinglier, and profeſſe more earneſtly, becauſe God hath made thee ſicke, or poore, or weake, or rich, or tender, or honourable, or learned: for I tell thee that there is no excuſe from comming into the Lords vineyarde. Thou canſt not come into heauen by a proxee, or ſubſtitute another to heare the goſpell for thee; but in thy owne perſon and ſoule, and ſtrength or weakeneſſe thou muſt enter into it. Therefore now looke to the matter, if euer thou wilt obtaine grace: for although we ſatisfied the wrath of God by another, namely, by Chriſt; yet we cannot be ſanctified in any mans perſon, but in our owne. All the lazers and lame diſeaſed men of Iſrael, came from all quarters thereof to be laide by the poole of Betheſda to be waſhed and cured, and none ſuffered any let to keepe them away; in like manner, let all the weake and lame ſoules of the world come to worſhip the Lord, and let not any hinderance keepe them backe.
            
            
               The xxxix. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 11.
                  Aſsemble your ſelues, and come all yee heathen, and gather your ſelues togither round about, there ſhall the Lord cast downe thy mightie men.
                  12.
                  Let the heathen be wakened, and come vp to the valley of Iehoſhaphat, for there will I ſit to iudge all the heathen round about.
               
               
                  
AS in the former verſes he called the ſouldiers which ſhoulde bee the miniſters of his wrath, to deſtroie his enimies: ſo nowe againe the ſecond time hee calleth the heathen to iudgement, to prepare them for the execution; and although their deſtruction ſhoulde come of themſelues, yet the Lorde calleth them to battle, that they might knowe it proceedeth from him. Concerning the firſt part of theſe two verſes, namely, the gathering of the heathen into the valley of Iehoſhaphat: wee haue alreadie ſpoken in the ſeconde verſe of this chapter. Therefore we wil brieflie touch that which is not hādled already. I might firſt note vnto you, that the Lord careth not for all the multitude of the world, althogh they were vp in armes againſt him, when hee ſaith, Aſſemble your ſelues and come all yee heathen, meaning to warre, and defende themſelues againſt his ſouldiers before called. Secondly, in theſe words I might ſhew you, how the heathen and infidels in all their warres, truſt to their multitudes, and bring all the force they can make: as we may reade of the Madianites againſt Gedeon; and the Philiſtines againſt Barac: but it is the Lorde that ouerthroweth the horſe and the ryder. I will cast downe thy mightie men. By theſe wordes the prophet telleth vs, that God will deale with the ſtrongeſt, and confounde them, Luk. 1. 52. The Lorde who is of great wiſedome and infinite ſtrength and power, doth buckle alway The ſtrongeſt ouerthrowne by God. with them that are of greateſt account, ſuffering the pride of the leſſer to be puniſhed by men, but he himſelfe controuleth the oppreſsions of the mightie. Whereby wee may ſee, that there is no cauſe why wee ſhoulde feare anie force or furie, or rage of man, for hee can, and doth, take the mightieſt to ouerthrow them. When we ſee any lifting vp themſelues aboue their brethren, then are wee to thinke their pride is aſcending vp before the Lorde to be croſſed. This is a ſweete inſtruction and comfort for the poore members of Chriſt: for as there are none in the

worlde more humble than themſelues, ſo there are none more oppreſſed by the pride of other than they are: But they may heere learne, that their mightieſt foes are neereſt to the vengeance of God. The reaſons: Firſt, becauſe Reaſon 1. his name is omnipotent, Exod. 15. 4. this was the reaſon that Moſes gaue of the ouerthrowe of Pharaoh: and therefore it is no maruaile if any man or army, or nauie, or caſtle, or king, or emperour, be throwne downe as the ſnowe falleth from heauen; for the omnipotencie of his name remaineth for euer. By it he drowned the giants, he burned the Sodomites, he ouerthrew the Egyptians, hee ſlewe the Cananites, hee captiuated the Iſraelites, hee hath changed the liues of great princes, and ſhall at the latter day iudge both quicke and dead. Another reaſon: bicauſe ſtrong 2 and mightie men doe mightily abuſe their ſtrength: as we may ſee in Goliah, who knowing his owne ſtrength, came and defied all Iſraell. And ſurely heerein we may greatlie lament the eſtate of the worlde, for men doe abuſe all the benefits of God: Such is the corruption of ſinne in Adams children, that their riches are the coales of iniquitie, their authoritie a libertie to tranſgreſſe, their health a patent for worldly vanity, & their ſtrēgth a ſufficient charter to reuile God, and oppreſſe man: But as Dauid the leaſt in Iſrael cut off that monſters head, ſo ſhall the leaſt part of the Lordes power take reuenge vpon our higheſt abuſes. Let vs Vſe. therefore learne to be humbled vnder the hande of God, 1. Pet. 5. 6. For if we be poore and baſe, men will puniſh vs: but if we be high & rich, God himſelfe will plague and caſt vs downe. But alas, we are neuer humble till it be too late, namely, till we be laide in our graues; for while wee liue pride is rooted in vs, that it will not out of vs: there is ſuch league betwixt the life of man and the ſin of man, as was betwixt Naomi and Ruth, for nothing but death can part them in ſunder. Who would be rich to be ſpoiled by theeues? who woulde be wicked to be damned by diuels? and who would be proud to be plagued by God? Aduance

not thy ſoule for thy birth, or thy wealth, or thy friendes, or thy office, or thy libertie, or thy ſtrength; for God will caſt downe the mightie men: diſtruſt thy vertues, and thy cauſe, and thy fauour, and thy health, and thy ioy, and thy life, for if thou bee exalted in anie of theſe, God will ſurelie humble thee to thy ſhame. Let the heathen bee wakened. Nowe hee ſheweth vs, that the heathen after they had ſpoiled the church, grewe to ſecuritie, and therefore hee calleth on them to bee awaked; for there were no manhood in it to ſlay them in their ſleepe. By which we may note, that the wicked in their greateſt A ſudden deſtruction to the wicked. ſecuritie ſhall be drawen vnto iudgement, Ier. 22. 23. when their buildings are ſtately, their bodies healthie, their mindes loftie, their wealth abundant, and their liues paſt feare; then, then commeth the alarme of their miſerie, waking them from their ſoft beds, heauie ſleepe, ſweete loue, pleaſant paſtime, eaſie health, and happy ioy, to gather them into the ſlaughter-houſe of hell. Oh that men would mitigate their deſire of pleaſure, and once diſtruſt their harts when they be ioyfull! for as Herod was ſtrooke with death while hee ſate vpon his throne of maieſtie; ſo are we neuer neerer to our woe, than when we are mounted to honour, or ſeated in quietneſſe. The phiſitions ſay, that want of motion, and loue of reſt breedeth more diſeaſes than all euill ſurfeits: and ſo muſt we ſay that are the phiſitions of mens ſoules, that moe periſh by eaſe, than by labour; by ioie, than by ſorrow; by pleaſure, than by paine; and by idle religion, than by earneſt and zealous profeſſion. The reaſons: the ſame that Iſay taught, chap. 65. 12. becauſe God is refuſed in his word: and good reaſon why Reaſon 1. it ſhould be ſo; for as already we haue ſhewed, that the word muſt be a light for our pathes, and a remembrancer to our ſoules: which being forgotten, no maruell if in our greateſt ſecuritie the Lords wrath ouertake vs. Therefore let the idle followers of the goſpell perſwade their ſoules with more zeale and diligence to bee informed by the

Lord, leaſt the wrath take them ſleeping, or ſelling, or drinking, or playing, or dicing, or dauncing to their condemnation. Secondly, another reaſon, becauſe they loue pleaſure 2 more than God, 2. Tim. 3. 4. therefore as Saneherib Iſay. 37. was ſlaine at that inſtant when hee was worſhipping his idoll; ſo ſhall their bane bee wrought when they are in their belly-worſhip following their pleaſing delights. Let vs therefore neuer put danger out of our Vſe 1 mindes, but then when wee are in moſt quiet comfort of ſoule and body, let vs trouble our peace with one thought or other, Mich. 3. 11. If thou haue children, feare their death; if thou haue parents, feare their wrath; if thou haue friends, feare their hatred; and if thou haue health, feare thy ſickneſſe; if thou be ioyfull at a feaſt, thinke on the miſerie of famine; if at a pleaſure, thinke vpon the paine of the wounded; if at libertie, thinke vpon the irons of the impriſoned; if in life, thinke on the pangs of death. Neuer exempt thy ſelfe from danger, but in peace remember warre; in youth remember age; in play remember labour; and in the heauen of the worldes delight, thinke vpon the hell of another life. Let ſorrow be in thy ſenſe; mourning in thy ſoule; danger in thy life; feare in thy muſicke; trouble in thy ſleepe; paine in thy health; want in thy plentie; diſlike in thy loue; and diſtruſt in thy deſire: ſo ſhalt thou neuer be called to ſicknes, but with leſſe griefe; or to danger, but with leſſe feare; or to death, but with leſſe trouble; or to iudgement, but thou ſhalt be prouided for it. Another vſe: ſeeing the wicked ſhall be drawen to iudgement 2 in their greateſt ſecuritie; then we may learne, whether they feare wrath and euil, or feare it not, yet all is one, it ſhall come vpon them. Dauid ſaid, that the feare of the wicked ſhall fall on him; and herewee ſee Ioel ſaith, that though they ſleepe, yet ſhall they be awaked with and for their danger; ſo that if wicked men feare, their ſorrowe is the more; and if they feare not, their danger is not the leſſe. Oh miſerable captiuitie of wicked men! which are

hardened to feele more paine, and ſoftened to feare more wrath; would not this bring vs out of loue with our ſinne, and make vs earneſtly to lament our follies, which giue vs no peace till we deſire them, and no reſt after wee poſſeſſe them! But of this often haue wee ſpoken before. For there will I ſit. When he ſaith, that he will ſit in iudgement: we may note, that the Lord will with no labour condemne the wicked, as it is Mal. 1. 4. euen as one that ſitteth in al eaſe. Againe, in this that he ſitteth in iudgement, he alludeth to the iudgements of men which were moſt lawfull; ſhewing that his proceedings againſt the wicked were not vniuſt or extraordinarie, but according to equity. But this is eſpecially to be regarded when he nameth the perſons whom he will iudge, ſaying, all the heathen rounde about: meaning all thoſe which dwelt neere vnto Iſraell; Whereby we are taught, that thoſe which are our neighbours The neereſt foes of the Church in the greateſt danger. and ſee our worſhip, and liue neere, or among vs, and yet be not of vs, but are our enimies, God will iudge them more ſeuerly, Ierem. 12. 14. For if they which liue among vs, and ſee euerie day the workes of God for vs and in vs, will not be ruled by vs or turned to vs, they may waite for the heauier iudgement. And therefore was Philisthia more iudged then Arabia, and Syria more vexed then Ethiopia, becauſe they were on the confines of Iſraell. Then ſurely this may teach the looſe Proteſtants and vaine profeſſors among vs, what great daunger they liue in all this while; they haue heard the Goſpell and not beleeued it; the neerer they were to the truth, the more is the Lordes wrath againſt them; and the longer they haue liued in our peace and ſeene the glorious workes of God, the more ſhall bee their heauie iudgement. It were better for them that they liued in Rome, or in Barbarie, or in Tartarie, where the goſpell is not talked of, for then ſhould they be farther from danger; but now they liue with vs, eating at our tables, treading on our Land, ſtanding in our churches, cloathed with our garments, and bleſſed by our God: Oh how deere

ſhall they pay for all theſe benefits! for the Lord will iudge them that dwell neere vs; much more them that dwel with vs: he will condemne them that dwel about vs, much more them that dwell among vs. The reaſons of this doctrine are Reaſon 1. theſe: Firſt, bicauſe they ſhould be ſubiect to the church, Iſa. 60. 5. The members of the church are the true & lawfull kings of the world, & all other ought to be their ſubiects: therefore when the ſubiect rebelleth againſt his naturall prince, he is more puniſhed then a ſtranger; ſo when the neereſt neighbours of the church are moſt of all negligent, they are more endangered then other are: for when the Lord giueth moſt meanes of inſtruction, ſuch as is to liue among the godly, then he rewardeth ſuch neglect or contempt with more ſeuere puniſhment. Another reaſon: becauſe 2 they ſhould ſuccour thē in their neceſsitie, Iſa. 21. 14. but if they will taſte of their benefits, and not beleeue their ſayings or cōfort them in their ſorrowes, they are the more woorthie to be deſtroyed. The vſe: let vs neuer meddle Vſe. againſt good men, Matth. 27. 19. for their iniuries will be rewarded double vpon our heads. If thou liue with them, honour them; if thou heare of them, goe viſite them; if they teach thee, beleeue them; if they want thee, relieue them; and neuer be an enimie vnto them. The Lord ſaith, that our treading on the earth, is ſufficient to make vs without excuſe if we beleeue him not: and then ſurely it is ſufficient to condemne thoſe that liue vnder the Goſpell, and receiue not the Goſpell that they tread on our lande, ſee our churches, reade our bookes, and beleeue not our Sermons. Now thinke with thy ſelfe that haſt liued thus long in a ſtrange place, & yet knoweſt not, nor obeyeſt the Lord of that place, art thou not in danger to be arraigned for rebellion? Yes verily: and ſo are all thoſe that liue with good men, and know them not, that may haue the truth, and labour not for it; that might be ſaued, and yet will be reprobated. Be not therefore an enimie to godlines or to any member of the church: for if thou heare them not, their

words will hurt thee; if thou helpe them not, their wants will witneſſe againſt thee; and if thou oppreſſe them, the Lord himſelfe will iudge thee.
            
            
               The xl. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 13.
                  Put in your ſithes, for the haruest is ripe: come get you downe, for the wine-preſſe is full: yea, the wine-preſſe runneth ouer, for their wickedneſſe is great.
                  14.
                  O multitude, ô multitude, come into the valley of threſhing: for the daie of the Lorde is neere in the valley of threſhing.
               
               AT the length by the aſsiſtance of God we are come to the laſt part of the execution, contained vnder the allegorie of an harueſt and threſhing of corne. In the harueſt and wine-preſſe, we muſt conſider their death; and vnder the threſhing, their condemnation. For the firſt, where hee compareth their deſtruction to a harueſt, he doth but as it is vſuall in the Scriptures, both olde and newe, to ſet foorth a maſſacre of men, by cutting downe of corne; the which is applied to the latter iudgement in the Reuelation, onely heere is mention made of ſithes, but there the angels are ſaide to reape with ſickles, the matter is all one, for as one ſaide; Non multum refert an vno grandi fluctu, an paulatim aqua ſubrepente, nauis ſubmergatur: It commeth all to one thing to haue a ſhippe drowned either with one great waue, or by a leake; and it is no matter whether a mā be killed with a ſword or a rapier: ſo the iudgement is alike both with the ſickle and with the ſythe. By the allegorie both of the harueſt and of the wine-preſſe, wherein there is not a ſtalke but it is cut, nor a grape but it is preſſed out, we may note that not one ſhall eſcape the iudgement of God, Amos 9. 2. The which thing the

Lorde by this plaine ſimilitude woulde haue vs obſerue, that euery day wee might ſee our miſerie, and learne to mitigate the wrath of God towarde vs. Neither is the eſtate of the wicked more tolerable, bicauſe it ſeemeth they are heere compared to corne, for it is but the woorſt and baſeſt corne, ſuch as is cut with the ſythe, not reaped with a ſickle: For although they are corne, yet they are not for the Lordes ſpending. Dauid ſaith they lie like ſheepe in hell: are they the better in hell bicauſe they are compared to ſheepe? no verily; no more are they the happier bicauſe they are reſembled to corn. The reaſon of this Reaſon. vniuerſall iudgement is, becauſe the Lorde will bring euery action whether it be good or bad vnto iudgement, Eccl. 12. 14. If he will bring euery action, then much more euerie man, for euery man hath a thouſand actions, all which ſhall be ſo adiudged, as we ſhall know the particular cenſure of God vpon euery one of them. Seeing therefore Vſe. there is not one man in the worlde but hee muſt come to iudgement; as there is not one ſtalke in a corne-fielde but it muſt be cut downe; and as the apoſtle ſaith, 2. Cor. 5. 10. that wee muſt euery one appeere before the iudgement ſeate of God: then let vs liue in the continuall expectation thereof. A man that is wrongfully impriſoned thinketh it long till the iudge come, who will ſet him at libertie becauſe he knoweth his iniurie: in like ſort, a man that is a chriſtian is a priſoner in this worlde, hauing his fleſh for his gaole, his ſinnes for his irons, the diuels for his keepers, and Chriſt his Sauiour for his iudge; thinketh long till his iudge come and ſet him at libertie, and therefore deſireth euery day to come into the preſence of God. A iudgement we muſt all vndergo; therefore they are happy men that deſire the ſame; let not any be ſo wilfull as to wiſh there were none, for they which cannot like iudgement, doe denie iuſtice, and they which denie iuſtice ſhall certainely feele it. Appeere before the Lorde often with thy praiers, that hee may knowe thee at the generall iudgement.

Be not as vnwilling to come before him, as a theefe that careth not for the face of the iudge; but as Ioſeph thought long till hee ſawe his father Iacob, after he knew hee was aliue; ſo doe thou thinke euerie daie manie yeeres, till thou haue ſeene the Lorde in his kingdome. Againe, when in the ſecond place he mentioneth the wine preſſe, ſaying, it runneth ouer, and their wickedneſſe is great: he thereby noteth the qualitie of ſinne, namely, if God had not ſet a meaſure thereof, it would growe immeaſurable; for as the meaſure of the wine preſſe neuer ſtaieth till it bee full, and when it is full, it ceaſeth not till it runne ouer; ſo will the ſinnes of men neuer ceaſe til they exceede meaſure, Ier. 9. 3. whereby we may ſee a wonderfull worke Sinne will neuer ceaſe growing. of God, for there is not one man liuing but he hath in him the ſeede and ſpawne of all ſinne: now it is wonderfull that euery one groweth not, and that any man liuing ſhould haue in him any little drop of goodneſſe. We may alſo lament our corrupt and ſinfull eſtate, that during the time of our life we are ſubiect to all ſinne: for there is no ſubiect ſo true, but if God let him fall he will become a traitor; no woman ſo honeſt, but ſhe may become an adultereſſe; no man ſo righteous, but he may become a theefe; and to conclude, there is not any ſo glorious, but hee may be as infamous; for as we are ſubiect to all ſickneſſes, ſo are we to all ſinnes. O miſerable men that wee are, who ſhall deliuer vs from theſe bodies of ſinne! it is borne with vs, it groweth with vs, it liueth with vs, and it dieth with vs, it is the death of it ſelfe, and the death of vs; the death of it ſelfe by killing vs; and the death of vs by exceeding meaſure: for as the ſonnes of Zeruiah were too ſtrong for Dauid, although he was king; ſo our ſinnes are too ſtrong for vs, although we ſhoulde rule them. We were happy men if our ſins were not, or if they were not ſo immeſurable. They will com at the firſt to be our ſlaues, as the Philiſtines; but in the end they will be our lords, as they would be to Iſraell. Oh, woulde God we might conquer them and driue them out

of our ſoules, as they expelled the Philiſtines out of Ieruſalem! The reaſon is; becauſe the power of ſathan which Reaſon 1. is the efficient cauſe of ſinne, doth encreaſe to deceiue vs, 2. Theſſ. 2. 9 11. The diuell neuer ceaſeth to ſuggeſt new temptations, and wee are ſeldome able to reſiſt them: therefore he neuer is idle, but euer proceedeth farther and farther, till he haue plunged vs ouer the eares in ſinne, that ſo he might drowne vs. When he made Peter denie Chriſt once, then hee made him to denie him thriſe; ſo when he hath perſwaded vs a little to follow the waies of our owne hearts, then he neuer giueth ouer till hee haue made vs to denie him often: ſo that this encreaſing in ſinne muſt bee attributed to the diuell; for in truth the diuell ſhall be puniſhed for the ſinnes of the whole worlde, and yet euerie wicked man ſhall be puniſhed for his owne. Let vs learne Vſe 1. then that there is a meaſure appointed to receiue our ſinnes, and ifwe ceaſe not till it bee full, we cannot ceaſe till it runne ouer; and if we ſuffer it to runne ouer, wee cannot hinder it from ouerrunning vs. There is none that woulde bee willing to ſell his inheritance to fill a theeues purſe with golde: Therefore let not any of vs be ſo ſimple as to fill the diuels meaſure full of our ſinnes, which wee buie by ſelling away our ſoules. Oh, that we were as hard to the diuell when he craueth for a ſinne, as we are to a begger when he crieth for an almes! we thinke well, if we beſtowe a pennie in a weeke vpon ſuch a perſon, and wee can hardly be drawen in for more: but ſinne after ſinne we commit, as faſt as haile commeth from the cloudes. Let vs then emptie the meaſure of our ſinne, and not fill it, and be as vnwilling to caſt one follie into the diuels hande, as manie are to caſt one farthing into the poore mans boxe. Let vs reſiſt the temptations of ſinne, as Iacob reſiſted the voice of his ſonnes perſwading him to ſuffer his little Beniamin to goe with them into Egypt; and let vs neuer yeeld vnto him: let vs not be ouercome, rather let vs die. For their iniquitie is great. Theſe wordes contayne the

reaſon of their iudgement, namely becauſe of their ſinnes; for in truth if men did neuer ſinne, they ſhould neuer be iudged: and therefore ſeeing euery one that is borne hath ſinned, euery one borne ſhall anſwere for their ſinne at iudgement. But when he ſaith, it is great: hee teacheth vs that euery man ſhall be puniſhed according to the quantitie Such as is our ſinne ſhall be our paine. of his ſinne, Luc. 12. 47. Many ſinnes many ſtripes, great ſinnes great iudgement: As in ciuill politicall gouernment there is a difference; ſo alſo is there in the heauenly regiment; for euery one ſhall bee puniſhed according to the meaſure of his ſinnes. Therefore now take occaſion to ſtay the heate of thy ſinnes, ſeeing many pleaſures, many ioyes, many thefts, many adulteries, many othes, many lies, and many wicked actions ſhall bring vnto thee manifold indignation. Moſes would not ſuffer any of Iſrael to ſacrifice in Egypt, becauſe the Egyptians would ſlay them: if feare of death made them ceaſe ſacrificing to God, then let feare of death make thee ceaſe to ſinne againſt God. Some men will not eate the beſt meates, although they loue them well, becauſe their price is too coſtly: oh that we could as willingly abſtaine from ſinne, which we loue too well, becauſe it will coſt ſo deerely! for one howers pleaſure will bring a whole worlds paine. The firſt reaſon: becauſe God hath ordained his church to haue Reaſon 1. ſeuerall kindes of puniſhment, Matt. 18. whereby he teacheth that he will obſerue the ſame order in the worlde to come, to caſt out obſtinate offenders into the pit that is prepared for heathens and hypocrites; for all the actions in the church militant, do leade vs to the like in the church triumphant. Secondly, another reaſon is, or elſe the greateſt wretch of the worlde were in no woorſe caſe then the 2 new-borne babe: but this cannot be; for then were there not degrees of the Lords iuſtice, as there are in his mercie. Let vs learne to make this vſe thereof: ſeeing the Lorde woulde haue a man that had ſtolen any goodes, or taken wrongfully from any man, to reſtore it fowerfolde: then

let vs learne by the greatneſſe of our ſinnes to aggrauate our ſorrowes; for ſurely, if we ſtill remaine impenitent in the church of God, his wrath will in the end ouertake vs as it did Ioab, who was ſlaine at the hornes of the altar. For the ſlaughter of the Gibeonites which Saul made vniuſtly, God after his death cauſed ſeuen of his poſteritie to bee hanged, becauſe Saul had not pacified the matter himſelfe. Be carefull therefore to repent thy ſinnes with ſorrow, and to recompence them with obedience, leaſt thy deſarts fall vpon thy poſteritie: otherwiſe thy delight will bee too deere, and the fruites of thy pleaſure will bee more bitter then wormwood. Had Iudas knowen when hee was with Chriſt at ſupper that which now he feeleth, all the prieſtes of Iewrie and al the money in their ſeueral treaſuries, could neuer haue perſwaded him to that treaſon: Trie not the aduenture of thy ſinnes; for hell is hotter then the fornace of Babylon, and they which once come in it, can neuer come out againe. Learne alſo to knowe the waight of 2 euery one of thy ſinnes, that thou maieſt eaſily ſee they are odious to God, infamous to men, and dangerous to thy ſoule: how the diuell hatcheth them, the fleſh nurſeth them, the worlde maintaineth them, and God abhorreth them. Looke I ſay, vnto their waight; for they are a burden too heauie for thee to beare: if thou keepe them, they will eate thee; if thou ſtriue with them, they wil weary thee; if thou beare them, they will hurt thee; if thou forſake them, they will follow thee; and if thou knowe them, they will feare thee: therefore learne to meaſure them, and number them, and waigh them, that thou maieſt emptie and leſſen, and caſt them downe, neuer to take them vp againe.
               
                  O multitude. In this verſe is contained the ſeconde ſimilitude, Verſ. 14. whereby their deſtruction is decyphered. For after harueſt commeth threſhing: and in my opinion in the former verſe is ſet downe their firſt death; and in this verſe their ſecond death, by reaſon of the reſemblance betwixt

the paines of hell, and the action of threſhing. Firſt, the ſtroke of the threſher ſeemeth to threaten the corne to ſtrike it in peeces, but yet it doth not ſo; a man woulde thinke that the paines of hell woulde make an end of them that ſuffer them, but yet they abide them: Secondly threſhing followeth the cutting of the corne; and ſo hell followeth the death of the body. Thirdly, threſhing is a continuall ſtriking of one ſheafe; and ſo hell is a continuall tormenting of one ſoule: for paine followeth paine, as ſtroke followeth ſtroke. But certaine it is a deſtruction is heere ſignified, and that a more ſharpe and ſeuere one then was noted in the former verſe: wherefore he calleth vnto them mournefullie; O multitude, ô multitude: The which phraſe of ſpeech teacheth vs, that God is verie ſorie God is ſorrie to deſtroy vs. to execute his wrath vpon the wicked; for ſo our Sauiour expreſſed his griefe for Ieruſalem, Luk. 13. 34. when hee cried out, O Ieruſalem, Ieruſalem! howe often woulde I haue gathered thee, &c. The which thing putteth vs in minde of the infinite loue of God, whereby hee woulde pittie our loſſe, reuoke his ſentence, ſilence his wrath, and ſaue vs from heauie deſtruction. But ſuch is our nature, as is the nature of children in their birth, which thinke not vpon the paines of their mothers in trauaile; although they die in extremitie, yet they forget them when they bee olde: and ſo doe we both the anger and the loue of God, we regarde not his mercies, nor his iudgements, nor his goſpell, nor his teares, nor the bloud of our Sauiour The reaſons of this doctrine: Firſt, in regard of vs, becauſe we knowe Reaſon 1. not the things that belong to our peace, Luke 17. 42. So wretched is the eſtate of men, that they are not able to diſcerne when God bleſſeth them or curſeth them: when hee wiſheth them well, and when he wouldeth them euill. This is cleerer then the ſunne, for Chriſt and his Goſpell being offered to the worlde, and preached to euery degree of men; you ſhall ſee nothing more vilely eſteemed, or baſely regarded, inſomuch as wee may ſay, that the men of

our time doe not knowe the thinges that belong to their peace. For if the Lorde threaten them, then they ſpurne; if he bleſſe them, then they are wanton; if he puniſh them, then they murmure; if hee honour them, then they are proude; and euerie one thinketh that the Goſpell ſerueth but for a time, and they ſhall doe as well without it, as with it. They knowe not that nowe is their viſitation, or that nowe they worke their death, or life; or that nowe they are married to God or the diuell: Surely, if men beleeue not the Goſpell, and walke not thereafter, they are ſathans bond-ſlaues, although their wealth be as great as Salomons; and their authoritie as great Hamans: but if they ioyfullie embrace it in the miniſterie of the worde, then are they the wife of the lambe, and the elected heires of grace. Another reaſon; ſecondly in regard of God, becauſe hee 2 rather willeth repentance then vengeance; of this wee haue often ſpoken. Let vs make this vſe: Firſt, when we Vſe 1. ſee the froward and wicked diſpoſition of the world, that will not bee reclaimed by any warning, or any mercy of God: let vs doe as Chriſt doth for the Phariſies, Marke 3. 5. Mourne for the hardneſſe of their heartes. It is the cuſtome of ſome vaine profeſſours, (for ſo I may terme them) to raile odiouſly at them that will not bee ruled by their wordes: and ſo it is of ſome cholericke and vnwiſe preachers, who will take libertie in their pulpits rather to reuile men then to reclaime them, except at the firſt they come and lay their hands vnder their feete; in the one it is fooliſh zeale, in the other vaine folly. Learne therefore by our Sauiour how to be affected when thy people, or thy children, or thy ſeruants, or thy friends, or thy neighbours, will not bee gouerned by thy inſtruction, namely, to mourne for their hardnes of hart; and no maruell, for thou ſeeſt God to mourne for them: when thy words can no longer preuaile, then let teares; and if they will not be mooued by warning, let them be by mourning. Hardnes of hart is a ſickenes ſent by God, and it lyeth not

in the power of man to cure the ſame: therefore caſt not away a man when he is ſicke, not a ſoule when it is hard; but let ſorrow and prayer ſpeake for it to God when there is no helpe in mans phiſicke. Another vſe: ſeeing God is vnwilling, and therefore mourneth for our deſtruction, 
                     
                        •
                     
                   and ſo do all good men alſo: oh let vs not deſpiſe and neglect all their ſorrowes, and cares, and teares which they powre foorth for vs! it is vngodlines not to regard the Goſpell, but it is vnnatural not to regard the ſorrowful. In heauen is nothing but ioy, oh wretches that wee ſhould make the Lord ſorrowful for vs! in the church there is al ſorrow; oh vnkinde and pitileſſe men that we ſhould encreaſe their ſorrow, and mourning, and teares, and adde to their affliction! but that which is worſt of all, wee are hardened and will not care for their cries. Be mooued to repentance, and conuerſion, and holines, and religion, for God and men do mourne for thy rebellion: let their teares make thee weep in this life, or elſe they will make thee roare in another life. Secondly, we may obſerue in this verſe, when hee calleth vpon the multitude to come to deſtruction, that God careth no more for a multitude, then for one man, and will as eaſily caſt many into hell as one ſoule, as we may ſee in the drowning of the old world, Gen. 7. 21. The reaſon: becauſe all are but fleſh, Gen. 6. 3. that is but vile, made of earth; but weake, wanting ſtrength; and abhominable, corrupted with ſinne. Now what ſhould the Lord ſtriue and ſtand with earth, or weaknes, or ſinne, he hath not an angell, but it is ſtronger then a world: and therefore a multitude are as eaſily giuen to damnation as one or two. Let vs learne not to doe euill after the example of a multitude, Exod. 23. 2. Although many be blaſphemers, or Atheiſts, or heathens, or papiſts, or whooremongers, or neglecters of the Goſpell, deſpiſers of preachers, and ſuch like: yet bee not thou ſo, for it is no eaſe to haue company to hell.
               Againe, when he calleth them to come into the valley of threſhing, meaning the place of wrath, vſing no other 
                     
                        •
                     
                  
                  
meanes to draw them thither but his call: we may note, that the onely word of God ſhal bring men to iudgement, Pſalm. 50. 1, 2, 3. and the reaſon is, becauſe he is ſtrong that giueth the word, Ierem. 30, 7. Oh therefore that the ſame word might ſtirre vs vp to ſaluation, which ſhall prepare vs to condemnation and iudgement, 2. Theſſ. 3. 1. For verily if it be ſo powerfull as to bring all the world in one companie togither, and to raiſe the dead out of their graues, and make liuing men out of the duſt of the earth: in whom I beſeech you is the fault? that it gathereth not vs to heare it when the Lord ſpeaketh in the congregation, and rayſeth vs not vp to the life of righteouſnes: ſurely as the Lordes hand is not ſhortened; ſo his word is not weakened.
            
            
               The xlj. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 15.
                  The ſunne and the moone ſhall be darkened, and the ſtarres ſhall withdraw their light.
                  16
                  The Lord alſo ſhall roare out of Zion, and vtter his voice from Ieruſalem: and the heauens and earth ſhall ſhake: but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the ſtrength of the children of Iſrael.
               
               AS in the former chapter, when the deſtruction and calamities of the Lords owne people the Iewes, were threatened, the heauens were ſaid to be couered with darkneſſe; ſo now, when the enemies ſhall bee brought to iudgement, the like terrors, and feare, and darkneſſe, and wonders ſhall be wrought to their aſtoniſhment: ſo that the prophet to the ende of this chapter handeleth theſe two things; firſt, the fearefull tokens of the enemies deſtruction in theſe verſes: and ſecondly, he concludeth with ſweete comforts to the godly. Concerning the darkening of the ſunne and moone and ſtarres, wee haue already ſpoken in the former chapter, where we told

you; firſt, that the darkening of theſe lights did teach vs, that no creatures are able to keepe their places when the Lord is angrie, Iſa. 13. 9, 10. becauſe they themſelues haue a naturall feare of corruption, Iob. 15. 15. Secondly, wee ſhewed you, how they waite vpon God to ſhine when he ſmileth, and to frowne when he chideth, teaching vs to doe the like. Againe, by vttering of his voice we ſhewed you that he meant thunder; and therefore when he ſaith, that he will vtter his voice out of Zion, and roare out of Ieruſalem at the ouerthrowe of his enemies: he thereby teacheth vs, that all that liue in the church of GOD muſt make account to heare and ſee many fearefull ſignes Fearefull things in the church. and wonders, Pſal. 48. 5, 6, 7. for in the church God manifeſteth his wrath againſt others and againſt it; he ſheweth, that he is terrible and will be feared: therefore we heare the thunders, when other feele the blowes; wee ſee the miracles, when other ſmart for their operation; wee are taught by others harmes, and wee are terrified by other mens deſtructions. Therefore none can liue in the church proudly, but the heauens will diſmay him; or prophanely, but ſignes and wonders will admoniſh him; or wickedly, but the word of God will reprooue him; or ignorantly, but the ſhaking, and quaking, and troubling, and darkening of the world inſtruct him. Therefore the church is well called the kingdome of feare; for there is feare of God, and feare of trouble, and feare of damnation: feare of God, wrought by worde and woonders; feare of trouble, leaſt violence ſhould ouerthrowe all religion; and feare of damnation, leaſt the diuels kingdome ſhould be enlarged: and ſurely we were better feare in this place, then bee ſecure in another; as the godly Iewes which had rather fight vpon the wals of Ieruſalem, then ſuffer all quietneſſe in Babylon. But I haue followed all this more effectually in another place. But the Lord will be the hope. When hee had tolde them that hee would roare out theſe deſtructions in Ieruſalem, leaſt they ſhould feare that a new calamitie was comming

vpon them: He telleth them that he will bee their hope; that is, they ſhall hope in him, and he will be their ſtrength to deliuer them from al his wrath and vengeance. Whereby wee may ſee that by the fearefull ſignes and woonders which he worketh in his church, he teacheth vs to hope in him more aſſuredly, Ierem. 30. 5. 11. So that nowe I might Woonders make good men to hope in God. thus reaſon with al my brethren: We haue had many fearfull and extraordinarie thunders; manie terrible flaſhes of lightening, which haue killed men, and burned houſes; manie woonderfull apparitions in the ayre, as fire and bloode, and light and darkeneſſe, and the viſions of armed men; many comets or blazing ſtarres; beſide many other: yet hath the Church ſtoode, the Goſpell beene preached, our lande quieted, our prince preſerued; yea God is ſtill our God, and wee are ſtill his people. Therefore let vs hope in him more aſſuredly. Paul hauing beene once ſtoned, & raiſed vp againe, feared the violence of that death neuer afterwarde; and ſo ſeeing we haue often ſuffered theſe things, and neuer yet periſhed in them, let God be our hope for euermore. Conſider howe he ſaued ſome in the fire; ſome in the dens of lions; ſome in ſhipwracke on the ſea; and ſome being taken vp aboue the cloudes, yet returned without all hurt: Euen ſo will he doe vnto vs; no quaking of the earth, or breaking of the cloudes, or darkning of the day, or changing of the ayre, ſhall change our mindes from truſting in our God. When Sinai ſhooke and burned like a worlde on fire, not one of the people were hurt by it; but they were prepared to a more reuerend receiuing of the law: and ſo let theſe wonders and fires prepare vs to the like, that our proude natures may bee humbled by them, our ſecure liues may bee wakened, our little feare of ſinne may be encreaſed, and our daily expectation of iudgement may be renued; that when the Lord ſhall come, he may finde vs preaching or praying, or mourning, or faſting, or watching, or hearing, or reading, or repenting and readie for his kingdome:

Oh, bleſſed are they that are in ſuch a caſe, and bleſſed are they whoſe hope is in the Lorde. The firſt reaſon: bicauſe Reaſon 1. all the endes of the worlde may ſee the ſaluation of our God, Eſay 52. 10. For the godly which are ſcattered heere and there thorough all the worlde will ſpread abroad the ſame, that euerie one might learne it. Another reaſon; becauſe in the middeſt of all terrors, yet is God in the church, 2 
                  Pſal. 50. 2. and his beautie is then greateſt, when he ſhineth in darknes, and dwelleth in fire, and ruleth in woonders, & is feared in his ſignes. Let vs learne by theſe thinges to encreaſe our faith, and confidence in the Lorde, that we may Vſe. ſaie with Dauid, Though the earth bee remooued, yet we will not feare There is a baſe kind of truſt or confidence which men retaine and content themſelues withall, when as they growe not forwarde into a moſt Chriſtian reſolution, not caring for riches, which are but vanitie; or for health which is but weakeneſſe; or for life, which is but temporall; or for death which ſhall bring immortality. This confidence maketh a man like to Chriſt, who cared not for the croſſe, bicauſe God was his father, and in like ſort ſhall not we care for the miſeries of the worlde, if (as we ſay) we care not for the world. Let vs not care for that which wee cannot keepe, I meane our life; much leſſe let vs ſinne to keepe it by vnlawful means, for then we do but hire a lion to watch our lambes, which in the ende will deſtroy them all. Wee can ſaie in our health, that wee can comfort the ſicke; but being in ſickneſſe, wee can receiue none our ſelues: ſo there be many that make great ſhewe of faith, and confidence in theſe times of health and peace, and quietneſſe, as if they were readie to die for God; but alas, if the Lorde frowne vpon them but a little, their faith fadeth like mowen graſſe, and they are at their wits ende. Therefore come into the cloſet and ſtorehouſe of thy ſoule, and ſee that thy faith be as good as thy face, and that it will as well abide the burning furnace, as the warme ſunne, and trie whether it will abide the torments of death, and not

be killed: thy faith if it be true muſt be as immortall as thy ſoule, that it may ſtande in all ſtormes; ſwimme in all ſeas; abide in all dangers; liue in all deathes; and raigne in all glorie.
               
                  So you ſhall know that I am the Lord your God dwelling in 
                  Verſ. 17 
                  Zion, my holy mountaine: then ſhall Ieruſalem be holy, and no ſtrangers ſhall goe through her any more. Now the Prophet drawing to a concluſion of his Sermons, ſhutteth them vp with many ſweete promiſes of the Lords fauour; as firſt of all his preſence, then his bountie: his preſence in this verſe, which ſhall ſanctifie them and keepe them from enimies. Concerning the former part of this verſe where the Prophet ſaith, they ſhall know him to be their God dwelling in Zion; ſufficient hath beene alreadie ſpoken, and I will not ſtand any longer thereon, but referre you to the former chapter. This therefore his promiſe vnto Ieruſalem, that it ſhould be holy, teacheth vs the perfection or greateſt honour of the church, namely Holines, Epheſ. 1. 4. when Holines is the perfection of the church. the Lord promiſeth that his church ſhould bee holy: hee thereby teacheth vs that all gifts and goodnes, and mercy, and glorie, and dignitie of the church, proceedeth from this that ſhe is holy; neither can the Lord in this world beſtow any greater benefit vpon his church, then hir ſanctication. This Holines conſiſteth not in learning, nor in ſtudying, nor in knowledge, nor in propheſie, nor in miracles, nor in church-offices, but in a good life and in all them; ſo that a holy man is a perfect chriſtian. Now verily when the Lord promiſeth Ieruſalem to be Holy, he giueth hir all things, for he giueth hir grace to be righteous, his fauour to be honorable, and his benefits to be glorious: Without holynes men are heathens, but with it they are chriſtians; without it they cannot enioy the earth, but with it they may enioy the heauens; without it they are ſathans ſlaues, but with it they are the Lords ſonnes: and to conclude, Holines is the will of God, the ende of our redemption, the fruit of the Spirit, the cloathing of our ſoules, the ioy of the godly,

and the perfection of the church. By Holynes, landes are eſtabliſhed, euil is baniſhed, kings thrones are maintained, and it maketh a nation dwell without danger; no enimie can touch them, no famine can diſmay them, no miſery can ouerthrow them, becauſe they be holy: and ſo may euery mans ſoule by Holynes driue away the diuell, continue in the church, and obtaine the kingdome of heauen. The Reaſon 1. firſt reaſon: becauſe in nothing do we reſemble God more then in holines, Exod. 22. 23. who is only holy, Reuel. 15. 4. Holines and righteouſnes was the image wherein God created vs, and therefore he cauſed to bee wrote vpon the breaſt of the high Prieſts roabes, Holines to the Lord. Contrarie vnto this holines, is prophaneſſe, when men abuſe whatſoeuer is appointed to be holy; whereby I ſee that they are verie iuſtly termed prophane men, who haue no maner of ſhew of holines. God his fearefull name which is holy they blaſpheme; the ſabbaoths which are holy, they prophane; religion which is holy, they contemne; the congregation which is holy, they perſecute; praiers which are holy, they ſeldome vſe; and to be briefe, al the lawes of God which are holy, they violate: theſe are carnall men; theſe are miſerable men; theſe are ſubiect to all abhominations. So that as there is no bleſsing, but it belongeth to the holy; ſo there is no curſe but it belongeth to the prophane. Another reaſon is: becauſe holynes is freed from 2 ſin & hell, Iſa. 11. 8, 9. now to be freed from ſin, is the greateſt bleſsing in this world; & to be freed frō hel, is the greateſt bleſsing in the world to come: & indeed one followeth another; for whoſoeuer is freed from ſin, is alſo freed from hell. But there are many that thinke it a great paine vnto them to be free from ſin, becauſe they cannot endure to be free from the meanes of ſinning: yet let vs know that this is, or ought to be our prayer that wee may once be freed from committing of ſinne; that whereas we haue a minde to idolatrie or Poperie, it may be turned from it; or if we be inclined to ſwearing, we may fall to leaue it and hate it;

and if we be addicted to be enuious, we may be charitable; or to luſts, we may be chaſte; or to falſhood, we may bee true; or to couetouſnes, we may be liberall; or ignorance of the ſcriptures, we may be learned in them; and finally if to any vaine or vnlawfull thing, we may no more deſire it, then children do the rod: oh happy were we if we were thus cleanſed from ſinne, that we might be thus ſanctified. Let vs learne that exhortation of the Apoſtle, 1. Pet. 1. Vſe 1. 15, 16. That ſeeing God which hath called vs is holie, ſo let vs bee holie, that wee may purge our ſelues from all filthineſſe of the fleſh and ſpirite. And ſurely this reaſon of the Apoſtle, is very effectuall to mooue vs vnto holineſſe, when hee telleth vs that God which called vs is holie. Therefore looke to thy ſelfe, that heareſt the Goſpell preached, and leadeſt a lewde and prophane life; for I tell thee that this very call of God whereby thou art ſeuered from Iewes and Turks, ſhall at the latter day tell thee of thy euill, which wouldeſt not walke in holineſſe, although God which called thee were holie. The firſt image of God created in thee is decaied, and it can neuer be repaired but by holineſſe: wouldeſt thou be glorified, thou muſt firſt be ſanctified: thy bodie muſt be holy, abſtaining from pleaſure; thy ſoule muſt be holy, not yeelding to temptation; thy affections muſt be holy, not corrupted with vanitie; and thy life muſt be holy, not drowned in ſinne. Oh be holy as God is holy; it is a part of his eſſence, ſo let it be of thine; it is neuer parted from him, ſo let it be euer with thee; it is alway found in him, ſo let it be alway found in thee: God is holy in the earth; ſo be thou; he is holy in the church, ſo be thou; he is holy in the day, ſo be thou; he is holy in the night, be thou ſo alſo; and he is holy in heauen, oh that we may be ſo! his iudgements are holy, ſo let thine be; his words are holy, ſo ought thine to be; and his works are holy, ſo let thine be. Oh that we could be holy, as he is holy; that we might be perfect, as he is perfect; holy without ſinne, holy without want, holy

without loue: without ſinne, that they were pardoned; without want, that all graces might be ſupplied; and without loue, that life, and health, and world, and pleaſure, and lands may giue place to holineſſe; for holy people are redeemed of the Lorde, but the wicked and prophane are damned to hell. Another vſe is, that now we are exhorted 2 to holineſſe, let vs learne how to bee holy, which Iohn teacheth vs 1. Ioh. 3. 2, 5. which is firſt by expectation of Chriſts comming: ſecondly, by hoping for our glorification: and thirdly, by purging our ſelues; in a word this is all, We are made holy by regeneration and ſanctification; for a new minde is a holy minde, as a new life is a holy life. So then, wouldeſt thou be holy, the word muſt beget thee in the wombe of the church; and the blood of Chriſt muſt purge thee in the tabernacle of thy fleſh: & this is the way to make a ſaint firſt by the word, thē by the blood of Chriſt; and all of this muſt bee done in this life: for they doe but mocke and delude the world, which canonize ſaints after they be dead, except they can bring them to life againe. So then a pure life maketh not a ſaint, that is, holy, without a new minde; nor another minde without a cleane life. Some are of opinion, that there are no ſaints but in the kingdome of heauen: but they are eaſily confuted by the ſcripture, which calleth the godly at Corinth, at Epheſus, at Coloſſa, and many other places, by the name of ſaints. But they ſay we do, all them ſaints which the ſcripture calleth holy men: and I pray what difference is there betwixt a ſaint and a holy man? ſurely none at all: but euery holy man is a ſaint, in all toongs that euer I learned. But if they vnderſtand ſaints to be the ſoules of godly men in heauen, then I ſay that in all good diuinitie and ſound writers, there are none ſuch ſpoken of, I meane, that the bleſſed ſoules in heauen are onely called ſaints. To conclude, heare the goſpell, beleeue the promiſes, waite for the appeering of our Sauiour, and take but a drop of his blood to purge thy ſoule and life, and thou ſhalt bee holy, thou

ſhalt be a ſaint: otherwiſe, thy life lead in long iniquitie ſhall ende in euerlaſting woe, paine, and miſerie.
               
                  And no ſtrangers. In theſe words he telleth them one benefit of his preſence and their ſanctification or holynes, which is this, that no ſtrangers ſhall any more go thorough Iſraell: meaning, that they ſhould neuer be ouercome by any enimies; otherwiſe to harbour ſtrangers is the commandement of God. But by theſe wordes we are taught, that onely religion maketh a common-wealth or kingdome Religion only maketh a kingdome happie. to bee peaceable and happie, 1. Sam. 12. 14, 15. Although humane policie and worldly wiſedome do much in the gouernment of any nation: yet there is not any thing that ſo eſtabliſheth a people and maketh them happie as religion, which is the wiſedome and written word of God. Why was not Ahabs gouernment as good as Dauids, or Ieroboams a moſt politike king as good as Salomons? Surely becauſe the one was ſtabliſhed in the law of God, and the other was mingled with filthie idolatrie. Let all the Polititians of the world, and curſed Machiuillian Atheiſts murmur what they dare into the eares of kings and great perſons, that they muſt ſometime regard Stratagems contrary to the Scriptures, or elſe thrones cannot ſtand: yet they are all deceiued, for no policie nor counſell can ſtande againſt the Almightie. Oppreſsion, breach of promiſe, toleration of malefactors, inſinuations, examinations, extortions, creations of offices, and all the like policies cannot ſtand without religion: for there was neuer yet any Polititian, but he ended his life in great ſorrow, as did Achitophel: I meane ſuch as are not ruled by the ſcriptures. We haue reade many policies of wicked men, as of Pharaoh, to keepe the Iſraelites in Egypt; of the Philiſtims, to keepe them without weapons; of Ieroboam, to keepe them from Ieruſalem; of the kings of Aſſyria, to keepe them from returning home againe; of Herod, to kill our Sauiour Chriſt, but what gained they all by their policie
                     •
                   ſurely nothing, but their owne ſorrow and death: for as Dauid ſaith,

                  The Lord intrappeth the wicked in the net that he laid for other, Pſalm. 9. The reaſons of this doctrine are theſe: Firſt, becauſe for ſinne God diſſolueth kingdomes, Prouerb. 28. 2. Reaſon 1. and therefore for religion he eſtabliſheth them: for there is not any thing ſo contrarie to ſinne, as is the Lords worſhip, I meane religion; for all other humane vertues, are rather in the compaſſe of ſinne, then in the ſhadow of true godlineſſe. Neither yet are all policies ſo condemned, as it is vtterly vnlawfull to vſe any; for ſome are godlie and may bee practiſed, as wee may ſee in Ioſeph with his brethren, who was a great courtier, and yet vſed no vnlawfull extremitie of his authoritie: ſo wee may reade of Moſes that ſent ſpies into the land of Canaan; of the Iſraelites fighting with the Beniamites, and of Gedeon when he ſlew ſo many of the Ephramites whom he found out by pronuntiation of the word Shibboleth: but if policie bee grounded vpon any ſinne, or accompanied with any vnlawfull thing, then better abide the hazard, than that wee ſhould do euill that good may come of it. Another reaſon: becauſe, Kings raigne by the Lord, and by him Princes beare rule. Now we muſt not thinke that he fauoureth or 2 accounteth any nation bleſſed without his worſhip, for he regardeth not a ſoule that feareth him not. For this cauſe he droue Nebuchadnezzar from the throne to the heards of cattle, that he might teach him, that his throne depended vpon him. Now ſhall we ſay that God is, where there is no God accounted; or if accounted, yet not worſhipped; or if externally worſhipped, yet not ſincerely; where euery fancie of a worldly wiſe man is preferred before that truth, which is ſealed with the Lords blood. I graunt that Iethro a heathen gaue Moſes counſell how to behaue himſelfe in his gouernment, but GOD approoued it: and ſo let euerie man ſpeake for the good gouernment of a nation; but let the word of GOD gouerne their ſayings. The vſes: firſt, let vs take that counſell of the wiſeſt king that euer was, Prou. 25. 5. Take away the wicked from the

king, and his throne ſhall be eſtabliſhed in righteouſneſſe. If the wicked be remooued, wicked counſell will be ſilenced; and if wicked counſell be ſilenced, then will the princes throne bee eſtabliſhed in righteouſneſſe. Dauid would not haue them to be his courtiers that ſlew Iſhboſeth his enemie, and no more woulde he haue any vaine perſons or liers to bee his ſeruants, Pſalm. 101. 5, 6. for as Gedeons armie was moſt honorable when he had ſent away all daſtardes and fearful ſoldiers (although it was ſmall) ſo a kings court is moſt glorious, when all wicked are baniſhed from it, although very fewe be left. Multitudes are verie dangerous, & many men many wicked men: Our Sauiour Chriſt had but twelue, and yet one of them was a traytour, and ſo it is moſt likely there is not any great company liuing in court or countrey, but there are ſome wicked among them. Although wicked men may bee good for the common wealth, yet they cannot eſtabliſh the kings throne in righteouſneſſe: therefore I woulde that all the princes of the world would ſay with Dauid, Pſal. 119. Awaie from me yee wicked, for I will keepe the commandements of my God. Another vſe: let vs pray for kings and kingdomes, that the worde of God 2 may take place in their hearts and landes: for verilie, if it onely make them bleſſed, we ſhall be very vncharitable to make them curſed, for ſeeing God doth ſo highly delight in our praiers, that when we pray but for our owne peace, he heareth and granteth our petitions: much more will he be mercifull vnto vs when we pray for his worſhip, and for the enlarging of his kingdome. And ſurely if Paul wiſhed that king Agrippa were like himſelfe, his bonds excepted; then let vs alſo vnfainedly praie that all kinges and people were like ours, our ſinnes excepted, which are as heauie on vs, as were Pauls bondes on him.
            
            
               
               The xlij. Sermon.
               
                  
                     Verſ. 18.
                  
                  And in that day ſhall the mountaines drop downe new wine, and the hils ſhall flow with milke, and all the riuers of Iudah ſhall runne with waters, and a fountaine ſhall come foorth of the houſe of the Lorde, and water the valley of Shittim.
               
               HAuing promiſed them his preſence, nowe hee alſo granteth them his bountie, for as the barrenneſſe of the earth wrought their famine; and their famine wrought their curſe: ſo the fruitefulneſſe of the earth muſt worke their plenty; and their plenty muſt bring their ioye. Nowe then the church being deliuered, the warres quieted, the godly ſanctified, and religion or the true worſhip of God once againe eſtabliſhed, all the mountaines and hilles, and valleies and riuers flow with abundance of worldly comforts. That the mountaines ſhould drop wine, and the hilles flowe with milke, and all riuers runne with water, it is but a figuratiue or hyperbolicall ſpeech: whereby is noted the woonderfull plentie and abundance that ſhoulde come vnto them after their peace; yea, beyonde the nature of the earth, and the expectation of man. In this verſe there are theſe two thinges to bee ſpoken of: Firſt, of the plentie of victuals and foode: and ſecondly, of the fountaine that ſhoulde come out of the houſe of the Lorde; and water the valley of Shittim, which was a place in the countrey of Moab, where the Iſraelites committed fornication with the daughters of Moab, Numer. 25. 1. Firſt, in the large promiſe of ſo great plentie as theſe Iewes The peace of the church reioice the creatures of God. ſhoulde haue after the reſtitution of worldly things, wee may note, that if God giue peace to his church, then al the creatures of the worlde are the better for it, Eſa. 30. 24, 25. For and in the peace of the church, there is nothing in the worlde but are reioiced in it: The heauens are cleerer, the ſunne is lighter; the oxe is ſtronger; the ſheepe are fatter;

the riuers are fuller; the breade is ſweeter; the fieldes are fruitfuller; and the worlde is ioyfuller. So that when they grow which worſhip God, they ſhall alſo growe that ſerue man. Till Adam ſinned there was not any creature that knewe the curſe: and ſo if the church could liue without ſinne, there is not a creature but ſhould be free from euill. Wherefore when their ſinnes are purged and themſelues reconciled to God & eſtabliſhed in peace; then the herbs grow, the fields abound, the trees bloſſome, the cattle labour, the wines nouriſh, and all things proſper forgetting their curſe, as a man recouering health, forgetteth ſickenes, or as a reconciled friend forgetteth his malice. The godly therefore being in captiuitie in Babylon, had good cauſe to put away all mirth and ioy vntill they ſaw the deliuerance of the church of God. And if euer any nation in the world had the experience of this propheſie, that they could ſay their land was quiet, their earth was fruitfull, their people were many, their hils flowed with milke, their houſes with wine, their coffers with gold, their paſtures with ſheepe, their yokes with oxen, their fields with corne, their bread with ſtrength, and their health preſerued by the fruits of the earth: then may wee in England ſay that the Lords plentie hath beene among vs, becauſe his church is with vs. We haue had no warre, but we conquered; no ſicknes, but we were comforted; no famine, but we were deliuered; no danger, but we were preſerued, & no occaſion of mourning in our ſtreets, and all becauſe the ſpouſe of Chriſt dwelleth among vs. Our earth hath not loſt her ſtrength; our children haue not beene left fatherleſſe; our ſommers, haue not burned vs; our winters haue not killed vs; our harueſt hath not failed vs; our ſeaſon hath reached our barley harueſt; our barley harueſt, our wheat harueſt; our wheat harueſt, our vintage; and our vintage, our ſeaſon againe: and this is all becauſe the lambes of Chriſt feed with our flockes, the ſeruants of Chriſt ſit at our tables, the ſpouſe of Chriſt dwelleth in our houſes, and the church of

Chriſt is at peace in our lande: oh wake not the beloued of Chriſt vntill ſhe pleaſe, and let her not bee impriſoned as Ioſeph was, becauſe all things proſper vnder peace! The Reaſon 1. firſt reaſon, becauſe when the church is at peace, the people haue the Lord about them as riuers, and their iniquitie pardoned, Iſa. 33. 21. 24. The Lord is all things to the world, as he is all things to the elect in another life: What is the reaſon? that the angels hunger not, that the ſaints in heauen die not, or be not ſicke or cold, that they liue without bodies, or without meate, that they ſee without day or ſunne, that they watch, and neuer ſleepe; that they ſpeake, and neuer be wearie; and that they liue, and ſhall neuer die; but becauſe the Lords preſence is all vnto them, Reuel. 21. 22, 23, 24. and ſo is it in the church when the Lord giueth quietnes vnto it, he bringeth all ioy, and peace, and comfort, and glorie, and plentie; that not onely men, but his dumbe and ſenceleſſe creatures may reioyce in them. Then it followeth that the peaceable eſtate of the church in this life, is little inferiour to the ioy of another life. In the other life they haue no want, no more haue we; there they haue no ſorrow, no more is heere; there is no feare of enimies, no more is here; there they take no care for life, no more doe they here; there they haue immortalitie, heere they bee aſſured of it, onely death hindereth: there they worſhip God continually, ſo they do here, only naturall infirmitie letteth: and to conclude, there they haue God, and ſo haue we here. Oh, who would not liue in the church, that he may haue a heauen in this world? Secondly, another reaſon: the angels of heauen reioyce at it, and therefore 2 much more men and creatures of the earth: for when Chriſt was borne, a number of heauenly ſouldiers ſang glorie vnto God, becauſe peace was on the earth and good will toward men, Luke 2. 13. 14. Bleſſed therefore is that peace which glorifieth GOD that ſendeth it, and reioyſeth angels that heare of it, and comforteth good men that haue it, and bleſſeth all creatures that grow in it.

Surely they which take away the peace from the church, take away all glory from God, and all comfort from men. Let vs which liue in theſe bleſſed times looke to our ſelues Vſe. aboue all other: for as God hath made our earthly eſtate better then other mens, ſo will he doe our condition in the other life woorſe then all mens for the abuſing heereof. Let me lament my countrey as Eſaie lamented Iſrael, cap 43. 22, 23, 24. ſaying. Thou hast not called vpon me ó Englande, but thou hast wearied mee; Thou hast not brought mee the ſheepe of thy burnt offeringes, neither hast thou honoured mee with thy ſacrifices; I haue not cauſed thee to ſerue with an offering, nor wearied thee with incenſe. Thou hast not bought mee ſweete ſauour with thy money; neither hast thou made me drunk with the fat of your ſacrifices, but thou hast made mee to ſerue with thy ſinnes, and wearied me with thine iniquities. O my brethren! thus may the Lorde complaine of vs. We haue had peace, who hath beene honoured for it? we haue had money, who hath beene worſhipped for it? we haue had cattle and corne, to whom haue wee ſacrificed? ſurely wee haue honoured our policie, for our peace; wee haue worſhipped our goods and landes, with our money; and wee haue ſacrificed our corne and fleſh, to our bellies. What coulde the Lorde giue more then he hath? or beare more then he doth? or tarrie longer then he muſt? or we receiue more then hath beene caſt vpon vs? Oh, that I could now powre foorth my ſelfe in words, to lament the eſtate of our times! We haue much preaching, but little religion; for the prophets ſcant beleeue themſelues; wee haue much peace, but little knowledge of God is reaped thereby; we haue great plentie, but verie ſmall thankfulneſſe: our peace hath bred pride; our pride hath bred want; our want hath cauſed mourning; our mourning hath brought foorth plentie, and our plentie hath hatched pride againe. Let the harts of men cleaue in ſunder, to conſider this point: that now we fall as faſt to our former vomites, as any ruffian to his former follies. We haue beene

humbled, and God hath heard vs; God hath heard vs, and we regard it not: for the rich men eate their flock in plentie; lauiſh out their money in wantonneſſe; ſpende God his fruites in riote, and neuer thinke of thankefulneſſe. This, ſaith hee, my friendes left me; or I gained by ſuch a bargaine; or I wonne at ſuch a game; or got by ſuch an office, or I ſaued in my ſhop, and nowe I will bee merrie with it: And the Lorde hath no ſweete ſauour by their money, nor any ſacrifice by their flockes. But to come to the point, they beginne alreadie to forget that there was a famine: and as the ſtaruen kine in winter, become wanton and wilde in the ſpring, ſo they which of late coulde ſpeake pitifully, and mourne bitterly for want; now they begin to forget their want, and their God and all. Oh my deere brethren! we are nowe in more danger to periſh by plentie, then wee were to fall by famine; for eaſe ſlaieth the fooliſh, and the proſperitie of the wicked ſhall deſtroy them. When the children of Iſraell went euery day poore and rich to gather Manna, and to eate thereof, they liued well; but when the quailes came, and they eate thereof, the plague tooke them while the meate was in their mouthes: ſo, not want of foode, but want of grace and thankefulneſſe deſtroieth men. Therefore now let the magiſtrates looke to the lawes; let the miniſters diſcharge their places; let the fathers admoniſh their children; and let all men gouerne themſelues, leaſt our plentie of fruits coſt the death of our ſoules. Nowe be as diligent to render praiſe, as you were woont to bee vigilant in praier: let the teares burſt foorth for ioy; for our peace reioiceth both men and angels. We are come to our firſt heauen (I meane the peace of our church) if we now waxe proud, and grow inſolent, as the diuels were caſt out of heauen aboue; ſo ſhall we be out of heauen beneath. Remember ſickneſſe followeth health, death followeth ſickneſſe, iudgement followeth death; and damnation followeth iudgement: nowe are our ſoules ſicke, let vs recouer thē, for elſe they die, & if they die, they

will be iudged, & if they bee iudged, they will be damned. Secondly, he promiſeth that a fountaine ſhall goe foorth of the houſe of the Lord to water the valley of Setim: meaning that the Goſpell ſhould be preached to the Gentiles; for it began at Ieruſalem as at the ſpring head, and ſo flowed thorough the whole world; of the which the Prophet Ezechiel ſaw a viſion, Ezech. 47. 3, 4, 5, &c. whereby wee are taught: firſt, that God cauſed ſaluation to flow from the Iewes vnto the Gentiles; they had both ſpring and ſtreame, and yet wanted grace to drinke thereof: whereupon ſhee ſpeaketh, Cant. 1. 5. that they made her the keeper of the vines, but ſhe kept not her owne vine. Secondly, in that the Goſpell is compared to a running water: we may note that it neuer ſtandeth ſtill, but goeth as it were a flood thorough the world, and there is no power to reſiſt it: And this is the cauſe why all the kings and counſellers of the world could neuer ſtop the courſe thereof, onely the Biſhop of Rome is that ſtarre called Wormewood, Reuel. 8. 10. 11. that fell from heauen and corrupted theſe fountaines of water; whereby they beeing made bitter, cauſed the death of many that dranke thereof. Thirdly, the valley of Setim was a very dry place, and theſe waters made it fruitful; ſo were al the Gentiles, wherof we are a part: & if theſe waters of the Goſpel had not come vnto vs, we had remayned vnfruitfull lande, verie neere vnto curſing and burning. Laſtly, we may ſee that no other doctrine or profeſsion whatſoeuer is to be receiued, but this which is deriued from Ieruſalem: We muſt not fetch our water frō Rome, or from Mecha, or from any other place, but take of theſe which flowed from the temple. And it is verily thought, that God would not ſuffer Ieruſalem or the temple to ſtand, nor conuert it into a Biſhops-ſeate, leaſt the antiquitie or dignitie of the place ſhould challenge authoritie to ſend forth what waters and what Goſpell they pleaſed into the world.
               
                  Egypt ſhall be wasted and Edom ſhal be a deſolate wildernes, 
                  Verſ. 19. 
                  for the iniuries of the children of Iudah, becauſe they haue ſhed

innocent blood in their land. Once againe he mentioneth the deſtruction of their enimies: for in their ouerthrowe ſtandeth the felicitie of good men, when they ſhall not be able to moleſt the church by their power, nor to corrupt it by their euil example. Hereby we ſee firſt of all noted vnto vs, that the blood of the Lords ſaints ſhal be certainly reuē
                  ged, although it coſt whole coūtries, Iſa. 9. 12. The reaſons: Firſt, bicauſe they are the images of God, Gen. 9. 6. the Lord ſaith that hee will haue his blood ſhed that ſheddeth any blood: Secondly, the nature of it is to crie for vengeance in the eares of God, Gen. 4. 10. as the Lord ſaide to Cain: and therefore I thinke verily there will come a day that our recuſants, which are the ofspring of many bloodie perſecutours, ſhall haue the blood of the Lords ſaints reuenged vpon them. But if the blood of ſaints ſhall be ſo reuenged; then much more ſhall the blood of Chriſt, Heb. 10. 29. There are only two kinds of people vpon whom the Lord wil bring the blood of his ſon, the Iewes whom we ſee ſcattered ouer all the world, being accounted a verie miſerable and forlorne people: the other are the contemners of the Goſpell, which make no account to be ſaued thereby; who are in a maner as guiltie of the death of Chriſt, as were the ſoldiers & Iewes that nayled him on the croſſe: Wherfore God will not forget how they tread vnder their feete his pretious blood. Againe, let vs take occaſion to praiſe the Lord which letteth not the blood of his children be ſhed in vaine, Deut. 32. 43. as he bleſſeth them that take reuenge vpon his enimies, & make them fall to the earth; ſo he curſeth thē that cauſe any of his ſeruants to com to their latter end. Again, by this verſe we may note, that the blood of the Lords ſaints is innocent, 2. King. 21. 16. whatſoeuer lawes of princes or decrees of men be laide to their charge, yet this muſt ſtil comfort them, that if they die for the Lords cauſe, they are innocent, and ſhall certainly receiue life eternall. The reaſons: becauſe thorough hatred and malice of the world are they deliuered, Ioh. 17. 4 Secondly being the ſeruants

of righteouſnes, they cannot bee iuſtly executed for the ſame, Rom. 6. 18. Let vs bee heereby encouraged not to feare death, 1. Pet. 2. 19. for if we die naturally, we die happily; and if we die violently, we die innocently. Againe, let not any of vs that are Chriſtians ſuffer for our euill doing, 1. Pet. 4. 15. but rather let vs watch ouer our liues, that no ſinful danger of humane lawes doe euer ouertake vs.
               
                  But Iudah ſhall dwell for euer, and Ieruſalem from generation 
                  Verſ. 20▪
                   
                  to generation.
               
               
                  For I will clenſe their blood that I haue not clenſed, and the 
                  21 
                  Lord ſhall dwell in Zion. Theſe verſes containe the laſt promiſes of the Lord vnto his church, grounded vpon the preſence of God among them; Firſt, for their perpetuitie; Secondly, for the declaration of their innocencie, which hee noteth when he ſaith, that he will clenſe their blood, &c. when as vpon the report of the iniuries receiued in the former verſe, he preſently addeth, that they ſhall dwell for euer: we may note, that the wrongs which good men in this life endure, ſhall bee one meanes to forwarde their reſt, and glorification, Pſa. 12. 5. For this is the fruit of our afflictions, to perſwade the Lord for our immortalitie: for as when the Iſraelites cried in Egypt, then the Lord brought them into Canaan; ſo when wee crie for our wrongs, we are readieſt for heauen. The reaſons; God euermore hath an eie to the afflicted, Pſal. 9. 13. Secondly, then are we moſt like to the ſonne of God, and when we are likeſt to him on earth, wee are neereſt to him in heauen. Let vs ſo beare our afflictions and wrongs, as if we were borne for them, 1. Cor. 4 9. for we ſee they ſhall turne to our greater ioy. But of this matter we haue ſpoke often. I might alſo remember out of this verſe, when he ſaith, that Iudah and Ieruſalem ſhall dwell for euer: hee meaneth not the citie Ieruſalem, for that is long agoe deſtroied; but he meaneth that the Iewes ſhall neuer be vtterly deſtroied, but many of them ſhal be ſaued in the world to come. When he ſaith, that he wil clenſe their blood: that is, hee will manifeſt to all the worlde that they

were not iuſtly executed, but vniuſtly murdered: whereby we may ſee at length that the wicked, whether they were wilfully blinded, or ignorantly affected in perſecuting good men; yet they ſhall know, and ſo ſhall other, that they murdered them vniuſtly, as the Iewes which ſhall ſee Chriſt whom they pearced, Reuel. 1. 7. Mat. 27. 3, 4. for wilfull murders cannot be euerlaſtingly concealed: and it is al one before God to ſteale by authoriti
                     •
                   or without law, to kill by law or without authority. Laſtly we may ſee when he ſaith, he will dwell in Zion, that the preſence of God preſerueth the church, Reuel. 1. 13. how can it euer periſh when the Lord maintayneth it? Surely ſathan told Chriſt that he could not do amiſſe, for the Angels watched about him and held him vp that at no time he ſhould daſh his foot againſt a ſtone: If the helpe of Angels in the diuels conceit was ſo great to preſerue Chriſt; then much greater is the preſence and hand of God to vphold his church. Hee alone buildeth it, that it fal not; keepeth it, that it fade not; dreſſeth it, that it may be holy; & preſerueth it, that it may be godly: ſo that ſo long as the Lord endureth, ſo long ſhall the church ſtand, maugre the might of all the diuels in hell. To the which God euerlaſting, immortall and onely wiſe, the moſt glorious Trinitie, the Father, the Sonne, & the holy Ghoſt, let vs render all praiſe, aſcribe all maieſtie, and giue our whole ſpirits, ſoules and bodies, that he may be glorified in vs, and we be glorified in him:
               
               Amen, Amen.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   