
      
         
            
            
            The Chriſtians LOOKING-GLASSE: Wherein hee may cleerely ſee, His loue to GOD liuely expreſſed, His Fidelity truely diſcouered, And Pride againſt GOD and Man, Anatomiſed.
            whereby the Hypocriſie of the times is notoriouſly manifeſted.
            By THOMAS TVKE, Miniſter of GODS Word at Saint Giles in the Fields.
            LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Okes, and are to bee ſold by Richard Bolton, at his Shop in Chancerylane, neere Holborne. 1615.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT VERTVOVS AND HONOVRABLE LADY, the Lady ALICIA DVDLEY.
            
               MADAME,
            
            
               THere are three neceſſary vertues well be-ſeeming euery Chriſtian Man, Charity, Fidelity, and Humility, both towardes God and Man.
               4. Reaſons of louing God. Math. 23. 9 There are foure reaſons (to paſſe by many moe) which ſhould moue vs to the loue of God: Firſt,Iam. 1. 18. becauſe hee is our gracious Father, who of his owne will begat vs with the word of truth, that we ſhould be as

the firſt fruits of his Creatures. Now if a childe ſhall loue his father, of whom he hath receiued a part of his body, how much more ought he loue God, (Qui animam ſuam infundendo creauit, & creando infudit) of whom hee hath receiued his ſoule, and to whoſe goodneſſe he ſtands obliged both for ſoule and body, both for the being & continuing of them? Therefore Dauid ſaith, Thou haſt poſſeſſed my reines,
               Pſalm. 139 13. Pſal. 71. 6. 
               thou haſt couered me in my Mothers wombe. Vpon thee haue I been ſtaied from the wombe: thou art hee that tooke me out of my mothers bowels. And Iob long before him, Thine hands haue made me,
               Iob. 10. 8. 11. 12. 
               and faſhioned me wholly round about; thou haſt clothed me with skin and fleſh, and ioyned me together with bones and ſinewes: thou haſt giuen me life and grace, and thy viſitation

hath preſerued my ſpirit.
            
            Secondly,2. Reaſon. 
               God is to be loued for his moſt ſweet and pleaſing nature, which the wicked indeed feeleth not; becauſe (as Iſidore ſaith) he hath loſt the palate of his heart with the feuer of iniquity.
            
            Thirdly,3. Reaſon God by his beneficence hath deſerued our loue:Ioh. 3. 16. for out of his meere loue he ſent his own and onely Son into the world, to ſaue vs when we were loſt, to redeeme vs when we were captiues, and by his death to giue vs life when we had deſerued nought but death.
            Fourthly, aske now the beaſts,
               4. Reaſon. Iob. 12. 7. 
               & they ſhall teach thee, and the fowles of the heauen, and they ſhall tell thee: ſpeake to the earth, and it ſhall ſhew thee, or the fiſhes of the ſea, & they ſhall declare vnto thee. Euen theſe things in their kindes do praiſe

God, and ſhew their loue vnto man, for whom they were appointed: and ſhall man ſhew no loue to God; and in loue do nothing for God, for whom his creatures doe ſo much good, & ſuffer ſo much euil, being all put vnder his feet, and ſubiected to his power,Pſal. 8. 6. 7. 8. 
               All ſheepe & oxen, yea & the beaſts of the field, the fowles of the aire, and the fiſh of the ſea?
            
            
               Of the manner how wee ought to loue God.Now becauſe a man hath in him life like a plant, ſenſe as a beaſt, and vnderſtanding proper to a Man, therefore it behooues him to loue God with his life, with his ſenſes, and with his reaſon. Our Sauiour ſaith, we ought to loue God with all our heart, with al our ſoule,
               Mat. 12. 37 1. With all our heart. 
               and with all our minde. We ought to loue him with all our heart, that is, with all our affections, delighting and ioying in him more then in any thing:

For he loues not God, that delights in any thing more then in God: and as St 
               Auſten ſaith, Minus te amat, qui aliquid t
                     •
                  cū amat,
               A Simile. 
               quod non propter te amat. By how much the more the lower bowes of a Tree are multiplied, by ſo much the leſſe it groweth vpwards: ſo by how much the more a man doth loue theſe things beneath, by ſo much the leſſe is his loue erected and lifted vnto God aboue: therefore ſuch loue is to be pruned & cut away, as ſuperfluous branches frō a tree, that it may thriue the better. God requires the whole heart, My ſon, giue me thy heart,
               Pro. 23. 26. A Simile. like ſome noble Bird of prey, that ſeizeth vpon the heart: for he alone created it, he alone couers it, and he only can content and fill it. Totum exigit te,
               Auguſ
                     •
                  ine. 
               qui fecit te totum, he requires thee all

that made thee all.Si totum me debeo pro me facto, quid addam iam pro me refecto? Bernard.
                If we owe our ſelues wholly for our generation, what ſhall wee adde for our regeneration? Neither are we ſo eaſily new made, as made. In the firſt work God gaue vs vnto our ſelues: in the ſecond he gaue vs himſelfe, and reſtored vs vnto our ſelues. Being therefore both giuen and reſtored, we doe owe our ſelues for our ſelues, and we do owe our ſelues twice. But what ſhall wee repay vnto the Lord for himſelfe? For although we were able to repay our ſelues a thouſand times, what are wee vnto the Lord?A Simile. If a man had ſome ſpeciall iewell which he is minded to giue away, he would bethinke himſelfe where hee might beſt beſtow it. Our heart is the beſt member which wee haue, and God is our beſt friend, let vs beſtow it vpon him: it is

not loſt, that is giuen vnto him.
            Secondly,2. With all our ſoule. wee muſt loue the Lord with all our Soule, induring rather the ſeparation of the ſoule from the body, then that our ſoule ſhould be ſeparated from God, who is the ſoule of our ſoule, & the comfort both of ſoule and body.Our life and ſenſes ſhould be beſtowed vpon God And becauſe our ſoule affoords life and ſenſe vnto the body, therefore to ſhew that we loue God with all our ſoule, we ought to honour him with our liues all our life long, and with all our ſenſes, ſuffering them to be guided by his will, and chuſing rather to bee depriued of them all, then of him, that gaue them all.
            Thirdly,3. With all our minde we muſt loue him with all our minde and vnderſtandings and cogitations being fixt vpon him, and ruled by him: His word ſhould informe

               
                  •
               nd direct our reaſon;God m
                     •
                   haue o
                     •
                   though
                     ••
                   & vnderſtanding our reaſon rightly informed, ſhould rule our wils, our affections and conuerſations, in all which wee ought to ſeeke and apply our ſelues vnto God, that our liues, our affections, our wils, and our vnderſtandings may be ſaid to be Gods, ſo as although we liue, yet we may truly ſay, We liue not, but God doth liue within vs. And ſo much for our loue of God.
            
               Of ſelf loue Why and how a mā ſhould loue himſelfe.Loue of Man is either loue of our ſelues, or of our Neighbour. That a man ſhould loue himſelfe it is very neceſſary: for he that loues not himſelfe, cannot loue another. And as St 
               Auſten ſaith, Sinon noſti diligere teipſum, tim
                     •
                  o ne decipias proximum ſicut teipſum; if thou knoweſt not to loue thy ſelfe, I am afraid leaſt thou ſhouldſt deceiue thy neighbour as thy ſelfe. Yet is it

no eaſie matter for a man to loue himſelfe aright: for he that loues iniquity hateth his owne ſoule, and hee that loues himſelfe in the way of ſin, doth loue a robber condemned to dye.Auguſtine. 
               Si malè amaueris, tunc odiſti: ſi benè ode
                  
                     •
                  is, tunc amaſti: If a man loue himſelfe amiſſe, hee hates himſelfe: but if hee hate himſelfe well, then he loues himſelfe. If a man looſe himſelfe by louing himſelfe, then he finds himſelfe, if he hate himſelfe. Let vs therefore learne to loue our ſelues by not louing our ſelues. He that hates his luſts, loues himſelfe: he that loues his luſts, hates himſelfe. He that will loue himſelfe well, muſt loue himſelfe in God, and 
                  •
               or God: and either becauſe he is Gods, or that hee may bee Gods. 
               
                  •
               nd thus much for Selfe-loue.
            
            Our Neighbour alſo is to bee

loued, whether friend or foe, rich or poore, yong or old, high or low:
                  Gregory. Why our neighbour is to bee loued. For (Per amorem Dei amor proximi gignitur, & per amorem proximi amor Dei nutritur) the loue of our neighbour is begotten by the loue of God, and the loue of God is nouriſhed by our loue of our Neighbour. Here firſt I ſay, we ought to loue our neighbour, becauſe he is a Man of the ſame fleſh with vs, or becauſe he is a Chriſtian of the ſame faith, incorporated into the ſame body, and animated by the ſame ſpirit. In whomſoeuer Chriſt doth ſhew himſelfe, he is to bee loued, in the poore as in the rich, without reſpect of perſons. A Diamond is a Diamond whether ſet in Gold or Siluer, or in Iron, or Wood, and hee that reiects or cōtemnes Chriſt in a poore man, loues not Chriſt

in a rich man, but riches: yea,5. Reaſons of louing our enemies. Math. 5. 44 we are to loue our Enemies. So Chriſt ſaid, and ſo he did. Hee ſaid ſo: I ſay vnto you; L
                     •
                  ue your enemies, bleſſe them that curſe you, doe good to them that h
                     ••
                  e you,
               Coloſ. 1. 22 Rom. 5. 8. 
               and pray for them that hurt you. And ſo hee did; for vs, which were ſtrangers and enemies, hath he alſo reconciled. Whiles we were yet ſinners, Chriſt died for vs. Secondly, thus it behooues vs to doe, that wee may reſemble our heauenly Father, and ſhew our ſelues to be his ſonnes: For hee ſendeth his raine on the iuſt and vniuſt. Thirdly, elſe ſhall we looſe our reward:Math. 5. 45 46. 
               For if you loue thē that loue you, what reward ſhall yee haue? Fourthly, becauſe GOD hath ſelected and ſingled vs out from the multitude of the world, therefore wee muſt bee ſingular and egregious for our

conuerſation:Mat. 5. 47. 
               If yee bee friendly to your brethren onely, what ſingular thing do yee? do not euen the Publicans likewiſe? And ſhall Chriſtians do no more thē Publicanes, then Turkes, then Indians, then naturall men? Fiftly, it is by our Apoſtle commanded and commended vnto vs, When hee ſaith;Gal. 6. 10. 
               Let vs do good vnto all; if vnto all, then vnto our enemies;Rom. 12. 20 
               Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him, ſaith he, If hee thirſt giue him drink. Now if wee muſt not deny him our beneficence, then not our beneuolence for it is no good deed, if it bee not of good will: And if we muſt recompence no man euill for euill,
               Rom. 12. 17. then not to our enemies; and where there ought to be no maleficence, there ſhould alſo be no malevolence; as wee muſt not worke him ill, ſo wee muſt not

will, nor wiſh him ill.
            So then our Neighbour is to bee loued,How our neighbour is to be loued. but how? Euen as our ſelues; which As doth not ſhew partiality, or equality, but ſimilitude; not meaſure, but manner;Mat. 22. 39 that is to ſay, Holily, Iuſtly, Truely, and Conſtantly: Holily,
               Sanctè. that is, for GOD, and not againſt GOD, vnder GOD, not aboue GOD: For he loues not GOD, that loues his neighbour with GOD, whom hee loues not for GOD; and hee that loues his neighbour more then GOD, is vnworthy of GOD, and makes his neighbour to be his GOD.
            
               Iuſtly,
               Iuſtè. for a man muſt not loue his neighbour in euill, or for euill, but in good, and for good: Hee muſt bee ſo loued, as that his vices may be hated: Hee muſt bee loued, if not (quia iuſtus) becauſe hee is iuſt, yet (vt

ſit iuſtus) that hee may become iuſt. Loue muſt not bee the bond of vnrighteouſneſſe; we may not loue a man ſo as to fall in loue with, and to learne his vices.
            
               Verè. Auguſt.
               Truely, that is in the Truth, For (nemo poteſt veraciter eſſe amicus hominis, niſi primitus fuerit amicus ipſius veritatis) no man can be a true louer of a man vnleſſe firſt he bee a louer of the truth. I ſay againe truely, that is, the man muſt be loued, not his riches, honours, greatneſſe, his good muſt be ſought, and not his goods; hee, not his. Some loue their neighbours, as dogs doe bones, for the fleſh that is on them; or as men do Trees, for their fruite; or as Kites do a Carkaſe, for reliefe: But wee ought to loue them euen for themſelues, for this, that they are men, or for this, that they are vertuous
               
and good men.
            Laſtly,
                  Perſeueranter. Of the cō
                  ſtancy of loue. our Neighbours are to be loued Conſtantly: With ſome men, friends are like flowers, which are eſteemed of no longer, then whiles they are freſh. Many mens loue is like to that of Harlots, who loue, whiles there is lucre; they loue not the man, but his gifts: They are like the Gleads in the fable, that followed the old wife bearing Tripes to the Market, but forſooke her home-ward, when ſhe returned empty. A man ſhall be loued in proſperity; but it is a queſtion whether the man, or his fortunes, bee rather loued: Aduerſity will try the force of friendſhip, and vertue of loue: Hee which forſakes his Neighbour in aduerſity, doth manifeſtly ſhew that hee loued him not in proſperity: It was not the

man which was loued, but the mans proſperity. But we ought to bee conſtant in our loue: Whiles we ſee either Humanity, or Chriſtianity, we haue cauſe to loue.Gal. 6. 9. 
               Let vs not therefore bee weary of wel-doing:
               Heb. 13. 1. 
               Let brotherly loue continue. And ſo much for charity, which for perpetuity,1. Cor. 13. 13 and ſeruiceableneſſe vnto others, is more excellent, then either faith or hope.
            
               Of faithfulneſſe.The next is Fidelity, when men are faſt and faithfull vnto men for GOD, and vnto GOD for GOD himſelfe. This faithfulneſſe vnto GOD is demonſtrated by fearing him vehemently, by obeying him conſtantly, by diſpenſing faithfully, by keeping things committed to him carefully, by louing him inceſſantly, and by ſuffering for him couragiouſly. The reaſons that ſhould

moue vs heereunto are many.7. Reaſons o
                     •
                   Fidelity. Reu. 2. 20. 1. GODS Commandement. Bee thou faithfull vnto the death: 2. His Promiſe, And I will giue thee the Crowne of life.
               2. Tim. 4. 7. 8. 
               I haue fought a good fight, (ſaith Saint Paul) and haue finiſhed my courſe, I haue kept the faith: heeres his Fidelity: From henceforth is laid vp for mee the Crowne of Righteouſneſſe: theres his reward. 3. The example of GOD, and his ſeruants: Of GOD,Pſal. 94. 14. Pſal. 146. 6. Ier. 32. 40. who failes not his people, forſakes not his inheritance, but Keepes his fidelity for euer, and will not depart from them to doe them good. Of his Seruants, as Abraham, Iob, Moſes, Daniel, and the Martyrs, whom no death could daunt, no torment could afright, no pleaſure hold, no promotion preuaile with, no allurement inchant, but claue faſt to GOD,

and chuſed rather to die for Him, then to liue againſt Him. 4. We deſire GOD to be faithfull vnto vs, therefore we ſhould ſhew our ſelues faithfull vnto Him. 5. Wee exact fidelity of thoſe, that are vnder vs, therefore in reaſon we ſhould behaue our ſelues faithfully to GOD, which is aboue vs. 6. Fidelity is a moſt certaine argument of felicity,Mat. 1
                     •
                  . 22. Heb. 1
                     •
                  . 39 for hee that endureth to the end ſhall bee ſaued: Finally, vnfaithfulneſſe is puniſhed with perdition:Reu. 21. 8 
               Fearefull and vnfaithfull perſons ſhall haue their part in the lake, which burneth with fire and brimſtone, which is the ſecond death; And ſo much for Fidelity.
            
               Of humility.The laſt is Humility, wherby we doe not ouer-weene our ſelues, but behaue our ſelues humbly towards GOD, and Man. Humility

is to be ſhewed towards a mans Superiors, Equals, and Inferiours.Iam. 4. 7. 10 The Superiour of all Superiours is GOD. Submit your ſelues vnto GOD: caſt downe your ſelues before the LORD, and hee will lift you vp. GOD is Omnipotent, All-VViſe, moſt Iuſt, and hath abſolute authority ouer all fleſh, therefore wee ought to humble our ſelues before him, and throw our ſelues downe before his Foote ſtoole. Secondly, we ought to carry our ſelues lowlily towards all our Betters. Therefore the Law ſaith,Ex. 20. 12. 
               Honour thy father, and thy mother: And Saint Peter,
               1. Pet. 5. 5. 
               yee younger ſubmit your ſelues vnto the Elders. Thirdly, towards our Equals,
               Math. 7. 12. For wee muſt do, as we wold be done by: wee would haue our equals giue vs due reſpect, and not by pride exalt themſelues aboue vs. In giuing

honour (ſaith Saint Paul) go one before another:
               Rom. 12. 20 
               Rom. 13. 7. 8. 
               Giue to all men their due; owe nothing to any man, but loue. It was Pompeis too-great ſtatelineſſe, that hee would acknowledge no equall. Fourthly, towards our Inferiours:
               Why wee muſt bee humble toward our inferiours. For it is a mans honour ſometimes to neglect his honor, and his greateſt Greatneſſe, in caſe, not to know his greatneſſe. I ſuppoſe there is in euery man ſomething, which craues our humility; and euen this ſhould make vs humble vnto all, becauſe life and death is common to vs all, becauſe by Nature wee are ſinners all, and it is nothing in vs, that makes the difference, but the grace of GOD vnto vs, which was neuer deſerued of vs. For who hath ſeparated thee?
               1. Cor. 4. 7 
               and what haſt thou, that thou haſt not receiued? It behoues vs therefore

(as we are exhorted) To ſubmit our ſelues one vnto another,
               1. Pet. 5. 5. 
               and to decke our ſelues inwardly in lowlineſſe of minde:
               Luk. 18. 14. 
               For euery man that exalteth himſelfe, ſhall bee brought low: and he that humbleth himſelfe, ſhall bee exalted. For GOD is gracious to the humble, but oppoſeth himſelfe to the proud, hee breaketh their branches, hee teareth them vp by the rootes, hee ſcattereth brimſtone vpon their dwellings, hee tumbles them from their ſeates, and laughs at their downe-fals.
            Thus haue I giuen you a ſay of that, which is more largely handled in this Booke, which I Dedicate vnto your Ladiſhip, in whom theſe three vertues, by the Grace of GOD, haue met together, & do kiſſe each other, beſeeching this good GOD ſtill to increaſe his Graces in you,

and at the length to Crowne you with eternall glory in the heauens.
            
               Saint Giles in the Fieldes, Auguſt. 13. 1614.
               
               Your Ladiſhips in Chriſt Ieſus, Thomas Tuke.
               
            
         
         
            
            The Contents.
            
               LOue in generall deſcribed. page. 1
               
               Good, either true, or ſeeming, is the obiect of loue. p
                     •
                  g. 3
               
               The property of loue is to vrite, or ioyne. pag. 3
               
               The loue of man to God deſcribed. p. 3
               
               Loue is an affection of the heart. pag. 3. 4
               
               Loue is a gracious affect. pag. 4
               
               Loue riſeth out of knowledge and Faith. pag. 4. 6. 7
               
               Loue is a Coeleſtiall fire pag. 9
               
               Loue is kindled by the holy Ghoſt p. 9. 10
               
               Loue knits vs to God, and makes him our contentment. pag. 10. 11
               
               This loue to God is neceſſary in ſixe r
                     •
                  
                  gards. pag. 16. 18
               
               The equity of this loue is ſhewed in ſixe reſpects. pag. 19. 22
               
               Gods loue to vs is a deſcending loue p. 19
               
               There are 6 benefits of this loue. p. 23. 30
               
               This loue is excellent in nine regards p. 32. 38.
               
               
                  Of the Author, Nature, Ends, Effects, Subiects and Obiect of this loue. pag. 32. 33. 34. 38.
               
               In fiue reſpects God is worthy of our loue aboue all other things. p. 45. 48
               
               What Iehouah, Kurios, Dominus, and our Engliſh word Lord doth ſignifie. pag. 39
               
               Why the world ſhould not be loued. p. 59
               
               VVhy riches ſhould not haue our heart. pag. 61
               
               Of the loue of Pleaſures, and why they ſeeme ſo ſweet. pag. 63
               
               Of the incertainty of honors. pag. 64
               
               Of the vanity of beauty. pag. 65
               
               How a man may loue himſelfe, and who is he. pag. 67
               
               Nine vndoubted tokens of true loue to God. pag. 69. 83
               
               God ought to be loued in his Church vniuerſall, and in euery true viſible ſociety of beleeuers. pag. 85
               
               Which is a true viſible Church. p. 85. 87
               
               God ought to be loued in his Miniſters. pag. 88
               
               A Miniſter is to be loued meerely for his Office, Power, VVorke, and faithfull

execution thereof. pag. 88. 89
               
               The note of a true Miniſter of God. p
                     •
                  g. 90
               
               God is to be loued in his people. pag. 91
               
               How Miniſters ought to demonſtrate their loue to God in feeding their Flockes. pag 95
               
               God muſt be loued in Chriſt pag. 96
               
               VVhy CHRIST ought to bee loued. pag. 96. 97
               
               Two ſpeciall wayes whereby loue is ſhewed to Chriſt. pag. 97 99
               
               A man may be ſaid to bee faithfull in two reſpects. pag. 100
               
               VVho haue beene counted faithfull to the Lord. pag. 101
               
               How God preſerues the Faithfull. Externally p. 102
               
               How God preſerues the Faithfull. Internally, p. 102
               
               How God preſerues the Faithfull. Eternally. p. 102
               
               Three reaſons of Faithfulneſſe pag. 103
               
               Fiue notes to know a Faithfull Man. pag. 103. 106
               
               VVho is a Chriſtian indeed. pag. 107
               
               A Commendation of loue from ſome notable effects thereof. pag. 110
               
               
                  Sundry ſimilies to illuſtrate the worthineſſe of this vertue. p. 111.
               
               What pride is. p. 112.
               
               Seuen wayes of proud dealing againſt God. p. 113.
               
               How Pride againſt man diſcouers it ſelfe. p. 114.
               
               Twenty three examples of Gods iudgements vpon the proud. p. 116. 120
               
               Two milder kindes of his puniſhments. p. 122
               
               Of the folly, baſeneſſe, inhumanity, impiety, and iniuſtice of pride. p. 123.
               
               Of the contentiouſneſſe, vglineſſe, and waſtfulneſſe of Pride. p. 124. 125
               
               Pride like a Thiefe, like thunder, like a venemous beaſt, like a Moth, or worme. p. 126
               
               How pride is to be auoyded. p. 127.
               
               An Exhortation to the loue of God. pag. 128.
               
               If God loue vs, we need not ſo much feare the ill will of men: this cleared by two compariſons. pag. 129
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Chriſtians Looking-Glaſſe.
            
            
               
                  
                     PSALME. 31. VER. 23.
                  
                  Loue ye the LORD, all his Saints, for the LORD preſerueth the faithfull, and aboundantly rewardeth the proud-doer.
               
            
            
               HOLY Dauid, hauing in foure verſes next afore-going declared the goodneſſe of GOD to them that feare him: and among them to himſelfe in ſpeciall; in this verſe hee exhorteth All Saints; euen all that the LORD hath ſanctified to himſelfe by his mercies, to deuote

and addict themſelues to the LORD by loue.
            In this verſe two things are conſiderable: Firſt, the Pſalmiſt Exhortation, Loue yee the LORD all his Saints; And ſecondly his Reaſons to ſet it on, drawne from an act of GODS grace to ſome, and of his iuſtice to others, expreſſed in the words enſuing.
            In the exhortation three things are to bee obſerued: firſt, the duety required, Loue: ſecondly, the obiect of it, the LORD: thirdly, the perſons, of whom it is to be performed, All his Saints.
            
            
               Scal. ex. 301 Sec. 1.
               Of loue firſt, Amor eſt affectus vnionis. Loue is an affection of vnion; Quo cum re amatâ aut vnimur, aut perpetuamus vnionem: By the which wee are either vnited, or doe continue the vnion with the thing beloued.What loue is. Or Loue is a certaine motion, whereby the heart is moued towards that, which either is Truely, or Seemingly good, deſiring to draw the good vnto it ſelfe, that it might

enioy it.The obiect of loue. For the obiect of loue is good;The property of loue. And though a man ſometimes loue an euil, yet it is to him a ſeeming good: And the Nature of loue is to vnite and Knit diuerſe things together, and of ſundry things to make one; And a regular and true-hearted loue is that, which cauſeth vs to loue a thing▪ becauſe it is good in it ſelfe, and not for any baſe, or by-reſpect. With this loue wee ought to loue GOD, and our neighbor for GOD.Loue of GOD what.
            
            The loue then, wherewith we are exhorted to loue the LORD, is an Holy affection, Whereby wee loue GOD in CHRIST IESVS, for himſelfe: Or it is, a Gracious affection of the Heart, ariſing out of Knowledge and Faith in GOD, and kindled in the ſoule by the HOLY GHOST, by which a man is ioyned & Knit to GOD, taking delight and content in him more, then in any thing beſides.
            Firſt,Loue is an affection. I call it an affection of the heart, becauſe with it the heart is affected and inclined; affections being certaine motions of the heart,

where they haue their ſeate and being.
            
               Loue a grace.Secondly, I ſaid it is a Gracious affection; for to loue is a worke of Nature, but to loue an obiect W
                     •
                  ll, that's truely Good, as is the LORD, is 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , a worke of Grace. For wee are not ſufficient of our ſelues to thinke any thing,
               1. Cor. 3. 5. 
               as of our ſelues: Therfore our ſufficiency & ſtrength to loue a right obiect rightly, muſt needs bee from the Grace of GOD, Who worketh in vs both the will and the deed of his owne good pleaſure.
               Phil. 2. 13.
            
            Thirdly, I ſay this loue ariſeth out of the Knowledge and Faith in GOD.
                  Ouid. Loue is frō knowledge For Quod latet, ignotum eſt, ignoti nulla cupido; Things vnknowne are vnaffected, and loue is according to a mans acquaintance: A man cannot loue GOD, before hee know that GOD is, and that hee is good, and therefore worthy loue, ſweete and amiable, and according to that meaſure of knowledge, that men haue of him, and of his benefites, and according as they ponder

and remember them, ſo they may be ſaid to loue him: And for becauſe our knowledge of him is in this world nothing ſo perfect as it ſhall bee in the world to come, therefore alſo our loue on earth is not ſo perfect, as it ſhall bee in the heauens, when beſides the viſion of Grace wee ſhall attaine vnto the viſion of Glory,1. Cor. 13. 9. 12. Viſion of Grace, & of Glory. When Wee ſhall ſee face to face, and know as wee are knowne, as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh to the Corinthians. Will yee ſee this in the glaſſe of humane practiſe?The laſt point cleered by Similies. A child not knowing the worth of ſiluer preferres a Counter to it; Barbarous people not knowing the benefites of learning loue it not. The couetous man knowing the vertue of gold, hoords it, loues it as his GOD: A good ſoule knowing the vileneſſe and dangers of ſinne ſhunnes it, loathes it; and perceiuing the benefites of true Religion loues it, followes it; and experience ſhewes that many men, places, things, are vnloued, and vnregarded, becauſe

their vertues, properties, excellencies are not knowne to them, that do looke-ouer and neglect them. Hee then that would loue GOD,Why men loue GOD no better. let him learne to know GOD: If men knew him well, they would not loue him ſo ill. The reaſon why men commonly are ſo farre in loue with pleaſures, profits, and preferments is becauſe they know the ſweetneſſe of them, though they proue often bitter to them in the latter end, ſo as that they might iuſtly wiſh they had not knowne them, or had knowne better how to haue vſed them: So ſurely our knowledge of GOD would ſtirre vp our loue, did wee know him and vnderſtand his perfections well and truely, hee would rauiſh our hearts, but the loue of the world doth raiſe vp ſuch a miſt within vs, as that our eyes are darkened, the ſtarres of our vnderſtanding are clouded, ſo that we ſee not, wee thinke not of his louely Nature, we cannot behold his Beauty: But let vs diſpearſe theſe fogs,

and labor to know him, that we may bee fit to loue him.Loue is as a threed, and knowledge a Needle. Loue like a thrid ſowes our ſoules to GOD, but the way is prepared by knowledge as by a needle.
            And as concerning Faith,
               Loue ſprings out of faith. certaine it is that faith in the loue of GOD makes a man returne his loue vnto GOD, for till a man beleeue that GOD doth loue him, and is reconciled to him, hee comes not to him: So long as hee apprehends nothing but wrath, hee flies him as his enemy; and being puniſhed hee repines and murmurres, as male-conted: But when a man comes to bee perſwaded of GODS fauour to him, and begins to haue affiance in his mercy, forth-with hee begins to draw neere by loue vnto him, hee ſets his heart vpon him, and in loue preferres him to all the world: And the more hee beleeues, the more he loues, his ſoule is ready to ſay with Dauid, Thou art my LORD,Pſ. 16. 2. 5. & 103. 1. 3. 4 
               and the portion of my inheritance: My ſoule praiſe thou the LORD, and all that is

within thee praiſe his holy Name, which forgiueth all thine iniquity, and healeth all thine infirmities, which redeemeth thy life from the graue, and crowneth thee with mercy and compaſſion?
            
            The truth of which wee ſee confirmed by Saint Paul, who ſaith that Loue is out of a pure heart,
               1. Tim. 1. 5. 
               and a good conſcience, and of faith vnfaigned: Without the which faith alſo there is neither pure heart, nor good conſcience. This wee may illuſtrate by the dealings of men,A Similie. who will not make a league of loue with them whom they truſt not, but rather abandon all ſociety with them: On the contrary, whom they dare truſt them they dare liue with; in whom they haue confidence, in them they do delight; and of whoſe loue they are perſwaded, them they will loue and ſhew kindneſſe too.A Similie. And wee ſee by experience that one flame licks another to it, and one fire draweth another; ſo one loue alſo begets and drawes another. And if it happen that a man bee hated of

him to whom hee beareth loue,Why a mā hates him, that loues him. it is becauſe hee that is loued, takes no notice of, nor feeles the loue which is borne vnto him. Let vs therefore haue faith in GOD, for as wee beleeue, ſo ſhall wee loue:A Similie. Without doubt the brethren of Ioſeph, when they met with him in Aegypt, did not loue him as their brother, till hee had made himſelfe knowne, and till they were verily perſwaded that hee was their brother; ſo wee ſhall neuer loue GOD as his children, till wee acknowledge him for our Father, and bee by faith perſwaded of his loue.
            Fourthly,Loue a fire. I ſaid that loue was Kindled in the ſoule: For the loue of GOD is a Coeleſtiall Fire, ſeruing to comfort and refreſh the heart▪ and to inflame it with an holy zeale and to conſume theſe filthy vapours of malice, enuy, pride, treachery, and ſuch other noyſome luſts, as ar
                  •
                within him.
            Fiftly, I ſay it is kindled by th
                  •
                HOLY SPIRIT, therefore Sai
                  ••
               
               
               Paul cals it the Fruit of the Spirit;Gal. 5. 22. Loue, the worke of the Spirit. for if the hatred of GOD be a worke of the fleſh, and from the motion of the Deuill; then the true loue of GOD muſt needes bee the worke of the Spirit, who enlightens the minde, inſpireth faith, and perſwades the heart to loue and delight in GOD: How much are wee bound to GOD, of whoſe pure loue to vs it is, that wee haue any loue to him: He comes downe to vs, before we go vp to him; Hee drawes vs before we run, and lookes vpon vs before we turne our eyes to him:Pſ. 144. 3. Pſ. 116. 12. Pſal. 145. 1. LORD, what is man that thou regardeſt him, or the ſonne of man, that thou ſo thinkeſt on him? What ſhall I render vnto the LORD for all his benefits towards mee? O my GOD and my King, I will extoll thee, and will bleſſe thy Name for euer and euer.
            
            
               Loue knits vs to God.
               Finally, I ſaid that loue doth knit our hearts to GOD, and makes a man take him for his chiefe contentment: For as hatred doth rend, diſioyne, and ſeparate: So loue doth vnite, knit, and tye together. Loue

married Iacob and Rahel, loue vnited Dauid and Ionathan: and ſo our hearts by loue are wedded and vnited to GOD, and for GOD to one another: That they might bee knit together in loue, ſaith Saint Paul.
               Col. 2. 2. Ioh. 17. 21. 'Twas Loue▪ that made our Sauiour pray that all his Members might bee One with Him, and his Father: and it is loue alſo, that makes vs deny our ſelues and the world, and ſtudy to liue ſo, as if wee were not ours,The fruits of hatred and loue. but GODS: 'Tis hatred that breeds diſlike, auerſation, and diſcontentedneſſe: And ſo it is loue, that cauſeth ioy, delight, contentment: When loue hath once poſſeſt the ſoule, it moues it to ioy in GOD, to make him her prime contentment, and to exclaime with the Pſalmiſt: Whom haue I in heauen but thee?
               Pſa. 73. 25. 26. 
               and I haue deſired none on earth with thee: GOD is the ſtrength of mine heart and my portion for euer. And vndoubtedly, what thing ſoeuer a man doth beſt loue, that to him is his beſt contentment: for loue cauſeth content,

as the light doth comfort,A ſimile. and contentment is imbarked and enbotled in it, as a Tree in a Barke, as water in the clowdes; Therefore the Greek word (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ) ſignifying to loue, ſignifies to reſt in, or to bee contented: And thus wee haue ſeene what loue is.
            
               GOD the obiect of this loue.The Obiect, on whom this loue heere ſpoke of ſhould bee fixed, is the LORD, euen hee, who is gracious, and mercifull,Pſ. 145. 8. 17 ſlow to anger, righteous in all his waies, and holy in all his workes:Pſal. 145. 3. & 147. 5. & 146. 6 7. 8. & 147. 3 Pſ. 145. 19 20. & 146. 9. Euen he, whoſe greatneſſe is incomprehenſible, and whoſe wiſedome is infinite, which made heauen and earth, the ſea, and all that is therein; and keepeth his fidelity for euer; which executeth iuſtice for the oppreſſed, giueth bread to the hungry, loueth the righteous, healeth thoſe that are broken in heart; preſerueth all that loue him, fulfill the deſires of all that feare him releeueth the fatherleſſe and widdow, and ſheweth mercy vnto thouſands to them that loue him:Ex. 20. 6. Euen

hee, I ſay, that remembred vs in our baſe eſtate, cut the cords of the wicked, reſcued vs from our oppreſſors, deliuered vs from our ſins, brought vs from our errours, tranſlated vs out of Babylon, ſaued vs from that Purple Harlot, ſhewed vs his Word, giuen vs his Goſpell, honoured vs with peace; deliuered our Rulers, reſcued his Annointed, and ſaued vs all, both Church and Kingdome, from that Hel-made, horrid,Nouem. 5. 1605. and prodigious Powder. O LORD, how great is thy loue vnto vs! how amiable is thy Name in all the world! Bleſſed bee thy Name for euer, and let all thy people ſay, Amen.
            
            The Perſon
                     •
                  
                who are exhorted to this Loue are All GODS Saints,
               Who ought to loue GOD. euen all they, that haue taſted of his loue, and which in mercy hee hath hallowed for himſelfe; euen All of them, yong and old, rich and poore, high and low, men, women, and children; for in ſaying All, hee ex
               
                  •
               epteth None; the Yong men for their ſtrength; Old men for their wiſedome,

the Rich for their wealth, the Poore for their correction, the High for their greatneſſe; the Low for their meaneſſe, with which vertue and piety commonly cottens beſt with; Men for their ſupereminent honour, Woemen, becauſe hee hath graced their Sex, by bringing forth of a Sauiour, and Children for his great care and manifold protection of them: and all in generall for their Sanctification by grace on earth, and eternall Saluation in immortall glory in the Heauens.
            
               Obiect.But are none bound to loue the LORD but his Saints?
            
               
                  Solution. Pſal. 145. Math. 5. 1. Tim. 4 10Yes, without doubt, the Law ties all, for all are of his making, his goodneſſe reacheth vnto all, and hee is the Sauiour of all: But Dauid heere ſpeakes vnto Saints onely, being ſuch as himſelfe moſt delighted in, and of whom hee beſt hoped, being beſt affected, and ſuch alſo as whom GOD doth moſt deerely loue, and honour with his greateſt fauours.
            
               Our leſſon then from hence is this; All of vs, euery mothers child,Doctrine. without exemption of any; ſhould loue the LORD.
            But becauſe,Barbarus his ego ſum, cum non intellig
                     •
                  r vlli, Ouid.
                as hee that ſpeakes Greeke or Lattine to him, that is no Grecian or Latiniſt, is but as a Barbarian to him, and does but beate the aire: So the Language and diſcourſe of loue to him, that loues not, is but barbarous and vnpleaſing, as ſounding Braſſe, and a tinckling Cymball: T
                  •
               erefore that wee may conceiu
                  •
                and reape profite by theſe things, which ſhall bee deliuered concerning our loue of GOD, it behoues vs to blow vp the dying and fainting coales of this heauenly and holy fire within our breaſts:Iob. 12. 11. And ſeeing that the eare taſteth words, as the palate doth meate, let vs haue vnderſtanding and attentiue eares, that diſcerning the things, we ſhall heare, to bee good, wee may receiue and digeſt them, and like prudent hearers ſhewforth the fruits therof in our liues & conuerſations.
            
               
               Reaſon 1. Why wee ſhould loue the LORD from the neceſſity thereof. Deut. 6. 5 & 10. 12.Firſt, then I ſay, Neceſſity lies vpon vs to loue the LORD: Woe vnto vs, if wee loue him not. For firſt, it is GODS expreſſe commandement: Thou ſhalt loue the LORD thy GOD; and now Iſrael (ſaith Moſes) what doth the LORD thy GOD require of thee, but to feare and loue him. This our Sauiour calleth a Great Commandement;Mat. 22. 38 the Commander is great, the Obiect is great, the vſe of the duety is great, and their reward is great, that take care to do it:GODS precept binds vs to loue him. And though there were no other reaſon to moue vs to it, but his bare command, yet were that reaſon ſtrong enough to bind vs: Sic vult, ſic iubet, ſtet pro ratione v
                     •
                  luntas. The power of a King, the authority of a Father, the place of a Maiſter, neceſſitatis, the ſubiection, and obedience of a Subiect, Childe, and Seruant. But GOD is our King, our Father, and our Maiſter, hee hath an abſolute, ineuitable and vncontrouleable power and iuriſdiction ouer vs: Therefore his very bare

command ſhould condition and controule vs without more adoe.
            But ſecondly, beſides the precept,Except we loue GOD we ſhall be curſed. there is a moſt heauy curſe, which, vnleſſe a man do loue GOD, hee cannot ſcape: For though our loue of GOD bee not the cauſ
                  •
                why, but a ſigne that GOD will bleſſe vs, yet our hatred, or Non-loue, doth deſerue his curſe. Therefore Saint Paul denounceth him accurſed,1. Cor. 16. 22. Rom. 9. 5. that loues not the LORD IESVS, who is GOD ouer all, bleſſed for euer, Amen.
            
            Thirdly, except wee loue GOD,No loue no worſhip. wee cannot worſhip him: For true worſhip is, Loue ioyned with duety towards a mans ſuperiours: So that,Scal. ex 317 ſ. 3. where there is no loue, there is but counterfeit ſeruice, or none at all.
            And indeed,No loue of GOD, n
                     •
                   lo
                     ••
                   of the go
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  . h. 3.
                     ••
                  .14. as hee that loues not GOD, cannot worſhip him, ſo neither can hee loue his neighbour for GOD, and in GOD: And Hee that loueth not his brother, is not of GOD but abideth in death: Certainely, hee that loues not the father, as the father,

loues not the ſonne, as the ſon, loues not his brother as the childe of GOD, as the brother of CHRIST, as the childe of the Church: which wee all ought, and who ſo doth not, ſhall haue ſmall reward.
            
               GODS ordinances profite not him, that loues not GOD.And that the neceſſity of this duty may yet appeare, let vs know, that as iron is vnfit to bee wrought on, vnleſſe it bee heated in the fire: and as waxe will not ſeale well, except it bee warme and ſoft: euen ſo are wee, till wee bee inflamed with loue, till that holy fire hath heated v
                  •
               : Till then, the Word, the Sacraments, the Miniſter, his Binding, Looſing, Preaching, Praying, Bleſſing, will bee of no true reckoning with vs, and wee ſhall take no comfort in them.
            
               Without lo
                     •
                  e, good deeds, fa
                  
                     •
                  our of 
                     •
                  en, &
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  e nohing 
                     •
                  o
                     ••
                  h.And ſay that a man had the loue of all men; ſay that hee could ſpeake all Languages in the world, and were able to remoue Mountaines, to caſt out deuils, to cure all diſeaſes, to heale all wounds, and ſhould crumble out all his goods to the

poore, ſuffer for the truth, do and ſuffer many things for his Country, yet if he loued not GOD, he might truely ſay with Saint Paul;1. Cor. 13. 2 
               Hee were Nothing: And thus wee ſee the neceſity of louing GOD.
            A ſecond argument of this duety,2d Reaſon, To loue GOD is a matter of equity. is from the Equity thereof: For ſeeing Almighty GOD doth loue vs, as it appeareth by his Electing, Redeeming, Sanctifying, and Preſeruing vs in CHRIST IESVS his beloued Sonne, it is a matter of equity that wee ſhould remonſtrate our loue vnto him in that his Sonne; and the rather alſo, becauſe our loue to him comes ſhort in meaſure of his loue to vs: For GODS loue is a Deſcending loue, but our loue to him is an Aſcending loue;GODS loue to vs deſcēding and loue deſcending is more naturall, more vigorous, and more vehement then loue aſcending: As wee ſee in fathers and mothers, who loue their children better then their children loue them. And reaſon may bee giuen heereof: For GOD knowes vs better

then wee know him: And there is no corruption, no vitioſity of nature in him, as there is in vs: Wee are not ſo good and candid of na
               
                  •
               ure, as Hee: Neither haue wee any thing of ours in GOD to loue, as hee hath in vs; for wee, and euery good thing in vs is of GOD.
            Beſides, GOD loues vs, that deſerue his hatred,Ephe. 2. being by nature dead in ſinnes, and children of wrath, and bringing forth many rootes of bitterneſſe, and fruites of iniuſtice; how vnequally then ſhould wee deale with him, if wee ſhould not loue him, who deſerues our loue, being moſt louely in himſelfe, and bearing ſuch loue vnto vs. What is man (ſaith Dauid vnto GOD) that thou art ſo mindfull of him,
               Pſal. 8. 4. 8. 144. 3. 
               or the ſonne of man, that thou thinkeſt on him? And what is GOD, ô man, that thou art ſo vnmindfull of him, bearing ſo ſmall reſpect and loue vnto him? If it bee vntolerable ingratitude for a man to be loued of a man, and to receiue continuall tokens of

loue from him, and yet in the meane time not to loue his louer, and to ſhow no ſignes of kindneſſe towards him? What horrible impiety, iniuſtice, and vnthankefulneſſe, is it to bee beloued of GOD, and to returne no loue vnto him; to receiue daily teſtimonies of loue from him, and yet to ſhew no loue vnto his Name? Farre be this vneuen and vnthankefull dealing from vs, that owe more loue vnto him, then wee can expreſſe in worke or word? Nimis durus eſt animus,
               Auguſt. 
               qui ſi dilectionem n
                     •
                  lebat impendere, n
                     •
                  lie rependere: His heart is Oke, not fleſh, but flint, that though hee will not beginne to loue, yet finding loue will ſhew no loue: But GOD doth loue vs; out of his loue hee ſent his Sonne,
               Ioh. 3. 16. Col. 1. 13. his onely Sonne, the Sonne of his loue into the world to ſaue vs; Hee ſends vs fruitfull ſeaſons, and fils our hearts with gladneſſe:Lam. 3. 22. 23. 
               It is his mercies that wee are not conſumed, they are renewed euery morning. Yea, we ſhould bee very vniuſt and iniurious vnto

our ſelues, if wee will not loue him, ſeeing (as the Apoſtle teacheth) All things (life and death,Rom. 8. 28. health, and ſickeneſſe, ſame and reproach, plenty and penury, proſperity and aduerſity) worke together for good vnto thoſe that loue GOD.The equity of our loue further explained. And what reaſon is there, that wee ſhould deſire his loue to vs, and with-hold ours from him? Or what reaſon haue wee to require loue of our wiues, children, ſeruants, neighbours, acquaintances, if wee care not to ſhew loue to him, who hath adopted, married, and aſſumed vs vnto him? Or finally, with what equity can we deſire that our commands ſhould bee reſpected of thoſe that depend on vs, if wee make no count of this duety (which drawes on all the reſt) which he exacteth and expecteth at our hands? Wee ſee then that common ſenſe and Equity, extorts it from vs, and cals vs to it.
            
               3. Reaſons from the profite of loue.Thirdly, the commodities of this loue ſhould moue vs to the entertainement and performance of it.

For firſt,1. Commodity. by this loue our faith produceth thoſe good duties, which we owe to GOD. For Faith, is as an Hand Receiuing, but by loue we giue and beſtow, and without it wee can do no good workes well: Therefore the Apoſtle ſaith,Gal. 5. 6. that Faith worketh by loue: And as Saint Auſten ſpeaketh, Our life and all our conuerſation is named of our loue: Nec faciunt bonos vel malos mores, niſi boni vel mali ſint amores: Which being good or bad, makes our manners to be thereafter; ſuch as the loue is, ſuch is the life;
                  
                     •
                  ike as th
                     •
                   loue 
                     〈◊〉
                   the l
                     ••
                  e. a holy loue, a holy life; an earthly loue, an earthly life: If a mans loue be ſet on GOD, his life muſt needs bee good: And though this bee certaine, A man is iuſtifyed by Faith, yet this is true; The life of a man is iuſtified by Loue, a naughty loue, a naughty life: Againe, his life is good, whoſe loue is fixt on good: and what greater good then GOD, who is the good of goods, and n
                  •
               thing but Good?
               3. Commodity.
            
            Secondly, this loue doth poiſe

and ſeaſon knowledge, which without loue would bee windy, light, flaſhy, and vnſauory: Knowledge without Charity makes a man to ſwell and bluſter;1. Cor. 8. 1. but the loue of GOD and of man, for GOD will make the beſt learned moſt humble and officious.A Similie. Meate vndigeſted breeds corruption, but being digeſted, it affoordeth nouriſhment and ſtrength: ſo knowledge, vnleſſe it bee boyled and concocted in the ſtomacke of the ſoule, with this ſacred fi
                  •
               e of loue to GOD, and of man for GOD, it engendreth crudities, windineſſe, and diſeaſes, euen corrupt conditions in heart and life; but being by loue digeſted it is very nouriſhable and of great vſe.A Similie Yea further, as ſhewers of raine occaſion ſtore of weeds, except there bee heate and drineſſe to receiue, alter, and digeſt them: but being by the drought of the ground and heate of the Sunne turned and concocted, they make the ſoile more freſh and fruitfull. Euen ſo the words of inſtruction,

exhortation, admonition, communication, counſell, conſolation, ſtraining from the Scriptures in the Miniſtery of the Church, and falling vpon men, become vnprofitable and dangerous to them, except they bee tempered and receiued by loue: But being by loue embraced, and as it were digeſted, they bring forth in them the fruites of righteouſneſſe, and make them more fat and fertile, much more ſeruiceable to both GOD and Man: Yea, whereas meate by heate is turned into the body, and dewes and ſhewers into the earth and hearbes: By loue the word is not turned into vs, but wee rather into it, being brought vnder the obedience of it, and now no longer ſeeking and ſeruing the fleſh, but ſtudying to conforme our ſelues to it, and wraſtling againſt our luſts, that it might poſſeſſe vs, guide and order vs. O Loue, by thee I go out of my ſelfe, that the Word of GOD might enter in, by thee I warre againſt my

ſelfe, that it might raigne in peace within mee, by thee I mortifie mine earthly members, that it might liue, might like, and proſper in mee!
            
               3. Commodity of loue. By the loue of GOD a man may know his eſtate before GOD.Thirdly, by the loue of GOD wee may know in what eſtate wee are in. A man by grace within him may know the grace of GOD vnto him: A may by looking vpon a Dyall may know the motion of the Sunne in heauen; ſo by ſifting his owne ſoule hee may ſee the good will of GOD vnto him. I ſee not the aire, but I can perceiue the operation of the aire; neither do I ſee the heart (or loue of GOD) as it is in his owne breaſt, but there are certaine operations of his loue, euen in the hearts of men, which if they truely find, they may aſſure themſelues of his loue vnto them. Now that loue, whereby a man loues GOD, is a work of GODS loue, whereby he loues man; So that he that loues GOD, may conclude that GOD loues him. For GOD

cals no man effectually, but out of his loue vnto him: But as Saint Paul ſheweth, hee that loueth GOD is called of his purpoſe: And againe,Rom. 8. 28. 
               If any man loue GOD,1. Cor. 8. 3. (ſaith hee) the ſame is knowne (ſcientiâ approbatiuâ) That is, acknowledged, and loued, and approued, of him. And Saint Iohn ſaith; Wee loue him,
               1. Ioh. 4. 19. Eccleſ. 1. 7. A Similie. 
               becauſe hee loued vs firſt. For our loue ſprings out of his, as the Riuers from the Sea; his loue drawing our hearts vnto him, as the Loadſtone doth iron to it, or as the Sardius doth wood; our loue anſwering to his loue, as an Eccho to a mans voyce, or as a face doth to a face in water:A Similie. And as one candle doth lighten another, ſo the conſideration of his loue to vs doth cauſe the reflexion of our loue to him: Which our conſideration of his loue vnto vs, is a gracious operation of his loue within vs, being a fruit, not of the fleſh, which is bent againſt GOD, but of the Spirit, which proceedeth from GOD: And for becauſe the haters of GOD,

and the louers of worldly things, are of Babylon, of the world of the deuill; and ſeeing the louers of GOD are of Ieruſalem, of the Catholique Church our Mother, of GOD our Father, and haue their ſinnes forgiuen (Interoget ſe vnuſquiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   quid amet,
               Luk. 7. 47. Aug. in Pſ. 64. 
               & inueniat vnde ſit ciuis) Let euery man but examine himſelfe what hee loues, and he ſhall finde in what eſtate he is, and to what Citty hee doth belong; Tis true I confeſſe a man is not loued becauſe he loues, but becauſe hee is loued therefore hee loues:A Similie. And as the Sunne ſhining vpon a plate of ſiluer is not idle and void of operation, but heates the plate, which ſendeth from it both light and heate: So GOD ſhining with the reſplendent and burning beames of his loue vpon vs, is not now idle, and voide of all ſucceſſe, but inflames our heart with loue, by which wee are both well affected towards him, and for his ſake alſo towards others; that as no man can ſtand by, or meddle

with, that plate of ſiluer, which ſhall not receiue of the light and heate of it; ſo no man can (as it were) paſſe by vs, or haue any dealing with vs, but wee ſhall ſh
                  •
               w our good affection towards him.
            Fourthly,4. Commodity of our loue of GOD. the loue of GOD is not lazy; if it labour not it is no loue. Our loue of GOD ingenders in vs the loue of the godly for GOD, which is alſo very comfortable: For as hee that loues the King, as King,The loue of GOD makes vs to loue the godly. cannot but loue his faithfull and loyall ſubiects: And as hee that loues the father, cannot, will not,A Similie. doth not hate his childe; and as hee that loues his friend, will not miſuſe his picture: So he that truely loues GOD, will alſo loue thoſe, that by their godly conuerſation doe ſhew themſelues to bee the ſeruants and children of GOD, and which are the liuelieſt pictures of GOD, which mortals can ſee: And this kinde of loue is comfortable, becauſe heereby we may aſſure our ſelues to be the true Diſciples of our LORD,

and know (as the Apoſtle teacheth) that we are Tranſlated from death to life.
               1. Ioh. 3. 14.
            
            
               5. Commodity. A SimilieAnd as many boughes come from one roote, and much water from one ſpring; ſo many vertues ariſe from this loue, and (as Gregory ſpeaketh, Non habet viriditatem ramus boni ope
                     ••
                  , niſi manſerit in radiee charitatis) the workes of all vertues will but wither, except they remaine in the greeneneſſe of this Roote, except they bee nouriſhed by this loue: The loue of money,A Similie. the loue of mammon is the roote and nouriſher of all euill; ſo the loue of GOD is the mother and nurſe of all good, of all pious Offices vnto GOD, and Chriſtian duties vnto man.
            
               6. Commodity. A Similie.And in one word, the loue of GOD is as ſtrong as death; for as death doth kill the body, ſo our loue to GOD doth mortifie our loue to the world, and like a ſtrong wind it diſpels the thicke and ſtinking fogs of rancour, wrath, malice: And as the riſing of the Sunne

doth driue away the cold and dulneſſe of the night, and as the pouring in of wine into a veſſell cauſeth the aire to giue place; ſo the loue of GOD doth diminiſh and ſend packing the inordinate loue of worldly vanities, and when our hearts are once warmed with it, it cauſeth the coldneſſe of our affections vnto good to depart and leſſen: When GOD comes into the heart (as hee doth when the heart doth loue him) Mammon muſt needs go out; When wee fixe our eyes on heauen wee remoue them from the earth; and when wee fall into a league of loue with GOD, it cannot bee but that wee muſt fall out of loue, and into hatred, with all his enemies. Therefore Dauid ſaith out of his loue to GOD:Pſal. 139. 21, 22. 
               Do not I hate them, O LORD, that hate thee? I hate them with an vnfeygned hatred, as if they were mine vtter enemies: And thus wee haue had a ſay of the commodiouſneſſe of this our loue to GOD.
            
               
               4. Arguments of loue to GOD from the excellency o
                     •
                   it. Excel. 1. 1. Ioh. 4. 7. Iam. 1. 17.The Excellencie thereof remaineth yet to bee diſcuſſed: True loue, wherewith GOD is affected, is excellent in all theſe reſpects which follow. Firſt, in reſpect of the Authour of it, which is not man, but GOD: For loue, as Saint Iohn ſheweth, commeth of GGD: and whoſoeuer loueth GOD, doth it by the finger and gift of GOD.
            
               Excel. 2.Secondly, in reſpect of the true Endes thereof, which are not baſe but honourable, as the glory of GOD, the ſaluation of our ſoule, the edification of our brother, the honour of our calling, and that wee might not grieue the Spirit of GOD.
            
               Excel. 3.Thirdly, in reſpect of that of GODS, which moues vs to loue, which is his goodneſſe, becauſe he is good in himſelfe, and good to vs.
            
               Excel. 4.Fourthly, in regard of the Subiects of it, or the perſons, in whom it raigneth, which are onely the beloued Saints and Seruants of GOD, the excellenteſt of humane race, and

in them the Heart, euen the beſt member in them is the Hearth or Altar, on which this heauenly fire kindled by the HOLY GHOST doth lie.
            Fiftly,Excel. 5. in reſpect of the manifold and excellent Attendants and Companions, which waite vpon it; euen all the vertues: For our loue of GOD, is not forlorne and ſolitary, but like an honourable Lady, very well attended.
            Sixtly, for the perpetuity thereof,Excel. 6. beyond faith and hope: For whereas they ſhall ceaſe, when a man hath once obtain'd full fruition of the things which hee doth beleeue and to expect haue and enioy; loue ſhall not ceaſe, but become compleate.
            Seuenthly, our loue of GOD,Excel. 7. hath three moſt excellent Effects, to ſpeake of no more.
            Firſt,1. Effect of loue. it makes a man officious to GOD, and for GOD to Man. True obedience is the fruit of loue; and all obedience which is not of loue, is hipocriticall and vnſauory. Wee

ſee the loue of a child forces him to obey his father, though hee had not a rod, not an arme: So GODS Childe by his loue is moued to ſerue GOD; yea, and would ſtudy to obey hi
                  •
               , though hee would not ſtrike, though there were no hell to be puniſht in for diſobedience: Yea, the force of loue is ſuch, that it will make a man obey GOD, though there were no After-reward of obedience: Euen as wee ſee amongſt men, loue will enforce a man to doe well vnto one, whom hee loues, euen freely, then when the party receiuing the benefite is not able now, nor likely heereafter, to make a requitall of it.
            
               2. Effect of loue. 1. Ioh. 4. 8.Secondly, it makes a man like to GOD (for GOD is LOVE) and it is not the leaſt commendation of a childe to bee like his father.
            
               3. Effect.Thirdly, hee that loueth GOD, doth, as it were, depriue himſelfe of himſelfe, and beſtowes himſelfe on GOD, whom hee doth loue; inſomuch that hee doth dye, by little,

and little, in himſelfe; but GOD, whom hee loueth, liueth in him: For the loue of GOD (if ſincere and feruent) is of a Rauiſhing diſpoſition, by the which the louer is ſo rapt out of himſelfe, that hee forgets himſelfe, denies himſelfe, and is wholy in GOD, whom he loueth, and GOD, whom he aff
                  •
               cteth, being in him. So that this loue is able to make the louer ſay; I liue, but not I now, but GOD liueth in mee.
               A Similie. For euen as the loue of the world makes the worldling liue vnto the world, and the world to liue in him; ſo, as it may bee ſaid of them in ſome ſort: They two are become one: So our loue to GOD doth cauſe vs to liue to GGD, and GOD (as it were) to liue in vs; ſo as that wee are now no more Ours, but His, no more Two, but One: Neither ſeeke we our ſelues, but Him: Non nostra ſed ſua; not ours, but His.Excel. 8. The reward of the loue of GOD.
            
            Eightly, our loue of GOD may bee ſaid to bee excellent, in reſpect of that excellent and ſupereminent

               Reward, wherewith GOD will recompence them, that loue him, how poore or meane ſoeuer: and this is no leſſe then a Crowne, then a Kingdome, the Crowne of Glory, the Kingdome of Heauen. Hearken my beloued Brethren (ſaith Saint Iames) Hath not GOD choſen the Poore of this world,
               Iam. 2. 5. 
               that they ſhould bee rich in faith, and Heires of the Kingdome, which hee hath promiſed to them, that loue him?
               2. Tim. 4. 8. Why it is called the crowne of righteouſneſſe. And Saint Paul likewiſe ſheweth, that the Crowne of righteouſneſſe, euen that, which CHRIST hath purchaſed by his righteouſneſſe, that which GOD hath in mercy promiſed, and in iuſtice will performe, that wherewith righteous men ſhall bee rewarded, ſhall bee rendred to them, that loue his comming, which onely they do, that loue him himſelfe. Doubtleſſe, hee that loues not the Iudge, loues not his comming to iudgement: Hee then that would liue in heauen like a King, let him loue GOD firſt on earth like a Subiect: Hee that would

haue that Glory, let him haue this Grace. Oh! how men loue the world, whoſe pleaſures are but for a ſeaſon, and whoſe ioyes are but imperfect? But in the preſence of GOD there is fuln
                     •
                  ſſe of ioy,
               Pſ. 16. 11. 
               and at his right hand there are pleaſures for euermore. O! how couetous are men of riches, how ambitious of a Crowne? And yet Riches remaine not alway,
               Pro. 27. 24. 
               nor the Crowne from generation to generation: But the riches of Glory, that come 
                  By, I ſay, not For.
                
               By the loue of GOD, are euerlaſting; the Crowne and Kingdome promiſed to them, that loue him, is eternall and vnchangeable. The preferments, profites and pleaſures, which the earth can affoord, are obuious to the eye, and not ſo goodly as fooliſh men imagine: But the things which GOD hath prepared for them that loue him,1. Cor. 2. 9. are ſuch as no eye hath ſeene, no eare hath heard, no heart hath conceiued; none can expreſſe them but they that enioy them. Oh, that men would therefore ſet their loue vpon him, and remoue it from

the world! For hee, that loues GOD, loues him that will reward him with peeereleſſe honour; but hee, that loues the world, loues his owne betrayer, for the world ſayes to the deuils concerning him that is in loue with her, as Iudas ſaid to the Iewes:Mar 
                     •
                  4. 44. 
               Whomſoeuer I ſhall kiſſe, it is hee,
               Iudg. 4. 19. 22. 
               take him: And as Iael ſerued Siſ
                     •
                  ra; ſo ſerues the world all thoſe, that ſhee lulles a ſleepe within her Tent: Well may ſhee feed them with her milke and butter, but if ſhe get them once a ſleepe, ſhee peirces the very Temples of their ſoules, and nailes them faſt vnto the ground.Excel 9.
            
            Finally, this loue is excellent and matchleſſe in reſpect of the Obiect of it, who is the Omni-potent, Omni-preſent, Omni-ſcient, All-wiſe, Euer-liuing, and Euer-louing GOD, who is Goodneſſe, Mercy, Iuſtice, Loue, and Life it ſelfe, who onely is Verity, Vertue, Vnity, Amity, the Beautie of Beauties, the Perfection of Perfections, euen Beauty and

               Perfection it ſelfe.What IEHOVA, CVRIOS, DOMINVS, and LORD do ſignity. In Hebrew called IEHOVAH, becauſe hee is of, and for himſelfe, all other things elſe being both from him and for him: In Greeke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , becauſe hee hath authority ouer all: In Latine DOMINVS, becauſe hee tameth, ruleth, and owneth all things: In Engliſh LORD, becauſe hee hath Honour and Authority, and for that hee is IL-LAF-FORD (where the word LORD by contraction, or corruption commeth) which is as much as a Giuer,
               Pſ. 104. 27. & 145. 16. Pſal. 3 4. 9 10., or an Affoorder of Bread: For hee giueth food to all fleſh, and bread, with all things needfull, for this life preſent, and for the life to come, to all his ſeruants that attend and feare him.
            The execellency therefore of the Obiect ſhould moue vs to the loue thereof: What Nature is there comparable to GODS? Whoſe conditions is ſo ſweete, ſo abſolute, as his? What canſt thou loue, that's worthy loue, which is not be found in him in all compleatneſſe? Doſt

thou delight in the Mighty?
               Ier. 32. 27. 
               Behold (ſaith he) I am the LORD GOD of all fleſh: Is there any thing too hard for mee? If hee but ſpeake the word, it's done, his power is ſo great.
            Doſt thou loue Wiſedome? GOD is All-knowing and moſt Prudent: Hee ſcattereth the deuices of the crafty,
               Iob 5. 12. 23 
               ſo that their hands cannot accompliſh that, which they do enterpriſe: He taketh the wiſe in their craftineſſe, and the counſell of the wicked is made fooliſh. Hee is wiſe in heart,
               Iob 9. 4. & 12. 16. 17. 
               and mighty in ſtrength: who hath beene fierce againſt him and hath proſpered? With him is ſtrength and wiſedome: Hee cauſeth the Councellours to go as ſpoyled, and maketh the Iudges fooles:
               Pro. 21. 30 
               There is no wiſedome nor vnderſtanding, nor counſell againſt the LORD.
            Delighteſt thou in Valour and Stoutneſſe of Spirit?Pſal. 24. 8. 
               The LORD, is ſtrong and mighty in Battell: Hee leadeth away Princes as a Prey, and ouerthroweth the Mighty:Iob 12. 19. 21. 
               Hee powreth contempt vpon Princes, and maketh the ſtrength of the Mighty weake: The

courage of al men, the fortitude of all Angels; the ſtoutnes of all creatures, is to GODS, as a drop of water to the vaſt Ocean, the light of a candle to the ſplendor of the Sunne, or as a thing finite to infinite.
            Is thy delight in him, that deſerues admiration? The LORD doth great things, and vnſearchable, yea merueilous things without number. Lo, when hee goeth by mee (ſaith Iob) I ſee him not, and when hee paſſeth by,
               Iob. 9. 10. 11. 
               I perceiue him not! Behold, when hee taketh a prey who can make him to reſtore it? Who ſhall ſay vnto him, what doſt thou?
               Iſa. 40. 22. 23. 
               Hee ſitteth vpon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as Graſhoppers: Hee ſtretcheth out the heauens, as a curtaine, and ſpreadeth them out as a Tent to dwell in: Hee bringeth the Princes to nothing, and maketh the Iudges of the earth as vanity: Hee blowes vpon them, and they wither, and his whirle-wind takes them away as ſtubble.
            Wilt thou loue the Faithfull and him that is conſtant in Truth? GOD

               is faithfull,
               1. Cor. 1.
                     •
                  . Pſa. 146 6 Pſa. 100. 5 
               hee keepeth his fidelity for euer, and his truth indureth from generation to generation.
            
            Couldeſt thou affect one that is lust in all his proceedings? The LORD is righteous in all his waies:Pſ. 145. 17 Pſa. 96. 13 
               He will iudge the world with righteouſneſſe, and the people with his truth.
            
            Couldeſt thou find in thine heart to loue him that is mercifull by Nature, and which hath compaſſion on the poore, and him that is afflicted and weary?Pſa. 116. 5 Pſal. 146. 9. 2. Sam. 22 28. Iſa. 40. 29 Iob. 36. 15. 
               The LORD is mercifull and full of compaſſion: Hee relieueth the fatherleſſe, and is a friend to the poore: Hee giueth ſtrength vnto him that fainteth, and vnto him that hath no ſtrength hee increaſeth power: He deliuereth the poore in his affliction, and openeth their eare in trouble.
            
            Wilt thou fix thy ſoule on him, that loues a good heart, and which hates him, that is ill diſpoſed? Behold, GOD will not caſt away an vpright man,
               Iob. 8. 20. Pſal. 84. 11. Iob. 13. 16. 
               neither will hee take the wicked by the hand. The LORD will giue grace and glory, and no good thing

will hee with-hold from them, that walke vprightly: but the hypocrite ſhall not come before him.
            
            Wouldſt thou ſet thy heart on him, that is ſo compleate in himſelfe, as that hee can neither bee profited by the iuſtice of any,Pſal. 16. 2. nor hurt by the ſinne of any? This is onely the LORD: My goodneſſe extendeth not to thee, ſaith Dauid. May a man bee profitable vnto GOD (ſaith Eliphaz) as hee, that is wiſe,
               Iob. 22. 2. 3 
               may bee profitable to himſelfe? Is it any thing to the Almighty that thou art righteous? or is it profitable vnto him that thou makeſt thy waies vpright? if thou ſinneſt,
               Iob. 35. 6. 7. 8. 
               what 
                     •
                  ost thou againſt him? Yea, when thy ſinnes bee many, what doſt thou vnto him? If thou bee righteous, what giueſt thou vnto him? or what receiueth hee at thine hand? Thy wickedneſſe may hurt a man, as thou art: and thy righteouſneſſe may profite the Sonne of man: No man can giue any thing to GOD, which hee hath not, nor take ought from him which hee hath.
            Finally, wilt thou loue him, that

will ſaue them, that feare him, and preſerue them that loue him? Then loue the LORD; For his ſaluation is neere to them that feare him: Becauſe hee hath loued mee, therefore will I deliuer him:
               Pſal. 85. 9. & 91. 14. & 145. 20. 1. Pet. 1. 5. 9. 
               The LORD preſerueth all them that loue him: And by his power hee will guarde them through faith, that in the end they ſhall attaine to the end of their faith, the ſaluation of their ſoules in heauen. And in one word, becauſe nothing doth more moue a man to loue another, then faith and conſtancy, then this, that a man loues one that is no flincher, no changling,Mal. 3. 6. euen this ſhould prouoke vs to the loue of GOD, Who changes not,
               Iam. 1. 17. 
               and with whom (as Saint Iames ſpeaketh) is no variableneſſe, nor ſhadow of turning.
               Iſ. 46. 10. 11 Ier. 31. 3. Ioh. 13. 1. Ier. 32. 40. Pſal. 94. 14. His counſell ſhall ſtand; he will do whatſoeuer he hath ſaid: Whom hee loueth once, hee loueth with an euerlaſting loue vnto the end: And wil neuer turne away from them to do them good: but will delight in them to do them good, & will not faile them nor forſake them.
            
               The truth is,Fiue reaſons why GOD ſhould bee loued aboue all things. 1. Reaſon. 2. Cor. 12. 15. there is no man, no nothing in the world, which doth deſerue our loue ſo as GOD doth, or which ſhould ſtand cheeke by ioule with him in our affections.
            For firſt, a man may loue men, and yet not bee loued of them: For (as it ſometimes falleth out) the more that ſome are loued, the leſſe they loue, affecting them leaſt that loue them moſt. But the more any man loues GOD, the more hee may bee ſure that GOD loues him; Not that GOD is drawne to loue for the merite of our loue: But becauſe our loue to him is a fruit of his loue to vs, and increaſeth as his: Euen as the more heate is, which commeth from a wall, or from the ground, the more it argues that the Sunne beats vpon it.
            Secondly, earthly things,2. Reaſon. as riches, honour, credite, preferments, and the like, cannot giue a man ſuch contentment, as may bee found in GOD. For they are momentany and vncertaine; but GOD is cerraine,

conſtant, and eternall. They are mingled with ſome-thing, which may diſpleaſe vs: But GOD is altogether profitable, and full of pleaſure: A man may bee glutted with them, hee may loue them too well, hee may ſurfeit on them, hee may ioy ſo long in them, as at laſt hee may bee puniſht with his owne perdition: but no can bee too full of GOD: Hee will cloy no mans ſtomacke, no man can loue him too much, too long; for the meaſure of louing him is to loue him without meaſure, the end is endleſſe, it is a debt which is alwaies due vnto him, and for euer; which a man muſt bee euer a paying, and neuer haue done paying: And further, although a man had all pleaſures, all wealth and honour that the whole world could affoord him, yet if hee gaue way vnto his minde, hee would ſtill wiſh for more, and delight in change: For the Round world, and all that's in it, is not able to fill mans heart, that is Triangular,
               Pro. 30. 16. and vnſatiable as fire,

that neuer 
                  •
               aith it is enough; For if any man bee content, and thinke he hath enough, it is out of diſcretion becauſe hee ſees no true contentment can come from earthly things: But GOD, becauſe hee is the fulneſſe of good, a pure, and a perfect Truth, Beauty, and Perfection, is able to giue true and full contentment to the ſoule, to all the ſoules of men, yea though there were 2 thouſand thouſand worlds of men.
            Thirdly, wee loue men,3. Reaſon. whoſe fury reacheth not vnto the ſoule, and whoſe loue ſometimes can doe but little good: But the wrath of GOD is the woe of man, his anger reacheth vnto the ſoule, his indignation is more terrible then the roaring of ten thouſand Lyons: But in the light of his countenance is life, his fauour is like the dew vpon the graſſe, or as a cloude of the latter raine, his loue is euen our life, & the fountaine from whence our holines and happines, our grace and glory, our comfort & contentment ſprings.
            
               
               4. Reaſon.Fourthly, our loue to the creature is ioyned with feare and care, leaſt the thing, we loue ſhould take ſome harme: Res est ſolliciti plena timoris amor: Our friends may bee kil'd or hurt, goods may bee ſtollen, houſes may be burnt, a mans ſtocke may be waſted, his credite may be weakned, his ſeruant ſeduced, his children miſvſed, and his wife corrupted: A thouſand miſchances m
                  •
               y happen vnto theſe things, which are ſubiect to fire and water, winds and weather, birds and beaſts, ſinne and ſickenes, Men and deuils: But GOD is liable to no ſuch thing in himſelfe, Hee is ouer all, vnder none, altogether bleſſed, Impaſſible, immutable, Inuincible, Inuiolable.
            
               5. Reaſon. Act. 10. 34.Finally, whereas ſome will bee loued of ſome, but contemne the loue of others; GOD, with whom there is no reſpect of perſons, accepts of euery man, that loues him, yea, though the loue of all men can adde nothing to him: euen as alſo in louing other things, men are

often iealous, enuious, and malicious, and will endure no riuals, no competitors; which is cleane otherwiſe in our loue of GOD▪ for ſo powerfull is the grace of GOD in thoſe that loue him, as that it makes men deſirous of companions. A man that addicts himſelfe to ſome man, is afraid of another, leaſt that hee creeping into his loue ſhould hinder his gaines: But GOD hath enough for all, that loues him, hee is able to giue them all ſo much, as that they thēſelues ſhal ſay, They haue enough; Hee is ſo well able to ſatisfie them all, as that euery one of them might ſay;Pſal. 16. 6. 
               The lines are fallen vnto mee in pleaſant places; yea I haue a faire heritage: Thou doſt annoint mine head with oyle,
               Pſal. 23. 5 
               and my cup runneth ouer. And though it fall out ſometimes among vs, that wee will diſlike him, that doth increaſe our acquaintants, followers, or ſuch as ſhall hang vpon vs to be relieued and maintained by vs; yet it is not ſo with GOD: For if any man ſhall conuert ſinners vnto

him, and increaſe his friends, if true, tho not vncoſtly to him, the ſame man doth a worke pleaſing to him, and doing it out of loue hee ſhall not looſe his reward: For GOD is not vniuſt to forget your worke,
               Heb. 6. 10 
               and labour of your loue, (ſaith Saint Paul) which yee haue ſhewed vnto his Name. And they (ſaith the LORD) that turne many to righteouſneſſe,
               Dan. 12. 3. 
               ſhall ſhine as the Starres for euer and euer. And indeed wherefore were the Apoſtles ſent abroad into the world, but to gather Diſciples to him, and to increaſe his followers?
            A
                  •
               d that I may yet preſſe this poi
                  •
               t a little more, being of ſo great importance. Tell mee, how ſhall man ſhew himſelfe thankefull vnto GOD. except hee loue him for creating him in his Image?G
                     ••
                  . 1.
                     •
                  7 2
                     •
                  . How ſhall hee excuſe himſelfe, if hee loue him not, ſeeing he hath not planted him in a world vnfurniſhed, but hath prepared him all things needfull: Light for ſeeing, Aire for breathing, Meates for feeding, Clo
                  •
               thes for couering,

and hath giuen him rule ouer the Fiſh of the Sea,Pſalm. 8 7. the Fowles of Heauen, and ouer euery beaſt that moueth vpon the earth?
            Wee are forbidden to haue any other GOD vnto our ſelues,Exod. 20. 3 but the LORD which hath brought vs out of the land of darkeneſſe, the region of death, and deliuered vs from bondage vnder ſinne and ſathan: which wee ſhall neuer bee able to obſerue, vnleſſe by loue we deuote and wed our ſelues vnto him.
            How ſhall wee ſanctifie the Name of the LORD, and not defile it,Leuit. 19. 12. 18. except wee loue it? How ſhall wee meerely vpon GODS naked Precept forget an iniury, and 
                  •
               ot auenge our ſelues, if 
                  •
               he loue of GOD do not perſwade vs?
            Will any man with Moſes poſt-poſe his ow
                  •
               e greatneſſe to the glory of GOD,Numb 14.
                     •
                  .12. 13. except hee loue 
                  •
               im? and will hee bee carefull that thoſe, which are committed to his care, ſhould not behaue themſelues a
                  •
                rebels, and ſtart-awaies, vnleſſe t
                  •
               e

loue of GOD enforce him?
            How can parents bring vp their children religiouſly,Deut. 6. 7. & 11. 19. Ephe. 6. 4. inſtruct them in GODS Commandements carefully, and bring them vp (as they are required) in the information of the LORD piouſly, except the loue of GOD doth moue them to it?
            How ſhall wee bee able to meditate in the Law of GOD day and night,Ioſh. 
                     •
                  . 8. as wee are exhorted, our dulneſſe and auerſneſſe is ſo great by nature, except the loue of GOD do ſpurre vs vp and vanquiſh vs?
            
               Iudg. 2. 17.How ſhall wee with the children of Iſrael, turne quickely out of the way, wherein our fathers haue walked, and go an whoring after the idoll, idle and addle inuentions of men; ſpecially if we were but put to it a little, except our loue to GOD reſtraine and bridle vs?
            What ſoule will ſay to GOD, but that which loues him deerely, as Ruth ſaid to Naomi,
               Ruth 1. 16. 
               Whether thou goeſt, I will go, and where thou dwelleſt I will dwell. It is lacke of loue, which

makes men forſake him, deny him ſeruice, and depart out of his houſe.
            Will a mother with Hannah,
               1. Sam. 1. 11 24. 28. dedicate her ſonne vnto the LORD, but that ſhee loues him? ſurely if her dedication be in deuotion, it is the fruit of her loue.
            Wouldeſt thou with Dauid ſet all the Lawes of GOD before thee,2. Sam. 22. 23. 24. and not depart there from? Wouldſt thou bee vpright towards him, and keepe thee from thy wickedneſſe? Then loue him; For what was it,1. Sam. 20 4. 17. that made Ionathan ſo ſincere to Dauid? what cauſed him to ſay vnto him, Whatſoeuer thy ſoule requireth, that will I do vnto thee? Euen this, Becauſe hee loued him as his owne ſoule.
            
            What but loue forced the true mother of the child to ſay vnto Salomon,
               1. King. 3. 26. 
               Slay him not; whereas the other for want of loue ſaid, Diuide it. So nothing but the loue of GOD makes a man ſtudy the peace & vnity of his Houſe, and cauſes his bowels to yearne at the diuiding of it.
            
               What but the zeale of loue to GOD,2. King. 18. 4. moued Hezekiah to break the images, to cut downe the groues, 
                  •
               nd to demoliſh the brazen Serpent? So certainely thou ſhalt neuer 
                  •
               leaue faſt to the LORD, and throw downe thoſe idols, that are within thee, and keep thy ſoule from inchaſtity, except thy loue to GOD conſtraine thee.
            Wouldſt thou haue thy Religion coſtly, and not count it a burthen to thee? Wouldſt thou bee cheerefull, and Free-ſpirited in all thine oblations and gifts vnto GOD? Then muſt thou needs addict thy ſoule to GOD by loue. It was this which made Dauid ſay to Ornan, I will not take thine for the LORD▪
               1 Chron. 21. 24. 
               nor offer burnt offerings without coſt. It was deuotion, which moued the Iſraelites to beſtow their ſiluer and gold and precious ſtones vnto the building of the Temple: Of whom it is written, that They offered willingl
                     •
                   vnto the LORD,1 C
                     •••
                  n. 29.
                     •
                  . 
               with a Perfite 
                     •
                  eart.
            
            
               It was without queſtion true loue to GOD, which made S
                     •
                  lomon pray for wiſedome and knowledge to gouerne the people of GOD,2. Chron. 1. 10. & 2. 1 and build an houſe for the Name of the LORD:Pſal. 132. 3. and which made Dauid ſay; I will not enter into the Tabernacle of mine houſe, nor come vpon my pallat or bed, nor ſuffer mine eyes to ſleepe, nor mine eye-lids to ſlumber, vntill I finde out a place for the LORD, an habitation for the mighty GOD of Iacob. Euen ſo doe thou,Reu. 1. 6. whom CHRIST hath made a ſpirituall King, deuote and beſtow thy ſelfe on GOD by loue, if euer thou deſireſt to gouerne thy ſelfe, to mortifie thy luſts, and to make thine heart an houſe for GOD to dwell in: Wouldſt thou not ſleepe till thou haſt found out an houſe for GOD to dwell in? Then ſurely thy loue muſt keepe thee awake.
            Loue vnto God, and of his worſhip,E
                     ••
                  a 3. 11. made the people ſing for ioy and ſhoute with a great ſhoute, when the foundation of the LORDS

Houſe was laid: Euen ſo it behoues vs truely to loue GOD, if wee would truely reioyce, when wee ſee the Church,1. Tim. 3. 15 which is the Houſe of GOD, newly founded or repaired, in any Kingdome, State, Citty, Towne, Village, Family: or when wee ſee the truth of CHRIST planted and receiued in any man.
            Wee are commanded to ſanctifie the Sabboath day: and Nehemiah was very zealous for the keeping of it, and reproues the Rulers for the breach thereof.Neh. 13. 17 
               What euill thing is this (ſaith hee) that yee doe, and breake the Sabboath day? Did not yours fathers thus, and our GOD brought all this plague vpon vs, and vpon this Citty? yet yee increaſe the wrath vpon Iſrael in breaking the Sabboath. Now certainely, vnleſſe by loue we ſanctifie GOD in our hearts, we ſhall neuer ſanctifie the Saboath for GOD. This is the cauſe that wee ſteale away the Saboath from GOD, becauſe our lucre and pleaſures doe ſteale away our loue, that is due to GOD, from vs.
            
               It was loue that made Ester ſay to the King:Eſter 8. 6. 
               How can I ſuffer and ſee the euill that ſhall come vpon my people? or how can I ſuffer and ſee the deſtruction of my kindred? Doubtleſſe he loueth Iacob, that pitties the affliction of Ioſeph. Loue vnto GOD will make the heart bleed at the bloud-ſhed of the godly: Thou canſt not loue GOD, if thou beeſt not moued at the plots and practiſes of godleſſe men againſt the people of GOD: I ſuppoſe him void of all loue to GOD, that could haue ſeene & ſuffered that execrable Powder-practiſe,
               Nouemb. 5. 1605. or which now doth grieue in ſecret to ſee it diſapointed.
            To conclude, what moued Iob to patience? Loue.
               Iob 13. 15. What made him ſay, Though hee ſlay mee, yet will I truſt in him,
               Pſal. 16. 2. & 40. 8. 
               and I will reproue my waies in his ſight? Loue. What made Dauid ſay, Thou art my LORD, thy Law is within mine heart? Loue. What made him ſo ſing of GOD, and compoſe ſo many Pſalmes vnto him?Prou. 30. 8. 
               Loue. What made Agur pray, Feed mee with foode conuenient, leaſt I bee

full, and deny thee, and ſay; Who is the LORD? and leaſt I be poore, and ſteale, & take the Name of my GOD in vaine? Loue. What made Salomon riſe at the laſt,Eccleſ. 1. 2 & 12. 1. relinquiſh his luſts, cry All is vanity, & call vs to the remembrance of GOD in our youth? Loue. What moueth the Church to ſpeak thus vnto her huſband;Cant. 1. 1. 6 & 2. 5. 
               Let him kiſſe mee with the kiſſes of his Mouth: Shew me where thou feed
                     •
                  ſt, where thou lieſt at noone? Stay me with flagons & comfort me with Apples? Nothing but Loue. Shee is ſicke of loue. What made Daniel venture vpon the Lyons, the three children vpon the fire, and the Chriſtian Martyrs vpon all kinds of deaths? Surely this, They loued not their liues vnto the death, but out of their loue vnto GOD made more account of his glory, then of their owne liues, liberties, pleaſures, profits, and preferments, and held the truth at an higher rate, then all earthly things whatſoeuer.
            Loe then, what reaſon wee haue to loue the LORD! I all the wit

and induſtry of fleſh and bloud were ſpent and exerciſed in arguing for the loue of earthly things, yet all were nothing, of no validity, nor efficacy to remoue our loue from GOD to them. What ſhall detaine our loue? the world.Iam. 4. 4. 
               Know yee not, (ſaith Saint Iames) That the amity of the world is the enmity of GOD?
               Why men ſhould not dote on the world. 1. Ioh. 2 15. 
               Whoſoeuer therefore will bee a friend of the world, maketh himſelfe an enemy of GOD. Loue not this world (ſaith Saint Iohn) neither the things that are in this world▪
               
               What the world is. 
               if any man loue this world the loue of the FATHER is not in him What is the world, but a pleaſant phrenſie, a Theater of vanity, a ſi
                  •
               ke of ſinne, a ſhop of deceit, the center of inquities, and a very mi
                  •
               rour of miſery?Reu. 17. 2. 4 A Simil
                     •
                  e. Shee is like that skarlet Harlot, louely to looke on, but dangerous to deale with; who makes the Kings and Inhabitants of the earth drunken with the wine which ſhee preſents vnto them in her golden cup. Hee which followes the world, is like a foole or child, that

followes a ſhadow, or a butterfly, a thing of no valew, and which mockes them moſt, that loue her beſt, and follow her faſteſt. But ſay, why wilt thou loue the world?The world is vnconſtant. becauſe ſhee is conſtant? Erre not: nothing is more inconſtant then the world, conſtant in inconſtancy, and as inconſtant in her conſtancy: Shee is in nothing the ſame, ſaue in this, that ſhee loues not to bee the ſame. But GOD is the ſame for euer. Thou art the ſame,
               Pſ. 102. 27. 
               and thy yeares ſhall not faile:
               Iam 1. 17. 
               With thee there is no alteration, nor ſhadow of conuerſion.
               Num. 23. 19 GOD is not as man, that hee ſhould lie▪ nor as the ſonne of man that hee ſhould repent: Hath hee ſaid it, and ſhall hee not doe it? and hath hee ſpoken, and ſhall hee not accompliſh it? The world is fleeting and floating vp and downe in her loue; whom ſhee fauours to day, ſhee forſakes to morrow: But whom GOD loueth once, hee loueth euer: Once and Euer are all one with him;Iohn 13. 1. Ier. 32 4
                     •
                  . Pſa. 
                     •
                  9. 33. The world will ſhake off her deereſt louers, as an Oliue her leaues, or as

a Colt doth his rider; But GOD neuer caſts off him, that loues him (Et te nemo amittit,
               Auguſt. 
               niſi qui te dimittit) and no man doth looſe him, but he that leaues him: Then loue the LORD, and let go the world: Why ſhould thy Soule,
               Reaſons againſt the loue of the world. which is of an heauenly beginning, bee buryed and cloſed vp within the earth? Why ſhould it, which is immortall, bee pinned on things, that are but mortall? Why ſhould it, which is a Spirit, and Inuiſible, be fixt on things that are groſſe and viſible? Amor rerum terrenarum eſt viſcus ſpiritualium pennarum. The loue of the world is the lime-twigs of the ſoule, Amicitia ſol
                     •
                   eſt inimicitia poli. Friendſhip with the earth is enmity with heauen: But wee will deſcend vnto particulars.
            What wilt thou loue?Prou 23. 5. Why men ſhould not loue riches. 
               Wealth and Riches? Wilt thou caſt thine eyes vpon that, which is nothing? For riches taketh her to her wings, as an Eagle, and flyeth into heauen. Riches haue ſold more, then they haue redeemed;

and rich men haue few friends, but many flatterers that follow them, as Ants do Corne,Seneca. or as crows do carrion: Praedā ſequitur iſta turba: nō hominē: Such follow the prey, & not the perſon, loue the riches, but care not for the man; they would flea off his Hide to make themſelues thongs with it. An Ethnique could ſay, when hee had loſt all his goods; Perijſſem, ni perijſſent; I had loſt my ſelfe, if I had not loſt them. But for GOD who is our greateſt good; whether wee looſe our goods or not, if wee looſe him, and will looſe him; if we loue riches more then him, we looſe our ſelues, our comfort & contentment: Therefore if riches increaſe,
               Pſal. 62 1
                     •
                  . Who is moſt rich. 
               ſet not thine heart vpon them: If thou aboundeſt not, be contented, for hee hath moſt that couereth leaſt; He is the richeſt that leaſt admireth riches: Hee is the greateſt, who is contented with the ſmalleſt portion.
            
               Why the loue of pleaſures ſhould not hinder our loue to GOD.What then ſhall haue thy loue? ſhall Pleaſures? What are pleaſures but pleaſing vanities? What are pleaſures

to the paines of hell which waite vpon them? What ſweetneſſe is there in them to the ſweetneſſe which is in GOD? If our ſoules were ſweetned with the true taſte of GODS loue, all other things would ſeeme bitter to vs: And that men feele not the ſweetneſſe of GOD,Why GOD ſeemeth not ſo ſweete to ſome. Heb. 11. 25 it is becauſe their mouthes are out of taſte, being corrupted with the ague of worldly loue. Conſider the example of Moſes, who choſe rather To ſuffer aduerſity with the people of GOD, then to enioy the pleaſures of ſinne for a ſeaſon, eſteeming the rebuke of CHRIST greater riches, then the treaſures of Aegypt. Remember that ironicall ſpeech of Salomon to voluptuous perſons:Eccleſ. 11. 9 
               Reioyced yong man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheere thee, whilſt thou art yong, and walke in the waies of thine heart, and in the ſight of thine eyes; but know that for all theſe things GOD will bring thee to iudgement.
               Plutar. 
               Lyſimachus to quench his thirſt yeelded himſelfe to the Scythians, and when hee had drunke their cold

water, he ſaid; Quam breuis volupt
                     •
                  
                  tis cauſâ quantam depoſui foelieitatem! O what great happineſſe haue I forgone for a ſhort pleaſure! Let vs beware that wee part not with our Birth-right for a little water-gruell, and that wee looſe not GOD, and forgoe the ioyes of heauen, for a ſmall portion of vaine delights. Malorum eſca voluptas,
               T
                     •
                  ll. 
               quâ homines cap
                     •
                  untur, vt hamo piſces. Pleaſure is the baite of euils (of diuels) wherewith men are caught,A Similie. as fiſhes with an hooke: Either therefore we muſt ſhune them vtterly, or take heed of the hooke which lies hid within them.
            But what wilt thou ſet thy loue on? Honour? How vncertaine is it, and ſubiect to bee loſt?Eſt. 7. 10. 
               Haman was Honourable, and hanged in one day. Olofernes was Honourable,Judith 13. 8 and Headed in one night:Why honou
                     •
                  s ſhould not ſteale away our hearts. How great and common are the fals of many? Hee that is in account to day, may bee contemned to morrow: In pratis vt flos, ſic perit omnis honos: Honour vaniſheth

like a vapour,A Similie. and great men are like great bubbles, and all the glory of the world like graſſe, like the flowre of the graſſe. Caeſar was ſtabd in his height. Nebuchadnezer was abaſed in the midſt of his greatneſſe: Alexander was poyſoned in the top of his honours.Act. 12. 22. 23. A Similie 
               Herod was ſtrucke with an Angell then, when hee was applauded as a GOD. How vaine a thing is honour, which like ſmoake mounted aloft doth vaniſh, whiles a man is looking on it? But great, conſtant, infinite are the honours, which are laid vp for thoſe that loue GOD.
            But peraduenture Beauty ſhall haue thy loue. Heare the iudgement of beautifall Bathſheba vnto Salomon her ſonne. Fauour is deceitfull,
               Pro. 31. 30. 
               and beauty is vanity, But a woman that feareth the LORD, ſhee ſhall be prayſed.
               The vanity of beauty. What is beauty? indeed the Loadſtone and delight of the eye, very pleaſing to the ſight, but exceeding brittle, mutable, and momentany, like Summer Apples which laſt not

long: One wound, one fit of an ague, a little ſickeneſſe, or a few yeares will marre it.How beauty hath bin called. 
               Bion called it, Bonum alienum, a good but none of ours, being able neither to giue it, nor to keepe it: Socrates called it, modici semporis tyrannidem, a tyrant, which raigned but a while: Theophraſtus ſaid it was; Tacitam deceptionem, aut ſilentem fraudem; a Still deceiuer, or Silent fraud: And as for be
                  •
               utifull perſons, if vicious, and voide of loue to GOD, they are like Tulipees,
               A Similie. goodly to looke on, but of no good ſauour: Or like Alablaſter boxes filled with vineger; like guilded pot-ſheards; or more properly, like a ring of gold in a Sowes ſnowt; or ſome precious iewell in a Beares eare: And finally, if beauty, the gift of GOD, be of ſo great requeſt, how much more then ſhould GOD, the giuer of it, who is ſo full of beauty, as that if His Beautifulneſſe could bee ſeene, it would draw the eyes and hearts of all, that ſaw it, to him?
            
               But ſay, if none of theſe, what ſhall haue thy loue, Thy ſelfe? Beware, if thou makeſt thy ſelfe thy GOD, thou makeſt thy ſelfe thy diuill:How a m
                     •
                   may loue himſelfe. Certainely thou maiſt loue thy ſelfe, ſo thou loue GOD in thy ſelfe, and thy ſelfe in GOD; and whilſt thou doſt loue thy ſelfe vnder GOD, and not ouer GOD; For GOD, and not againſt GOD: Otherwiſe, if thou doſt loue thy ſelfe, thou doſt but hate thy ſelfe; if thou wouldſt ſaue thy ſoule, thou ſhalt deſtroy thy ſoule; For GOD is the Soule of thy ſoule, the Ioy of thy heart, the Strength of thy life, thy Shield and Shadow, thy Sauiour and Deliuerer: Much better were it therefore for a man to leaue his body, and to looſe his life, rather then by louing what he ſhould not loue at all, or more then is allowed, to looſe and depriue himſelfe of GOD, who is the true Light and Life, the Grace and Glory of all our ſoules, and bodies alſo.
            What ſhall therefore ſeparate vs

from the loue of GOD,Heb. 12. 9. 
               the Father of our ſpirits; the Breath of our noſthrils, the Caſtle of our comfort,Pſal. 18. 2. & 144. 2. our Rocke of defence, and the Fountaine of Life? What ſhall extinguiſh this Sacred and Celeſtiall fire of loue vnto his Maieſty within our breaſts? What ſhall vnlooſe vs, or cut the cords of our loue, whereby wee are tyed vnto him? What ſhall wipe him out of the Table-bookes of our hearts, and blot him out of our memories? Shall promotions, profites, pleaſures, beauty, brauery, tribulations, life, death, men, or diuels? No, no: nothing: no not the whole world, and all that is therein. What were it to gaine all the world, and to looſe thy ſoule?
               Mark. 8. 36. What were it to bee Lord of all the world, and to bee depriued of him, for whom all the world was made? What were it to bee beloued of all men, and yet to bee hated of the GOD of men? I will therefore loue GOD, keepe GOD; for hee that hath GOD wants nothing; but hee

that wants GOD, hath nothing.
            Now becauſe to loue GOD truely, and as euery good Chriſtian ought, is a duety ſo needfull, equall, excellent, and commodious; and becauſe men are much abuſed by their immaginations (the heart of man being a Sea of ſubtilty, and a Mine of deceipt, giuen to deceiue and beguile it ſelfe) I will therefore propound certaine notes, whereby wee may diſcerne, if wee loue him truely with a ſincere and regular affection; or whether wee onely draw neere vnto him with our lips, being far from him in regard of hearty loue.
            Firſt, true loue is not lither,1. Note of true loue. Gregor.
                but laborious, Si operari renuerit, amor non eſt: it if it will not labour it is not loue.True loue is laborious. What paines will not the Soldier take that affects the victory? what wil not the worldling do to get or keep riches? How did Eſter labour to ſaue her kindred & Country-men the Iewes?Gen. 31. 40 41. 
               Iacob indured the heate of the day, the froſt of the night,

and want of reſt, euen continuall toyle and trauell in a ſeruice of foureteene yeares, vnder none of the kindeſt Maiſters (Laban, his name turned, but his nature retained, a very Naball) and all this for his loue to Rahell. Our Gameſters will ſit vp night and day, at dice and cards: Our gallant Dames, out of their loue of brauery, what coſt will they ſpare, what time will they not ſpend in making, changing, dreſſing, pluming, pranking? And is the loue of GOD onely lazy, ſleepy, ſluggiſh and vnwilling both to do, and ſuffer? It is not doubtleſſe.
            
               2. Note.Secondly, hee that loues GOD truely, and with a well regulated loue▪
               GOD is to bee loued for himſelfe. will loue GOD, chiefly for GOD himſelfe, euen becauſe hee is Good, Excellent, Perfect, and Amiable in himſelfe, and not for thoſe Loue-tokens onely, which GOD in loue doth daigne to giue him: For to loue one meerely for gaine, is not to loue him, that giues it, but our ſelues, that take it. If this bee well

conſidered, it is to bee feared that many men loue GOD, as they vſe to loue their friends; that is, not for their friends ſake, but for themſelues; not becauſe their friends are Religious, Iuſt, Wiſe, Vertuous; but becauſe they receiue benefites, as money, meate, credite, and ſuch things by them. But Saint Paul was of a more generous, and truer Spirit: For he ſaith: I ſeeke not myne owne profite, but the profite of many,
               1. Cor. 10. 33. 2. Cor. 12. 14. 19. Phil. 4. 14 17. 
               that they might bee ſaued. And againe, I ſeeke not yours, but You; and doe all things, that you may bee edified: And againe, yee haue done well that yee did communicate to mine affliction; Not that I deſire a gift, but I deſire a fruit, which may further your reckoning:
               Rom 9. 3. And yet more fully; I could wiſh my ſefe to bee ſep
                     •
                  rated (
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . anathematized) from CHRIST (my life, my light, my glory) For my brethren, that are my kinſmen in the fleſh. If they might be receiued, he paſſed not though himſelfe were reiected; if they might be ſaued, hee cared not though himſelfe

were excluded out of heauen: ſo they might bee bleſſed, hee could wiſh himſelfe were accurſed: Thus the Galatians loued the Apoſtle:Gal. 4. 13 14. 15. They deſpiſed not his trials, not his pouerty, and afflictions, but receiued him as an Angell of GOD, and to haue done him good could haue found in their hearts to haue pulled out their owne eyes, and haue giuen them vnto him. This true loue alſo was ſeene in Moſes to GOD, and his Country-men: For when they had, in his abſence, made them an Idoll, and prouoked GOD againſt them by their idolatry, inſomuch that GOD ſpeaking to Moſes ſaid; Let Mee alone,
               Ex. 32. 10. 12. 
               for I will conſume Them, but I will make of Thee a mighty people: (which was a tempting offer, but marke how Moſes took it) Hee moſt earneſtly beſought the LORD to ſpare them; preferring their good, to his owne greatneſſe, which argued the truth of his loue vnto them; and intreated the LORD to turne from his wrath, and why?

Leaſt his enemies ſhould blaſpheme his Name, and ſay; Hee brought them out maliciouſly to ſlay them in the mountaines; eſteeming more of GODS glory, then his owne greatneſſe, and aduancement. Yea ſo louing hee was of the people, but eſpecially ſo iealous of GODS glory, that rather then hee would haue them deſtroyed, or it eclypſed, hee wiſheth himſelfe To bee razed out of GODS Booke.
               Ex. 32. 32. Gen. 22. So likewiſe Abraham out of his deuotion vnto GOD is ready at GODS commandement to ſacrifice, to ſlay his onely Sonne, his Hope, and Honour. Indeed this is the nature of a mans ſincere and regular loue to GOD, to loue GOD for himſelfe, to obey him without ſcruple, and to neglect ones ſelfe for the reſpect of GOD. And though wee ought to loue GOD for thoſe good bleſſings,GOD is to bee loued for his bleſſings, and the order how. which hee communicates vnto vs, (as a friend his friend for courteſies receiued) yet wee muſt not reſt there, if wee will proue our loue to bee vpright and ſound; but wee muſt

go further, and learne to loue him for that louely and peereleſſe Excellency, and that immenſe and profound Sea of Goodneſſe, which is in him, eſteeming thoſe his benefites conferred on vs as certaine ſtreames flowing from the ſame; and prizing of them, not ſo much in their owne worth, as for being effects and tokens of his fauour to vs.A Similie. Euen as a man ſhould not ſo much value the good turnes of his friend, according as they are worth in their owne nature, as becauſe they are fruits and arguments of his vertu-full and bounteous diſpoſition. And this is the purer degree or kind of loue,Iob 6. 3. & 8. 14. ſuch as was in Iob, who though GOD ſeemed to bee his Enemy, (For hee ſaith that the arrowes of the Almighty were in him, the venome whereof drunke vp his Spirit, and that the terrours of GOD fought againſt him; that hee feared him with dreames, and aſtoniſhed him with viſions) yet did hee continue to loue GOD, and profeſt

that though GOD ſhould ſlay him,
               Iob. 13. 15. yet his confidence ſhould be repoſed in him.
            Thirdly,3. Note of true loue. whoſoeuer ſhall loue GOD cheerefully, and in conſcience of GODS commandement, euen becauſe GOD bids him loue him, hee doth euidently declare the truth of his loue vnto him: For hee, that doth a thing ſimply becauſe hee is bidden, doth ſhew a louing and reuerent reſpect vnto the bidder.
            Fourthly,4. Note of true loue. hee demonſtrates a ſound heart, and entire loue vnto GOD, that ſuffers nothing to dominere within him but his GOD:A man louing GOD tru
                     ••
                  y, loues none more then GOD. Not Mammon, not Bacchus, not Venus▪
                not the loue of any Man, not of Himſefe, nor of any other thing whatſoeuer, but deturbs and caſt out all, that GOD alone may haue poſſeſſion of him, and reigne within him: as hee may bee ſaid to bee a chaſte and louing husband, who ſuffers no other to ſteale away his loue from his lawfull wife, to whom hee hath vowed his loue, and plighted

his Troth:Ouid. 
               Non bene cum ſocijs Regna, Venuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   manent: Nec Regna ſocium ferre,
               Seneca. 
               nec tede ſciunt: Lordſhip and loue will broke no fellowſhip: Aut Caſar, aut nullus:
               GOD will haue the Throne, or elſe bee gone. GOD will be either alone or gone: He wil admit no copes-mate; Hee will not part ſtakes with any. He will allow thee to entertaine ſome thing, that ſhal be ſubordinate, & vnder him,How a mā may loue other things. but none that ſhall ſtand in oppoſition vnto him, or which ſhall draw againſt him: If therfore thou permit nothing to draw thine affection from him, it argues thy loue is firme and faſt vnto him.
            
               5. Note of loue.Fiftly, as a worldly-minded man doth ſhew his loue of riches by his vnſatiable deſire of hauing more and more: For the more hee hath, the more hee would; like thoſe two daughters, which cry, Giue, giue; or like the earth,Pro. 30. 15. 16. 
               That (as Agur ſaith) cannot bee ſatiſfied with water So may wee proue our loue of GOD, if whilſt wee liue on earth, wee couet to haue more and more intereſt in 
                  •
               im, and neuer reſt contented,

whiles any thing liueth in vs beſides himſelfe.1. King. 22. And as Ahab was tormented in minde for Naboaths vineyard;2. Sam. 13. 2. and as Ammon was ſo ſore vexed, that hee fell ſicke for his ſiſter Tamar: And as the Spouſe in the Canticles exclameth:Can. 2. 5. 
               Stay mee with flagons, for I am ſicke of loue; Euen ſo hee that doth truely loue GOD,Griefe or ſickeneſſe of ſoule wai
                     •
                  s on loue. is not quiet till hee do enioy him: And becauſe there is no full fruition of Him, till wee come in heauen, therefore if wee truely loue him, wee ſhall not meete with full contentment, till wee come in heauen: but ſhall, as that Spouſe our Mother, bee Sicke of loue, and wounded with longing after him, till wee doe enioy him to the full. Indeed the ſickeneſſe of minde is not loue; for loue it ſelfe is moſt ſweete and pleaſing; but it is the fruite of Deſire,
               This ſickeneſſe is not loue, but from deſire. which waiteth vpon loue, till loue do perfectly enioy the thing it doth loue: And if delay be made, that it cannot enioy the thing, which it would, as it would, and ſo ſoone as

it would, then this delay, by reaſon of the deſire, doth engender a certaine griefe and ſickeneſſe in the minde; which ſickeneſſe, and the deſire which doth produce it, ſhall both end, when that, which is deſired is perfectly obtained, and enioyed.Loue ends not, when this deſire ceaſeth. But then loue hath that it would: and then ends not, as the deſire; but is at her higheſt pitch, in all her iollity, and in her proper element, there where ſhee would bee, and would neuer but bee: Now whoſoeuer hath in him this longing after GOD, this ſickeneſſe and griefe to torment and vexe him, (ſeeing that heere on earth a man ſometimes looſeth his feeling of GODS loue vnto him, and neuer enioyes him full
                     •
                  
               ) hee may aſſure himſelfe that hee truely loueth GOD.N
                     •
                  te. And this g
                  •
               iefe of heart ſhould be ſo farre from cauſing diffidence, doubting, or deſperation, that a man ſhould rather gather ſtrength and comfort by it:A Similie. For where this is, there is the loue of GOD; as there is a loue of

drinke, where there is a thirſt and earneſt deſire after it, and a certaine trouble and griefe of ſoule, becauſe it cannot bee had, or is long a comming: As Dauid ſaith,Pſal. 63. 1. 
               My ſoule thirſteth for thee, my fleſh longeth greatly after thee: which argues the deſire and languiſhment of his ſpirit; ſo he likewiſe ſaith;9. 
               My ſoule cleaueth vnto thee, which declares his loue. Now he, that loueth GOD, may bee bold to thinke that GOD loues him: And the proper and principall ground of our conſolation and ſaluation is in this,Pſal. 63. 3. that GOD loues vs;Ioh. 3. 16. not in this that Wee loue GOD,
               Eph. 2. 4. 8. in this that GGD is gracious vnto vs, and not in this, That the graces of GOD are in vs.
               Tit. 3. 5. Of which loue and grace of GOD vnto vs,Our loue to GOD a ſigne of his to vs. this (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ) free-grace of Loue wherewith our hearts are enflamed towards GOD, is an vndoubted token and effect (as breath is of life, or ice of cold) appropriated to GODS Elect, and faithfull Children.
            
               
               6. Note of true loue.Sixtly, as the mindes of adulterers runne vpon their harlots, as the thoughts of worldlings are on their wealth; as the heads of the ambitious are occupied about their honours, as the hearts of Epicures are with their pleaſures; as the braines of Schollers are beate about their bookes; as the minde of Souldiers is on the victory; and as hee that loues the Law, hath his meditations in the Law;Pſ. 119 97. 
               O how I loue thy Law (ſaith Dauid!) It is my meditation continually; ſo hee, that loues the LORD is ſtill muſing and thinking of him, of his Grace and Glory, his Power and Prouidence, his Truth, Iuſtice, Mercy, &c. His Head is on him, his Heart goes with him, his Spirit is preſent with him; For the ſoule is preſent as well (Vbiamat,
               Bernard. as vbi animat) where it loues, as where it liues and liſens: As GODS loue to vs made come downe (as it were) to vs; ſo our loue towards him, makes vs go vp to him, as his loue to men made him conuerſe with men;

ſo mens loue to GOD,The fruits of loue Diuine & Humane. makes them conuerſe with him: And as his loue to vs makes him preſent with vs to helpe and guide vs; ſo our loue to him makes vs preſent with him to cleaue vnto him, and to follow him. His loue cauſeth him to thinke on vs, and our loue maketh vs to thinke on him: So that hee which in heart is preſent with him, and doth meditate and thinke often on him, may bee aſſured that the loue of GOD is in him. It is true, a man cannot but bee where GOD is, becauſe hee is euery where;Ier. 23. 24. Preſence in caſe i. as abſence. 
               Doe not I fill heauen and earth, ſaith the LORD? Yet this preſence is rather abſence, when our heart is abſent; euen as his preſence is but abſence, if his loue be abſent: A friend is then preſent, when hee is at hand to helpe, and his thoughts are to relieue; and hee loues truely, whoſe heart is preſent with his Loue continually, not letting it to ſlide out of his memory.
            Seuenthly,7. Note. hee that is not fickle and inconſtant in his deuotion and

deuote affection vnto GOD, may know that hee loues him truely: I ſay, if hee loue, like a true friend, At all times,
               Pro. 17. 17. as wel when the whether is foule as faire; in winter, as well as in Summer;True loue is cōſtant. when the heauens are blacke, as well as when the Sunne doth ſhine: For onely true loue is conſtant, it accounteth nothing hard, nothing grieuous, and intolerable.Plautus. 
               Fel. quod amarum eſt, id m
                     •
                  l faciet: It will make gall, which is bitter to bee ſweete as hony: Periculis inſultat, mortem irridet: ſi amor eſt, 
                     •
                  incit omnia: It contemneth dangers, it ſcorneth death; if it bee true loue, it ouercommeth all things, inſomuch that though the louer may bee kil'd, yet Inuictiu moritur, 
               
                  •
               ee dies vnvanquiſhed: as wee ſee in the Martyrs,The praiſe of the Martyrs. whom neither pleaſure, profite, nor promotion, on the one ſide; nor any torture, or cruell kinde of death on the other; could beguile, inueigle, aſtoniſh, or deterre: But through their loue (by Him, that did enable them) they conquered,

and contemned all things, ſtucke faſt to GOD.
            Eighthly,8. Note. the keeping of GODS Word (in the minde to remember it, in the heart to beleeue and embrace it, and in the life to liue by it) and a contention of Spirit to obey his Precepts, is an infallible argument of true loue vnto him.1. Iohn. 5. 3. 
               This is the loue of GOD (ſaith Saint Iohn) that wee keepe his Commandements: A child by obedience demonſtrates his childe-like affection vnto his parents: Hee ſhewe
                  •
                his loue and loyalty to the King,No loyalty, no loue. which makes account of his Edicts and Lawes: In vaine doth a ſeruant ſay hee loues his Maiſter, except hee bee carefull to obey his will. So then, hee that liues in any knowne enormity, and preferres his gaine, pleaſure, credite, and fauour with men to GODS Commandements, doth plainely ſhew that hee wants the loue of GOD: without which his Loue, his Baptiſme, hearing of Sermons, receiuing the Communion,

and all his faire ſhowes will ſtand him in no ſteed, but rather further his condemnation: And one thing more I adde; although hee do many deeds,Good deeds are, without loue, of little or no account. in appearance good, and ſeeme to keepe ſundry precepts, yet it is not of loue vnto GOD (without which his doing and keeping ſhall not bee remembred in the world to come) but for ſome other reaſon, if hee ſhall in the meane while addict himſelfe vnto ſome one ſinne, which hee knowes to bee a ſinne:The vertue of true loue. For the power of true loue is ſuch, as it will moue a man to humour his friend in euery lawfull and conuenient thing: and he giues not his heart, that is diſpoſed to thwart and reſiſt him (eſpecially being his Gouernour▪
               ) in anything, that's honeſt, and not vnſeemely: But GOD is our Supreme Moderator & LORD, and all his Commandements are lawfull and good: For his Will is the rule of Law,GODS Will the Rule of Law. and reaſon; and all his Commandements ate according to his will.
            
               To conclude,9. Note of true loue. GOD will be loued in his Church, in his Miniſters, in his Chil
                     •
                  ren, and finally in that his beloued Sonne CHRIST IESVS, ſo as that they, which hate theſe, loue not him.
            Firſt, for the Church,
               GOD is to bee loued in his Church. by which I vnderſtand not ſo much the Catholique Church, (which is the Mother of vs all, and which whoſoeuer loueth not as his MOTHER, loueth not GOD as his FATHER, and ſo will proue himſelfe to bee ſome Baſtard-plant) as I meane all True viſible Chu
                     •
                  ches,
               Euery true viſible Church is to bee loued. The mark of ſuch a Church. or Congregations: And ſuch I call True, which GOD hath honoured with True Doctrine; or meanes ſufficient vnto ſaluation, and with ſuch men, as haue a True Power, or authority, to Miniſter, and Diſpenſe the ſame. Now heere, I ſay, whoſoeuer loueth ſuch a Church, becauſe ſhee is ſuch a Church, whoſoeuer loues her for GOD, and in GOD, without doubt it argues his loue to GOD.A Similitude. Hee that loues a Ring for the Diamond,
               
               
                  •
               hat is ſet in it, or for the worke-man, that made it, queſtionleſſe hee loues 
                  •
               he Diamond, and the Worke-man much more: So certainely, 
                  •
               ee that loues a Church for the Word and Sacraments, and power 
                  •
               f GOD, that is in her; and becauſe ſhee is the Church of GOD planted by his gracious bleſſing, doth much more loue GOD: Surely that thing, for which wee loue an other thing, that wee cannot hate, but loue.
            On the contrary, if thou ſhalt hate a true Church of GGD, how dwelleth the loue of GOD in thee? Thou wilt ſay, I know, that i
                  •
                thou wert aſſured that ſhee is a true Church, thou weul
                  •
               ſt not hate her, but ioyne vnto her.Marke this well. I ſay, againe, art thou ſure that the Church, which thou hateſt, is falſe? If thou beeſt ſure of it▪ if thou dareſt pawne thy ſoule vpon it (but be ſure thou beeſt ſure) then auoide her, depart out of her, giue her a Bill of Diuorcement, let her go: But if thou beeſt not

ſure, hate her not, ſeuer not thy ſelfe from her. Wilt thou hate and leaue her moſt certainely, whiles thou art not certaine what to iudge of her? Thou doſt not ſee her Truth; but canſt thou ſpye her falſhood? A blind man cannot ſee the Sunne at Noone, but they which ca
                  •
                ſee, may ſee her: But what if a man bee ſo blind, a
                  •
                that, becauſe hee doth not ſee the Sunne himſelfe, therefore he thinketh the Sunne is ſeene of none? And what if thou, with a few more, as blind as thy ſelfe, doſt hate and forſake a Church, becauſe yee do not ſee her Truth? I ſay, what if all her Siſter-Churches in Europ
                     •
                  , beſides your ſelues (which were borne within her iuriſdiction for the moſt) will ſay ſhee is a true Church of GOD? Whether are they to be beleeued or yee? Or do yee thinke that all they are blind, and that ye are the onely men, that ſee?
            Well let vs beware, if we think that we loue GOD, let vs ſhew our loue vnto him by louing of his Church.
            
               
               GOD is to bee loued in hi
                     •
                   Miniſt
                     ••
                  s.Secondly, GOD is to bee loued in his Miniſt
                     •
                  rs, which are called the Men of GOD, a
                  •
               d Saints, by reaſon of their holy Office and authority, which GOD hath ſanctified and ſet apart vnto himſelfe: And this their Function and Miniſtery, is not onely Sanctifyed,
               Act. 1
                     •
                  . 1
                     •
                  . 1. T
                     ••
                  . 4 
                     •
                  6 but Sanctifying, and Sauing. Now whoſoeuer doth l
                  •
               ue theſe Saints, as Saints, doth loue God the Sanctifier of them: Hee that loues this Office ſimply, doth loue him that hath ordeined it: Hee that loues the man of GOD in this Name,A Miniſter 
                     •
                  s t
                     •
                   be lo
                  
                     •
                  e f
                     •
                  r his 
                     〈◊〉
                  . doth vndoubtedly l
                  •
               ue G
                  •
               D the MAISTER. Hee that loues a Miniſter meerely for his Miniſtery, or as Saint Paul exhorteth, F
                     •
                  r his worke ſake;1. Theſſ. 
                     •
                   1
                     •
                  . 
                     〈…〉
                  . hee, no queſtion loueth GOD, whoſe ſeruant hee is, and for whom hee worketh. On the contrary, they that loue not the Mi
               
                  •
               iſt
                  •
               r for his Office and Labours, but rather malice and moleſt him, bec
                  •
               uſe hee P
                  •
               eacheth the Truth, w
                  •
               ich they diſtaſt; or confuteth errours, that they foſter; or reproueth

their ſinnes, which they delight in; as ignorance, pride, drunkenneſſe, prophane ſwearing, violating the Saboath, contempt of the Ordinances, and Church of GOD: theſe men without doubt are offended at GOD, and did hee come himſelfe in the ſhape of a Man, they would deale with him, as they deale with his Meſſengers. But thou wilt ſay, thou for thy part doſt loue thy Miniſter; I aske thee,How a mā ſhold loue his Miniſter. Doſt thou loue him euen becauſe hee is thy Miniſter, becauſe hee hath authority ouer thee in GOD, for the benefite of thy ſoule? If thou doſt loue him ſimply in this reſpect, (but do not delude thy ſelfe) ſurely 
                  •
               hy caſe is good, thou loueſt GOD; Receiuing him, thou receiueſt GOD: But to loue a Miniſter, for his Parentage, Alliance, Riches, Aduancements, and ſuch worldly conſiderations, is no token of loue to GOD, it is not to loue the Miniſter, but ſome circumſtances belonging to him. The loue of the man for his

Office, or for his carefull execution of it, is Diuine, a note of loue indeed vnto GOD: And to contemne, or perſecute, him, for his very place and power, or the faithfull diſchargement of it, is diueliſh, and argues the loue of darkeneſſe: Hee that that hates the ſeruant, how can hee loue the maiſter? They that hang head, looke vnder the browes, ſtampe, and ſtorme, at them, that deliuer but their Maiſters errand, euen for the very doing of it, they do it to the Maiſter, that did appoint and ſend them: And refuſing or diſgracing the men, they diſhonour their Maiſter.
            
               Who are GODS true Miniſters.But when I ſay GOD is to be loued in His Miniſters, miſtake not the men: For thoſe are his True and Faithfull Miniſters, which are ſent by GOD, and who deliuers their Maiſters Errand, and not in ſteed thereof their owne errours. For though hee ſhould deliuer GODS Meſſage, and adminſter the Sacraments, yet if he haue no power, no

authority committed vnto him by GOD, hee runnes vnſent. And though he haue a ſending, yet if hee do not that Meſſage, which GOD appoint
                  •
                him, but brings ſome Such, I meane, as euert
                     •
                   the ground
                     •
                   of Faith, or go
                     •
                  d Manners, and which ſets the Church in an vprore. 
               Nouelty, coy
                  •
               ed in the braine of man, hee abuſes his power; if hee defile, or mangle, the Sacraments, hee tranſcends his bounds, and tranſgreſſeth his authority, and therefore is to bee reproued, and auoyded.
            Thirdly, GOD is to be loued in his Children.
               GOD is to bee loued in his people. All godly men haue the Name of GOD called vpon them, and a new Nature created in them, and are become holy, through the worke of the HOLY SPIRIT in them. Now hee that loues a godly man for his godlineſſe, a Saint for his Sanctimony, a new Man, for his new Nature; queſtionleſſe, the ſame man loues GOD, who is the Authour of it. O
                  •
                the contrary, if any man ſay, I l
                     •
                  ue GOD,
               1. Iohn. 4. 20. 
               and hate his brother, hee is a lyer, 
                     •
                  or how can hee, that loueth not his brother, whom hee

hath ſeene, loue GOD whom hee hath not ſeene?
               Hatred of godlineſſe is the hatred of GOD. Hee that hates, diſlikes, and perſecutes his brother for the Truths ſake, for Vertues ſake, for that new Nature which his FATHER hath created in him, and becauſe hee liues not ſo riotouſly, as himſelfe, doth hate, diſlik
                  •
               , a
                  ••
                p
                  •
               rſecute the FATHER Himſ
                  •
               lfe. Therefore CHRIST ſaith: Saul, Saul,
               Acts 9. 4. 
               why perſecuteſt thou mee? Whereas not hee perſonally; b
                  •
               t his Seruants and Confeſſours, were perſecuted of him. And if thi
                  •
                bee true, which is moſt true, That Euery one, which loueth him which did beget,
               1. Ioh. 5. 1. 
               loueth him alſo, which is beg
                     ••
                  ten of him: Then certainely hee, which hates him, which is begotten, hates him alſo, which did beget him. Let men therefore take heed; for he that loues GOD, cannot but loue a good man for GOD: and hee that hates the godly, hates GOD, whoſe Image hee ſuſtaines: He that hates true Deuotion, true Zeale, and a Sober Conuerſation in man, will neuer bee

able to excuſe 
                  •
               im of 
                  •
               a
                  •
               red vnto GOD the Worker of them. There is a brood of men (or of diuils rather, in the ſhape of men) ſuch as Dauid ſpeakes of, which are aduerſaries to their Neighbours.Pſal. 38. 20. 
               Becauſe they follow goodneſſe: Theſe are enemies to GOD, whatſoeuer they thinke of themſelues: Of ſuch the Pſalmiſt ſpeaketh, when hee ſaith; Surely GOD will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy pate of him,
               Pſal. 68. 21. 
               that walketh in his ſinnes: And againe,Pſ. 129. 5. 6. 
               They that hate Syon ſhall bee all aſhamed and turned backeward; they ſhall bee as the graſſe on the houſe tops, which withereth afore it commeth forth. It were good for them therefore to take vp betimes, and to turne their hatred into loue.
            There is, I confeſſe,Many ſorts of loue, yet little true charity. much loue in the world, ſuch as it is; Naturall loue, Ciuill loue, Dom
                  •
               ſticall loue, Matrimoniall loue, Fleſhly loue, Worldly loue, Pot-loue, Humane loue, but little godly charity is ſeene among vs: For who loues godlines

in a man? Who ſeekes GOD in his Neighbour, Friend, Childe, Seruant, Familiar? Who ſtudies and ſtriues, that Religion, Iuſtice, and true Chriſtianity ſhould flouriſh in his Children, Seruants, Friends, and Neighbour
                  •
               ? I doubt not but Turkes, Moores,
               A Turke may loue a Chriſtian, but not his Chriſtianity. and other Pagans, loue Religious and true Christians ſometimes, as I am perſwaded ſome of our Marchants, and their Factors are, that liue and trafique with them? But loue they their Religion, do they lou
                  •
                them for their Chriſtianity? No, no: they could wiſh them as ſuperſtitious, as themſelues: If therefore thou wilt giue an infallible demonſtration of thy loue to GOD, loue thy brother for GOD, and in GOD, loue his Piety, his Chriſtianity, and pray that the Kingdome of GOD may be planted, and eſtabl
                  •
               ſhed in him.
            
               How M
                     •
                  
                  
                  
                     ••
                  ſt
                     •
                  rs hold ſhew loue to GOD.And as all me
                  •
                ſhould ſhew their loue vnto GOD by louing of his people: ſo eſpecially the Miniſters of GOD; which they ſhall doe by

their dilligent and faithfull feeding of them. Therefore our LORD will haue Peter expreſſe his loue vnto him by feeding his Flocke:Ioh. 21. 15. 16. 17. 
               Peter (ſaith he) loueſt thou mee? Feed my Lambs, feed my Sheepe, Feed my Sheepe: Paſce mente, paſce ore, paſce opere,
               
                  Serm. 2. de reſur.
                
               paſce animi oratione, verbi abhortatione, exempli exhibitione. Feede them (ſaith Bernard) with thy minde, Feed them with thy mouth, feed them with thy worke, feed them with the prayer of thy heart, with the exhortation of the word, with ſetting them a good enſample. What other thing (ſaith Saint Auguſt.) is this,
               
                  Aug. in Ioan. tract. 123. 
               If thou loue mee, Feed my ſheepe, then if it had bene ſaid
                     •
                  ; If thou loue mee, do not thinke to feede thy ſelfe, but my Sheepe; Fe
                     •
                  d them as mine, not as thine; ſeeke my glory in them, not thine, my Lordſhip, not thine, my gaines, not thine:
                  Chryſoſt. praeſat. in Epiſtolas. What Miniſter doth truly loue GOD. Which ſpeech when Saint Paul, (as Chryſoſtome ſpeaketh) had heard was vttered to Saint Peter, hee ſtudied to declare this loue 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                euen in the ſuperlatiue degree: And vndoubtedly

doubtedly there is no Miniſter, which doth truely loue GOD, but hee will bee carefull to feed the people of GOD, which are the Sheepe of His Paſture,
               Pſal. 100. 3. 1. Pet. 5. 2. committed to him, and Depending on him. And hee, that onely looketh after the Fleece, but leaueth his Flocke at ſixe and ſeuens, doth bewray his loue of the world, but declares no loue to GOD.
            
               GOD muſt be loued in CHRIST. Ioh. 15. 23. Iohn 8. 24.Finally, GOD will bee loued in his Sonne IESVS CHRIST, the Sonne of the Virgine Mary: For he that hateth me (ſaith CHRIST) hateth my FATHER alſo. Except yee beleeue that I am HEE, yee ſhall die in your ſinnes.
               See 1. Cor. 
                     •
                  6. 22. Which ſhewes the fearefull eſtate of vnbeleeuing Turkes, Iewes, and Pagans. And moſt worthy is hee of our loue: For hee is White and Ruddy,
               Cant. 5. 10. 16. 
               the chiefeſt of ten thouſand, and wholly delectable. Being GOD hee hath married our fleſh, Hee came downe from heauen, that wee might go vp to heauen; Hee ſerued, to make vs free; Hee became poore, to make vs rich; Hee was

made a curſe,Gal. 3. 13. that wee might bee bleſt; Hee died, that wee might liue; Hee was Crucified, that wee might bee Crowned: And that our loue vnto him might appeare true, let vs try it by theſe two notes.
            Firſt,1. Note of loue to CHRIST. by our care to know and keepe his Lawes euen to the death. For, ſaith CHRIST, If yee loue me, keepe my Commandements:
               Ioh. 14. 15. 22. 23. 24. 
               Hee that keepes them loues mee, Hee that loues mee not, keepeth not my words. If wee breake them at our pleaſure, and preferre our gaine, or gaming, or any thing elſe to them, truely wee loue him not: For did wee indeed loue him, wee would bee loath to offend him, and would make more eſtimation of Him and his Word, then of any earthly thing.
            Secondly,2. Note of loue to CHRIST. try thy loue to CHRIST by thine endeuour to bee Like him: For true loue cauſeth imitation. CHRIST was the mirrour of Mercy, very Meeke, Humble, Patient, and Zealous of GODS Glory: Hee went vp and downe doing good:

Hee prayed for his perſecutors, FATHER fogiue them.
               Luk. 23. 34 Canſt thou for CHRIST pray for thine enemies? CHRIST forgaue thee,Co
                     •
                  . 3. 13. wilt thou for CHRIST forgiue him, that wrongs thee, that reuiles thee to thy face, that bites thee behind thy backe, that ſcornes thee, hates thee, troubles thee? If thou doſt, thou loueſt him; but if thy heart bee ſo great, thou wilt not, where is thy loue? For vnderſtand thus much, where CHRIST is loued, there CHRIST loues, where CHRIST loues there he liues, and where hee liues, there the fleſh, with the luſts thereof dies;Ioh. 14 21. ſo then hee that liues out of Charity, in the ſpirit of rancour, hatred, and reuenge, and will not controule his corruptions, hee is not CHRISTS, CHRIST liues not in him, he liues not in CHRIST, he loues not CHRIST, hee loues not God, but is in the ſtate of death, how well ſoeuer hee conceiueth of himſelfe: For tell me, doſt thou thinke that CHRIST liues in

an heart of Oake, of Adamant? No, no, but in an heart that is humble, meeke and louing. And what thankfulneſſe, what loue is ſhewed vnto CHRIST, when thou wilt not pardon him,We ought to forgiue one another. whom CHRIST doth pardon, when thou wilt not forgiue him, whom CHRIST hath died for, when thou wilt not vouchſafe him thy pardon, to whom CHRIST hath giuē himſelfe, when thou, I ſay, thou wilt not forgiue, CHRIST hauing forgiuen thee, and hauing giuen Himſelfe vnto thee, yea and thy ſelfe vnto thy ſelfe, for by thy ſinnes thou hadſt loſt thy ſelfe: Certainely therefore thou muſt forgiue for CHRIST, or elſe (beleeue it) thou doſt not loue CHRIST.
            Let v
                  •
                therefore deale truely with our ſelues, examining our hearts and practiſes by the fore-named notes, and wee ſhall eaſily ſee whether the loue of GOD, and of his Sonne CHRIST IESVS bee in vs; or whether the loue of the world, and of our ſelues, beare ſway

with in vs. And ſo much concerning the Loue of GOD, to which we are exhorted.
            
               The reaſons of the exhortation.The reaſons, which the Pſalmiſt vſeth to perſwade vs to this duety, follow: One is drawne from the Louing and courteous dealing of GOD with them, that are faithfull in their loue and ſeruice to him; the other is taken from the ſeuerity of his Iuſtice againſt thoſe, that out of pride and obſtinacy caſt of his yoke, and care not for to loue and ſerue him.
            
               1. Reaſon.The former is ſet forth in theſe words. The LORD preſerueth the faithfull:
               A man i
                     •
                   ſaid to bee faithfull in two reſpects. A man may bee ſaid to bee faithfull in a double ſenſe: Firſt he, that beleeueth in GOD, and giues credite to his Word, is a faithfull man; and to this Faith, diffidence, and incredulity is oppoſed; and by this kind of faith a man laies hold vpon the mercy of GOD in CHRIST for his Iuſtification. Secondly, hee that may bee beleeued for his truth, hee that is iuſt and true

in his words and dealings, is a faithfull man: For faith (Fides) is of, fio, to be done: Fac quod dicis, & fides eſt, do what thou ſaiſt, and it is Faith, ſaith Saint Auſten. Then (ſaith Gregory) are wee truely faithfull, if what wee promiſe in word, wee performe in deed. To this kind of faith, treachery, falſhood, and hypocriſie is oppoſed: So that he that doth truely loue GOD, and is a faithfull keeper of his Doctrine, and forgets not his promiſe to him in his Baptiſm
                     •
                  , but is carefull and ſtudious to performe it,Neh. 9. 8. hee may bee ſaid to bee a faithfull man. Such a faithfull man was Caleb,
               Num. 14. 22 24. 
               Who followed GOD ſtill, and had another Spirit, then thoſe tempting and diſobedient Iſraelites had, which were not ſuffred to enter into Canaan. Such a faithfull man was Moſes,
               Heb. 3. 5. who was faithfull in GODS Houſe: Such a one was Dauid, of whom GOD ſpake ſaying;Act. 13. 22. 
               I haue found Dauid the ſon of Ieſſe, a man after mine owne heart, which will do all things that I will: Such

were Zacharias and Elizabeth,
               Luke 1. 6. that walked in all the Commandements, and O
                  •
               dinances of GOD, without reproofe: Finally, ſuch were all the Martyrs of CHRIST, who rather then they would betray his truth, and make ſhipwracke of their faith and conſcience, indured all manner of torments, and refuſed no kinde of death which was deuiſed for them.
            Now thoſe that are thus faithfull, GOD doth preſerue them, ſaith Dauid: Sometimes hee preſerues them by vouchſafing them deliuerance from dangers (as in his Wiſdome he ſees conuenient) whiles they liue heere:2. Chron. 16. 8. 9. as hee preſerued Noah in the Floud, Let out of Sodome, Dauid in many dangers, Daniel among the Lyons, the three Confeſſours in the fire; our Religious King, with many others,N
                     •••
                  . 5. 16 
                     •
                  5. from that infernall Powder-plot, of the Papiſts; and infinite are his ſauours of this kind. But further, hee pre
                  ••
               rueth the ſaithfull as concerning their ſoules, and the ſpirituall

and eternall happineſſe of both body and ſoule:Iſa. 49. 16. For hee hath engrauen them vpon the palmes of his hands.Ier. 32. 40. Hee will Neuer turne away from them, to doe them good, but gards them by his power through faith (as Saint Peter teacheth) vnto ſaluation,1. Pet. 1. 5. 9 that in the end they ſhall attaine to the end of their faith, the felicity of their ſoules without end.
            This ſhould ſtir vs vp to loue this good GOD, and to ſhew our ſelues faithfull to him in our ſeruice;Reu. 2. 20. the Crowne of life is promiſt to the faithfull, wee deſire faith of GOD, and exact it of others, let vs then bee faithfull our ſelues.5. Notes of faithfulneſſe. This faithfulneſſe may bee demonſtrated fiue waies.
            Firſt,1. Note. by being carefull to know the will of our Maiſter, and diligent to keepe all his Precepts: For if wee will not endeuour to pleaſe him in all things,Mark. 6. 20 but will bee Licentious Libertines in ſome things, wee are very Herods, hypocrites and diſloyall, our hearts are not vpright with

Him, but do go an whoring after our owne deſires: Hee is no faithfull ſeruant, which will do but what hee liſt himſelfe.
            
               2. Note.Secondly, faithfulneſſe is ſeene in trouble:Pro. 24. 10. 
               If thou bee faint in the day of aduerſity, thy ſtrength is ſmall. A friend that forſakes in affliction, was no friend, but of himſelfe: So hee that ſhall forſake GOD, deny his Truth, embrace errours, by reaſon of perſecution, doth betray GOD to his power, and ſhewes a falſe and vnfaithfull ſpirit hath poſſeſt him.Seneca. 
               Fidem nemo vnquam perdit, niſi qui non habet: No man euer looſeth faith, but hee that hath it not: For Faith (if it be not feyned) is very valorous and truſty:
                  Ci
                        •
                     . l. 2. Rhet.
                
               Nulla neceſſitate ad fallendum cogitur, nullo corrumpitur pramio: It is compelled to falſhood by no neceſſity, it is corrupted by no reward; Vre, coede, occide; Burne, beate, kill, do what you will, it will not periſh: It is like Camomill, which being troden vpon ſmels, the better: or like the Chryſopraſus, which (as

               Zanchy writeth) ſhines more cleerely in the darke,
                  Lib. 3. de Met. ter. c. 6. 3. Note. then in the light.
            Thirdly, a faithfull ſeruant will delight to ſaue his Maiſters gaine, and is glad to ſee his Maiſters cuſtomers increaſe; euen ſo hee, that is faithful-hearted towards GOD, will reioyce to ſee his Kingdome flouriſh, his Word receiued, his Lawes obſerued,Iſai. 55. 1. his graces eſteemed, and his Cuſtomers or Chapmen, that come to buy them of him, multiplied.
            Fourthly,4. Note. if a Maiſter ſhall allow his ſeruant time to diſpatch all his owne buſineſſes, but withal appoint him a certaine time to doe him ſeruice in: if this ſeruant ſhall not onely ſpend his owne time (alotted him by his Maiſter) as hee liſt himſelfe, but will alſo miſ-
                  •
               pend that time, which his Maiſter commands him to ſpend for him, miſ-ſpend it (I ſay) in idlenes, leudnes, gaming, wickednes or otherwiſe vpon himſelfe, and not vpon his maiſter, this ſeruant is vnfaithfull to his maiſter, and (as I

thi
                  •
               k
                  •
               ) if hee will not breake this c
                  •
               ſtome, his maiſter will not keepe him, but turne him packing. So are t
                  •
               oſe v
                  •
               faithful vnto God, that prophane his holy Sabboth,
               Marke this we
                     •
                  l. Of prophaning the Sa
                     •
                  oth day. which hee hath ſa
                  •
               ct
                  •
               fied for himſelfe, by their merchan
                  •
               iſing, gadding, gaming, rioting, and ſuch proph
                  •
               ne behauiour. And I feare, tha
                  •
                if th
                  •
               y will not mend theſe manners: S
                     •
                  d vox faucib 
                     ••
                   h
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  t On the contrary, they that are carefull to ſpend their maiſters time in their maiſters worſhip, as in prayer, reading, hearing, m
                  •
               ditation, ſinging of Pſalmes, doing the workes of mercy, and the like, theſe ſhew themſelues faithfull to him: and as they are carefull to keepe his S
                  •
               bboth on earth before him, ſo ſhal they certainly celebrate an euerlaſting Sabboth in heauen with him.
            
               5. Note.Finally, a ſeruant is not therefore to be counted faithfull, becauſe hee is entertained in his Maiſters houſe, and weares his cloth, and eates his meate, and heares him ſpeake: For ſay he be not afraid to diſpleaſe him,

ſuppoſe he ſhall corrupt an
                  •
                peruert the mindes of any of his fellowes, and bring them to be ſtout and ſaucie, or lazie and vntrue; and imagine he doth ſecretly cōſpire with his Maiſters foes, and do ſeruice vnderhand, or openly for them, will yee ſay that this is a faithfull ſeruant, or rather a Falſ-hearted and wicked Knaue? So, euen ſo a man is not preſently to bee counted faithfull and true to God, becauſe he is admitted into his Ho
                  •
               ſe, which is the Church, becauſe he is baptized,1. Tim. 3. 15. which is his liuery, becauſe hee is called or reputed his ſeruant, becauſe hee receiues the Sacrament, which is (as it were) his bread, becauſe he heares his maiſter ſpeake vnto him in his Miniſters. For we may ſay of a Chriſtian as Saint Paul ſaith of a Iew, and of Baptiſme, as he ſpeakes of Circumciſion. All they are not Iſrael,
               Rom. 9. 6 7 
               which are of Iſrael: neither are they all Children, becauſe they are the ſeede of Abraham. He is not a Iew which is one outward; neither is that Circumciſion

which is outward in the Fleſh:
               Rom. 2. 2
                     •
                  . 29. 
               but he is 
                     •
                  lew, that is one within, and the circumciſion is of the Heart, in the Spirit, not in the Letter, whoſe praiſe is not of Men, but of God. So we may ſay, euery man is not faithfull vnto God, that is counted or called Godly, but he that proues his heart and practiſes vnto God. He is not faithfull, that is come of faithfull parents, vnleſſe he partake with them in their faith, as well as in their fleſh. A man is not indeed a Chriſtian,Who is a true Chriſtian▪
                becauſe hee is ſo named, or reputed, except he be fleſh of Chriſts fleſh, and bone of his bone, except he bee annointed with the Oyle of gladneſſe, and haue the Spirit of Chriſt to rule him. Neither is that Baptiſme which ſtands in water onely,What true Baptiſme is. (Flumine, non Flamine:) For true Baptiſme is to be baptized with the Holy Ghoſt and Water, with the bloud of Chriſt as well as with water. Neither hath he any benefite by the Sacrament, that doth not receiue (Panem Dominum) the Lord, who is the bread and ſtaffe of

our ſoules, as well as (Panem Domini) the bread of the Lord, which the Lords Steward doth diſpenſe vnto vs. Thoſe therefore, that feare not Gods diſpleaſure, that would ſeduce his ſeruants from their allegeance to him, that are at a league (as it were) with ſinne, and conſpire with Sathan, and doe him ſeruice, all theſe whatſoeuer, notwithſtanding their place in the Church, their hearing of Sermons, their comming to Church, and receiuing of Sacraments; and al-be-it they bee called Chriſtians, and called godly, the truth is, they are not faithfull vnto God, but falſe-hearted wretches. On the contray, thoſe are truly faithfull which truly feare God,Who truly faithfull. which counſell and encourage their fellowes to bee faithfull to him, and which doe truly hate Sinne, Sathan, and the World, and are at no league or couenant with them, but keepe continuall watch and ward ouer their hearts, leſt they ſhould bee ſurpriſed and drawne away.
            
               And thus we haue ſeene the firſt reaſon that Dauid vſeth to moue vs to the loue of God, becauſe he preſerues them that are faithfull to him: and therefore if we deſire his preſeruation, or if we will ſhew our ſelues thankfull to him for preſeruing vs, or if we doe take delight in that his ſo ſweet & good diſpoſition, who is by nature prouident ouer, and carefull for thoſe that loue him, and are faithfull to him, it behoues vs much to loue him: and let vs bee aſſured, that except we loue him truly, we do not t
                  •
               uly loue our ſelues; but certainly we doe cleane forget our ſelues, if we fo
                  •
               get to performe this duety to him: yea, wee haue loſt our ſelues, vnleſſe wee haue him to liue in our hearts by loue.
                  
                     ••
                  e praiſe o
                     •
                   L
                     •
                  ue. O Loue! what ſhall I ſpe
                  •
               ke i
                  •
                thy commendation? Magnaes, & pr
                     •
                  uales, thou art great in power,Can. 8. 6 
                     •
                  
                and preuaileſt. Thou art ſtr
                     •
                  ng as Death, powerfull as the graue, thy coles are fiery▪ thy fl
                  •
               mes v
                  •
               olent, the waters cannot quench thee, the flouds cannot drowne thee,

thou doeſt ſubdue mine vnde
                  •
               ſtanding for God, thou bringeſt mine ambitious and vnruly conceits into bondage vnder Chriſt, thou leadeſt me Captiue, yea thou kilſt me, that he may liue within me.
                  Loue a fire Thou art a Fire to purifie my minde from droſſe by meditation on him.A Light. Thou art a Light to comfort and enlighten my ſoule with thoſe louely vertues that waite vpon thee.Hony. Thou art Hony to ſweeten my ſoule with the feeling of Gods fauour, and to make ſweet vnto my ſoule, thoſe ordinances of life and godlineſſe which hee hath erected in his houſe.And Wine Thou art Wine to make my ſoule glad by enioying my God, my Sauiour, whoſe goodneſſe is equall to his greatneſſe, both of them infinite and vnmatchable. If I looſe thee, I looſe my ſelfe, my ſoule, my Sauiour. If thou liue in me▪ I liue my ſelfe, nay I dye, but God my Lord and Sauiour doth liue within me.
            And this is the Pſalmiſts firſt reaſon to incite vs to the loue of God.

The ſecond is taken from his ſeuere iudgments againſt the Proud,
               The ſe
                     •
                  ōd reaſon of the exho
                     •
                  tation. which will not ſtoope to God and his Law, but are diſobedient to him, and by their pride and inſolency trouble and miſufe other men better then themſelues. The Pſalmiſt ſaith; God Rewardeth aboundantly the proud doer: that is, hee puniſheth him for his pride with manifold and grieuous puiſhments.
            Pride (which is hatefull before God and Man,
               Ecclus. 10. 7. What pride is. as Syracides ſpeaketh) is a certaine vice, or ſwelling of the heart, whereby we count our ſelues worthy of more honour and dignity then there is reaſon, by reaſon of an ouer-weening opinion of our ſelues, imagining that we haue thoſe good things which we haue not indeed, or that we haue them in greater meaſure then we haue.
            Now a man may ſhew pride either againſt God, or againſt man.
            
               Pride is againſt God and Man.
               Againſt God, pride is ſhewed many waies, ſome whereof I will declare, that the madneſſe of men

may appeare vnto you. As firſt,1. Note of pride againſt God
                when a man imagines himſelfe to be God, and would be ſo conceited of men, as Caligula, who (being an open mocker of all religion) at length fell to thinke there was no other God then himſelfe. Secondly,2. Note. when men imagine, that what they haue, they haue it of themſelues, or that, if God giue them any thing, it is for their deſerts. Thirdly,3. Note. when men in their hearts ſay: He ſhall not raigne ouer vs, who ſhall controll vs? and ſo contemne the ordinances of God, his Word, his Sacraments, his Miniſters, their Work. their power. Fourthly,4. Note. whē a wan ſhal thinke he is perfect, breakes not the Law, and is able to do good deeds, whereby he ſhall merite euerlaſting life for the worthineſſe of them. Fiftly,5. Note. when men imagine they can doe good workes by their owne ſtrength: or when in heart they ſay, we will do this and this, who ſhall let vs? we will goe thither, or thither, who ſhall hinder? Sixthly,6. Note. when men will diſobey the will of

God vnder pretence of humility,Thou art vnworthy to pray to God, but God is worthy to whō thou ſhouldſt obey. Pſal. 50. 15 Mat. 11. 2
                     •
                   7. Note. as they that plead for their prayers to the Saints in heauen, becauſe they ſay, it is a point of humility, to come to ſo great a King by ſuch meanes: whereas God ſaith: Call vpon me in the time of trouble. And Chriſt accordingly, Come vnto me yee that are heauy lad
                     •
                  n, and I will eaſe you. Laſtly, when men will murmure againſt God, and are angry with him when he doth afflict them.
            
               Of pride againſt Man.Pride againſt Man diſcouers it ſelfe many wayes: for the proud perſon enuies the good of another, as if he deemed himſelfe either onely worthy,When men make great outward ſhewes, & braue it in coſt
                     •
                  y apparell, of purp
                     •
                  ſe to bee counted better men then they are, it is very pride. So painting of the face to bee thought a beautifull creature, not being ſo, is very pride. or elſe the greatneſſe of others to hinder his. He will acknowledge no ſuperior, nor equall by his good will, as Agamemnen and Pomp
                     •
                  y, he vſeth his equals as inferiors, his inferiors as ſeruants, his ſeruants as beaſts: hee thunders, lightens, crackes, threatens, his words are great, his lookes bigge, he is mad if he be not applauded: and as for humling himſelfe to any man ſincerely,

he knowes not how: if hee giue backe, it is but to fetch a better leap: if hee ſtoope a little, it is but to vant and climbe the higher. If he be below, he will not patiently tarry till one come and bid him ſit vp higher; but he will worke by indirect courſes, as by bribes, or ſlanders, or (it may be) poyſons; nothing being ſo horrible in his eye, as a meane or low degree. And when he is climbed vp, he pluckes vp the ladder after him, if he can, that no man ſhall come vp after, or but ſuch as he pleaſeth.
            To theſe proud and haughty perſons God oppoſeth himſelfe, theſe he reſiſteth,
               1. Pet. 5. 5. theſe he throweth from their pinnacles, and tumbles downe head-long, ſhakes with his whirle-windes, ſtrikes with his lightnings, beats with his thunder-claps, turnes vp their roots, and puniſheth them (when he pleaſeth) very ſeuerely, openly, and (as Dauid ſaith here)▪ 
               Abundantly. But let vs ſee ſome iudgements of God vpon the Proud.
            
            
               
               2. Pet. 2. 4. Iude 6. Gen. 3. 5. 6.The wicked Angels for their pride were baniſht out of heauen, and are vnder wrath. When our firſt Parents would haue been check-mate with God by pride, they brought a downfall of themſelues and children.Gen. 11. 4. 9. The builders of Babel for their pride were ſcattered, and their tongues confounded. Haman by pride brake his necke.1. Sam. 17 10. 45. 50. 51. God ouerthrew that vaunting Giant Golias by Dauid, then when he was in the top of his iollity. God threatned to viſit the fruit of the proud heart of the King of Aſhur, Senacherib, and his glorious and proud lookes,Iſaiah. 10. 12. 13. becauſe he ſaid: By the power of mine owne hand haue I done it, and by my wiſedome, becauſe I am wiſe: and ſo he did, for by his Angell he kild in one night, an hundred fourſcore and fiue thouſand of his Army,Iſaiah. 37. 36 38. gathered againſt Hezekiah, and not long after his owne ſonnes, Adramelek, and Sharezer ſlue him as he was in his Idols Temple worſhiping of Niſrech his God.Dan. 4. 27. 28. 30. 31. 34. Proud Nebuchadnezzar for his pride was

baniſhed the company of men, and depriued of his kingdome: and after, comming to better ſenſe, he could praiſe God, and ſay, That thoſe which walke is pride he is able to abaſe. Proud and bragging H
                     •
                  lofernes by Iudith loſt his head:Iudith. 6. 2 4. & 13. 8. 2. Mac. 1. 15. 16. ſo likewiſe was that wicked and inſolent Antiochus met withall, as he had deſerued, his head being firſt well battered with ſtones, and afterwards cut off. The iudgements of God vpon Pharoh for exalting himſelfe againſt God, and in his people, were many, and famous.
                  Nat. Comes Myth. l. 9. c. 25. 
               Timotheus the Ateenian neuer proſpered in any enterpriſe, after he had in his account giuen to the ſtate, often intermingled this ſpeech; And in this fortune had no part; ſo diſclaiming Gods prouidence, and ſacrificing to his owne nets. Apryes a king of Aegypt,
               Guid. Iuuenan Ter. Eun. which gloried that neither God nor Man could put him by his kingdome, was afterward ſtrangled. Caphaneus, when he had ſaid, that he would ouerthrow Thebes, Inuito Deo, whether

God would or no, was ſtrooke with lightning. Aiax ſaid, that Cowards could win with the helpe of God: But I (ſaith he) wil win this glory without God: not long after God puniſht him by permitting him to kill himſelfe with a ſword, which he had receiued of Hector. Herod Agrippa for not giuing glory vnto God, when the people madly flatter him in their acclamation,Act. 12. 22. 24. 
               The voyce of God, and not of Man, was ſuddenly ſmitten by Gods Angel, and eaten of wormes, and ſo ended his life. Simon Magus alſo to nuzzle the people in their fooliſh opinion of him,
                  Ioſeph. Antiq. lib. 19.
                     •
                  .17. who for his wonders thought him to be a God, boaſted that hee would flye into Heauen: and as he was in his flight, Saint Peter commanded the wicked ſpirit, by whoſe helpe he flue, to throw him downe, ſo that he fell, and was bruiſed to death. Alexander the great was alſo ſicke of this diſeaſe: for he practiſed with the Prieſts at the Oracle of Hammon to be pronounced the

               Sonne of I
                     •
                  piter: but not long after hee was wounded in India, which made him confeſſe hee felt the infirmities of a man, and a little after being returned to Babylon, as he was there in all his pompe and iollity, he was poyſoned in a banquet after ſupper, and ſo dyed. Emp
                     •
                  docles deſirous to be counted an immortall God, threw himſelfe into Aetna, where he periſhed. Domitian likewiſe was ſo blinded with pride, that he would be called a God, and worſhipped: but how did God reward him? He was ſlaine of his ſeruants with daggers, by his wiues conſent, in his priuy chamber: his body was buried without honour, his memory curſed, and his trophies defaced. Demetrius, Alexanders ſucceſſor, was by the fooliſh Athenians entitled a Sauing God, and had a Prieſt to doe Sacrifice vnto him, which honour he liked well of: but how did God like of it? He ſpoyled a number of his ſhips with his wind
                  •
               s, he ouerthrew him in battell by Saleuchus, and after

this ſuffered him to ſtuffe himſelfe ſo ful with vittails, that he burſt in ſunder. To all theſe we may adde thoſe, that haue by their deuiſes counterfeited lightnings and thunders, that they might be feared as Gods, as did Alladius,
               
                  Dio
                        ••
                     ſ. Hal
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                     . 1. Antiq. R
                        •
                     m. Dio
                        •
                     . l
                        •
                     b. 4. a king of the Latines before Romul
                     •
                  s, and a certaine king of Elide: both which were notably puniſhed for their inſolency by that God into whoſe th
                  •
               one they would haue aduanced themſelues. For Alladius had his houſe fired with true lightning, and ouerthrowne with a tempeſt of raine, together with the ouer-flowing of a pond hard by it: ſo that he periſhed by fire and water, being both burnt and drowned all at once. The other was deſtroied with a thunder-bolt from heauen, and ſo ſuffered a iuſt puniſhment of his wicked pride. Hiſtories furthermore report, how Q
                  •
               eene 
                  Ʋenda, daughter to Gracus the famous King of Poland,
               
                  H
                        •••
                     . H
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     . Pol
                        •
                     . lib. 1. c. 
                  
                     •
                  . out of her proud & ſtately nature, refuſed to be ioyned in marriage with any; and at length, leaſt

her fortunate gouernement ſhould bee diſgraced by ſome vnlucky miſhap, and ſo her pride eclypſed, to preuent this feare, deſperately caſt her ſelfe from an high bridge into the Riuer Vistula, and ſo ſuffered the puniſhment of her proud and ſtately minde,
                  I
                        •
                     ſ
                        •
                     p
                        •
                     . de 
                        ••
                     l Iadd. 1.
                     •
                  .12. 13. by a ſhamefull and baſe death. When Ieruſalem was taken by Herod and Soſius there was a Iew, that had hid himſelfe in a Caue with his wife and ſeuen children; to whom Herod offered both life and liberty, if hee would come forth: But hee, out of the pride and wilfulneſſe of his ſpirit refuſing this offer, firſt threw downe his children from an high Rocke, and brake their neckes, then flung his wife after them, and laſtly caſt himſelfe after them; a fearefull ſpectacle of a proud and obſtinate ſpirit. And▪
               Many waies GOD puniſheth the proud. many waies doth the LORD meete with the pride of men; ſometimes giuing them vp to hardneſſe and impenitency of heart; ſometimes bringing them into diſgrace and open ſhame,

and opprobry; ſometimes ſuffring them to fall into other ſinnes, whereby the lawes of men take hold of them, either to depriue them of their liues, or of their places, offices, and honours: One way or other hee doth vſually puniſh them, euen i
                  •
                this life, to ſay nothing of thoſe puniſhments of the life to come. And his mildeſt and moſt mercifull corrections of them are,The milder kind
                     •
                   of GODS iudgemēts vpon the proud are two. when either by cutting their combes, and abaſing them by ſome notable affliction, hee teacheth them by his grace to confeſſe their pride, and to ſee their weakeneſſe; or when hee ſuffers them to fall into ſome grieuous ſinne, at which by his grace, hee makes them to bluſh, and moues them to diſtaſt their proud opinions of their owne ſtrength, and to ſeeke in all humbleneſſe of heart for his aſſiſtance and protection. By the former meane hee ſchooled Nebuchadnezzar:
               Dan. 4. 34 and by the latter Saint Peter, who by his fall did learne euer after, not to

va
                  •
               nt, or build, vpon his owne ſtrength, but to depend vpon the grace and aide of GOD.
            Now the conſideration of theſe things teacheth vs theſe two duties. Firſt to deteſt, eſchew, and abandon pride;
                  Oſorius de Reg. Inſtit. l. 5 fol. 151. Then which nothing is more fooliſh, more baſe, more inhumane, more impious.
            
            For what can bee more fooliſh,The folly of pride. then not to ſee how fraile, and brittle, all the things of the world are, how ſoone all things are changed, and by what ſuddaine, and grieuous chances men are depriued of their riches, glory, greatneſſe, and life it ſelfe?
            What can be more baſe and abiect then to haue the minde pinned and nayled to the ground,The baſeneſſe of pride. and not to looke on heauenly things and eternall, but earthly and momentany, and to bee puffed vp with wealth and honours, mortall and vaine things, that delight to flit, and change their Maiſters?
            What more inhumane and leſſe

beſeeming the ſtate of man,The inhumanity of pride. then to contemne and skorne others, and 
                  •
               ſteeme all as Cyph
                     •
                  rs in compariſon of themſelues?
            
               The impiety of pride.What more vngodly, then to glory of riches, honours, dignities, nobleneſſe of birth, wit, ſtrength, beauty, vertue; as if they were not 
                  •
               he free-gift
                  •
                of GOD▪ as if men were not obliged to him for them?
            
               The iniuſtice of pride.Againe, what more iniust then pride? For a proud man aſcribes more to himſelfe then is due, and takes that from others, which is due vnto them.
            What more contentious then pride?P
                     •
                  o.13.
                     ••
                  . Pride the mother of contentions. Therefore Salomon ſaith, Onely by pride doth man make contention. Pride hath euer beene a ſetter on foote of all hereſies and ſchiſmes, that euer were in the Church; and is a notorious Make-bate in Commonwealthes, Kingdomes, Citties, and priuate houſes. Harder it is for a man to keepe peace with the proud, then with any; and impoſſible it is for one proud perſon to agree ſincerely

with an other, except peraduenture in ſuch a caſe as this, when as one, out of his pride, will endure no man to bee aboue him, and another being proud of humility, or humiliation rather, will not like that any ſhould be vnder him: Theſe two perhaps may liue friendly together, being though both proud, yet in a different reſpect.
            Finally,The ouglineſſe of pride. what can be more miſhapen and ougly then this vice of pride, which makes a man vnlike to GOD (whom to bee like is mans greateſt Honour) and like to the deuill, who is the father of pride, and by pride ouerthrew himſelfe? What more certaine ſigne and effectuall worker of any mans ouerthrow, then pride?Pro. 16. 18. 
               Pride goeth before deſtruction (ſaith Salomon) and an high mind before a fall. What more hatefull and waſtefull enemy to all vertues and all good things, a man hath then pride? By p
                  •
               ide a man is ſpoyled of them all:A Similie. Therefore as men take heed of Theeues, that rob and

ſpoyle, ſo and much more ſhould wee beware of pride (Quae inſidiatur bonis operibus,
               Auguſt. 
               vt pereant) which marres all good things, and turnes them vp ſide downe.Pride a waſter. If an humble man be proud of his humility, hee hath loſt of his humble minde, and is become puft with pride: If a man be proud of his beauty, he hath loſt his true beauty, and is a beautifull foole. If a man bee proud of his wiſedome, hee is become a foole; if hee bee proud of his wit, an Aſſe hath it in keeping; if hee bee proud of his pouerty, hee is rich in pride; if hee bee proud of his riches, hee is poore in piety. Now what a woefull and odious ſinne is pride, which is not onely euill in it ſelfe, but it turnes the nature of good things, as (they ſay) thunder doth good drink,A Similie. and as venemous beaſts turne, whatſoeuer they eate into venome; ſo pride makes the proud man, turne all his thoughts, words, and workes into pride, whiles hee draweth and referreth euery thing to his owne

praiſe and honour. Thus pride becomes like a moth, or worme,
               Pride a moth. which frets the cloath, and eates the wood, wherein it was bred. For pride ſpringing of vertue corrupts it, and there is no good thing ſo excellent, which becomes not euill, ſo ſoone as this wicked vice hath tainted it.
            It behoues vs therefore to fly this wretched vice,The way to withſtand prid. which wee cannot, vnleſſe wee ſubmit our ſelues to GOD and his Ordinances, vnleſſe wee confeſſe him to bee the Free-Giuer of all good things we haue; vnleſſe wee cut off that errour of conceipt, whereby wee thinke better of our ſelues, then there is reaſon; vnleſſe wee ſeeke to GOD for his helpe; and finally, vnleſſe we remember that GOD reſisteth the proud, but giueth grace to the humble,
               Iam. 4. 6.
               
                  Hugo lib. 1. de anima.
                and that Pride (as one prettely ſpeaketh) was bred in heauen, but hauing (as it were) forgotten which way it fell from thence, it could neuer afterward finde the way thither backe againe,
            
            Secondly, the conſideration of

Gods iudgements vpon the Proud ſhould teach vs (as Dauid would haue it) to loue the LORD who, hates and puniſhes that ſinne aboundantly, that is, or ought to bee ſo odious to vs. Seeing therefore GOD takes part with vs againſt the proud, and by hating them ſhewes the goodneſſe of his owne Nature, and in that hee plagues them, being euer the bittereſt enemies to his trueſt friends, it behoues vs, and the reſt of all GODS Saints to delight in GOD and loue him,Hee that loues GOD, loues himſelfe. and in loue to ſubmit our ſelues vnto him. If we loue not him, wee do not loue our ſelues; but if wee loue him truely, wee do truely loue our ſelues, and wee are, (not in our owne opinion onely, but) truely beloued of Him; which is infinitely much more worth, then if all the world beſides him did affect vs. Neither need wee care how ill the world thinkes of vs, if he thinke well of vs;A Similie. as a ſober and chaſte woman cares not how other men are conceited of her, ſo be

it her husband like well of her, and truly loue her: or as a loyall ſubiect, who makes more reckning of his ſoueraignes loue, then of the frendſhip of all the traitors in the world. Now the God of loue work and confirme this loue within our hearts, that we may liue and dye in his loue, and at length obtaine a full and finall fruition of him, whom we doe loue, receiving the reward of our loue, the euerlaſting life and happineſſe of our ſoules, and that by the merits of that his beloued Son, Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghoſt, three perſons, but one Euerliuing & Euerlouing God, be all loue, and honour, all praiſe and power, now, and euer-more. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ERRATA.
            PAge 25. l. 2. read commination. l. 3. read ſtreaming. P. 39. l. 11. read Laf-ford. and whence. p. 58. and laſt line, read, if all.
            
         
      
   