
      
         
            
            
            A godlye and learned treatiſe, wherin is proued the true iuſtificacion of a Chriſtian manne to come frely of the mercy of god in Chriſt, without the deſeruyng of man by his merites: and alſo how good workes oughte to bee done & what be true good works in dede. Wherunto is ioyned a cō
               ference betwene the law and the goſpel, very profitable for al men to exerciſe themſelues therin.
            ☞ Eſay. xliii.
            ☞ I, euen I am he only, who for myn owne ſelfes ſake doe awaye thyne offēces and forget thy ſynnes, ſo that I wil neuer thynke vpon them.
         
         
            
            
            
               ✚ To the reader.
            IT was trulye and wiſelie ſaied of the poete, that one witnes, whiche hathe ſeen the thinge with his eyes, is more to be ſet bye, then tene of reporte. For in dede in thinges ye be ſubiect to ſenſes, as euerie ſēſe hathe certeine of thē peculiar to him, and by ſome bye meanes cō
               men with other: ſo eche of them, in things properly apperteyning to them, performe their functions more ſuerly. As moſt certeynlye iudgeth the ſmel of odors, the eye of colors, and the eare of voices, thogh the eare alſo can iudge of colors by relation of others, and the eye can perceaue the differēce

of voices ſet out in geometrycall proportions, or of muſicians by wryting expreſſed. For clearer is the water at the ſpringe, then farther of in the ryuer. but wherunto ſerueth this: Herunto gentle reader. We ſee in theſe owre dayes, in which, after longe and horrible darknes of gods true knowledge, which lighteneth euerye mā that commeth in to the worlde, ye lyke to haue chaunced amonge vs betwene the worldlyngs and meſſengers of god, whiche, becauſe they were not of the world, could not be fauored in the worlde, as dyd happen among ye Iſraelites, when ſo euer god of his infinite mercye raiſed vnto them any prophete, good prince or other promotor of hys glory. For as then ye worlde lacked not that ſpoured forward on ther ſyde, bothe emōg the commons thorow ſimplicitie

and of the learned ſorte by malice blinded: ſo led god in his aray againſt the worlde learned for learned and ſimple againſte ye ſimple man. For by Chriſt they ſayed, yt the ruder ſorte folowed him and not the princes and learned: and yet we knowe that Nicodeme, a price of ye phariſies, reſorted to hī, and Gamaliel doctor of the lawe and Pauls ſchoole maſter, drewe ſome what nye to him, & Ioſeph, the Centurion and ye Eunuche of Candia cloue to him, and wer euerye one of them, for their talētes, ſetters oute of that fayth, yt was preached in his name. But in them we perceaue this difference, as in ye ſeruaūtes of god at theſe days, that amonge thoſe, that embrace the trueth, ſome only knowe that theyr enemyes part is falſe, ſome know ye trueth, but not ſo throughly that thei ſe the foundation and

groūd thereof, which is graūted yet vnto ſōe other. Wherfore, me ſemeth they maye not vnaptly be called, the fyrſt two hearing witneſſes, thother ſeinge. For as they are ſeuerall giftes, to perceaue yt error, to holde the truthe, and to knowe yt: ſo maie the one be with owte the other, as other diſtincte gyfts of god be. But to my purpoſe, where as the indeuors of them all, tending to the inſtruction of others, are thankfully to be accepted, and the ſpirite to be extincted in none: ſo what ye latter ſort doeth to the ſame end diligently, me ſemeth yt is worthye not to cōme owte to the hādes of manie, but with ſome ſpecial note vnto the reader, to make hym for his farther commoditie the more attent in reding it. For though the ſaylable wyne nede no yue bough, becauſe it wil in tyme gett cheymen,

and well abyde theyre ſlowe commynge: ſo yet, ſeynge the late knowinge of the ſpiritual workes hinder moſt the reader, and not itſelfe, as abydinge ſtill good in ytſelfe, where as contrary wyſe the ſeller and not the byer is hurt in euil wine thorow lacke of the yue bough, me thinketh this prouerbe ſhold nothing feare me frō cōmending this boke vnto the, except yt, wheras ye only cauſe why I print it is ye increaſe of thy godly knowledge, I cold in the ſame mynd be lothe of thy moſt profyte. Wherfore as I hope thou knoweſt the doctrine, wher of it is intyteled, to be ye chefe pointe and in maner the whole ſome of oure relygion, vtterly ranſacking the kingdōe of ye deuil: So, yf I can iudge any thing therin, yt is handled in ſuch exacte ſorte, as to do the lyke fewe men wolde, and fewer colde. So

that me ſemeth, yt maye worthely be ſayed: diuers lerned men haue hetherto, to oure greate comfort, ſhot at this mark, and ſome came nye ye wight, but this hath hit the pricke. I meane for clear vtteryng of the matter to our more perfite vnder ſtanding, and to the plaine and brefe diſſoluing, which both are geuen but vnto few, of al ſuch ſcruples, as well that riſe to the ſymple Chriſtian in wayeng this doctrine, as alſo that are otherwayes by the malycious ſuggeſtion and craft of the truthes ſubtil enemyes inuented and forged: & to be ſhort he hath done the whol ſo diſtinctlie, referringe al things to their peculier places, by theyr difference playnely ſeparated: yt in him, if in any man againe, appeareth that rare vertue, of which the wiſe man Socrates, as his diuyne ſcholer plato ſheweth, ſet

ſuch ſtore, that when he met with ſuch an one, he wold make of him as of halfe a god. I meane to diſtinct thinges, which gifte he truly ſayed was the principal waye to come in queſtyons to the fynding oute of truth. In which vertu this autor not only paſſeth the olde wryters, touching this mater, which wrotte not ſo clearly, as oure age of certeine articles, becauſe they were not ſo ſore darkened as a lytle before oure tyme, yt they ſhold ſo much nede to laboure in them: but alſo ſurmoū
               teth the moſt part, that hath learnedly wrytten at this dayes therof, ſo that I maye in maner ſaye of him and them, as a learned man ſayed in comparing the two worthy philoſophers, Plato and Ariſtotel, together: that is to wit, yt the one ſet forth of his profoūd knoweledge but lytle in manye

elegant wordes, & the other much in fewe. Wherfore gentyl reader, if thou woldeſt gladly knowe the booke for the doctrynes ſake, double thy diligēce in reading yt attentli, playeng as the good iudge wolde in matters criminall: who if he gaue halfe an eare to an eare witnes, would geue the whole to an eye witnes. For as thou coldſt not but profyte much thereby, yf yt were but a meane woorke: ſo muſt thou much more profit yt beinge as it is: ſeyng a thing ons well don is twiſe done.
            VALE.
         
         
            
            
            The contentes of the boke.
            
               
                  ☞ The. 1. Chapter. ☞ The autors intent in iuſtificacion.
               
                  ☞ The. 2. Chapter. ☞ The ſignifications & deſcription of the terme, iuſtifieng.
               
                  ☞ The. 3. Chapter. ☞ Who is the mediatour & how he delyuereth vs.
               
                  ☞ The. 4. Chapter. ☞ That Chriſt taketh away our ſynnes, and that ſo we are recōciled to god, proued by the ſcripture
               
                  ☞ The. 5. Chapter. ☞ Chriſte beareth our ſynnes, when his iuſtice is made oures, which is don by faith on our ſide.
               
                  ☞ The. 6. Chapter. ☞ That the maner of iuſtificacion is on our behalfe by faith.
               
                  
                  ☞ The. 7. Chapter. ☞ Theſe ſayenges: we are iuſtifyed by the grace of god, or by chriſtes merites, or by faith: be all one.
               
                  ☞ The. 8. Chapter ☞ By fayth onelye are we iuſtified: which terme, onelye, is not of mans braine inuented.
               
                  ☞ The. 9. Chapter. ☞ Iuſtification is taken from al maner of works, whether they be of the lawe, or of grace.
               
                  ☞ The. 10. Chapter. ☞ Faith iuſtifieth not in yt it is a worke, but in that it truſteth to yt mercye of god through Chriſt.
               
                  ☞ The. 11. Chapter. ☞ That no man is iuſtyfyed by works, whether they go before or after iuſtificacion, is proued by the nature of works.
               
                  ☞ The. 12. Chapter. ☞ The nature of iuſtifycacyon

argueth, that faith and not works iuſtifie.
               
                  ☞ The. 13. Chapter. ☞ Faith is not without workes, but what place they haue in the churche, and whence they ſpryng in vs.
               
                  ☞ The. 14. Chapter. ☞ That we doe not wel, tyl god dwell in vs to worke good works in vs, and how rightwyſenes is aſcribed to workes.
               
                  ☞ The. 15. Chapter. ☞ How gods workes in vs are called ours, but ſo yt we can challenge naught for them, but for an other cauſe.
               
                  ☞ The. 16. Chapter. ☞ The. 2. ſortes of men, that the Apoſtles had to do with, which make them ſeme to varie in iuſtificacyon.
               
                  ☞ The. 17. Chapter. ☞ The termes, rewardes or merites,

examined by the ſcripture.
               
                  ☞ The. 18. Chapter. ☞ The rule to meaſure good works, that thei may be good indede, and not of our good intent onelye.
               
                  ☞ The. 19. Chapter. ☞ The expoſition of the. 10. commaundementes, which are the lymites of our good works.
               
                  ☞ The. 20. Chapter. ☞ That ye lord requyreth naught els of vs but the workes of the. x. commaundementes.
               
                  ☞ The. 21. Chapter. ☞ That the foreſayd proprietes of good workes are requyſite indede to workes, is declared more playnlye by the ſcripture.
               
                  ☞ The. 22. Chapter. ☞ The concluſion or peroration,
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            A godlye and learned treatiſe, wherin is proued ye true iuſtificacion of a Chriſtian manne to come frely of the mercy of god in Chriſt, without the deſeruyng of man by his merites: and alſo how good workes oughte to bee done & what be true good works in dede. Wherunto is ioyned a cō
               ference betwene the law and the goſpel, very profitable for al men to exerciſe themſelues therein.
            ☞ Eſay. xliii.
            ☞ I, euen I am he only, who for myne owne ſelfes ſake doe awaye thyne offēces and forget thy ſynnes, ſo that I wyll neuer thynke vpon them.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The authors intent and purpoſe in thys matter of iuſtificacyon.
            The. 1. Chapter.
            PUrpoſing playnly & brefely to ſpeake of the true iuſtifying of a Chriſtian mā, and aſwell of vpright true good workes, as the maner and fourme therof: I mynde not to tell what diſputaciōs mē haue had of the ſame, but what God (who cannot lye) hath vttered & ſpoken therof in his worde. This matter of iuſtificacion I thought to ſerue my turne: Firſt beecauſe that Iohn the Apoſtle and Euā
               geliſt, whom I now haue in hād doth in maner treate wholy therof. Upon whom I was perſwaded to make the better declaracion,

if I aforehande out of all the ſcripture ſet a ſhort Summe of iuſtificacion and of good workes. Secondly, beecauſe that in oure fayth and religion there is nothyng, wherof we may be ignorante with greater hurte, or that with greater profit may be knowen, perceaued and vnderſtand, then euen the maner of iuſtificacion and of good workes. For iuſtificacion is the ſureſt ground and eſtabliſhment of our life & wellfare.
            Thirdly, becauſe this matter (beyng els playne and euydent) is now in our dayes, thorow the many folde darke myſtes▪ of contencious men, vtterly confuſed & cleane toſſed out of order. For, cō
               cerning iuſtificacion, diuerſe and ſondrye men haue ſtraunge and nyce opinions. Some ſaye ſtyl, that the faythfull are iuſtifyed

thorowe the onelye belefe in the Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, whiche is a trueth in dede.
            Other there be, that refuſe & condemne thys as an erroneous opynyon, but with great arrogā
               cye aſcribe their iuſtificacyon vnto mens works. Some referre iuſtificacion to faith and workes a lyke. And ſome there be, that vnto fayth aſcrybe the begynnynge of iuſtificacion, and the finiſhīge or perfourmaunce thereof vnto workes. Yet haue I not recyted the myndes and opinions of all. But foraſmuche as there is ſuch contencion among the learned, the peoples conſciences are therby vexed, troubled and ſore tēpted.
            Wherefore to eſtabliſhe the Chriſtian verite, and for an introduction into the holy and godlye goſpell of Iohn: I mynde to colleete

& gather together a ſhorte Summe of the iuſtificacion of a Chriſtyan manne, and concernyng good workes. Nether will I here bring forth eny thinge at all, which I do not declare and proue wyth ſenſible playne teſtimonies of gods ſcripture: yea and as touchinge iuſtificacion and good workes, I wil collecte & conferre together nothing els, but the moſt euident witneſſes of the ſcripture. So that without the order and homelie vnpainted oracion, ther ſhalbe nothig mine: nether wil I compte any thinge mine own but trye & proue altogether by gods word. And doutles in the moſt waightie maters of our Religion, we ought euen ſo to vſe our ſelfes.
         
         
            
            ¶ Afore al things it ſhalbe nedefull, to ſette forth a ſure deſcription, expoſicion and ſignificacion of this terme iuſtifieng.
            The. 2. Chapter.
            TO iuſtifie, or this terme, Iuſtifie is in the ſcripture taken ſondrie waies. For ſomtyme it ſignifieth to aſcribe honour and right vnto god, to yelde vnto him: ſtowtlie & boldly to confeſſe, that he onelie is rightuous, but we oure ſelues ſynners and vniuſt. Thus is it red: And all the people and the Luke. 7. publicanes, that heard him, iuſtified god, and were baptiſed & the baptiſine of Ihon.
            
               
More ouer, it ſignifieth aſmuch, as to defende and ſpare himſelf, and to ſet forth himſelfe for iuſt and ryghteous. For ſo the Lorde vſeth it whan he rebuketh ye Phariſees, Luke. 16. ſaying vnto thē. Ye are they, that iuſtifie youreſelues Luke. 16. beefore men, but god knoweth your hartes.
            Notwithſtanding in this our preſent matter, I vſe thys terme (Iuſtifie) as the cuſtome is in cauſes iudicial and belonging to the law. And ſo doeth it betoken aſmuche, as to pronounce hym iuſt and righteous, that is, to diſcharge from punyſhment, and by ſentence to cleare and quite him free, whiche is accuſed and required to haue execucion. Againe contrary vnto thys doth the ſcripture now ſet that, whyche is called to pollute or ſtayne: that is, by ſentence to pronounce one defiled,

vngodly, vnrighteous and worthye to bee plaged, and ſo to geue hym ouer to be puniſhed.
            For it is red thus: If there be Deu. 25. a ſtrife betwene men, they ſhall come to the law: and let ye iudges geue ſentence betwene them, and iuſtifie the rightuous, and condemne the vngodly. What canne thys be els, but euen aſmuche as to ſaye: Let them diſcharge and quite free the rightuous, & iudge the vnrightuous to be puniſhed. For Eſaye in the fift Chapter ſaieth Eſay. 5. yet more playnlye thus: they iuſtifie the vngodly for rewards ſake, but condemne the iuſt cauſe of the ryghteous.
            Which is euen aſmuch to ſay as: the righteous doe not they de clare to be righteous, neyther delyuer they hym from the vilanye and wrong of the vniuſt: but take rewardes and giftes, and leaue

him to the wilfulnes of violent oppreſſours. Here vnto ſerueth it that is writte in the prouerbes of Salomon the 17. chapter: The Pro. 17. lorde hateth aſwel him that iuſtifieth the vngodlie, as him that cōdemneth the innocēt. Item that, out of the. 12. of Matthew: Out of thy wordes thou ſhalt be iuſtified, Math. 12. and out of thy wordes thou ſhalte be condemned.
            Of the worde Iuſtifie, cōmeth the worde iuſtificacion or iuſtifieng. Iuſtificacion. And the ſame is a iudicial terme in the ſcripture. For iuſtificacion is the declaracion of the iudge, who pronounceth ſentence for the accuſed: that is, diſchargeth and quyteth him free from ye accuſaciō and threatned puniſhment. Iuſtificaciō therfore is nothing els, but a diſcharge, delyueraunce and reſtitucion from death to life.
            
               
Herof is rightuouſnes called a diſcharge and pardon frō ſynne: And they be the rightuous, whoſe ſynnes are forgeuen, and which, beyng a quyted frō death, are become hieres of eternal life. The Apoſtle Paul therfore, more Iuſtificacion is remiſſion & redēpcion. then in one place, doth expounde Iuſtificaciō, by ye name of redēpcion & remiſſion of ſynnes: For ye which cauſe he ſetteth them both together, yt one maie be vnderſtā
               ded bi āother. For in yt Acts of ye Apoſtles he ſaieth: Be it knowē vnto you therfore, ye men & brethren, Actes. 13. yt thorow this mā (namely Chriſt) is preached vnto you forgeuenes of ſynnes, and that by him all, that beleue, are iuſtified frō al things, frō which you could not be iuſtified by the lawe of Moſes. And to ye Romanes he Roma. 4. ſaieth: euen as Dauid alſo deſcrybeth the ſaluacion of that man,

vnto whom god imputeth righte ouſnes wythout workes. Bleſſed Pſal. 32. are they (ſaieth he) whoſe vnrighteouſneſſes are forgeuen, and whoſe ſynnes are couered. Bleſſed is that man, vnto whom the Lorde wyll not impute ſynne.
            Behold now, how he ioyneth and knytteth iuſtificacion, bleſſedfulnes (or ſaluacion) and remyſſyon of ſynnes together. So doeth Eſaye alſo in maner wyth Eſay. 53. more playne wordes in the. 53. Chapter, ſaying: my ryghtuous ſeruaunte ſhall with his knowledge (or with the knowledge of him) iuſtifie the multitude: for he ſhall beare away theyr ſynnes. For thys laſt: he ſhal beare away their ſinnes: doeth in maner expound that, whych goeth beforewyth hys knowledge, or wyth the knowledge of hym, ſhal he iuſtifie and deliuer the multitude.

Thus he declareth, that iuſtificacyon is nothyng els but remyſſion of ſinnes. For whan the lorde taketh away our wyckednes, he iuſtifieth vs.
            To iuſtifye therefore and to beare ſynne away, to delyuer frō ſynne or to forgeue ſynne, is all one matter. So that we lack now no more but to ſay: iuſtyfycacion is the remiſſion of ſynnes & the diſcharge from damnacyon, the deliuerance, I ſaye, and forgeuenes of ſynne: yea euen the receauing vp of a ſinner into the grace of god, and inherytaunce of lyfe. Wherfore whan the queſtyon is The forme faſhiō and maner of ye mediacyon and iuſtificacion. aſked concernyng the true iuſtificacyon of man: vndoubtedly it is demaunded, what that maye be, for whoſe ſake or by whō ſinners are diſcharged frō the threatned and deſerued death, or by whoſe meanes our ſynnes are forgeuen

vs. Or: Wherein is the worlde reconcyled with god: And ſo in thes poynts conſiſteth the whole knowledge of our iuſtificacion, that whan we haue knowne the mediatour & redemer, the fourm and maner of the redempcion, ye faſhion and meane alſo wherby the delyueraunce cōmeth vnto vs & is geuen vs: the iuſtificacion of a Chriſtian mā may lykewiſe be vnderſtande.
         
         
            ¶ Uvhat is to be held of ye mediator, as who he is: and the maner of iuſtificacion, as howe he delyuereth vs.
            The. 3. Chapter.
            BUt to the intēt y• no darke nor doubtfull thing remayne in

eny mans mynde: I wil firſt declare, what is to be holden of the Mediator or interceſſor, & what the maner of iuſtificacion is. All this wil I ſet forth before mens eyes, yt euery one maie vewe & ſe it: Namelie, y• Chriſt Ieſus is y• ſame, for whoſe ſake the father is pacified and contented: In ſuch forte, yt he imputeth not ſinne vnto vs, but cōpteth vs righruous & iuſt. For Chriſt hath take our ſynnes vpon him ſelfe, ſatiſfied for them with his innocent death, & hath geuen vs his owne rightuouſnes. Then wil I ſhewe, how we becōe partakers of this rightuouſnes. For in this mater muſt ſpeciall reſpect be had to theſe two poyntes: Namely, who is ye mediator & redemer of ye damned & how he hath delyuered thē: yt is, after what ſorte we become pertakers of the redempcion and

iuſtificacion, or how the deliuerance extendeth to our commodite and welfare. To ſpeake of the fyrſt, imagen thou nowe by thy ſelf, that god, the righteous iudge of all, ſitteth vpon hys iudycyall Throne, before whō ſtand al mē and before accuſed as vngodlye and vnfaythfull, ſtayned and defyled wyth al vyces, and are conuicte of the ſame, by meāes wherof, the ſentence of condemnacion is called for and required. The men haue vtterly nothing, wherby to excuſe themſelues, nether is there aught els to loke for, but that they altogether ſhalbe caried forth and hurled awaye to damnacyon and eternall death. Neuertheles in thys greateſt and final daunger, there appeareth to the moſt woofull mankynde, an exceadyng great hope: namelye the eternall ſonne of god, who to

be arbiter & mediatoure betwene god and man, and to delyuer thē from deſtruction, that were condemned vnto death: tooke oure fleſhe vpon hym, and became very man, to the entente that he, beynge tormented and ſufferynge death, might alſo lade our ſinnes vpon hym, and wyth hys innocent death to take away our gyltines, purginge our ſinnes with his bloud, and making vs heires of eternall lyfe.
            Wyth thys enſample, I think it euidently inough vttered and declared, what the mediatour is and what is iuſtificacion. I ſuppoſe alſo, euery man doeth well perceaue and vnderſtande, that Chryſt the mediatour, and the in carnacyon wyth the croſſe of the Lord Ieſu, is euē the ſame right principall poynt and only cauſe, wherby we are iuſtified & made

rightuous.
            But here might an vnreaſonable and vnequal hearer or reader crye againſt me and ſaie: Thou ſhuldſt byde by thy promes, bringinge forth gods ſcripture, and not ymagined enſamples. For at the firſt thou diddeſt promes a pure and ſyncere conference of ye ſcriptures: but now, forgettinge thy ſelfe, thou holdeſt the ſymple vp with bare enſampls. Anſwer. I am nothing at all aſhamed, to ſpeake after the propertie of the eternall maieſtie of god. Now doth yt holy ſcripture yet ſet forth ſuch ſunilitudes and figures vnto vs. For it bringeth god in as a iudge, before whoſe preſēce ther goeth forth a conſumynge fyre, Before god is no man iuſtified. Pſal. 5. and in whoſe ſight the giltie is not excuſed. Here vnto ſerueth it that Dauid wryteth: For thou art the god, that hath no pleaſure

in wickednes, nether ſhal eny euell dwell with the. Such, as be fooliſhe, ſhall not ſtand in thy ſight: for thou hateſt al them that worke vanitie. Thou ſhalt deſtroie them that ſpeake leſyngs: the lorde will abhorre both the bloude thirſtie and diſceatfull man. This ſame Dauid likewiſe, remembryng the accuſacyon and accuſed, ſayeth moreouer: The Pſa. 14. 53. lord loked down from heauen vpon the children of men, to ſee if there wer any, that would vnderſtand, and ſeke after God. But they wer al gone out of the way, they altogether became abominable: there was none ye dyd good, no not one. And thys teſtymony of the Prophet Dauid is rehearſed againe of S. Paul in ye third chapter to the Romaynes. Roma. 3. Againe the ſame royal Prophete himſelfe, making menciō of the

iudge, the iudgement and dānacyon, ſayeth thus: Entre not into Pſal. 143. iudgement wyth thy ſeruaunt, O lord: for in thy ſyght ſhal no mā liuyng be iuſtified. Itē: if thou, Pſal. 130. Lord, wilt be extreme to marke what is done amyſſe, O Lorde, who maye abyde it? Holy Iob Iob. 9. alſo ſayeth: I knowe and am ſuer it is true, that a mā, compared vnto god, cannot be iuſtified. If he would argue with him, he might not anſwere him vnto one amōg a thouſande.
            If I would iuſtifie my ſelfe, myne owne mouth ſhoulde condemne me &c. Thus in my forere cited enſample, I haue broughte forth nothyng, that is ſtraunge, or not cōſonaunt to the ſcripture. As concerning the mediatoure & redemer, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the maner alſo and meaſure of the Mediacyon and redempcion,

wherof I haue ſpoken ſomewhat afore: the ſcripture expreſſeth altogether ſo playnly and perfectly, yt doubtles whoſo euer would denye the ſame, muſte nedes be ſuch an one, as hath neuer red the ſcripture.
            But for aſmuch as the ryghte ſure point of our iuſtificacyon lyeth in this, whiche I haue proponed out of the ſcripture, that our Lorde Ieſus Chryſt, beeyng the mediatour, hath layed vpō himſelfe the giltines of all ſuche, as were condemned, makyng ſatyſfactyon for them wyth hys own body vpon the tree of the croſſe, and waſhyng them awaye wyth hys bloude: namelye, in that he hath iuſtifid, abſolued and quite diſcharged vs, which were damned vnto death: And in that god, receauynge vs vnto grace, hath iudged and pronounced vs iuſte

and rightuous for hys ſake. Therfore minde I now to confirme ye ſame, prouing and declaryng it wyth ſtrong, ſure and euydente teſtimonies of holy ſcripture.
         
         
            ¶ That Chriſte / our mediatour, hath taken vpon hym our ſynnes: and that therefore god hath receaued vs into grace, is proued oute of ſcrypture.
            The. 4. Chapter.
            ESay, the chefe among the moſt holy witneſſes, in ye liii. chapter alone geuethe vs eyght teſtimonyes. The firſt is this: he onely hath taken Eſa. 53. on him oure infirmites, & borne oure paynes.
            
               
And immediatly after: whereas he yet was wounded for our offences, and ſmitten for oure wickednes.
            This is euen aſmuche, as if he ſaid thus: we thorow our ſynnes deſerued ſtripes and woundes, ſickneſſes and paynes: But all theſe hath ye lord laide vpon him, to diſcharge vs of thoſe griefes.
            The ſeconde teſtimonye: For the puniſhment of our correction was layed vpon hym, and wyth his ſtrypes are we healed. Lo, y• puniſhment, that belonged vnto vs, was layed vpon hym, & with his ſtrypes are we made whole. The third: As for vs, we al haue gone aſtraie like ſhepe, euery one hath turned his owne waye, but the lorde hath heaped together vpon hym the iniquitie of vs.
            That is to ſaye: that Whereas

no man might be ſaued by his own vertue, the Lorde, hauynge compaſſyon vpon the miſerye of man, hath, of hys mere goodnes, geuen hys own ſonne: that he takyng vpon hym the ſynnes of vs all, paying our raunſome and ſatiſfyeng for vs, myght alſo make vs partakers of his rightwiſnes. The fourth: He was cut of from the grounde of the liuing. Which punyſhment did goe vpon hym for the tranſgreſſion of my people. The Lorde was vngilty, and therfore ſuffred he for our ſinnes whyche he toke awaye.
            The fifte: Yet pleaſed it the lord thus to bruſe hym with plages, and to ſmite him with infirmite: that whan he had made his ſoule (or lyfe) an offeryng for ſynne, he myght ſee a longe laſtyng ſede. The offeryng for ſynne, hath he here taken for the ſufficient recō
               ciliacion

and obteyning of grace for all ſynnes.
            The ſixte: for he ſhal beare away their ſynnes. Herof doubtles is it thoughte, that Iohn the Baptiſt toke thys hys excellente ſentence: beholde the lambe of Iohn. 1. god, that beareth or taketh away the ſynne of the world. Aſſuredli out of this place of the Prophete Eſay, dyd holy S. Peter ſpeake in hys Epiſtle, ſaying: which his 1. Peter. 2. own ſelfe bare our ſynnes in his body on the tree.
            The ſeuenth accordeth wyth the Sixte: who yet ſhall take or beare away the ſynnes of many: namely, of the whole multitude, doubtles euen of faythfull beleuers.
            The eyght teſtimonye concludeth thys preſent matter: and he made īterceſſiō for the miſdoers. That is, he ſetteth hymſelfe betwene

god and men, in that he, taking vpon him oure ſynnes, ſatiſfied ye 
               
                  •
               uſtice of god forthe ſame, & hath made vs partakers of his owne rightuouſnes.
            The ſecond witneſſe, holie S. Paul, ye electe veſſel of god, ſpeaketh Roma. 8. very playnly: Who ſhal laye eny thinge to the charge of gods Choſen? It is god that iuſtifieth: Who is he that can condemne? It is Chriſt which dyed, yea rather which is riſen agayn: which is alſo on the right hand of god, and maketh interceſſion for vs.
            Here thou heareſt, that we are iuſtified by the interceſſion and mediacion of our lorde Ieſu. S. Paul ſaieth moreouer: For god was in Chriſt, and made agremēt 2. Cor. 9. betwene ye worlde & himſelfe, & īputed not their ſynnes vnto thē.
            And immediatlye after he ſayeth: For he made him to be ſynne

for vs, which knew no ſynne: yt we by his meanes ſhuld be y• rightuouſnes, which before god is allowed. Doubtles euen yt we (thorow him) hauynge porcion and feloſhippe in gods true rightuouſnes, might altogether be reputed & compted rightuous before god. Whervnto that alſo agreeth wherof ye ſame Paul maketh mē
               cion with theſe wordes: But are Roma. 3. iuſtified frelie by his grace, thorow ye Redempcion yt is in Chriſt Ieſu, whom god hath ſet forth to be the obteyner of mercy, thorow faith in his bloud &c. Lykewyſe to ye Galathians: Chriſt hath delyuered vs frō ye curſe of the law, Gal. 3. in aſmuche as he becāe a curſe for vs, that the bleſſinge of Abrahā might come among the Gentiles in Chriſt Ieſu.
            Now let the thirde witneſſe come forth, euen Ihon, the ſonne of thonder, and dearlie beloued

diſciple of the Lord, who in hys Epiſtle ſayeth wyth expreſſe wordes after thys maner: & the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt his ſonne Iohn. 1. clenſeth vs from all ſinne. And afterwarde he ſaieth: and if any mā 
               Iohn. 2, ſynne, we haue an aduocate with god, euen Ieſus Chryſt the righteous, and he it is, that obteineth grace for our ſines: not for oure onely, but alſo for the ſynnes of the whole worlde.
            If all trueth nowe ſhal ſtand in the mouth of two or three, then wil no man (I truſt) from hence forth denye, that Ieſus Chryſte is our righteouſnes, that we are iuſtified by the bloud of Ieſus Chryſte, that the death of ye lorde Ieſus Chryſt is it, by meanes whereof ſynners are delyuered from death, that our ſynnes are pardoned and forgeuen vs for Chryſts ſake, and that in him we

are reconcyled with God the father: who for the ryghtuouſneſſe ſake of his anoynted, whyche he hath geuen vs, doeth compte vs ryghtuous, beyng of oure ſelues voyde of all ryghtuouſnes.
            Vnto theſe very playne teſtymonyes, commeth thys alſo, that deſcended from the excellent glory out of heauen, euen the ſētence of god vpon the Lorde Ieſus, whan he went vp from the Baptyme, wyth theſe wordes: Thys Math. 3. is my deare ſonne, in whom I delyte, and in whom I am pacyfyed.
            And Paule to the Coloſſyans ſayeth: for it pleaſed the father, yt 
               Coloſ. 1. in hym ſhoulde dwell al fulnes, and by hym to reconcyle al thīgs vnto himſelfe, and to ſet at peace by hym, thorow the bloud of his croſſe, both thynges in heauen, and thynges in earth &c. To this

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
agreeth alſo that, which he ſaith to the Epheſians with theſe wordes: He (namely the father of oure lorde Ieſu Chriſt) ordeyned Ephe. 1. vs before, thorow Ieſus Chriſt, to be heires vnto himſelfe, acordinge to the good pleaſure of his will, to the praiſe of the glory of his grace, wherwith he hath made vs accepted thorow the beloued: By whom we haue redempcion thorow his bloud, euen the forgyuenes of ſynnes, acording to the riches of his grace &c.
            Out of al this I conclude, that a Chriſtian man is iuſtified thorow Chriſt, and reconcyled with god the father: euen by him; who with his bloud hath clenſed vs from ſynne, delyuered vs from ye power of the deuel & of darknes, reſtored vs vnto life with his owne death, and made vs heires with him in eternall life.
            
               
And for al this now, yet doth not the ſcripture ſpeake againſt itſelf ſayīg: A Chriſtian man is iuſtified by ye grace of god: for Chriſt the anoynted of the lorde is the free gifte of god, and the fulneſſe of all grace, for aſmuche as Ihon ſaieth: We al, takynge out of the fulnes of Chriſt, haue receaued Iohn. 1. grace for grace. For the lawe was geuen by Moſes, but grace and trueth commeth by Ieſus Chriſt, who is full of grace and veritie.
         
         
            Chriſt beareth our ſynnes, and by his ſtripes we are healed, when his iuſtice is made ours: which is done by fayth on our ſide.
            The. 5. Chapter.
            
               
THis hitherto haue I ſpoken in generall, concernīg the maner of iuſtificaciō: that is, howe and after 
                  〈…〉
                what ſort the ſentence of damnacyon, geuen of god vpō al mankynd, is hyndered: how thei, that were condemned, be delyuered, Howe we be made partakers of the rightuouſnes of Chryſt. and reconcyled agayne with god thorowe Chryſte.
            But yet haue I ſpoken nothīg of the lawe, howe the righteouſnes of Chryſt is become oures, or how we be partakers of this redempcyon.
            For there be many, whych, vnderſtanding Chryſte to be a medyatour, doe not yet beleue, that he is alſo their mediatoure with god the father. And ſo the ſtrēgth and vertue of the Mediacyon doeth not profyte them. Hereby maye we perceaue, that the maner of iuſtyficacyon is not fullie

fyniſhed and perfourmed, whā we haue gottē onelie ſome knowlege of the mediator and interceſſor, vnleſſe we alſo knowe, & be ſuere thorow faith, that Chriſt is our mediator, yea in euery poynt ours all together, & yt therfore al his giftes & goodes ar our owne.
            Therfore hereafter haue I noted ſpecially, how the Reconciliacion and iuſtificaciō, wrought by Ieſus Chriſt, is become ours: And what it is, yt maketh vs partakers of the redempcion or rightuouſnes of Chriſt: ſo that now the Lorde Ieſus hath not onelie ſuffred death, but dyed euen for vs, waſhed awai our ſinnes with his bloud, iuſtified vs and made vs rightuous: Yea ſo hath he iuſtified vs, that we now, beyng abſolued from our ſinnes, and delyuered from damnacion, are aſſuredlie become inheritours of al

the goodes of Chriſt, namelie of true rightuouſnes and eternall life. Her I ſpeake openly, playnlie and ſymplie: We are become partakers of Chriſt by ōly faith, that is, by truſt and belefe on ye 
               By faith are we iuſtified not by bare knowledge but by ſted faſt belefe in Chriſte. lorde Ieſus Chriſt. And euen therfore is it, that the prophetes and Apoſtles haue ſayde ſo euidently, that men are iuſtified by faith: Item that Chriſt iuſtifieth thorow faith. For ſuch ſaienges expreſſe this meanynge and vnderſtandyng: namely, that Chriſt geueth vnto vs his owne rightuouſnes: that is, he forgeueth vs oure ſynnes, he delyuereth vs frō damnacion, and maketh vs partakers of eternall life: Not for eny worke or deſeruyng of vs but of his owne pure grace & merite thorow faith: In whō we holde & beleue vs to be accepted, not for ours;elfes or for our owne works,

but for Chriſtes ſake. Whom the father of al grace and mercy hath geuen vs for a pledge and aſſuraūce, yt we ſhal lyue in his name.
         
         
            That the maner of reconciliacion through chriſte is on oure ſyde by faith.
            The 6. Chapter.
            IT is not my deſyre to be credited herin, vnleſſe I defende with very playne and euident ſcriptures yt, which I haue taken in hand. Now haue I ſayed, that Chriſt iuſtifieth vs by faith: that is, thorow ſtedfaſt belefe is the rightuouſnes of Chriſt geuen vnto vs. This dyd the prophet Eſaye eſtabliſhe before wt 
               Eſa. 53. ſenſible wordes, ſayēge: my rightuous

ſeruaunt (namely Chriſt ye lorde) ſhal with his knowlege, or with the knowlege of him, iuſtifie the multitude. Beholde how he ſaieth, my rightuous ſeruaunt ſhal iuſtifie the multitude, church or congregacion, and that thorow ye knowlege of him. Now is it certayne and ſure, that the knowlege of him ſignifieth the knowlege of Chriſt: euen ye ſcience, no doubte, wherby true faith knoweth him, cōfeſſeth him, and poynteth vnto him. This is therfore the prophet Eſays doctryne, or rather gods: that Chriſt thorow faith iuſtifieth thoſe that bee his. After Eſaye doth the prophet Abacuc Abac. 2. ſpeake, ſayīge: The iuſt and rightuous ſhal lyue in his faith and beleffe. Which ſentence holie S. Paul Tim. 1. Gala. 3. Hebr. 10 vſed not onelye one tyme, to proue by this teſtimonye, as with it which is moſt euident, ye
               
all beleuers are iuſtified & made lyuing by faith. S. Ihon alſo, ſpeaking of the lord in his goſpel, Iohn. 1. ſayeth thus: He came among his owne, & his owne receaued him not. But as many as receaued him, to them gaue he power to be the ſonnes of god, euen them that beleued on his name. Loe now, what could more ſenſibly haue bene ſpoke? As many, as receaue Chriſt, are gods children: but thei that beleue, receaue Chriſt: therfore thorow beliefe become we vndoubtedlie the children of god, iuſt and rightuous, bleſſed and ſaued. And in the goſpell of Ihō ſaieth our lord Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe: Verely, verelie I ſaie Iohn. 5. vnto you: He, that heareth my word, and beleueth on him that ſent me, hath euerlaſting life, and ſhal not come in to damnaciō, but is eſcaped from death vnto life.

And agayne: This is the will of him which ſent me, that who ſoeuer Iohn. 6. ſeyth the ſonne, and beleueth on him, haue euerlaſting life, and I wil raiſe him vp at the laſt dai. Herof commeth it alſo, that this Apoſtle in his epiſtle ſaieth very euidētly: yf we receaue the witnes of men, the witneſſe of god 1. Iohn. 5. is greater. For this is ye witneſſe of god, whiche he hath teſtified of his ſonne: Who ſo beleueth on the ſonne of god, hath gods witneſſe in him. But who ſo beleueth not, hath made him a lyar, becauſe he hath not beleued the witnes, which god hath teſtified in his ſonne. And this is ye teſtimonye, that god hath geuen vs eternal life, and this life is in his ſonne.
            Whoſo hath the ſonne of god, hath life: He that hath not ye ſōne of god, hath not life.
            
               
Here we ſe clearlie, yt the ſonne of god is had and poſſeſſed thorow faith: and in the ſonne aſſuredlye rightuouſneſſe, all good things and eternal life. Therfore muſt it nedes be true, that we are iuſtified by faith. Now ſaieth ye Apoſtel Paul alſo very diſtinctlie: The rightuouſnes of god is declared without the lawe, for aſmuch Roma. 3. as it is allowed by ye teſtimonie of ye lawe & of ye prophets. The rightuouſnes of God commeth by the faith of Ieſus Chriſt vnto al and vpō al them, yt beleue. And in the tenth chapter: Chriſte Roma. 10. is ye end, or fulfilling, of ye lawe to iuſtifie al yt beleue. Finally while Paul & Silas laye at Philippis in priſon for Chriſtes name ſake, and the keper of the priſon aſked: Acte. 16. good ſyrs, what muſt I do to be ſaued? Thei anſwered him: Beleue in the Lord Ieſus Chriſt,

ſo ſhalt both yu and thy houſholde be ſaued. By this now I ſuppoſe it euidentlie ynough proued, that we be iuſtified by faith: Namely that vnto vs thorow faith is geuē rightuouſnes, with the merites of Chriſt.
         
         
            Thes ſayings: we are iuſtified by the grace of god, or by Chriſts merites, or by fayth, varie not.
            The. 7. Chapter.
            NEther can I thynke, that eny man, which is but a litle exerciſed in holie ſcripture, wil ſtomble or be offended at ſuch kynd and maner of ſpeche: We are iuſtified thorow the grace of god, or

horow the merites of Chriſt, we are iuſtified by faith on the lorde Ieſus: as though thei eny where dyd not agree, or aſcrybed Iuſtificacion to vnlike thinges. For thei are all one in effecte, aſcrybing iuſtificacion to the onelie mercie of god, to whom onelye the prophetes and Apoſtles directed all their vnderſtandinge & meditacion. Theſe, as oft as thei loked behind thē to the fountaine and well ſpring of iuſtificacion, ſaide, that men are iuſtified thorow the grace of god. But whan thei had pondered & conſidered the mercy pledge, & him, by whō we are iuſtified, thei ſayd: We ar made rightuous by Chriſt. And whan thei called to remembraūce it, wherby we become partakers of grace and of Chriſt, thei ſaide, that we are iuſtified by faith.
            Nether were thei for all this

careful, that their ſayenges ſhuld not agree together and ſerue the mater: As ſome curious bodies Sharpe diſputacions of this mater. do ſharplie diſpute: Namelie, whether faith be rightuouſnes, or an inſtrument and meane to becōe partakers of rightuouſnes: whether it be an inſtrument to receaue, or a thing where thorow rightuouſnes is poured in as thorow a tonnell: Or whether it be the rightuouſnes itſelfe &c. After this ſorte is mans vnderſtanding occupied, but what auayleth it vnto true godlines? The holie Apoſtles, who alwaie ſtudied ſimplicitie with playneſſe, they diſtinctly expreſſe and declare, that god, the grace of god, Chriſt and faith iuſtifieth. Itē that by grace, by chriſt and by faith we ar iuſtified. Which ſymplicitie I, myndinge to folowe, leaue ſuch ſubtile curioſitie vnto others.
         
         
            
            By faith onely are we iuſtified, which terme, onely, is not of mans braine inuented.
            The 8. Chapter.
            ANd where as I haue allready added there vnto: We are iuſtified onelie by faith for Chriſtes ſake, & not for our workes: the ſāe haue I not lēt of myne own, but taken it out of the holie ſcripture. For the ſonne of god, Ieſus Chriſt, ſaieth in the goſpell: Excepte ye eate the fleſh of ye ſonne Iohn. 6. of man and drinke his bloude, ye haue no life in you. Lo, the ōly eating of the fleſh, and drinking of the bloude of Chriſt, maketh vs lyuinge: nether is there eny

thingels in ye whole world, that geueth life. Now what it is to eate the fleſh of Chriſt, he declareth immediatlie in ye ſame chap. ſayeng: Verelie verely I ſaie vnto you: Who ſo beleueth on me, hath euerlaſting life. Item: He, that cōmeth vnto me, ſhal not hō
               ger: And he that beleueth on me, ſhal neuer be a thirſt. Here ſhuld he haue ſaide: He, that drynketh me, ſhal neuer thirſte: but in the place of this word, drinke, he hath ſet, beleue. Therfore to eate and drynke here, is nothing els but to beleue. So then yf we beleue not that the ſonne of god was gyuen for vs vnto death, we can neuer lyue: Ergo faith it is that maketh lyuinge. With this euangeliſt agreeth Paul alſo, ſaiēg: we know Gala. 2. that a man is not iuſtified by the dedes of the lawe, but by ye faith of Ieſus Chriſt, And we haue

beleued on Ieſus Chriſt, yt we might be iuſtified by the fayth of Chriſt, and not by the workes of the lawe. For in that he ſaieth: A man can not be iuſtified but by the faith of Chriſt, what geueth he with this ſayenge els to vnderſtand, but that a man muſt be iuſtified by the onelie faith of Chriſt or in Chriſt? For in Gene. Gene. 43. Ioſeph ſaide vnto his brethren: loke that ye ſe not my face, except your yōgeſt brother be with you. And in the boke of Numerus, the Num. 11. people complayned, whyninge againſt god, and ſaienge: Oure eyes ſe nothing but this Manna. And in the ſame boke ſaieth Balaam: Nume. 23. Muſt not I kepe that and ſpeake it, which the lord hath put in my mouth? In Deuteronomy Deut. 10. ſaieth Moſes alſo: And now Iſrael, what doth ye lorde thy god requyre of the, but to feare the

lord thy god, and to walke in all his waies: And Paul himſelfe to the Romaynes vſeth ye ſame maner of ſpeche whan he ſaieth: ther is no power but of god. Item in Roma. 13. ye firſt epiſtle to the Corinthiās: Euen ſo knoweth no mā what is in god, but the ſprite of god. And 1. Cor. 2. againe: I ſhewed not my ſelfe forth amonge you, that I knewe eny thing, ſaue only Ieſus chriſt, that was crucified.
            Theſe, and ſuch like ſentences innumerable in the ſcripture, ſignifie nothing els, then yf thou ſhuldeſt ſaie: This onelie poynte ſhal open you the entraunce vnto me agayne, yf ye bring your yongeſte brother with you: Oure eyes ſee but onlie Manna, and nothing els: Onelie that, which ye lorde committeth vnto me, maie I doe and ſpeake: This onelie requyreth the lorde of the, yt thou

loue him: All power is onely of god: Onelie gods ſprite knoweth the thinges that are in god: I haue compted my ſelfe to knowe onely Chriſt, that was crucified.
            Seynge thē it is thus vndoubtedlie, and no man can denye it to be moſt euidently ſpoken alſo of Chriſt and Paul, namely, that no man is made lyuing, iuſt or rightuous but by faith: It is much to be wōdred, that certayne famous men, which will be reputed to be ſyngularly lerned, braule & chyde ſo vehemētlie againſt vs, for that we ſaie, we are iuſtified onelye by faith.
            For Chriſt and Paul haue ſpoken ſo afore. Why goe thei not to rebuke thē, yf thei thinke them to haue failed therein? We ſpeake but as we haue learned out of thē: the ſenſe & meaning of oure doctrine we finde in them.
            
               
For very childiſh is it, yt thei obiecte: Namely, that this word, onelie or alone, is not added of them. For this is euen one thing, as yf a ſcholar wolde thinke the ſcholmaſter had not geuen him leue to go forth, whan he had aſked him: Syr geue ye me leue to go? And he made him anſwere, I geue: And dyd not expreſlie ſaie after the cōmen maner: Yea. For either of both the ſaiēges geueth one vnderſtāding. Euen ſo, whā thou ſaieſt: we knowe that no mā is iuſtified but by faith: Or, we knowe that a mā is iuſtified onelie by faith: The ſaienges are all one, & meane one thing. And whā it is ſaied, that a man is iuſtified by faith not by workes, is it not euen aſmuch, as to geue euident teſtimonye, that a mā is iuſtified onelie by faith? The Apoſtle ſaieth: they are made rightuous Roma. 3.
               
frelie (or for naught) by his grace But howe can eny thinge be don frelie or for naught, that is done for rewarde or worker Doubtles yf we be iuſtified frelie thorow the grace of Chriſt, then is it not done by workes. For in the xi. chapter alſo ſaieth this Apoſtle: Yf it be of grace, thē is it not now of workes: for els grace then is nomore grace. but yf it be of workes, then is it now no grace: for els were deſeruing then nomore deſeruyng. Therfore in the moſt aſſured trueth we knowledge, & be ſtedfaſtly perſuaded, that a Chriſtian man is iuſtified by the helpe and myniſtracion of onelie faith. Faith ſtandeth or leaueth vpon the grace of god, and not vpon mans ſtrength. But vnto god it aſcribeth altogether, as I wil ſhortlie declare hereafter at large.
         
         
            
            ¶ Iuſtificacion is taken not onelie from workes of the law, but alſo from all maner of workes, as frō faith in yt it is a work.
            The. 9. Chapter.
            IN ye fore recyted cap. cōcludth the holy Apoſtle the whole mater of iuſtificacion, thus: We holde therfore, that a mā is iuſtified Roma. 3. by faith without the workes of ye lawe. And in ye fourth chapt. he declareth euidently, that rightuouſnes is imputed vnto vs by faith, not by workes (meanynge not onlie the workes of the lawe, but all maner of workes) acordinge as he ſaieth alſo to the Epheſians: By grace are ye ſaued thorow faith, & that not of youre Ephe. 2.
               
ſelues. It is the gift of god, and commeth not of workes, leaſt eny man ſhulde boaſt himſelfe. For we are his workmanſhip, created in Chriſt Ieſu vnto good works, which god ordeyned, yt we ſhulde walke in them.
            By grace (ſaieth he) are ye preſerued or ſaued (aſſuredly iuſtified) thorow faith. For faith apprehendeth & laieth ſure holde vpon grace. And to the intēt that no body here ſhuld aſcribe aught to the ſtrength of man, he addeth: And that not of youre ſelues. For nether grace nor faith commeth of you. What then? vpō yt he addeth immediatly: It is the gift of god (vndoubtedly that we are iuſtified, and alſo that we beleue) Yea he ſetteth yet one thing to it: Not of works, leſt eny man ſhulde boaſt himſelfe.

For in the prophet Ieremy alſo the lorde will not, that eny man Iere. 9. Eſa. 65. glory or reioyſe, ſaue onelie in his mercy. Yet ther folowth a cauſe: We ar his woorkemanſhip &c. Why wold erth & claye then lifte vp it ſelfe againſt the potter, of whom he hath, what he is & hath? And ſo this place doth euidently aſcribe iuſtificacion vnto faith, & taketh it from workes.
         
         
            ¶ Faith iuſtifieth not in yt it is a worke, but in that it truſteth to the mercie of god thorow Chriſte.
            The 10. Chapter
            ALl this ſhalbe yet more playn, and more perfectly vnderſtand and known, whan I ſhall ſhewe, that

this iuſtifieng faith holdeth and beleueth, yt we are accepted vnto the lord, not for our ſelues, or for our own works, but for Chriſtes ſake: That is, faith truſteth not vnto workes or deſeruinges, but to the promes of god, and to the merites of Chriſt our lord. Therfore whan Paul ſaieth to the Romaines, Roma. 3. that Chriſt our lord is of god ſet forth vnto the world, to be ye mercy ſeate or reconcyler thorow faith in his bloud: he teacheth and declareth euidently, yt faith truſteth vnto ye bloud, that is vnto the death, merites and redempcion of Ieſus Chriſt. And treating largelie and perfectly of this mater in the fourth chapter, he wryteth thus: Neuertheles it is not written onelie for him (namelie Abraham) that it was rekened vnto him for righteouſnes, But alſo for vs, to whō it ſhalbe

ſo cōpted, yf we likewiſe beleue on him, that raiſed vp Ieſus our lorde from the dead: which was delyuered vp for oure ſynnes, & raiſed againe for our iuſtificaciō.
            With theſe wordes he ſheweth vs two thinges: The one, that faith is compted vnto vs for rightuouſnes: The other, that ye ſame faith leaneth and truſteth vpon the lorde Ieſus Chriſt, who dyed for vs and was raiſed vp agayne. That is, faithfull beleuers cōpte themſelues rightuous and iuſtified, becauſe thei vnderſtand by faith, that Chriſt dyed for them, to take a waie their ſynnes: And that he was afterward raiſed vp agayne, to make them lyuinge, for whom he had payed the rawnſome, and reconcyled them.
            And in the tenth chapter of Roma. 10. this epiſtle, whan Paul holdeth and compareth the rightuouſnes

of the lawe and the rightuouſnes of faith together, the one againſt the other, he declareth playnlie, that the rightuouſnes of the lawe truſteth vnto workes, but ye rightuouſnes of faith truſteth vnto Chriſt. For faith ſaieth thus: The worde is nere vnto the, euen in thy mouth and in thine hart. Then addeth he therto: This is ye word of faith which we preach, namelye: yf thou confeſſe Ieſus with thy mouth, that he is the lorde, and beleueſt in thine hart, that god raiſed him vp from the deed, thou ſhalt be ſaued. For to beleue with the hart, iuſtifieth: and to cōfeſſe with the mouth, ſaueth. For ye ſcripture ſaieth. Who ſoeuer beleueth on him, ſhall not Eſai. 28. be confunded. Therfore is it no maruaill, that this Apoſtle, wryting Philip. 3. to ye Philippiās, reputeth al

thinges but loſſe, for the excellē
               cy of y• knowlege of Ieſus Chriſt, and iudgeth them but vyle: deſyringe to wynne Chriſt, and to be foūd in him, not to haue his owne rightuouſneſſe of the lawe, but rather that rightuouſnes, which commeth by the faith of Ieſus Chriſt. Which thīges afterwarde immediatlye he ſetteth in ye true knowledge of Chriſtes death and reſurrection.
            Here vnto (I ſuppoſe) ſerueth ſpecially the very playne argumente of this Apoſtle, whan he ſaieth: Yf the inheritaunce ſhuld Gala. 3. come by the lawe, thē were it not geuen by promes: But god gaue it frelie vnto Abrahā by promes. The worde of promes is this: In thy ſede &c. For the ſaluacion ſetteth he vpon one onelie, and not in many. Now yf the inheritaūce and bleſſinge were ſet in many,

then ſhuld it be geuē for ye workes ſake: But we all are bleſſed and ſaued in one, and by one. For as Roma. 5. the curſe, by the ſynne of one, reached ouer all men vnto condemnacion: Euen ſo, by the rightuouſnes of one, reacheth the gifte or bleſſing vpon al men to ye iuſtificacion of life. For aſmuch now as the bleſſing, rightuouſnes and redempcion, is in the worde of trueth aſcribed onlie vnto chriſt, and ſeeinge our faith is directed ſtraight vpon him: euery faithful beleuer doth well vnderſtande, ye he is accepted vnto god thorow Chriſt, not for his own ſelf or for his workes ſake. For god dyd choſe and ordeyne vs before, becauſe he wolde accepte vs for his Ephe. 1. owne children thorow Iheſus Chriſt in him ſelfe, acording to ye good pleaſure of him ſelfe, to the praiſe of the 
                  〈…〉
                of his grace:

wherby he hath accepted vs in ye beloued, in whom we haue redēpcion thorow his bloud: namely ye forgeuenes of ſynnes, oute of the riches of his grace, which he hath poured vpon vs. Herevnto alſo belongeth it, that the Apoſtle ſaieth: fayth commeth by hearynge Rom. 10. and hearyng cōmeth by the word of god.
            For immediatlye therevpon, doth the holy Apoſtle Paul adde out of the Pſalme: Verelye their Pſal. 19. ſounde went out into all landes, and their wordes vnto the endes of the world. With all theſe moſt ſtronge teſtimonies of the ſcrypture, I haue vndoutedly gotten the iuſtifying faith, confidence & truſt: that we are reconciled and accepted vnto god, not by means of our ſelues or our own workes, either of the law
                  ••
                of grace, but for Chriſt and 
                  ••
                merites ſake.

For faith ſtanding faſt, truſteth and leaneth vpon ye true promes of god, euen vpon the lord chriſt, and not vpon any of our workes. Therfore is iuſtificaciō referred vnto faith, becauſe that what ſoeuer belongeth to ſaluacion and rightuouſnes, faith aſcribeth it al to ye grace of god in Chriſte. And thus by the nature of iuſtifyinge faith, I haue ſhewed, that onely fayth iuſtifieth: now will I alſo declare out of the nature or propertie of mens workes, that they doe not iuſtifie.
         
         
            That no man is iuſtified by works, is proued by the nature of works, whether thei bee before or after iuſtificacion.
            The. 11. Chapter.
            
               
WHat the workes of mans nature be (namelie ye workes that are done by ſuch, as are not yet regenerate) the lord him ſelfe in the goſpell declareth, & ſaieth: That, whiche is borne of fleſh, is fleſh. Paul alſo, Iohn. 1. ſpeaking of the fleſh, ſaith: To be fleſhlie mynded (or the mynde Roma. 8. and wil of the fleſhe) is death, & enemitie againſt god: for it, nāelie the fleſhe, and ye inclinacion of the fleſhe, is not obedient to ye lawe of god, nether can be. For Ephe. 2. Deu. 27. Gala. 3. we all by nature are children of wrath. Now is euery one curſed, that abydeth not in all thinges, which are writtē in the boke of the lawe. So farre therfore, ar oure owne naturall woorkes frō iuſtifieng eny man, that they rather condemne.
            Moreouer of the workes of the lawe hath Paul the electe veſſell

ſpokē thus: we know that whatſoeuer the law ſaieth, it ſaieth it vnto Roma. 2. ſuch as are vnder ye lawe: that al mouthes maye be ſtopte, and that al the wholle world maie be detter vnto god, becauſe that by the dedes of the lawe no fleſhe is iuſtified in his ſight. He ſaieth alſo els where: I refuſe not the grace of god. For yf rightuouſnes Gala. 2. come by the lawe, then dyed Chriſt in vayne. And yet more playnlie: Yf there had bene myniſtred Gala. 3. a law, which coulde haue geuen life, then no doubte rightuouſnes ſhuld come by the lawe. But the ſcripture hath ſhut vp all vnder ſynne, that by faith in Ieſus Chriſt the promes might be geuen to thoſe, that beleue.
            Now come we to the workes Workes of fayth and grace. of faith or of grace, which be called good works, & works of rightuouſnes. Theſe (ſaie thei) theſe

iuſtifie. Anſwere. Yf thei be good workes, & workes of rightuouſnes, then muſt thei nedes be wrought by good and rightuous people. Wherout it foloweth that the workes go after rightuouſnes, and not before iuſtificacion: for thei are done by thoſe, that be rightuous or iuſtified. Whefore yf thei firſt folowe after, then make thei no mā rightuous: but faith it is that iuſtifieth. And ſuch, as be rightuous thēſelues, do worke rightuouſnes or yt works of rightuouſnes. For it is written: The rightuous ſhal liue Abac. 2. Rom. 1. Hebr. 10 a. 3. by his faith. And agayne: who ſo applyeth himſelfe vnto rightuouſnes, the ſame is rightuous & iuſt. Thus is faith the groūd and iuſt occaſiō of vertue, & goeth before the workes of rightuouſnes, of faith and of grace, nether is it firſt made out of workes.
            
               
Yf thou be not ſatiſfied here The vngodly and ipocrites. with, thē let vs ſet this cōſideracion before vs not after ye things, but after the perſonnes: Thus: Thei, that work or do the dedes, be either vngodly wicked people & ypocrytes, or els thei be godly, rightuous and holie frendes of god. No man (by the grace of god) will aſcribe iuſtificacion to the workes of the vngodly and ypocrites, for aſmuch as it is written: The lorde hateth the ſacrifices Pro. 15. 21, of the vngodly. And agayne: The ypocryts hope ſhall Iob. 8. come to naught, his confidence ſhalbe deſtroyed, & his truſt ſhal be a ſpyders webbe, he ſhal leane vpō his houſe, but it ſhal not ſtād & he ſhall hold him faſt by it, but yet ſhal it not endure. And before him (namelye beefore GOD) maie no ypocryte ſtand. As for ye
               
godlie (of whom it is written: Ye are whaſhē, ye are ſanctified, ye 1. Cor. 6. are iuſtified by the name of the lorde Ieſus, and by the ſprete of god) thei aſcrybe their vertue & rightuouſnes vnto god and vnto The holy & regenerate gods ſprete, by whom thei knowe thei are ſanctified, and that they now maie do and perfourme holie and good workes. And alſo thei fele in their ſanctified fleſh, namelie in themſelues, there remayneth & worketh, thorow out their whole life, ſo greate weaknes and feblenes, that thei dare not aſcrybe eny iuſtificacion not vnto the workes, that ar done by faith in holyneſſe. Herof might I bring forth many recordes. Yet will I alledge onelie two. Firſt thē let Iob, the moſt faithful ſeruaunt of god, come forth: For him Iob. 1. hath the godlie ſentence cōmended and praiſed vnto vs, that he

was a perfecte & iuſt man, ſuch one as feared god, and eſchued euil and that there was none lyke him vpon erth. And yet the ſame man, being with ſo excellent a titell of rightuouſnes commended vnto vs, doth ſaie: If I wil iuſtifie myſelfe, myne owne mouth Iob. 9. ſhal condemne me. Yf I will put forth myſelfe for a perfecte mā, he ſhal proue me a wicked doer. And agayn: Yf I haue done wickedly, Iob. 10. wo vnto me. And though I haue dōe rightuouſlie, yet dare I not lifte vp my head. Therfore is it certayne, that this moſt holy and iuſt man dyd aſcribe nothing to the frutes of his owne rightuouſnes, but truſted onely vpon ye mercy of god. Now let the other witnes come forth, euen Paul ye Apoſtel, who ſaieth with ſenſible wordes: I delyte in the lawe of god after the inwarde man: But Roma. 7.
               
in my membre I ſe another law, which rebellein againſt the law of my mynde and ſubdueth me to the lawe of ſynne, which is in my membres. The holie Apoſtle ſpeaking of himſelfe, and of all ſuch as be regenerate, teſtifieth, that in them abyde ſtil yt remnauntes of the fleſhe: by the nature, power and force wherof, it cōmeth to pas thorow out the wholle life of man, that thei alſo do the thing which they thēſelues wolde not: And therfore are thei neuer able to attayne and come to true perfectnes, ſo long as thei lyue vpon erth and in this fleſh.
            For aſmuch then as it is ſo, euery man ſeith wel, that iuſtificacion is not to be imputed vnto the workes of faith or of ſuch as be regenerate, conſydering that it muſt be athinge moſt pure and thorowly perfecte, wherby god

is pacified and pleaſed with vs. Yea the ſcripture geueth euident witneſſe, that euē Abraham, the Abraham. father of all faithfull beleuers, was not iuſtified by the workes of faith. Herof then maie we be bolde to conclude, that we alſo by no workes of faith are iuſtified. For thus Paul argueth: yf Abrahā were iuſtified by workes, thē 
               Roma. 4. hath he wherof to reioyce, but not with god. But what ſaieth ye ſcripture: Abraham beleued god, and it was compted vnto him for rightuouſnes. To him that goeth aboute with workes, is the rewarde not rekened of grace, but of duetie. To him that goeth not aboute with workes, but beleueth on him that iuſtifieth ye vngodly, is his faith cōpted for rightuouſnes. Where as we now by the enſāple of Abrahā do cōclude, yt we muſt be iuſtified in ſuch like pure

maner as he was, we ſpeke it not of our owne ymaginaciō, but out of the wordes of S. Paul, that ſaieth: Neuertheles it is not written Roma, 4, onelie for him, that it was rekened vnto him for righteouſnes, but alſo for vs: to whom it ſhalbe ſo compted, yf we likewiſe beleue on him, that raiſed vp Ieſus oure lorde from the deed.
         
         
            ¶ The nature of iuſtification argueth, that faith & not workes iuſtifie.
            The. 12. Chapter.
            NOw like as out of the nature & propertie of faith and workes I haue ſhewed, that faith, and not works, doth iuſtifie: So

wil I now declare and proue the ſame by ye nature of iuſtificacion. The right propertie, natural vertue and power of iuſtificaciō, is to pacifie, to ſtil and quiete the cō
               ſcience, which heretofore, by the remembring and conſidering of ſynne and damnacion, was vexed and troubled. For Paul ſaieth: Becauſe therfore that we be iuſtified & made rightuous by faith, we haue peace with god thorow Roma. 5. oure lorde Ieſus Chriſt. As for mens workes, thei are neuer able ſo to comforte and pacifie an vnquyete conſcience. For who hath at eny tyme perſuaded himſelfe, yt he with his owne workes hath ſatiſfied the lawe of god, and is therfore abſolued, diſcharged of his ſynnes, delyuered from damnacion, and become rightuous & vndefyled? Specially ſeyēg that Salomō, the wiſeſt among al mē, Pro. 20.
               
hath ſaide: Who can ſaie: My herte is cleane, I am innocent frō ſynne? Wherfore yf oure workes quiete not the conſcience, then do not thei in eny wiſe iuſtifie a mā. But faith iuſtifieth and perfectly ſtilleth the conſcience. And therfore it iuſtifieth. For the lord hath ſaide in the goſpell: Who ſo euer drynketh of this water (wherby Iohn, 4, vndoubtedly he dyd meane outward thinges, and al mans help) ſhal thyrſt againe: But who ſoeuer drynketh of the water that I geue him, ſhall neuer be more a thyrſt: but the water, that I ſhal geue him, ſhalbe in him a well of water ſpringing vp in to euerlaſting life. And againe: I am ye bred of life. He that cōmeth to me, ſhal not honger: And he that beleueth Iohn. 6. on me, ſhal neuer thyrſt.
            Here thou ſeiſt, yt faith, which preaſſeth on forth directly vpon ye lorde Ieſus, doth ſatiſfie vs. For

faith vnderſtādeth, yt Chriſt him ſelfe is the right fulnes & plentiful ſufficiēcie of heauēly goods, and that euen he gaue himſelfe whollye for vs, and in all thinges became our owne: ſo yt now from hence forth an oppreſſed & afflicted cōſcience maie reſt vpon himfor in chriſt the ſonne of god, full of grace & trueth, there is nether blemiſhe nor weakneſſe. But in works, yea of moſt holie mē, ther is alwaie found feblenes and imperfection. And yf we wold now beholde the propertie & nature of him, before whoſe iudgmēt ſeate we ſhal ſtande, we ſhulde playnly fynd, yt we are iuſtified by ye myniſtraciō & help of faith, & not of Holy men do not glory in works but in the mercy of ye Lorde. workes. For vndoubtedly ye higheſt & moſt rightuous of al hath reſpect ōly to ſuch as are hūble of contrite hertes, & thoſe aſſuredlie he iuſtifieth. But ſuch as are proud & glorie ī their own merits

thoſe he condemneth, and turneth himſelf from thē. Here vnto ſerueth ye parable or ſymilitude out of the goſpel, concernyng the two that wente vp together in to the Luke. 18. temple to praie: Of whō the one boaſted of his good workes, told what thei were, truſted vnto thē & ſet out himſelf for a rightuous and good man. As for the other, he truſted in the onelye mercy of god, & nothing at all in his owne merites, but cryed: O god, be mercyfull vnto me ſynner. This man wente downe, out of the temple, iuſtified: but yt other, being wrapt and ſnared in ſynne, failed of his hope. Therfore in the prophet Ieremye hath the lorde geuen vs a right good counſail, & ſaide: Let Ieremi. 9. not ye wiſe man reioyce in his wiſdome, nether the ſtrong man in his ſtrength, nor the riche man in his riches: but who ſo wilreioice,

let him reioyce in this, that he vnderſtandeth & knoweth me. For I am the lorde yt do mercy, equitie and rightuouſnes vpon earth. This counſaill dyd the godlie Apoſtle Paul folowe, ſaieng: God forbyd that I ſhulde reioyce, ſaue Gala. 6. onelye in the croſſe of our lorde Ieſus Chriſt, wherby the world is crucified vnto me, and I vnto the world: For in the goſpell alſo the lorde ſaid: whan ye haue done Luke. 17. all that is commaunded you, ſaie: we are vnprofitable ſeruauntes, we haue not done that we ought to do. Therfore the godlie praiſe yt grace of god, not bragginge of their owne merites, nether truſting eny thing at all vnto them, The righte ouſnes of fayth and workes agree not to gether. but comforte them ſelues in the mercie of god.
            Finally, yf we now compare both the rightuouſneſſe (namelie of faith and of workes) the one

againſt the other, we maie eaſely perceaue that theſe beynge moſt vnlike maie not ſtand together. For as concernyng the rightuouſnes of workes, the holie Apoſtle Paul hath ſpoken: Thorow the Roma. 3. Gala. 2. workes of the lawe ſhall no fleſhe be iuſtified before god. But of ye rightuouſnes of faith he ſaieth thus: Al thei are iuſtified that beleue. And in another place he ſaieth: The rightuouſnes of faith is Roma. 4. imputed of grace or fauour: but ye rightuouſnes of works is not imputed of grace or fauour, but of dewti. And againe he ſaieth: Iſrael, which folowed ye law of rightuouſnes, coulde not attayne to ye 
               Rom. 9. law of rightuouſnes: But ye Heithen which folowed not rightuouſnes, haue ouertakē rightuouſnes, euen the rightuouſnes which cōmeth of faith. And immediatly geueth he a reaſon of the fyrſt

pointe, and addeth therto: Wherefore? Euen becauſe thei ſought it not by faith, but as by the workes of the lawe: for thei ſtombled at the ſtombling ſtone. Therfore remayneth it ſtil true and certayne, that the one rightuouſnes ouerthroweth the other: And therfore we that teach, a manne to be iuſtified by faith in the lorde Ieſus, & not by workes, do not peruerte ye Chriſtian faith, as our aduerſaries ſhamfully belye vs: But thei rather do ouerthrowe it, that by all meanes and waies myniſhe ye honour of ye faith in Chriſt: mainteinyng, that the churche or congregacion of the faithfull ar, by the workes & merites of men, abſolued from ſynne, delyuered from damnacion, and obteyne the inheritaūce of eternall life.
         
         
            
            Faith is not without works, and what place works haue in the church, and whence they ſpring in vs
            The. 13. Chapter
            WIth this diſputation and talke, concernyng Chriſt, the lorde, who iuſtifieth vs by faith, not by works: Or concernynge faith, that iuſtifieth without workes: Many wt
               out all doubte wil be ſore offended, thinking that I ſet nothing by good workes, and that I leaue them no place of honour in the church. For thei ſai: if good works helpe not a man to obtayne rightuouſnes, then are thei nothing worth, nether neceſſary in the church: And therfore is it in vayn

that good workes are ſo oft and many tymes menci
                  •••
               d of in holie ſcripture: The 
                  •••
               ſtles alſo of the lorde, & the holy prophetes loſe but their labour, in requiring vs to exerciſe and declare oure faith, praiſyng god our father in heauen, with good workes. Why is the holy Apoſtle Iames ſo erneſt Iacob. 2. to teach, that a man is iuſtified by workes, and not by faith onely? Yf faith onelye be ſufficient to obteyne ſaluacion, what els remayneth for vs to do, but euen to eat and drynke, and then to ſaie vnto god the iudge: I haue beleued thy goſpel, therfore ſaue thy ſeruaunt? Thus is baniſhed all vertue, good lyfe, and Godlynes, And thus men exerciſe and applie them ſelues nomore to innocēcie of life and good maners. Anſwere
            
            Thei that after this ſorte take the mater ſo euell and cōplayne,

vnderſtād nether the ſtrength of faith, nor 
                  ••
               e true order of good workes. A
                  ••
                as for vs, we do not hold, that faith is without good workes, whā we ſaie after the Apoſtle: that faith iuſtifieth with out good workes. But we knowlege and confeſſe, that faith iuſtifieth with his owne ſtrength, not with ye helpe & additiō of works. For Chriſt is mightie ynough of himſelfe and of his owne power to iuſtifie the faithfull beleuers, nether nedeth he enye ſupplie or filling vp of our workes. Faith alſo is not without good workes, nether are Chriſtian mēs works therfore in vaine or vnprofitable, becauſe thei do not iuſtifie. For thei haue neuertheles a very honourable place and rowme in the holie church. And whā it is ſayde in ye ſcripture (as it is oft) yt they iuſtifie, it is ſo ſpokē of them for

ſpeciall cauſes. Which thing to ye intent it maie ye better & more perfectly be vnderſtād, I will make ſomwhat deper reherſall of good workes, & bringe thē forth out of their owne fountayne and original, declaring their certayne and vndoubted boundes, wherby all their nature & propertie maie perfectly be knowne. Vpon ye name or terme, I do not much paſſe. for (as euery man knoweth) there be euil and vnprofitable workes, workes of iniquitie & wickednes, ye doers wherof are called the workers of wickednes. The ſame workes alſo are called the workes of the fleſhe and the workes of darknes. Agayne there be good workes, contrarie to the other, which the ſcripture calleth the works of repētaunce, the frutes of the ſprete and of light: ſuch are the offices and dueties of frendſhip a loue, which wer cōmēded ī Tabitha, of

whom it is ſaid, that ſhe was full of good workes.
            Now whā we deſcrybe them, we ſaie: thei be ſuch as are done by thoſe, that ar borne a new, or regenerate, Good workes out of the good ſprete of god, by faith, & acording to gods word, to the praiſe and honour of god, to the honeſt bewtifulnes of life, and finallie to the profite & cōmoditie of ye neighbour. Theſe are ſhorte wordes, and therefore peraduenture vnto ſome thei be ye darker and more hard to vnderſtande: But yf the grace of god ſhewe vs light, thei ſhal, by the declaracion folowinge, be playnlie and eaſelie perceaued. No other fountayne of good workes can I ſhewe, then onelie god himſelfe. For the prophet ſaith: All men are lyars, onelie god is true. And the lorde ſaieth in ye goſpel: There Pſal. 116. Math. 19. is no man good, but onelie god.

Therfore is it neceſſary, yt good workes ſpringe not of man, who is a lyar, wicked and naught, but of god himſelfe, of whom proceadeth all that good is.
            Neuertheles it behoueth ſuch men, as by the ſprete of god and faith in the lorde Ieſus are regenerate, that thei hence forth work not their owne, namelie carnall workes, but the workes of god. For the works of thoſe, that be regenerate, growe and ſpryng of gods good ſprete, dwelling with in them: which ſprete, as the ſappe of life, geueth ſtrength to the trees, that thei maie bring forth frute: Euē ſo makth he multituds of ſondrie vertues to ſpringe and growe oute of man, As the lorde himſelfe teſtifieth and ſaieth: I am the vyne, ye are ye braunches. Iohn. 15. Like as ye braunche can not bring forth frute of it ſelfe, excepte it

abyde in the vyne: Euē ſo cā not ye alſo, vnleſſe ye abyde in me. Whoſo abydeth in me, and I in him, yt ſame bringeth much frute: for without me cā ye do nothing.
            And thus (I ſai) ye good works, that be done, are done by faith. For faith is a gift of god, wherby we receaue Chriſt, & are iuſtified & made lyuynge, for aſmuch as the ſcripture ſaieth: The iuſt ſhal lyue by his faith. And in another 
                  
                     •
                  hac. 2. place: Chriſt dwelleth in your hertes thorow faith. And as Ephe. 3. gayne: Now lyue not I (ſaieth Paul) but Chriſt lyueth in me, for that I lyue in the fleſh, I lyue Gala. 2. in the faith of ye ſonne of god, who loued me, & gaue himſelfe for me. Lyuinge workes thē doth he, vndoubtedly euen thorow him, by whom he himſelfe became alyue. And he, that is iuſtified, doth alſo works of rightuouſnes, aſſuredly

euen thorow him, by whom he is become righteous. Which is thus much to ſay: the iuſt worketh righteouſnes thorow Chriſt, and rightuoſnes comprehēdeth the wholle ſumme of all vertues. And therfore yt onelie god remayneth ſtill the fountayne and originall of all good workes. Hereto ſerueth it alſo, that vnto god, who in the regenerate worketh by his ſprete in faith, holie ſcripture aſcribeth ye workes of thoſe yt be regenerate.
         
         
            ¶ That god is the worker of good works in vs, and that we do not wel til he dwell in vs, is ſhewed out of ſcripture, and how rightuouſnes is aſcribed to workes.
            The. 14. Chapter.
            
               
THis wil I now euidently declare with playne teſtimonies, taken out of the lawe of god, out of the holie prophetes, out of the moſt holie goſpell, and of the electe Apoſtles of Iheſus Chriſt. For thus ſaieth Moſes: The lord ſhal bleſſe the. And the lorde thy Deu. 30. god wil circumciſe thine hert and the hert of thy ſede, that yu maieſt loue the lorde thy god with all thine hert and all thy ſoule, that thou maieſt lyue. The prophete Eſaie ſaieth: Lorde vnto vs thou Iſa. 26. ſhalt prouyde peace, for thou alſo workeſt al our workes and deuyces. In the goſpell of Ihon oure Sauiour ſaieth thus: Who ſo Iohn. 3. doth the trueth, commeth to the light, that his workes maie be knowne, becauſe thei are done in or by god. And agayne: Who ſo abydeth in me, & I in him, ye ſame Iohn. 15.
               
bringeth forth muche frute, for without me ye can do nothing. Item the holy Apoſtle Paul to the Philippians ſaieth: To you it Phil. 1. is geuen, not onely to beleue in Chriſt, but alſo to ſuffre for his ſake. And yet more playnlie: It is Phil. 2. god that worketh in you both the will and the dede, acording to the good purpoſe of hys mynde, or becauſe he hath delyte vnto you. Thus ſayet alſo S. Iames one of Iacob. 1. the. xii. Apoſtles: Euery good gift and euery perfecte gift commeth downe from aboue, euen frō the father of lightes. Yea all partes of the worke doth the holie Apoſtle Peter aſcrybe vnto god, ſaiēg: The god of all grace, which 1. Pet. 5. hath called vs to his eternall glorie by (or in) Chriſt Ieſu, ſhal his owne ſelfe (after that ye haue ſuffred a litle afflictiō) make you perfecte, ſetle, ſtrength & ſtabliſh

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
you. For (as the Apoſtle Paul ſaieth agayne) we are not ſufficient 2. Cor. 3. of ourſelues to thinke any good thyng, as of our ſelues: but if we be able vnto any thyng, the ſame commeth of god. Wherfore god abideth ſtill the onely fountaine of good workes, & euen he it is that worketh al good thynges in vs al. By this then that I haue broghte forth herein out of holy ſcripture, concerning ye true occaſion of good workes, it is farthermore eaſye to be conſidered, how the ſcripture aſcribeth righteouſnes vnto workes, ſeyng that it is rendered vnto the grace of god, whan it is aſcribed vnto faith: and beyng aſcrybed vnto workes, it is aſcribed to the ſame grace of god. For gods grace it is (and therfore god hymſelfe) yt in vs workth good works: and ſo is it the more conuenient, yt iuſtificacion be rather imputed to

the grace of god and vnto Chriſt, which worketh by vs. Herevnto had holy Auguſtine reſpect who in ye boke de gratia et libero arbitrio. Auguſtinus. ca. 8. writeth thus: if eternall lif for recōpēce be geuē vnto good works, as ye ſcrypture openlie ſaieth: for god ſhal geue vnto euery one acordīg to his dedes, how is grace ye eternal life: Yf grace bee not aſcribed vnto workes, but geuen frelie, as ye Apoſtle wryteth: To him yt goeth about wt works, is yt reward geuen not of grace or fauour but of dewtie, & agayne: The rēnaūt (ſaieth he) are ſaued Roma. 11. thorow ye electiō of grace. And immediatly he addeth thervnto: if it cōe of grace, thē it is not of works els ſhold grace be no grace. How thē is grace eternal life beīg takē out of works? Or did not yt holy apoſtle nāe eternal life to be grace? Yea he named it ſo, which cā in no

wiſe be denied. Nether requireth it one of a ſharpe vnderſtanding, but onelie a diligent hearer. For whan he had ſayde: the rewarde or ſtipend of ſynne is death, he added ſtraight ther vnto: But the grace of god is eternall life in Chriſt Ieſu our lorde. Therfore me thinketh, this queſtion can in no wyſe be reſolued, vnleſſe we vnderſtād, that our good works, to the which eternal life is aſcrybed, belōg alſo vnto the grace of god, becauſe the lord Ieſus ſaith: wtout me ye can do nothing. And whan the Apoſtle had ſaide: By grace are ye ſaued thorow faith, he addeth therto: And that not of yourſelues, it is the gift of god, & commeth not of workes, leſt eny man boaſt himſelfe. This wryteth holye Auguſtine.
         
         
            
            How the workes / that god worketh in vs, are called owres, but ſo that we can not bragge of thē or challenge awt for them, but muſt referre that to another cauſe.
            The. 15. Chapter.
            HEre vnto muſt adde alſo, that good works, though in very dede thei be properlie gods and ye frutes of faith and of the ſprete, yet are thei called and be oures: that is to ſaie, workes of faithful beleuers: Partly, becauſe god worketh them by vs, & vſeth our myniſtracion to fyniſhe them: Partli, becauſe that thorow faith we be childrē of god, and therfore

ar becōe brethren & heires annexed wt Chriſt. For by menes of this inheritaunce, al the woorkes and giftes of god begynne to be ours, not as ſtraunge, but as ſpeciallye our own. The ſcripture alſo aſcribeth the ſame vnto vs, as vnto children and to thoſe that bē born free foraſmuche as our ſauioure in the goſpell ſayeth: the ſeruaunte abydeth not for euer in the houſe, but the ſonne abideth for euer. Nowe as al wt is in the fathers houſe, is ye ſonnes by titel & right of inheritaūce, although he hath not purchaced it by his own trauail & policie, but hath receaued it of the fait
                  •••
               l liberalitie of his parētes: Euē 
               
                  ••
                good workes, which ye father worketh in & by vs, are alſo called and be oures, beecauſe we are ye heires and children of god. Now were it an exceading ſhame full thing, & a ſure declaraciō of a very vnthākful mynde, yf ye ſonne

not remēbring ye faithfulnes, & liberalitie of yt father, wold boaſt himſelfe, yt he with his diligence, care & watching had gottē al theſe goods which he hath as heier.
            Therfore ſaieth S. Paul very godlie: What haſt yu, that yu haſt not receaued? Yf thou haſt receaued 1. Cor. 4. it, why thē braggeſt thou, as thogh thou haddeſt not receaued it? The holie martyr Ciprian had Ciprian. a very Chriſtian an godly opiniō herof, for he was wonte to ſaie: It is not for vs to boaſt of eny thing, for aſmuch as nothing is oure owne. Here vnto (as I ſuppoſe) ſerueth it yt is red in Eſayedoth the axe boaſt it ſelfe againſt him yt heweth with it? Or doth the ſawe bragg againſt him that carieth it? Therfore out of the minde of ſcripture and after god hath Auguſtin ī his boke degratia et libero arbitrio. ca. 7. ſhewed

his iudgment, declared and ſpoken with theſe woordes: As ſone Auguſtinus. as grace is lent and geuen, oure merites begīne to be good, neuertheles thorow grace. For yf the ſame be with drawne, thē mā falleth, and is not lifte vp, but throwen downe thorow fre wil. Therfore whan a man begynneth to haue good merites, he ought not to aſcrybe that vnto himſelfe, but vnto god, to whom it is ſpoken in the pſalme: Thou art (or be thou) my help. O forſake me not &c. In that he ſaieth: forſake me not, he declareth, that yf he be forſaken, he is able of himſelfe to no good thing.
            Hetherto hath Auguſtine ſhewed euidently ynough, that good workes are oures, and that neuertheles all perteyneth vnto grace. By meanes wherof, whan rightwiſnes is aſcrybed to our workes,

it is trulye aſcrybed vnto grace, out of the whiche good workes proceade. Others there be, that vndoo this knot thus, ſayenge: that faithfull beleuers pleaſe god thorow Chriſt, who hath reconcyled them againe with god. And ſeyng thei pleaſe god, that do the workes: thē ye works which be dōe of ſuch, as are reconcyled and in ye fauour of god, be alſo acceptable vnto him: Doubtles not for their own ſake, or for yt thei be done by thē, but much rather becauſe thei are wrought by the membres of Chriſt. Some are of this opiniō: Faith (ſaie thei) and workes are not ſeuered: for the rightuous lyueth by faith, and he, that is rightuous, worketh rightuouſneſſe. Nether is vncircūciſiō eny thing worth, nether auaileth circumciſion: but faith, that is ſtrong in operacion and worketh by loue.

Therfore by meanes of this vnſes parable cōiunctiō & vnitie, yt is aſcribed to ye one, which els in very dede & properlie is the others. This matter alſo might be wel expoūded & declared thus: Nameli In faith ther muſt reſpect be had to two thīgs: To ye recōciliaciō, & to obedience. To ye recōciliaciō, becauſe we vnderſtād by faith, that god is recōcyled & pacyfied to vs ward for Chriſts ſake, by whō we ar accepted & in fauour wt god. To obediēce, becauſe yt thei, which be reconcyled & receaued vnto grace do wholly geue thēſelfes to him, by whō thei be reconcyled, & are deſyrous to do his wil. Here ther fore maie it well be ſaid, yt it is a two folde rightuouſnes: one iuſtifiēg & one harknyng or obeing. Of it, ye iuſtifieth, is Paul myndful, whā he ſaith: Becauſe therfore yt 
               Roma. 5. we be iuſtified by faith, we haue

peace wt god thorow our lord Ieſus chriſt, by whom alſo in faith we haue entran̄ce vnto this grace, wherin we ſtand. Of it alſo, that harkeneth, he maketh menciō, ſaying: knowe ye not, ye vnto whō ye geue ouer yourſelues as ſeruaūts to obey, his ſeruauntes ye be, to whō ye obey: whether it be ſynne vnto death, or obediēce vnto rightuouſnes? Properly now is iuſtyficaciō aſcribed vnto yt rightuouſnes which iuſtifieth, & not vnto it yt is obediēt: for ye ſame cōmeth of ye other, & wt out ye other mighte not it be called rightuouſnes. Moreouer, this knot maye be loſed thus. The moſt naturall work of fayth is purifieng or ſanctifieng. For ye holy Apoſtle Peter ſaith expreſely, thorow fayth ar ye heartes purified. Now in ye mater of ſāctifiēg doth ye holy ſcripture declare two thynges: The firſt, that as manye of vs, as beeleue, are freelye ſanc|

tified by the bloude of Iheſus Chriſt. For S. Peter ſaieth: we 1, Pet, 1, are electe thorow ſanctifieng of the ſprete, in the obedience and ſprinklinge of the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt. And yet more playnlie: Ye know, that ye are not redemed with trāſitory ſiluer or golde frō youre vayne conuerſacion of the tradicions of the fathers: but wt the precious bloude of chriſt, as of the innocent vndefyled lambe. Paul alſo ſaieth: By the wil of god we are made holie, euē by the Heb, 10, offring of ye body of Ieſus chriſt once for all. For (as it foloweth immediatly after) with one oblacion hath he made perfecte foreuer them, that are ſanctified. The Apoſtle Ihon likewiſe teſtifieth the ſame, and ſaieth: The bloude of Ieſus Chriſt, the ſonne of god, 1, Iohn, 1, clenſeth vs from all ſynne. And thus faith in the bloude of Ieſus

Chriſt verelye and naturally ſanetifieth or makth holy, by yt meanes of him that ſayde: I ſanctifie my ſelf for them, that thei alſo maie Iohn. 17. be ſanctified in the trueth.
            The ſecond thing, that holye ſcripture declareth in the mater of ſanctifiēg, is this: Namelie, that thei, which thorow faith are ſanctified with the bloud of Chriſt, do daily ſanctifie them ſelues, & applie them vnto holyneſſe. And to this end, in my iudgment, doth a good parte of the exhortacions of the Apoſtles ſerue. Verely S. Peter 1. Pete. 1, ſaieth: Lyke as he which hath called you is holy, euen ſo be ye holye alſo in all your conuerſaciō, according as it is writtē: Be ye holy, for I am holye. And the holie Apoſtel Paul ſaieth: This is the wil of god, euen your ſanctificacion, 1, Theſ. 4, that ye refrayne from whordome, & yt euery one knowe,

how to kep his veſſel in holyneſſe and honour, not in fleſhlie luſt, as do the Heithen which knowe not god. And that no mā oppreſſe or defraude his brother in bargainyng. Thus dyd Ihon alſo the Apoſtle teach & ſaie: We are now gods children, and as yet it appeareth not what we ſhalbe. But we know, yt whā he appeareth, we ſhalbe lyke him: for we ſhal ſe him as he is. And euery one that hath this hope in him, purifieth himſelfe, like as he alſo is pure. Therfore euē this our purifiēg, which is done by our care and diligēce, hath alſo the name of ſanctifieng, not becauſe of it ſelfe, but for the fyrſt purifieng ſake that goeth before: which yf it go not before, then is our ſanctifienge nothinge worth. Againe, yf the ſame go before then muſt this alſo folow after. For right well & trulie ſaieth

S. Iames the Apoſtle: Faith, yf it haue no workes, is deed in it ſelfe. In it ſelfe, or for it ſelfe, I ſaie, that is: It alone, and fruteful with no good woorkes. For as the body wtout ye ſprite is deed, ſo faith alſo wtout works is deed.
            Doubtles a lyuing body doeth & worketh ſomewhat, and ſerueth many: likewiſe faith, by deutie & offices of loue, muſt be profitable & cōmodious vnto many. Now yf faith do good to no man with godlie workes, thē is it an emptie ymaginacion & vayne name. As alſo the ſanctifieng of mā, yf it do not breake forth & ſhew it ſelfe in holy words and workes, aſſuredly it is to be reputed falſe, feyned and full of ypocriſie. Beſydes this, all that belongeth vnto true holynes in yt our ſāctifieng, which appeareth in our workes, muſt be referred to the ſanctifiēg done by

the bloud of chriſt, to the which moſt properlye apperteyneth the honour of ſāctificaciō. Wherfore whan thou ſeiſt in holy ſcripture, that rightuouſnes is aſcribed vnto our workes, remēbre it is done for ſuch cauſes as I hitherto haue ſhewed. For the ſprete of the Apoſtles cānot be againſt himſelf.
         
         
            ¶ The. 2. ſorts of mē, that the Apoſtls had to do wt for iuſtificacion, which make thē ſeme to varie in aſſignyng the cauſe of iuſtificacion, with their reconciliacion.
            The. 16. Chapter.
            
               
AND knowē it is, that the Apoſtles of the lorde dyd ſtryue with two ſortes of people: the one ſorte aſcrybed rightuouſnes and ſaluacion to their own good works, which were done after the meſure and rule of gods lawe, & therfore they deſpyced Chriſt. For while thei wēte about to ſtabliſh, mainteyne and ſet vp their owne rightuouſnes, thei were not obedient to ye rightuouſnes of god. Againſt the vngodlie opyniō of theſe, dyd the holie Apoſtles teach (and ſpecially S. Paul) that rightuouſnes and life is obteyned by faith in the lorde Ieſus, and not by our workes. The ſame Paul ſaieth to the Galathians: I refuſe not the grace of god. For yf rightuouſnes come by the law, then dyed chriſt in vayne. And agayne: Chriſt profiteth you nothing. And: ye are

gone quyte from Chriſt, and are fallen frō grace, yf ye wil be iuſtified by the lawe. Againſt ſuch alſo was kepte at Hieruſalem the Counſail that Luke maketh mencion of in the Actes of the Apoſtles.
            There were agayne certayne other light & euell diſpoſed people, that abuſed ſuche doctryne of the Apoſtles to the libertye and ſenſualitie of the fleſh: thinking it ſufficient to ſaluacion, whan they beaſted themſelues of faith, although there were no good workes found in them. Therfore againſt thoſe, as againſt the very peſtilence and decaye of true Religion and gods ſeruice, dyd the ſame Apoſtles alſo ſtryue, and taught that the Chriſtian fayth was not a vayne opyniō or fruteleſſe knowledge, but a lyuelie & ſtronge confidence, moſt fruteful

in good works. For Paul, writing againſt theſe, ſaieth vnto Titus: Thei ſaie thei knowe god, but wt 
               Titu. 1. their dedes thei deny him, ſeinge they are abominable and diſobedient, & vnapte vnto euery good worke. And Peter the Apoſtle rebuketh ſuch diſſemblers, but ſom what more darkly, whā he ſaieth: Herevnto geue all diligence, that 2. Pete. 1▪
                in your faith ye myniſtre vertue, in vertue knowlege, in knowlege tēperaūce in tēperaūce paciēce, in paciēce godlynes, in godlines brotherlye kyndnes in brotherly kindnes loue. For yf theſe thinges be amonge you & be plenteous, thei wil make you, yt ye nether ſhalbe ydle nor vnfrutefull in the knowledge of our lord Ieſus chriſt. But he, yt lacketh theſe thinges, is blind and gropeth for the waie with his hands, and hath forgottē that he was pourged frō his olde ſynnes.
            
               
It is manifeſt alſo vnto euery man, that Ihon and Iames, ye holy Apoſtles of Chriſt, wrote herof: S. Iames moſt erneſtlye defēding that Abrahā was not iuſtified by onelie faith (that is, by a vayne opynion) but by workes, vndoubtedlie euen by true faith. And yet with thoſe, and ſuch lyke exhortacions, wold not the faithfull Apoſtles of Chriſt myniſhe his grace and merites, & magnifie the merites of man: but rather wt
               ſtand the filthynes of ſuch as neuer rightly knew nor lerned the faithe of Chriſt, & made yet their boaſt ther of to the greate offence and hinderaunce of ye weake. For yf thei trulie had knowne it, they had vndoubtedliled a more ſober life. Therfore whan the Apoſtles are erneſti prouoking vnto good workes, they prouoke vnto ye true faith in Chriſt, which is mightie

in operacion & worketh by loue: And yet neuertheles thei aſcribe al thinges to the grace of God, yea euen the ſame workes which they requyre of the faithfull. And that I here teach the true vpright doctryne of faithe, all they ſhall affirme, that haue but a litle ſearched, tried and red the ſcriptures of the Apoſtles. Auguſtine alſo, a Auguſtinus. true faithfull teacher of the Chriſtian church, ſhall teſtifie, that I haue here inuented no new thing. For in his boke of grace and fre will the ſeuenth chapter, he wryteth thus: Such as haue not vnderſtand what the Apoſtle ſaieth (we holde, that a man is iuſtified by faith without the workes of ye law) Haue thought him to affirme that faith is ſufficiēt to a mā, althoughe he lyue euyll and haue no workes: which thing god forbyd the electe veſſell ſhulde ſo

meane, who yet in another place whan he hath ſaide, in Chriſt Ieſu auayleth nether circūciſion nor vncircūciſion, he addeth immediatlye therto: But faith, whiche worketh by loue. Euen this is the ſame faith, that ſeparateth gods beleuers from vncleane deuels. For thei alſo (as the Apoſtle Iames ſaieth) beleue and tremble, but no good thinge do thei. Therfore haue they not that faith, out of the which ye iuſt lyueth: namely which worketh by loue, that god maye geue him lyfe acordinge to his workes. But for aſmuch as good dedes are of god, of whō we haue not onelie faith but alſo loue: therfore the ſame teacher of the heithen named eternall lyfe it ſelfe, grace.
            This haue I alledged out of Auguſtine, & hetherto haue I opened & declared, how the ſcripture

aſcribeth rightuouſnes vnto good workes, and that ye ſame doctryne is not againſt ye Apoſtles teaching and iudgmēt, which aſcribeth rightuouſnes vnto faith in Chriſt Ieſus. But for aſmuch as vpon this mater of ye rightuouſnes of workes, there hangeth the queſtiō concernyng ye merites of good workes: I wil adde herevnto a lytle, touching the rewarde and merite of good workes: chefelie to the intēt that no mā raſhlye and vngodlye iudge of good workes, and ſo purchace himſelfe to haue not good but rather euel merites.
         
         
            Theſe termes / rewardes or merites, tryed by the ſcriptures and expounded how largely thei ar to be extēded.
            The. 17. Chapter.
            
               
MErite or deſeruyng, as it is ſpokē of in ye ſchools, is no where found in holy ſcripture, and yet ther in is oft mencion made of the rewarde. The ſcripture in this foloweth oure maner and faſhion of ſpeakynge. And for aſmuche as vnto ſuch, as be oure freindes or that haue well deſerued it at our hands, we geue rewards & giftes, as an hyre or wagies: Therefore after lyke maner of ſpeche is it ſayd, that god geueth his frendes eternall life to a reward, for their noble and excellent dedes & merites. For thus we reade in Eſaie: O happie are the rightuous, for they maie enioye ye frutes of their deuyces. But wo vnto the vngodlye and vniuſt, for he ſhalbe recō
               penced acordinge to his dedes. In the goſpell the lorde ſaieth: Bleſſed are you, whā men reuyle

you, and perſecute you, ſpeake all maner of euel againſt you, & belie you for my ſake. Reioyce and be glad, for great is your rewarde in heauen. The Apoſtle Paul alſo ſaith: Euery one ſhal receaue his rewarde acording to his laboure. But herein muſt not the worde (Rewarde) be violently forced, as yf ought were oures: for euen our merites themſelues are nothing els but giftes of god. Therfore like as holye Auguſtine in other doctrynes of our faith dyd euery where obſerue and teach ye vniuerſal mynde and vnderſtanding of the right canonical trueth and of the holie churche: Euen ſo he not onelie ſheweth playnly the true meaning and vnderſtāding, concernyng the merites of good De gra. et. lib. arbi. cap. 7. workes, but alſo with very diligent cōference of the ſcripture he defendeth the ſame, and ſaieth

thus: Ihon, the forerunner of our lorde, ſaieth: A man can receaue nothing, excepte it be geuen him from aboue. Now yf thy good workes be the giftes of god, then doeth god crowne thy merites, not as thy merites, but as his own giftes. Now let vs cōſidere the merites of the Apoſtle Paul, that is, whether he obteyned thē of himſelf, or whether thei be the giftes of god. He ſaieth: I haue foughten a good fight, I haue ended my courſe, I haue kept faith. Fyrſt, yf good thoughts had not gone before theſe good dedes, thē ſhulde they be no good dedes. Marke therfore what he ſayeth of the ſame thoughts: Not that we be able of ourſelues to thinke eny good thyng, as of our ſelues, but al our abilitie is of god. Lette vs then beholde euery thing ſeuerall. He ſaieth: I haue foughtē
               
a good fight. Here I demaunde: with what ſtrength fought he? with it that he had of himſelf, or with it that was geuen him from aboue? But god forbyd, that ſuch an excellent teacher of the heithen ſhulde not haue knowne the lawe of god, whoſe voyce and worde ſtandeth in Deuteronomie: Thou ſhalt not ſaie in thine hert: My ſtrength and the power of my handes was able to bring this to paſſe: But remembre thou the lorde thy god. For it is he that geueth the ſtrength and power to do it. And what profiteth a good battail, yf the victory folowe not after? And who geueth the victory, but euen he of whom he ſaieth: god be thanked, whiche hath geuen vs the victory thorow our lorde Ieſus Chriſt? And in another place, whan he hath recyted the teſtymony out of the pſalme:

for thy ſake are we put to death al the daye long, we are compted as ſhepe apoynted to be ſlayne) he added therto and ſaide: But in al this we ouercome for his ſake yt loued vs. It is not therfor by our ſelues that we ouercome, but by him which hath loued vs. And afterward he ſaid: I haue ended my courſe. This ſpake he, yt ſayde in another place: It lieth not in eny mans wil or runnyng, but in ye mercy of god. Which meanyng maie in no wiſe be peruerted, as to ſaie, that it lieth not in the mercy of god, but in euery mans will or runnyng. For whoſoeuer dare ſaie ſo, declareth euidently, that he ſpeaketh againſt the Apoſtle. Finally, he ſaide: I haue kepte ye faith. This ſpake euen he, which in another place ſayed: Mercye haue I obteyned, yt I ſhoulde be faithful. He ſaid not: I obteyned

mercy becauſe I was faithful, but that I ſhuld be faithfull: By this thē declareth he, that faith can not be had excepte god be mercyfull, and that faith is the gift of god. Which thing he techeth very euidently and ſaieth: By grace are ye ſaued thorow faith, and that not of your ſelues, but it is ye gift of god. For thei might ſaie: Therfore haue we receaued grace, becauſe we beleued, aſcrybinge ſo faith to themſelues, and the grace vnto god. Therfore the Apoſtle whan he had ſaide thorow faith, he ſaieth: And that not of yourſelues, but it is the gift of god. Agayne: to the intent they ſhuld not ſaye, that with their workes they had merited ſuche a gift and rewarde, he added ther vnto immediatly: not of workes, leſt eny man ſhulde boaſt himſelfe. Not that he denieth or miniſheth good

workes, for he ſaieth: god ſhal rewarde euery one acordyng to his workes: But becauſe that workes proceade out of faith, & not faith out of workes. And therfore haue we the workes of rightuouſnes euen of him, of whom faith itſelf cōmeth. The iuſt ſhall lyue by his faith. Out of S. Auſtine word bi word haue I alledged all this: which doubtleſſe ſo perfectlye comprehendeth, and ſo cōſtauntly with ſcriptures proueth & ſetteth forth, what ſo euer maye be ſayd of ye merites of good works, that I ſuppoſe, there can nomore be ſpoken therto. For what could be more brefelye, more ſyncerly & more perfectly ſpoken, then that vnto good workes there is prepared a rewarde, and that the ſāe is nothinge els but grace: Yea the merites of ſainctes are gods

gifts, which whā god crowneth, he crowneth his owne giftes? In all this therfore ſtandeth ſure the perpetual, vnfayling and vniuerſall doctryne, that thei, which beleue, are iuſtified and ſaued by onely faith or grace of god.
         
         
            The rule of good workes to meaſure them by, that they maye bee good in dede, and not of oure own good intente and brayne onelye.
            The. 18. Chapter.
            WHerfore now come we agayne to good workes, which yf they proceade not out of god by faith, they maye not be named good.

But yf they ſpring out of god thorow faith, then are thei ordred acording to ye rule of gods word. In ye deſcripcion therfore of good workes, I haue added therto and ſayde, that, they are done by ſuch as are regenerate, out of the good ſprete of god, and acordinge to gods worde. For the workes that we ymagen of ourſelues, they pleaſe not god. For he alloweth obedience: As for the good meanyng and intent that groweth in us, he refuſeth it. Which thinge I affirme and proute wih theſe teſtimonies of ſcripture: In Deuteronomye the lord commaūdeth euidētli with theſe words: ye ſhal not do, euery one that which he thinketh good. What ſo euer I commaunde you, that loke ye obſerue, to do therafter: Adde nothinge thereto, nether myny ſhe aught there frō. Moreouer in the

ſtorie of Samuel there ſtandeth an enſample herof. For Saul the king of Iſrael, being cōmaunded to make a ſlayne offeringe of the Amalechites & al their ſubſtaūce, dyd, of a good intent & ſelf choſen gods ſeruyce, reſerue the fatteſte oxen for a ſacrifice vnto god. But the prophet Samuel ſaieth vnto him: hath the lord as greate pleaſure in brent ſacryfices and offeringes, as whan the voyce of the 1. Reg. 15. lorde is obeyed? Behold, to obeye is better then ſacrifice: & to herkē, is better thē the fatte of rammes. For rebellyon is as the ſynne of witchcraft, and ſtubburnes is as the wickednes of ydolatrie.
            Here in theſe few wordes thou haſt a godly cōmendacion of ſelf choſen relygion or gods ſeruice, and of workes that ſpring of our owne good meanynges and good intēntes. They, that deſpiſynge &

refuſing the lawe of god folowe their owne good intētes, are of ye trueth called witches, rebelles & ydolatoures. Although thei think them ſelues to be gods good ſeruauntes, and feruent folowers of the tradicions of holye fathers, biſhoppes, kynges and prynces: yet god, who can be no liar, ſaieth euidently, that the workes of ſuch folkes doe nothyng dyffer from witchcraft, rebellion and ydolatrie, which are the moſt horrible thinges, that cā be thought or deuyſed. The lorde therfore in the goſpel, out of the prophet Eſay, condemneth and refuſeth all ſuch ſelf choſen works, as proceade out of our owne good meanynges & intentes, whā he ſaieth: in vayne ſerue thei me, while thei teach the doctrynes & preceptes of mē. Euery plantyng, which my heauēly father hath not planted, ſhall be

rooted out. Let thē go, blynd thei are, & ye leaders of ye blynd. Here of came it no doubte, ye G. Paule ſo boldly & ſtowtly ſaid, ye the cō
               maundmentes & ſtatutes of men are not ōly cōtrarie to the trueth, but alſo very lyes. In another place he ſaieth: What ſo euer is not of faith, is ſynne. And agayn: Faith cōmeth of hearyng, & hearing cōmeth by the word of god. Wherby it maie wel be gathered, yt the workes, which are not done out ye worde thorow faith, are ſo very naught, yt thei be alſo called ſinne. To the Coloſſiās doth Paul moſt euidentlye reiecte the ſelfe pleaſing gods ſeruice, ethelothreſchian, which is expounded a ſuperſticiō, & ſignifieth a ſelf willed & ſelfchoſē religiō & gods ſeruice.
            Wherfore out of all this it is playne, that we do not reiecte nor withſtand vpright good workes,

whan we refuſe the workes of monckes, freres & popiſh prieſts, whiche proceade of the election and good intent of man, without gods worde. For now is it more certayne, that they of a trueth are not good workes, which we ymagen of our ſelues, but onelye ſuch as god hath commaunded vs. Which thing is yet more euident out of the wordes of S. Paul: We are created (ſaieth he) thorow Iheſus Chriſt, vnto good workes, to the which god ordeyned Eph. 2. vs before, yt we ſhulde walke in thē. Here ſetteth he two marks or euident tokēs of good workes. The firſt: we are created thorow Chriſt Ieſus vnto good workes. A good worke then muſt be done by ſuch one, as is created thorow Chriſt, or graffed in Chriſt Ieſu. For yf the braunche abyd not in the vyne, it can not bring frute.

By faith are we graffed in to chriſt the vyne. The ſecond: Thei muſt not be euery nor al maner of workes, but ſuch as god ordeyned of olde, that we ſhulde walke ther in. What the ſame be, he hath expreſſed in his law, which is the wil of god. Herof is it, that the lorde in the goſpel, beyng deman̄
               ded concernyng eternall life and true vertues, poynteth to the law and ſaieth: What is written in ye law? And, yf thou wilt entre in to life, kepe the commaundmentes. The ten cōmaundmentes then are the moſt ſure and moſt perfecte fourme of good workes. Which thing, to the intent it maie be perfectly vnderſtand, I will brefely declare it all, as in a painted table.
         
         
            
            The expoſition of the. x. commaundmentes, which ar the limites and precinctes of our good workes.
            The. 19. Chapter.
            TO the fyrſt cōmaundmēt thou muſt referre the fear of god, faith in god, and fynally moſt ſure hope in trouble & aduerſitie. Itē ſufferaūce & vnmoueable vnſhrinking ſtedfaſtnes. To the ſecond, belōgeth the true, & to god acceptable, vndefyled & ſyncere worſhipping: likewiſe ye refuſing, denyal & eſchuyng of all ſuperſticiō & peruerted gods ſeruyce. To the thirde: ye reuerencyng of ye power & maieſtie of god, alſo cōfeſſion, true inuocaciō of ye name of god & ſanctifieng of yt ſame. In ye fourth is cōteyned the cōelie obſeruaciō
               
of the cerimonies and rytes of ye church, ye preachīg of gods word, the commē praier, and al external myniſtracions. To the fifth maieſte thou referre feare and loue towardes father and mother, towardes thy natyue countre and kynſfolkes: Item the right obediēce that we owe to magiſtrats, and of al duties of a cyuile life & conuerſacion. To the ſixte thou ſhalt referre rightuouſnes & iudgment, the defence of wedowes & of the oppreſſed, afflicted, frendles, Fatherles and Motherles children: benefites and innocencye. To the ſeuenth maye be referred matrymonyall plight and trothe, the honeſt and godly bringynge vp of children, diligence and exerciſe of clenneſſe, ſobernes and temperauncie. To the eyght ſhalt thou referre equitye in bargaynyng, liberalitie, myldneſſe:

and hoſpitalitie. To the nyenth: diligēt appliēg of trueth thorow out the whole life, to kepe faithfulnes & fydelitie in wordes and workes, to vſe ſuch wordes as are ſober, honeſt and maye edifie. To the tenth, referre good and holy deſyres, and finally all holye and honeſt thoughtes.
            This is now a very ſhort ſūme and fourme of good workes. But yf thou deſyre yet a ſhorter, then harken vnto the Lorde himſelfe, ſayeng in the goſpell: Thou ſhalt loue the lord thy god with all thy hert, with all thy ſoule, and with all thy mynde. This is the chefe and greateſt comman̄dment. The ſecond is lyke vnto it: thou ſhalt loue thy neghbour as thyſelfe. Item what ſo euer ye wold men ſhulde do vnto you, do you the lyke vnto them.
         
         
            
            That the lord requyreth naught els of vs, but the workes of the. x. commaundements, is proued out of ſcripture.
            The. 20. Chapter.
            AL faithful beleuers, which be deſyrous to do good workes, muſt directe theyr eyes, hertes and myndes vnto theſe commaundmentes of the lorde: And that with ſo much the more diligence and ſted faſtnes, as they more euydently ſe, yt god in the lawe and in the prophetes requireth nothing els, yea none other workes of thoſe that are his. This maie I proue and

maynteyne with moſt euydent teſtimonies of the moſt principal prophetes. Moſes in his fifth boke ſaieth thus: Now Iſraell, What requyreth the lord thy god of the, but that thou feare ye lorde thy god, and walke in his waies, and loue him, and ſerue the lorde thy god with al thy hert and with all thy ſoule. And that thou kepe the cōmaundmētes of the lorde, & his ordinaūces, which I cōmaūd the this daie? Kyng Dauid alſo aſketh: Lorde, who ſhal dwell in thy tabernacle? And immediatly he anſwereth: Euen he yt leadeth an vncorrupte life, doing yt which is right, and other thinges cōteyned in ye ten cōmaundmētes. Eſay the prophet moueth the ſame queſtion alſo, and ſaieth. Who is he among us, that is able to abyde the eternall heate? And he anſwreth: Euē he yt leadeth a verteo

life, ſpeaking that which is right, & doing the other thinges cōteyned in ye x. cōmaundmentes. Ieremye in the. 22. chap. bringeth in euen the ſame thinges, & erneſtly requyreth them, ſaienge: Thus the lord cōmaundeth: Kepe equitie and rightuouſnes, delyuer the oppreſſed from the power of the violent, do not greue nor oppreſſe the ſtraunger, the fatherles nor the wedow, and ſhede no innocēt bloud in this place. And no other workes doth Ezechiel recyte thorow a long Regiſtre in the eightenth chapter. In Oſea the lorde ſaieth: I haue pleaſure in mercy, and not in ſacrifice: And in the knowlege of god, more then in burntoff ringes. Miche as alſo aſketh what he ſhal do, and wt what workes he muſt recōcyle himſelfe vnto god. And by gods reuelaciō he anſwereth: I will ſhewe the,

O man, what is good, and what the lord requyreth of the? Namely, to do right, to haue pleaſure in louing kyndnes, & to walke lowly before thy god. Lyke anſwere doth the prophet Zacharie geue Zach. 7. vnto thoſe, that aſked hym concerning vertues & acceptable works. Thus ſaieth the lorde of hooſtes: Execute true iudgmente, ſhewe mercy and louyng kyndnes euery man to his neghbour: do the wedowe, the fatherles, the ſtraunger and poore no wrong. And let no man ymagen euel againſt his brother in his hert. Loue no falſe oothes, for theſe are the thinges Zach. 8. that I hate, ſaieth the lord. From this doctryne of the prophetes, diſagreeth not the doctrine of the Euangeliſtes & Apoſtles: which euery where teacheth loue, righteouſnes and innocency, doubtles as the effecte & ſumme of al good

workes. This now ſo plentifully, and with ſo many teſtimonies of the ſcripture haue I vttered & declared: to ye intent no man hence forth ſhulde either doubte or be ignoraunte, that thoſe onelie are good workes, which be done our of the good ſprete of god thorow faith, and acording to the ſcripture or word of god.
         
         
            ¶ That the ſayed proprietes of good workes are requiſite ī dede to good works, is declared by the conferēs of the ſcriptures more plainlye.
            The. 21. Chapter.
            
               
YEt ther reſteth ſomwhat which I muſte adde vnto the ende of the deſcrypciō of good workes, namely to confirme and make it more playne wyth the conference and agreement of the ſcripture. I ſaid that tyght good workes be done by ſuch, as are regenerate, to the glorie of god, to the bewtifienge of life and to the edyfieng of the neyghbour. For vnto our good workes doth the lorde appoynte this end in Mathew, and ſaieth: So let your light ſhyne before mē y• thei maye ſe your good workes, & glorifie your father which is in heauē. Itē the Apoſtel Paul, many tymes exhorting mē vnto good worckes, addeth therto a thyng, which might ſpecially moue eny man, Namelie that wt their godly workes thei ſhulde do worſhippe vnto ye doctryne of our ſauiour &

redemer, in al thinges. Now like as a cōely & honourable apparel doth bewtifie the mā, ſo do right good works ſet fort, and garniſh mās life wt great commendacion. And this is ye cauſe yt ye Apoſtles of Chriſt gaue ſo oft counſaill, to laye aſyde ye olde man, & to put on the new, which is ſhapē & faſhioned after god: for therof cōmeth praiſe and honour vnto vs. We are called, & be in dede, ye ſeruaū
               tes and children of god, whoſe propertie and vertue appeareth in vs, to the praiſe and magnifiēg of his name. Moreouer, yf we do good, he increaceth his giftes in vs continually the longer ye more, conſidering he hath ſpoken: Vnto euery one, that hath, ſhallbe geuen, Mat, 13, that he maye haue aboundaunce: But who ſo hath not, from him ſhalbe taken alſo euen that he hath. And herof it commeth,

that vnto ſuch, as do well, god is gracious and mercyfull, repleniſhing thē with many (yea and with temporall) giftes, and finally endeweth them with eternal life. For ye Apoſtle Paul ſpeaketh euidently and plainlie: god ſhal geue vnto euery on acording to his dedes: Namelie praiſe & honour & immortalitie vnto thoſe y• with pacience in good woorkes ſeke eternall life. And againe: Praiſe, honour and peace vnto all ſuch as do good. Howbeit in all good workes the iuſt and godlye ar appoīted to kepe theſe boūds and lymites, that they will not ſeke their owne welth, but the glorie and wil of god, and finally the commoditie and profite of their neghbour. For the Apoſtle Paul ſaieth: Lette no manne ſeke that which is his own, but let eueri mā 
               
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 10. ſeke yt which belōgeth to another:

Euen as I pleaſe all men in all thinges, not ſekyng myne owne profit, but the prophet of many, that they myght be ſaued. Al godlie perſonnes therfore directe all their diligence, exerciſe & works to this end, that they maye edifie many: wherin they expreſſe and declare the nature of god, whoſe children they be. For he is enclyned and deſyrous to ſhewe goodvnto all creatures. And herof it commeth, that his children alſo are well doers. And in al thinges whatſoeuer thei take in hād, thei haue ſtil before their eyes (as the onelie marck of their life) a delyte and deſyre to do good.
         
         
            The Concluſyon or peroration.
            
               The. 22. Chapter.
            THus much at this tyme haue I done concernyng the propertie, nature, diſpoſicion, cauſe, end and operacion: that is, ye true & right faſhion & meaſure of good works Out of ye which, I truſt, this may chefelie be vnderſtand, how the lorde aſcribeth the name of rightuouſnes and Iuſtificacion to the good works of holy mē: And how god in ſcripture is ſayde to geue rewarde: And that neuertheles the right and principall doctryne of our religion ſtādeth ſure and vnmoued: Namelie, that we are iuſtified out of the grace of god for Chriſtes ſake by faith, & not by workes.
            Wherfore there remaineth now

nothing els, but that for the true faith in the lord Ieſu, by ye which we are iuſtified, we fal downe at the lords fete with erneſt praier, with feruent and deuoute cryeng & callyng vpon his name: in ſuch forte that we put in practiſe thys talke and diſputaciō had of good works: Namely, that as touching the faith, which we profeſſe in the lorde Ieſus Chriſte, we expreſſe, ſhewe forth and garniſhe the ſame with right good workes: Remembring the wordes of the lord Iheſus Chriſt, who in his goſpell ſaieth: Not euerye one that ſaieth vnto me, Lorde, lorde, ſhall entre in to the kyngdome of heauen: but he that doth the will of my father, which is in heauen.
            Many ſhall ſaye to me in that daye: Lorde, lorde, haue not we

prophecied in thi name? haue not we caſt out deuels in thy name? haue not we done manye mightye dedes in thy name? And then wil I knowlege vnto them: I neuer knew you, departe frō me ye workers of iniquitie. Therfore who ſo euer heareth of me theſe wordes, and doth the ſame, I wil lickē him vnto a wiſe mā, which buylte his houſe vpō a rocke. And a ſhower of rayne deſcended, and the floudes came, and the wyndes blew, and beat vpon that houſe, & it fel not, becauſe it was grounded on the rock. And euery one yt heareth of me theſe words, and doth them not, ſhalbe likened vnto a fooliſhe man, which buylte his houſe vpon ſand. And a ſhower of rayne deſcended, and the floudes cāe, & the wyndes blew, and beat vpon that houſe, and it fell, and greate was the fall of it.
            
               
Wherfore let vs applie all oure diligence with holie feruent praie
                  •
               , with true zeale and godlynes of oure mynde, that we alſo as lyuinge ſtones, beyng buylded vpō Chriſt the ſure rock of lyfe, maye become a lyuinge houſe, which maie endure faſt in al aſſaultes of manifolde tentacions: That we (I ſaie) beinge a ſpirituall habitacion, and an holy prieſthode, maie bring and offre vp to our Redemer & iuſtifier, Ieſu Chriſt, ſpiritual & acceptable ſacrifices: praiſe and thankes geuyng, almes and oure own bodies, yea oure ſelues, fully, wholly, and all together.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            
            Amirrour or glaſſe / wheryn al men may behold their own condemnacyon by the lawe of god: With a remedy for the ſame.
            
               The office of loue
               THe law is a doctrine that beddeth good and forbid deth euel as the commaū
                  demētes ſpecifie ſayinge. Loue thy Lorde god with all thyne hart, with all thy ſoule, and Deut. 6. Mat. 22. with all thy mynde.
               This is the fyrſt and great commaundment. The ſecond is lyke vnto that: loue thy neyghboure as thy ſelfe. In theſe two commaundementes hange al the lawe and the prophetes.
               
                  
                  ¶ He, that loueth god, loueth his neyghbour.
                  If a man ſay, I loue God, and yet hateth his brother, he is a liar. 1, Iohn. 4. He yt loueth not his brother whō he hath ſene, how can he loue god Let euery man examyne hys conſcience by this rule whom he hath not ſene.
                  He yt loueth his neighbour as him ſelfe kepeth al ye cōmaundementes of god, what ſo euer ye wold that men ſhould do to you, euen ſo do you to thē. For this is the lawe Math. 7. Rom. 13. and ye Prophets. He that loueth his neyghbour, fulfylleth yt lawe.
                  All the lawe is fullfylled in Gala. 5. one worde, that is, loue thy neyghboure as thy ſelfe.
               
               
                  ¶ He, that loueth god, kepeth all the commaūdmentes.
                  He that loueth his neyghboure, kepeth all the commaundmentes Ro. 13. Gal, 5. 1. Ioh. 4. of god, and he that loueth God, loueth his neyghbour: ergo he, yt loueth God, kepeth all his commaundmentes.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ He that hath faith, loueth god and kepeth the cōmaundmentes.
                  My father loueth you, becauſe ye Iohn. 16. loue me and beleue that I came from God.
                  He, that hath the faith, loueth god, and he that loueth God kepeth all hys cōmaūdemēts: ergo he that hathe the fayth kepeth all the commaundementes of God.
                  He that kepeth one commaū
                     dement of god kepeth all.
                  For without faith it is impoſſible Heb. 11. to kepe any of the cōmaūdemētes of GOD, and he that hath the fayth kepeth all the commaundemētes of god: ergo he that kepeth one cōmaundement of god kepeth them all.
                  He that kepeth one commandemente of God, he kepeth all: ergo he that kepeth not al the cō
                     maundmentes

of god, kepeth not one of them.
               
            
            
               The office of the lawe
               
                  ¶ It is not in our power to kepe any of the commaundementes of god which wer geuen to ſhewe vs our ſynnes, and byd thinges impoſſible for vs.
                  Without grace it is impoſſible to kepe any of the commaundementes of god, and grace is not in our power: ergo it is not in our power to kepe any of ye commaū
                     dementes of god.
                  By the law commeth the knowledge of ſynne.
                  I knew not what ſynne ment, Rom. 3. Rom. 7. but thorow the lawe.
                  
                     
I had not knowen what luſt 
                        ••
                     d ment, excepte the lawe had ſayde, thou ſhalt not luſt: without the lawe ſynne was deed, that is, it moued me not, neyther wyſt I that it was ſynne, which not with ſtandinge was ſynne and forbydden by the lawe.
               
               
                  ¶ The lawe byddeth vs do that thinge, which is impoſſible for vs.
                  It biddeth vs kepe the commaundementes The law is a ſcholemaſter to brig vs to chriſt of god, & yet is it not in our power to kepe any of thē: ergo it biddeth vs do yt is impoſſible for vs. Thou wylt ſay, where to doeth God byd vs do yt is impoſſible for as? I anſwere, to make the knowe that thou arte but euel, & that there is no remedi to ſaue ye in thyne own hād, & that

thou mayſt ſeke remedy at ſome other, for the lawe doth naught but condemne the.
               
               
                  ¶ Of the Goſpell.
                  Like as the condemned man is ioyful to heare of pardon for hys fault: Euē ſo ſhalt thou heare for thye delyuerans the ioyfull nues of the goſpell.
                  THe goſpell is as moch to ſay in our tonge, as good Iohn. 4. Luke, 2. Rom. 5. Rom. 4. 1. Pet. 1. Apoca. 1. He. 7. 9. 1. Pet. 2. 1. Tim. 1. Gala. 5, 1. Ioh. 2 1. Tim. 2. tydynges, lyke as one of theſe are: Chriſte is ye ſauiour of the worlde. Chriſt is our ſauiour. Chriſt died for vs. Chriſt dyed for our ſines. Chriſt bought vs with his bloud. Chriſt waſhed vs with his bloud. Chriſt offered himſelfe for vs. Chriſt bare our ſynnes on his backe. Chriſt came into this worlde to ſaue ſynners. Chriſt came in to this worlde to take away our ſynnes. Chriſt was

the price that was gyuen for vs & Gene. 5. Theſ. 5. 1. Cor. 1. our ſynnes. Chriſte was made debt our for vs. Chriſt paied our debte, for he dyed for vs. Chriſt hath made ſatyſfaction for vs & our ſynnes. Chriſt is our rightwiſenes. Chriſt is our ſatiſfacciō. Chriſt is our redempcion. Chriſt is our goodnes. Chriſte hath pacified the father of heauen.
                  Chriſte is oures and al his. Chriſte hath deliuered vs frō the law, from the deuel, and from hel. The father of heuen hath forgeuen vs our ſynnes for Chriſtes ſake. Or ſuche lyke, whereyn is declared vnto vs the mercy of god.
               
               
                  ¶ The nature of the lawe and the goſpell.
                  The lawe ſheweth vs our ſynne. The Goſpel ſheweth vs remedie for it. The lawe ſheweth vs our cōdemnacion. The goſpel ſhewet vs oure redēpcyon. The lawe

is the lawe of Ire. The goſpell is the word of grace. The lawe is the worde of deſpayre. The Goſpel is the worde of comfort. The law is the worde of vnreſt. The Goſpell is the worde of peace.
               
               
                  ¶ A diſputacion betwene the lawe and the goſpel.
                  The lawe ſaith, paye thy debt. The goſpell ſayth, Chriſt hathe payd it. The lawe ſayeth, thou art a ſynner, deſpayre and thou ſhalt be damned.
                  The goſpel ſayth, thy ſynnes are forgeuen the, be of good comforte, thou ſhalt be ſaued.
                  The lawe ſayth, make amendes for thy ſynnes.
                  The goſpell ſayth, Chriſt hath made it for the. The lawe ſayth, the father of heuen is wroth with the. The goſpel ſaith, Chriſt hath pacifyed hym with his bloude.
                  
                     
The lawe ſaieth, where is thy ryghtwyſeneſſe, goodnes and ſatiſfaction: The goſpell ſayeth, Chriſt is thy ryghtwyſenes thy goodnes and ſatiſfaccion. The lawe ſayth, thou art bounde and obliged to me, to the deuel and to hell. The goſpel ſayth, chriſt hath delyuered the from them all.
               
            
            
               ☞ Of faith.
               FAyth is to beleue god: lyke as Abraham beleued god, and yt was imputed vnto him for Gene. 15. ryghtwyſenes.
               ¶ He, that beleueth God, beleueth 1, Iohn. 5. his word, and who ſo beleueth it not, beleueth not him alſo.
               To beleue god, is to beleue his worde, and to recoūte it true, that he ſayeth.
               He yt beleueth not goddes word he coūteth him falſe & a lyer, and beleueth not yt he maie & will fulfill

his worde: and ſo he denyeth both the might of god, and god hym ſelfe.
               
                  ¶ Fayth is the gyfte of god and not in our power.
                  Eeuery good thing is the gifte of god, faith is good: ergo fayth Iaco. 1. is the gifte of god.
                  The gyfte of god is not in our power, fayth is the gyfte of god, ergo faith is not in our power.
               
               
                  ¶ Without faith it is impoſſible to pleaſe God, and that is done by fayth pleaſeth him.
                  Al that commeth not of faith is ſynne, for without fayth can no Rom. 14. Heb. 11. man pleaſe god. Beſydes that, he that lacketh faith, he truſteth not god, he that truſteth not god, truſteth not his worde, he that truſteth not his word, holdeth him falſe and a lyar, he that holdeth him falſe and a lyar, he beleueth

not that he maye do that he promyſed, and ſo denyeth he that he is god. And how can a man being of this facyon pleaſe hym: No maner of way, I ſuppoſe, though he dyd al the dedes that euer dyd man or angell.
                  Ryght is the worde of god and al his works in fayth Lord thyne eyen loke to faith, that is as moch to ſay, as lord thou delyghteſt in faith God loueth hym, that beleueth in hym, howe can they then diſpleaſe him? He that hath the faith is iuſt and good, and a good tre bereth good frute: ergo all y• is done in faith pleaſeth GOD. Moreouer, he that hath the faith beleueth god: he that beleueth god, beleueth his worde: he that beleueth his worde, woreth well that he is true and faythfull, and maye not lye. But knoweth that he both may and will fullfyl hys

word. How can he then diſpleaſe him? for thou cāſt not do any greter honoure to god, then to counte him true.
               
               
                  ¶ He, that hath the fayth, is certeyne that he pleaſeth god.
                  For all that is done in fayth, pleaſeth god.
                  Fayth is a ſure confidence of Heb. 11. thinges, which are hoped for, and a certeinte of thinges whiche are not ſene. The ſāe ſpirite certeneth our ſpirite, yt we are ye children of Rom. 8. god. Moreouer he ye hath ye fayth, wotteth well yt god wil fulfyl his worde: ergo faith is a ſurenes.
               
               
                  A man is iuſtified by fayth.
                  Abraham beleued god, and yt was imputed vnto hym for rghtwyſenes: Gene. 15. Roma. 3, we ſuppoſe therfore ye a man is iuſtified by faith, without the dedes of the lawe.
                  He, that worketh not but beleueth

on hym that iuſtifieth ye vngodly his faith is counted to hym for Rom. 4. Aba. 10. Gal. 2. rightwyſenes. The iuſt man lyueth by his faith. We knowe that a man is not iuſtified by the dedes of the lawe, but by the faith of Ieſu Chriſt. And we beleue in Ieſu Chriſt, that we may be iuſtifyed by the faith of Chriſt, & not by the dedes of the lawe.
               
               
                  Of the faith of Chriſt.
                  The faith of Chriſte is to beleue in him, that is to beleue his worde and to beleue that he wyll helpe the in al thy nede, and delyuer the from all euell. Thou wilt aſke me what worde? I anſwere, the goſpell. he ye beleueth ichriſt ſhalbe ſaued
                  He that beleueth the ſone hath euerlaſtinge lyfe: verely verely I ſaye to you, he that beleueth in me hath euerlaſtyng life: This I 1, Iohn, 4. wryt vnto you, that beleue on the

name of the ſonne of god, ye ye may knowe how that ye haue eternal
                        •
                      lyfe. Thomas, becauſe thou haſt ſene me therefore beleueſte thou: Iohn. 20. happy are thei that haue not ſene, and yet haue beleued in me. All the Propheres to hym beare wytnes, Act. 10. that who ſo euer beeleueth in hym, ſhall haue remiſſyon of theyr ſynnes. What muſt I do y• I maie be ſaued? the Apoſtles anſwered, beleue in the Lorde Ieſus Act. 16. Chriſte, and thou ſhalt be ſaued. If thou knowlege with thy mouth that Ieſus is ye lorde: And Rom. 10 beleue with thyne harte that god rayſed hym vp from death, thou ſhalt be ſaued.
               
               
                  ¶ He that beleueth not in Chriſt Mar. 16 Iohn. 2. ſhal bee condemned.
                  He that beleueth not ſhall be damned. He that beleueth not the ſōne ſhal neuer ſe lyfe, but the ire of god abydeth hym. The holy

gooſt ſhall reproue the worlde of ſynne, becauſe they beleue not in me.
                  They, that beleue in Ieſu Chriſt are the ſonnes of god.
                  Year al the ſōnes of god becauſe Gala. 3. ye beleue in Iheſu Chriſt
               
               
                  ¶ He that beleueth that Chriſt is the ſōne of god is ſaued.
                  Peter ſayde, thou arte Chriſte Mark, 16, the ſonne of the lyuing god. Iheſus anſwered and ſaid vnto him, happy art thou Symon the ſonne of Ionas, for fleſh & bloud hath not opened to the that, but my father that is in heauen. We haue beleued and knowe that thou arte Chriſt the ſōne of the lyuing god. I beleue that thou arte Chriſt the Iohn, 6, Iohn, 11, ſōne of god which ſhulde come into the worlde.
                  Theſe thynges are wrytten, that Iohn, 1, ye might beleue yt Ieſus is chriſt the ſonne of God, and that ye in

belyuing mighte haue lyfe. I beleue yt Ieſus is the ſonne of god. Acte. 8.
                  
               
               
                  He that beleueth God, beleueth the Goſpel.
                  He yt beleueth god, beleueth his worde, whiche is ye goſpel: ergo Iohn, 4, he that beleueth god, beleueth ye goſpel: As Chriſt is ye ſauiour of the world, Chriſt is our ſauiour. Apo. 1. Chriſt boughte vs wt his bloud. Chriſt waſhed vs wt his bloud, Chriſt offered hymſelfe for vs. Chriſt bare our ſynnes on his owne back. &c.
                  He that beleueth not the goſpel, beleueth not god.
                  He, that beleueth not goddes He. 7. 8. 1. Pet. 2, word, beleueth not himſelf, for the goſpel is goddes worde: ergo he yt beleueth not ye goſpell, beleueth not god himſelf: & cōſetquēly thei that beleue not ye aboue wryttē & ſuch other, beleue not god: He, yt beleueth the goſpel, ſhalbe

ſaued. Go ye in to al the world & preche the goſpel vnto euery creature, Mar. 16. he yt beleueth & is baptyſed, ſhal be ſaued, but he that beleueth not, ſhall be condemned.
               
               
                  A compariſon betwene faith & vnfaithfulnes or incredulite.
                  Faythe is the rote of al good. Incredulyte is the rote of all euyll. Fayth maketh God and mā good frendes. Incredulite maketh thē foes. Faith bringeth god & mā together. Incredulite ſundreth thē. Al that faith doth pleaſyth god. Al that incredulyte doth diſpleaſeth god. Faythe onely maketh a man good and ryghtwyſe.
                  Incredulite only maketh hym vniuſt and euyl. Faithe maketh a man a mēbre of Chriſt. Incredulite maketh him a mēbre of ye deuyl. Fayth maketh a mā ye inherytour of heuē. Incredulite maketh

him inheritour of hell.
                  Faith maketh a man the ſeruaunt of god. Incredulite maketh hym the ſeruaunte of the deuyll. Faith ſheweth vs god to be a ſwete father. Incredulite ſheweth hym a terrible iudge. Faith holdth ſtiffe by the worde of god. Incredulite wauereth here and there. Fayth counteth & holdeth god to be true Incredulyte holdeth hym falſe & a lyar. Faith knoweth god. Incredulite knoweth hym not. Fayth loueth both god and here neyghboure. Incredulite loueth nether nother. Faith only ſaueth vs. Incredulite onelye condemneth vs. Faith extolleth god and his deds. Incredulite extolleth herſelf and her owne dedes.
               
            
            
               Of hope.
               HOpe is a truſtye lokinge after the thinge, that is promyſed vs to come: as we hope

after euerlaſting ioy, which chriſt Pſal, 117, hath promyſed vnto all that beeleue in him.
               We ſhulde put our hope and truſt in god alonly.
               It is good to truſt in god and Pſal, 113, not in man. He yt truſteth in his owne harte is a fole. It is good to truſte in god and not in prynces. They ſhalbe lyke vnto the images they make, & all that truſte in thē. He yt truſteth i his own thoughts doth vngodly. Curſed be he that truſteth in man. Byd the rych mē of this world, that they truſt not Hiere, 17, in theyr vnſtable ryches, but that they truſt in the lyuyng god. It is harde for them that truſte in money, to entre in to the kingdome of heauen.
               Moreouer we ſhulde truſt in Mar, 10, him onely that may help vs: God only may helpe vs: ergo we ſhuld truſte in hym onely, wel is them

that truſt in god, and wo is them that truſt not in him.
               Wel is the man that truſteth Hiere, 17, Sapi, 3. Pſal, 5, in god, for god ſhal be his truſte. He yt truſteth in hym ſhall vnder ſtonde the verytye. They ſhall al reioyce that truſt in god, they ſhal euer be glade and he will defende them.
            
            
               Of charite.
               CHarite is the loue of thy neyghboure. The rule of charite is this. do, as thou woldeſt be done to. For charitie holdeth al a lyfe, ye ryche, and the poore, the frende and the foe, the thankefull & vnthankefull, the kynſeman and ſtraunger.
               ¶ A compariſon bitwene fayth, hope and charite.
               Fayth cometh of the worde of God, hope cometh of faith, & charite ſpryngeth of them bothe.

Faythe beleueth the worde.
               Hope truſteth after that is promyſed by the word. Charite doth good vnto her neyghbour thorow the loue, that it hath to god.
               Faith loketh to god & his word, Hope loketh vnto his gyfte & reward. Charite loketh on her neighboures profyte. Faith receaueth god. Hope receiueth his reward. Charite loueth her neyghbour wt a glad harte, & that wtout any reſpecte of rewarde. Fayth pertayneth to god onely, hope to his reward & charite to her neyghbour.
            
            
               Of workes.
               NO maner of works make vs rightwiſe: we beleue yt a mā 
                  Gala, 2, ſhall be iuſtifyed wythout workes: No man is iuſtifyed by ye dedes of the law, but by ye fayth of Ieſu Chriſt, and we beleue in Ieſu Chriſt, that we may be iuſtified by the faith of Chriſte & not

by the dedes of the lawe. If rightwyſenes came by the lawe, then Gala, 3, dyed Chriſt in vaine. That no mā is iuſtified by the lawe, it is manifeſt: for a rightwiſe mā lyueth by his faythe, but the lawe is not of faythe. Moreouer ſyth Chriſte the maker of heuen and erth, and all that is therin, behoued to dye for vs, we are compelled to graūt that we were ſo far drowned and ſūke in ſinne, that nether our deds nor al the treaſures that euer god made or mighte make, might haue holpen vs out of them: ergo no dedes nor woorkes maye make vs rightwyſe. No workes make no vnrightwiſe. For yf am works made vs vnrightwiſe, then the cō
                  trary workes ſhuld make vs rightwyſe. But it is proued that no workes can make vs ryghtwyſe: ergo no workes make vs vnrightwiſe.
               
                  
                  ¶ Workes make vs neyther good nor euyll.
                  It is proued that no workes Nota. neyther make vs rightwyſe nor vnrightwyſe: ergo no works make vs neyther good nor euyll. For rightwiſe and good ar one thing, & vnrightwiſe & euil likewiſe one.
                  ¶ Good workes make not a good man, nor euel workes an euyl mā, but a good man maketh good workes, and an euyl man euyl workes:
                  Good frute maketh not the tre good nor euel frute the euell tre, but a good tre bereth good frute, & an euell tre euill frute. A good mā can not do euell workes nor an euel man good workes, for a good tre can not bear euil frute nor an euel tre good frute.
                  A man is good ere he do good workes, and euel ere he doe euill: for tre ye is good er he beare good

frute, & euill ere it bere euel frute.
               
               
                  ☞ Euery man is eyther good or euil, and his workes like wyſe.
                  Euery tree is eyther good or euel: either make ye the tre good & the frute good alſo, or els mak the tre euel and the frute of it lykewiſe euyll,
                  For all frute trees are eyther good or euell. Eyther make ye the tre good and the frute good alſo, or els make ye tre euel and ye frute of it likewiſe euil. A good man is knowen by his workes: for a good man doth good works, & an euell euel workes: ye ſhal knowe thē by their fruyte, for a good tre bereth good frute, & an euel tre euel frute A man is lykened to the tre, and Mat, 7, his workes to the frute of ye tre.
                  Beware of the falſe prophets, which cōe to you in ſhepes clothes but inwardelye they are rauenyng

wolues, ye ſhal knowe them by theyr frutes.
               
               
                  None of our workes nether ſaue vs nor condemne vs.
                  It is proued that no workes make vs nother rightwyſe nor vnrightwyſe, good nor euil, but firſt we ar good ere we do good works and euell ere we do euell workes: ergo no workes, neyther ſaue vs nor cōdemne vs. Thou wilt ſay, then maketh it no mater what we do. I anſwer, yes. For if thou do euel, it is a ſure argument yt thou art euil and wanteſt the faith.
                  If thou do good it is an argumente that yu art good and haſt ye 
                     By the fruite the tree is knowen. faith, for a good tre bereth good frute, & an euil tre euel frute: yet good frute maketh not ye tre good, nor euell frute the tre euyll, ſo the mā is good ere he do good dedes & euel ere he do euel dedes. The man is the tre, his workes are the

frute, faith maketh the good tre, Incredulite the euel tre: ſuch a tre ſuch frute, ſuch a mā ſuch works. For all that is done in fayth pleaſeth god & are good workes. And al that is done wtout faith diſpeaſeth god and are euyll workes.
                  Who ſo euer beleueth or thynketh to be ſaued by his works: denieth that Chriſte is his ſauiour. For how is he thy ſauioure, if yu myghteſt ſaue thyſelfe by thy workes? or wherto ſhuld he dye for the, if any workes might haue ſaued the? Verely, thou ſhuldeſt haue dyed perpetually, yf Chriſt to delyuer the had not dyed for ye and chaūged thy perpetual death in to his owne deth. For thou madeſt the faute, and he ſuffered the payne, & that for the loue he had to the or euer yu waſt borne, when thou haddeſt done nether good nor euel. Nowe ſyth he hath paid

thy debte, yu nedeſt not, no thou canſte not, but ſhuldeſt be damned if his bloude were not: But ſyth he was puniſhed for ye, thou ſhalt not be puniſhed if thou truſt in him. Fynallye, he hath delyuered the from thy condemnacion and al euel, and deſyreth naught els of the, but yt thou wilt aknowledge what he hath done for the and beare it in minde, and yt thou woldeſt helpe other for his ſake, bothe in worde and dede, euen as he hath holpen the for naughte and without rewarde. O how redy wolde we be to helpe other, if we knewe his goodnes and gentelnes towardes vs. He is good & a gentle lord, for he geueth vs frely. Let vs beſech you yt ar Chriſtians to folowe his foteſteppes, whōal the world ought to prayſe and worſhip.
                  Amen.
               
               
                  ¶ He that thynketh to bee ſaued

by his workes calleth him ſelfe Chriſte.
                  For he calleth him ſelfe his ſauioure, which pertayneth to chriſt only. What is a ſauiour but he yt ſaueth? & he ſayth I ſaue my ſelf, which is as moch to ſay as I am Chriſt, for Chriſt only is the ſauyoure of the worlde.
                  We ſhulde do no good workes for ye entent to get the inheritaūce of heuen or remiſſyon of ſynne.
                  For who ſo euer beleueth to get the enheritaunce of heuen or remiſſion of ſynne thorowe works, he beleueth not to get yt for Chriſtes ſake. And thei that beleue not that theyr ſynnes ar forgeuen thē and yt they ſhal be ſaued for Chriſtes ſake, they beleue not the goſpel. For the Goſpell ſayth, you ſhalbe ſaued for Chriſtes ſake, ſynnes are forgyuen for Chriſtes ſake. He yt beleueth not ye goſpel,

beleueth not god. So it foloweth that thei which beleue to be ſaued by their workes or to get remiſſiō of their ſynnes by their owne dedes, beleue not god: but recount him as a lyer, and ſo vtterly deny hym to be god. Thou wilt ſaye, ſhall we then do no good dedes? I ſaye not ſo, but I ſay we ſhulde do no good workes for the entent to gette the inheritaunce of heuen or remiſſyon of ſynne. For if we beleue to gette vs heuen thorow good workes, thē we beleue not to get it thorowe the promiſe of god: if we thynke to get remiſſyon of our ſinne ſo, the we beleue not that they are forgeuen vs for Chriſte, and ſo we counte God a lyar. For god ſayth, you ſhal haue the inheritaunce of heuen for my ſonnes ſake, thy ſynnes are forgeuen the for my ſonnes ſake: & you ſay it is not ſo, but I wyl wynne

it thorow my workes. So I condemne not good dedes: But I cō
                     demne ye falſe truſte in any works For al the works, that a mā putteth confidence in, are ther with povſoned and become euyll.
               
               ¶ To god onely geue the glorye.
            
         
         
            A dialogue wherin is brefely declared the longe continuaunce of ye Goſpel taught as well to the vngodly as to the godly: The cauſe of the deſtruction of the wicked: And alſo the office of the lawe, and the goſpel.
            
               William.
               ¶ For aſmuche as  God hath conſtituted me a creature reſonable, and endued me wt
                  
an vnderſtanding, I am naturallye deſyrous to knowe what end I am created to. 
            
            
               Gyles. 
               Thā ſhal it be neceſſarie Iohn. 3. for you to haue faith. For he, that ſhal haue to do with God or with godlynes, muſte fyrſte of al beleue after ye holy ſcriptures.
            
            
               William.
               Than tel me what faith is, by  thoſe holy ſcriptures.
            
            
               Giles.
                After ye ſaienge of ſaincte Paule, it is a ſure Heb. 11. Gala, 4, certaynie of godly thinges which we truſt vnto, & a grounded euydence in the ſpirite of heauenlye cauſes that neuer were ſene wt the eye. 
            
            
               Wil.
               What ſuppoſe ye moſt neceſſari  Apo. 14. to direct me into this faith 
            
            
               Gi.
               The eternal Teſtament or goſpel of Ieſu Chriſte.  Rom. 1. Iohn, 14.  For that is the power of God vnto ſaluacion to al them that beleue. 
            
            
               Wil.
               Whan was this goſpell fyrſte taught.
            
            
               Gil.
               Soone after the worldes begyunynge, whan Adam had once Gene. 3. offended leſte that he ſhuld haue fallen in vtter deſpaire & ſo haue

bene loſte for euer more. 
            
            
               Will.
               And hath the Goſpel contynued euer ſyns, to the cōforte of man? 
            
            
               Gil.
               Yea trulie, and oft ſins that time hath ben confirmed by more earneſte promiſes from age to age, tyll the meke Lambe came, which tok awaye the ſynnes of the worlde Gene. 22. Pſal, 131, 1. Pet. 1, through the ſhedyng of his moſt innocent bloud. For the ſcripture ſaith, that his mercye was plentuous from kyndred to kiudred, to them that feared the Lorde. 
            
            
               Wil.
               Hath all men ben called to grace by that goſpell of ſaluacion?
            
            
               Gil.
               Yea doubtles haue thei, yet haue thei not all thankfully receyued it. So wel was it tought of our fyrſt father Luke. 1. Mat. 22. Luke. 4. Ge. iiii. Adam to Cayn as to Abel.
               Sowel dyd Noe preache it to Cham as vnto Sem and Iaphet. So well dyd Abraham ſhewe yt to Iſmael as vnto Iſaac. So well Gene, 21 Moyſes to Pharao as to ye people of Iſrael. Dauid to Ammon and

Abſolon, as to Salomon & Nathan. Helyas to Achab and Ieſabel, Exo. 
                        •
                     . 2. Reg. 13 3. Re. 18 as to the moſte faithfull beleuers. No leſſe dyd Chriſte open therof to Iudas, then to Peter, Iames and Ihon. And ſo forth Math. 10. Act. 8. Rom. 1. to the other Apoſtles and true preachers to this preſent daye. So that none can excuſe thē ſelfes
            
            
               Wyl.
               Howe commeth it than to paſſe that ſo many are loſt and ſtyll yet dothe dalye periſhe, through their conuerſacion and lycencious lyuyng?
            
            
               Gyl.
                No faute can be aſcribed to the goſpel, but to their vnthankful receiuing of the fruites therof, ſo frelye offred them.
               The diſdaynfull ſpurnyng aſyde Roma. 1. 2. Cor. 12. of that neceſſary health in chriſt, is cauſe of their decaye, and not the ſet ordynaunce of god, which willeth all men to be ſaued. 
            
            
               Wil.
               If Adā thus receyued this Goſpel, and ſo taught it to his poſterite, it hath cōtinued much longer than

I ſuppoſed.
            
            
               Gil.
               The Goſpel is as the lord is, euerlaſting. For as witneſſeth the apoſtle ſaint Iohn: In the beginning Apo. 14. was the worde, & the worde was with god, and god was the Iohn, 1. worde. 
            
            
               Wil.
               Than was not Mathew with the other Euangeliſtes, the fyrſte wryter therof. 
            
            
               Gil.
               No, god did wryte it firſte in the natural herte of man, and ſo it remayned here ſtyl, tyll Moſes & the prophetes dyd leaue it in outewarde wrytynge to the peoples further erudicion. For as ſaynt Paule ſaith: Al they eate frō the fyrſte beginnynge of one ſpiritual meate, and drāke of one ſpiritual drinke, the harde Rocke folowing thē, which 1. Cor. 10. was Ieſus Chriſt. And this is an euydent token, that one Goſpell hath reygned among the people of God ſyns the worldes begynnynge.
            
            
               Wil.
                But nowe tell me, what ſhal become of them, which haue

not, of all this longe ſeaſon in the true feare of god, regarded his Roma. 1. holſome and ſwete promiſes.
            
            
               Gylles
               As they haue in theyr vnthankfulnes here bē left to them ſelues to worke all vngodlynes, & haue departed hence with a deſperate conſcience: ſo ſhal they at the later day bee condemned vnto eternall fyre, with the deuyl & al his aungels. Mat. 22  
               
            
            
               Wil,
               Our mercyful redemer defend vs from that maledic
                     •
                  ion. But what ſhal moſt ſpedeli bring me to the Goſpel of helth? 
            
            
               Gil.
               The meke  knowledge of thy ſelfe,Luke. 3. The. 3. that thou art of nature the ſynful ſone of Adam, iuſtlye condemned in his tranſgreſſion, beeſydes thine owne wicked doinges, & ſo loſte for euer, were not the reſurrectiō, which thou haſt in Ieſus chriſt. 
            
            
               Willi.
               Shew me by what meane I may  come to that knowlege. 
            
            
               Gile.
               Seke firſt vnto the law, 1. Cor. 15. which the lord Ieſus taught by Moyſes. 
            
            
               Willi.
               What

is the lawer 
            
            
               Gil.
               The lawe is a godly Myrrour or glaſſe giuen vnto vs ſynners, that we therin ſhuld ſe & know our ſynnes, what we are & Iohn. 2.  what imperfection is in vs.
            
            
               Wiliā
               
               Doth the law then make vs rightuouſe and good. 
            
            
               Gilles
               No more thā the glaſſe makth him faire that lokth therin. For the Lawe demaundeth of vs rightuouſnes, but it gyueth vs no power to do that, whych yt commaundeth.
            
            
               William
               What helpeth than the knowledge of ye Lawe, am I than therby made free from my ſynne? 
            
            
               Gilles
               No yt maketh no man quyte of his ſynne, but it gyueth an occaſiō to ronne and call for helpe of Ieſus Chriſt our lord, that he wold do that thynge which is impoſſyble to the lawe, yt is, to make vs pure and cleane. The glaſſe doth nether waſhe nor make fayre any mannes face, but it gyueth occaſion, eyther to ſeke for water, or

els ſome other thynge that maye make it fayre and cleane. Thus our ſores once knowne by ye lawe and the daungers & perylles of the ſame conſidered, we are dryuen of neceſſite to ſeke remedy in the goſpel. 
            
            
               Willi.
               What is the Goſpel?
            
            
               Gil.
               It is the power of god, whiche ſaueth al men that beleue in it. It promiſeth vs a mercyfull god, it declareth vnto vs forgyuenes of our ſynnes and lyfe euerlaſtyng, through Ieſus chriſt our ſauiour.
            
            
               Willi.
               Doth the Goſpel make vs rightuous? 
            
            
               Gil.
               Yea, for it promyſeth vs  that Ieſus Chriſt is our owne, & that he dyed for our ſynnes, and dyd ryſe againe for our ryghtuouſnes. Yf we haue Chriſt, than haue we forgeuenes of our ſines, & euerlaſtynge lyfe. 
            
            
               Willi.
               Doth the goſpel than teache none other ſaluacion, but that which is in Chriſt?
            
            
               Gilles
               No ſurely. He alone is the Lābe that taketh awaye the lynnes of ye
                  
worlde. The falſe worſhippers ſeke him in outwarde thynges, & neuer fynde hym: but ſeke thou hym in ſprete and veritie, & thou ſhalte haue hym preſente. 
            
            
               Williā
               
               By this your hole proteſtacion, it ſhulde ſeme vnto me, that I am ordeyned of god to this ende: fyrſte to a knowledge my ſelfe a wicked ſinner, than to aryſe frō it through true repentaunce, and ſo to leade a newe lyfe after the Goſpel, tyll ſuch tyme as my eternall Father ſhal with ſaue to cal me from this corruptible māſiō, this forē lād, this vale of miſery, thys caſtel of ſynne, & this habitacion of death, into y• eternal heritage of his ſōne Ieſus Chriſt. To whom with the holy goſt be euerlaſting praiſe, honoure and glorye, worlde wythoute ende.
            
            Amen,
         
      
   