
      
         
            
            
            A DISCOVRSE
OF DEATH,
BODILY, GHOSTLY, AND
ETERNALL:
NOR VNFIT FOR SOVLDIERS
Warring, Seamen ſayling, Strangers trauelling,
Women bearing, nor any other liuing
that thinkes of
DYING.
            BY THOMAS TVKE.
            
            
               PSAL. 89. 48.
What man liueth, and ſhall not ſee death? ſhall he deliuer his ſoule from
the hand of the Graue?
            
               ECCL. 14. 17.
All fleſh waxeth old as a garment, and this is the condition of all times,
Thou ſhale die the death.
            
            
               IOB. 17. 13.
The graue ſhall be my houſe, and I ſhall make my bed in the darke.
            LONDON,
Printed by William Stansbie for George Norton.
1613.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
WORSHIPFVLL SIR
IOHN LEVENTHORPE
Knight, and to the right-vertuous
Ladie, the Ladie IOANE
LEVENTHORPE,
his louing Wife.
(⸪)
            
               RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, many
write, and many more doe
ſpeake of Death: and it were
not much, if as many wrote
thereof, as could write at all.
For it is the Way, that all muſt walke in: and
although to all it be either very fortunate, or
very fatall, yet of the moſt it is forgotten, till
it ſeeme to ſeize vpon them: yea, euen we,
that ſpeake and write about it, are ſometimes
too vnmindful of it; perhaps then alſo, when
we ſpeake and write vpon it. But howſoeuer

wee doe forget it, it will bee ſure to remember
vs. It hath been wiſely ſaid, that to ſpeake
and thinke often and ſeriouſly of hell, is a good
meane to ſaue the ſoule from hell: ſo I ſuppoſe
that a ſad and ſober thinking, and remembring
of bodily death, will bee a bleſſed helpe
to keepe the ſoule and bodie from eternall
death. It is ſtrange to ſee the feares of many:
yet euen the fearefull ſometimes ſhew ſmall
feare of death, except then, when it is to bee
embraced. Others well neare with the feare
of death are brought to death. Some will not
beginne to liue, till they feele themſelues
beginne to die. And how many are there,
that are a-fraid of death, and yet dare play
with the ſting of death? It were no great matter
to handle a Snake, when her poyſoning
tooth is pulled out: but to flie a Snake, and in
the meane time not to feare that, which
makes her venome, were (I wot not well)
whether more baſe, or fooliſh. I know not why
death ſhould not be counted terrible, whiles
her venomous and killing tooth is in her head;
but that being once pulled out, why ſhee
ſhould affright a man, I ſee no reaſon. For
why ſhould he feare death, whom death
doth helpe, not hurt, and eaſe rather then end?

Hee that dies, whiles he liues, liues whiles he
is dead: yea, and that death at laſt ſhall meet
with death it ſelfe. Certainly death cannot
be ill to him, that liues well: neither is that
worthie the name of death, which is made
the doore of life. Yet I finde the vertuous
ſometimes appalled with her griſly lookes.
They are loth to part, that haue liued long
together: and a man can ſcarce without ſome
reluctation forſake the houſe, wherein he was
bred, and hath euer liued, ſince he liued, to
dwell in another, though a better, Countrie.
But (me thinks) the delicacie of the place,
the affluence of all good things there, amongſt
theſe the fellowſhip of the Saints, the
preſence of that louing and beloued Sauiour,
the fruition of the All-ſufficient God, together
with a certaine expectation of a ioyfull
returne at laſt, ſhould ſatisfie the departing
Soule, and ſettle her vnruly paſſions.
            As for you (Right Worſhipfull) I doubt not
but that God, to whom you ſtriue to liue,
hath taught you both ere now to die. I write
not theſe things therefore, as intending to
inſtruct you, but rather to ſhew that the memorie
of your loue doth liue within me, and
as one deſirous by putting you in minde of

thoſe things, which ye know alreadie, that,
whiles you liue, the remembrance of them
might not die. Read them at your leyſure,
and enioy them. And that God, vnder whom
they were begunne and ended, giue a bleſſing
to them: vnto whoſe ſauing grace I do commend
you both, beſeeching him in Chriſt
Ieſus to vouchſafe you his loue while ye liue
on earth, and to crowne you after death with
eternall life in heauen. London St. Clem.
Ann. 1612. Nouember 5. A day neuer to bee
forgotten of true Engliſh hearts.
            
            
               Your Worſhips to be commanded
in the Lord,
Thomas Tuke.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               I Suppoſe there is not one thing
more common and leſſe thought
of then death.Heu viuunt homines tanquam mors nulla ſequatur, aut velut infernus ſabula vana foret. All men muſt die,
yet moſt men liue, as if they
thought they ſhould neuer die.
Wherein men are very iniurious to them ſelues;
the ſad and ſetled remembrance of death being a
notable furtherance of Repentance, and a profitable
meane to keepe vs from eternall death. For
I pray you, why ſhould man lift vp himſelfe againſt
his Maker, who ere long muſt fall into the earth?
Why ſhould we be proud and inſolent, who are but
duſt? Why ſhould we inſult ouer any man, becauſe
wee ſurpaſſe him in wit, wealth, ſtrength, honor,
beautie? Are we not all food for the Wormes? Will
not death knocke all our bones together? Is not our
life a breath, a bubble? Why ſhould a man pinne
his heart to the earth, and ſet his loue on the
World? Shall not the earth deuoure him? Will not
the world forſake him?Note. Shee is certaine in nothing,

but in vncertainetie, vncertaine in nothing,
but in her certainetie. If ſhe doe not him, yet of
neceſsitie Hee muſt forſake her. We are here but
Pilgrims,
               1. Pet. 2. 11. and Forrainers: Mors manet omnes:
and we know not how ſoone our Pilgrimage will
end: neither can we carrie the world away with
vs. We come naked, and we go naked. Why then
ſhould we wed our ſoules to the World? Riches, pleaſures,
wife, children, friends, honors, and all the
things that the world can afford,Linquenda tellus, & domus, & placens vxor. Hor. Carm. l. 2. od. 14. are all mutable,
momentanie, mortall: but mans ſoule is immortall:
wherefore then ſhould it be ſet vpon theſe
things? Why not vpon God, who is an immortall,
and immutable Good, only indeede able to giue
true and full contentment to the ſoule?2. Tim. 6. Iam. 7. And finally
why ſhould men wallow in their ſinnes, and deuote
themſelues vnto their luſts? Shall we not all die?
And as the tree falleth, ſo ſhall it lie. In what eſtate
we die,Eccl. 11. 3. in that we ſhall be iudged. Oh that we
would therefore remember our latter end! Oh
that wee would number our dayes, and thinke of
our death, that we might apply our hearts vnto
wiſdome!Note. Lie is vncertaine, Death is moſt certaine:
if men could duly meditate of this, that is
moſt certaine, they could not abuſe and miſpend
that ſo much, which is precious, but moſt vncertaine.
But beſides that all men must once die,

euen by the courſe of nature; death being by ſinne
bred in the bone, and will neuer out of the fleſh:
God, who hath the keyes of life and death in his
hand, doth by many meanes bring men vnto
their ends: and ſometimes he doth puniſh vngodly
wretches by vntimely and vnexpected death,
ſhewing his anger by the manner and occaſion
of his puniſhing. Famous were the Iudgements
of God vpon thoſe perſecuting Tyrants; Domitian,
Hadrian, Valerian, Diocleſian, Maximinus,
Aurelian, Arnolphus, Baiazet the Turke,
and Mamucha a Saracen.
            
            The former was ſlaine with Daggers by his
owne Seruants,
               Domitianus. Apud Sucton. in his priuie chamber, his
Wife conſenting.
            The ſecond hauing cauſed ten thouſand Chriſtians
at one time to bee crucified,Hadrian. Spartian. lib. 2. cap. 12. and ſtill raging
againſt them; God tooke him in hand at laſt, ſmit
him with an iſſue of bloud, then with a conſumption
of his lungs, and lights, which he ſpat
out, thirdly with a dropſie, and being in horrible
torment he would haue killed himſelfe, but being
hindred, he died in that miſerable eſtate.
            The third being taken priſoner in the Perſian
warres,Valerian. Euſeb. hiſt. lib. 7. cap. 30. 
               Sapor the King of Perſia vſed him
as a blocke or ſtirrope to get on horſebacke,
and (as Euſebius ſaith) made him to be ſlayed

aliue, and powdered with ſalt.
            The fourth in hatred of Chriſtianitie by publike
edict commanded the Chriſtians Churches
ſhould be beaten downe,Diocleſian. and their Bibles burnt and
torne, and themſelues to be put out of their offices
in the Common-wealth,Ruffin. which had any: but God
met with him, plagued him with ſtrange diſeaſes,
fired his houſe with lightning, and terrified him
with thunder ſo, as that not knowing where to
hide himſelfe he fell mad, and killed himſelfe.
            The fift was ſmitten with a moſt ſtinking and
vile diſeaſe,Maximinus. which increaſed his crueltie, and at
laſt killed him;Nicephor. his carkaſſe being rotten and full
of wormes. St. Chryſoſtome ſaith the Apple
of his eye fell out before his death.
            The ſixt had his throat cut by his owne ſeruants.Aurelian.
            
            The ſeuenth rotted liuing, and ſending forth
lice and wormes continually,Arnolphus. at length died miſerably
in the twelfth yeare of his tyrannie.
            
               Baiazet was taken captiue by Tamerlaine,
caried about in a Cage, and vſed as his ſtirrope,
and ended his daies miſerably.
            
               Mamucha returning from the ſlaughter of
many Chriſtians, was with his whole Armie ſwallowed
vp of the Sea, few or none eſcaping of an
hundred ſaile of ſhips.
            
               
What need I ſay ſo much? The iudgements of
God are many and fearefull in all the world. Morindus
a cruell Tyrant in this Iland, was deuoured
of a Monster that came out of the Iriſh Seas.Stow Anno mundi. 3659. 
               Popiel
a King of Poland, an Vncle-murtherer, and
a notable curſer,Munſt. Coſm. lib. 1. cap. 32. was with his wife (who conſented
to his Vncles death) eaten vp of Rats. Cerinthus
periſhed with the fall of an hot-houſe vpon
him. Arrius voided his guts. The Emperours
Conſtantius and Valence,
               Socrat. Zozom both Arrians, were
puniſhed by God; the former by a ſodaine, and inexpected
Apoplexie, whereof he died; the latter
was burnt in a little houſe,Ruffin. l. 2. c. 13 in which he had hid
himſelfe in his ſlight from the Gothes. But what
need I goe ſo farre for examples? All ages are
full of them. And we ſee how God ſuffers Adulterers,
Drunkards, and other ſinners which ſcape
often vnpuniſhed, to fall into thefts and murthers
whereby they come vnto their deaths. Which
things, if men would duly conſider, it would rouſe
them vp by the grace of God vnto better care and
conſcience: which God grant vnto vs. But I will
hold thee no longer, but leaue thee to conſider the
things I haue prepared for thee.
            
               Thine in Chriſt,
Thomas Tuke.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A DISCOVRSE OF
DEATH: CORPORALL,
SPIRITVALL AND
ETERNALL.
            
               THere is,Three ſorts of Death. as of Life, ſo of Death, three
different kindes; externall or bodily,
internall or ſpirituall, eternall,
or of both body and ſoule.
            
               Externall or bodily death is, as
               Plut. comp. aq. & ignis. 
               Plutarke ſaith, the Priuation of all
heate, or asScal. Excre. 307 Sect. 23. 
               Scaliger ſpeaketh, the Priuatien of Life:
or as theyPlut. de conſolat. Scal. ibid. both ſay, the Diſiunction of the ſoule from
the body, which two by God were coupled to make
one liuing, and perfect man.
            Death, is a diſiunction of the ſoule, not a deſtruction,Note.
it is a ſeparation, and not an annihilation.
Etſi morimur corpore, nunquam tamen ſpiritu: for
though (as Martialis ſaith) we die inIn Epiſt. ad Burdig. regard of the
bodie, yet we neuer die as touching the ſoule: becauſe
death (as Lactantius ſpeaketh,De diuino praemio, lib. 7. c. 16. 
               Mors non extinguit
hominem, ſed ad praemium virtutis admit tit:)
doth not make a man to be iuſt nothing, but admits

him to the reward of vertue, if hee haue beene vertuous:
or elſe deliuers him vp to moſt greeuous puniſhments,
if he haue beene vicious.
            Amōgſt the heathen ſome there were, that held the
death a diſſolution of the ſoule, as Democritus, Epicurus
& Dicaearchus: others there were, which held
it was immortall, as Pherecydes, Plato, & many moe.
The Stoicks (ſaith Lactantius) held that the ſoules
of men continue,Lact. de diu. praem. l. 7. c. 6. 7. 13. Lib. 7. c. 10. Xenoph l. 8. de Inſtit. Cyri. and that (nec interuentu mortis in
nihilum reſolui) they are not brought by death to nothnig.
Cyrus inſtructing his ſonnes a little before his
death ſaith, that he was (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , &c.) neuer perſwaded
that the ſoule af man died; when it left the
body: but ſaith, that the mind, when it is freed from
the fellowſhip of the body, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
is then moſt wiſe and vnderſtanding: and that,
when a man is diſſolued, euery thing in the bodie
(
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ) beſides, the ſoule returnes (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               )
vnto the things of the ſame kinde, that is,
are reſolued into the elements, out of which they
were taken: and therefore hee forbids his ſonnes to
thinke (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ) that he ſhall be Nothing
any more after his death. In like manner
Hermes deſcribing the Nature of man ſaith,Vid. Lactantii l. 7. c. 13. that
God made man of both natures, to wit, of an immortall
nature, and of a mortall, (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               )
making the ſame
man to bee partly immortall, and partly mortall;
which immortalitie is to be vnderſtood of the ſoule,
experience ſhewing the body to bee mortall and
corruptible without all remedie. And finally, the
Diuell himſelfe, as he gaue teſtimonie to the diuinitie

of Chriſt, ſo hath hee by Oracle ſhewed the
immortalitie of the ſoule:Lact. l. 7. c. 13. de diu. praem. for being by Polytes conſulted
vnder the name of Apollo Mileſius, Whether
the ſoule remained after death, or was diſſolued,
hee anſwered, that the ſoule, when it was departed
from the body (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               )
is alwaies free from the weakeneſſe of
olde-age,
               Lact. vbi ſupra. 
               and continueth altogither vnvanquiſhed.
            
            To theſe teſtimonies of the Creature we may for
better ſatisfaction adde the witneſſe of holy Scriptures,Scriptures prouing the immortalitie of the Soule. Ec. 12. 7. Iſ. 66. 24.
which are the very Oracles of the great Creatour.
Salomon ſaith, that when the body returnes to
the earth, the ſpirit returnes to God that gaue it. Eſay
ſaith, that the Worme of the tranſgreſſors ſhall not
dye, & that their fire ſhall not be quenched, which argues
the mortall immortalitie, or immortall mortatalitie
of their ſoules. Accordingly our Sauiour
ſheweth in two parables, that the ſoules of wicked
men dye not with their bodies, but remaine in
torments. The one is of him that ſaid, Soule, thou
haſt much goods layed vp for many yeeres:
               Luk. 12. 19. 20. but God
ſaid vnto him, Thou foole, this night will they fetch
away thy ſoule from thee. The other of another rich
Epicure,
               Luk. 16. 22. 23. who was grieuouſly tormented in hell after
hee was dead. It is true therefore, that as Lactantius
ſpeaketh,Lib. 7. c. 12▪ de diu. praem. 
               Mors non funditus perimit, ac delet,
ſed aeternis afficit cruciatibus, Death doth not vtterly
kill and extinguiſh, but euerlaſtingly torment and
puniſh.
            Now if the ſoules of the wicked dye not, but continue
(though indeede afflicted ſo, as that their life
is worthy to bee called and accounted death, an

euer-dying life, or an euer-liuing death) it were very
abſurd to thinke that the ſoules of the godly
ſhould periſh with their bodies. Doth not our Sauiour
ſay,Ioh. 12. 26: vpon the death of Lazarus, that had
lien dead foure daies, whom hee raiſed vp to life,
Whoſoeuer liueth, and beleeueth in me, ſhall neuer die?
Did hee not ſay to the Thiefe,
               Luke 23. 43 that was crucified
with him,Luke 14. 13. 
               To day ſhalt thou bee with mee in Paradiſe?
Doth hee not profeſſe that his Martyrs are
bleſſed, that they reſt from their labors,
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                
               and that their
workes doe follow them? What bleſſednes haue they
now? what is their honour, if their ſoules doe dye
with their bodies? And to what end ſhould that his
Proto Martyr Saint Steuen commend his ſoule vnto
him,Act. 7 59. ſaying, Lord Ieſus receiue my Spirit, but
that hee knew his ſoule did liue, when his bodie
was diſſolued? Or why ſhould Saint Paul, if he did
not verily beleeue the immortalitie of the ſoule, deſire
to bee looſed,
               Phil. 1. 23. 
               and to bee with Chriſt, and vſe this
boldnes of ſpeech vnto the Corinthes. We know that
if our earthly houſe of this Tabernacle bee deſtroyed,
               2. Cor. 5. 2.
               wee haue a building of God, an houſe not made with
hands, eternall in the heauens? And finally, if Chriſt
Ieſus be like vnto his Brethren in All things,
               Heb. 2. 17. & 4. 15. as the
Apoſtle teacheth, Sinne excepted: then it appeares,
that his Brethen are like vnto him: but Chriſt hath
a ſoule, which is immortall, and did not dye, though
his body lay dead a time: their ſoules therfore liue
euer, and dye not with their bodies. And that vvee
may not ſeeme to forget that memorable ſpeech of
our Sauiour to the Sadduces,
               Mat. 22. 32. 
               God is not the God of
the dead, but of the liuing: but hee is the God of

               Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob: therefore theſe three
are liuing in their ſoules, though dead as touching
the life of their bodies.
            And thus our faith concerning the not dying of
the ſoule is founded, fed, and fortified by the teſtimonie
of the Scriptures, which beeing of infallible
veritie, are ſimply to bee beleeued, for God, the Authour,
and Inſpirer of them.
            Neither is Philoſophy here of no vſe: therefore
Iulius Caeſar Scaliger,
               Exerc. 307. Sect. 20. by three reaſons prooueth
it, taken (as himſelfe profeſſeth) from Ariſtotle, and
created Nature.
            Firſt,Philoſophicall arguments ſhewing the ſoule of man to be immortall▪
                no ſimple is reſolued into the grounds therof:
for it is compoſed of no grounds: but the ſoule
of man is a thing ſimple, and not compounded: for
it is an Act, (and no Act is a Power: therefore it is
not compounded) and a Ground, Principium effendi
& agendi, which it cannot bee, if it be compounded.
It followes therefore that the ſoule beeing vncompoſed
is irreſoluble, and ſo immortall.
            Secondly, the ſoule is a celeſtiall Nature: namely,
a Fift Eſſence,
               Arg. 2 differing from the Nature of the
foure elements: vnſubiect therefore to corruption,
whereunto all bodies elementarie are obnoxious.
            Thirdly, if the ſoule doe die, being a ſimple nature,
it muſt needes be brought to nothing:Arg. 3. for it
cannot be reſolued into the grounds of it, becauſe
it hath none (for grounds are the acts of thoſe
things whereof they bee grounds: and no ſuch
ground as the ſoule, hath a ground of it ſelfe beſides
God, into whom nothing can bee reſolued:)

now if the ſoule ſhould be brought to nothing, then
of ſomething nothing ſhall be made.
            It is true indeede,Note. that the ſoule and all created
natures, may be corrupted & deſtroyed, how ſimple
they be ſo euer. For there is but one abſolute and
prime Beginning or Ground of all things, which is
God: all other things are dependant, they are all
from and by him. Now whatſoeuer dependeth
on God, at his will the ſame thing may bee changed
of God, and altered at his pleaſure. But the
ſoules of men depend on God, and therefore at
his becke they may bee depoſed from that eſſence,
in which hee made them. Now they are
not corrupted, becauſe hee will not haue them ſo
to be.
            Theſe Arguments are of ſome ſoliditie, and worthy
to be receiued: but as for that, which ſome doe
bring to demonſtrate the immortalitie of the ſoule,
to wit, becauſe (they ſay) it is (not onely A Deo,
but alſo De Deo) of the very eſſence of God, which
is immortal, it is altogether vnreaſonable & wicked.
For ſo it wold follow that the nature of God ſhould
be captiuated,Note. deceiued, altered, defiled, damned, &
tormented. For though indeede wee be the Progenie
of God,
               Acts 17. 28. and partakers of the diuine Nature, as
the Apoſtles ſpeake,2. Pet. 1. 4. yet are we not parts of his nature,
neither doth he communicate by generation
his nature to vs, as a Father to his Children: For
God hath but one naturall ſonne, which is Chriſt
Ieſus, who is begotten from all eternitie, and hath
the whole Nature of the Father in his perſon, neither
is the Nature of God capable of alteration or

diuiſion: and for the ſpeeches of theſe two Apoſtles,Note.
               Paul and Peter, they are to bee vnderſtood
partly becauſe God is our Architect and Creatour,
and partly in reſpect of thoſe excellent giftes and
graces, which ſhine in men, ſpecially good men,
more then in all other creatures, and partly in regard
of that new name, ſtate or Nature, which is
through the grace of God in Chriſt beſtowed on
vs. It is true indeede that the Soule in ſome ſenſe
may be ſaid to be Mutable (in deterius ſcilicet deſiciendo,
               Note.
               & in melius proficiendo) to wit, by waxing better
or worſe, in reſpect of good and euill: yea, and
Mortall, by dying either to ſinne by Mortification,
or by being dead in ſinne,How the ſoule may be ſaid to die. through bondage, and
ſubmiſsion to it, or elſe by ſuffering tormentes for
ſinne, which depriue it of the ioyes of life; but to
ſay that the ſubſtance, the eſſence of the Soule, doth
dye, doth periſh, is diſſolued, this is againſt all
ſound reaſon, both Theologicall, and Philoſophicall.
            It may bee then demanded,Quaeſt. if the ſoules of men
dye not, when their bodies looſe them, whether goe
they, what becomes of them?
            
               The Author of the Queſtions in Iuſtin ſaith,
               Quaeſt. 75. 
               that
the Soules of the iuſt are carried into Paradiſe, where
is the company and ſight of Angels, and Arke-angels,
and of our Sauiour Chriſt: but the Soules of the wicked
into Hell.Hom. 16. in Ep. ad Rom. Death (ſaith Chryſoſtome) doth not ſeuer
vs from Chriſt, but ioines vs to that company, which
is with Chriſt.In Col. 1. 
               And Anſelme agreeth ſaying, So
great peace is wrought by the death of Chriſt, that the
ſoules of the Righteous doe now, when they goe forth

               of the bodie, forthwith enter into Heauen, the Angels
being glad thereof. And this appeares to bee true by
that Parable in the Goſpell,Luke 16. 22. 23. which ſaith that the
Begger died, and was carried by the Angels into Abrahams
boſome: the Richman alſo dyed, and was
tormented after his death in Hell. For where ſhould
the ſoules of men be after Death, but either in Heauen
with Chriſt, or in Hell with the Diuell? Non
eſt vllus vlli locus medius,
               Aug. lib. de pec; mer. & remiſ. c. 28. 
               vt poſsit eſſe niſi cum Diabolo,
qui non eſt cum Chriſto. There is not any place
for any man, to be any where but with the Diuell,
who is not with Chriſt, ſaith Saint Auſten. There are
two receptacles for mens ſoules, Heauen and Hell:
Tertium penitus ignoramus:
               Author Hypog. l. 5. a third place we are vtterly
ignorant of, ſaith one. The Scripture ſpeaketh
of no moe, then two.
            Thus wee haue ſeene what Death is, to wit, a
diſiunction of the ſoule from the bodie, and not a
diſſolution of the Soule with the bodie; the ſoule
remaining vncorrupt,lib. 7. de diu. prem. c. 12. and In aeternum, as Lactantius
ſpeaketh.
            Death, though, for the Nature of it, it bee but
one, and the ſame, to wit, a temporarie diuorce or
ſeparation of the ſoule and body, which were married
or vnited by God himſelfe, yet in reſpect of
the ſtate, into which men are by it admitted, it is
double: and in regard of the meanes or waies,
whereby it is effected, it is manifold: for as Seneca
truely ſpeaketh, Mille ad hanc aditus patent,
there are a thouſand waies to bring a man to
Death.
            In reſpect of the perſons dying,Of a double Death. and of that

eſtate, which they are let into by death, death is twofold,
a death of the godly, and a death of the wicked,
a ſanctified and comfortable death, a miſerable and
vnhappie death.Num. 23. 10. Pſal. 116. 15. Of the former, Balaam ſpeaketh
in his wiſh. Let me die the death of the righteous, and
let my laſt end be like his: and Dauid in the Pſalme,
Precious in the ſight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints. Of the latter our Sauiour ſpeaketh in the parable
when he ſaith,Luke, 12, 20. Luke. 16. 22, 23. 
               O foole this night will they (the
diuels he meanes) fetch thy ſoule from thee: And againe,
The rich man alſo died, and was buried, and
being in hell tormented, &c.
            
            Furthermore, death we ſaid was manifold for
the waies or meanes thereof.Many waies of death. For albeit death bee
the common way of all fleſh,
               Ioſh 23. 14. Maximianus. 
               (Omnibus eſt eadem
lethi via, non tamen vnus Eſt vitae cunctis, exitij
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
modus,) yet all men goe not the ſame way vnto
death.Statius. 
               Mille modis lethi miſeros mors vna fatigat.
Death meets with vs a thouſand waies. As into a
great Citie,A Simile. or into the maine Sea, ſo vnto death
there are many waies. It is as the center, wherein
all the lines doe meete; a towne of Mart, wherein
many waies from contrarie coaſts doe end. Hos
bella,
               Silius. 
               hos aequora poſcunt: His amor exitio, furor his,
& ſaeua cupido: Vt ſileam morbos. Some are eaten
vp of warres: ſome are ſwallowed vp of the Seas.
The old world was drowned, the Sodomites were
burned,2. King. 13. 14. the diſobedient Prophet was killed of a
Lion, the mocking children were deuoured of two
Beares,2. King 2, 23. 24. 
               Senacheribs Armie was killed with an Angell,
Herod Agrippa was eaten of wormes,2. Chron. 32. 21. 
               Pherecides
of lice,Act. 12. 23. a King of Epirus was killed with a

tile, a King of Iſrael with an arrow, and of France
with a dagger,1. King. 22. 34, 35. ſome haue beene ſwallowed vp of
the earth, ſome haue beene killed of Serpents,
ſome haue beene eaten of Wolues,
                  Hatto Archbiſhoppe of Mentz. Anno Domini 940. 
               one was killed
of rats, ſome by the fall of towers and trees, ſome
by one meanes, ſome by another.
            But we will bring them to ſome heads, yet heere
we promiſe no accurateneſſe. There is therefore
an ordinarie way of dying,Read Numh. 18, 19. 30. which is vpon ordinarie
cauſes, and is common to all the ſonnes of Adam
ſince their tranſgreſſion:Of the kinds of death. or there is a death by cauſes
more rare and extraordinarie, as by peſtilence,
ſamine, battell, opening of the earth, wilde beaſts,
and the like.
            Or thus,1. Kind. there is firſt a naturall death, which is
when nature is ſpent,A Simile. when her forces are exhauſt.
A light will go out of it ſelfe, when the flame wants
oyle, waxe or tallow to feed on. A mellow apple
will fall of it ſelfe, and through-ripe corne will ſhill
without ſhaking.Iob. 5. 26. O' this death Eliphaz ſpeaketh,
Thou ſhalt goe to thy grane in a full age, as a ricks of
corne commeth in due ſeaſon into the barne:
               1. Chron. 29. 28. and ſuch
a death Iob,
               Iob. 42. 17. and Dauid died, of whom it is ſaid,
they died in a good age, and full of daies.
            
            Secondly,2. Kind. there is a ciuill death, which is inflicted
by the ciuill Magiſtrate, Who is the Miniſter of God
to take vengeance on him that doth euill.
               Rom. 13 4. Ioſh 7. 25. Mark. 15. 37. Such a death
died Achan vnder Ioſhuah, and the two theeues
vnder Pilate.
            
            But it may be asked if the magiſtrate may lawfully
take away the life of an offender,Queſt. ſeeing no man
is abſolute Lord of the life of man, but only God?

To the ſoyling of this doubt,Sol. if any be, wee muſt
know that the Magiſtrate is Gods Lieutenant, or
God in office,Pſal 82. 6. according to the Pſalme, I haue ſaid
yee are Gods,
               2. Chron. 19. 6. Rom. 13. 1. and as Iehoſophat ſaith, hee executes
not the iudgements of men, but of the Lord, whoſe
creature he is, and whoſe perſon he repreſents, and
who beareth not the ſword for nought, but for the
protection of the good, and for the terrour and
ſuppreſſion of the wicked. Thoſe therefore that are
cut off by the Magiſtrate, as he is a Magiſtrate, or
the Miniſter of God, as S. Paul doth ſtile him, they
are not cut off by Man, but by God, in as much as
the authoritie is Gods, by which they bee cut off.
And although we be all as one by Chriſt,Gal. 3. 28. yet is it in
reſpect of the Communion of the Spirit, and not by
reaſon of any politicke, or worldly parilitie. And albeit
Chriſt hath made vs all Kings,
               Reuel. 16 yet we may iuſtly
ſay with Chriſt,Job. 18. 36 
               Our Kingdome is not of this world,
though begunne in this world: and our regalitie
may very well ſtand without wrong to Caeſar, or his
ſword. But to returne.
            Ciuill death is double, iuſt, or iniuſt. A man dies
iuſtly, when he dies for ſome wickednes committed,
or for ſome notable villany, as high treaſon, intēded
and plotted, though not performed. Thus Ioab was
ſlaine at the commandement of Salomon,
               1. King. 2. 31. 46 as alſo Shimei,
both of them by Benaiah. In like maner Bigtan
and Tereſh were both hanged for intending & ſeeking
to lay violent hands vpon their King Ahaſhueroſh.
Thus iuſtly died thoſe Powder-Papiſts,
               Anno 1605. Nouemb. 5. that
moſt barbarouſly plotted with one blaſt to haue
blowne vp this whole Church and State, vnder the

wings whereof it is protected; Praiſe be vnto Chriſt
for euer, who hath honoured vs with this ſaluation,
and let all good people ſay, Amen.
            
            Againe, a man dies vniuſtly, when he dies vndeſeruedly.
Thus died Naboth vnder Ahab, S. Iohn
the Baptiſt vnder Herod,
               1. King. 21. 13. Marke. 6. 27. Note.
                the Martyrs of Chriſt vnder
Tyrants, and Chriſt himſelfe vnder Pilate. For
though that Chriſt his death was moſt iuſt in regard
of God, to whom he was to make ſatisfaction for
vs, whoſe roome he did willingly ſtand in: yet Pilate
had no iuſt cauſe to condemne him, nor the
Iewes to accuſe him.
            
               But ſuppoſe the Magiſtrate will take away a mans
life without cauſe,
               Queſt. 
               or for maintaining Gods cauſe;
may not a man reſiſt, take vp armes againſt him, or
practiſe his death? No, in no caſe: for though he abuſe
his power,
               Anſ. 
               yet thou maiſt not breake thy patience:
the miſapplying of his authoritie, muſt not
make thee forget thy loyalty.
               1. Sam. 24. 6. Dauids heart ſmote
him, when he did but cut the very coate of his Soueraigne
Saul.1. Pet. 2. 19. 22. 23. 
               And Saint Peter ſaith, It is acceptable,
if a man for conſcience toward God endure
griefe, ſuffering wrongfully. For hereunto (ſaith hee,
that was willingly crucified with his heeles vpward
for his maſters ſake) yee are called: for Chriſt alſo
ſuffered for you, leauing you an example, that ye ſhould
follow his ſteps: who when he was reuiled, reuiled not
againe: when he ſuffered, he threatned not, but committed
it to him that iudgeth righteouſly.1. Pet. 3. 14. 15. Bleſſed are
yee, if yee ſuffer for righteouſneſſe. And bee readie
alwaies to giue an anſwere to euerie man, that asketh
a reaſon of the hope, that is in you, with meekeneſſe,

and reuerence,16, 14, 15. hauing a good cōſcience. Yea, feare not
their feare, neither be troubled. But ſanctifie the Lord
God in your hearts. For what praiſe is it, if when yee
bee buffeted for your faults,1. Pet. 2. 20. ye take it patiently?
            It is not indeede the praiſe of Martyrdome (for
non paena ſed oauſafacis Martyram,
               Cyprian the cauſe makes
a Martyr, and not the Croſſe:) but if when ye doe
well, yee ſuffer wrong, and take it patiently, this is acceptable
to
God. And thus much of Ciuill death ſuſtained
by the authoritie of the Magiſtrate, who
ought to be very wary how he ſmites, remembring
that it is more Prince-like to ſaue then to deſtroy,
and more difficult to reuiue one dead man, then to
kill a thouſand liuing, and that the ſmalleſt member
is not to bee cutt from the body, but for the
fafety of the body, and finally, that the Emperour
Theodoſius (Maluit ſibi homines religione,
               Ambroſ. de Obitu Theodoſ. 
               quàm timore
a ſtringere) thought it better to binde his Subiects
to him by Religion, then by terror. For (Multos
timere debet, quem multi timent) he muſt needs
feare many, who will needes bee feared of many:
(Quem multi timent, pauci amant) whom many doe
feare, few doe loue: and quem quiſque odit, perijſſe
expedit.
               Sed piger ad poenas Princeps, ad praemia, velox, Quiſque dolet quoties cogitur eſſe ferox, Ouid. de Pont. l. 1. eleg. 3. But a Prince, that is ſlow to puniſh, and
readie to reward, and which is ſory, when hee is
conſtrained to be ſeuere, as it was ſpoken of Auguſtus
Caeſar, doth moſt reſemble the Prince of Princes,
and gaineth the loue of his Subiects, which is
(ſaith Seneca) Regi inexpugnabile munimentum, an
inuincible fortreſſe for the Kings protection. But
we haue too much digreſſed.
            Thirdly,3. Kinde: there is a voluntary, or rather a Wilfull
               
Death, when a man doth of purpoſe kill himſelfe.
Of this death died Achitophel and Iudas,
               2. Sam. 17. 23. Act. 1. 18. who hanged
thēſelues, & ſuch as deſperately cut their owne
throats, & throw themſelues into Welles & waters,
or burn themſelues vp; as ſhe, that ſeeing her goods
and bagges conſumed with fire, ran in a rage into
the fire and there dyed: thus alſo dyed Empedocles a
Sicilian Poet,De Arte poet ſub finem. of whom Horace thus writeth,
—Deus immortalis haberi
Dum cupit Empedocles, ardentem frigidus Aetnam
Inſiluit —
            That is,
Whiles that Empedocles deſired that men ſhould
count him an immortall God, hee leapt into the
flames of Aetna; a Hill in Sicily, whence ariſeth
moſt horrible ſmoke and flames of fire, to the
end that diſappearing on the ſudden from the ſight
of men, he might haue beene thought to haue gone
into heauen, and to haue been a God, as he did affirme
vnto his fellow Citizens, the people of Agrigentum.
But (by the way) marke the hap; The flame
(as one ſaith) more iuſt then hee, discouered his
impoſture: for it caſt vp one of his pantables or
ſandals, and ſo it was iuſily coniectured that the
poore ambitious wretch was there conſumed. Here
ſundry Queſtions are to be reſolued.
            Firſt,Queſt. 1. whether vpon any cauſe it be lawfull for a
man (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ) to kill himſelfe?
            I anſwere no,Anſ. except God doe by ſpeciall and extra
ordinarie reuelation of his will command. The
reaſon is, becauſe a man is not created for himſelfe,
but for God:
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                and no man is abſolute and Soueraigne

Lord of his owne life:Rom 14 8. for wee are not our
owne,1. Cor. 6 19. & 3. 23. & 6. 20. we are Chriſts: our bodies and our ſoules
are not ours, but Gods, as Saint Paul doth teach vs.
Our bodies are the Temples of God: if any man
ſhall pull downe or deſtroy his Temple, if he haue
not expreſſe warrant for it, God will him deſtroy.
The ſixt Commandement ſaith,Ex. 20. 13. 
               Thou ſhalt not kill,
now he, that killes himſelfe, kills a man, therefore
hee violates the lawe, and ſo incurres the curſe. And
whereas true fortitude is occupied about thinges,
that might ingender feare, and becauſe (as Ariſtotle
ſpeaketh) nothing is more terrible then Death,
               Eth. l. 3. cap. 6.
it might ſeeme therefore that thoſe which kill
themſelues, are very valiant men, and therefore to
be commended as men indued with the vertue of
true fortitude.Note. But in truth they are of all other moſt
cowardly, which doe kill themſelues to auoide diſcredit,
ſhame, pouertie, torments: for becauſe they
want diſcretion, and courage to beare the croſſe,
therefore out of paſsion, and through ſaintneſſe of
Spirit they make themſelues away. This is the courage
of an Hare, which fearing to be rent in pieces
of the Hounds runnes vnder the Hunter. Which
kinde of fatall foole-hardmeſſe Ouid doth elegantly
ſet forth in theſe Verſes,De Pont. l. 2. eleg. 2.
               
                  Qui rapitur fatis, quid praeter fat a requirit?
                  Porrigit ad ſpinas duraque ſaxa manus.
                  Accipitrem metuens pennis trepidantibus ales
                  Audet in humanos feſſa venire ſinus.
                  Nec ſe vicino dubitat committere tecto,
                  Qua fugit infeſtos territa cerua canes.
               
               
                  
                  He that the fates haue met with, what doth he ſeek,
                  But things as fatall as the Fates, hee met with?
                  He graſpes the ſharpeſt thornes, & rougheſt ſtones.
                  The tired Bird, fearing the greedy Hauke,
                  Flyes to a man, that is as greedy of her.
                  and ſo the Hind dreading the hoūds, that chaſe her,
                  Takes vp ſome neighbour houſe as Fatall to her.
               
            
            
               What valour was in the Fiſhes in the Fable, which
leapt out of the Frying panne into the fire? What
wiſedome is it for a voiding ſhame to ruſh into a
ſhamefull death. Is this courage to kill thy ſelfe for
feare of being killed by others? Fortitude hath his
name (a Ferondo) of bearing:
               Eth. l. 3. c. 9. Lib. 3. Cap. 7. Sub ſinem. 
               And men are called
valiant (ſaith Aristotle) becauſe they indure thoſe
things, which are troubleſome and bitter. But (ſaith
he) for a man to kill himſelfe, that hee might auoide
pouertie, or trouble, doth not betoken courage, but rather
cowardice. For it is the point of a feeble and effeminate
ſpirit to ſhunne thoſe things, which are painefull.
Neither doe they indure to dye for honeſty ſake,
but that they might eſcape and auoide ſome euill, or
greeuous thing.
            Secondly,Queſt. 2. it may bee asked whether a man may
not lawfully hazard his life, yea, and expoſe himſelfe
to certaine death for the Churches ſake, or for the
good of his Countrey?
            
               Yea,
               Auſ. 
               no doubt he may and muſt, if neceſsitie ſo
require.
               1. Joh. 3. 16. Hereby (ſaith Saint Iohn) we perceiued loue
that Chriſt laide downe his life for vs, therefore wee
ought alſo to lay downe our lines for our Brethren. And

Saint Paul ſaith,
               Acts 20. 24: I paſſe not at all, neither is my life
deare vnto my ſelfe, ſo that I may fulfill my courſe
with ioy, and the miniſtration which I haue receiued
of the Lord Ieſus, to teſtifie the Goſpell of the grace of
God. And when Agabus by the inſpiration of the
Spirit,
               Acts 21, 11. 
               had told Paul that the Iewes ſhould bind him
and deliuer him to the Gentiles, wherevpon ſome
that heard it,
               12, 
               with teares beſought him that hee
would not goe to Ieruſalem; Then Paul anſwered,
What doe yee weeping,13 and breaking mine heart? For
I am ready not to be bound onely, but alſo to die at Ieruſalem
for the Name of the Lord Ieſus. And vnto
the Philipians he profeſteth his willingneſſe to dye
for their confirmation,
               Phil. 2. 17. Yea, ſaith he, and though I
be offered vp vpon the ſacrifice, and ſeruice of your
Faith, I am glad, and reioice with you all: And
this kinde of death is very honourable. For (ſanguis
Martyrum eſt ſemen Eccleſiae) the bloud of
the Martyrs is the ſeede of the Church. Perſecutiembus
creuit Eccleſia,Cyprian De laud. Martyrij. Martyriis coronata eſt. The
Church (ſaith Saint Ierome) increaſed by perſecutions,
and was crowned by Martyrdomes. Tanta
eſt virtus Martyrij, vt per illam credere etiam ille
cogatur, quite doluit occidere. So great (ſaith Saint
Cyprian) is the force of martyrdome, that thereby
euen he is forced to beleeue with thee, that was ready
to haue killed thee.
            
            The Phoenix (as Epiphanius,
               A ſimile. & others doe report)
when ſhe is come to her full age, gathereth in ſome
high mount a pile of Myrrhe, Frankencenſe, and
other Spices, which being kindled by the heate of
the Sunne, ſhe ſuffereth her ſelfe to be burnt vp; and

of her aſhes there firſt breedeth a litle worme, which
at laſt becomes a Phoenix: ſo the Martyrs of Chriſt
hauing gathered a pile of vertues and good works,
when they ſee the glory of God, and the good of
the Church requires it, expoſe themſelues to the
ſcorching heat of perſecution, and ſacrifice themſelues
by patience in the flames therof, that by their
death the poſteritie of the Church might be preſerued,
another generation of faithful Chriſtians ſpringing
(as it were) out of their aſhes.A Simile. 
               Philo ſaith that
the Coriander ſeed being cut into little peeces, euerie
parcell thereof bringeth out as much as the
whole ſeede would haue done: ſo it may be ſaid
that euery inch of the Martyrs, euerie drop of their
bloud is exceeding fruitfull Ligabantur (ſaith Saint
Austen,) They were bound, beaten, butchered, burned,
& multiplicabantur,
               De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 22. cap. 6. 
               and yet they multiplied, inſomuch
as at laſt Chriſtianitie did preuaile; Emperours,
Kings and Queenes ſubmitting their ſoules
to the Scepter of Chriſt Ieſus, and being become
nourſing-fathers, and nourſing mothers of the
Church which is the Spouſe of Chriſt,Iſa. 49 23. as Eſay prophecied.
            In like manner honourable and honeſt is their
death, that die for the ſafegard of their King and
Countrie.A Simile. How readie is the hand to ſet it ſelfe before
the head, caring for no danger (that I may ſo
ſpeake) ſo that the head may bee preſerued whole.
The King is the Head of a Kingdome: what good
Subiect or Seruant will not willingly glue his life to
ſaue the life of his Soueraigne?Hor. l. 3. car. ode. 2. 
               Dulce & decorum
eſt pro patriâ mori: it is a ſweete and honeſt death

(ſaith Horace) which a man indures for his country.
Patria eſt communis omnium noſtrum Parens: Our
country (ſaith Tully) is the common Mother of vs al.Or. 1. in Cat.
               Chari ſunt liberi &c. We loue (ſaith he) our children,
kindred, acquaintance: but our Countrie alone
hath all the loues of all men (omnes omnium charitates
patria vna complexa eſt) for which what good
man would refuſe to die to doe it good?Offic. 1, For the
Commonwealth is a name of an vniuerſall Citie,Cic. 2. de Leg.
on which wee ought to beſtow our ſelues wholly,
and as it were to conſecrate our ſelues. A wiſeman
ſhould refuſe no danger for the ſafetie of his Countrie:
for thus (ſaith Tullie) he reaſons with himſelfe:
Non mihi ſoli, ſed etiam, atque adeò multo potius, natus
ſum patriae:
               Ad Heren. l. 4. I am not borne for my ſelfe alone,
but alſo, and much more too for my Countrie. Vita,
quae fato debetur, ſaluti patriae potisſimum ſoluatur:
Let the life, which is due to deſtinie, bee payed
eſpecially for the ſafegard of the Countrie: O fortunata
mors,
               Phil. 14. 
               quae naturae debita pro patria potiſsimum
eſt reddita! O bleſſed death (ſaith hee) which being
due (as a debt) to nature, is payed eſpecially for the
Countries good! And vndoubtedly they, that willingly
and deuoutly lay downe their liues for God
and their Countrie, being called thereunto, are of
all others moſt louing, and moſt couragious: neither
doe they die but liue in happie and eternall
memorie with God, who no doubt rewardes their
momentanie croſſe with an immortall crowne of
glorie in the heauens.
            Thirdly,Quaeſt. 3. it may be demanded, whether the death
of Chriſt and of the holy Martyrs may be called voluntarie,

ſeeing they died at the commaund and by
the execution of others.
            I anſwere,Anſ. their death was voluntarily but not
with wicked wilfullneſſe ſuſtained of them. For
Chriſt could haue ſaued himſelfe then,Math. 26. 53. when hee ſuffered
himſelfe to be apprehended, condemned, and
executed:Iohn. 10. 18. for hee had power to lay downe his life and
take it vp, and might to doe what he liſted: no man
could take his life from him againſt his wil: for being
verie God he could not be compelled.1. Iohn. 5. 20. And for the
Martyrs of Chriſt, they died in deed by the malice of
others, and not through the malicious wilfulneſſe of
their owne ſpirits:Note. yet did they willingly die, chooſing
rather to die, then to denie their Lord, and to
betraie a good cauſe. A man will caſt away his
wares rather,A Simile. then bee drowned himſelfe: ſo the
Martyrs would willingly embrace the fire rather,
then diſhonour God by cowardize, and
looſe their ſoules by Apoſtacie. And that it may fully
appeare that their death was with their willes
(though not ſimply,Note. as if they were in loue with
death, or were wearie of their liues) aske the cauſe
of their profeſsion. What made, who forced them
to embrace the faith? No man, but they willingly
through the worke of Gods Spirit receiued it. Againe,
though they did embrace it, yet if they would
haue forſaken and for ſworne it; they might haue ſaued
their liues, and perhaps haue come to preſerment
alſo, many of them: but rather then they
would denie their Lord, that bought them, and his
truth commended to them, they did willingly and
cheerfully endure thoſe puniſhments which were

laid vpon them. There bee two ſorts of voluntarie
deathes,Two kindes of voluntarie death. the one lawfull and honeſt, ſuch as the
death of Martyrs, the other diſhoneſt and vnlawfull,
when men haue neyther lawfull calling,
nor honeſt endes, as of Peregrinus, who burnt
himſelfe in a pile of wood, thinking thereby to
liue for euer in mens remembrance. So of Aſdrubals
wife, who at the ſurprizing of Carthage, rather
chooſed to burne out her eyes, and yeeld her
bodie to her countrey flames, then to behold her
husbands miſerie,Judg. 9. 53. 54. and to be her ſelfe a prey vnto the
enemie: finally of Abimelech, who made his Page
thruſt him through and kill him, leaſt it ſhould bee
ſaid of him. A woman ſlew him: for a certaine woman
had broke his braine-pan with a ſtone. But the
holy Martyrs ſuffered themſelues to be ſlaine for the
glory of God, the honour of his truth, the confirmation
of his people,Heb. 11. 35. & the remonſtration of their
gratitude and fidelitie, and that they might obtaine a
better reſurrection.
               Queſt. 4.
            
            Fourthly, it may be asked whether this willing & alacrious
death of the Martyrs deſerued for the worthines
therof to be rewarded with the ioies of heauē?
            Vndoubtedly no:Anſ. Rom. 8. 23. for euerlaſting life is (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ) the gracious gift of God through Ieſus Chriſt,
and not giuen for the bloud of the Martyrs, which
yet no doubt is very precious in his ſight.De compunct. cord. 
               Et ſi millies
moriamur: Although (ſaith Chryſoſtome) we ſhould
die a thouſand deathes, Et ſi omnes virtutes animae expleamus,
though we ſhould ſhew the perfection of all
the vertues of the ſoule: Nil dignum gerimus ad ea,
quae ipſi à Deo percepimus, yet doe we nothing worthie

in compariſon of thoſes things which we haue enioyed,
of God.
               De verb. Apoſt. ſer. 2. 
               Te coronat in miſeratione, & miſericordia
ſaith Saint Auſten, God crownes vs in mercie and
compaſsion. Notabis quod mors Chriſti ſola potuit
mererivitam vitam aeternam:
               Excit. l. 9. You ſhall marke (ſaith
Cuſanus) that the alone death of Chriſt was able
to merit eternall life. Alij omnes Martyres non
merentur ex ſua morte vitam aeternam.
               Serm. 61. in Cant. No other
Martyr by his death dotht deſerue eternall life. Merium
meum miſeratio Domini my merit, (ſaith Bernard)
is Gods meruie.
               How it appeares that Martyrdome merits not of God. And to make it ſully cleare,
by reaſon that by their deathes they could merit
nothing, I demand whether Martyres ſtand not
bound to Chriſt for his death, which is their deliuerance,
to die for him, if he require it? It may not be
denied, a brow of braſſe would bluſh at the deniall
of it. I demaund further, who giues them courage
and conſcience to ſuffer death? Euen God, of
whom we receiue, what wee haue, and who for
Chriſt doth giue vnto men,1. Cor. 4. 7. not onely to beleeue in
him, but alſo to ſuffer for him. Eueu Homer could
ſay,Phil. 1. 29. Iliad. 2. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that God
did increaſe and daunt the courage of men. And
Pindar likewiſe, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
O God, great vertues (and what greater
then fortitude and pietie?) doe come to mortall men
from thee. I aske thirdly, is God bound to the
Martyrs to giue them courage, conſtancie, fidelitie
patience? No verily: for God is (Liberrimum Agens)
a moſt free worker, tied to no man further then he
liſt himſelfe.Rom. 9. 18. Rom. 11. 35. 
               He will doe what he will, he hath mercy
on whom he liſteth. And who hath giuen vnto him

firſt? I demaund yet once more; Is it by Gods gracious
aſſiſtance, or by their owne proper ſtrength,
that the Martyrs did vſe their gifts and vertues wel,
and not looſe them, or vſe them indifferently? No
man, though his head were made of ſteele, could ſay
but that it is by Gods grace that he doth continue
conſtant in grace, and vſe his gifts with profit. For
who doth confirme vs vnto the end, but God?1. Cor. 8. Phil 1. 6. 1. Pet. 15 who
but he doth performe the good woorke begunne,
vntill the day of Ieſus Chriſt? By whoſe power are
we kept and guarded through faith vnto ſaluation,
but by the power of God? Of whom are we to deſire
ſtrength,1. Pet. 5. 10 confirmation, perfection, and eſtabliſhment
but of God? Whom to are we to aſcribe
them, but to God. It followes therefore that the
Martyrs for their very martydomes ſtand rather
bound to God, then God to them. No man hauing
freely beſtowed vpon another a gift,Note. is bound by
the good vſe of the ſaid gift to beſtow more, but he
that receiueth it, is rather bound to him, that giues
it. But all the works of grace whatſoeuer, though
neuer ſo well vſed, are freely beſtowed vpon men
by God, who alſo of his free good will doth enable
them to vſe them well: therefore God is not
bound by the good vſe therof to beſtow more. And
ſo conſequently all holy Martyrs ſtand obliged vnto
God, and all their reward (which is very great:
for according to their paſſions and their patience,
ſuch ſhall bee their euerlaſting poſſeſſions in Paradiſe)
is of Gods mercie, and not for their
merits.
            Fiftly, it may bee asked if a man ſeeing his

neighbour about to cut his owne throat, to
drowne, poyſon, hang, or otherwiſe to kill himſelfe,
be bound in conſcience to hinder him, if hee
may poſſibly?
            I anſwere,Anſ. hee ſtands bound by the lawe of
charitie. For if a man ſhould ſaue his neighbours
ſheeepe from drowning, or his houſe from burning,
how much rather ought hee to ſaue his
neighbour himſelfe from periſhing? It is true indeed,
which the Poet ſaith,Hor. de. Arte Puct ſub. ſinem. 
               Inuitum qui ſeruat,
idem facit occidenti: Hee that ſaues a man againſt
his will, doth as hee, that kils him, that is, hee
out of his corruption of heart, and diſtemper of
braine accounts him as his murtherer, that would
ſaue his life, becauſe hee accountes it worſe then
death to liue:Note. but our neighbours corruption may
not let our courteſie, his weakeneſſe and wilfulneſſe
muſt not cauſe vs to bee vncharitable: and
though hee by reaſon of diſtemper will take him
for his enemie, that ſaues him, yet God, to whom
euerie man owes his life, doth account it charitable,
and agreeing to ſound reaſon, that a man
ſhould to his power hinder any man, that out of
will and weakeneſſe ſeekes his owne deſtruction,
and will not hold him guiltleſſe of murther, that
wittingly and willingly ſuffers his neighbour to
make himſelfe away, if it lay in his power to
haue hindered him with the ſafetie of himſelfe.
            Sixtly,Queſt. 6. it may bee demanded, whether for a man
wilfully to kill himſelfe bee a great ſinne, as it is
commonly reputed, and whether it may bee forgiuen?
            
               
To the firſt branch of the queſtion I thus anſwer.Anſ.
It is a moſt grieuous ſin for a man wilfully to murder
himſelfe.One reaſon againſt ſelfemurther. For firſt, he ſinnes againſt God, who
out of his goodneſſe lent him his life to vſe it to his
glorie, and not to cut it off with ſhame and wickednes.
Indeede if a mans life were his owne, and not
Gods,The firſt common cauſe of ſelfe-murder. he might doe with it what he would. Commonly
a man makes himſelfe away for one of theſe
cauſes; either becauſe hee counts his ſinnes vnpardonable,
and that with God there is no mercy for
him: and this made Iudas hang himſelfe, who notwithſtanding
his vile treaſon, and abhominable couetouſnes,
which brought him to it, might haue
found mercy, if he had had the grace by Faith to
haue come to Chriſt, and with true repentance to
haue returned: but to all his other ſinnes adding
theſe of finall deſperation, and wilfull murder, hee
did wilfully depriue himſelfe of mercy. Iudam traditorem
non tàm ſcelus,
               Lib. de vtil. Poenit. 
               quod commiſit, quàm indulgentiae
deſperatio fecit penitus interire: The villany (ſaith
Saint Auguſtine) that the Traitor Iudas committed,
was not the cauſe of his vtter deſtruction, ſo much
as his deſpaire of pardon. Sceleratior omnibus, O
Iuda (ſaith Leo) & infaelicior extitiſti, quem non paenitentia
duxit ad Dominum, ſed deſperatio traxit ad
laqueum. Thou waſt, O Iudas, more wicked and
more wretched, then all men, for that Repentance
led thee not to the Lord, but Deſperation drew thee
to the halter.Ob, Yea, but a deſpairing man will ſay, I
haue beene a moſt grieuous ſinner all my life long,
how ſhould I looke that God ſhould forgiue mee?
let no man diſtruſt (ſaith Saint Auſten) let no man,
               Ju Pſ. 50. Sol.
               
               
               guiltie to himſelfe of his old offences deſpaire, Nouit
Dominus mutare ſententiam, ſi tu nouer
                     •
                  s emendare
delictum, mend thou thy faults, and God will vouchſafe
thee fauour. Let thy end be good as the Theeues
was, and Chriſt will receiue thee into his kingdom.
Let no man deſpaire of pardon (ſaith Iſidore) though
he repent about the end of his life:
               Lib. 2. de ſum
                     •
                   bono. 
               for God doth iudge
euery one as his end is, and not as his life was. And
ſuppoſe that God will not forgiue thee: wilt thou
therefore by killing thy ſelfe make thy ſinne the
greater, and ſend thy ſoule the ſooner into Hell?
this is very madneſſe, and extremitie of folly. But
why ſhouldeſt thou deſpaire?Ambroſ. in Luk. l. 2. Iſid. vbi ſupra. 
               Deſperatio certa mors
eſt: deſperation is certaine death, faith Ambroſe,
Aeternae ciuit atis ianuas nobis deſperatio claudit:
Deſperation doth ſhut the gates of heauen againſt
vs:Ibid. 
               Deſperare eſt in infernum deſcendere, to deſpaire
is to deſcend into Hell, (ſaith Iſidore) On the contrarie,
Prima ſalus eſt declinare culpam,
               Hug. l de vera ſap. 
               ſecundae non
deſperare veniam, to auoide the fault is the firſt ſtep
to ſaluation, and the ſecond is not to deſpaire of pardon.
Doeſt thou deſpaire of mercie,Queſt. Sol. as thinking
that God cannot helpe and pardon thee? Hee can
doe all things: with him nothing is impoſſible:
neither can the fountaine of his mercy be drayned
dry.Gen. 4. 8. 23. 
               My ſinnes (ſaid Cam) are greater then can bee
forgiuen. Mentiris, Cain, maior eſt Dei miſerieordia,
quàm omnium peccatorum miſeria: thou lyeſt,
Cain, (ſaith Saint Auſten) Gods mercie is greater
then the miſery of all ſinnes.
            Or doeſt thou deſpayre,Queſt. becauſe thou thinkeſt
God will not forgiue thee?
            
               
Tell me,Anſ. O vaine man, hath God made thee of
his counſell; how canſt thou thus thinke with reaſon?
Why doeſt thou imagine that God hath no
mercie for thee? Is it becauſe thou art a greeuous
ſinner? Who is not ſo? Is it becauſe thou art not
worthy of mercy? who is worthy? Mans worthineſſe
is vnworthineſſe, and his merits, demerites; if
mercy ſuccuored not, miſery would ſwallow al men.
But why will not hee haue mercy on thee? Is not
God mercifull and tender-hearted? Be mercifull to
thy ſelfe by repentance and true hope, and doubt.
leſſe God will be mercifull to thee by pardoning
thee. Doeſt thou thinke that he will not heare thee,
if thou calleſt? Be not iniurious to thy ſelfe: The
Lord is neare vnto all,
               Pſal. 145. 18. 
               that call vpon him in trueth.
Come vnto mee, all yee, that are heauy laden,
               Mat. 11. 28. ſaith
Chriſt, and I will refreſh you. Iuſtly doth he lack, that
may haue for asking. Thinkeſt thou that God delights
in thy death? Be not iniurious to God. As I
liue,
               Ezck. 33. 11. ſaith the Lord, I deſire not the death of the wicked,
but that the wicked turne from his way and liue.
Turne thee, turne thee, and deſpaire not, and thou
ſhalt liue. Tertullian here exclaimeth, Iurat Deus,
Viuo, dicens, cupit ſibi credi, God ſweareth ſaying.
As I liue; Hee deſires that men would beleeue
him. O beatos, quorum cauſa iurat Deus! O miſerrimos,
ſi nec iuranti Domino credimus. O bleſſed
men, for whoſe ſake God doth ſweare; but O moſt
miſerable wretches, that we are, if we will not credit
him,Ob. though hee doe ſweare! But thou haſt liued
long without repentance, thou haſt long abuſed
his lenitie, and haſt ſetled on thy lees, it is now iuſt

that God ſhould ſet the feete of his Iuſtice on thee,
and tread vpon thee like vnſauorie ſalt, it is too late
to repent,Sol. repentance is hid from his eyes. It is true
that God may iuſtly deny thee mercy now, ſeeing
thou haſt neglected thy good, miſpent thy time, abuſed
his gentlenes. But God neither doth alwaies,
neither hereafter will be euer doe all which he may
may iuſtly doe: but hee ſometimes ſhewes mercie,
when men are moſt miſerable, and haue very long
abuſed his patience towards them. Hee vouchſafed
mercy to the Thiefe vpon the Croſſe, that no man
by reaſon of long or grieuous wickedneſſe ſhould
deſpaire of mercy. Deſpaire not then, O Man, but
hope in God: he can forgiue thee, if he will: he hath
not told thee that he will not: he will forgiue thee,
if thou wilt repent: repent then, and repent of theſe
deſperate imaginations, and he will remit thee. Cry
out, and ſay,Lam. 5. 21. Cant. 1. 3. 
               O Lord, helpe, O Lord forgiue, Turne
me, O Lord, vnto thee, and I ſhall be turned. Draw
me, and I will runne 
                     •
                  fter thee. Hide thy face from my
ſins,
               Pſal. 51. 9 10. 11. 
               & put away all my miſdeeds. Create in me a cleane
heart, and caſt mee not away from thy preſence.
            
            And this is one common cauſe, to wit, the deſpaire
of pardon, which makesmen make themſelues
away.
            Another is very vanity of minde,The ſecond common cauſe of Selfe-murder. and to auoide
reproch, inſamy, beggery, contempt, and the deſpight
of the enemy. Thus Saul commanded his Armour-bearer
to thruſt him through with his ſword,
leaſt the Philiſtims ſhould kill and mocke him: and
becauſe his Armour-bearer would not,1. Sam. 31. 4. therefore
he killed himſelfe: And his Armour-bearer ſeeing

him dead, fell likewiſe vpon his ſword, and dyed
with him.2. Sam. 17. 23. In like manner Achitophel ſeeing his
counſel was not followed, and no doubt fearing the
wrath of his Soueraigne, which he had by his treacherie
deſerued, went home and hanged himſelfe.
Lucretia ſtab'd her ſelfe to renowne her chaſtitie.
Cleopatra applyed venemous Serpents to her body,Hor at. car. in l. 1 Od. 7.
becauſe ſhee would not bee carried as a Captiue in
triumph. Others (wee haue heard) haue hanged
themſelues, becauſe the price of corne hath fallen
againſt their couetous deſire and expectation. Oh,
what horrible iniury is here offered vnto God!
Such ſurely either thinke God is not, or that his eye
mindes them not, or elſe they preſume vppon his
mercie, or diſtruſt his prouidence: but how euer it
be, it is ſure there wants true wiſedome, and fortitude
of ſpirit, they forget to humble themſelues vnder
the mighty hand of God, and are not contented
with his corrections, and finally take vpon them as
if they were the Lords of their owne liues, and
forget to winde their care vpon his prouidence.
            Now ſeeing theſe are cauſes of ſuch ſelfe-murdering
courſes, wee muſt needes account ſuch ſelfe-ſlayers
guilty of greeuous ſinne, whereby they are
very iniurious to Almightie God, the Lord and authour
of their liues.
            Secondly,Reaſon 2. againſt ſelfe-murder. hee that murthers himſelfe is iniurious
to the Church of God. For whereas he ſhould obey
the doctrine taught him, which ſhe commends vnto
him from Chriſt her Husband, hee flatly ſhewes
himſelfe diſloyall, vnthankefull, and vnruly: and is
by this his wilfull murder a griefe vnto her, & ſcandalous

by his leud enſample. And whereas his life
ſhould vpon neceſsitie haue beene giuen away in
her ſervice and for her ſecuritie, it cannot now bee,
neither can he performe ſuch ſeruice for her, as hee
ought and might haue done, if this murderous ſpirit
had not poſſeſt and ſpoiled him.
            Thirdly,3. Reaſon. he that murders himſelfe, offers wrong
vnto his Country. For as he was borne in her, ſo he
was born for her. His life, which he owed to death,
ſhould (if neede had beene) haue beene offered vp
in her ſeruice: but by this vnnaturall murder of himſelfe,
he depriues her of all helpe and honour, which
otherwiſe ſhee might haue enioyed of him, if true
valour, faith, and wiſedome had poſſeſt him.
            Fourthly,4. Reaſon. he offers wrong vnto his Parents, which
vnder God were the cauſes of his life. And is this all
the thankes, the comfort, and credit, hee does them,
for their generation, and education, care and coſt,
to make himſelfe away, to bee his owne hangman
or executioner? Such a Sonne is a Shame to his Father,
and an Heauineſſe vnto his Mother, and by his
wickedneſſe depriues them of that helpe and comfort,
which God and Nature claimed at his
hands.
            Finally,5. Reaſon. he is iniurious vnto himſelfe: firſt to his
ſoule, making himſelfe guilty of murder, and ſo of
death: Secondly, to his body, which with his owne
hands hee doth deſtroy, and deliuer to corruption,
beeing neuer able to repaire it by himſelfe againe,
and depriues it of that honeſt and comely buriall,
which otherwiſe it might haue had with the bodies
of the Saints: Thirdly, he marres his credit, making

himſelfe famous by an infamous death, and giues
iuſt occaſion to men greatly to ſuſpect his ſaluation.
            Wee are now come to the ſecond part of the
Queſtion,Second part of the 6. queſt. 
               Whether may this Selfe-murder be forgiuen?
Vndoubtedly it may, if God will; for Gods
mercy is greater then the miſchiefe and malice of
any ſinne or ſinner:
                  Anſ. Selfe-murder may be pardoned. and the death of Chriſt is of
merit ſufficient to waſh away the fouleſt wickednes,
that can be committed. This therefore I ſay,
a man that killes himſelfe,Note. if hee doe repent of his
murder, before he be dead, he may, and ſhall be forgiuen.
Gods mercy may be beſtowed, Inter pontem
& fontem, betweene the bridge and the water, betweene
the ſtabbe and death.Note. The ſinne againſt the
Holy Ghoſt might be forgiuen, if the ſinner could repent:
but becauſe hee cannot repent by reaſon of
the hardnes of the heart, which ſhall not be remoued
to death, therefore he cannot be forgiuen. But
Selfe-murderers are not alwaies (as thoſe ſinners)
puniſhed with finall hardnes and impenitencie, and
therefore they may be forgiuen, and no doubt are
ſometimes, then when God doth giue them grace
to repent, and grone vnto him for his mercy. But
let no man preſuming vpon Gods mercy dare to
commit this barbarous villany, leaſt by preſuming
on mercy, he meet with iudgement, which is the ordinarie
portion of preſumptuous offenders: but
rather let him pray and ſay with Dauid,
               Pſal. 19. 13, 14. 
               Keepe thy
Seruant from preſumptuous ſinnes, and let the meditation
of mine heart be acceptable in thy ſight: for
indeede the meditation and intention of murder

is too too vvicked and abominable.
            To conclude,Queſt. 7. it may be demanded whether a man
be guilty of his owne death, if he ſhall be kild, when
out of a priuate humour, and deſire of reuenge hee
doth either make, or take a challenge?
            Yes no doubt:Anſ. for though hee did not ſimply
will, but rather nill his owne death, yet becauſe he
left his calling, and did willingly agree and condeſcend
vnto the meanes of his death, which is fighting,
hee becomes thereby guilty of his death. And
it is not inough to ſay that hee did not intend to
worke his death, but rather to ſaue his credit, and
honour, by offering or accepting the challenge, and
by sighting. For neither God, nor the poſitiue lawes
of our kingdome doe allot and allow thoſe meanes
of ſauing mens reputations and of righting themſelues
by them, but vtterly condemne them, and
puniſh the vſurpers of them: & beſides, whatſoeuer
he ment to effect by thoſe irregular courſes, yet the
euent ſhewes (when he is ſlaine by them) that they
were the meanes of his ſlaughter, to which he gaue
conſent without conſtraint.Note. Yea, I adde further, that
whoſoeuer holds this paradox, which is ſo commonly
receiued in the world,A Paradox of our vnwiſe Gallants. 
               That the giuing of the
lye, or of foule-mouthed language, muſt neceſſarily
for the ſaueguard of honour bee reuenged vvith a
Stabbe, a Stroke, or a Challenge of a combat, He is
an embracer of a murderers doctrine, and by holding
it makes himſelfe a very Murderer in the
iudgement of GOD, who condemnes all murdering
poſitions, intentions, & deſires, as well as the
acts of murder. And thus much concerning voluntarie
Death.
            
               
               Violent
               I take not Violent in the largeſt ſenſe. 2. Sam. 18. 9. 14. 15. death is when by force a man doth die.
Such a death did Abſalon die, when as full againſt
his will he hanged in the Oake, where he was ſlaine
hanging, by Ioab and his tenne ſeruants.Dan. 6. 24. Luke. 13. 4. The like
death died Daniels accuſers, who being caſt among
the Lions were cruſhed and killed of them. In like
manner alſo this kinde of death thoſe eighteene
died, vpon whom the Tower in Siloam falling ſlew:
and of this death Horace ſaith,Lib. 2. Carm. ode. 17. he had almoſt periſhed
by a tree that fell vpon him.
            And that we may briefly conclude our diſcourſe
of the kinds and waies of dying,Other waies of dying. one man dies more
eaſily, another with more difficultie, and greater
paines: One dieth in his full ſtrength, being in all
eaſe and proſperitie:
               Iob. 22. 24, 25. 
               his breaſts are full of milke, and
his bones runne full of marrow: and another dieth in
the bitterneſſe of his ſoule, and neuer eateth with
pleaſure. One dieth being waſted with long ſicknes,
and lingring diſeaſes: another dieth ſodainly, without
warning,Quaeſt. 3. and beyond his expectation. Now it
may be by the way demanded, Whether it bee lawfull
to pray againſt ſodaine death?
               
                  Anſ. It is not vnlawfull to pray (as in our Letanie) againſt ſodaine death. I anſwere thus;
becauſe our corruption is great, our ſins are daily,
our aduerſarieslie and ſubtle, readie to take all aduantages,
and becauſe without repentance men
may not looke for pardon, and becauſe as
death doth leaue vs, ſo the latter day ſhall finde vs,
therefore leaſt we ſhould be taken vnprepared, it is
fit and needfull for vs to pray that God would not
take vs away vpon the ſodaine: or if it ſhall ſeeme
good vnto him to remoue vs ſodainly, that hee
would be pleaſed not to take vs away vnprepared
               
for him: but that, whēſoeuer he doth remoue vs, he
woud pardon & accept vs,Note. & be pleaſed to ſmite vs,
whiles we be either in ſome holy worke of his ſeruice,
as preaching, prayer, meditation, or the like,
or elſe in ſome honeſt worke of our honeſt calling,
or at the leaſt in no euill plot, nor about any euill act.
            
            Now finally, of ſodaine deathes ſome are by the
diſtemper of the paſſions,
                  Of ſodaine death. Valer. Max. & Hen. Steph. ex Gregor. Gyrald. as the death of ſuch as die
of feare, ſorrow, or ioy. Thus died that good old
Poet Phileman, who being neere an hundred years
old, and ſeeing (as he lay) an Aſſe eate figs, fell
into an extreme laughter, and hauing called his ſeruants,
he bad them giue the Aſſe ſome drinke after
his figges, and laughing very earneſtly ſo died.
            
               Plutarch alſo writeth of one Polycrita, who
with ioy conceiued,De virtut mulierum. for that her life was granted,
whereof it ſeemes ſhe was not a little fearefull, fell
downe ſodainly, and ſo died. Againe, ſome that
die ſodainly, are taken away by the extraordinarie
hand of God, as Dathan and Abiram, whom the
earth opening her mouth by Gods command deuoured:Num. 16. 30. 31 32. Leuit. 10. 2.
thus alſo two ſonnes of Aaron, Nadab,
Abihu, ſodainly were killed by fire ſent out from
God.1. Sam. 25. 38. 
               Nabal alſo the Lord ſodainly ſmote and
ſlue, not long after his churliſhneſſe toward Dauid.
Others haue died by the ſpecial permiſſion of God,
though by the meanes of the diuell himſelfe: as
Iobs children, who were ſodainly ſlaine with the
fall of the houſe vpon them, which was blowne
downe with a ſodaine ſtorme,Iob. 1. 18. 19. raiſed doubtleſſe by
the power of the diuell. Others haue beene ſodainly
diſpatcht with their owne hands, as Lucretius
               
the Poet:Jud. 3. 21. ſome haue beene ſodainly killed of
others as Eglon, whom Ehud ſlue with his dagger,
or as the Princes and people of the Philiſtins, on
whom Sampſon with the ſorce of his armes pulled
downe the houſe,Iud. 16. 30. in which they were aſſembled: or
alſo as Siſera,
               Iud. 4. 21. whom Iael ſlue with a naile driuen into
his head, as he was ſleeping in her Tent: but all
theſe1. Eg. the Phil. and Siſera. periſhed without treaſon: but ſome others
haue been ſodainly diſpatcht by treaſon, as Senacherib,
whom his owne ſous ſlue,Iſa. 37. 38. 1. King. 16. 9. 10 as he was in his Idols
temple, & as Elah whom his ſeruant Zimri kild, as
he was in his drunkenneſſe: and thus with inhumane
barbarity ſhold our noble king with many mo haue
died in the Parliamēt houſe by the malice of wicked
Ieſuits and their bloudie ſchollers,
               An 1605. Nouemb. 5. had not God from
heauen deliuered them, Whoſe name be praiſed for euermore,
Amen.
            
            And thus from the kinds of death we paſſe vnto
the cauſes.Of the cauſes of death. God inflicteth death. Pſal. 39. 5.
            
            The firſt and higheſt Ruling cauſe of death is Almightie
God. Dauid ſaith to the Lord, Thou haſt
made my daies as an hand breadth. Hezekiah ſaith,
Thou wilt make an end of mee: to whom ſaid God,
I will adde vnto thy daies fifteene yeares.
               Iſa. 38. 12. By which
it appeareth that God is (vitae neciſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , arbiter) the
Author and Ordainer of life and death. Yea the
Lord by that commination vnto Adam.
               Gen. 2. 17. 
               In the day
that thou eatest thereof, thou ſhalt die, doth plainely
ſhew that in his hands is the power of life & death.
Finally he ſaith,Iſa. 45. 7. 
               I forme the light, and create darkeneſſe,
the light of proſperitie, the darkneſſe of aduerſitie,
the light of life, the darkneſſe of death,

               I make peace, and create euill, the euill, not of ſinne,
but of ſorrow, of troubles, bloudſhed, famine, peſtilence,
death.
            
               To all things (ſaith Salomon) there is an appointed
time,
               Ec. 3. 1. 2. 
               a time to be borne, & a time to die: & who
hath appointed this time,Act. 1. 7. but GOD, who hath
put times and ſeaſons in his owne power, as our Sauiour
teacheth? And ſurely, if God number the verie
haires of our head, doubtleſſe he hath numbred
the daies and houres,Math. 10. 29. 30 and minutes of our life, and
hath ſet downe the periode of our age. And if a
poore Sparrow cannot light on the ground without
his will, ſurely then no man can fall into the ground
but by his will. Euen the wiſer heathen knew this,
therefore Hector ſaith in Homer,
               Iliad 22. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
that God did call him vnto
death. Tertullian another Doctor ſaith, Deus vniuerſa
vti
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  ,
               Contra Marcel. 
               diſponendo praeſcituit, & praeſciendo diſpoſuit,
that God hath foreknowne and diſpoſed all
things: if all things, then the liues and deathes of
men.In lerem. c. 12. Saint Ierome ſaith, What good things or euill
things ſoeuer be in the world, Non abſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , prouidentia,
& fortuito caſu accidit, ſed Iudicio Dei, not one of
them comes to paſſe by chance, and without prouidence
but by the iudgement of God, if nothing, then not
murthers, manſlaughters, killing. Finally, Saint Auſten
ſaith,De gen. cont. Manich. l. 1. c. 2 
               Voluntas Deiomniū, quae ſunt, ipſaeſt cauſa,
that the will of God is the verie cauſe of all things,
that are: and to conclude with the Prophets ſpeech:
Who is he that ſaith,
               Lam. 3. 37. 
               It commeth to paſſe, and the
Lord commandeth it not?
            
            It will be thus perhaps obiected,Ob. 1. If God be the

Author of death, then it ſeemes hee delightes in
the deſtruction of his creature: for by death
life is put out, and the bodies of men are corrupted.
            I anſwere thus,Sol. Death is a puniſhment, or at the
beſt, and to the beſt a triall, a correction, a paſſage
to a better life: now God ordaines and appointes
death, not ſimply as it is a deſtruction, but eyther
as it is a puniſhment of wicked men,In what ſenſe God may be ſaid to ordaine and cauſe death. A Simile. or a correction
and triall of the godly, and as a meanes of deliuerance
to his elect from worldly and wicked miſeries.
Euen as a wiſe, potent, and iuſt King appointeth
places of execution, executioners, and the death
of grieuous malefactors, not as though hee delighted
in them, but for the maintenance of iuſtice, the
puniſhment of vice, and for the good of the Commonwealth:
Or as a Father, who maketh and vſeth
rods, not becauſe he taketh pleaſure ſimply in
whipping, or in roddes, but becauſe hee deſires the
good of his children, and that they might be afraid
of euill: Or finally, as a Landlord that puls downe
his Tenants houſe, not becauſe he delightes ſimply
in pulling downe of houſes, but for that he purpoſeth
to cure it of all rottenneſſe and ruines, and to
build it for him new and faire againe.
            It may againe bee thus obiected:Ob. 2. If God appoint
and ordaine euery mans death, then if a man
murther himſelfe, or if he be killed by another, or
be vniuſtly put to death by a Tyrant, God (you will
ſay) appointed and ordained that mans death,
which you will ſay is harſh.
            I anſwere,Sol. and let my words be well obſerued.

Our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt wee all know was moſt
wickedly put to death by the Iudges iniuſt ſentence
at the malitious purſuite of the Iewes: now Saint
Peter ſaith expreſly that he was deliuered by the determinate
councell of God,
               Act. 2. 23. and that his enemies were
gathered together againſt him: and what to doe?
To doe (ſaith Peter) What ſoeuer thine hand,
               Act. 4. 28. 
               and thy
councell had determined before to be done. Thus therefore
I ſay, if any man kill himſelfe, or bee killed by
others, no more is done then was of old determined
by the hand and counſell of Almightie God.
            Thou wilt then replie,Ob. 3. if a murtherer do but what
God willed and determined to be done, then he is
to be excuſed as one that fulfils the will of God.
            Not ſo:Sol. and the reaſon is, becauſe though he did
that act,No murtherer is excuſed by Gods decree. which God would, and determined in his
ſecret and eternall councell to be done, yet he did
it not vpon thoſe grounds, & for thoſe ends, which
God did propoſe vnto himſelfe. For all the workes
of God are done in wiſedome and iuſtice: but the
murtherer is ſet a worke by the diuell, and his owne
inward corruption. When the Father deliuered his
ſonne,
               Epiſt. ad Vinc. 38. (ſaith Saint Auguſtine) and Christ his bodie,
and Iudas his maſter, wherfore is God in this deliuery
iuſt, and man guiltie, but that becauſe in one thing,
which they did, the cauſe is not one, for which they did
it?
               Note. Againe, though a murtherer doe what the hand
and counſell of God hath determined to bee done,
yet that is no warrant for his murther, becauſe hee
ſinnes againſt the reuealed will of God, the which
is to be obeyed of euery man vnto death: now Gods
reuealed will is that we ſhould not murther.Ex. 20. 13.
            
            
               
It will be ſaid then that the reuealed will of God
(which forbids murther) is contrario to his ſecret
will,Ob. 4. by which hee doth determine and appoint
it.
            I anſwere,Sol. the reuealed will is not contrarie to
his ſecret will: for the reuealed will forbids murther
ſimply as it is murther: but the ſecret decrees
and willes it, not as or becauſe is is murther, ſed propter
coniunctum bonum, but for ſome good conioined
with it. For it is not poſſible that God, who is the
fountaine of good things, yea and goodneſſe it
ſelfe, ſhould will any euill for it ſelfe.
            But that no man be miſtaken, that readeth theſe
things, I will heere briefely ſhew mine opinion in
this point of murther.
            Firſt,Note. I ſay God is not the Author of murther, as
it is murther, but doth deteſt and condemne it, and
puts no (not the leaſt) malice into any mans heart,
which ſtirres him, or moues him vnto murther.
            Secondly, I ſay that which God doth about
murther, is comprehended in theſe actions.
            Firſt,Three actions of God about murther. 1. as the vniuerſall cauſe of all things hee ſuſtaineth
man and all his actions, ſo that no man
could either be, or act any thing, but that God
doth ſuſtaine him.Act. 17. 28. For by God we are, we liue, and
moue. All a mans actions therefore, as they are actions,
and euery man, as he is a man, is the worke
of God, and therefore alſo good. The action then
(which is the materiall part or ſubiect) of murther,
the naked action (I ſay) is of God,Note. 
               not the murther,
which is the formall part, indeed the deformitie of
that action.
            
               
Secondly,Act. 2. God with-holdeth his grace from the
murtherer, and leaues him to himſelfe, being tied to
no man further or longer then he liſt. Now, as Hugo
de Sancto Victore ſaith, Peccatū neceſſarie ſequitur ex
gratiae ſubtractione, Sinne neceſſarily, followes vpon
the with-holding of grace: but how? not as the effect
followes the efficient:Note. for God doth not put
any murtherous thought or intention into their
hearts: but he doth onely denie them his grace,
which ſhould make them tender hearted & louing:
he giues Satan leaue to egge them on, and offers
them ſundrie obiects by themſelues good, which
they turne into occaſions of euill, hauing neyther
will nor power to ſtay themſelues. And God may
thus deale, becauſe he is bound to no man.
            Thirdly, God ordereth and diſpoſeth the murther,
and that is thus:Act. 3. hee directes it ſo, as that it
proceeds no further, nor no otherwiſe, then hee
pleaſeth: ſometimes hee turnes it to another end,
then the murtherer thought of: ſometimes hee
makes a way by it to puniſh ſome other ſinne, and
ſometimes he turnes it to the good of them, that
are murthered.
            But I will ſet downe ſome ſentences of the learned,
of whom I haue light my candle: which I
will propound as Anſweres to theſe enſuing Queſtions:
            Firſt,Quaeſt. 1. is there any thing, whether good or euill,
which is not by the will of God?
            Non fit aliquid,Sol. niſi omnipotens fieri velit, vel ſinendo
vt fiat, velipſe faciendo: there is nothing done
(ſaith Saint Auſten) but that which the Almightie
               Enchir. c. 95.
               
               will haue done, Either by permitting it to be done, or
by doing it himſelfe.
            Secondly,Queſt. 2. may not a man will that with an vniuſt
will, which God doth with an holy?
            
               Fieri poteſt vt hoc velit homo voluntate malâ,
               Sol. 
               quod deus vult bonâ.
               Enchir. c. 101. It may fall out (ſaith Saint Auguſtine)
that a man may will that with a will, that is
euill, which God doth will with a good.
            Thirdly,Queſt. 3. Is it good that there ſhould bee euill?
            
               Quamuis ergo,
               Sol. 
               quaemala ſunt, in quantum mala
ſunt, non ſunt bona: tamen vt non ſolum bona, ſed etiam
ſint & mala, bonum eſt. Nam niſi eſſet hoc bonum,
vt eſſent & mala, nullo modo ſinerentur ab omnipotente
bono:
               Enchir. c. 98. Although (ſaith Saint Auguſtine) thoſe
things, that are euill, as they are euill, are not good;
Yet it is good that there ſhould bee not good things
onely, but euills alſo: for except it were good that
euilles be, they would by no meanes bee permitted
of that Good that can doe all things.
            Fourthly,Queſt. 4. is that, which is againſt the word, at
any time done with the will of God?
            
               Intelligendum eſt omnia vel adiunante domino perfici,
               Sol.
vel deſerente permitti: vt intelligas tamen nolente
Deo nihil prorſus admitti.De Praed. & Grat. c. 15. Vnderſtand (ſaith Saint
Auguſtine) that all things are either done by Gods
helpe, or ſuffered to be done by his forſaking, that
thou maiſt know that there is nothing at all committed
if God nill it. Propterea namque magna opera
Domini exquiſita in omnes voluntates eius, vt miro
& ineffabili modo non fiat praeter eius voluntatem,
               August. Enchir. c. 101.
               quod etiam contra eius fit voluntatem: for therefore

(ſaith he) the great workes of the Lord are exquiſit
according to all his willes, that after a maruellous
and vnſpeakeable manner, that is not done beſides his
will, which is alſo done againſt his will.
            Fiftly,Queſt. 5. doth God will no more, then his will is to
worke himſelfe?
            
               Eſt Dei voluntas beneplacitum eius,
               Sol. 
               voluntas eius
operatio eius & voluntas Permiſsio Eius: the will of
God (ſaith Hugo) is his good pleaſure,Lib. 1 de Sacr. c. 7. part. 4. his will is
his operation, and his will is his permiſsion.
            Sixtly,Queſt. 6. doth not God will contrarie thinges, if
he doe will thoſe things, which he doth in his law
forbid?
            Yea (ſaith Perkins) if hee ſhould will that the
ſame thing ſhould come to paſſe,Sol. Depraedeſtin & grat. p. 48. and not come to
paſſe in the ſame reſpect and manner: but God forbiddeth
ſin, as it is an euill: and doth will it ſhould
come to paſſe, as it hath reſpect of good. Here vpon
Thomas Aquinas ſaith,Sum. 9. 19. art. 9. 
               Deum velle mala ſieri, & Deum
velle mala non ſieri, non opponuntur contradictoriè,
cum vtrumque ſit affirmatum, this is no contradiction
to ſay that God doth will that euills ſhould bee
done, & that God doth will that euils ſhould not be
done, ſeeing both the propoſitions are affirmatiue.
            Seuenthly,Queſt. 7. doth God make men ſinners, or doth
he onely order them?
            
               Saint Auſten ſaith,
               Sol. God makes men iuſt and orders
them,De Gen. ad lit. imperf. cap. 5. peccatores autem, in quantum peccatores, non
facit, ſed ordinat tantum: but God makes not ſinners,
ſo farre forth as they be ſinners, but onely orders and
diſpoſes them.De ciuit. Dei l. 11. c. 17 
               And againe, as God is the beſt Creatour
of good willes, it a malarum voluntatum iuſtiſsimus

ordinator, ſo is he a moſt righteous orderer of euill
willes.
            Eightly,Queſt. 8. is it iniurious to God to ſay that hee
drawes good out of euill, and vſeth euills, as a wiſe
Phiſitian doth poiſon, vnto good?
            Clemens Alexandrinus ſaith,
               Sol. it is a point of diuine
wiſedome,Strom. l. 1. vertue and power, not onely to doe good
things, but alſo to bring the deuiſes of the wicked to
ſome good and profitable end, & vtiliter iſs, quaevidentur
mala vtatur, and to vſe thoſe things profitably,
which ſeeme euill. Auſten ſaith,
               Euchir. ad Laur. c. 101. Deus quaſdam voluntates
ſuas vtique bonas implet per malorum hominum
voluntates malas: God doth accompliſh certain
good wils of his, by the naughty wils of naughty
men. And Fulgentius ſaith, De malo opere cuinſlibet
non deſinit ipſe bonum operari, that God ceaſeth
not of euery mans euill worke▪ to worke that,
which is good.
            
            But tell me yet againe,Queſt. 9. though God put no corruption
into any mans heart, yet doth hee not incline
the will to ſinne by offering a man obiects, and
by leauing him to himſelfe, as a Shepheard ſtirres
vp his ſheepe to eate by ſetting Hay or Graſſe before
it, or as a Huntſman ſtirres vp his Greyhound
to a courſe by ſhewing him the Hare, and letting
the ſlip goe?
            Manifeſtum eſt,Sol. &c. It is manifeſt (ſaith Saint
Auſten) that God doth worke in the heartes of men
(Ad Inclinandas corum voluntates) to incline their
willes,De grat. & lib. arbit. cap. 21. whither he pleaſeth, either to good things for his
mercie, or to euill things for their deſerts, ſometimes
verily with his open iudgement, ſometimes ſecret, but

alwaies iuſt.De amiſſ. grat. l. 2. c. 13. 
               And Bellarmine ſaith that by a figure
God exciteth men to ſinne, As an Huntſman ſetteth
the Dogge vpon the Hare, by letting goe the Slip, that
held in the Dogge.
            If theſe things then, which are ſpoken of ſinne
in generall, be applyed vnto the particular ſinne of
Murder, it will appeare that euery Murderer doth (as
it is ſaid of the Murtherers of our Sauiour) Whatſoeuer
the hand and counſell of God had fore-determined
to be done,
               Acts 4. 28. and that God doth permit, limit,
and order him, as it ſeemeth beſt in his holy wiſedome.
            Now wee haue ſeene how God is the Ordainer,
and Inflicter of Death.
            But further wee muſt know,Sinne the mother of Death. that death comes by
Sinne, as the Apoſtle ſheweth, and before ſinne
there was no death at all.Rom. 5. 12. 
               For death is the wages of
ſinne.
               Rom. 6. 23. 
               Quoniam mors non naturae conditio, iſed poena
peccati, ſequatur neceſſe eſt poena peccatum. Becauſe
death (ſaith Saint Auſten) is not the condition of nature,
               Depraed. & grat. c. 11.
               but the puniſhment of ſinne, it is neceſſary that the
puniſhment ſhould follow the ſinne. For it is moſt certaine
that God hath not made death (as though be
were in loue with death for it ſelf ſake) neither hath
he pleaſure in the deſtruction of the liuing:
               Wiſd. 1. 13. 15. but vnrighteouſneſſe
bringeth to death, and man by forſaking
God hath procured his owne death. And although
(as ſaith Siracides) Life and Death come of the
Lord,
               Eccleſ. 11. 14. yet not vpon the ſame ground. For vita is a
donante,
               Aug. retract. l. 1. c. 21. Life is a gift of God, that giues it: but
Mors is a vindicante, Death is a puniſhment inflicted
of God, auenging, as Saint Auſten teacheth. But let

vs heare Saint Paul. By one man, ſaith he, that is,
by Adaem,
               Rom. 5. 12. 
               ſinne entred into the world, and death by
ſinne.
            
            And that wee may briefely diſpatch the cauſes
of Death,Note. we muſt vnderſtand, that as Death is
of God For ſinne, ſo it comes by diuers meanes
(as hath beene toucht afore) all which from the
greateſt to the ſmalleſtare determined, ordered and
directed by the Lord, ſo as that none of them come
to paſſe, but according to his moſt holy prouidence.
And thus wee leaue the cauſes of death,Who are Subiect to Death. and come
vnto the Subiects thereof.
            Albeit Ieſus Chriſt the Sonne of Mary dyed,
yet wee muſt know it was not by his owne deſert
(for hee knew no ſinne,
               2. Cor. 5. 21. he was no Sinner) but becauſe
it was his will to dye,Ioh. 10. 15. 18. that by his death hee
might deliuer vs from eternall death,Rom. 3. 25. and ſanctifie
our death to be the doore of life vnto vs.
            And although Adam dyed, yet it was not becauſe
hee was a man, but becauſe he was a Sinner.
For if Adam had neuer ſinned, Adam had neuer
died,Bucan. loc. 11. q. 13. becauſe God had granted him this grace, Vt
poſſet non mori, ſi eius mandatis obſequeretur, as to bee
able not to die, if he did obey his precepts.
            This then I ſay,1. Cor. 15. 22. 
               All the children of Adam by
reaſon of ſinne (in which all but Chriſt are conceiued
and borne) are all without exception ſubiect
vnto death.Rom. 5. 12. 
               By one man (ſaith Saint Paul) ſinne entered
into the world, and death by ſinne, and ſo death
went ouer All men.
               Lib. contra Fortunat. diſput. 2. 
               The law of ſinne (ſaith Auſten) is
that whoſoeuer ſhall ſinne,
               Gen. 3. 19. 
               muſt die. The Law of death
is whereby it is ſaid to Man, Thou art earth, and

vnto earth thou ſhalt returne. Out of it we ſpring, becauſe
wee are earth. Et in terram ibimus propter meritum
peccatiprimi hominis, And to earth we ſhall returne
for the firſt mans ſinnes deſert.
            
            But you will ſay,Queſt. How is it that Infants of a
day olde doe dye, ſeeing that they commit no
ſinne?
            I anſwere,Anſ. Sinne is either the corruption of nature,Why Infants dye.
or any euill, which proceedes as the fruites
thereof: or thus, ſinne is either originall, or actuall:
the former is in Infants, though not the latter.
For euen Infants are conceiued and borne in ſinne,
               Pſal. 51. 5.
being naturally vncleane and guiltie of Adams firſt
tranſgreſſion.Aug. de praedeſt. & grat. cap. 2. 
               The ſtame of the roote corrupted is ſo
propagated & diffuſed through all the branches, which
ariſe thereout, that as Saint Auſten truely ſpeaketh,
Nec infans quidem vnius diei a culpâ ſit primae praenaricationis
alienus, indeede an Infant of a day old
is not free from the fault of the firſt tranſgreſsion.
            
            But it may bee asked,Queſt. how Infants can become
guilty of that, they did not giue conſent to?
I anſwere.
            
               The fall of Adam and Eue is the fall of all their
Children begotten after the common order,
               Anſ. 
               euen
as the righteouſneſſe of Chriſt is become the righteouſneſſe
and ſaluation of all his Children:
               Why Infants are guiltie of Sinne. 
               becauſe
as Chriſt, ſo Adam was no priuate perſon,
but repreſented all Mankinde, which vvas now
within his loynes.
               Lib. 16. de excell. Mariae. c. 10. Becauſe (ſaith Anſelme) the whole
nature of man was (in protoplaſtis) in our firſt formed
Parents, and nothing thereof was out of them,

the whole nature was weakened, and corrupted. As
therefore, if it had not ſinned, it ſhould haue been propagated
ſuch, as it was of God created: it a poſt peccatum,
qualem ſe fecit peccando, propagatur: ſo ſince
it hath ſinned, it is propagated ſuch, as it hath made
it ſelfe by ſinning. Fuit Adam, & in illo fuimus omnes
perijt Adam, & in illo perijmus omnes. Adam was
(ſaith Saint Ambroſe vpon the Goſpell of Saint Luke)
and in him wee all were: Adam periſhed, and in him
we periſh all; In him, becauſe wee were all in him,
becauſe we are all of him, and he as our Head and
Repreſenter receiued and loſt for vs all.
            
            But it vvill bee obiected that Infants baptiſed
haue no ſinne,Queſt. it beeing taken away in baptiſme,
how happes it then that Infants baptiſed die? And
how is it that the beſt Beleeuers die,Reu. 1. 5. ſeeing that
their ſinnes are vvaſhed away in the blood of
Chriſt?
            I anſwere,Anſ. with the Auguſtane Confeſſion out
of Saint Auſten: Sinne is remitted in Baptiſme (non
vt non ſit, ſed vt non imputetur) not ſo that it ſhould no
longer bee, but that it ſhould not bee imputed. It is deſtroyed
(ſaith Anſelme) not as if it were made nothing,
               In cap. 6. ad Rom.
               ſed vt non cogamur ei ſeruire, but that wee might not
be compeld to ſerue it. But to giue a full anſwere;
the reaſon why the Lord inflicts death on them,Note.
that are baptiſed and doe beleeue, is not as if their
ſinnes were vnforgiuen, for they are for Chriſt forgiuen
fully: neither yet is it to be ſuppoſed that they
ſhould haue dyed, though they had not ſinned:
for death is not the condition of Nature, but the
Daughter and deſert of ſinne: neither yet doth

God take away their liues, as intending thereby to
puniſh Them: for if ſinne be forgiuen them (as it is
indede) then alſo all the puniſhments due to ſinne,
which followes ſinne, as the ſhadow doth the bodie:
God therefore inflicts death vpon his Elect,Note.
not as a Iudge offended with them (for hee loues
them moſt dearely,Pſal. 116. 15. and their death is precious in his
ſight) but as a Father, a Friend, or gracious King▪
who by death doth humble, try, amend, and deliuer
them from worldly miſeries, ſinfull diſeaſes, and
earthly diſcontentments, and brings their ſoules
into heauenly Canaan, to the fellowſhip of Chriſt,
and thoſe bleſſed Spirits of Men and Angels, that
tend vpon him in the Heauens.
            To returne therefore to the point a freſh.All men muſt dye. Euery
child of Adam is ſubiect vnto death.Heb. 9. 27. 
               It is appointed
vnto men that they ſhall once dye, ſaith Paul, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
Death is a debt that all men
owe.2. King. 2. 2. 
               I goe the way of all the Earth, ſaith Dauid, that
is, I draw neere to death, which is the common
courſe of all men liuing vpon she earth.Tuſcul. 1. Ouid. ad Liuiam. 
               Moriendum
eſt omnibus, All men muſt dye, ſaith Tully.
            
            
               Tendimus huc omnes, met am properamus ad vnam.
               Omnia ſub leges mors vocat atra ſuas.
            
            To death (ſaith Ouid) wee doe All of vs goe, it is
the marke wee haſt to, ſhee cauſeth all to bee in
thrall her lawes vnto.Hor. Car. l. 2. od. 28. l. 2. ode. 3. 
               Omnes vna manet nox, &
calcanda ſemel via lethi. Omnes eôdem cogimur.
Death waites for all, the way thereof muſt needes
bee once trod. Thither we are driuen All, ſaith Horace.
There is no writ of priuiledge to exempt vs:
her eyes are pitileſſe, her heart is inflexible, and

her hands will hold no bribes. Pietie, vertue, goodneſſe
cannot put by her ſtroke.Iliad. l. 6. 
               Hector in Homer is
reported to haue ſaid vnto his wife, that no man
could kill him before the time of death deſtinated
vnto him,

                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
            
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : but
as for deſtinie, (and ſuch a thing is death) he tolde
her that no man, neyther good nor bad, could
ſcape it.
            
               —Nec pietas moramHor. carm. lib. 2. od. 14.
               
               Rugis & inſtants ſenectae
               Afferet, indomitae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   morti:
            
            Pretie (ſaith the Poet) will cauſe no ſtay to
death. Abraham, Moſes, Ioſhuah, Iob, Dauid
were godly men: but yet the Scripture ſaith of them
all; they died.
            
            
               Strength is not able to withſtand death.Homer. ll. 18. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
Hercules was a ſtrong man, yet the ſtrength of Hercules
yeelded vnto death, which ouercame him.
Milo was renowned for his ſtrength of bodie, yet
Milo was weaker then death. Sampſon was ſtronger
then euer any mere man was, yet was he ouercome
of death.
            Fortitude and valour of ſpirit cannot out-ſtand
death, but the moſt couragious that euer liued, yeelded
vnto death. Dauid and his Worthies were valiant
men,Hor. carm. l. 2. od. 16. yet all of them are dead. Abſtulit clarum
citamors Achillem, Achilles famous for his courage
was taken away by death.
            
               Wiſedome is a moſt excellent vertue, yet it is vnable

to conquer death.Pſal. 49. 10. 
               Salomon the wiſeſt King that
euer raigned, is of death diſpatched. Wiſe men die
as well as Fooles, and goe whenſoeuer death calleth
them.
            
               Eloquence is not able to charme death, but the
moſt eloquent men that euer liued, haue alſo died,
as Tullie, Demoſthenes, and the reſt.
            
               Nobleneſſe of birth and royaltie are vnable to encounter
with death, and ouermaſter it. Alexander,
Iulius Caeſar, and the moſt victorious Princes, that
haue euer raigned, haue ſtooped vnto death, which
ſubdueth all men!Hor. l. 1. Carm. od. 4. 
               Pallida mors aequo pulſat pede
pauperum tabernas, regum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   turres. Death can finde
way into Princes pallaces, into the courts of Kings
as well as into the peaſants Cottage. Magiſtrates
are Gods in office, but yet as mortall as their ſubiects.
I haue ſaid yee are Gods, but ye ſhall die as a
man, and ye Princes ſhall fall like others. Agamemnon,
Cyrus,
               Pſal 82. 6. 
               Nebuchadnezzar, and Auguſtus Caeſar,
were mightie Monarches: but yet death hath
preied vpon them all.
            
               Old age is venerable, youth is ſtout and luſtie,
ſwiftneſſe and actiuitie are commendable: but death
reuerenceth not the gray hoires of the aged: it reſpecteth
not the greene lockes of the young: neyther
is there any by ſwiftneſſe of foote or dexteritie
of hand able to out-runne and out-match death.
            
               Miſta ſenum ac iuuenum denſantur funera: Old
and yong die in heapes together.Hor. carm. lib. 1. od. 28. Death will not die
vnder any Magiſtrate, neither wil ſhe be ouer-awed
with the hore-head, or graue behauiour of any aged
father. Both old and young are a prey vnto her.

All is fiſh that comes vnto her net. The Lambes
skinne is common in the market, as well as the
old ſheepes.Hor. carm. l. 3. od. 11. 
               Mors & fagacem perſequitur virum,
nec paroit imbellis iuuentae poplit ibus timido
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , tergo.
Death followes him, that flies him, and ſpateth not
young folkes,Ouid. though fearefull of him. Serius aut
citius ſedem properamus ad vnam: Firſt or laſt we
muſt all die. Yea but the beautifull peraduenture
may finde better fauour. No doubtleſſe: Rebecca,
Bathſheba, Eſter, Helena, Irene were goodly creatures.
Abſalon and Achilles were gallants, yet all
theſe with many moe are dead and gone.2. Sam. 2. 18. 
               Aſahel
was as ſwift as a Roe, yet death out-went him, won
him, Goliah was a great fellow, but death was the
greater.
            
               Achitophel was verie politicke and ſubtile, Ariſtotle
learned, Aeſop wittie, Mithridates a good
linguiſt: but they bee dead all. Rich and poore,
Craeſſus as well as Codrus, wiſe and fooliſh, high and
low, young and old, bond and free, all men muſt die.
Omnia peribunt, ſie ibimus, ibitis, ibunt. All muſt away,
I, thou, and euerie man beſides. Intrasti, vt
exires: we came all into the world to go out againe.
Contra vim mortis non eſt medicamen in hortis. No
phiſicke can preuent death, no charme can let it, no
wile can catch it, no bribe can blinde it, no griefe
can moue it, no leaſt can abaſh it, no place, no pleaſure,
no man,Eccl. 3. 20. no meanes can ſtay it. All goe to one
place, and all was of the duſt, and all ſhall returne to
the duſt.
               Quest. Shall all men then die? haue all men then
in former ages died?
            Surely Saint Paul directed by God doth tell theSol.
               
               Corinthes that All (meaning them that liue at the verie
laſte gaſpe of the world) ſhall not die:
               1. Cor. 15. 5. 
               but all muſt
be changed, by which ſodaine change they ſhall be
ſtript of all corruption and mortalitie. And againe,
if euer any man in former daies haue not died, or if
any man ſhall be tranſlated without death into heauen,
as Enok and Elias, who are now in their glorified
bodies with Chriſt in heauen, it muſt be confeſſed
that ſuch a tranſlation and aſſumption is of
meere fauour by a ſingular priuiledge, and not common:
for commonly all men do die, and come not
into heauen, till they haue beene dead. In like
manner, if any man haue beene, or ſhall be ſmitten
into hell aliue in bodie (as Romulus, who by a diuell
was carried away in a mighty tempeſt of thunder &
lightning: or peraduenture Abiram and Dathan)
this is to be counted to be by a ſingular and extraordinarie
iudgement: for ordinarily all wicked men
doe die before they goe into hell.
            Hauing ſpoken of the Subiects of death,Of the time of Death. we come
now to ſpeake of the time, and number thereof:
where we are to note theſe things.
            Firſt, that God in his counſell hath determined the
yeare, the moneth, the weeke, the day, yea the verie
houre, minute, and moment of euery mans death
that dieth. He that denies this, denies the prouidence
of God.
            Secondly, this time prefined by God for death,
cannot be auoided by man, or prorogued. For the
counſell of God ſhall ſtand (ſaith Eſay)Iſa. 46. 10. 11. 
               and his purpoſe
ſhall be performed. Euen Homer brings in his Iupiter,
affirming,Iliad. 1. (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               )

that
whatſoeuer he doth will, ſhall irreuocably and vndoubtedly
be fulfilled. Seeing therefore the day
of death is defined in the decree of God, it is not to
be imagined that any man can euer die ſooner, or
tarrie longer then the time by God appointed.
            
               Certa quidem finis vitae mortalibus adſtat,
               Nec deuitari lethum pete,Lucret. quin obeamus,
               A certain terme of life to each there is appointed
               And die we muſt, death cannot be avoided.
               Lanificas nulli tres exorare puellas
               Contigit:Martial. obſeruant quem ſtatuere diem.
               The purpoſe of God doth ſtand vnalterable,
               His day for our death he keepes vnchangeable.
            
            For though it be true that the Scripture ſaith of
Hezekiah, that God added fifteene yeares vnto his
daies? yet it is not meant as if God did alter his eternal
purpoſe cōcerning Hezekias his death,Iſa. 38. 5. but gaue
ſtrength vnto nature now decayed in him, by reaſon
of his grieuous diſeaſe,Note. ſo as he ſhould be able
by his grace to hold out fifteene yeares longer: not
longer then God had from eternitie determined,
but longer then he now had reaſon to looke
for, being waſted and worne with ſickneſſe and
ſorrow.
            Thirdly, the time of deathes comming is not to
all alike, or the ſame: for one dieth old, another in
his full ſtrength,Seneca. Herc. fur. and from ſome, (Prima, quae vitam
dedit, hora carpſit) the houre that firſt gaue them
life, did alſo take away their life.
            
               
Fourthly, no man can tell certainly how long he
ſhall liue,Deaths houre is vnknowne. nor certainly foretell the verie time of his
death, vnleſſe God doe teach him, or vnleſſe death
be preſent and viſible in his cauſes, Quis eſt, quamuis
ſit adoleſcens, cui ſit exploratum ſe ad veſperum
eſſe victurum? Who is there (ſaith Tullie) though
he a youth, who is certaine of his life till euening?
            Fiftly,Tul. 1. de finib. death is a dayly attendant. Mors quaſi
ſaxum Tantalo ſemper impendet. It hangs and houers
ouer vs alwaies. There is not one moment of life
without ſome motion vnto death: We die daily (ſaith
Seneca) for euerie day we looſe ſome part of our life.
               Epiſt. 23. 
               Et
tunc quoque,
               Note. 
               cum creſcimus, vita decreſcit, and euen
then, when we do increaſe, our life doth decreaſe. Hunc
ipſum, quem agimus diem, cum morte diuidimus: this
verie day, which now we liue in, we diuide with death.
And as euerie man doth carrie death about him in
his forerunnrs,A Simile. euen ſo alſo euery man the longer he
carries it, the nearer he is to it, as a glaſſe, the longer
it runnes, the ſooner its runne out, leſſe ſand remaining
in it.Death is but once.
            
            Sixtly, death befalles one man ordinarily but once.
It is appointed to men that they ſhall once die,
               Heb. 9. 27. ſaith the
Apoſtle,Carm. l. 1. od. 18 
               Et calcanda ſemel via lethi: the way of
death muſt once be trodden, ſaith Horace. Yet ſome
we doubt not but that they haue died twiſe, as Lazarus,
and the man that roſe from death, when the
Prophets dead bodie toucht him,2. King. 13. 22. as hee lay in his
graue, and ſome others alſo: but this was extraordinarie.
Thus much for the time and number of
death: I will adde heere moreouer two things: firſt
that it is an eaſie thing for a man to be depriued of

his life: ſecondly, that as death doth leaue vs, ſo
the iudgement of God in the latter day ſhal find vs.
            Of the eaſineſſe of deaths comming we neede no
long diſcourſe:Death takes poſſeſſion eaſily. experience ſhewes that men are
many waies eaſily brought to death. Our nature is
verie fraile of it ſelfe, and beſides ſubiect to many
exterior anuoyances. Nonne fragiliores ſumus, quàm
ſi vitrei eſſemus? Are wee not more brittle (ſaith
Saint Auſten) then if we were of glaſſe? Vitrum
enim et ſi fragile eſt, tamen ſeruatū diu durat, for
though glaſſe be brittle, yet being kept it laſteth
long. But though wee keepe our ſelues neuer ſo
well, yet death will ſteale vpon vs, and ouercome
vs. For what is your life (ſaith Saint Iames?) It is
euen a vapor,
               Iam. 4. 14. which is eaſily diſſolued. And for externall
meanes, how eaſily can any thing kill, if God
permit? A little fire, a little water, a little waight,
a little bullet, a bone, a flie, what not, who not? Eripere
vitam nemo non homini poteſt: at nemo mortem:
mille ad hanc aditus patent: There is none,
ſaith Seneca, but can take away a mans life,
but no man can hinder death: to it there are
a thouſand paſſages. There are not more riuers
runne into the Sea, then waies leading vnto death.
It is much more eaſie to deſtroy then to build, to
fall then to riſe, ſoone is an houſe burnt downe, that
hath beene long in ſetting vp, corruption is readier
then generation, and a tree that hath beene an hundred
yeares a growing is blowen downe or cut vp
in one day, and may eaſily bee ſoone conſumed to
aſhes.Hor. car. l. 4. od. 7 Our life is tranſitorie. For (puluis & vmbra
ſumus) we are but duſt and ſhadowes (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               )

nothing but a breath and a ſhadow.Eurip. Hor. 16. The
continuance of our life is verie vncertaine. Quis ſcit
an adijciant hodiernae eraſtina ſummae tempora Dij ſuperi?
Who knowes if God will let him liue to morrow?
And how eaſily may death arreſt vs? It is an
eaſie thing to blow out a candle,A Simile. or to put out a
little fire: ſo it is an eaſie thing to cut a-ſunder the
threed of life: eaſily is the life of man extinguiſht;
a little ſmoke or vapor (ſuch as is the life of man)
is eaſily and ſoone reſolued, and vaniſht out of
ſight.
            
               For the ſecond; In what eſtate a mans laſt day
ſhal find him in this eſtate (ſaith Auſten) ſhall the laſt
day of the world receiue him:As death leaues ſo the Iudge findes men. Ad D
                        •
                     oſcor.
                Quoniam qualis in die
iſto moritur, talis in die illo iudicabitur: For as he dies
in this day ſuch ſhall his iudgement be in that day. As
the tree falleth,Eccl. 11. 3 ſo it lieth. For this life is the onely
time allowed vnto man to prouide againſt damnation.
Quando hinc exceſſum eſt,Cyp. Tract. ad Demetrian. nullus iam
poenitentiae locus: When we are once gone hence
(ſaith Saint Cyprian) there is no place for repentance.
            I come now to ſpeake of the commodities, that
come by death.Of the cōmodities of death. Death vnto the R
                  •
               probate and vngodly
doth bring no good, but depriues them of all
earthly benefits: and though it rid them of many
croſſes, which they did perhaps endure, whiles they
liued, yet it makes them no true gainers, but ſets
them in further miſerie, for meaſure greater, and
for continuance longer. For the wicked are in bitter
and inextricable torments ſo ſoone, as death
hath preyed vpon them▪
            
            
               
The true commodities then of death belong
truely to the Elect and Godly,
               To whom death is 
                     •
                  ndeed a benefit. whoſe death is ſanctified
by the death of Chriſt, who by his death hath
beene the death of ſinne, which is the cauſe of
death, and by fulfilling the Lawe for vs hath made
an entrance for vs into heauen.
            Firſt of all,Commod. 1. by death the Children of God are
deliuered from all worldly troubles and vexations.
Mors eſt malorum remedium,
               Vid. Plutarch. de conſolat. ad Apol. 
               & portus humanis
tempeſtatibus: Death is the remedy of all earthly
euilles, and brings vs out of all ſtormes and tempeſts.
            Secondly,Commod. 2. by Death the godly are deliuered
wholly from ſinne: after death they ſinne not at all:
but in their ſoules, and after the Reſurrection in
their ſoules and bodies, they doe ſerue God purely;
God in his prouidence ordaining that the Daughter
ſhould eate vp the Mother, that ſinne the mother of
death, ſhould be deuoured by death.
            Thirdly,Commod. 3. by death the ſoules of the Faithfull are
brought into Abrahams boſome, and inioy the fellowſhip
of thoſe onely, who are iuſt and holy, and
doe liue in all peace and quietneſſe in a Paradiſe of
euerlaſting pleaſures, where the King is Veritie, the
Lawe Charitie, the peace Felicitie, and the Life Eternitie.
Precious is the death of the Saints (ſaith
Bernard) precious without doubt, as the end of labors,
as the conſummation of a victorie, tanquam vitae ianua,
& perfectae ſecuritatis ingreſſus, as the doore of
life, and the entrance to perfect ſecuritie.
            
            And the onely diſcommoditie, that death doth
bring vnto the godly, is that it depriues the ſoule

of the body for a time: which diſcommoditie is not
voide of many commodities, which doe make amends.
For by this departure of the Soule,Note. a man
is taken from the ſight and ſenſe of many ſinnes
and ſorrowes, many croſſes and calamities: he looſeth
earth, and gaineth heauen: hee forſaketh men,
but findeth Angels and holy Spirits: hee looſeth
the company of his friends on earth, but inioyes
the face and fellowſhip of God, of Chriſt in heauen:
and though he leaues his body, which he loues moſt
dearely,A ſimile. yet hee ſhall not be depriued of it alwaies:
hee goes but as it were out of a ſmokie and ſluttiſh
houſe, waiting a time (yet with vnſpeakeable ioy
al the while with pleaſing companions there where
is good being) till it be renewed, and made cleane.
Wherevpon Saint Auſten ſaith.In Ioh. 
               Qui cupit diſſolui, &
eſſe cum Chriſto, non patienter moritur, ſed patienter
viuit & delectabiliter moritur, He which deſireth to
be diſſolued, and to be with Chriſt doth not dye
as a Patient, but liues as a Patient, and dies with
delight.
            Indeede Death to the wicked is full of diſcomforts.Death is diſcommodious to the wicked 1. 2 3 4 5.
For it depriues them of their worldly promotions,
profits, and pleaſures: it robs them of their
Friends and Familiars: it depriues them of their bodies:
it abridges them of the light of the ſunne, the
ſocietie of the liuing, and the comfort of the creatures:
and finally, it cloſeth them vp in Hell vvith
Diuels and Reprobates, there to bee tormented in
endleſſe,Aug. ad Julian. ep. 211. eaſeleſſe, and remedileſſe tortures, Vbi
mors optabitur, & non dabitur, where death ſhall be
deſired, but not granted to them.
            
               
Hauing thus farre diſcourſed of bodily death, we
will now ſee whereto it is compared, and then anſwere
a few queſtions, and ſo come to apply the former
doctrines to our edification, and this with as
much breuitie and perſpicuitie, as we may conueniently.
            
            Death is compared to a Phyſitian,
               What to death may be compared. Simile 1. Death is a Phyſitian. Adiſsimile.
                becauſe it
cures men of all earthly miſeries, as the Phyſitians
cure men of their maladies. But herein it ouergoes
all Phyſitians: for whereas it killes them all, they
are not all able to kill it.
            It is alſo likened to an Hauen.
               Death is an Hauen, For as an Hauen
               
affoordeth quietneſſe, and comfort to thoſe, that
haue beene toſſed with windes and waues vpon the
Seas: ſo death vnto the Godly is a quiet and ſafe
harbour, freeing them from all that hard weather,
and tedious trauels, which they did indure in the
world, which as a Sea, is full of changes, croſſewindes,
tempeſtes, and vexations; according to
that of the Scripture,Iſay. 57. 1. Reu. 14. 13. Adiſsimilitude.
                
               The righteous are taken away
from the euill. They rest from their labours, and their
workes follow them. But yet here is ſome diſsimilitude
in two other reſpects.In two caſes Death is vnlike an Hauen. For firſt, the hauen entertaines
and comforts all, whether good or bad:
but death affords no true reſt, no true comfort, but
to the godly onely. For much more miſerable are
the wicked after death, as may appeare by the parable
of the rich Epicure in the Goſpel:
                  Luke 16. A ſecond diſſimilitude. Secondly, ſaylers
tarry not long in the hauen, but put forth again,
when they ſee conuenient, into the Seas a freſh: but
men, when they once come into Deathes Hauen,
there they continue till God will, there they tarry,

and neuer returne more into this mortall life, they
neuer come more vpon this glaſſie Sea, vnleſſe it bee
by an extraordinarie worke of God. He ſhall returne
no more to his houſe ſaith Iob,
               Job. 7. 10. 
               neither ſhall his place
know him againe. 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
Diſeaſes
come and goe,Vid. Nat. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Myth. l. 3. c. 13. and returne againe: but death
comes but once, neither did any man euer ſee (ſaith
Agathias) a dead man to come againe. Let the holy
Land bee excepted, and it will not bee denyed, I
thinke, except perhaps in Troas once a dead man
was by Paul reuiued.Acts 20. 9. 10.
            
            
                Thirdly,Death is a Night. Death is compared to the Night. For
as the night is the priuation of the light, ſo death is
the priuation of life: as the night followes vpon
the going downe of the Sunne, which is the fountaine
of light, ſo death enſueth the departure of the
ſoule,A diſsimile. which is the Author of life. But yet here alſo
is ſome oddes: for the night comes and goes, and
comes againe: the Sunne doth ſet and riſe againe:
but when our life is gone, when our death is
come, wee returne no more to a life with men on
earth: our night endes not, our Sunne riſeth not,
vntil that determined time of the Reſurrection be fulfilled,
which how long or how ſoone it will be, before
it bee expired, God, that hath appointed all
times and ſeaſons, can onely tell.
            
                Furthermore, Death is compared to a Medicine
or Remedie, for it cures all croſſes, it is a ſalue for all
ſores,Agath. in Nat. Com. vbi ſupra. A diſsimile. a medicine for all maladies, and the remedie
of all calamities, Quae morbos placat, pauperiemque
leuat. But heere is the difference; a man may chuſe

whether he will vſe a medicine or no: but death will
not be denyed, cannot be eſchewed, Dat cunctis legem,
recipit cum paupere regem. And where as medicines
are applyed during the reſidence of the
Soule in the bodie: this medicine is the reliction
of the bodie, the diſceſſion of the Soule out of
the bodie.
            Againe, Death is like Fire, that ſaith not, It is 
inough:
               
                  Pro. 30 16. Death a fire. ſo is Death vnſaturable, it is not contented
with thoſe infinite millions, which it hath alreadie
deuoured,A diſsimile. but ſtill waiteth to ſwallow vp more. Indeede
here is great diuerſitie in another reſpect. For
there is no fire made by man, but it will either bee
put out, or goe out: but death is a fire, that man by
ſinne hath kindled, which hee is not able to extinguiſh,
neither will it dye of it ſelfe. Chriſt alone is
able to ſlake it with his bloud: he will be the death
of death.
            Moreouer death is likened to an Harueſter vvith 
his Sickle cutting downe the corne without partialitie,Death is a Reaper.
or reſpect: ſo death moweth down all, and ſpareth
none: Mors reſecat, mors omne necat, nullumque
veretur: it cuts vp all, killes all, feares none. And
as the Harueſter cuts downe the corne, but is not
cut vp himſelfe of the corne, neither can bee: ſo
death takes away all, but it ſelfe is kild of none.
Mors mordet omnes, mordetur a nullo: it bites all, it
deuoures all,A Diſsimilitude. it is bitten, it is deuoured of none. Yet
here alſo is ſomething vnlike: For Harueſters tarry
till the corne bee ripe: but death ſtayes not alwaies
till men come to ripeneſſe of age, but like a woman,
that longs, puls the greene Apple off, before it bee

halfe ripe, or like hungry Cattell, which croppe vp
corne as ſoone as it ſproutes vp. Pelles quot pecorum,
tot venduntur vitulorum. Infants dye as well as
old men: the Calues skinne is as vſually ſold in the
market, as the old Cowes, and the Lambe goes to
the ſhambles as well as the Ewe.
            
            
                Seuenthly, death is compared to a cruell Tyranneſſe,
that pities neither age,Death is a Tyrant. nor ſexe: and ſo death,
altogither pitileſſe, ſpareth neither man nor vvoman,
neither yong, nor old. Eſops wit, Irenes beautie,
Tullies tongue, the Infancie of Dauids firſt child
by Bathſheba, no reſpect whatſoeuer can withſtand
death, obtaine her fauour. Indeede here is a difference:
for as Iuuenall ſaith,A Diſsimili. Satyra 10. 
               Ad generum Cereris ſine
caede & vulnere pauci Deſcendent reges, & ſicca morte
tyranni, few tyrants ſcape vnmurdered: but no
man can tyrannize ouer death, no man can kill her.
Hee that could kill a thouſand with an Aſſesiaw,
               Iudg. 15. 15.
could not kill death with all his weapons. Euulſisque
truncis Enceladus iaculator audax.
               Horat. Carm. l. 3. Od. 4. Hee (if any
ſuch) that could pull vp trees by the rootes and caſt
them like dartes, could not ſtrike a dart through
death. And they, that haue beene moſt skilfull in
poyſons, could not ſaue themſelues from the
poiſon of death, and poiſon her: no ſinner can ſubdue
her.
            
            
                Moreouer, death is compared to a woman winged.
For death is fruitfull and very ſwift:Death is a flying woman. it often
takes men ere they bee aware, and like a Serieant
is at their backes before they looke for
 her.
            Againe,Death is a Sea. death is like the Sea, which is terrible,

not to bee drained, not to bee turned out of his
channell, and which breaking bankes and preuailing
without mercy carries all away with it, which
it meetes with. And as into the Sea, ſo vnto death,
there are many vvayes and meanes to bring
men.
            Beſides, it is compared to the Lyon in the fable,
to whoſe denne many beaſts went,Death a Lion. but none returned:
ſo many die, but from death to life again we
ſee no man to returne. It accepts as many as comes,
but like a couetous niggard, it keepes all and parts
with none.
            Finally, death is compared to Sleepe. Homer
               
calles Sleep the Brother of death (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               )
And Diogenes being wakened
out of a dead Sleepe,Death a Sleep. and asked of his Phyſitian,
how he did,Laert. lib. 6. Plutarc. Conſol., ad Apoll. anſwered I am well, Nam frater fratrem
amplectitur, for one brother embraceth another.
            
            And Gorgias beeing neere vnto death and ſleepic,
if any man askt him how hee did, returned
this anſwere, I am ſomnus incipit me fratri ſuo tradere.
Sleepe begins now to deliuer me to his brother,
meaning death. Which two are ſomething alike.
For death is common as ſleepe: and a dead man is
depriued of worldly cares, and is at reſt in his ſoule,
if godly, and his bodie lyeth in the graue as in a
bed:A Disſimilitude. but yet a man ſleeping is not wholly depriued
of the vſe of his bodie: for the pulſes beate, the
ſtomacke digeſteth, and the breath comes & goes:
but death depriues a man wholly for a time of all
vſe of his body: Againe, a man wakes out of his
ſleepe and returnes vnto the workes of his calling a

freſh: but a dead man wakes not to the workes of
his former life: neither can hee bee awakened out
of the ſleepe of death, but by the power of God,
of whom alone the day of our reſurrection is ſeene
and knowne.
            Thus much for the things, where vnto death may
be compared.
            There remaine certaine Queſtions concerning
death,28 queſtions about Death. worthy to bee ſoiled, which I remembred
not in time to ſet in their more proper places, neither
are they here ſo methodically digeſted, as
plainely reſolued.
            Firſt,Queſt. 1. it may bee demanded whether any death
may be ſaid to be naturall, ſeeing it deſtroyes life,
which is according to nature, Quae cupit ſuum eſſe,
which delights ſtill to be?
            I anſwere,Sol. a thing is ſaid to be naturall more waies
then one.How death may be ſaid to be naturall. Death being ſimply in it ſelfe conſidered
is not naturall: but foraſmuch as that which doth
neceſſarily follow the nature of a thing, and hath
the beginning or ground of his exiſtence therein,
to which that, which is violent, is oppoſed, is called
naturall,Note. 
               That death therefore, which followes the
conſumption and diſſipation of the naturall moyſture
by the naturall heat, ſeeing it comes of cauſes,
which are within the bodie, in that reſpect is called
naturall.
            
            Secondly,Quest. 2. it may againe be asked, what naturall
death is properly?
               Sol.
            
            I anſwere,Naturall death deſcribed. that properly is called naturall death,
when naturall heat faileth, by reaſon that the moyſture
is dried vp by it, as a lamp goeth out when the

oyle is ſpent. And this death is with much eaſe,
and with little or no paine, as Ariſtotle writeth.
            Thirdly,Queſt. 3. it may be asked, what violent death is
properly?
            I anſwere,Sol. that is called violent death, when by
accident, eyther the moyſture is drawne out of the
bodie,What violent death is. or the heat extinguiſhed by ſome inward or
outward violence and oppreſſion. Inward violence
is by poyſon,A Simile. gluttonie, drunkenneſſe, or ſuch exceſſe,
as when a lampe is drowned in the oyle. Outward
violence is when a man is ſtrangled with an
halter, as a fire ſodainely choaked with ſome huge
heape of earth,A Simile. or aſhes, throwne vpon it; and many
moe oppreſſions of life there are of this kinde.
So that, taking violent death in this largeneſſe of
ſenſe, it will appeare that fewe die a naturall
death.
            
            Fourthly,Queſt. 4. it may be demanded, when a man doth
die, or when the ſoule doth leaue the bodie?
            I anſwere,Sol. then when there is a defect of thoſe inſtruments
of the ſoule, whereby life is prolonged.
When the bodie is become vnfit for the ſoule to
worke with, then doth the ſoule forſake the bodie,
which it loues moſt dearely,Note. and not before. Death
comes not by the impatience & fickle-mindedneſſe
of the ſoule, but by reaſon of the impotencie and
vnaptneſſe of the bodie;A Simile. as a workeman leaues his
toole, when it is become altogether vnfit for his vſe.
            Fiftly,Quaeſt. 5. but whence is it that one man dieth ſooner
then another, that nature failes in one ſooner
then in another?
            I anſwere,Sol. the higheſt reaſon hereof is Gods decree:

but the Principall naturall cauſe of the length
of life is firſt a fit compoſition of heat and moyſture
in the ſinewes,The cauſes of long life. marrow, ſpirits, &c. And ſecondly,
the long and fortunate continuance of this good
temper, which being interrupted by diſeaſes and other
oppreſſiōs death neceſſarily follows, & a mans
life is ended, as an artificers occupation then endes
of neceſſitie, when his tooles are worne and paſt
working with,A Simile.
            
            Sixtly,Queſt. 6. whether natural death be by no meanes to
be auoided (if a man eſcape violence) ſeeing that
the radicall humour, as it waſteth, may be repaired
by nurriture, and therewith maintained?
            I anſwer,Sol. that the radicall humour may indeed
by nouriſhment be daily renewed, yet that reſtored
moyſture is not ſo good, as that which was waſted
of the beate:This anſwere belongs to the ſtate of mans fall by ſinne. it is not ſo pure as that, which
was of the ſeed: it is not ſo wel wrought and excocted
as the ſeed, neither ſo exactly mingled and attenuated.
Seeing therefore that which is reſtored, is
not ſo pure as that, that was waſted, the heat for
want of conuenient matter to feed vpon at length
is diſſipated and put out. Neyther is the quantitie
of the humour reſtored ſo much to be reſpected,Note. as
the qualitie: whereupon Auicennus ſaith that,
Though there were as much reſtored, as is daily waſted,
yet muſt we of neceſsitie die. And beſides all this,
we are all Sinners,
               Note. vnable to keep ſuch a preciſe and
regular diet, but that we ſhall offend herein, and old
age will ſteale vpon vs, doe what wee can. Feſtinat
enins decurrere velox Floſculus auguſtae,
               Juuenal. Satyr. 80. 
               miſerae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , breuiſsima vitae Portio, dum bibimus, dum ſerta,

vnguenta, puellas Poſcimus, obrepit non intellecta ſenectus.
Senſim, ſine ſenſu ſeneſcimus.
            
            Seuenthly,Queſt. 7. what difference is there betwixt the
death of a man, and of a beaſt?
            I anſwere,Sol. when a beaſt dies, his ſoule doth vaniſh,
and is diſſolued: but when a man dies,
his ſoule ſtill continues. For the ſoule of a beaſt is
mortall: but the ſoule of man is immortall, as hath
beene ſhewed. God (ſaith Gregory) created three
liuing ſpirits:
               Three liuing ſpirits created 
               one, which is not couered with fleſh: another
which is couered with fleſh, but dies not with the
fleſh: a third which is couered with fleſh, & dies with the
fleſh. Primus Angelorum ſecundus hominum, tertius
brutorū animaelū: the firſt is of Angels, the ſecond of
men, the third of brute beasts. And albeit the Scriptures
ſometimes ſpeak of the death of the ſoules,How mans ſoule is ſaid to die. yet
eyther the perſon or the life is to be vnderſtood, or
ſuch a death as is not the extinction and deletion
of the ſoule, but her ſeparation from God, who is
her comfort and contentment.2. Difference. Secondly, the death
of a man is wont to be with much comfort, or elſe
horror of hell it ſelfe, our conſcience telling vs of
another ſtate after death: but beaſts, becauſe they
haue no conſcience, no hope of heauen, nor feare
of hell, are not therefore ſubiect to ſuch paſſions,
eyther of ioy or ſorrow.3. Difference. Thirdly, when beaſts die,
they die for euer: but though death deuoure vs, as
the Whale did Ionas, and binde vs as the Philistins
did Sampſon, yet we ſhall come forth againe, the
bands and ſnares of death ſhall be broken, and we
ſhall be deliuered. For it is moſt true which Saint
Bernard ſaith:In Cant. ſer. 107 
               There is a threefold ſtate of holy

ſoules: the firſt in the corruptible bodie (and that is in
this life:) the ſecond out of the bodie, (and this is after
death;) the third in the bodie glorifyed (and that
ſhal be at the Reſurrection,) And ſo there is a threefold
condition of wicked ſoules: the firſt is in their
bodies of ſinne: the ſecond is in miſery out of their
bodies by death diſſolued: the third ſhall be in eternall
torments within their bodies at the Reſurrection:
which Reſurrection ſhall be of men,Iohn. 5. Act. 24. 15. Queſt. 8. both iuſt
and vniuſt, but not of beaſts.
            Eightly, Whether may death be ſaid to be euill?
            
               Thales ſaid that death was no more euill,Sol. then a
mans natiuitie:Laert. lib. 1. c. 1. wherefore being asked by one, that
heard him ſay ſo, Cur igitur tu non moreris? Why
doe not you die then, Thales? Hee made him this
wittie anſwere: Ob hoc ipſum, quia nihil refert. Potius
enim habetur, quod accerſitur: which is as if he
ſhould haue ſaid, The reaſon, why I die not, and forſake
my life, is becauſe there is no difference betwixt
life and death one is not better then another:
for that is counted the better, which is deſired. If
therfore I ſhould haſten mine owne death, it might
be well ſuppoſed that I doe account death better
then life, whereas I make no difference betweene
them. But to paſſe by this conceit of Thales: that
we may anſwere rightly to the queſtion we muſt diſtinguiſh.
            Death conſidered ſimply by it ſelfe,
                  Anſ. How death is an euill, and how not. and as it is an
effect of ſinne, is euill: for if life bee good, then
death muſt needes be euill: and if it bee an euill to
bee in Hell tormented, then to an euill man death
muſt needes bee euill, becauſe by death his ſoule is

brought into affliction in hell, and hee altogether
depriued of thoſe benefits of life, which hee did before
enioy.
            But death beeing conſidered as bereaued of her
ſting,
               Note. which is ſinne,
               1. Cor. 15. and as it is ſanctified by the
death of Chriſt to be the dore of life vnto his members,
it is not in this reſpect euill, but rather good.
Chryſoſtome ſaith well, Mors noneſt malum: ſed
poſt mortem poenas dare malum eſt, Death is not euill,
but to ſuffer puniſhmēt after death is euill. Death is
an euil, not in regard of gods iuſtice, for ſo it is good:
but it is euill to him, that ſuffers it; for it is a puniſhment,
and a very curſe to the wicked: But vnto the
godly it is become a benefit▪ the graue is as a bed,
Death is as a ſleepe, and the ſoule is at peace vvith
Chriſt.
            9. Whether is the day of a mans birth or death
the better?Queſt. 9.
            
            I anſwere,Sol. if a mans birth and death bee ſimplie
conſidered, ſurely it is better to be borne, then to
dye, Melius eſt naſci, quàm denaſci. But if wee remember
how we are borne in ſinne,Pſal. 51. 5. how we ſinne,
as long as we liue,Note. and that our life is full of croſſes:
and if withall we doe remember that death, if wee
die Gods Seruants, doth deliuer vs from all worldly
euilles, both of ſinne and ſorrow, and is the meane,
whereby our ſoules are brought vnto the Cape of
Hope, and Hauen of pleaſing reſt, then ſurely wee
may ſay with Salomon,
               Ec. 7. 3. 
               the day of death is better then
the day that one is borne in: & melius eſſe denaſci,
quam naſci.
            
            10. Whether is better to dye quickely,Queſt. 10. or to
liue long?
            
               
I anſwere,Sol. it is better for a Reprobate to dye betimes
euen in the cradle, then to liue till olde age:
becauſe his ſinne increaſeth with his yeeres, and his
puniſhment ſhall bee anſwerable to his ſinne. But
for an Elect and godly man to dye quickly, is better
then to liue long, and not better.
            It is the better in this ſenſe,Note. becauſe he is the ſooner
deliuered from ſin and ſorrow: it is not ſo good
in another regard, namely becauſe by his long life
hee may doe much good vnto others, and hee may
come to ſuch grouth of grace, & to ſhew forth ſuch
abundance of good workes, as that his glory in the
life to come may be much augmented: for as we doe
excell in grace in this world, ſo we ſhall exceede in glorie
in the world to come.
            
            11. Whether is it lawfull for a man to haſten
his death,Queſt. 11. that he might bee the ſooner vvith
Chriſt?
            I anſwere,Sol. wee may not do euill, that good may
come of it.Rom. 3. 8. The end makes not an act good, but the
good ground of it,We muſt not die till God call vs. the good forme and the good
end together. Thou ſhalt not kill, ſaith God, as
not another, ſo not thy ſelfe. Non eſt noſtrum mortem
arripere: It is not for vs (ſaith Saint Hierome)
to catch at death, but to accept it willingly if others inflict
it. Vnde & in perſecutionibus non licet propriâ manu
perire: Wherefore alſo, when wee are perſecuted, it
is vnlawfull to kill our ſelues.
            
            12. Whether is it lawfull to deſire death,Queſt. 12. or
no?
            I anſwer thus:Sol. To deſire death merely for deaths
ſake, and onely or principally to be rid of grieuances

is a certaine weakeneſſe; and vnlawfull. But to
deſire death to be deliuered from all ſinne; and to
be with Chriſt, and in the laſt place) to bee rid of
croſſes (and annoyances, ſo long as we referre all to
the good pleaſure of our God, it is vndoubtedly
lawfull,Phil. 1. 23. and according to Paules enſample. It was
well ſaid by Saint Auſten: Poteſt iuſtus iuſtè optare
mortem in vitâ amariſsimâ: ſi non concedat, iuſtum
pativitam amariſsimam: a iuſt man may iuſtly wiſh
for death, when his life is full of Wormewood: but
if God grant not this, iuſt it is to ſuffer this moſt
bitter life.
            13. Whether may a man pray againſt death?Queſt. 13.
            
            I anſwere,Sol. to pray againſt death as it is the ſtipend
of ſin it is allowable:lu what ſenſe a man may pray againſt death. againe to pray againſt
death, till a man haue learned how to dye is lawfull,
prouided that he ſtudie and deſire to be prepared
and inſtructed: to pray againſt death, till a man
haue effected ſome good worke, which hee deſired
to ſee done before his death; & generally if a mans
endes of his deprecation of death be good, it is lawfull
for him to pray againſt it,Note. Prouided, that hee
commit all to the will of God, reſting himſelfe therwith
content,Iob. 13. 15. reſoluing with Iob, that though the
Lord doe kill him,
               Iob 17. 3. 4. 6. yet to put his confidence in him,
and ſo long as his breath is in him, to ſpeake no
wickedneſſe, nor to forſake his righteouſneſſe.
            14.Queſt. 14. Whether is death to be feared?Sol
               Epiſt. 88.
            
            When thou haſt walked much and long (ſaith
Seneca) thou muſt returne home. It is folly to feare
that, which thou canſt not auoide: hee hath not eſcaped
death, who hath deferred it. Hac conditione

intraui, vt exirem, I came into the world vvith this
condition, to goe forth againe. Therefore for a man
to torture himſelfe with the feare of Death, and
as it were to dye for feare leaſt hee ſhould dye, is
baſeneſſe of Spirit, and vnchriſtian.
            But yet altogether to be without feare of death
is not good:Note. for death beeing againſt Nature,
doubtleſſe Nature cannot but ſomething feare
it:How death may be feared. and for a man nothing to feare it is a certaine
oppreſsion of Nature. Beſides, the feare of death,
if moderate and mixed with Faith in the Death of
Chriſt, doth further to repentance and ſanctimonie
of life,Aug. l. 2. de doct. Chriſt. and (quaſi clauis carnis omnes motus ſuperbiae
ligno crucis affigit) doth faſten all proud and carnall
motions as it were with nayles vnto the Croſſe. Againe,
the moderate feare of Death makes vs meditate
the deeper of it, & nihil ſic reuocat a peccato,
quàm frequens mortis meditatio, and nothing (ſaith
Saint Auſten) doth ſo much recall a man from ſin,
as doth the often meditation of his death. And finally,
there is no better way to vanquiſh the terrible
aſpect of death approching, then a well tempered
feare of Death before it doe come.Greg. 
               Sic mors
ipſa, cum venerit, vincitur, ſi prius, quam veniat,
ſemper timeatur. Death, when it comes, is
ouercome, if, before it doe come, it be alwaies feared.
            
            15 Whether is the ſuddenneſſe of death in it
ſelfe an euill?Quaeſt. 15.
            
            
               I anſwer,
               Sol. 
               if the death be not euil, the ſuddē cōming
of it is not euil:
               When ſudden is euill. Anſelm ſaith wel: Nō nocet bonis &c.
It is not hurtful to good men, though they be ſlain, or die
ſuddenly: non enim ſubito moriuntur, qui ſemper ſe

cogitauerunt morituros: for they die not ſuddenly,
which haue alwayes thought they ſhould die. Precious
in the ſight of the Lord, alwayes is the death of
his Saints: as it is ſaid, Quacunque hora iuſtus moriatur,
iuſtitia eius non auferetur ab eo. Whenſoeuer
a righteous man dieth, his righteouſneſſe ſhall not bee
taken from him. And as the Common ſaying is,
Qualis vita, finis ita, a good life hath a good end,
how ſudden ſoeuer it falleth out.
            16 Whether is it vnlawfull to lament the death
of Parents,Queſt. 16. Children, Friends, Kinsfolkes, and honeſt
Chriſtians?
            Not to bee grieued at all for their death,Sol. is a ſinne
to be lamented with griefe of heart. For they are
our fleſh,How we may lament the death of our friends. wee haue inioyed comfort by them, and
are now depriued of it: and their life ſometimes is
very profitable to the Church and Kingdome. To
grieue then is a thing both naturall and honeſt.
Contriſtamur (ſayth Auſten) ſet non ſicut caeteri.
               De verb. Ap. ſer. 3 2.
               Wee ſorrow, but not as others, that are hopeleſſe.
Non culpamus affectum (ſayth Bernard) but exceſſum,
               In Cant. ſer. 29.
               wee accuſe not the affection,
               1. Theſ. 4. 13. 14. 
               but the exceſſe,
Saint Paul forbidding the Theſſalonians to ſorrow
for the dead, doth not ſimply forbid all ſorrow: but
Sorrow not (ſayth he) as other, that haue no hope. For
if we beleeue that Ieſus is dead, and is riſen, euen ſo
them, which ſleepe in Ieſus, will God bring with him.
And hee himſelfe profeſſeth that God had mercie
on him,Note. in ſparing Epaphroditus,
               Phil. 2. 27. 
               Leaſt (quoth hee)
I ſhould haue ſorrow vpon ſorrow. What ſhould I
heape vp the examples of Abraham mourning for
his wife Sarah, of the Iſraelites for Samuel, of the

               Machabees for Iudas their noble Captaine, of
Dauid for Ionathan, of the Widowes for Dorcas,
of Martha for Lazarus? Infinite are examples
hereof.Note. But this our mourning muſt bee moderate,
and mixed with hope. For they are not (amiſsi but
praemiſsi) loſt. but ſent before vs. And (Sapiens eodem
animo fert illorum mortem, quo ſuam expectat)
a wiſeman will take their death, as hee doth expect
his owne.Whiles I was a writing theſe things, it pleaſed God to take from me mine onely ſonne, before he was a fortnight old. 
               Filium meum memini me genuiſſe mortalem
moriturum.
            
            
               Thy child, that's borne to day, and dies to morrow,
               Looſeth ſome daies of reſt, but yeares of ſorrow.
               Thou looſeſt wife, and friends, and parents deare,
               The Heauens find them, though thou looſe them
here.
            
            17 But of all the meanes of death:Queſt. 17. which are
very many, which doth death moſt certainely follow
and attend?
            Seneca ſhall giue the anſwere.
               Epiſt. 30. Other kindes of
death (ſayth he) are mingled with hope.Sol. A diſeaſe
endeth, a fire is extinguiſhed, a man eſcapes a ruine,
which was likely to haue oppreſt him, the Souldier being
readie to cut the necke aſunder held his hand back:
nil autem habet, quod ſperet, quem ſenectus ducit ad
mortem: but there is no hope of eſcaping leſt for him,
whom Old-age leadeth vnto death.
            18 Of all,Quaeſt. 18. that die: who commonly forget
themſelues and die without ſound repentance?
            The ſinner (ſayth Caeſarius) is ſmitten with this
puniſhment (Vt moriendo obliuiſcatur ſui,Sol. qui viuensIn admonit. 6.
               
oblitus est Dei) that hee ſhould forget himſelfe at his
death, who forgot God in his life. Et vix benè moritur
quimalé vixit, and he, that liued ill (ſayth Saint
Auſten) doth ſcarcely die well,
            19 Whom to is death moſt terrible,Quaeſt. 19. and vnwelcome?
            Surely to thoſe,Sol. whoſe GOD is their Belly,
whoſe portion is the world, whoſe end is damnation,
and whoſe conſcience affrights them. Death
(ſayth Tully) is terrible to thoſe,
               In paradox. 
               who looſe all thinges
with their life, not vnto them, whoſe praiſe is immortall.
            
            20 Who die moſt cheerefully,Quaeſt. 20. and with leaſt
diſcomfort?
            
               They queſtionleſſe,
               Sols 
               whoſe conſcience witneſſeth
with them. Venientem nemo hilaris mortem recipit,
niſi qui ſe ad illam rectè compoſuerit, No man giues
death a cheerefull welcome, when it comes, but hee
that hath rightly prepaired himſelf for her. Hee dies
moſt readily that liued moſt religiouſly.
            
            21 Is there any thing in the world more certaine,Quaeſt. 21.
and withall more vncertaine then death?
            
               No verily.
               Sol. What (ſayth Saint Bernard) in humane
things is there more certaine, then death, and
what is found more vncertaine,Death both certaine and vncertaine. then the houre of
death? Shee pitties not pouertie, ſhee reuerenceth not
riches, ſhe ſpareth not wiſdome, manners, age: niſi quod
ſenibus mors eſt in ianuis, iuvenibus vero in inſidijs:
ſauing that death lookes olde men full in the face, but
lies skulking to take yongmen napping at vnawares.
            22 Doth death make no difference betweene
the bodies of the rich and the poore,Quaeſt. 22. the noble and

the ſimple? And are all theſe worldly differences among
men become dead by death?Sol.
            
            
               We are all borne naked (ſaith Saint Ambroſe) and
wee die naked: there is no difference among the carkaſſes
of the dead, vnleſſe perhaps the bodies of rich
men doe ſauour more ſtrongly by reaſon of their riot.
               A Simile.
And as a Marchants Counters vpon his counting
table may ſtand for a greater or leſſer number, as he
pleaſeth, but are all alike, when they are ſhuffled
together, and put in the bagge: euen ſo theſe earthly
differences, which were amongſt men, whiles
they liued vpon earth, doe all take their end, and
die, when death hath once ſhuffled them together
on heapes in the graue. Alphonſus, asked what
made all men equall? anſwered Aſhes.
            
            23. But of all kindes of death,Quaeſt. 23. which is the beſt,
and worſt?
            Doubtleſſe of the beſt the death is the beſt,Sol: and
of the worſt the death is the worſt.Whoſe death is beſt. Of the death of
good men, I ſuppoſe the death of Martyrs to bee
the beſt, becauſe it is indured with ſhew of the
greateſt vertues, and (as I thinke) is beſt rewarded:
and they loſe that for God, which is moſt deare to
nature, namely life.
            And of Malefactors their death is the worſt ſimply,
               Whoſe death is counted worſt.
who haue liued and die moſt wickedly: but theirs
is counted moſt odious and infamous, who either
murder themſelues, or elſe die by Law for their outragious
villanies. Bias being asked, What kinde of
death was euill,
               The iuſter the Law, the worſer the death. anſwered (Quod legibus constitutum
est) That, which the Lawes ordained, meaning that
which men haue deſerued for their wickedneſſe, as

treaſon, murther, robberie. In like manner hee in
Plautus ſaith, So I die not for my faults, I care not
much though I periſh heere: Qui per virtutem peritat,
non interit, He that dies for well-doing, doth not die.
            
            24. Why doe not men know the very time,Queſt. 24. that
is appointed for their deathes?
            
               Saint Auſten ſhall anſwere,
               
                  Sol. Why God keepes from men the time of their deaths De conſolat. ad Apoll.
                Latet vltimus dies,
vt obſeruentur omnes dies: A mans laſt day is kept ſecret,
that all daies might be obſerued. Ad hoc fortè
neſcis, quando veniet, vt ſemper paratus ſis: therefore
it may be thou knoweſt not when he will come, that thou
mighteſt be alwaies prepared. I ſuppoſe (ſaith Plutarch)
that Nature knowing the confuſion and ſhortneſſe
of our life, would therefore haue the period of our
life vnknowne to vs: for it is cōmodious for vs. For if we
ſhould forknow it, many would pine away with vntimely
mourning, & would preuēt death with death: he means
the feare of death would kill thē, wheras otherwiſe
by courſe of nature they might haue liued longer.
            
            25. Whether is a man worſe at his death,Queſt. 25. or at
his birth?
            
               Peiores morimur,
               Sol. 
               quâm naſcimur, we die more euill
then we are borne, ſaith Seneca. But this is our fault &
not natures,Epiſt. 22. if we conſider it ſimply without relatiō
to corruption. Indeed we are borne in ſinne: but
that ſin is not acted of vs, but by propagatiō deriued
to vs: but before we die, if we liue the age of a man,
we die after the commiſſion of many actuall tranſgreſſions.
Neuertheleſſe by the grace of God in
Chriſt a mans death may be better then his birth, &
much more comfortable.Note. For to be borne is a worke
of nature, but to die with Chriſtian faith & fortitude

either for Chriſt, or in Chriſt, is a work aboue nature.
I haue read of ſome, that are ſaid to die, or to ſleepe
in Chriſt: but I read of none, that is borne in
Chriſt: re-borne, and borne a new in Chriſt
we may be ſaid,Note. but not borne. In briefe, There is
no man borne iuſtified and abſolued. But a man
may die iuſtified and abſolued. Now it is better
to die iuſtified, then to bee borne a ſinner: It is
better to die the child of Chriſt,
               Note. then to bee borne
the ſonne of Adam. This then I ſay; an old man
dying (if we regard him by himſelfe) is worſe then
an infant newly borne: but if we conſider an Infant
without Chriſt, & an old man in Chriſt, certainly it is
much better for him to die with many ſins forgiuen
in Chriſt, then fot the other to be born (though but
with one ſin) out of Chriſt, & ſo to die in that eſtate.
            26. Of all kindes of death conſidered ſimply
without reſpect of grace,Queſt. 26. or ſinne, which is the beſt?
            
               Iulius Caeſar ſaid that ſodaine death was beſt,Sol. and
a ſodaine death befell himſelfe. But (as I take it) a
ſodaine death, except it be by the courſe of nature,
without violence,What is the beſt death, without reference to ſinne or vertue. is not the beſt. For that doubtleſſe
is the beſt, which is moſt agreeable vnto nature:
now a naturall death is not ſimply ſudden, becauſe
it is not without meſſengers, and ſignes foregoing:
yet ſometimes it comes on the ſodaine, that is, in a
trice, or before a man thinkes, or while he thinks,
he may liue a while longer, or when he thinkes not
of it,A Simile ſometimes whiles he ſleepes, ſometimes whilſt
he is awake, as a mellow apple which drops of, whilſt
a man ſometimes is lookng on it.
            27. Whether is it lawfull for a man to pray thatQuaeſt. 27.
               
God would tell him directly when hee ſhall leaue
the world and die?
            I would not ſay it is altogether vnlawfull, by reaſon
of ſome extraordinarie occaſions.Sol. But vſually
and ordinarily it is not expedient.Why it is vnlawfull to pray to know the time of our deathes. For reuealed
things belong to vs,Tu ne quaeſieris ſcire (neſas) quem mihi, quem tibi finem Dij dederint. Seu plures hyemes, ſeu tribuit Iupiter vltimakm. Hor. car. l. 1. od. 11. Rom. 14. 23. Pſal. 39. 5. 
               but not the ſecrets of God,
ſuch as are hidden ſeaſons, locked vp within Gods
breaſt, as the day of our death, & the day of Chriſts
comming. And as it is no way fit to pray to know
the day of iudgement, the verie time of the Iudges
cōming, ſo neither is it to pray to know the certain
houre of death. For though our end may be good,
yet that is not enough to make a prayer good, but it
muſt be made in faith according to the will of God.
But the curious inquiring into ſuch things hath a
checke in the Scriptures. And though Dauid pray,
Lord let me know mine end, and the meaſure of my
daies, what it is, and let me know how long I haue to
liue: yet he meanes (as I take it) not to begge the
knowledge of the verie point & article of his death,
but deſires God to giue him grace to acknowledge,
conſider, and duely to acquaint himſelfe with the
ſhortneſſe and frailtie of his life, as to me it ſeemeth,
by conſidering the words enſuing, and by comparing
it with Pſal. 92. 12. But howſoeuer it be, we
know (Legibus viuitur, non exemplis) that good
and obedient Chriſtians muſt liue by lawes. and not
by enſamples. But I demaund, why wouldeſt thou
know the verie moment of thy death? That thou
mighteſt prepare thy ſelfe the better for it? Thy
meaning may be good, but this thine ayme is of litle
moment.Note. Know this, thou art a man, die thou muſt:

this verie day may ſee thy death: prepare thy ſelfe
this day.Spacio breui ſpem lougant reſeces. Dum loquimur, ſugerit inuida aelas. Hor. car. li. 1. od. 11. Act. 1. 7. Thou maiſt die any day, to day, to morrow,
next day, be therefore prepared euery day,
to day, to morrow, next day, any day, euerie day:
Miſerable man, why doſt thou not prepare thy ſelfe
euery houre? Thinke of thy ſelfe as if thou werſt
now a dying, for thou knoweſt thou muſt die. It
is not for thee to know the times or the ſeaſons, which
God hath put in his owne power. If God will not
haue thee know them, then deſire not to know
them. It is enough for vs to know wee muſt die:
how ſoone, or when, it skils not: it cannot be long
to: for we are but fome, and fume.
            
            28. What honour ought the liuing to performe
vnto the dead?Queſt. 28.
            
            I anſwere, they ought moderately to be touched
with the loſſe of them:Sol. they ought to giue them
honeſt buriall: they ought to commemorate and
imitate their vertues:The honors performed to the dead. they ſhould praiſe God for
his graces giuen them, and for receiuing them to
mercy, out of a miſerable & mercileſſe world: they
ought to maintaine their credits: they ought not
to miſuſe their bodies, neither ſpeake euill of them:
if the deafe ought not to be euill ſpoken of,Leuit. 19. 14. much
leſſe the dead: for who deafer then a dead man?
who further off. Who leſſe able to anſwere for himſelfe?
            Hauing thus ended theſe queſtions concerning
death, and dead men; I come now to ſet down ſome
principall vſes of that,Vſes of the former diſcourſe. 
                     •
                  . which hath beene ſaid
before.
            Firſt, ſeeing death deſtroyes not the ſoule, though

it diſſolue the bodie,The bodic is baſer then the ſoule. we ſee that the ſoule is of a
more noble nature, then the bodie, and therefore
more to be eſteemed, and with greater care and loue
to be kept and tended. As God excelleth all ſoules,
or as the Ladie excels her handmaid,A Simile. ſo the ſoule
excelleth all bodies.Note. What would a man haue euill?
Surely nothing, not his wife, not his ſonne, not his
ſeruant,Why ſhould a man haue an euil ſoule, that would haue a good bodie? not his horſe, not his ground, not his fruite,
no not his coate: and wilt thou haue an euill
ſoule? For ſhame take care of it, that it be not
euill. Euill it is, or good. For (Omnis anima aut
Chriſtiſponſa, aut Diaboli adultera eſt,) euery ſoule
(as Saint Auſten ſpeaketh) is eyther the Spouſe of
Chriſt (and then good) or the diuels harlot, and ſo
is euill. If euill, then thy ſtate is euill; and if death
finde it euill, it leaues it euill: and this ſoule which
cannot die, in reſpect of diſſolution, yet it doth die
in regard of conſolation, being ſeparated by euill,
as wel from God (who is the ſoule and ſolace of the
ſoule) as from the bodie, which in life it did enioy
with ioy. And forſomuch as the ſoule doth ſuruiue
the bodie,A comfort againſt the feare of death. and liue, when it is dead, it ſhould comfort
mē againſt the dread, that death brings with it.
For they ſhall not be Nothing, nor No-where. Death
doth ſubdue but one part, and that which is the baſer
of them.
            Secondly,Vſe. 2. ſeeing God inflioteth death, without
whoſe prouidence it could not come,Why death is to be borne with patience. it teacheth vs
in all patience, quietneſſe, and humilitie to bee contented
with his worke, not opening our mouthes
againſt him, though he take vs away in the flower of
our time, or by the crueltie of wicked men. And to

them, that truly ſerue God according to his will, it
cannot but be a comfort that whē they die,A comfort to a good man dying. they die
not without the knowledge, but by the will and diſpoſement
of their gracious aud louing Maſter, who
is able to ſaue them in death,Dan. 3. & 6. as he did Daniel in the
Lions denne, and the three Children in the fierie
furnace.
            Thirdly,Vſe. 3. ſeeing death is the fruit of ſinne, it ſhould
teach vs to deteſt ſinne. Death is not very pleaſing,
but rather odious to fleſh and bloud: How much
more odious then ſhould ſinne bee counted,A reaſon to hate ſinne. by
which death found entrance into the world, and
without which no man had euer died? Diſeaſes,
death,Sinne a very Crab-tree. and damnation come by ſinne: diſeaſes hinder
health, death endeth life, and damnation depriues
man of the ioyes of ſaluation: will any wiſe
man then delight in ſinne, a thing ſo odious, hurtfull
and vnhappie? Salomon being directed by the Spirit
of God calles him a Foole that maketh a mocke of
ſinue,Pro. 14. 9. & 10 23. and as a pastime to doe wickedly. Doth any
man loue the plague, the gout, the palſie, the ſtone,
the crampe, the canker, or the dropſie? I ſuppoſe
no man. All theſe diſeaſes are the conſequents of
ſinne: the world had not knowne them, had ſhee
not beene acquainted with ſinne: and certainely
theſe diſeaſes are not more hurtful to the body, then
ſinne is to the true health and life of the ſoule. Sinne
is a Tyger, a Beare, a Lyon, an Aſpe, a Viper, a deſtroyer
both of bodie and of ſoule.
            
               Fourthly,
               
                  Vſe. 4. Inordinate feare of death to be ſuppreſt. 
               the ineuitable neceſsitie of Death,
which lies vpon all the world, condemnes the immoderate
feare of Death in many men. There is no

man ſo ignorant, but knowes hee muſt die: yet
when death is threatned, what feare is there, what
fainting, what tergiuerſation, what impatience is
there to be ſeene in many?
               Senec. 78. epiſt. Quid fles miſer, quid trepidas?
Eye wretch why doeſt thou weep? why doſt thou
tremble? This yoke is laid vpon euery necke: thou goeſt
the way that all mê go. To this waſt thou born, this hath
befallen thy Father, thy Mother, thine anceſtors, to all
men before thee, and to all that ſucceed thee. Wilt thou
not thinke to come thither at laſt, whither thou haſt
beene a going alwaies?Epiſt. 24. Nullum ſine exitu iter eſt: there
is no iourney without an end. VVee make our life vnquiet
with the feare of death, and ſuch is the madneſſe
of men, that ſome by the feare of death are brought vnto
death: wee ought to fortifie our ſelues, that wee loue
not our life too well, and that wee hate not death too
much: and when reaſon aduiſeth vs, to dye, and not to
feare. Vir fortis & ſtrenuus non fugere debet de vita,
ſed exire, a man of courage and ſpirit ſhould not flye
out of life, but goe out.Epiſt. 78. To dye is not glorious, but to
dye couragiouſly is glorious.
            Finally,Vſe 5. ſeeing all men muſt dye, and ſeeing
Chriſt vvill finde them at the day of iudgement, as
the day of their Death doth leaue them, it behooues
all men to prepare themſelues for Death,
that it may not hurt them, but rather helpe them.
To this end theſe things are to bee conſidered,Rules of preparation againſt Death. 1. and
performed.
            Firſt, hee that would haue comfort in his death,
muſt beleeue in God the Authour of life, in Ieſus
Chriſt, who ſaues vs from the power and euill of
Death,John 5. 24. 
               Verily, verily, I ſay vnto you (ſaith Chriſt:)

               Hee that heareth my word, and beleeueth him that
ſent me, hath euerlaſting life, and ſhall not come into
condemnation, but hath paſſed from death to life. And
to Martha ſpeaking of himſelfe hee ſaith,Iohn 11. 25. 26. 
               I am the
Reſurrection and the life:
hee that beleeueth in mee,
though he were dead, yet ſhall he liue, and whoſoeuer
lineth, and beleeueth in me. ſhall neuer die, meaning
the death of the damned. Now Chriſt, who thus
ſpeaketh to vs, is omnipotent, and true: Verbum
eius ab intentione non diſſentit, quia Veritas eſt: nec
factum a Verbo, quia Virtus eſt. Hee is Trueth, and
therefore he ſpeakes, as he meanes: and he is Might
it ſelfe, therefore he does as he ſpeakes. But he doth
profeſſe and promiſe that thoſe, that beleeue in him,
ſhall not periſh by death, but liue for euer: therfore
we may be bold vpon his word, and ſhould ſtir vp
our ſelues to beleeue.Note. And let no man deceiue himſelfe:
For hee onely doth aright beleeue in Chriſt,Who is a right beleeuer, and who fantaſticall.
who beleeues him in his word and Sacraments, and
in his Miniſters ſpeaking according to his word.
In vaine it is for men to ſay or thinke they beleeue
in Chriſt, who beleeue not his Lawe, who regard
not his Sacraments, who beleeue not his Seruants,
declaring to them their Maiſters minde. This faith
is not faith, but fancie.
            Secondly,Rule 2. hee that would dye the Death of the
Godly, muſt repent of the ſinnes of the wicked. For
without Repentance it is vnpoſsible to eſcape the
damnation of vnrepentant Sinners.Ezek. 18. 30. 31. 
               Returne (ſaith
God) and iniquitie ſhall not be your deſtruction. Caſt
away all your tranſgreſsions: For why will yee die? Qui
per poenitentiam peccata diluit, angelica foelicitatis

conſorsin aeternum erit. He, which by repentance
purgeth away his ſinne, ſhall be partaker (and ſaith
Saint Auſten) of Angelicall happineſſe for euer.Fiue duties of a true penitent.
Now a true penitent perſon muſt bee thus diſpoſed.
Firſt, hee muſt plainely and from his heart confeſſe
his ſinnes to God. Secondly, he muſt earneſtly beg 
pardon of his ſinne, deſiring God for Chriſt to bee 
reconciled to him. Thirdly, hee muſt reſolue fully 
to leaue his ſinues, and to practiſe all holy, and honeſt
duties.Ezek. 18. 22. 
               If the wicked will returne from all his
ſinnes, and doe that, which is lawfull and right, he ſhall
ſurely liue,
               Note. 
               and ſhall not dye. It is not inough to ſet
himſelfe againſt one fault, but againſt all, all, all,
without exception of any.A Simile. For one wing belimed
may cauſe the whole bird to be taken, and one diſcaſe
may bee the death of all the bodie: ſo one vnrepentant
of knowne enormitie, euen one (though
there were no more,) may, yea and will bee the ruine
of the ſoule, the deſtruction of the ſinner. Fourthly,
where an iniury is done vnto our neighbours,
there ought wee to ſeek reconcilement, and to giue
them ſatisfaction. For hee, that hauing offended
man, ſeekes not to be reconciled to him, doubtles
ſhall neuer truely be at peace with God. Briefely,
hee that would ſhew himſelfe a true penitent, muſt
be truly grieued, becauſe his repentance is ſo poore,
his deuotion ſo cold, and his life ſo bad.
            Thirdly,Rule 3. hee that would dye comfortably in
Chriſt,Iobn 3. 16. ſhould liue obediently to Chriſt. For hee that
obeyeth not the ſonne ſhall not ſee life, but the wrath of
God abideth on him. Now he, that will proue his obedience
vnto Chriſt the Lord, muſt ſhew it vnto

the Biſhops and Miniſters of the Church, his Seruants
ſpeaking vnto them in his Name according
to his Lawe.Heb. 13. 17. 
               Obey them (ſaith the Holy Ghoſt)
which haue the ouerſight of you, and ſubmit your
ſelues. Certainely they, that diſhonour, diſobey, and
diſdaine them, diſhonour, diſobey, and diſdaine
Chriſt their Maiſter.
            Fourthly,Rule 4. it behooues vs to weine our affections
from the world: for the pleaſures and vanities of
the world are very bandes and boltes vnto our
ſoules, if wee wed our ſelues vnto them, and they
vvill make vs altogether vnwilling to depart.
            Fiftly,Rule 5. doe good vnto the poore and afflicted
members of Chriſt Ieſus; pray for them, viſite
them, and aduiſe them, help them, feede them,
cloth them,Pro. 16. 6. harbour them. By mercy and trueth
iniquitie ſhall be forgiuen, ſaith Salomon, Charge them
that are rich,
               1. Tim. 17. 18. 19 ſaith Paul, that they bee rich in good
workes, and be ready to diſtribute and communicate,
laying vp in ſtore for them a good foundation againſt
the time to come, that they may obtaine eternall life.
That which is giuen to pore chriſtians,Note. becauſe they
be chriſtians,Mat. 25. is giuen vnto Chriſt himſelfe, who will
recompence our temporall gifts with eternal glory.
Pore chriſtians are as a rich fieldif: the rich will ſow
the ſeede of their charitable almesdeedes on them,A Simile.
they ſhal by the heauens bleſsing receiue a plentiful
crop of eternall happines. On the contrarie, he ſhuts
againſt himſelfe the doores of Gods mercy,Iam. 2. 13. who
will ſhew no mercy to his afflicted brother.
            Sixtly,Rule 6. he that would haue comfort in his death,
ought to liue, or at leaſt to die in the loue and reuerent

affection to the Church of Chriſt: neither
meane I onely the Catholique Church, part whereof
is triumphing in heauen, and a part warring
on earth: but that true viſible Church, in which
hee is borne and baptiſed, and to the obedience
whereof he is moſt properly called.Engliſh Papiſts & Browniſts are liable to damnation. for their obſtinate Schiſme. For I doe very
much doubt of the ſaluation of all ſuch as dye vnreconciled
to the church, out of loue with that church,
vnto the loue and obedience wherof God doth call
them. Let our Papiſts therefore, Browniſts aud ſuch
like ſpirits take heede vnto themſelues, how they
liue and dye, out of loue and loyalty to this church
of England, whereof they ſhould be louing and obedient
members: but vnto which indeede they ſtand
ill-affected, diſobedient, and vndutifull. They malice
her, they write and ſpeake againſt her, they
ſpeake euill of her, and of her chiefeſt members. I
meane not to diſpute of her lawfulnes and trueth:
this is all I ſay:Note. if ſhee be found to be a true Church
of Chriſt, as it will appeare one day, I doe much
feare that theſe her enemies, her ſlanderers, her diſobedient
and vnruly children, will not bee able to
ſtand vnconfounded before her Head,
               Reu. 22. 12. & Husband,
Chriſt Ieſus, who then will recompence to euery
one according to his workes, euen euerlaſting life
to them,Rom. 2. 7. 8. 
               which through patience in well-doing ſeeke
glorie, and honour, and immort alitie: but vnto them,
that are Contentious, and diſobey the trueth, indignation
and wrath. It behooues vs therefore for our
better aſſurance of comfort and ſaluation, to know
the true Church, and to cleaue vnto it beeing
knowne.
            
               
Seuenthly,Rule 7. let a man ſet his houſe in order, and
diſpoſe of his eſtate.Iſay 38. 1. It was the laſt wiſe work, which
Achitophel performed.2. Sam. 17. 23.
            
            And finally, when death ſeemeth to approch (if
it giue him any warning;Acts 7. 59. as vſually it doth) let him
commend his ſoule with Steuen into the hands of
Chriſt, Lord Ieſus receiue my Spirit, crauing for mercie,
and not forgetting that the ioyes of Heauen, after
which he gaſpeth, are farre more compleat, and
are able to giue a thouſand times more true contentment
to the ſoule of man, then all the tranſitorie
pleaſures, profits, and preferments of this world
can doe.The death of the godly commended. He that is thus compoſed for death, ſhall
not dye, but liue for euer: his death ſhall bee as a
pleaſant ſleepe: his graue as a bed: and his ſoule
ſhall reſt in peace with Chriſt, till the time appointed
for the Reſurrection of our bodies bee fulfilled.
            Oh that men would thinke of theſe things, practiſe
theſe things! Wouldſt thou haue comfort in
thy death? then ſeeke and ſue for comfort in thy
life. Wouldſt thou bee armed againſt the feare of
death?1. Cor. 15. 56. then dye betimes to ſinne: Death is a Serpent,
her ſting is Sinne: pull out the ſting by true repentance,
and thou needſt not feare the Serpent:
Death can not hurt thee, if thou hurt not thy ſelfe
by Sinne.Note. Death is not (Interitus) Death to the penitent,
(Introitus) but an entrance into heauen:
and the way is made, and the doore is opened by
true repentance, and by Faith in Chriſt, who is the
Sunne of our glorie, and the Saluation of our ſoule,
by whoſe death letum delethum, mortua mors eſt)
               
death is defaced,Note. and dead it ſelfe. But wouldſt thou
giue hope of the truth of thy turning? then turne,
whileſt thou maiſt runne on, repent when thou
mighteſt yet ſinne: deferre not thy turning till thy
death, leaſt it be thought that the world doth forſake
thee, and not thou the world, and that ſinne
rather leaues thee, then thou doſt leaue ſinne,
and that the cauſe of this turning is, not the
loue of GOD and godlineſſe, but the feare
of death, and the apprehenſion of damnation only.
Take heede therefore, and deale plainly with thy
ſelfe. I know many men thinke well of themſelues,
and would count themſelues much iniured,A falſe imagination of ſundrie perſons if they
ſhould bee cenſured as euill members, which yet
how they will auoide, I cannot ſee. This is my reaſon,
they are notorious and ordinarie prophaners
of the Lords day; euen thoſe houres, that are deſtinated
to the publique worſhip of GOD, euen
thoſe very houres, are miſpent vſually in eating and
drinking, in buying and ſclling and gaming.
            This is a mortall ſinne (ſtat againſt the Law of God
and his Church)Ex. 20. 8. 10. and is commonly practiſed of manie:
how is it poſſible for theſe Sinners to haue any
true comfort? How can they be ſaued? Vndoubtedly
ſo continuing they are in the ſtate of death,Rom. 6. 16. and
not in the ſtate of grace.1. Joh. 3. 8. 9. For hee that oheyes ſinne
is the Seruant of ſinne, is not borne of God, doth not
ſerue God. And there is no way to ſcape but by true
repentance,Ezek. 18. 21. which conſiſts in Auerſion from ſinne,
and in Conuerſion vnto God;Iſ. 1. 16. 17. theſe are the two celeſtiall
Poles or Hinges, whereon repentance turneth.
I name this one ſinne: but there are others, as drunkenneſſe,

whoredome and ſuch like, which beare
ſway with many, and if they looke not to it, will
ſway and weigh them downe into the pit of Hell.
It behoues vs all therefore to looke vnto our ſelues.
Death and the Iudgement are the things moſt certaine:
but when, or how, or where our death ſhall
happen, that we know not. If wee ſhould bee taken
away in our ſinnes, all the world could not
ſaue vs: but if we repent vnfeignedly, then happie
are wee: death cannot come amiſſe: wee may embrace
it, kiſſe it, welcome it: wee looſe the earth,
but wee find Heauen, wee goe forth of the wilderneſſe
into Canaan, out of the Region of death into
the Land of the liuing, the euer-liuing, wee goe
from Sinners to Saints, from Men to Angels, to
God, with him to liue in immortall glorie, and in
glorious immortalitie, in that Kingdome, wherein
all ſhall be Kings, and of which there ſhall neuer
be an end; vnto the which, God for his mercie bring
vs through Ieſus Chriſt, vnto whom with their Holy
Spirit be all honour, praiſe, and glory this day
and euermore, Amen.
            Hauing finiſht our diſcourſe of Corporall (or
temporarie) death, it remaineth that we ſay ſomething
of Spirituall, and Eternall deatb.Of ſpirituall death.
            
            
               Spirituall death is either of the wicked, or of the
godly.
            The ſpirituall death of the wicked is a certaine
ſpirituall ſeparation of them from ſpirituall and
Chriſtian grace and goodneſſe, when as they lie dead
(without all godly feeling)Eph. 2. 1. in ſinnes and treſpaſſes,
their hearts being alienated from God,Col. 2. 13. and true
godlineſſe.
            
               
This is a moſt miſerable kind of death: for they,
that are thus dead, are the Seruants of ſinne, the
Vaſſals of Satan, the Children of wrath, out of the
ſtate of grace, and in the Region and ſhadow of
death, liable to damnation, which to eſcape they
can haue no hope, while they continue in that eſtate.
            The ſpirituall death of the godly is threefold.The ſpirituall death of the Godly, is threefold.
            
            The firſt is, whereby they are dead to ſinne. This
death ſtands in the diſallowing and condemning 
ſinne in the iudgement, in the nilling and refuſing it
in the will; in the hatred of it and grieuing for it in
the affections, and finally in the declining and forſaking
it in the life and conuerſation.
            This death is the ſeparation of the ſoule from
the approbation,What death to ſinne is. loue and embracing of wickedneſſe.
It is of God through Chriſt, and with much
comfort and contentment. For hee, that dies to
ſinne, ſhall neuer die fot ſinne: he that dies to ſinne,
doth liue to God: and whoſoeuer liues vnto God
in this world, ſhall liue for euer with GOD in the
world to come.The preeminence of a Saint. To die to ſinne is to liue a Saint:
and precious in the ſight of the Lord is both the life
and the death of his Saints. They be like the Moū
                  taine
that was not to bee toucht:Ex. 19. 12. 
               They that touch
you (ſayth the Lord) touch the apple of mine eye:
               Zak. 2. 8. and
wee know that the apple of the eye is very tender.
            The ſecond Spirituall death of the Godly is 
whereby they are dead to the Law:Rom. 7. 4. and this is becauſe
the Law doth not condemne them,Gal. 2. 16. 19.
               Note. that are

in Chriſt Ieſus, who by iuſtifying vs through his
righteouſneſſe doth deliuer vs from the curſe of the
Law, and rids the conſcience of thoſe terrours,
which the Law might cauſe by ſinne vnpardoned.
            
                The third death Spirituall of the Godly is,
whereby the world is crucifyed or dead to them,
and they dead vnto the world.Gal. 6. 14.
            
            The World is dead to them,When the World is dead to a man. when as they dote
not on the world, but contemne all worldly things,
and account them as nothing in compariſon of
Chriſt Ieſus, and his benefits. This death is very
needfull: for he, that liues to the World, liues not
vnto GOD: and hee liues to the World, to whom
the World is not dead, but who doteth on the
World, ſhall periſh with the World: hee that liues
not to God in this life, ſhall not liue with God in
the life to come.
            Godly men are ſaid to bee dead to the World,How a man is ſaid to be dead to the World.
when the World coutemnes them, hates them,
perſecutes them, and wiſheth (as it were) to be rid
of them. This kind of death is the ordinarie portion
of the Godly. For they being not of the
World,Iob. 15. 19. & 16. 3. but of God, whom the World knowes not,
and being but as Forrainers and Strangers, it is no
maruell if the World frowne on them,1. Pet. 2. 11. and ſhew
her ſelfe an vnkinde Step-mother towardes them, it
is no wonder though wicked Worldlings beat
them, bite them, barke at them, and flie at their
throats: for thus Dogges vſe to deale with Strangers,
which they know not.
            And thus much wee haue ſeene what death is in

reſpect of the World, to wit, the Separation and
abalienation of our hearts from the World, or of
the World from vs: and ſo much alſo for Spirituall
death.
            The third kind of death is called Eternall death,Reu. 22. 8
or the ſecond death,What eternall death is. which is the Separation of the
ſoule from God, or the euerlaſting puniſhment of
the whole man, conſiſting of ſoule and bodie,
from the comfortable preſence of GOD,2. Theſ. 1. 9. in hell
fire.
            
               The Prouider and Inflicter of this death is God,
               God the inflicter of eternall death.
               who is a moſt iuſt Iudge, Whoſe very ſoule doth hate
the wicked,Pſal. 11. 5. and him that loues iniquitie. Tophet (which
indeed is Hell) is prepared of old.Iſ. 30. 33. Hee hath made it
deepe and large; the burning thereof is fire and much
wood: the breath of the Lord like a Riuer of brimſtone
doth kindle it. By which we ſee that Hel-fire is
prepared, and kindled by the Lord.
            
            Now God doth not ordaine and inflict death
for it ſelfe,Note. as if he did delight in death and deſtroying:
but it is for the clearing of his iuſtice: for if
wicked men ſhould neuer be puniſhed, they would
imagine either GOD is not, or that he is not iuſt.
But all the world ſhall know that God both is, and
that he is iuſt, and therefore hee will puniſh wicked
ſinners,Rom. 2. 5. 8. and by that meane declare his iuſt iudgement
againſt vicious wretches.
            The deſeruing cauſe of death of ſinne,Death the fruit of ſinne. as ignorance
of God, diſobedience of the truth, eſpecially
of the Goſpell of Chriſt Ieſus,
               Rom. 6. 23. and obedience of vnrighteouſneſſe,2. Theſ. 1. 8.
as the Apoſtle ſheweth, as alſo want
of charitie,Rom. 2. 8. and charitable behauiour towardes the

poore and needie members of Chriſt Ieſus, as hee
himſelfe doth teach vs.Matth. 25. 41. 42. Neyther are theſe ſins only
meritorious of death, but euen euery ſinne, though
the ſmalleſt want of that, which the law requireth,
is in it ſelfe odious, and deadly. For the wages of euery
ſinne is death.
            The perſons ſubiect to this death are all the Sons
of Adam,
               Who are ſubiect to eternall death. is as much as all are Sinners: yet all of
them ſhall not die this death, namely they that are
redeemed by the bloud of Chriſt, who by his death
hath deliuered them from this death, by them
through ſinne deſerued.
            Thoſe then ſhall die this death,Who ſhall die this death. that were reprobated
of God, and who by their wickedneſſe and
hardneſſe of heart, which could not repent, haue
treaſured vp vnto themſelues wrath againſt the day
of wrath.Math. 25. 41. 
               Depart from me, ye curſed, ſaith Chriſt into
euerlasting fire. The curſed then are they, that
muſt die this accurſed death. I neuer knew you ſaith
Chriſt, Depart from me, ye workers of iniquitie. They
that ſhal die this death are ſuch as Chriſt knew not,Math. 7. 23.
owned not, neuer acknowledged for his: and ſuch
as whiles they liued, were very hypocrites, nouriſhing
ſome ſinne or other in their boſomes, though
they did many glorious and good works, as preach,
baptiſe, eiect diuels, cure diſeaſes, and were perhaps
of great account with men. The Apoſtle ſaith
that the Lord Ieſus will render vengeance at his appearing
vnto them that know not God,
               2. Theſ. 1. 8. 
               and obey not
the Goſpell. So that all, which are ignorant of God,
and which diſobey the Goſpell of his Sonne, ſhall
die this death.
            
               
This then I ſay, All impenitent ſinners ſhall be
damned, all that beleeue not in Ieſus Chriſt, as Mahometaus,
incredulous Iewes, and all other Infidels,
and all that profeſſe Chriſt in name, but denie him
in example: All theſe liuing and dying without
ſound repentance ſhall die this death. And I proue
it thus.Ioh. 8. 24. 
               Except ye beleeue, ſaith Chriſt, that I am he,
you ſhall die in your ſinnes:
               Note. but the Iewes beleeue not
that Ieſus the ſonne of Mary was the Meſſias foretold:
therefore they ſhall die in their ſinnes. Hee
that obeyes not the Sonne,
               Ioh. 3. 36. 
               ſhall not ſee life, but the
wrath of God abideth on him: but neyther Iewes nor
Mahometans obey Chriſt Ieſus: Therefore neyther
of them ſhall liue, but die. Peter being full of
the holy Ghost ſaid,
               Act. 4. 8. 11. that Chriſt is the Stone, euen
the fundamentall ſtone of mans ſaluation: Neyther
is there (quoth he) ſaluation in any other:
               1 Pet. 2. 4. 6 
               for among
men there is giuen none other Name vnder heauen,
               Act. 4. 12
               whereby we muſt be ſaued. All therefore, that either
denie him, or beleeue not in him, and do not know
him, whether Iew, Turke, Perſian, Moore, Indian,
American, or who elſe ſoeuer, all ſuch ſhall bee
damned, cannot bee ſaued.Iſa. 53. 11 
               For by his knowledge
ſhall my righteous ſeruant (Chriſt Ieſus)
               Gal. 2. 15. 16 
               Instifie many.
And we, which are Iews by nature, and not ſinners
of the Gentiles, know that a man is not iuſtified by
the works of the law, but by the faith of Ieſus Chriſt.
God (ſaith Saint Iohn) hath giuen vnto vs eternall
life,
               2. Ioh. 5. 11. 12 
               and this life is in that his Sonne. Hee that hath
that Sonne, hath that life: and hee that hath not
that Sonne of God, hath not that life. But Mahometans,
Iewes, and Infidels haue not that Son, therefore

they haue not eternall life (in ſpe) and ſhall not
haue it (In Re,)
               In hope. but ſo continuing ſhall vndoubtedly
die the damned death of the wicked,In actuall poſſeſſion. for ought
that man can tell.
            I ſay further,Note. that thoſe, which profeſſe Chriſt
in word and in ſhew, but denie him by their deeds,
addicting themſelues to wicked luſts, as whoredome,
pride, drunkenneſſe, auarice, idleneſſe, epicuriſme,
thoſe (I ſay) ſhall vndoubtedly periſh
without mature and true repentance.1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. 
               Know ye not
(ſaith Saint Paul that the vnrighteous ſhall not inherit
the Kingdome of God? Be not deceiued, neither fornicators,
nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons,
nor buggerers, nor theiues, nor couetous, nor drunkards,
nor raylers, nor extortioners, ſhall inherite the
kingdome of God. But among Chriſtians there are
offenders in all kinds of the ſinnes aforeſaid, therefore
(if they ſhall die in them) they cannot poſſibly
ſcape damnation. Our Lord ſaith, that The
fearefull and vnbeleening, the abhominable and murtherers,
whoremongers,
               Reu. 21. 8. 
               ſorcerers, idolaters, and all
lyars (wherewith the Chriſtian world aboundeth)
ſhall haue their part in the lake, which burneth with
fire and brimſtone, which is the ſecond death. And finally
S. Iude ſpeaking of ſundrie wicked Epicures
cept into the Church,Iude. 4. 13. ſaith that for them is reſerued
the blackneſſe of darkneſſe for euer.
            
            Thirdly, I ſay that all they which profeſſing
Chriſt doe notwithſtanding adde vnto the faith of
Chriſt,Note. and coyne articles, which they doe propoſe
as neceſſarily to be beleeued to ſaluation, all ſuch I ſay
by this their preſumption do cut themſelus off from

Chriſt, and ſhall vndoubtedly periſh except they
ſhall repent. In like manner they that doe take
from the faith any eſſentiall point, and needfull abſolutely
to ſaluation, they alſo are ſubiect to damnation,
which without repentance they cannot
ſcape. Ye ſhall put nothing vnto the word, which I
command you,
               Deut. 4. 2. & 12. 32 
               neither ſhall ye take ought therefrom:
It was twiſe at leaſt giuen in charge by Moſes.
When Moſes was now dead, and the gouernment
caſt vpon Ioſhuah, God gaue him the ſame leſſon
in effect:Ioſh. 1. 7. 
               Thou ſhalt not turne away from it to the right
hand, nor to the left. In like manner Agur ſaith. Put
nothing vnto his words, least he reproue thee, and thou
be found a lyar.
               Pro 30. 6. 
               I proteſt (ſaith Chriſt) to euery man
that heareth the words of the prophecie of this booke,
If any man how preciſe, how pure, how holy, how
auſtere, how ſanctified ſoeuer he ſeeme, or how learned
ſoeuer he be,Reu. 22. 18. 19. and wit tie in the iudgement of
men, ſhall adde vnto theſe things,
               How dangegerous it is to tract or adde vnto the word of Chriſt. 
               God ſhall adde vnto
him the plagues, that are written in this booke, and if
any man ſhall diminiſh of the words of the booke (he
meaneth the true ſenſe and ſubſtance of the words)
of this prophecie, God ſhall take away his part out of
the booke of life, and out of the holy Citie, and from
thoſe things which are written in this booke. If any ſubiect,
or ſubiects ſhall preſume to repeale the lawes
of the kingdome, or to make new lawes, and to vrge
men to receiue and obey them, the king in the mean
time vnacquainted with their proceeding, or diſliking
it,A Similitude. they ſhew themſelues buſie bodies, rebellious,
turblent: and taking vpon them as kings they
incurre the diſpleaſure of the king, and deſerue no

better then death it ſelfe: euen ſo are they the Children
of death,
               Note. who teach their Traditions in the
Church, which is the kingdome of Chriſt, for the
doctrines of God, and deuiſe new articles of ſaith not
heard of in the ancient Church, and preſſe them vpon
vs as neceſſarily to be beleeued, and they likewiſe,
who deſtroy the faith, or maime it by their ſubtractions,
and denialls of Articles neceſſarily to be beleeued.
            Let them looke to it therefore,As Anti-trinitarians, Arians that deny the
Trinitie, or the Diuinitie of Chriſt, and which deny
ſaluation by Chriſt alone, and they, that teach
worſhipping of images,As Papiſts. adoration of reliques,
prayer for the dead, tranſubſtantiation, and all they,
that beleeue it is of neceſſitie to ſaluation, for euery
Chriſtian to be ſubiect to the Biſhop of Rome, affirming
all to be Heretiques, that refuſe him to bee
their chiefe Paſtor on earth.
            Finally,No ſaluation for ſinners during their impenitencie. all wicked and impenitent Sinners without
exception of any, ſhall dye this death. Wit,
wealth, birth, beauty, ſtrength, friends, attendants,
theſe things cannot exempt them. Tophet is prepared
for Kings,
               Iſay 30. 33. if wicked: and Chriſt (as Iude ſpeaketh
out of an ancient Prophecie) will rebuke All
the vngodly.
               Iude 15. 
               Saul ſhall not bee deliuered by his
crowne, nor Nabal by his Coffers; Achitophel ſhall
not bee helpt by his counſell, nor Abſalon by his
beautie, nor Haman by his honour, nor Caiaphas
by his prieſthood, nor any man by his greatnes, by
his high Offices, and ſpacious Kingdomes. Theſe
things cannot ſaue the body from Death, much leſſe
able are they to ſaue the ſoule from Hell. Nec prece,

nec pretio: the Iudge will not bee perſwaded by
prayer, nor blinded by bribing, nor peruerted by any
meane,Reu. 22. 12. but vvill reward euery man according
as his worke ſhall be,Rom. 2. 6. without reſpect of perſons.
            The nature of this death is not eaſily to bee deſcribed
to the full:Eternall cannot be fully deſcribed. for neither hath the eye ſeene, nor
the eare heard, neither hath it entered into mans
heart to conceiue the panges and torments, that are
prepared for the wicked. Only they, that feele them,
are able (if able) to expreſſe them.
            Neuertheleſſe ſeeing the Scriptures are not
wholly ſilent,Three things about this death to be noted. wee may be bold to ſpeake by their
direction.
            Firſt therefore the damned are depriued of
the fauour of GOD,1. Paena damni. and the comfort of his preſence.
            Secondly,Paena Senſus. they doe indure horrible and very
painefull puniſhments, both in Soule and bodie.
            Thirdly,Aeternitas Paenae their paines are endleſſe, their tortures
abide without eaſe for euer.
            
            All theſe three Saint Paul affirmeth in one Verſe
together,2. Theſ. 1. 9. when he ſaith, they ſhall be Puniſhed with
euerlaſting perdition from the preſence of the Lord,
and from the glorie of his power. Here is (Paena Damni)
the puniſhment of loſſe and lack at the leaſt expreſt,
and the eternitie of it, if not alſo (Paena Senſus)
the puniſhment of feeling panges, and torments:
but our Sauiour ſheweth that the wicked ſhal ſuffer
Euerlaſting Paine:
               Math. 25. 46. and Eſay ſaith that their worme
ſhall neuer dye,
               Eſay 66. 24. nor their fire bee quenched. There

ſhall bee weeping and gnaſhing of teeth. Planè fltetus
ex dolore, ſtridor dentium ex furore, They ſhall
weepe (ſaith Bernard) for ſorrow, and grinde their
te-th through rage. Hell fire is full of paine, and altogether
voide of comfort.In fire two things. In fire there are two
things, heate and light: Hell-fire is hot, but darke:
if it giue light, it is not the light of comfort, but of
miſerie, to let the damned ſee thoſe things, which
might affright and grieue them.Note. But this fire is not
(as I ſuppoſe) ſuch fire as ours is, neither is their
worme ſuch a worme as creepes vpon the earth, or
as is bred in our body:Hell-fire is not like our fires. but it pleaſeth the Holy
Ghoſt by theſe words to point out, and as by ſimitudes
to ſhew vnto vs the griefes and gripes of the
damned, which ſhall be with much paine and horrour,
as the burning of a fire, or the gnawing of
wormes.Lib. 4. de ortho. c. 28. 
               The Diuell and the wicked (ſaith Damaſcene)
ſhall bee deliuered vp into euerlaſting fire, Non
materialem, qualis eſt apud nos, not vnto a materiall
fire, as is with vs, but into ſuch as is knowne to God.
And Saint Auſten doth thus ſomewhere diſpute about
this point:Lib. de cogn. verae vitae c. 40. If the fire of Hell bee corporall, it
muſt bee fed by corporall fuell, which beeing once
waſted it alſo muſt goe out, But it's certen that hell-fire
ſhall neuer fayle, therefore it is ſpirituall: but
if it bee a corporall fire, but by creation euerlaſting,
then muſt the ſoules of men feele a corporall
fire
            The Gluttons Soule in the parable was tormented
greeuouſly,Luke 16. burnt extremely: but vvith vvhat
fire? with hell-fire indeed; but it is improbable that
elemenrary or bodily fire could affect a ſpirit out of
the body.
            
               
But let vs not diſpute vvhat kinde of fire it
is,Note. 
               but rather ſtudie to keepe our ſelues from feeling
it.
            
            This fire,Math. 25. 41. ſaith Chriſt, is euerlaſting, ſemper vrens,
nunquam exurens: torquet, non extorquet: punit, ſed
non finit: it alwaies burnes, but neuer burnes them
vp: it paines them but kils them not: it afflicts, but
endes not. It is called Ignis inextinguibilis fire vnquenchable:
for it neither is put out it ſelfe, neither
doth it extinguiſh thoſe, whom it doth torment.
            Hell-fire (ſaith S. Gregorie) ſeeing it is (incorporeus)
not bodily,In 20. cap. Iob. it is neither kindled by the help of man,
nor fed with wood, but beeing once made it continueth
vnquenchable, and ſtands not in neede to bee kindled,
neither wants it heate.
            Neither muſt it ſeeme hard that the paines of the
wicked muſt indure euer,Note. For though indeede their
liues had an end,Why the death of the damned is for euer. ſome ſooner, ſome later, yet if
we conſider the infinitie of his perſon, whom they
ſinned againſt, and againe that their ſinnes left an
immortall and indeleble ſtaine in their ſoules, and
finally the eternall auerſion of their willes, that if
they had liued euer, they would haue ſinned euer:
if we conſider theſe things (I ſay) it will appeare
there is no cruelty or iniuſtice in the Lord to puniſh
them with eternall perdition, ſo as that their death
ſhall be without death, their wants without want,
their deſtruction without deſtruction.
            And that,The companions of the damned. The Place. which doth aggrauate their miſery is
that their companions are no better then the Diuels,
and the place of their abode no ſweeter no
better then Hell it ſelfe, which of all places in the

world is the worſt, the habitation of Diuels, voide
of order, full of horror, vbi nulla ſpes boni, nulla deſperatio
mali, where there is no hope at all of any
good, and no deſpaire of euill.
            But yet in Hell there ſhall be differences and degrees
of paines,Difference of torments. euen as in heauen there will be degrees
of glory: For pro diſparibus ponderibus peccatorum,
               Lib. 4. contr. Donat. c. 19. de Bap.
               erunt etiam diſparia tormenta paenarum) as
Saint Auguſtine ſpeaketh according to the different
degrees of ſinnes there ſhall bee different degrees
of torments. The ſeruant, that knowes his
Maiſters will,Luke 12. 47. and doth it not, ſhall be worſe beaten
then he, that knowes ir not, and doth it not. Chriſt
tells the Scribes and Phariſees that, becauſe vnder
the cloke of Religion they preyed on Widdowes,
therefore they ſhould Receiue the Greater damnation:
               Math. 23. 14. 15
and ſayes that they make their ſeduced proſelytes
Two fold more the children of Hell, then themſelues.
And ſpeaking of them, that contemne the
Goſpell offered them,Math. 10. 15. he ſaith, It ſhall bee eaſier for
them of the land of Sodome and Gomorrha, in the day
of iudgement, then for that Citie.
            
            As for the ſituation of Hell;Where Hell is. to ſay preciſely
where hell is,Iſay 30. 33. it is not eaſie: below it's doubtleſſe,
as may appeare by ſundry places of the Scripture,Luke 16. 26.
and farre from heauen:Reu. 9. 11. & 20. 3. & 17. 8. but that there is an Hell, to
wit,Num. 16. 30. 33 a place appointed for the tormenting of wicked
Angels,Iude 6. and vngodly men, it is cleere ynough:
our chiefeſt care ſhould bee ſo to demeane our ſelues
that we may neuer come there.
               2. Pet, 2. 4.
            
            And aſſuredly whoſoeuer is in the ſtate of grace
ſhall neuer come into that horrid place preparedNote.
               Whom Hell ſhall not receiue.
               
onely for graceleſſe and wicked people.
            He is in the ſtate of grace,Who is in the ſtate of grace. which depends wholly
on the grace of God, which turnes not his grace
into wantonnes, which delights not in vngracious
wretches, which maketh much of thoſe meanes of
grace, which God hath in his Church: and finally,
who out of a gratefull ſpirit doth beſtow himſelfe,
his ſoule & ſeruice vpon God, labouring tooth and
nayle with might and maine for the aduancement
of his honour, and the welfare of his houſe, which
is the Church, being ſorie at the heart that his ſeruice
is ſo ſimple, his weakeneſſes ſo many, and his
obedience ſo vnperfect as it is, Certainely this
man ſhall not dye, but liue eternally: not
hell, but: heauen ſhall bee his habitation:
God doth honour him with
his grace in this world, and
will crowne him with eternall
glory in the
world to
come.
            Trin-Vni Deo Gloria.
         
         
            
               
Becauſe theſe few pages left vntouched
ſhould not bee loſt, I haue ſet downe ſome
Poſitions which are not diſagreeing from the
matter handled.
            
               The firſt Poſition.
               Death is not the End of man, if wee ſpeake properly.
               
                  THE end is that properly, to which
a thing is ordained,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Ariſtot.
                   or for which it is,
But when God mad: a man, death
was not the end he ſhot at: diſſolution
is not the ſcope of Gods creation,
nor of Parents generation.
Againe,
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , the End by it ſelfe and of it owne natnre is
only good: but death of it ſelfe and in it owne nature
is not good, but the priuation of life, which is
a certaine good: death came in by ſinne, is the fruit
of ſinne,1 Cor. 15. 26. and is (as the Apoſtle ſheweth) an Enemie.
which ſhall bee deſtroyed as an enemie: and therefore
death properly is not good, but euill: therefore
properly death is not the end of man. Furthermore,
Finis eſt, quod maximè volumus, that is the
end, which we doe chiefly deſire: but neither God
nor man doth chiefly deſire death. A good Chriſtian
deſires death, not for it ſelfe, but to bee with
Chriſt, to be unburdened of his concupiſcence.

Many men out of diſtemper of minde and an ill-informed
will doe couet death, and kill themſelues:
but yet it is not for death it ſelfe, but for ſome reſpect
beſides: as Cato Vticenſis killed himſelfe with
his owne ſword, becauſe he would not fall into the
handes of Iulius Caeſar: Sophronia to keepe her
chaſtitie from the luſt of Decius the Emperour,
who daily aſſaulted it by her husbands conſent ſlew
her ſelfe: Portia the wife of Brutus, vnable to beare
the newes of her husbands death, killed her ſelfe
with eating burning coales: Labienus hearing his
bookes were condemned to the fire, killed himſelfe,
becauſe they ſhould not die before him. Siluius Italieus
murdered himſelfe to rid himſelfe of the torments
of his greuous and incurable diſeaſe. Pontius
Pilate, being baniſhed to Vienna, and feeling
the gripes of an accuſing conſcience, and fearing
puniſhment for his miſdeeds, to preuent all, killed
himſelfe. Theſe and ſuch like are the ends of Selfeſlayers,
and not death it ſelfe. And albeit God doe
appoint men to die, yet it is not death hee aimes at,
but the manifeſtation of his iuſtice in puniſhing
ſinne, of his power in rayſing men dead to life,
and for ſuch ends, as are beſt knowne vnto himſelfe.
               To conclude then,Ariſtot. lib. 1. de Anima. Death is not properly a mans
end non 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      ſed 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   not the higheſt ſcope of
Gods creation: nor a mans perfection or be atitude,
which is the full and finall fruition of Almightie
God: but it is a certaine Extreme, or the end of
priuation, which end is the corruption and the diſſolution
of a thing.
            
            
               
               The ſecond Poſition.
               It is iuſt with God to ſmite Sinners with death,
euen in the very act of their wickedneſſe, and
with that wherein they doe offend.
               
                  COrnelius Gallus and Quintus Elorius, two Roman
Knights died (as Plinie lib. 7. recordeth)
in the very action of filthineſſe. Arichbertus, eldeſt
ſonne to Lotharius King of France died, as hee
was embracing his whores. Anacreon the Poet,
a notable Drunkard, was choked with the huske
of a grape. A certaine African caled Donitius
eate ſo much at a Supper that he died there with.
Philoſtrates being in the Bathes at Sinreſſa, deuoured
ſo much wine, that hee fell downe the ſtaires,
and almoſt broke his necke with the fall. Alexander
the ſonne of Baſilius and Brother of Leo the
Emperour, being a very belly-god, one day hauing
crammed himſelfe too full, as hee got vp his horſe,
he burſt a veine, whereat flowed ſuch ſtore of bloud
that hee died. Theſe and many more ſuch are the
iudgements of GOD vpon Sinners and are in him
moſt iuſt. For firſt his will is the rule of iuſtice: but
theſe puniſhments hee doth will and ordaine (for
there is no euill in the Citie, no puniſhment, which
hee ſendeth not): therefore theſe muſt needes bee
iuſt.Rom. 6. 23. Secondly they are deſerued: for the wages of
ſinne is death:Note. and in that God doth not ſtrike euerie
Sinner alike, the reaſon is, becauſe hee is tied to
no Law, but is a Law vnto himſelfe, and may doe

what he will. But ſometimes he is pleaſed to ſmite
ſuddenly, to terrifie the wicked, and to keepe his
owne in obedience, and to let all men know that
there is a God, that iudgeth the world, and hateth
wickedneſſe, and wicked men.
            
            
               The third Poſition.
               A wicked man, though wickedly and cruelly murthered,
is not not therefore diſcharged of his wickedneſſe
vnrepented of, and ſaued.
               
                  SEnacherib was murthered of his ſonnes,2. King. 19. 37. yet for
that his owne Idolatry & other ſinnes were not
forgiuen. For men are not ſaued for any good thing
either done by thē, or for any euil ſuſtained of them.
The Eaſterne Emperour Zeno was ſuch a loathſome
Belly-god, that his wife Ariadne fell to loath bim,
and on a day as he lay ſenſeleſſe (as his manner was)
through gurmandizing, ſhe got him into a tombe,
and throwing a great ſtone vpon it, pined him to
death. This was a iuſt puniſhment of a glutton, in
regard of God, though vniuſt in reſpect of her, that
did it. This then I ſay, If a man out of the ſtate of
grace be murthered, or die by an iniuſt ſentence of
the Magiſtrate, yet he is not therfore deliuered from
the ſentence of God, but muſt ſuffer as he hath deſerued;
that his vntimely death being alſo long of
his ſinne. And though a wicked man or one not
within the ſtate of grace may die not deſeruing it of
man, as Archelaus King of Macedonia, who was
murthered of one Cratenas, whom he loued deerely,

or as that forenamed father was of Adrameleke
and Saraſar his ſonnes, yet is this their death iuſtly
ſent from God, whom they knew not, worſhipt
not, ſerued not, as they ſhould haue done. Yea their
death may be iuſtly puniſhed in their murtherers (as
Cratenas was himſelfe alſo after murthered) and yet
death deſerued at the hands of God. For though
God and the murtherer agree in the act, yet not in
their grounds and ends: God therefore purſues the
murtherer, becauſe he violates his law ſo ſouly, he
not bidding him,Why God puniſheth a murther, which he doth permit. but forbidding him to murther,
and putting no malice into his heart to make him
murther, giuing him no commiſſion, but onely a
certaine permiſſion, which God being Lord of all,
and bound to no man, may iuſtly doe.
            
            
               The fourth Poſition.
               The number of ſuch as ſhall ſuffer eternall death, is
greater then of them that ſhall be ſaued.
               
                  MAny are called,
                  Math. 20. 16. 
                  but few in compariſon of
them are choſen: now none ſhall be ſaued
but the choſen. There are, & haue beene many, that
neuer had a verball calling. An infinitie of people
there is at this day in the world, as of Turkes, Iewes,
Indians, Tartars, and other ſauage nations, in number
beyond Chriſtians: & of all that rabble there can
be no hope of life,Ioh. 3. 18. ſo long as they liue out of the
Church,Heb. 5. 9. and by no extraordinarie fauour,Ioh. 27. 9. know
Chriſt, who himſelfe doth teach that the way
of life is ſtrait,
                  Math. 7. 13. 14. and found of few, but that the way

to death is broad, and full of trauellers. And finally,
euen among Chriſtians, only thoſe ſhall be ſaued
which embrace the true faith, and are obedient vnto
Chriſt, in thoſe particular true viſible. Churches,
in which they were bred and baptized, and to the
obedience of which God doth call and tie them.
Now how few theſe are to heretikes, ſchiſmatikes,
and other factious firebrands, and euill liuers, as
drunkards, fornicators, earthwormes, idle and vnprofitable
wretches, the multitude of ſinnes and ſinners
which ſwarme like the flies of Egypt in Citie
and countrey doth demonſtrate.
            
            
               The fifth Poſition.
               Whoſoeuer doth ſimply and ſincerely will and deſire
to be deliuered from eternall death, ſhall not die,
but liue eternally.
               I Make it plaine thus;Note. he that willes the end ſimply
and ſincerly, doth ſeeke out means vnto it, & doth
vſe thoſe means: for if he know the means whereby
he may obtaine his deſire, & yet neglects to vſe thē,
and cares not for them, he ſhewes his deſire is but
confuſed, vncertaine, & vnſincere. If therfore a man
with an honeſt and true heart do will, wiſh, & deſire
to liue, and to eſcape death, he wil ſeeke out meanes
to accompliſh his deſire, & when he knowes them,
he will be carefull to vſe them. It is an old and true
ſaying, Wiſhers and Woulders were neuer good Houſeholders:
the meaning whereof is to taxe the fooliſhneſſe
of ſuch, as wiſh and would, but will take

no paines, will vſe no meanes. An idle peeſon would
be rich, but he will not labour: a trewant would be
a ſcholler,Note. but he will not ſtudie. The truth is that
he, that indeed would inioy a thing, wil vſe means to
compaſſe it: If then I would not die, but liue, I muſt
not runne on in ſinne, I muſt not diſtruſt God, I
muſt not diſobey the Church of Chriſt, and
kindle coales of contention, I muſt not contemne
the word and Sacraments, but I muſt beleeue in
Chriſt, repent of my ſinne, begge their pardon, reuerence
my Miniſter, loue my Brethren, and take
heede I giue no offence.Ezek. 18. 21. Now he, that doth carefully
vſe the meanes of life,Ioh. 3. 16. and auosdes the waies of
death, ſhall vndoubtedly liue, and not die. But hee,
that ſaith, I would liue, I would not die, and yet
goes the broade way, and regards not the narrow
path, this man ſurely is wrong: his will is not ſimple
and ſincere, but confuſed and miſhapen; and except
he reforme his courſe, he ſhall periſh notwithſtanding
his wiſhing and woulding.Note. Tell mee, if a
man ſhall ſay, he would be in health, and yet will
vſe no meanes of health, no good diet, no labour,
nor the like, but delights onely in eating, drinking,
glouzing, ſleeping, idleneſſe; tell me, does
this man indeed will health, and a good temper of
bodie? He doth not doubtleſſe: he may wiſh health,
but he will take no paines for it, which argues verie
fooliſhneſſe. Euerie man would be ſaued, who
would die? Balaam would not: no man would: yet
in the meane time who vſeth the means? Who leaueth
his ſinnes? Who fighteth with his luſts? Who
honoureth his Miniſter as the man of God? Who

thirſteth after Chriſt? Who is louing and obedient
vnto the Church? Is not ſinne committed & countenanced?
Is not the Sabbath commonly, and notoriouſly
profaned? Doe not othes, drunkenneſſe,
pride, idleneſſe, and hard-heartedneſſe abound? And
are not many to ſeeke (as it were) in the Alphabet
of religion. They know not which is the
true Church, which are the people of God, which
is his houſe.Note. What miſerable times doe we liue in!
How vaine is the world! Men would faine liue, they
would not die, they ſay, and yet they care not for
the waies of life, whereas if men did truely
and effectually will to liue, and to auoid death, they
would not runne the broad way, but would ſhew
themſelues wiſe men, that is, as well ſeeke out and
vſe the meanes as affect the end.
               
            
            
               The ſixt Poſition.
               Though a man feele not the fruits and working of
the Spirit in him, yet hee muſt not deſpaire of
life, and thinke hee is ordained to death, and
muſt needs be damned.
               A Man may bee called before death, though
now he be in ſinne ouer head and eares,Iſay 59. and
altogether voide of mercy: Gods arme is neuer too
ſhort to ſaue, his eare is neuer too dull to heare:
neither doth any man know what the purpoſe of
God is. Paul was as bad as one God; did call him, &
ſo was the Thiefe, that was called on the Croſſe.
               Againe, a man may be in the ſtate of grace, and
yet ſometimes feele no comfort,Note. no working of the

Spirit, euen as a man in a ſwoone or ſleepe doth
liue, though hee knowes not ſo much, and a child
(we ſee) liues before it knowes it liues.
               I ſay finally, what though thou feelſt no grace?
what though thou beeſt nothing ſo good, as thou
ſhouldſt bee? Wilt thou therefore deſpaire? Is
there no way with thee, thinkeſt thou, but death?
Wrong not thy ſelfe: where is thy faith? wee liue
by faith, and not by feeling. It is not thy graces in
thee, that doth ſaue thee, it is Gods grace in Chriſt
vnto thee, of which grace thou maiſt bee partaker,
though thou feeleſt no graces in thee.Note. And know
this, that it is not ſo much thy loue of God and thy
knowledge of Chriſt, which is ſauing to thee, as
Gods loue, whereby hee loues thee, as Chriſts
knowledge, whereby he knowes thee, who knowes
and loues thee before and better,1. Ioh. 4. 10. 19. then thou canſt
know and loue him. And certainely, if thou doeſt
earneſtly ſeeke and affect his grace, thou haſt grace:
for it is a grace to deſire grace: and it argues that,
if thou doeſt truely ſeeke Chriſt for Chriſt, thou
haſt alreadie found Chriſt, or rather that Chriſt hath
found thee. And finally, what if thou findeſt not all
the workes of the Spirit in thee?Note. If thou findeſt but
one, there is reaſon of quietneſſe. If feeling no
grace, thou doſt feelingly deſire and couet grace,
one drop of grace, this is a grace, a voice of the
Spirit, and there is reaſon of comfort, and why thou
ſhouldſt not be diſmaide. One greene leafe vpon a
Tree will ſhew the tree is aliue, one ſigh doth argue
life.Note. This then I ſay, if out of the want of Chriſt
thou deſireſt Chriſt, if feeling the want of the Spirit

thou doeſt deſire and pant after the Spirit, aſſure
thy ſelfe thou art not voide of grace, Chriſt doth
loue thee, the Spirit hath taken poſſeſsion of thee:
ſtand not in thine owne light, bee not ouer wiſe,
but bee ruled, and remember that Chriſt
cries,Mat. 11. 28. 
                  Come, vnto them, that are heauy
laded,Mat. 12. 20. and is ſo pitifull that hee vvill
not quench the ſmoking Flaxe
nor breake the bruiſed
Reede.
(⸪)
            
            Trin-Vni Deo Gloria.
            FINIS.
         
      
   