
      
         
            
            
            
            
            
            
               
               THE WHOLE BOOKE of Psalmes, collected into Englysh metre by T. Starnhold I. Hopkins & others: conferred with the Ebrue, with apt Notes to synge thē with al, Faithfully perused and alowed according to thordre appointed in the Quenes maiesties Iniunctions⸫
            
               ¶Very mete to be vsed of all sortes of people priuately for their solace & comfort: laying apart all vngodly Songes and Ballades, which tende only to the norishing of vyce, and corrupting of youth.
            
            
               
                  IAMES. V.
               
¶If any be afflicted let him praye, and if any be mery let hym syng Psalmes.
            
               COLLOSS. III.
               ¶Let the worde of God dwell plentuouslye in all wisedom teachinge & exhorting one another in psalmes, Hymnes & spirituall songs, & sing vnto the Lord in your herts.
            
            
               ¶Imprinted at Lōdon by John Day, dwelling ouer Aldersgate, ¶ Cumgratia & priuilegio Regie Maiestatis, perscpteunium. An. 1562.
         
         
            
               
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧ 
               A shorte Introduction into the Science of Musicke, made for such as are desirous to haue the knowledge therof, for the singing of these Psalmes.
            
               FOr that the rude & ignorant in Song, may with more delight desire, and good wyl: be moued and drawen to the godly exercise of singing of Psalmes, aswell in common place of prayer, where altogether with one voyce render thankes & prayses to God, as priuatly by themselues, or at home in their houses: I haue set here in the beginning of this boke of psalmes, an easie and moste playne way and rule, of the order of the Notes and Kayes of singing, whiche commonly is called the scale of Musicke, or the Gamma vt. Wherby (any diligēce geuen therunto) euerye man may in a fewe dayes: yea, in a few houres, easely without all payne, & that also without ayde or helpe of any other teacher, attayne to a sufficient, knowledg, to singe any Psalme contayned in thys Booke, or any suche other playne and easy Songes as these are.
            
               
               
                  ☞ Beholde this table
                  gamut
               
            
            In this table, or gāma vt, is cōteyned all, what is necessari to the knoweledge of singing Wherefore it must be diligent lie waid & muste also bee perfectly cōmitted to memory, so that ye can redely and distinctly say it without boke, both forwarde and backward: that is, vpward and downward And this is the greatest pain that ye nede to take in this trauayle.
            
               
Ye must also note that the letters ascending on the left hande of the Table, are called Kaies, or Cleuis: of whiche the first is a Greke letter, signifying g, & is called gamma, (of whom the whole table or scale is called, the Gamma vt.) All the other ar lattin letters vii. in number. a, b, c, d, e, f, g, then repeting the same again, beginning at a, & the third time repeting the same, till ye com to ee, la. which is the last, but all these Kayes ar not signed or set in these Psalmes: but onely ii. or three most commonly c, or e, or b. C, hath this form or signe, 𝄡 E, is signed after this maner 𝄢 B, hath thus, ▪ or thus sharpe. ♯
            
            The kayes of this Scale or Table, are deuided and set forth by thre diuers orders of letters. From gamma vt, to G, sol, re, vt,, ar signed with capitall letters, & are called graue base, or capitall kayes: From G, sol, re, vt: to G, sol, re, vt, they are wrytten with small letters: and are called meane or small kayes: And from g, sol, re, vt, to ee, la, they are written with double letters, and are called double kaies, and treble kaies.
            When it chaunceth ii. kaies to be of one letter, as G sol, re, vt: and g, sol, re, vt, A, la, mi, re


               
and, a, la, mi, re, E, fa, vt: and f, fa, vt: E, la, mi, & e, la, mi, ye may (to put difference and distinctiō betwene them) call the one, capitall G, or G, sol, re, vt, the lower: and tother small g, or g, sol, re, vt: the higher, and so of others.
            They are called kayes, because they opē, as it were the doore, and make awaye into song: for by the sight and place of the kaye, ye shall know easelye the whole songe, the nature of euery Note, in what kaie or place it standeth, and how ye shall name it. ye see also in the table, that some of the kayes be set in lines or rules, and other are set in spaces betwene the lines: as gamma, vt, is set in rule: a, re, in space:: b, mi, in rule. c, fa vt: in space d, sol, re, in rule, and so ascending to the ende: so also in the songs of your Boke, ye se rules and spaces: so that euery rule & space in your boke, answereth to some one rule or space of your table or scale: and taketh the name of the same, whiche ye may easely fynde oute, eyther by ascending or descending from the kaye set and marked in your song.
            Moreouer it is to be noted, that there are vi. voyces, or Notes, signified and expressed by these vi. sillables: vt: re mi, fa, sol, la, by whiche through repetition of them, may be sōg



al songes of what compasse so euer they be, which vi. notes, ye must learn to tune aptely of some one that can already sing, or by som Instrument of musike, as the Uirginals, or some other suche like, Which thing wel learned, ye shal nede none other teaching of any
            And for a plainer learning therof, I haue set before your eyes, those vi. notes ascēding and descending: and again with a litle varietie from theyr naturall order, to the end ye may attayne to the iust tunes of them, how so euer they be placed. For these two examples well had, and tuned a righte, all other songes and Psalmes, with little vse and a small labour will sone be attayned vnto 
                  〈♫〉
               
            
            Firste ye muste diligently searche out, in what kaie euery note of your song stōdeth: Which ye may easely do, in beholding your signed kaie (cōmōly called the cleaue) which is set in the beginning of euery song: & that lyne or, space wherin the signed kaie is set, beareth the name of the same kaie: and all Notes standinge in ye line or space, are saide



to stand in that kaie: and so ascending or descēding from that kaie, ye shall straight way see wherin, or in what kaie euery Note of your song standeth. As in this present example. if ye will know wherin your first Note standeth, consider youre kaie, signed & marked with this letter C. in the second rule (and because it standeth in rule, ye finde, by youre Table that it is C, sol, fa, vt: For thother two c, c, whiche are, c, fa, vt: and, cc, sol fa: stande in space) wherfore that seconde lyne throughout, is called, c, sol, fa, vt, and all the notes placed in that line, are counted to stand in c, sol, fa, vt: Then discend frō that kaie to the next space, which (as your table telleth you) is b, fa, ♯, mi. from thence to the next rule, whiche is a, la, mi, re, & from thence to the nexte space wherin your first Note standeth, which is G, sol, re vt: so finde ye by descending in order beginning at youre signed kaye, after thys sorte: c, sol, fa, vt,: b, fa, ♯, mi: a, la, mi, re: G, sol, re, vt: ye find that your first note standeth in G, sol, re, vt: wherfore ye may sing it by anye of these iii. Notes sol, re, or vt: But because this note vt, in this place is most aptest to ascend withall: ye shall call it vt: by the same triall ye shal find that your second Note standeth



in a, la, mi, re, ye shall expresse in singing by this voice re, rather then by la, or mi, because re, is in order next aboue vt, so shall ye finde the thirde Note to stand in b, fa, ♯, mi, which ye shall expresse by mi, The fourth standeth in the signed kaie or cleaue, wherfore it standeth in c, sol, fa, vt, whiche ye must expresse by fa. The fift in d, la, sol, re: and is to be expressed by sol. The sixt and highest Note, ye shall by ascending from your keie, finde to stande in e, la, mi: and is to be expressed in voice by la, so haue youthe whole compasse of your sōg▪ and as in order of notes, and sound of voice, ye ascendid, so contrarie wise; ye must defcēd till ye come to the last Note of your song.
            Here note that when b, fa, ♯, mi, is formed and sighed in this maner, with this letter b, whiche is called b, flat, it must be expressed with this voice or note, fa, but if it be formed and signed with this forme ♯, whiche is called b, sharpe: or if it haue no signe at all, then must ye expres it in singing with thys voyce or Note. mi.
            
            Like wise may ye practise; placing youre first Note vt, in anye other kaye, wherin ye finde vt, whiche are. vii. Gāma, vt, C, fa, vt: E; fa vt, graue: G, sol, re, vt, graue: c, sol, fa, vt: E, fa, vt,


               
sharpe: g, sol, re, vt, sharpe, ascending vp to la, and descending as in your former example. These vii. seuerall ascensions and descensyons vpon diuers groundes or cleues, are cō
               monlye called of writers vii. deductions, whiche ye may playnlye and distinctlye beholde in your table, or Scale.
            One example more haue I set, wherin ye sing fa, in b, fa, ♯, mi. Whose deductions beginneth in vt: placed in, E, fa, vt, graue or capital as ye see. 
                  〈♫〉
               
            
            Ye haue also in youre songes diuers fourmes and figures of Notes. Of which all, it behoueth you to knowe bothe the names and value.
            Diuers forms of Notes. 
                  〈♫〉
               
            
            The firste of these is cassed a Large: the secōd a Long. The third a Brief the fourth a Semibrief: the fift a Minime: the sixt a Crochet: The seuenth and laste a Quauer. The first is worth in value two of the seconde, that is, two Longes: and one



Longe is worth ii. Breues: and one Breue, is two Semibrefes. & one Semibrefe: two Minimest and hathet wise the time in pronouncing in singing that the Minime hath One Minime is worthe two crochets: and one Crochet, is two quauers, as appereth in this Table folowing.
            
            If there chaunce any pricke to be set by anye of these Notes, the pricke is worthe in value the Note nexte folowing it. As apricke set by a Semibriefe, as thus, 𝆹· is worthe this none, 톹텥 whiche is a Minime: and a pricke by a Minime, as here, 톹텥· is worth a 톺텥. There are also oftentimes ▪ in singing, ▪ Pauses or Restes, setin songes,



some time for ease of the singer, and comely staye of the songes: sometime where diuers parts are, for swetnes of the armonye, and apte repetityons & reportes: Which are signifyed by lifte strikes or lines, or halfe lines betwene the rules: as thus. 
                  〈♫〉
               
            
            The first which is drawen from the firste line to the iii. is called a longe Rest: & signifyeth that ye must pause while that a longe is song, whiche is worthe iiii. plaine song Notes, or foure Semibreues. The second which is from one lyne to a nother, is called a Breue rest, & requireth the pauling of a breue or of ii. semibreues. The iii. whiche is from a lyne to the halfe space vnderneth: is called a semibreue rest, and requireth the pause or space while a semibreue is in singing. The fourthe whiche is ascending from the line, to the halfe space aboue, is called a Minime rest, & is but the drawing of a breth, while a minime may be song The fifte and laste, whiche is like vnto the Minime reste, but croked at the top, requireth the pause of a crochet.
            To set out a full and absolute knowledg of the nature of the scale, the differences betwene notes and halfe notes, & halfe notes



betwene themselues, of interualles, proportions: and which notes concorde and agree together, and which disagree. What modes there are: and how many. What is perfection, what imperfection: How notes oughte to be bounde together, and what theyr value is so bounde, tayled vpwarde or downewarde? perteineth to a iust Introduction to the arte of Musike. These thinges before taught, seme at this time, for the poore vnlearned and rude, sufficiente and inoughe to the atteyning of such knowledg in singing as shall be requisite to the singing of Psalmes conteined in this boke, for which cause only they are set out.
         
         
            
            
               A Treatise made by Athanasius the great, wherin is setforth, how, and in what manner ye may vse the Psalmes, according to theffect of the minde: of gladnes or sorow: accordingly. which Psalmes ye shall vse for prayer, which for thankesgeuing, which for rehersal of Gods wonderful actes, to the praise of his name. Also ye may se in them how God hath holpen his chosen people from time, to tyme, and neuer forsoke them.
            
               THe whole scripture vniuersally is as it were a diuine Maystres. teaching both vertue and true faythe: but the booke of the Psalmes hathe ouer and besydes that, in a maner an expres ymage of the state & condicion of soules: For as he whiche goeth to a kyng, composeth fyrst his behauiour, and setteth in order his wordes, least he shoulde be counted rusticall and rude: so this deuine booke, fyrst by choise of all motions, wherwith the soule is affected, warneth, then frameth and instructeth by diuers formes of speaking all suche as couet vertue, and defyre to knowe the lyfe of the Sauiour. It is easy therefore for euery man to finde out in the Psalmes, the motion and state of his owne soule, and by that meanes, his own figure and proper erudition. Moreouer with what words he may please God, & with what wordes he may correcte himselfe, and geue God thankes, Lest if he speake that thing whiche is not leefull, he fall into impietie. For not alone of dedes but also of euerye worde muste we geue accounte before the iudge. wherfore if thou wilt pronounce any man happy and blessed: thou hast how and wherefore, and whom thou maist cal happy, in the Psalmes, as you may se in the first psalm. 32. psalme. 41. psa. 112. psalme. 119. psalme, and the, 128. psalme.
            If thou wylt complayne of the laying awayt of the Jews against the Sauiour, say the second Psalme.
            If thyne acquaintaunce persecute thee, and many ryse against thee, thou hast the thirde Psalme.
            If thou being troubled on this sort, hast called vpon the Lorde, and because he hath hard the thou wouldest giue him thanks: syng the. 4. psa. and the. 115 Psalme.
            If thou perceyuest wayte to be layd for the of euil willers and desyrest that thy prayer should be hard, syng the. 5. psal.
            If thou feelest the threatninges of God, and thereby perceyuest thy selfe to be dismaied. thou mayest say the. 6. psalm and the. 37.
            
               
If any consult or conspire againste the as Achitophel agaynst Dauid, and some man tel it the, syng the, 7. Psalme.
            when thou considerest the grace of our Sauiour euerywhere spread abrode, and man kind restored vnto helth, thē if thou wilt talke to the Lord, syng the 8. Psalme.
            If againe thou wilt synge of the wonderous workes of God gyuing God thankes, thou hast the 8. Psalme and the 81. Psalme.
            If thou wilt haue thine enemy stopped and driuen back & neuertheles the creature to be saued, not trusting in thy self but in Gods sonne, say the 9. Psalme.
            If any man wil make thee afrayed, thou with trust in the Lord shalt syng the. 10. Psalme.
            If thou seest the pride and malice of many to abounde, so that nothing which is good and godly is regarded amongst men, flye thou vnto Lorde and say the. 11. Psalme.
            If the lyinges in waite of enemies continew still, do not forget thy selfe, as though the Lord set nought by thee, but call vpon the Lord: synging the. 26. Psalme.
            If thou heare any man blaspheming and speaking ill against the prouidence: be not thou partaker of their wickednes, but flying vnto God say the. 14. Psalme. and 53. Psalme
            If thou wilt know after what sort the life of a citizen of the kingdome of heauen is, syng the 15. Psalme.
            If thou hast nede of prayer for them which withstand the and compas thy soule aboute singe the 17. Psalme and 86. 89. and 142. Psalme.
            If thou wilt knowe howe Moyses prayed thou hast the 90. Psalme.
            If thou art escaped from enemies, and deliuered from thē which persecute the, sing the 18. Psalme.
            If thou maruelest at thorder of thynges created, and the grace of the diuine prouidence syng 19. 26. 27. Psalme.
            If thou seest any man troubled, cōfort them, and praying for them, say the wordes of the Psalme 20.
            If thou seest thy selfe kept of the Lord and that thou prosperest, reioyce and syng the 23. Psalme:
            If thine enemies rush vpon thee, lift vp thy soule to God and say the 25. Psalme, and thou shalt see them worke wickednes in vayne.
            If thine enemies perseuer and continew, as with bloudy handes seke to seduce thee or kill thee, geue not iudgement



vnto manne for all humaine thinges are suspect. But requiring God to be iudge, who is thonly Iudge, say 26. psalme. and 35. 43. Psalme.
            If thine enemies cruelly curse the, & multiply, as it were an host with dispite: feare not, no more thē though thou wer nothing in daunger at all, and sing 46. Psalme.
            If againe they be impudent, which lye in wayte, set thou nothin by them but sing vnto the Lorde that which is in the 47. Psalme.
            If thou wilt know how thou ought to go vnto the Lord when thou wilt geue him thanks: playnly thou shalt vnderstand and sing 48. Psalme.
            Furthermore when thou renuest thy house & soule, which receiueth the Lord, & the sensible house in which thou bodely dwellest: geue thankes and say. 49. and 127. Psalme.
            If thou see thy kinsmen and frendes hate the for the truth leaue not of thy loue, nether feare such aduersaries, but think what is to come, and sing the 31. psalme.
            If thou seest them that be christened, deliuered frō the corruptible birthe maruelling at the deuine bounteousnes sing the. 31. Psalme.
            If thou wilt sing with the iust men, and remembring thē whiche liue a righte, synge the. 33. psalme.
            If thou haste fallen amongst enemies, and wisely escaped them, and fled from their snares, & therfore wilt geue thāks, call together the meke and sing with them the 34. Psalme.
            If thou see the wicked striue to do mischief, think not that sinne is naturally in them, as certayne heretikes helde an opinion: but say 36. Psalme.
            If thou se the euill work vnrighteousnes and beare them selues loftie against the lower sorte, and desirest to warne some therof, say the 37. Psalme.
            If thou hast determined to take hede vnto thy selfe, & seest the aduersary, lying in wait, who is most earnest against such and woldest arme thy self against him: sing the 39. psalme,
            If thou seest many pore men and beggers, and wouldest pitie them: thou mayst both trye them whiche are now pitied al redy and exhorte other to do the same, saing 41. Psalm.
            If thou hast a desire towarde God, & hearest the enemyes vpbraiding, let it not dismay thee, but vnderstanding thimmor tall frute, whiche springeth of this desire, comforte the soule with hope toward God, and with this releue, and mitigate the griefes of lyfe, saying 42 psalme.
            
               
If thou wilt often call to remembraunce the benefites of God, which he shewed to the fathers bothe in the going out of Egipt, and in the wildernes, and how God was good to them, but they were vnthankfull: thou hast the 44. Psalme. the 79. 80. 102. 106. 107. 114. Psalmes.
            If fleing vnto God thou hast escaped such things as wer spoken against thee, & woldest geue thankes vnto God, and declare his liberalitie & goodnes towards the thou hast. 46.
            If thou haste sinned & being turned, fallest to repentance, and wouldest obteyne mercy, thou hast the words of confession in the. 51. Psalme.
            If thou hast suffred a false accusation before an euill kyng and seest thenemy to bost: go aside and saye the. 52. Psalme.
            If any persecute thee & quarell willing to betray the, like as the Phariseis did Christe, and straungers Dauid, abashe not thy selfe, but with trust in the Lorde, syng the 54. Psalm. and the. 56.
            If persecution chaunce, and the persecutour vnwares enenter into the caue where thou arte hyd, feare not, for thou hast in this strayte profitable wordes, both for comfort and for remembraunce of the thinges, in the. 57. psalm and 142.
            If he that lieth in waite of thee, haue cōmaunded to watch and beset thy house, and thou hast escaped, geue thankes vnto God and in the tables of thy soule, graue the thinge, and say the 59. Psalme.
            If thenemies which troble thee, vp brayde thee, and with many wordes backbyte thee, which sem to be frends, and in thexercise of this thy trosse thou arte somwhat weake: thou mast call vpon the same also saying the. 4. Psalme.
            Against hipocrites and such as bragge to a mans face, saie to conuert them withall, the 58. Psalme.
            If they sharply rush vpon thee: and would catch thy soule set against them thy subiection to God ward, and be of good comfort, for the fearser they are themore shall they be subiecte vnto God, saye thou the 62. Psalme.
            If to anoyde persecution, thou flee into the deserte, fearenot as though thou werte there alone and desolate: but hauing God, and in the dawning of the day rysing to him, sing the. 63. Psalme.
            If the enemies make thee afrayd and cease not to sow deceytes, and searche alwayes against thee: althoughe they be neuer so many, cease not for all that, for theyr nettes shalbe



lyke shaftes of little chyldren, if thou sing the. 64. 68. 70. 71. Psalmes.
            yf thou wilt synge of God, and his prayse, thou haste the 65. Psalme.
            yf thou wilt enstruct anye man in the misterye of the resurrection, thou hast the 80. Psalme.
            yf thou aske mercy of God, sing the 67. Psalme.
            yf thou seest the wicked prosper in peace, be not so offended that thou be moued, but say the 73. psalme.
            yf God be angry with his people, thou haste woordes wherwith thou maist cōforte the same, in the. 74. Psalme.
            yf thou thinkest expedient to confes thee, sing the 71. 75. 92. 105. 106. 108, 111. 118. 136. and. 138. Psalmes.
            yf thou wilt rebuke a Gentile and an heretike. namelye such a one as knoweth not God thou maist with intelligēce sing and say that whiche is in the. 86. Psalme.
            yf thenemies haue taken thy refuges & thou art in great distres, althoughe thou arte troubled, yet despaire not, but praye, and if when thou criest thou art hearde, geue thankes vnto God saying that whiche is in the. 77. Psalme.
            If the enemies holde on and continue breaking in. & defilyng the house of God, and killing the sainctes and casting their bodies to the soules of thayre, feare not their crueltie but suffering with them that suffer affliction say the 79. psa.
            If thou wilt sing to the Lorde in solemnitie call together the seruauntes of God and sing the 81. and the 95. Psalm.
            If thenemies be gathered together euery where. & threaten the house of the Lorde, conspiring againste godlines, let not the multitude and power of them dismaie thee, thou hast as it were an authoure of hope, the wordes whiche are in the. 83. Psalme.
            yf thou see the house of God and his euerlasting tabernacles and hast a mind or affection toward them as had the Apostle: say the 84. Psalme.
            yf rancor be stinted and captiuitie released: thou haste to geue God thankes withall the 85. Psalm. and a 116.
            yf thou wilt know discord of the catholike church against diuisions & woldest conuert them, thou maist say that which is in the 87, Psalme.
            If thou wilt moue thy selfe and other to true religion & perswade that the hope in God maketh not the soule ashamed but rather put awaye all feare, prayse God, saying the



91. Psalme.
            If thou wilt synge vpon the Sabboth, thou haste the. 92, Psalme.
            If thou wilte geue thankes vpon the Sonday, thou haste in the 13. Psalme.
            If thou wylt geue thankes in the second Sabboth, synge the. 95. Psalme.
            If thou wylt sing vpoon the day of preparation, thou hast a forme of praise in the. 93. Psalme: and therfore a song of reioysing ought to be songe vnto God hymselfe.
            If there haue ben imprisonmente, and the house wasted, & bulded agayne, singe that which is in the. 96. Psalme.
            If the land haue ben vexed of thenemies, and whyles the Lorde ruleth and rayneth, it be at quiet, thou hast to singe the 97. Psalme.
            If thou wilt synge vpon the fourthe Sabboth, thou hast the 94. Psalme, for then he being betrayed, began to reuenge deathe, and to triumphe ouer the same.
            Therfore when thou redest the Gospell, & seest the Jewes consulting against the Lorde, and the Lord himself standing boldlye on our side against the deuill: syng that whiche is in the. 94. Psalme, as is next before sayde.
            If thou markest the prouidence of the Lorde in al things, and the Lorde of the same, and woldest enstruct any with the faythe and obedience therof, when thou hast perswaded thē syrft to acknowledge, synge the 100. Psalme.
            If thou knowest power in hym to iudge, and that God iudgeth mingling iudgemente with mercy, and hast a desyre to attayne vnto it, thou hast for this purpose, wordes in the 101. Psalme.
            If because of thim becillitie of oure nature, thou arte, after the maner of a phisicion, irke and weary of the manifold mischefes of life, and wouldest comfort thy self: thou hast the. 102. Psalme.
            For asmuche as it is mete and conuenient alwayes and in all thinges to geue God thankes, when thou wilt praise him thou hast wherwith to exhort thy soule the 103. Psalme.
            If thou wilt praise God, and know how to praise him for any thing, and what wordes he that prayseth ought to vse, thou hast 113. 127. 146. 133. 147. 148. 149. 150. Psalmes.
            If thou hast saythe, as the Lorde hath sayd, and beleuest in those thinges which thou speakest when thou prayest say the 96. Psalme.
            
               
If thou be captiuated with straunge cogitations, and hast perceiued thy self to be led out of the way, and are sorie therfore, cease from henceforth, and staying there where thou perceyuedst thy selfe to sinne, syt and mourne also, as the people did, saying the 137. Psalme.
            If thou suppose temptations to be for thy tryall, geue thankes after the temptation vnto God, saying 139. Psalm.
            If thou art agayne caught of thyne enemies, and wouldest be delyuered, say the 140. Psalme.
            If thou wilt make thy prayers, say the 5. Psalme, and the 141. 142. 143. 144. Psalme.
            If an enemie and tyrante be rysen vp against the people, feare thou no more then Dauid did Goliath, but with Dauid beleue and syng the 144. Psalme.
            If thou call to remembrance the goodnes of God toward thee and all men, and wouldest prayse God, say the 85. Psal.
            If thou wilt synge vnto the Lorde, thou hast to say in the 96. and in the 98. Psalmes.
            If thou being but a meane man peraduenture art set before thy brethren in some thing, puffe not vp thy self in pride against them, but geue the prayse to God, and synge the 52. or the 151. Psalme.
            If thou wyltsing obedience, thou hast the 105. and the. 106 107. 111. 112. 113. 114. 115. 116. 117. 118. 119. 134. 145. 147. 148. 149. 150. Psalmes.
            If thou wilt syng particularly of the sauior, thou haste of him in euery psalme: but specially in the 25. & the 110. Psalm.
            Suche Psalmes as shew his lawful generation of the father, and his presence, are the 11. Psalm.
            Suche as preache of the diuine crosse, and how muche lying in wayte he receiued for vs, and how great things he suffred, are the 2. Psalme, and the 119.
            Suche as signifie the lyinges in wayte of the Iewes, and the malyce, and Iudas Iscariothes betrainges, are the 21. Psalme, and the 50. 72. Psalmes.
            Suche as declare his kingdome, and power to iudge, and his presence in the flesh, is the 16. Psalme.
            For declaration of his gloryous resurrection in the fleshe reade the 24. and the. 47. Psalme.
            For his ascencion into heauen, the 93. Psalme 96. and the 98. the 99. Psalmes.
            Which it thou read, thou maiest espye what benefytes the Lorde bestowed vpon vs by hys passion.
            ☞ To him be glory foreuer.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The vse of the rest of the Psalmes not comprehended in the former Lable of Athanasius.
            
               IF thou wouldest prayse God, because he hathe geuen vs a good Prince whiche wyll and doth punish the enemies of Christes relygion, vse the 21. Psalme.
            If thou be persecuted withoute a cause, if thou wouldest haue no affinitie, with vice, nor with the virious, vse the 26. Psalme.
            If thou wouldest not be wicked, if not accōpted as a malefactor: but wouldest haue them punished, and thyselfe and suche other godly men defended from the tiranie, vse the. 28 Psalme.
            If thou seest the nobilitie, the counsell, the magistrates, & Princes not geuen to religion, nor to the praysing of God, vse the 29. Psalme.
            If thou desirest to be iust and vertuous, vse the 33. psalm.
            If thou beest afflicted with any sicknes, & wouldest faine lyue and see good daies, and Christes glory to be encreased, vse the. 29. Psalme.
            If thou be banished for religiō, and art almost in dispaire of retorning to thy countrey, vse the 42 psalme:
            If thou perceyue thy selfe forsaken of God, and therfore persecuted for religion and vertue sake, vse the. 44. Psalme:
            If thou wouldest complaine of a Doeg, of a wycked man, and would haue him to be voted oute, and thy selfe to haue prosperitye, vse the. 52 psalme.
            If thou wouldest be deliuered from thyne enemies which persecute thee vnto deathe vse the 54. Psalme:
            If thou wouldest haue the helpe of God againste suche as persecute thee without a cause, vse the 59. Psalme.
            If thou wouldest prepare thy selfe to fight against the Idumeane, or such lyke enemyes of Christ: vse the 60. Psalm.
            If thou wouldest haue Chryste to come conquere & beate downe the Siriās: Idumes, Amonites, Papistes: Antichristians. Nullifidians Neutralles, and vngratious Pelagyans vse the 68. Psalme.
            If thou best perswaded that Chryste wyll come and pounysh offenders ayde the true worshippers, and poure oure the dregges of wyne and vengeaunce of hys cuppe, on the



vngodly, vse the 75. Psalme.
            If thou neither wouldest haue Idolatry, neyther any lycencious lustes rayne in Christes common welth thou must geue God thankes if thou be perswaded, he bothe will and can take them awaye, vsing the 81: Psalme.
            If thou wouldest gladlie know Christes Churche, & how that Sion signifieth it, and how that the true religion shalbe delated and spred throughe the hole worlde, vse the. 87. Psalme.
            If thou goest to fight againste the Idumeans, or anye of Christes enemies, whether they offende in manners, or in doctrine, and wouldest desire God to geue the victorye, vse the 108. Psalme.
            If thou woldest liue a godly lyfe, if thou wouldest replenysh thy mynde with gooly preceptes, and therby obtayne imortalitie, and eternall felicitie: Study diligently the. 119. Psalme.
            If thou be thrust into a Colledge, or in a parish, towne or countrey, whose in habitours, are wicked, crafty, and malicious picke quarels, to be deliuered from them. vse the. 120. Psalme.
            If thou wouldest haue the congregatiō of Christ to prosper, vse the 122. Psalme.
            If thou wouldest be deliuered from contempt, infamye & the derision of the wicked, vse 123. Psalme.
            when thou art deliuered out of prison captiuitie, or anye distres in geuing thankes to God vse the 124. Psalme.
            To vnderstande, the saftie that those are in, whiche ar vnder the tuicion of the Lorde. Ioua, and howe that the wicked shalbe punyshed, consider the 125. Psalme:
            If thou desirest to knowe the felicitie that he hathe which reuerenceth God, and liueth godly, the tranquillitie & peace of conscience whiche he enioyeth in this life, and the vnspeak able ioye in the life to come, meditate diligentlie the 128. Ps.
            To vnderstand how the good and godlye are defended by the ayde of the Lord, and the wicked perish, consider the 129. Psalme.
            If thou wouldest not be arrogaunte and proude, vse the 131. Psalme.
            If thou wouldest prayse vnitie and concord amonge bretherne, vse the. 133. Psalme.
            To syng prayses to god for his mercies, vse the 134. Psal.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Venicreator.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  COme holy Ghost eternal God, proceding 
                     〈♫〉
                   from aboue: Both from the Father & the 
                     〈♫〉
                   son, the God of peace & loue, Uisit our mindes 
                     〈♫〉
                   & into vs thy heauenly grace inspire, that in all 
                     〈♫〉
                   truth & godlines, we may haue true desire.
               
                  Thou art the very comforter, in all wo and distres:
                  The heauenly gift of God most highe, which no tonguee an expres.
                  The fountaine and the liuely springe, of ioy Celestiall;
                  The fyre so bright, the loue so cleare, and vnction spirituall.
               
               
                  
                  Thou in thy giftes art manifold, wherby Christes church doth stande:
                  In faythfull hartes writyng thy law, the finger of Gods hand.
                  According to thy promise made, thou geuest speache of grace:
                  That through thy helpe the prayse of God, may stande in euery place.
               
               
                  O holy Gost into our wittes, sende downe thy heauenly light:
                  Kindle our harts with feruent loue, to serue God day and night.
                  Strength and stablish all our weaknes, sofeable and so frayle:
                  That neither flesh, the worlde, nor deuill. against vs do preuayle.
               
               
                  Put backe our enemies far from vs, and graunt vs to obteyne:
                  Peace in our hartes with God and man. without grudge or disdayne.
                  And graunt (O Lorde) that thou beyng, our leader and our guide:
                  We may eschewe the snares of sinne and from thee neuer slide.
               
               
                  To vs suche plentie of thy grace, good Lorde graunt we thee pray:
                  That thou maiest be our comforter, at the last dreadfull day.
                  Of all strief and discention, O Lord dissolue the handes:
                  And make the knots of peace and loue,



throughout all christen landes.
                  Graunt vs (O Lord) through thee to know the father most of might:
                  That of his deare beloued sonne, we may atteyne the sight.
                  And that with perfect faith also we may acknowledge thee:
                  The spirit of them both alway, one God in persons three.
                  Laude and prayse be to the father and to the Sonne equall:
                  And to the holy spirit also, one God coeternall.
                  And pray we that the only sonne, vouchesafe his Sprit to sende:
                  To all that doo professe his name, vnto the worldes ende.
               
               Amen. Loke for the lxxxxv Psalm. iii Fol. 237.
               
            
            
               ¶ The songe of S. Ambrose, called Te Deum.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  WE praise thee god, we knowledg the 
                     〈♫〉
                   the only Lord to be, And as eternal father, all the 
                     〈♫〉
                   earth doth worship the. To the al angels crye, the



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   heauens and all the powers therin: To the Cherub. 
                     〈♫〉
                   and Seraphin, To crie they do not linne.
               O Holy, Holy, Holy, Lorde, Of Saboth Lord the God:
               Through heauē & earth, thy praise is spred, And glory all abrode.
               Thapostles glorious companye yelde prayses vnto thee:
               The Prophets goodly selowship. praise thee continually.
               The noble and victorious host Of martirs sounde thy prayse:
               The holy churche throughout the world doth knowledge thee alwayes.
               Father of endles maiestie, they doo acknowledge thee:
               Thy Christ, thine honorable, true and only sonne to be:
               The holy Ghost the comforter, of glory thou art king
               O Christ, and of the father arte the sonne euerlasting.
               
                  
When sinfull mans decay inhand thou tokest to restore:
               To be enclosde in virgins wombe Thou diddest not abhorre.
               When thou hadst ouercome, of death The sharp and cruell might,
               Thou heauens kingdome didst set ope to eche beleuing wight.
               In glory of the father, thou doest sit on Gods right hand:
               We trust that thou shalt come our Iudge, our cause to vnderstand.
               Lorde helpe thy seruaunts whom thou hast Bought with thy precious bloud
               And in eternall glory set Them with thy sainctes so good.
               O Lorde doo thou thy people saue, Blesse thine inheritaunce.
               Lorde gouerne them, and Lord doo thou for euer them aduaunce.
               we magnifie thee day by day, and world withoutē ende
               Addore thy holy name (O Lorde) vouchesafe vs to defende.
               From sinne this day haue mercy Lord, haue mercy on vs all:
               And on vs, as we trust in thee, Lorde let thy mercy fall.
               O Lorde I haue reposed all, My confidence in thee:
               Put to confounding shame therfore Lord let me neuer be.
            
            
               
               ¶ The songe of the thre Children praysing God, prouoking all creatures to doo the same.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  O all ye works of god the lord bles ye 
                     〈♫〉
                   the Lord prayse him & magnifye him for euer.
               
               O ye the Angels of the Lorde, bles ye the Lorde prayse him and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O ye the sterry heauens hie, blesse ye the Lorde prayse hym and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O ye waters aboue the sky, blesse ye the Lorde prayse hym and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O all ye powers of the Lorde, blesse ye the Lorde prayse hym and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O ye the shining Son and Mone, blesse ye the Lorde, prayse hym and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O ye the glistring starres of heauen, blesse ye the Lorde, prayse hym and magnifye



hym for euer.
               
               O the showers and dropping dew, blesse ye the Lord prayse him and magnifye him for euer.
               
               O ye the blowing wyndes of God, bles ye the Lord prayse him and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O ye the fire and warming heate, blesse ye the Lord prayse him and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               Ye winter and the sommer tyde, blesse ye the Lord prayse him and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O ye the dewes and binding frostes, bles ye the lorde prayse him and magnifye him for euer.
               
               O ye the frost and chilling colde, blesse ye the lorde prayse him and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O ye congeled ise and snow, blesse ye the lorde prayse him and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O ye the nightes and light somdayes, blesse ye the lorde prayse hym and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O the darknes and the light, blesse ye the lorde prayse him and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O ye the lightnings and the cloudes blesse ye the lorde prayse him and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O let the earth eke blesse the lorde, yea bles the lord praise him & magnify



him for euer.
               
               O ye the mountaines and the hilles blesse ye the Lord prayse him & magnifie hym for euer.
               
               O all ye grene thinges on the earth blesse ye the Lord praise hym & magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O ye the euer springing welles, bles ye the Lorde praise him and magnifye him for euer.
               
               O ye the seas and ye the floodes bles ye the Lorde prayse him and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               whales and all that in waters moue bles ye the Lorde prayse him and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O all ye flying foules of thayre, bles ye the Lorde prayse him and magnifye him for euer.
               
               O all the beastes and cattayll eke bles ye the Lorde praise him and magnifye him for euer.
               
               O ye the children of mankind bles ye the Lorde prayse him and magnifye him for euer.
               
               Let Israell eke bles the Lorde, yea bles the Lord prayse him and magnifye him for euer.
               
               O ye the priestes of God the Lorde bles ye the Lorde prayse hym and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               O ye the seruantes of the Lorde,



blesse ye the lorde prayse him and magnifye him for euer.
               
               ye sprites and soules of righteous men, blesse ye the lorde prayse him and magnifye hym for euer.
               
               ye holy and ye meke of hart blesse ye the lorde prayse him and magnifye him for euer.
               
               O Ananias blesse the lorde blesse thou the lord, prayse him and magnifye him for euer,
               O Azarias bles the lorde, bles thou the lord prayse him and magnifie him for euer.
               And Misaell bles thou the lorde, blesse thou the lord praise him and magnifye him for euer.
            
            
               ☞ The song of Zacharias, called Benedictus.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  THe only lorde of Israel, be praysed 
                     〈♫〉
                   euer more: For through his visitation & mercy



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   kept in store, his people now he hathe redemde, 
                     〈♫〉
                   that longe hathe bene in thrall, and spred abrod 
                     〈♫〉
                   his sauing health vpon his seruauntes all.
               
                  In Dauids house, his seruaunte true, According to his minde:
                  And also hys annoynted king, As we in Scripture finde.
                  As by his holy Prophetes all, O ft times he did declare:
                  The whiche were since the worlde began, His way for to prepare.
               
               
                  That we might be deliuered, From those that make debate:
                  Our enemies, and from the handes, Of all that doo vs hate.
                  The mercy whiche he promised, Oure fathers to fulfill:
                  And thinke vpon his couenant made, According to hys wyll.
               
               
                  And also to performe the othe, Whiche he before had sworne:
                  
                     
To Abraham our father deare, For vs that were forlorne.
                  That he woulde geue him self for vs, And vs from bondage bringe:
                  Out of the handes of all our foes, To serue our heauenly kyng.
               
               
                  And that without all maner feare, and eke in righteousnes?
                  and also for to leade our life, In stedfast holynes.
                  And thou (o child) which now art borne and of the Lorde elect:
                  Shalt be the Prophet of the hiest, His wayes for to direct.
               
               
                  For thou shalt goo before his face, For to prepare his wayes:
                  and also for to teache his will, and pleasure all the dayes.
                  To geue thē knowledg, how that theyr Saluation is nere:
                  and that remission of theyr sinnes, Is through his mercy mere.
               
               
                  wherby the day spring, from an hie, Is come, vs for to visit:
                  and those for to illuminate, whiche doo in darknes syt.
                  To lighten those that shadowed be, with death and eke opprest:
                  and also for to guide theyr fete, The way to peace and rest.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The songe of Blessed Mary, called Magnificat.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  MY soule doth magnifye the Lord, My 
                     〈♫〉
                   sprit eke euermore, reioyseth in the Lorde my 
                     〈♫〉
                   God which is my Sauior, & why? because he 
                     〈♫〉
                   did regard, & gaue respect, vnto, so base estate 
                     〈♫〉
                   of his handmaid, and let the mightie go.
               
                  For now beholde all nations, And generations all:
                  From this time forth for euermore, Shall me right blessed call.
                  Because he hath me magnifyed, Which is the lorde of might:
                  whose name be euer sanctifyed, And praysed day and night.
               
               
                  
                  For with his mercy and his grace, All men he doth inflame:
                  Thoro wout all generations, To suche as feare his name.
                  He shewed strength with his greatarme And made the proude to start:
                  With all imaginations, That they bare in theyr hart.
               
               
                  He hathe put downe the mightye ones. From their supernall seate:
                  And did exalte the meke in hart, As he hath thought it mete.
                  The hungrie he replenished, With all thinges that were good:
                  And through his power he made the riche, Oft times to want their fode.
               
               
                  And, calling to remembraunee, His mercy euery dele:
                  Hath holpen vp assistantly, His seruaunt Israell.
                  According to his promise made, To Abraham before:
                  And to his sede successiuely, To stande for euermore.
               
            
            
               ¶ The song of Simeon, called Nunc dimittis. S.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  O Lord because my harts desire hath



                  
                     〈♫〉
                  wished long to see, my only Lord & sauiour thy 
                     〈♫〉
                   sonne before I die, the ioye and health of all mankind, 
                     〈♫〉
                   desired long before, which now is come in 
                     〈♫〉
                   to the worlde of mercy bringing store.
               
                  Thou sufferest thyseruaunt now, In peace for to depart:
                  According to thy holy word, which lighteneth my hart.
                  Because mine eies, whiche thou hast made, To geue my body light:
                  Haue now behelde thy sauing health, which is the Lord of might.
               
               
                  Whom thou mercifully hast set, Of thine aboundant grace:
                  In open sight and visible, Before all people face.
                  
                     
The Gentils to illuminate. And Sathan ouer quell:
                  And eke to be the glory of Thy people Israell.
               
            
            
               ☞ The Crede of Athanasius. N
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  WHat man soeuer he be that, saluation 
                     〈♫〉
                  will attayne, the catholike belefe he muste 
                     〈♫〉
                   before all thinges retayne, which faith vnles 
                     〈♫〉
                   he holy kepe, and vndefiledly, without al doubt 
                     〈♫〉
                   eternally, he shalbe sure to dye.
               
                  The Catholike belefe is this. that God we worship one.
                  
                     
In Trinitie and Trinitie in vnitie alone.
                  So as we neyther doo confound, the persons of the three,
                  Nor yet the substance whole of one In sunder parted be.
               
               
                  One person of the father is, an other of the Sonne,
                  An other person propre of the holy Ghost alone.
                  Of Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost but one the Godhed is,
                  Like glory, coeternall eke the maiestie likewise.
               
               
                  Suche as the father is, such is the Sonne in eche degree,
                  And suche also we do beleue the holy Ghost to be.
                  Nncreat is the Father, and vncreat is the Sonne,
                  The holy Ghost, vncreate: so vncreat is eche one.
               
               
                  In comprehensible Father is, Incomprehensible Sonne,
                  And comprehensible also is The holy Ghost of none.
                  The Father is eternall, and the Sonne eternall so,
                  And in like sort eternall is, the holy Ghost also.
               
               
                  
                  And yet though we beleue that eche of these eternall be:
                  Yet there but one eternall is, and not eternals three.
                  As ne incomprensible we, ne yet vncreat three,
                  But one incomprensible, one vncreat holde to be.
               
               
                  Almightie so the father is, the sonne almightye so,
                  And in like sort almightye is the holy Ghost also,
                  And albeit that euery one of these almightie be:
                  Yet there but one almightie is, and not almighties three.
               
               
                  The Father God is, God the Sonne, God holy Ghost also:
                  Yet are there not three Gods in all, but one God and n
                        •
                     mo.
                  So likewise Lorde the Father is, and Lorde also the Sonne,
                  And Lord the holy Ghost: yet are there not three Lordes, but one.
               
               
                  For as we are compeld to graunt by Christian veritie,
                  Eche of the persons by himselfe both God and Lord to be.
                  So Catholick religion for biddeth vs alway
                  
                     
That eyther Gods be three, or that there Lordes be three to say.
               
               
                  Of none the father is, ne made ne creat, nor begot:
                  The Sonne is of the Father, not creat ne made but got.
                  The holy Ghost is of them both, the father and the Sonne,
                  Ne made, ne creat, nor begot, but doth procede alone.
               
               
                  So we one Father hold, not three: one Sonne also not three:
                  One holy Ghost alone, and not three holy Ghostes to be.
                  None in this Trinitie before, nor after other is:
                  Ne greater any then the rest, ne lesser be likewise.
               
               
                  But euery one amonge them selues, of all the persons three:
                  Together coeternall all, and all coequall be.
                  So vnitie in Trinitie, as said it is before:
                  And Trinitie in vnitie in all things we adore.
               
               
                  Therfore what man so euer that saluation will attayne:
                  This faith touching the Trinitie: of force he must reteyne.
                  
                     
And nedefull to eternall life it is that euery wight
                  Of the incarnating of Christ our Lord beleue a right.
               
               
                  For this the right faith is, that we beleue and eke beknow,
                  That Christ our Lorde the son of God, is God and man also,
                  God of his fathers substaunce, got before the world began:
                  And of his mothers substance, borne in worlde a very man.
               
               
                  Both perfect God and perfect man in one one Iesus Christ
                  That doth of resonable soule, an humane flesh subsist,
                  Touching his Godhed egall with his father God is he.
                  Touching his manhed lower then his father in degree.
               
               
                  Who though he be both very God and very man also:
                  yet is he but one Christ alone and is not persons two.
                  One not by turning of Godhed into the flesh of man:
                  But by taking manhod to God this beyng one began,
               
               
                  All one, not byconfounding of the substance into one:
                  
                     
But onely by the vnitie that is of one persone.
                  For as the reasonable soule and flesh but one man is:
                  So in one persone God and man is but one Christ likewise.
               
               
                  Who suffred for to saue vs all to hell he did descend:
                  The third day rose agayne from dead, to heauen he did ascend.
                  He sittes at the right hand of God thalmightie father there:
                  From thence to iudge the quick and dead againe he shall retire.
               
               
                  At whose returne all men shall rise with bodies new restorde:
                  And of theyr owne workes they shall geue accompt vnto the Lorde.
                  And they into eternall lyfe shall go that haue done well,
                  Who haue done ill shall go into eternall fire to dwell.
               
               
                  This is the catholike belefe, who doth not faithfully
                  Beleue the same, without all dout, he saued can not be.
                  To Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, all glory be therfore,
                  As in beginning was, is now, and shalbe euermore.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The Lamentation of a Sinner. M
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  O Lord turn not away thy face, frō him 
                     〈♫〉
                   that lieth prostrate: Lamenting sore his sinfull 
                     〈♫〉
                   lyfe, before thy mercy gate: Which gate thou openest 
                     〈♫〉
                   wide to those that doo lament their sinne, 
                     〈♫〉
                   shut not yt gate against me lord, but let me enter in
               
                  And call me not to mine accompts How I haue liued here:
                  For then I know right well (O Lorde) How vile I shall appere.
                  I nede not to confesse my lyfe, I am sure thou canst tell:
                  
                     
what I haue ben, and what I am I know thou knowest it well.
               
               
                  O lord thou knowest what things be past And eke the thinges that be:
                  Thou knowest also what is to come, Nothing is hid from thee,
                  Before the heauens & earth were made: Thou knowest what thinges were then:
                  As all things els that hath bene since, Among the sonnes of men.
               
               
                  And can the thinges that I haue done, Be hidden from thee then:
                  Nay, nay, thou knowest them all (O Lord) where they were done and when,
                  wherfore with teares I come to thee, To begge and to entreat:
                  Euen as the child thht hath done euill, And feareth to be beat.
               
               
                  So come I to thy mercy gate, where mercy doth abound:
                  Requiring mercy for my sinne, Toheale my deadly wound,
                  O Lorde I nede not to repete, what I doo beg or craue:
                  Thou knowest (O Lorde) before I aske, The thing that I would haue.
               
               
                  Mercy good Lorde mercy I aske, This is the totall summe:
                  For mercy Lorde is all my sute, Lorde let thy mercy come.
               
            
            
               
               The humble sute of the Sinner. M.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  O Lorde of whom I do depend be 
                     〈♫〉
                   holde my carefull hart, & when thy wil & pleasure 
                     〈♫〉
                   is relese me of my smart, thou seest my sorowe 
                     〈♫〉
                   what they are, my gref is knowne to thee & there 
                     〈♫〉
                   is none yt can remoue, or take the same frō me.
               
                  But only thou whose ayde I craue, whose mercy still is prest
                  To ease all those that come to thee for souccour and for rest.
                  And sith thou seest my restles eyes. my teres and greuous grone,
                  Attende vnto my sute, O Lorde, Marke well my plaint and mone,
               
               
                  For sinne hath so inclosed me, and compast me aboute:
                  
                     
That I am now remediles if mercy helpe not out.
                  For mortall man, cannot release, or mitigate thys payne:
                  But euen thy Christ, my Lord and God, whiche for my sinnes was slayne.
               
               
                  Whose blody woundes are yet to see, though not with mortall eye:
                  yet doth thy sainctes beholde them all, And so I trust shall I.
                  Though sinne doth hynder me a whyle, When thou shalt see it good:
                  I shall enioye the sight of him and see his woundes and bloud
               
               
                  And as thine angels and thy saynctes, doo now beholde the same:
                  So trust I to possesse that place, With them to prayse thy name.
                  But whiles I liue here in this vale, where sinners doo frequent:
                  Assist me euer with thy grace My sinnes still to lament.
               
               
                  Lest that I treade in sinners trace, and geue them my consent:
                  To dwell with them in wickednes wherto nature is bent
                  Only thy grace must be my staye lest that I fall downe flat.
                  And being downe, then of my selfe cannot recouer that.
               
               
                  
                  Wherfore this is yet once againe, my sute and my request
                  To graunt me pardon for my sinne that I in thee may rest.
                  Then shall my hart, my tong and voyce, be instruments of prayse
                  And in thy Churche and house of sainctes, Sing psalmes to thee alwayes.
               
            
            
               The Lordes Prayer, or Pater noster.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  OUr father which in heauen art, lord halowd 
                     〈♫〉
                   be thy name, Thy kingdō come, thy will 
                     〈♫〉
                   be don in earth, euen as the same in heauē is. 
                     〈♫〉
                   Gene vs (O Lord) our dayly bread this day: As 
                     〈♫〉
                   we forgeue our detters so, forgeue our dettes
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
we pray. Into temptatiō lead vs not, From euill 
                     〈♫〉
                   make vs free, for kingdome, power and glory 
                     〈♫〉
                   thyne, bothe now and euer be.
            
            
               ¶ The, x. Commaundements. Audi Israell. Exod. xx. N
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  HArk Israel, & what I say, geue hede 
                     〈♫〉
                   to vnderstād. I am the lord thy God, yt brought 
                     〈♫〉
                   thee out of Egipt land, euen frō the house wherin 
                     〈♫〉
                   thou didst in thraldō liue a slaue. Non other gods
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   at all before my presence shalt thou haue.
               
                  No maner grauen image shalt thou make at all to thee.
                  Nor any figure like by thee shall counterfayted be,
                  Of any thing in heauen aboue, nor in the earth belowe,
                  Nor in waters beneth the earth, to them thou shalt not bowe.
               
               
                  Nor shalt them serue. The Lorde thy God, a ielous God am I,
                  That punish parents faultes vnto the third and fourth degree,
                  Upon their children that me hate: and mercy doo display
                  To thousands of suche as me loue and my precepts obey.
               
               
                  The name thou of the Lorde thy God, in vayne shalt neuer vse.
                  For him that takes his name in vayne, the Lorde shall not excuse.
                  Remember that thou holy kepe, the sacred Sabbat day:
                  Six daies thou labour shalt, and doo thy nedefull workes alway.
               
               
                  The seuenth is set by the Lord, thy God to rest vpon.
                  
                     
No worke shalt thou doo in it, ne thou, nor yet thy sonne,
                  Thy daughter, seruaunt, nor handmayd, thine oxe, nor yet thine asse
                  Nor straunger that within thy gates hath his abiding place.
               
               
                  For in six dayes God heauen, and earth, and all therin did make,
                  And after those his rest he did Upon the seuenth take,
                  Wherfore he blest the day that he for resting did ordayne,
                  And sacred to him self alone apointed to remayne.
               
               
                  Yeld honor to thy parentes, that prolonged thy dayes may be,
                  Upon the land, the which the Lord thy God hath geuen thee.
                  Thou shalt not murther. Thou shalt not commit adulterye.
                  Thou shalt not steale, nor witnes false against thy neighbour be.
               
               
                  Thou shalt not couet house that to thy neyghbor doth belong,
                  Ne couet shalt in hauing of his wyfe to doo him wrong:
                  Nor his man seruaunt, nor his mayde, nor oxe, nor asseof his:
                  Nor any other thing that to thy neighbor proper is.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ❧ PSALMES OF DAVID.
            
            
               ¶Beatus vir. Psalme. i. T. S.
               
                  ¶ Whether it was Esdras, or any other that gathered the Psalmes into a booke: it semeth he did set thys Psalme firste in maner of a Preface, to exhorte all godly men to study and meditate the heauenly wisdome, for theffecte herof is, that they be blessed that geue them selues wholy all their life to Gods lawe: And that the wicked contemners of God, though they seme for a whyle fortunate, yet at lengthe shall come to miserable destruction.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   1THe man is blest that 
                     〈♫〉
                   hath not bent, to wicked 
                     〈♫〉
                   rede his eare: nor led his life as sinners do nor sat 
                     〈♫〉
                   in scorners chair. 2. But in the law of god ye 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   lord, both set his whole delight, & in that law doth
               

                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   exercise, him selfe both day & night.
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  He shall be like the tree that groweth, fast by the riuer side:
                  Whiche bringeth forth most pleasant fruite. in her due time and tide.
                  Whose leafe shall neuer fade nor fall, But florish still and stand:
                  Euen so all thinges shall prosper well, that this man taketh inhand.
               
               
                  
                     verse 4
                  So shall not the vngodly men, Although the wicked seme to beare the swing in this worlde yet the lorde scattereth them likechaffe with a blaste of his mouthe. they shalbe nothing so:
                  But as the dust which from the earth, the windes dryue to and fro.
                  
                     verse 5
                  Therfore shall not the wicked men, in iudgement stande vpryght:
                  Nor yet the sinners, with the iust, shall come in place, or sight.
               
               
                  
                     verse 6
                  For why? the way of Godly men, vnto the Lorde is knowne:
                  And eke the way of wicked men, shall quyte be ouerthrowen.
               
            
            
               Quare fremuerunt gentes. Psalm. ii. T. S.
               
                  ¶ Dauid reioyseth, that notwithstanding hys enemies rage, & worldely power, yet God wil continue hys kyngdome for euer, and aduaūce it euen to the formost ende of the worlde. And therfore be exhorteth kinges and rulers, that setting vayne glory apart, they would humbly submit themselues vnder Gods yoke. Herein is signified Chryste and hys kyngdome.
               
               
                  
                  WHy did the Gentiles tumultesraise, ¶ Sing this psalme with the first tune what rage was in their braine?
                  Why dyd the Iewish people muse, seyng all is but vayne?
                  
                     verse 2
                  The kinges and rulers of the earth, conspire and are all bent:
                  Against the lord and Christ his sonne, which he among vs sent.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Shall we be bounde to them say they? let all theyr bondes be broke: Inheb, greate ropes or cables
                  
                  And of their doctrine and theyr lawe, let vs reiect the yoke.
                  
                     verse 4
                  But he that in the heauen dwelleth, their doinges will deride:
                  And make them all as mocking stockes, throughout the worlde so wyde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  For in his wrath the Lorde will say, to them vpon a day:
                  And in his fury trouble them, and then the Lorde will say.
                  
                     verse 6
                  I haue anoynted him my kyng, vpon my holy hyll:
                  I will therfore Lorde preach thy lawes. and eke declare thy will.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  For in this wise the Lorde him selfe, did say to me I wotte,
                  Thou art my deare and only sonne, to day I thee begotte.
                  
                     verse 8
                  All people I will geue to thee, as heires at thy request:
                  
                     
The endes and coastes of all the earth, by thee shall be possest.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  Thou shalt them bruse euen with a mace, as men vnder foote trode:
                  And as the potters sheardes shalt breake, them with an yron rodde.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Nowye, O kinges and rulers all, bewise therfore and learnde:
                  By whom the matters of the world, be iudged and discernde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  Se that ye serue the Lorde aboue, in trembling and in feare:
                  Se that with reuerence ye reioyse, to him in like manere.
                  
                     verse 12
                  Se that ye kisse and eke embrace, his blessed sonne I say:
                  Lest in his wrath ye sodenly, perish in the midde way.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  If once his wrath neuer so small, shall kindle in hys brest:
                  Oh then all they that trust in Chryst, shall happie be and blest.
               
            
            
               Domine quid multiplicati. sūt. Psal. iii. T. S.
               
                  ¶ Dauid being persecuted, & briuen out of his kingdome by his owne sonne Absalon: was greatly tormented in minde for hys sinne against God: and therfore calleth vpon God and wareth bolde through hys promises, against the great terrors of his enemies: yea, and againste deathe it selfe, whyche he sawe present before hys eyes. Finally he reioyseth for the good successe and victory, that God gaue hym 
                        〈◊〉
                      the Churche ouer hys enemies.
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  O Lord how are my foes increast, 
                     〈♫〉
                   which vexe me more & more, They kil my hart 
                     〈♫〉
                   when as they say, God cā him not restore. but 
                     〈♫〉
                   thou, O Lord, art my defence, whē I am 
                     〈♫〉
                   harde bestead: my worship & my honor bothe, 
                     〈♫〉
                   and thou holdst vp my hed.
               
                  
                     verse 4
                  Then with my voyce vpon the Lorde, I did bothe call and cry:
                  And he out of his holy hill, did heare me by and by.
                  
                     verse 5
                  
                     
5 I layde me downe, and quyetly, Gods strength muste not be measured by manes weakenes, and therfore we ought to feare no daungers. I slept and rose agayne:
                  For why? I know assuredly, The Lorde will me sustayn,
               
               
                  
                     verse 6
                  If ten thousande had hemde me in, I could not be afrayde:
                  For thou art still my Lorde my God, my sauiour and mine ayde.
                  
                     verse 7
                  Rise vp therfore, saue me my God, He retorneth to hys prayer for now to thee I call:
                  For thou hast broke the cheekes and teeth, of these wicked men all.
               
               
                  
                     verse 8
                  Saluation only doth belong, to thee, O Lorde aboue:
                  Thou doest bestowe vpon thy folke, thy blessing and thy loue.
               
            
            
               ¶ Cum inuocarem exaudiuit. Psal. iiii. T. S.
               
                  ¶ Whē Saule persecutid Dauid. be called vpō God, trusting most assuredly in his promise, & therfore boldli reproueth his enemies, who by wilfull malice resisted his dominion. And fynally preferreth the fououre of God before all worldly treasures. Let vs lykewyse learne to trust in Gods promises, whē we are afflicted with any kinde of Crosse and so we shall neyther feare our enemies, nor yet be ouer commen with tentations.
               
               
                  O God that art my righteousnes, Lorde heare me when I call: ¶ Sing this as the firste Psalme.
                  
                  Thou hast set me at liberty when I was bonde and thrall:
                  Haue mercy Lorde therfore on me, and graunt me this request: God will delyuer hys church frō all dangers, because he fauoureth it. Selah.
                  
                  For vnto thee vncessantly, to cry I will not rest.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3
                  O mortall men, how longe will ye my glory thus despise?
                  Why wander ye in vanitie, and folow after lyes?
                  
                     verse 4
                  Knowe ye that good and godly men, the Lorde doth take and chuse:
                  And when to him I make my plaint, he doth me not refuse.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Sinne not, but stande in awe therfore, examine well your heart:
                  And in your chambre quyetly, see you your selues conuerte,
                  
                     verse 6
                  Offer to God the sacrifice, of righteousnes I say:
                  And loke that in the liuing Lorde, you put your trustalway.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  The greater sort craue worldly goodes, and riches doo embrace:
                  But Lord graunt vs thy countenaunce, thy fauour and thy grace.
                  
                     verse 8
                  For thou therby shalt make my hart, more ioyfull and more glad:
                  Then they that of their corne and wine, full great increase haue had.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  In peace therfore lie downe will I, taking my rest and slepe:
                  For thou onely wilt me, O Lorde, alone in safety kepe.
               
            
            
               Verba mea auribus percipe. Psal. v. Th. Stern.
               
                  ¶ Dauid hauing suffered greate calamitie, as well by Doeg and Achitophell Sauls flaterers, as by other infinit enemies, calleth to God for succor, shewing howe requisite it is, That god shuld punish



the malicious enuye of hys aduersaryes. After beyng assured of prosperous successe, he conceiueth comforte: concluding, that when God shall deliuer him, other also shall be partakers of the same mercyes.
               
               
                  INclyne thyne eares vnto my wordes, ¶ Sing this as the thirde Psalme. O Lorde my playnt consider.
                  
                     verse 2
                  And heare my voyce my kyng my God, to thee I make my prayer.
                  
                     verse 3
                  Heare me betime, Lorde, tary not, for I will haue respect,
                  My prayer early in the morne, to thee for to direct.
               
               
                  
                     verse 4
                  And I will trust through patience, in thee my God alone:
                  That art not pleasd with wickednes, and ill with thee dwelleth none.
                  
                     verse 5
                  And in thy sight shall neuer stande. The wicked can not escape Gods punishment, who wil iudge all the worlde. these furious fooles, O Lorde:
                  Uaine workers of iniquitie, Thou hast alwayes abhorde,
               
               
                  
                     verse 6
                  The liers and the flatterers, thou shalt destroy them then:
                  And God will hate the bloud thirstye, and the deceitfull man.
                  
                     verse 7
                  Therfore will I come to thy house, In the depest of his tēptations he putteth hys full confydence in God. trusting vpon thy grace:
                  And reuerently will worship thee, toward thine holy place.
               
               
                  
                     verse 8
                  Lorde leade me in thy rightuousnes, for to confounde my foes:
                  And eke the way that I shall walke, before my face disclose,
                  
                     verse 9
                  
                     
9 For in their mouthes there is no truth, theyr hart is foule and vayne:
                  
                     verse 10
                  Their throte an open sepulchre, their tonges doo glose and fayne,
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  Destroy their false conspiracies, that they may come to nought:
                  
                     verse 12
                  Subuert them in theyr heapes of sinne, which haue rebellion wrought.
                  
                     verse 13
                  But those that put theyr trust in thee, let them be glad alwayes:
                  And render thankes for thy defence, and geue thy name the prayse.
               
               
                  
                     verse 14
                  For thou with fauour wilt increase, the iustand righteous still:
                  And with thy grace as with a shilde, defend him from all ill. Heb that will crowne hym.
                  
               
            
            
               1. Domine in furore tuo arguas me. Psal. vi. T. S
               
                  ¶ When Dauid by hys sinnes hathe prouoked Gods wrathe, & nowe felt not only hyshand against hym, but also conceyued the horrors of deathe euerlastyng: he desireth forgeuenes, be wayling that if God toke him away in hys indignation. he shoulde lacke occasion to praise him as he was wonte to doo whilest he was amongest men. Then so deinly felyng Gods mercy, he sharpely rebuketh his enemyes, which reioyseth in hys afliction. 
                        〈♫〉
                      
                     LOrd in thy wrath reproue me not 
                        〈♫〉
                      though I deserue thyne ire: Ne yet correcte.
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   me in thy rage, O Lorde I thee desire. 
                     〈♫〉
                   For I am weake therfore O Lorde 
                     〈♫〉
                   of mercy me forbeare, and heale me 
                     〈♫〉
                   Lorde: for why thou knowest my bones do 
                     〈♫〉
                   quake for feare.
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  My soule is troubled very sore, and vexed vehemently
                  But Lorde how long wilt thou delay to cure my miserie?
                  
                     verse 4
                  
                     
4 Lord, turne thee to thy wonted grace, my sely soule vp take:
                  Oh saue me, not for my desertes, but for thy mercies sake.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  For why? no man among the dead, He feared not so muche the death of the body but trembled as it werfor fear of gods iudgement, & so waxed dimand cold not praise God. remembreth thee one whit:
                  Or who shall worship thee (O Lorde) in the infernall pit?
                  
                     verse 6
                  So greuous is my plaint and mone, that I waxe wonderous faint:
                  All the night long I wash my bed, with teares of my complaint.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  My sight is dymme and waxetholde, with anguishe of mine hert Heb. mine eye is eaten as, with wormes.
                  
                  For feare of those that be my foes, and would my soulesubuert.
                  
                     verse 8
                  But nowe a way from me all ye, God sendeth comfort & boldenes in affliction. that worke iniquitie
                  For why? the Lord hath heard the woyce, of my complaint and crye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  He heard not onely the request, and praier of my heart.
                  But it receiued at my hande, and toke it in good part.
                  
                     verse 10
                  And nowe my foes, that vexed me, the Lord will sone defame.
                  And sodenly confunde them all, to theyr rebuke and shame.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Domine deus meus in te speraui. Psal. vii. T. S.
               
                  Dauid being falsely accused by Thus, one of Sauls kinsmen, he calleth to God to be hys defender. to whom he commendeth hys innocency. Firste shewyng, that hys conscience dyd not accuse hym of any euyll towards Saule. Next that it touched gods glory to awarde sentence against the wicked. And so entring in to the consideration of Gods mercies and promises hewaxeth bolde, & derideth the vaine enterprises of his enemies, threatning that it shall fall on theyr owne necks. that which they haue purposed for others.
               
               
                  
                     O Lorde my God, I put my trust, ¶ Sing this as the thirde psalme. and confidence in thee:
                     Saue me from them that me pursue. and eke deliuer me:
                     
                        verse 2
                     Lest like a Lyon he me teare. and rent in pieces small:
                     While there is none to succor me, and rid me out of thrall.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     O Lorde my God If I haue done, Where with Thus chargeth me. He reioyseth that God only hath aproued hys cause. the thyug that is not ryght:
                     Or ells if I be found in faut, or giltie in thy syght.
                     
                        verse 4
                     Or to my frend rewarded euyll, or left him in distres.
                     Which, me pursued most cruelly, and hated me causeles.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     Then let my foes pursue my soule, A sygne of a pure consciēce. and eke my life downe thrust,
                     Unto the earth, and also lay, myne honour in the dust.
                     
                        verse 6
                     Stert vp, O Lord, now in thy wrath, Selah. and put my foes to payne.
                     Performe thy kingdome promised, to me whyche wrong sustayne.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 7
                     Then shall great nations come to thee and know thee by this thing:
                     If thou declare for loue of them, thy selfe as Lorde and king. As touchyng my behauor towardes Saul and mine enemyes.
                     
                     
                        verse 8
                     And thou that art of all men iudge, O Lorde now iudge thou me,
                     According to my rightousnes. and mine integritie.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The second parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     Lorde cease the heart of wicked men, and be the iust mans guide.
                     
                        verse 10
                     By whom the secretes of all hartes, are searched and descride.
                     
                        verse 11
                     I take my helpe, to come of God, in all my grief and smarte:
                     That doth preserue all those that be, of pure and perfect heart.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12
                     The iust man, and the wicked bothe, God iudgeth by his poure:
                     So that he feleth his mighty hand, euen euery day and houre. He derideth Sauls enterprises, beyng surely perswaded to be preseruedby Gods fauour.
                     
                     
                        verse 13
                     Except he chaunge his mind, I die, for euen as he should smite,
                     He whet his sword his bow he bendth, ayming where he may hit.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 14
                     And doeth prepare his mortall dartes, his arrowes kene and sharpe:
                     For them that doo me persecute, The wicked s
                              •
                           me to labor of child 
                              ••
                           ll th
                              •
                           y haue cōfessed the
                              ••
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           
                           ▪
                         whilest he doth mischief warpe,
                     
                        verse 15
                     But we, though he in trauell be, of his deuilish fore cast.
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                        
And of his mischief once conceiued, yet bringeth forth nought at last.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16
                     He digth a ditche, and delueth it depe. The wicked mā is beat with his owne rod. In hope to hurte his brother:
                     But he shall fall into the pit, that he digde vp for other.
                     
                        verse 17
                     Thus wrong retorneth to the hurt, of him in whom it bread:
                     And all the mischief that he wrought, shall fall vpon his head.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18
                     I will geue thankes to God therfore, that iudgeth rightuously:
                     And with my song prayse will the name, of hym that is most hye.
                  
               
            
            
               Domine Deus noster. Psal. viii. Tho. Ster.
               
                  ¶ The Prophet considering thexcellent liberalitie, and fatherly prouidence of God towards man. whom he made as it were a God ouerall his workes, doth not only geue great thanks, but is astonished with thadmiration of the same: as one nothinge hable to compasse suche greate mercies, and so endeth.
               
               
                  O God our Lord how wonderfull, ¶ Sing this as the thirde psalme. are thy workes euery where:
                  Whose fame surmounte in dignitie, aboue the heauens cleare.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Euen by the mouthes of sucking babes, thou wilt confound thy foes:
                  For in these babes thy might is sene, thy graces they disclose.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  And when I see the heauens highe, the workes of thine owne hand:
                  The Sunne, the Mone, and al the Starres, in order as they stand.
                  
                     verse 4
                  What thing is man (Lorde) thinke I then,



that thou doest him remember:
                  Or what is mans posteritie, that thou doest it considre.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  For thou hast made him litle les, Herein appeareth the greate loue of god toward man. Hebr. 2. then Angels in degree:
                  And thou hast crowned him also, with glory and dygnitie.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Thou hast preferd him to be Lorde, of all thy workes of wonder,
                  And at his fete hast set all thinges, that he should kepe them vnder.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  As shepe and neat all beastes els, that in the fieldes doo fede:
                  
                     verse 8
                  Foules of the ayre, fishe in the sea, and all that therin brede.
                  
                     verse 9
                  Therfore must I say once agayne, O God, that art our Lorde:
                  How famous and how wonderfull, are thy works through the world.
               
            
            
               ¶ Confitebor tibi domine in toto. Psalm. ix. T. S.
               
                  ¶ After he had geuen thankes to God, for the sundry victoryes that he had sent hym against his enemies, and also proued by manifolde experience howe ready God was at hande in all hys troubles: he beyng now likewise in daunger of new enemies, desireth God to help hym accordyng to hys wont, and distroye the malicious arrogancie of his aduersaryes.
               
               
                  
                     WIth hart and mouthe, vnto the Lorde, will I syng laude and prayse: ¶ Sing this as the. iii. ps.
                     
                     And speake of all thy wondrous workes, and them declare alwayes.
                     
                        verse 2
                     I will be glad and muche reioyce, in thee (O God) moste hie:
                     And make my songes extoll thy name, aboue the sterry skie.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 3
                     For that my foes are driuen backe, and turned vnto flyght:
                     They fall downe flat and are destroyd by thy great force and might.
                     Thou hast reuenged all my wrong. God only defē
                           deth the iuste cause. my grief and all my grudge,
                     
                        verse 4
                     Thou dost with iustice heare my cause, most like a righteous iudge.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     Thou doest rebuke the Heathen folke, and wicked so confounde,
                     That afterwarde, the memory, of them cannot be founde.
                     
                        verse 6
                     My foe, thou hast made good dispatche and all our townes destroyed:
                     Thou hast theyr fame with thē defaced through all the world so wyde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     Know thou that he whiche is aboue, for euermore shall raygne:
                     And in the seate of equitie, true iudgement wil mainteyne.
                     
                        verse 8
                     With iustice he wyll kepe and guyde, the worlde and euery weight:
                     And so will yelde with equitie. to euery man his right.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     He is protector of the poore, what tyme they be opprest:
                     He is in all aduersitie, their refuge and theyr rest.
                     
                        verse 10
                     All they that know thy holy name, therfore shall trust in thee:
                     
                        
For thou forsakest not theyr sute, in their necessitie.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     Sing Psalmes therfore vnto the Lorde, We seke God. there by prayer or by vpright & godly lyfe. that dwelleth in Sion hill:
                     Publishe amonge all nations, his noble artes and will.
                     
                        verse 12
                     For he is mindfull of the bloud, of those that be opprest:
                     For getting not the afflicted hart, that seketh to him for rest.
                  
               
               
                  ¶The second parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     Haue mercy Lorde on me poore wretche, whose enemies still remayne:
                     Which from the gates of death are wonte, to rayse me vp agayne.
                     
                        verse 14
                     In Sion that I might set forth, thy prayse with hart and voyce:
                     And that in thy saluation (Lorde) my soule might still reioyce.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     The heathen sticke fast in the pit, that they them selues preparde:
                     And in the net that they did set, their owne fete fast are snarde.
                     
                        verse 16
                     God sheweth his iudgement which wer good The hebr. willeth men to meditate dilygently on thys thynge. for euery man to marke:
                     When as ye see the wicked man, lye trapt in his owne warke.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     The wicked and the sinfull men, go downe to hell for euer:
                     And all the people of the worlde, that will not god remember.
                     
                        verse 18
                     
                        
18 But sure the Lorde will not forget, the poore mans grief and payne:
                     The pacient folke neuer loke, for helpe of God in dayne.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     O Lorde arise lest men preuayle, that be of worldly might:
                     And let the Heathen folke receyue, their iudgement in thy sight.
                     
                        verse 20
                     Lord stryke such terror feare and dread into the harts of them:
                     That they may know assuredly, they be but mortall men.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Vt quid domine. Psalme. x. T. S.
               
                  ¶ He complaineth of the fraude, rapine, tiranny, and of all kindes of wrong, which worldly men vse, assigninge the cause thereof, whiche was that wicked men beinge as it were dronken with worldly prosperitie, and therfore setting aparte all feare and reuerence towardes God, thinke they may doe all thinges without controwlinge Therfore he calleth vppon God to sende some remeady agaynst these desperate enyls. And at length comforteth him selfe with hope of deliuerance.
               
               
                  WHat is the cause that thou (O Lorde) art now so sarre from thine? ¶ Sing this as the thirde Psalme.
                  
                  And kepest close thy countenaunce, from vs this troublous time?
                  
                     verse 1
                  The poore doth pearysh by the proude, and wicked mens desire:
                  Let them be taken in the craft, that they themselues conspire.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  For in the lust of his owne hart, the vngodly doth delite:
                  So doth the wicked praise hym selfe, and doeth the Lorde despite.
                  
                     verse 4
                  
                     
4 He is so proude that right and wrong, he setteth all apart:
                  Nay, nay, there is no God (sayeth he) for thus he thinketh in hart.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Because his wayes do prosper still, he doth thy lawes neglect:
                  And with a blast doth puffe against, suche as would him correct.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Tush, tush (saieth he) I haue no dread, lest mine estate should chaunge:
                  And why? for all aduersitie, to him is very straunge.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  His mouth is full of cursednes. He meaneth that wickednes is so far ouergrowē that God must nedes nowe helpe or neuer. of fraud, deceyt, and guyle:
                  Under his: tong doeth mischiefsyt, and trauell all the whyle,
                  
                     verse 8
                  He lyeth hid in wayes and holes, to slay the innocent.
                  Against the poore that passe him by, hys cruell eyes are bent.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  And like a Lyon priuely, lieth lurking in his den:
                  If he may snare them in his net, to spoyle poore simple men.
                  
                     verse 10
                  And for the nonce full craftely, he croucheth downe I say:
                  
                     verse 11
                  So are greate heapes of poore men made, by his strong power, his pray.
               
               
                  
                     verse 12
                  Tush God forgetteth this (sayeth he) therfore may I be bolde:
                  
                     
His countenance is cast aside, he doth it not beholde,
                  
                     verse 13
                  Arise (O Lorde) G God in wome, the poore mans hope doth rest:
                  Lift vp thy hand, forget not Lorde, the poore that be opprest,
               
               
                  
                     verse 14
                  What blasphemy is thys to thee? Lorde dost thou not abhorre it?
                  To heare the wicked in theyr hartes, say, tushe thou carest not for it?
                  
                     verse 15
                  But thou seest all thys wickednes, and well doest vnderstande:
                  
                     verse 16
                  That frendles and poore fatherles, are left into thy hande.
               
               
                  
                     verse 17
                  Of wicked and malicions men, By the Heathen he meaneth the Hypocrites whyche gloryed as yf they had bene of the churche. then breake the power for euer:
                  That they with theyr iniquytie, may pearish altogether.
                  
                     verse 18
                  The Lorde shall raine for euermore, as king and God alone:
                  And he will chase the Heathen folke, out of hys lande eche one.
               
               
                  
                     verse 19
                  Thou hearest (O Lord) the poore mans plaint, vntyll theyr praiers & request:
                  Their harts thou wilt confirme, thine eares to heare be prest.
                  
                     verse 20
                  To iudge the poore and fatherles, and helpe them to their right:
                  That they may be no more opprest, with men of worldly might.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ In Domino confido. Psalm. xi. T. S.
               
                  ¶ This Psalme conteyneth two partes. In the firste Dauid shewed how hard assaultes of temtations he susteyned, and in howe great anguish of mind he was, when Saul did persecute hym. Then nexte he reioyseth. that God sent hym succor in his necessitie declaryng his iustice, as wel in gouernyng the good and the wicked men as the whole worlde,
               
               
                  I Trust in God, how dare ye then, say thus my soule vntill: ¶ Sing this as the third Psalme.
                  
                  Flee hence as fast as any foule, and hide you in youre hyll.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Beholde the wicked bende theyr bowes, and make their arrowes prest:
                  To shote in secret and to hurte, the sound and harmeles brest.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Of worldly hope and stayes were shrunke and clearly brought to nought:
                  Alas the iust and rightuous man, what euill hath he wrought.
                  
                     verse 4
                  But he that in his temple is, most holy and most hye:
                  And in the heauens hath his seate, of royall maiestie.
               
               
                  The poore and simple mans estate, All thinges are gouerned by gods prouidēce. considereth in his minde:
                  And searcheth out full narowly, the maners of mankinde.
                  
                     verse 5
                  And with a cherefull countenaunce, the rightuous man will vse:
                  But in his harte he doth abhorre, all suche as mischiefmuse.
               
               
                  
                     verse 6
                  And on the sinners casteth snares, as thicke as any rayne▪
                  
                  
                     
Fire and brimstone, and whirle windes thicke As in the distruction of Sodom and Gomo appoynted for theyr payne.
                  
                     verse 7
                  Ye see then how a righteous God, doeth righteousnes embrace:
                  And to the iust and vpryght man, sheweth forth his pleasant face.
               
            
            
               ¶ Saluum mefac Deus. Psalm. xii. T. S.
               
                  ¶ The Prophet learnyng the miserable estate of the people. and the decaye of all good order, desyreth God spedely to sende succor to his children: Then comfortyng himselfe & others with thassuraunce of gods helpe: he commendeth the constant beritye that God obserueth in keping his promises, concluding that when all orders are most corrupted, then will God delyuer hys.
               
               
                  HElpe Lorde, for good and godly men, Sing this as the third psalme. doo perysh and decay:
                  And fayth and truth from worldly men, is parted cleane away.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Who so doeth with his neighboure talke, his talke is all but vayne:
                  For euery man bethinketh how, to flatter, lye and fayne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  But flatteryng and deceitfull lippes, and tounges that be so stoute:
                  To speake proud words, & make great bragges the Lorde soone cut them out,
                  
                     verse 4
                  For they say still, we wyll preuayle, our tonges shall vsextoll
                  Oure tonges are ours, we ought to speake, what Lorde shall vs controll?
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  But for the great complaint and cry, The lord doth deliuer from all daungers. of poore and men opprest:
                  Arise will I now (sayeth the Lorde,) and them restore to rest.
                  
                     verse 6
                  
                     
6 Gods worde is lyke to siluer pure, that from the earth is tried:
                  And hath no les then seuen times, in fire bene puryfyed.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Now since thy promise is to helpe, God can not deceue them that put theyr trust in him. Lorde kepe thy promise then:
                  And saue vs now and euermore, from this ill kinde of men.
                  
                     verse 8
                  For now the wicked world is full, of mischief manifolde:
                  When vanitie with mortall men, so highly is extolde.
               
            
            
               ¶ Vsquequo domine. Psalme. xiii. T. S.
               
                  ¶ Dauid (as it were) ouercomen with sundry and new afflictions, fleeth to God as his onely refuge, and so at the length being encouraged through Gods promises he conceyueth moste sure confidence againste the extreame horrors of deathe.
               
               
                  HOwe longe wilt thou forget me (Lorde) shall I neuer be remembred? Sing this Psalm with the iii. tune▪
                     
                  
                  How long wilt thou thy visage hide, as though thou were offended.
                  
                     verse 2
                  In hart and mynde how longe shall I. with care tormented be?
                  Howe longe eke shall my deadly foe, thus tryumphe ouer me?
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Beholde me now (my Lorde) my God, and heare me sore opprest:
                  Lighten mine eyes lest that I slepe, as one by death possest.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Lest this mine enemie sai to me, beholde I doo preuayle:
                  Lest they also that hate my soule, reioyse to see me quayle.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 5
                  But for thy mercyes and goodnes, The mercye of God is the cause of our saluation. my hope shall neuer start:
                  In thy relife and sauing health, right glad shall be my hart.
                  
                     verse 6
                  I will geue thankes vnto the Lorde, and prayses to hym syng:
                  Because he hathe hard my request, and graunted my wishyng.
               
            
            
               Dixit insipiens. Psalme. xiiii. T. S.
               
                  ¶ He described the peruerse nature of men, whiche were so growen to licenciousnes, that God was brought to vtter cotempt for the which thing although he was greatly greued: yet being perswaded that god would send som present remedy, he comfort him selfe and others.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  THere is no God, as folish mē affirm 
                     〈♫〉
                   in their mad mode: their drifts ar al corrupt 
                     〈♫〉
                   and vain, not one of thē doth good. The lord beheld 
                     〈♫〉
                   frō heauen hie ye whole race of mākind and
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   saw not one yt sought in dede ye liuing god to find.
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  They went all wide and were corrupt, and truely there was none:
                  That in the worlde did any good, I say, there was not one.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Is all theyr indgement so farre lost, that all worke mischief styll:
                  Eatyng my people euen as breade, not one to seke Gods wyll,
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  When they thus rage, then sodenly, great feare on them shall fall:
                  For God doth loue the rightuous men, and will maintayne them all.
                  
                     verse 6
                  He mocke the doinges of the poore, to theyr reproche and shame?
                  Because they put theyr trust in God, and call vpon hys name.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  But who shall geue thy people health, and when wilt thou fulfill: Where wicked men raine, all felicitie is but very slauery, lyke to Egipte or Babilon.
                  
                  The promise made to Israell. from out of Sion hill.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Euen when thou shalt restore agayne, suche as were captiues lad:
                  Then Iacob shall therin reioyse, and Israell shall be glad.
               
            
            
               ¶ Domine quis habitabit. Psalm. xv. T. S
               
                  
                     
¶ This Psalme teacheth on what condition Goddid chuse the Jewes for his peculiar people, and wherfore he placed his Temple amonge them, whyche was to thentent, that they by liuing vprightly & godly, might witnes that they were his speciall and holy people.
               
               
                  O Lorde with in thy tabernacle, Sing thisas thr. iiii. Psa. who shall inhabite styll?
                  Or whom wilt thou receyue to dwell. in thy most holy hill?
                  
                     verse 2
                  The man whose lyfe is vncorrupt, whose workes are iust and streit:
                  Whose hart doth thinke the very truthe, whose tong speaketh no deceyt.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Nor to his neyghboure doth none ill, in body goods, or name:
                  Nor willingly doeth moue salse tales, which might empere the same.
                  
                     verse 4
                  That in hys hart regardeth not, malicious wicked men:
                  But those that loue and feare the Lorde, he maketh muche of them.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  His othe and all his promises, that kepeth faithfully:
                  Although he make his couenaunt so, that he doth lose therby,
                  
                     verse 6
                  That put teth not to vsury, hys money and hys coyne: Them the which doo not this shalbe cast out of the church with Ismaelli and the hipocrites.
                  
                  Ne for to hurt the innocent, doeth brybe or els purloyne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Who so doeth all thynges as you see, that here is to be done:
                  Shall neuer perish in thys world,



nor in the worlde to come.
               
            
            
               Conserua me domine. psalm. xvi. T. S.
               
                  ¶ Dauid prayeth to God for succor, not for hys workes, but for hys faithes sake, protestyng that he hateth all Idolatry, takyng God only for hys comforte and felicytie: who suffereth hys to lacke nothing.
               
               
                  LOrde kepe me for I trust in thee, and doo confesse in dede: Sing thisas the, xiiii. psal
                  
                  Thou art my God, and of my good, O Lorde, thou hast no nede.
                  
                     verse 2
                  I geue my goodnes to the sainctes, that in the worlde doo dwell:
                  And namely to the faithfull flocke, in vertue that excell.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  They shall heape sorowes on their heds which runne as they were mad:
                  To offer to the Idols gods, alas it is to bad.
                  
                     verse 4
                  As for theyr bloudy sacrifyce, He would neyther by outeward professiō nor in hart consent with Ido latryes. and offringes of that sort:
                  I will not touch, nor yet therof, my lippes shall make report.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  For why? the Lorde the portion is, of mine in heritaunce:
                  And thou art he that doest mainteyne, my rent my lot, my chaunce,
                  
                     verse 6
                  The place wherin my lot did fall, in beauty did excell:
                  Mine heritage assigned to me, doth please me wondrous well.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 7
                  I thanke the Lorde that caused me, The faithfular sure to perseuer to the ende. to vnderstand the right:
                  For by hismeanes my secreat thoughtes, do teache me euery nyght.
                  
                     verse 8
                  I set the Lorde still in my sight, and trust in him ouer all:
                  For he doth stande on my ryght hand, therfore I shall not fall.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  Wherfore my hart and tong also, doeth bothe reioyse together:
                  My fleshe and body rest in hope, when I this thyng consider.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Thou wilt not leaue my soule in graue, for Lorde, thou louest me, That is to say, hys lyfe.
                  
                  Nor yet will geue thyne holy one, corruption for to see.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  But wilt teache me the way to lyfe, Where god fauoreth there is perfit felicitie. for all treasures and store:
                  Of perfect ioy are in thy face, and power for euermore.
               
            
            
               ¶ Exaudi domine iustitiam meam. Psal. xvii. T. S
               
                  ¶ Here he complayneth to god of thecruel pride and arrogancye of Saule, and the rest of his enemies, who thus raged withoute anye cause geuen on his part: therfore he desireth God to reuenge his innocency and deliuer him. This Psalm ought diligently to be noted of sucheas receiue euell, for well doyng.
               
               
                  
                     O Lorde geue eare to my iust cause, ¶ Sing this as the. xiiii. psalme. attend when I complaine:
                     And heare the prayer that I put forth with lippes that doo not fayne.
                     
                        verse 2
                     And let the iudgement of my cause, procede alwayes from thee:
                     
                        
And let thyne eyes beholde, and cleare thys my simplicitie,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     Thouhast well tryed me in the night, and yet couldst nothyng fynde:
                     That I haue spoken with my tonge, that was not in my minde.
                     
                        verse 4
                     As from the workes of wicked men, and pathes peruerse and ill:
                     For loue of thy most holy worde, I haue refrayned styll.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     Then in thy pathes that be most pure, stay me (Lorde) and preserue:
                     That from the way wherin I walke, my steppes may neuer swerue.
                     
                        verse 6
                     For I dou call to thee (O Lorde) surely thou wylt me ayde:
                     Then heare my prayer & way right wel the wordes that I haue sayde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     O thou the sauiour of all them, that put theyr trust in thee:
                     Declare thy strength on thē that spurn, against thy maiestie.
                     
                        verse 8
                     O kepe me (Lord) as thou wouldst kepe the apple of thine eye:
                     And vnder couert of thy winges, defend me secretly.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The seconde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     From wicked men that trouble me, and dayly me anoy:
                     Ind from my foes that go about, my soule for to destroy.
                     
                        verse 10
                     
                        
10 Whiche wallow in their worldly wealth, so full and eke so fat:
                     That in theyr pride they do not spare, to speake they care not what.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     They lye in wayte where we should passe Meaning himself and his cō
                           panyons. with craft me to confounde:
                     And musing mischief in their mindes, to cast me to the grounde.
                     
                        verse 12
                     Muche lyke a Lyon gredely, that would hys praye embrace:
                     Or lurking like a Lyons whelpe, within some secrete place.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     Up Lorde with hast preuent my foe, and cast hym at thy feete:
                     Saue thou my soule from the euil man, and with thy sworde him smite.
                     
                        verse 14
                     Deliuer me Lorde by thy power, out of these tyrantes handes:
                     Whiche nowe so longe time raigned haue. and kepe vs in theyr bandes.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     I meane from worldly men, to whom all worldly goodes are ryse:
                     That haue no hope nor part of ioy, but in this present lyfe.
                     Thou of thy store, theyr bellies filst, with pleasures to their minde:
                     Theyr children haue inough, and leaue, to theirs the rest behinde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16
                     But I shall with pure conscience, beholde thy gratious face:
                     
                        
So when I wake I shalbe full, with thine image and grace.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Diligam te domine. psal. xviii. T. S.
               
                  ¶ This Psalme is the fyrste beginnyng of Dauids saluation and thancks geuing in the entring into his kingdome, wherin he extolleth, and praiseth most highly, the maruelous mercies and grace of God, who hathe bothe preserued and defended hym: he setteth forthe the Image of Christes kingdome, painted in hys kindom: that the faithfull mai be assured, that Christe shall alwayes conquere and ouercome by the vnspeakable power of hys father, though all the whole world shuld say there against.
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      
                     O God my strēgth and fortitude, 
                        〈♫〉
                      of force I must loue the: Thou art my castell & 
                        〈♫〉
                      defence in mine necessitie. My god my 
                        〈♫〉
                      rock in whō I trust ye worker of my wealth, my 
                        〈♫〉
                      refuge, buckler & my shield, ye horn of al mi health
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 3
                     When I sing laud vnto the Lorde, most worthy to be strued:
                     Then fro my foes I am right sure, that I shalbe preserued.
                     
                        verse 4
                     The panges of death did compas me, and bounde me euery where:
                     The flowing waues of wickednes. did put me in great feare.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     The slie and suttell snares of hell, were round aboute me set:
                     And for my death there was preparde, a deadly trapping net.
                     
                        verse 6
                     I thus beset with payne and gryef, did pray to God for grace:
                     And he forthwith did heare my playnt, out of his holy place.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     Suche is hys power that in his wrath, he made the earth to quake:
                     Yea the foundation of the mounte, of Basan for to shake.
                     
                        verse 8
                     And from his nostrels came a smoke, When kindled was his ire:
                     And from his mouth came kindled coles, of hote consuming fire,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     The Lorde descended from aboue, and bowde the heauens hie:
                     And vnderneth his fete he cast, the darknes of the skye.
                     
                        verse 10
                     On Cherubs, and on Cherubins, full royally he rode:
                     
                        
and on the winges of all the windes, came fliyng all abrode.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The second parte.
                  
                     And like a denne most darke he made, his denne and secret place:
                     With waters black and ayrie cloudes, enuironed he was.
                     
                        verse 12
                     But when the presence of his face, in brightnes shall appeare:
                     Then cloudes consume & in their stead, come hayles and coales of fyre.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     These fiery dartes and thunder boltes, disperse them here and there:
                     And with his often lightninges, he puttes them in great feare.
                     
                        verse 14
                     Lorde at thy wrath and threatenings, and at thy chyding cheare.
                     The springes and the foundations, of all the worlde appeare.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     And from aboue the Lorde sent downe, to fetche me from belowe:
                     And pluckt me out of waters great, that would me ouerflowe.
                     
                        verse 16
                     And me deliuered from my foes, that would haue made me thrall:
                     Yea from such foes as were to strong, for me to deale with all.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     They did preuent me to oppres, in time of my great gryef:
                     But yet the Lorde was my defence, my succor and relief.
                     
                        verse 18
                     
                        
18 He brought me forth in open place, where as I might be free:
                     And kept me safe because he had, a fauor vnto me.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     And as I was an innocent, so did he me regarde:
                     And to the cleanes of my hands. he gaue me my reward.
                     
                        verse 20
                     For that I walked in his wayes, and in his pathes haue trod:
                     And haue not wauered wickedly, against my Lorde my God.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The third parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 21
                     But euermore I haue respect, to his law and decree:
                     His statutes and commaundementes, I cast not out fro me.
                     
                        verse 22
                     But pure and cleane and vncorrupt, appearde afore his face:
                     And did refrayne from wickednes, and sinne in any case.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 23
                     The Lorde therfore will me reward, as I haue done aright:
                     And to the cleannes of my handes, appearing in hys sight.
                     
                        verse 24
                     For Lorde with him that holy is, wilt thou be holy to:
                     And with the good and vertuous men, right vertuously wilt doo.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 25
                     And to the louing and elect, thy loue thou wilt reserue,
                     
                        
And thou wilt vse the wicked men, as wicked men deserue.
                     
                        verse 26
                     For thou dost saue the simple folke, In trouble when they lye:
                     And dost bring downe the countenance of them that loke full hie.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 27
                     The Lorde will light my candell so, that it shall shine full bryght:
                     The Lorde my God will make also, my darknes to be light.
                     
                        verse 28
                     For by thy helpe an host of men, disconfite (Lorde) I shall:
                     By thee I scale and ouerleape, the strength of any wall.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 29
                     Unspotted are the wayes of God, his worde is purely tryed:
                     He is a sure defence to suche, as in his faith abide,
                     
                        verse 30
                     For who is God? except the Lorde, for other there is none:
                     Or els who is omnipotent, sauing our God alone?
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The forthe parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 31
                     The God that girded me with strēgth, is he that I doo meane:
                     That all the wayes wherin I walke, did euermore kepe cleane.
                     
                        verse 32
                     That made my feete lyke to the hartes, in swiftnes of my pace:
                     And for my suertie brought me forth, into an open place
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 33
                     He did in order put my handes, to bataile and to fyght:
                     To breake in sunder barres of bras, he gaue my armes the myght.
                     
                        verse 34
                     Thou reachest me my sauing health, thy right hand is my tower:
                     Thy loue and familiaritie, doeth styll encrease my power.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 35
                     And vnder me thou makest playne, the waye where I should walke:
                     So that my feete shall neuer stippe. nor stumble at a balke.
                     
                        verse 36
                     And fiersely I pursue and take, my foes that me annoyed:
                     And from the field doo not reforne, till they be all destroyde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 37
                     So I suppresse and wound my foes, that they can rise no more:
                     For at my seate they fall downe flat, I strike them all so sore.
                     
                        verse 38
                     For thou dost gird me with thy strength to warre in suche a wyse:
                     That they be all scatred abroade, that vp against me ryse,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 39
                     Lorde thou hast put into my handes my mortall enemies yoke:
                     And all my foes thou dost deuide, in sonder with thy stroke.
                     
                        verse 40
                     They calld for help but none gaue eare, to helpe them with reliefe:
                     
                        
Yea to the Lorde they callde for helpe, yet hearde he not their grief.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The fifth parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 41
                     And styll lyke dust before the winde, I driue them vnder feate:
                     And swepe them out lyke filthy claye, that stinketh in the streat.
                     
                        verse 42
                     Thou kepest me from sedicious folke, that still in stryfe be led:
                     And thou doest of the heathen folke, apoint me to be hed.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 43
                     A people straunge to me vnknowen, and yet they shall me serue:
                     And at the first obey my word, wheras mine owne will swarue.
                     
                        verse 44
                     I shalbe ircksom to mine owne, they will not see my light:
                     But wander wide out of theyr wayes, and hide them out of sight.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 45
                     But blessed be the lyuyng Lorde. most worthy of all prayse:
                     That is my rocke and sauing health, praysed be he alwayes.
                     
                        verse 46
                     For God it is that gaue me power, reuenged for to be:
                     And with his onely worde subdued, the people vnto me.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 47
                     And fro my foe me deliuered, and set me hier then those:
                     That cruell and vngodly were, and vp against me rose.
                     
                        verse 48
                     
                        
48 And for this cause, O Lorde my God, to thee geue thankes I shall?
                     And syng out prayses to thy name, among the Gentils all.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 49
                     That gauest great prosperitie, vnto the kyng I saye:
                     To Dauid thy anoynted kyng, and to his seede for aye.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Coeli enarrant gloriam dei. Psalme. xix. T. S.
               
                  ¶ To the intent he might moue the faithfull to a deper consideration of Gods glory, he setteth before theyr eyes the most exquisite workemā
                     ship of the Heauens, with theyr proportion and ornamentes. And afterwarde calleth them to the law wherin God hath reueled hymselfe more familiarly to his chosen people. The whiche peculiar grace by commending the lawe, he setteth foorth more at large, and at thende, he concludeth with a Prayer.
               
               
                  THe heauens and the firmament, doo wonderously declare: Sing this as the. xiiii. psalme.
                  
                  The glory of God omnipotent, his workes and what they are.
                  
                     verse 2
                  The wonderous workes of God apere by euery dayes successe:
                  The nightes, which likewise theyr race run the self same thinges expresse.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  There is no language, tong, or speach, where theyr sounde is not heard: Roma. x. d. actes. xiiii, c.
                  
                  
                     verse 4
                  In all the earth and coastes therof their knowledge is conferd.
                  In them the Lorde made for the sunne, a place of great renome:
                  
                     verse 5
                  Who like a bridegrome ready trimde, doth from hys chamber come.
               
               
                  
                  And as a valiaunt champion, He noteth thre excellent qualytses in the sūn
                           •
                         his beautie, sweftnes and heate. who for to get a pryce:
                  With ioy doth hast to take in hande, some noble enterprise.
                  
                     verse 6
                  And all the skie from ende to ende, he compasseth about:
                  Nothyng can hide it from his heat, but he will finde it out.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Howe perfect is the law of God, how is his couenaunt sure?
                  Conuerting soules and makyng wyse, the simple and obscure. Mans inuentions are croked, without cōfort, filthy and blind
                  
                  
                     verse 8
                  Iust are the Lordes commaundimēts, and glad both hart and mynde:
                  His precept pure and geueth light, to eyes that be full blynde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  The feare of God is excellent, and doth indure for euer: What soeuer mans fantasye doth inuent, is but lyes, and vanitit.
                  
                  The iudgements of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether.
                  
                     verse 10
                  And more to be embraste alwayes, then fined golde, I say:
                  The hony and the hony combe, are not so swete as they.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  By them thy seruaunt is forewarnde, to haue God in regarde:
                  And in performance of the same, there shalbe greatrewarde.
                  
                     verse 12
                  But lord what earthly man doth know the errours of hys lyfe?
                  
                     
Then clense my soule from secreat sinnes, whyche are in me most ryfe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  And kepe me that presumptuous sinnes, prenayle not ouer me:
                  And then shall I be innocent, and great offences flee.
                  
                     verse 14
                  Accept my mouth and eke my hart, my wordes and thoughts echone:
                  For my redemer and my strength, O Lorde thou art alone.
               
            
            
               ¶ Exaudiat te dominus. Psal. xx. T. S.
               
                  ¶ A prayer of the people vnto God: that it woulde please hym to heare theyr king: and receyue his sacrifice, whyche he offred before he went to battell against the ammonites, declaryng howe that the Heathen put theyr trust in horses & chariotes, but they trust only in the name of the Lorde theyr God. Wherfore the other shall fall, but the Lorde will saue the kinge and hys people.
               
               
                  IN trouble and aduersitie, Sing this as the. xiiii. psal the Lorde God heare thee styll:
                  The maiestye of Iacobs God, defende thee from all ill.
                  
                     verse 2
                  And send thee from his holy place, hys helpe at euery nede:
                  And so in Sion stablish thee, and make thee strong in dede.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Remembring well the sacrifice, that now to him is done:
                  And so receyue right thankfully, thy burnt offringes echeone.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Accordyng to thy hartes desire, the Lorde graunt vnto thee:
                  
                     
And all thy counsell and deuyse, full well performe may he.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  We shall reioyse when thou vs sauest, and our banners displaye:
                  Unto the Lorde whyche thy requestes, fulfilled hathe alwaye.
                  
                     verse 6
                  The Lorde will his annoynted saue, I know well by hys grace:
                  And send him health by his right hand out of his holy place:
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  In charets some put confidence, and some in horses trust:
                  But we remember God our Lorde, that kepeth promise iust.
                  
                     verse 8
                  They fall downe flat, but we doo ryse, and stand vp stedfastly:
                  
                     verse 9
                  Now saue and helpe vs, Lorde & king, on thee when we doo cry.
               
            
            
               ¶ Domine in virture. Psalme. xxi. T. S.
               
                  ¶ Dauid in the parson of the people prayseth God for the victory which he gaue them against the Siriās and Ammonites. i. Sam. x. xi. wherin he had the riche crowne of the king of Ammon set vpon his head. ii, Sam. xii. and was indued with the manifolde blessinges of God, and contrarywise his enemies destroyed.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  O Lord how ioyfull is the king, 
                     〈♫〉
                   in thy strēgth, & thy power: how vemently doeth



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   he reioyce in thee hys sauior. For thou haste 
                     〈♫〉
                   geuen vnto him his godly harts desire: to hym 
                     〈♫〉
                   nothing hast thou denide of that he did require.
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Thou didst preuent hym with thy gyftes, and blessynges manifold: Dauid did not onely obtayne
                           •
                         lyfe, but also assurance that his posteritie shold raigue for euer.
                  
                  And thou hast set vpon hys head. a crowne of perfect golde.
                  
                     verse 4
                  And when he asked life of thee, therof thou madst hym sure:
                  To haue longe lyfe, yea suche a lyfe, as euer should indure.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Greate is hys glory by thy helpe, thy benefyte and ayde:
                  Greate worship and greate honor bothe, thou hast vpon hym layde,
                  
                     verse 6
                  Thou wylte geue hym felycytie, that neuer shall decay:
                  And with thy chearefull countenaunce, wylt comforte hym alway.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 7
                  For why the kinge doeth strongly trust, in God for to preuayle: Hereof he describeth the strength of christes kingdome against thenemies thereof.
                  
                  Therfore hys goodnes and his grace, will not that he shall quayle.
                  
                     verse 8
                  But let thyne enemies fele thy force, and those that thee withstande:
                  Finde out chy foes, and let them fele, the power of thy right hande.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  And like an ouen burne them Lorde, in firie flame and fume:
                  Thine angre shall destroy them all, and fyre shall them consume.
                  
                     verse 10
                  And thou wilt roote out of the earth, their frute that should increase,
                  And from the number of thy folke, theyr seede shall ende and cease.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  For why? muche mischief did they muse, against thyne holy name:
                  Yet did they fayle and had no power, for to performe the same.
                  
                     verse 12
                  But as a marke thou shalt them set, in a most open place:
                  And charge thy bowstringes readily, against thyne enemies face.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  Be thou exalted Lorde therfore. in thy strength euery houre:
                  So shall we sing right solempnely, praisyng thy might and power.
               
            
            
               ¶ Deus deus meus respice. Psalm. xxii. T. S
               
                  ¶ Dauid complayneth hymselfe to be broughte into suche extremities, that he is, like a man desperate & past al hope, after declareth wherof,



he recouereth himself from the botomles pit of temptations. And vnder his owne parson he setteth forth the figure of Christ, whō he dyd forsee in the spirite of prophecye. So this Psalme after two sortes doth declare that prophecye of Esay: he was taken forth of yrison and iudgemente.
               
               
                  
                     O God my God, wherfore doest thou, forsake me vtterly: ¶ Sing this as the. xxi. psalme.
                     
                     And helpest not when I doo make, my greate complaynte and cry.
                     
                        verse 2
                     To thee my God euen all day longe, I doo bothe crye and call?
                     I cease not all the night and yet, thou hearest not at all.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     Euen thou that in thy sanctuary, and holy place dost dwell:
                     Thou art the comfort and the ioye, and glory of Israell,
                     
                        verse 4
                     And he in whom our fathers olde, had all theyr hope for euer:
                     And when they put their trust in thee, So diddest thou them deliuer.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     They were delyuered for euer, when they called on thy name:
                     And for the fayth they had in thee, they were not put to shame.
                     
                        verse 6
                     But I am nowe become a worme, more like then any man:
                     And outcast whom the people scorne, with all the spite they can.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     And me despise as they beholde, me walking on the waye:
                     They gren, they mowe, they nod theyr heads, and in this wyse they faye.
                     
                        verse 8
                     
                        
8 Thys man did glory in the Lorde, his fauore and his loue:
                     Let him redeme and helpe hym nowe, his power if he will proue.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     But Lorde out of my mothers wombe I came by thy request:
                     Thou didst preserue me styll in hope, while I did sucke her brest.
                     
                        verse 10
                     I was committed from my birth, with thee to haue abod:
                     Since I was in my mothers wombe thou hast ben euer my God.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The seconde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     Then Lorde depart not now from me in thys my present gryef:
                     Since I haue none to be my helpe, my succor and relyef.
                     
                        verse 12
                     So many bulles doo compasse me, that be full strong of head:
                     Yea hulles so fat as though they had, in Basan field be fed.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     They gape vpon me gredely. as though they would me slay:
                     Muche like a Lion roring out, and ramping for his praye.
                     
                        verse 14
                     But I drop downe lyke water shed, my ioyntes in sunder breake:
                     My hart doeth in my body melt, lyke waxe against the heate.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     And like a potshard drithe my strength my tonge it cleaueth fast:
                     
                        
Unto my iawes, and I am brought, to dust of death at last.
                     
                        verse 16
                     And many dogges doo compas me, and wicked counsell eke:
                     Conspire against me cursedlie, they pearse my handes and fete.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     I was tormented so that I, might all my bones haue folde:
                     yet styll vpon me they doo loke, and still they me beholde:
                     
                        verse 18
                     My garments they deuided eke, in partes amonge them all:
                     And for my coate they did cast lottes, to whom it might be fall.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     Therfore I pray thee be not farre, fro me at my great nead:
                     But rather sith thou arte my strength, to helpe me (Lorde) make speade.
                     
                        verse 20
                     And frō the sword (Lord) saue my soule by thy might and thy powre:
                     And kepe my soule thy darlyng deare, from dogges that would deuoure.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 21
                     And from the Lions mouth that would me all in sunder shiuer:
                     And from the hornes of Unicornes, Lorde safely me delyuer.
                     
                        verse 22
                     And I shall to my brethren all, thy maiestie recorde:
                     And in thy church shall praise the name of thee the liuyng Lorde.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The thirde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 23
                     All ye that feare hym prayse the Lorde: Thou sede of Iacob honor hym:
                     And with al reuerence possible: thou sede of Israell worship him.
                     
                        verse 24
                     For he despiseth not the poore, he tourneth not awrye:
                     His countenaunce, when they doo call, but graunteth to theyr crye.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 25
                     Among thy flocke that feare the Lorde, I will therfore proclayme:
                     Thy prayse and kepe my promise made, for settyng forth thy name.
                     
                        verse 26
                     The poore shall eate and be suffised, and those that doo theyr deuer:
                     To knowe the Lorde shall prayse hys name, theyr hartes shall lyue foreuer.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 27
                     All costes of earth shall prayse the Lorde, and tourne to hym for grace:
                     The Heathen folke shall worship hym, before his blessed face.
                     
                        verse 28
                     The kingdome of the Heathen folke, the Lorde shall haue therfore:
                     And he shalbe their gouernor, and kyng for euermore.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 29
                     The ryche men of his godly gyftes, shall feede, and fast also:
                     And in hys presence worship hym, and bow their knees full low.
                     
                        verse 30
                     30 And all that shall go downe to dust, of lyfe by him must tast
                     
                        
My seed shall serue and praise his name whyle any world shall last.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 31
                     31 My seed shall plainly shew to them, that shalbe borne hereafter:
                     His iustice and his rightuousnes, and all his workes of wonder.
                  
               
            
            
               Dominus regit me. Psalm. xxiii TS.
               
                  ¶ Because the prophet had proued the great mercies of God at diuers times, and in sundry manners: he gathereth a certayne assuraunce, fully perswadyng hym selfe that God wil continue the very same goodnes towardes him for euer.
               
               
                  My shepehard is the liuing Lorde, Nothing therfore I nead: ¶ Sing this as the. xxi. psalme.
                  
                  In pastors fayre, with waters calme he set me for to fead.
                  
                     verse 2
                  He did conuert and glad my soule, and brought my minde in frame:
                  To walke in pathes of rightuousnes, for his most holy name.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  yea though I walke in vale of death, yet will I feare non ill:
                  Thy rod, thy staffe, doeth comfort me, and thou art with me styll.
                  
                     verse 4
                  And in the presence of my foes, my table thou shalt spread:
                  Thou shalt (O Lord) fill full my cup, and eke annoynt my head.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Through all my lyfe thy fauour is, So frankly shewde to me:
                  That in thy house for euermore, my dwelling place shalbe.
               
            
            
               
               Domini est terra. Psalme. xxiiii. I. H.
               
                  ¶ Because the grace of God was then to be vttered in the temple, more glorious then before it had ben in the tabernacle, Dauid geueth it a more glorious title, and with exclamation setteth forth the honor therof, styring vs to the consideration of the eternall mansions prepared for vs in the heauens: wherof this was a shadow and figure.
               
               
                  THe earth is all the Lordes, with all, Sing this as the. xxi. psal▪
                      her store and furniture:
                  Yea hys is all the worlde, and all, that therin doo indure.
                  
                     verse 2
                  For he hathe fastly founded it. aboue the sea to stand:
                  And layd alow the liquid flouds, to flow beneathe the land.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  For who is he (O Lorde) that shall, ascend into thy hyll.
                  Or passe into thy holy place, there to continew styll.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Whose hāds are harmles, & whose hart no spot there doth defyle:
                  His soule not set on vanitie, who hathe not sworne no guyle.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Him that is such a one the Lorde, shall place in blisfull plight:
                  And God his God, and sauior, shall yelde to hym his right.
                  
                     verse 6
                  This is the broode of trauelers, in sekyng of hys grace:
                  As Iacob did the Israelite, in that time of his race.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 7
                  Ye princes open your gates stand open, the euerlastyng gate:
                  For there shall entre in thereby, the king of gloryous state.
                  
                     verse 8
                  What is the kynge of glorious. the strong and mighty Lord:
                  The mightye Lorde in battailes stoute, and tryall of the sword.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  Ye princes open your gates stand open, the euerlastyng gate:
                  For there shall entre in therby, the king of Glorious state.
                  
                     verse 10
                  What is this kinge of glorious, the Lorde of hostes it is:
                  The kingdome and the royaltie, of glorious state is hys.
               
            
            
               ¶ Ad te domine leuaui. Psalm. xxv. T. S
               
                  ¶ The Prophet touched with the consideration of his sinnes, and also greued with the cruell malice of his enemies, prayeth to god most feruently to haue his sinnes forgeuen, especially suche as he had committed in his youth. He beginneth euery verse according to the Ebrue letters two or three except.
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      
                     I Lift mine hart to the my god & 
                        〈♫〉
                      guide most iust. Now suffer me to take no shame,



                     
                        〈♫〉
                      for in thee do I trust. Let not my foes reioyce, 
                        〈♫〉
                      nor make a scorne of me, And let them not 
                        〈♫〉
                      be ouerthrowē that put their trust in thee.
                  
                     But shame shall them befall, whyche harme them wrongfully:
                     
                        verse 3
                     Therfore thy pathes & thy rightwaies, vnto me Lorde descry.
                     
                        verse 4
                     Direct me in thy trueth, and teache me I thee pray:
                     Thou art my God and sauiour, on thee I wayte alway.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     Thy mercyes manifolde, I pray thee Lorde remember:
                     And eke thy pitye plentifull, for they haue ben for euer.
                     
                        verse 6
                     Remember not the fautes, and frailtie of my youth:
                     Remembre not how ignorant, I haue ben of thy trouth:
                  
                  
                     
                     Nor after my desertes, let me thy mercy fynde:
                     But of thyne owne beningnitie, Lorde haue me in thy mynde.
                     
                        verse 7
                     His mercy is full swete, hys truthe a perfect guyde:
                     Therfore the Lorde wyll sinners teach and suche as go asyde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8
                     The humble he will teache, hys precepts for to kepe:
                     He wyll direct in all hys wayes, the lowly and the meke,
                     
                        verse 9
                     For all the wayes of God, are trueth and mercy bothe:
                     To them that kepe hys testament, the witnes of his trouth.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The seconde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 10
                     Now for thy holy name, O Lorde I thee intreat:
                     To graunt me pardon for my sinne, for it is wondrous great,
                     
                        verse 11
                     Who so doeth feare the Lorde, True felicitye standeth in the feare of God. the Lorde doeth him direct:
                     To leade his lyfe in suche awaye, as he doeth best accept.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12
                     His soule shall euermore, in goodnes dwell and stande:
                     His seede and his posteritie, inherite shall the lande,
                     
                        verse 13
                     All those that feare the Lorde, know hys secret intent:
                     
                        
And vnto them he doth declare, hys wyll and testament.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 14
                     Mine eyes and eke my hart, to hym I wyll aduaunce:
                     That pluckt my fete out of the snare, of sinne and ignoraunce.
                     
                        verse 15
                     With mercy me beholde, to thee I make my mone:
                     For I am poore and desolate, and comfortles alone.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16
                     The troubles of mine hart, are multiplyed in dede:
                     Bring me out of this misery, necessitiy and nede.
                     
                        verse 17
                     Beholde my pouertie, mine anguish and my payne:
                     Remit my sinne and myne offence, and make me cleane agayne:
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18
                     O Lorde beholde myfoes, how they doo styll increase:
                     Pursuing me with deadly hate, that fayne would lyue in peace.
                     
                        verse 19
                     Preserue and kepe my soule, and eke deliuer me:
                     And let me not be ouerthrowne, because I trust in thee.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20
                     Let my simple purenes, me from mine enemies shend:
                     Because I loke, as one of thyne, that thou shouldest me defend.
                     
                        verse 21
                     
                        
21 Deliuer Lorde thy folke, and send them some relief:
                     I meane thy chosen Israell, from all theyr payne and grief.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Iudica me domine. Psalme. xxvi. I. H
               
                  ¶ Dauid oppressed with many iniuryes, finding no helpe in the worlde, called for ayde from God: and assured of his integritie toward Saul, desireth God to be his iudge and to defend his innocency, causeles afflicted. Finally he maketh mention of his sacrifice whiche he will offer for his deliueraunce, and desireth to be in the company of the faithfull in the congregation of God, whence he was banished by Saule, promisyng integritie of life & open praises and thankes geuingr
               
               
                  LOrde be my iudge, and thou shall see, Sing this as the. xviii. psalme. My pathes be right and plaine:
                  I trust in God, and hope that he, will strength me to remaine.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Proue me my God I thee desire, my waies to searche and trie:
                  As men do proue theyr gold with fire, my reines and hert espie.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Thy goodnes laide before my face, I durst be bold alwaies:
                  For of thy trueth I tread the trace, and will doo all my dayes.
                  
                     verse 4
                  I doo not lust to haunt or vse, with men whose dedes ar vayne:
                  To come in house I doo refuse, with the deceiptfull trayne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  I muche abhorte the wicked sort, their dedes I doo despise:
                  I doo not once to them resort, that hurtfull thinges deuyse▪
                  
                  
                     verse 6
                  
                     
6 My handes I washe and doo procede, in workes that walke vpryght:
                  Then to the aulter I make spede, to offer there in sight.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  That I may speak & preache the prayse that doth belonge to thee:
                  And so declare how wondrous wayes thou hast ben good to me.
                  
                     verse 8
                  O Lorde thy house I loue most deare, to me it doeth excell:
                  I haue delight and would be neare, wher as thy grace doeth dwell.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  Oh shut not vp my soule with them, in sinne that take their fill,
                  Nor yet my lyfe amongst those men, that seke much bloud to spill.
                  
                     verse 10
                  whose hands ar heapt with craft & guile their life therof is full:
                  And their right hand with wrēch & wile, for bribes doth pluck and pull.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  But I in rightuousnes entend, my time and daies to serue▪
                  
                  Haue mercy Lorde and me defende, so that I doo not swarue.
                  
                     verse 12
                  My fote is stayed for all assayes, it standeth well and right:
                  Wherfore to God will I geue prayse, in all the peoples sight.
               
            
            
               ¶ Dominus illum inatio. Psal. xxvii. I. H.
               
                  ¶ Dauid maketh this Psalme, being deliuerth frō great pearsts as appeareth by the prayses and thankesgeuyng annexed: wherin



we may see the constant fayth of Dauid against the assaults of all enemies, and also thende wherfore he desireth to lyue and to bedeliuered, only to worship God in his congregation. Herby he promiseth hymself assuraunce, though father & mother forsake hym, he teacheth this to be the only way, to to see the good thinges in the land of the liuing, and after his example he exhorteth to faith and to attend vpon the Lorde.
               
               
                  THe Lord is bothe my health and light ¶ Sing this as the. xviii. psalme. shall man make me dismayde?
                  Sith God doth geue me strength & why should I be afrayde?
                  
                     verse 2
                  While that my foes with all their strēgth might begin with me to brawle:
                  And thinke to eate me vp at length, themselues haue caught the fall.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Thoughe they in campe against me lye, my hart is not afrayd:
                  In battell pight if they will trye, I trust in God for ayde.
                  
                     verse 4
                  One thing of God I doo require, that he will not denye:
                  For whiche I pray and will desyre, till he to me applye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  That I within his holy place, my lyfe throughout may dwell:
                  To see the beauty of his face, and vew his temple well.
                  
                     verse 6
                  In time of dreade he shall me hide, within hys place most pure:
                  And kepe me secret by hys syde, as on a rocke most sure.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 7
                  At length I know the Lordes good grace, shall make me strong and stoute:
                  My foes to foile and cleane deface, that compasse me about.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Therfore within his house will I. Geue sacrifice of prayse:
                  With Psalmes and songes I will applye, to laude the Lorde alwayes.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  Lorde heare the voyce of my request, for whyche to thee I call:
                  Haue mercy (Lord) on me opprest, and send me helpe withall.
                  
                     verse 10
                  My hart doth knowledge vnto thee, I sue to haue thy grace:
                  Then seke my face sayste thou to me, Lorde I will seke thy face.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  In wrath turne not thy selfe a way, Nor suffer me to slide:
                  Thou art my helpe still to this day, be still my God and guide.
                  
                     verse 12
                  My parentes both theyr sonne forsoke, and cast me of at large:
                  And then the Lorde himselfe yet toke, of me the cure and charge.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  Teache me, O God, the way to thee, and leade me on forth ryght:
                  For feare of suche as watche for me, to trap me if they might.
                  
                     verse 14
                  Do not betake me to the will, of them that be my foes:
                  
                     
For they surmyse against me styll, false witnes to depose,
               
               
                  
                     verse 15
                  My hart would faint but that in me, this hope he fixed fast:
                  The Lorde Gods good grace shall it see, in lyfe that aye shall laste.
                  
                     verse 16
                  Trust still in God, whose whole thou art, His will abide thou must:
                  And he shall ease and strength thy hart, if thou in hym doo trust.
               
            
            
               ¶ Ad te domine clamabo. Psal. xxviii. I. H
               
                  ¶ Being in great feare and pensiuenes to see God dishonoured by the wicked men, he desireth to be rid of them, and cryeth for vengeaunce against them, and at length assureth hym selfe, that God hath hard his prayer, vnto whose tuition he commendeth all the faithefull.
               
               
                  THou art (O Lord) my strength and stay, Sing this as the. xxi. psal the succor whyche I craue:
                  Neglect me not, lest I be lyke, to them that go to graue.
                  
                     verse 2
                  The voyce of thy suppliant heare, that vnto thee doeth crye:
                  When I lift vp, my handes vnto, thy holy arke moste hye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Repute not me among the sort, of wicked and peruert:
                  That speake ryght fayre vnto theyr frēds, and thinke full ill in hart.
                  
                     verse 4
                  According to theyr handy worke, as they deserue in dede:
                  And after their inuencions, let them receyue theyr mede.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 5
                  For they regarde nothing Godes workes, his lawe ne yet his lore:
                  Therfore will he them and theyr seede, destroy for euermore.
                  
                     verse 6
                  To render thankes vnto the Lorde, how great a cause haue I:
                  My voyce, my prayer and my complaynt, that heard so willingly.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  He is my shield and fortitude, my buckeler in destresse.
                  My hope, my helpe, my hartes relyef, my songe shall him confesse.
                  
                     verse 8
                  He is our strength and oure defence, our enmies to resist:
                  The health and the saluacion, of his electe by Chryste.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  Thy people and thine heritage, Lorde blesse, guide, and preserue:
                  Increase them Lorde, and rule theyr harts that they may neuer swerue.
               
            
            
               ¶ Afferte domino. Psalme. xxix. T. S.
               
                  ¶ An excellent Psalme. wherin the Prophet exhorteth the verye Princes and rulers of the world (whiche otherwise for the most parte thinke there is no God) at the leaste to feare hym for the thunders and tempestes, for feare wherat all creatures tremble. And though thereby God threatneth sinners, yet is he alwayes mercyfull to hys, and moueth them therby to prayse his name.
               
               
                  GIue to the Lorde, ye potentates, ye rulers of the worlde: Sing this as the. xxi. Psa.
                  
                  Geue ye all prayse, honor and strength, vnto the liuing Lorde.
                  
                     verse 2
                  
                     
2 Geue honor to his holy name, and honor him alone:
                  Worship hym in his maiestie, within his holy throne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  His voyce doth rule the waters all, euen as him selfe doth please:
                  He doth prepare the thunder clappes, and gouerneth all the sease.
                  
                     verse 4
                  
                     He meaneth the thunderinges & tempestes. The voyce of God, is of great force, and wonderous excellent:
                  It is most mightye in effect, and muche magnificent.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  The voyce of God, doeth rent and break the Cedre trees so long:
                  The Cedre tres of Libanus, whiche are most hie and strong.
                  
                     verse 6
                  And makth them leape, like as a call, or els the Unicorne:
                  Not only trees, but mountaines great, wheron the tres are borne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  His voice deuideth flames of fyre, and shakth the wildernes:
                  
                     verse 8
                  It makth the desert quake for feare, that called is Cades.
                  
                     verse 9
                  It makth the Hindes, for feare to calue and makth the couerte playne:
                  Then in his temple euery man, his glory doth proclaime.
               
               
                  
                     verse 10
                  The Lorde was set aboue the floudes, ruling the raging sea:
                  
                     
So shall he raygne, as Lord and king for euer and for aye.
                  
                     verse 11
                  The Lorde will geue his people power, in vertue to increase:
                  The Lord wyll blesse hys chosen folke. with euerlastyng peace.
               
            
            
               ¶ Exaltabo te domine. Psal. xxx. I. Hop.
               
                  ¶ When Dauid should haue dedicated hys house to the Lorde, he fel so extreme sick, that he was without all hope of lyfe, & therfore after hys recouery, he rendreth thankes to God, exhortyng others to the lyke, & learn by his example, that God is rather mercyfull then seuere, and rigorous towardes his childrē, and also that the fall from prosperitie is sodeine. This done, he retourneth to prayer, promisyng to prayse God for euer.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  ALl laud & praise, with hart & voice, 
                     〈♫〉
                   O Lorde I geue to thee: whiche didst not 
                     〈♫〉
                   make my foes reioyse, but hast exalted me. 
                     〈♫〉
                   O lord my god to thee I cryde, in all my



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   paine & grief: thou gauest an eare, and didst 
                     〈♫〉
                   prouide to ease me with relief,
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Of thy good will thou hast calde backe, My soule from hell to saue:
                  Thou didst reuine when strength did lacke, and kept me from the graue.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Sing prayse ye sainctes that proue and see, the goodnes of the Lord:
                  In memorye of his maiestie, Reioyse with one accord.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  For why his anger but a space, doeth last and slake agayne:
                  But in his fauour and hys grace, alwayes doeth lyfe remayne.
                  Though gripes of grief, and panges full sore, shall lodge with vs all night:
                  The Lorde to ioy shall vs restore, before the day be light.
               
               
                  
                     verse 6
                  When I enioyde the worlde at will, thus would I boast and say:
                  Tushe, I am sure to feele none ill, this wealth shall not decay.
                  
                     verse 7
                  For thou (O Lorde of thy good grace, hadst sent me strength and ayde.
                  
                     
But when thou turnd away thy face, my mynde was sore dismaide.
               
               
                  
                     verse 8
                  Wherfore agayne yet did I cry, to thee, O Lorde of might:
                  My God with plaintes I did apply, and prayde both day and night.
                  
                     verse 9
                  What gayne is in my bloud saide I, if death destroy my dayes:
                  Doth dust declare thy maiestie, or yet thy trueth doth prayse?
               
               
                  
                     verse 10
                  Wherfore my God some pitie take, O Lorde I thee desyre:
                  Do not this simple soule forsake, of helpe I thee requyre.
                  
                     verse 11
                  Then didst thou turne my grief and wo, vnto a chearfull voyce:
                  The mournyng weede thou tokste me fro, and madst me to reioyse.
               
               
                  
                     verse 12
                  Wherfore my soule vncessauntly, shall syng vnto thy prayse:
                  My Lorde, my God, to thee will I, Geue laude and thankes alwayes.
               
            
            
               Inte domine speraui. Psal. xxxi. Io. Hop.
               
                  ¶ Dauid deliuered from some great daunger, in the desert of Ma
                        ••
                      or els wher, first reherseth what meditation he had by the power of sayth when death was before his eyes, his enemy beyng ready to take him: then he adioyneth the fauor of God alwaies to be ready to those that feare him. Finally he exhorteth al the faithful to trust in God & to loue him, because he preserueth and strengthneth, them, as they may se by his example.
               
               
                  
                     
                     O Lorde I put my trust in thee, Let nothyng worke me shame: ¶ Sing this as the. xviii. psalme.
                     
                     As thou art iust deliuer me, and set me quyte from blame.
                     
                        verse 2
                     Geue me (O Lorde) and that anone. to helpe me make good spead,
                     Be thou my rocke, and house of stone, my fence in time of nede.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     For why as stones thy strength is tride thou art my fort and towre:
                     For thy names sake be thou my guyde, and leade me in thy power.
                     
                        verse 4
                     Plucke forth my feete, & break the snare which they for me haue layde:
                     Thou art my strength, and all my care is for thy might and ayde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     In to thy handes Lorde I commit, my spirite whyche is thy dew:
                     For why thou hast redemed it, O Lorde thou God most trewe.
                     
                        verse 6
                     I hate suche folke as wyll not part, from thynges to be abhorde:
                     When they on trifles set theyr harte, my truste is in the Lorde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     For I will in thy mercy ioy, I see it doeth excell:
                     Thou seest when ought would me annoy, and knowest my soule full well.
                     
                        verse 8
                     Thou hast not left me in their hande, that would me ouercharge.
                     
                        
But thou hast set me out of bande, to walke abrode at large.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The seconde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     Great grief (O Lord) doeth me assaile some pitye on me take:
                     Mine eyes waxe dimme, my might doth my wombe for wo doth ake.
                     
                        verse 10
                     My lyfe is worne with grief and paine faile my yeares in wo are past:
                     My strength is gone & through disdaine my bones corrupt and wast.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     Amonge my foes I am a scorne, my frendes are all dismaide:
                     My neighbours and my kinsmen borne to see me are afrayde.
                     
                        verse 12
                     As men once dead are out of minde, so am I now forgot:
                     As small effect in me they finde, as in a broken pot.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     I heard the bragges of all the route, theyr threates my minde did fraye:
                     How they conspirde and went about, to take my lyfe awaye.
                     
                        verse 14
                     But (Lorde) I trust in thee for ayde, not to be ouer trod:
                     For I confesse and still haue saide, thou art my Lorde and God.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     The length of all my lyfe and age, O Lorde, is in thy hand:
                     Defend me from the wrathes and rage, of them that me withstand.
                     
                        verse 16
                     
                        
16 To me thy seruaunt (Lord) expresse, and shew thy ioifull face:
                     And saue me Lorde for thy goodnes, thy mercy and thy grace.
                  
               
               
                  The thirde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     Lorde let me not be put to blame, for that on thee I call:
                     But let the wicked beare their shame, and in the graue to fall.
                     
                        verse 18
                     Oh how great good hast thou in store, layde vp full safe for them:
                     That feare and trust in thee therfore, before the sonnes of men.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     Thy presence shall thē fence and guide, from al proud bragges and wrongs
                     Within thy place thou shalt them hyde from all the stryfe of tonges.
                     
                        verse 20
                     Thankes to the lord that hath declard on me his grace so farre:
                     Me to defend with watche and ward, as in a towne of warre.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 21
                     Thus did I say both day and night, when I was sore opprest:
                     Loe, I was cleane cast out of sight, yet heardst thou my request,
                     
                        verse 22
                     Ye sainctes, loue ye the Lord, I say, the faithfull he doth guide:
                     And to the proude he will repay, according to their pride.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 23
                     Be strong and God shall stay your hart be bolde and haue a lust:
                     
                        
For sure the Lorde wyll take your part, sith ye on him doo trust.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Beati quorum remissi sunt. Psal. xxxii. T. S.
               
                  ¶ Dauid punished with greuous sicknes for his sinnes, counteth them happy to whom God doeth not impute theyr transgressions. And after that he had confessed his sinnes and obteyned pardon, he exhorteth the wicked men to lyue godly, and the good to reioyse.
               
               
                  THe man is blest, whose wickednes. the Lorde hath cleane remitted: Sing this as the. xxx. psal
                  
                  And he whose sin and wretchednes, is hid and also couered.
                  
                     verse 2
                  And blest is he to whom the Lorde, imputeth not hys sinne:
                  Whyche in hys hart hath hid no guile, nor fraude is founde therin.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  For whilst that I kept close my sinne, in silence and constraynt:
                  My bones did weare and wast away, with dayly mone and playnt.
                  
                     verse 4
                  For night and day thy hand on me so greuous was and smert:
                  That all my bloud and humours moist, to drines did conuert.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  I did therfore confes my fault, and all my sinnes discouer:
                  Then thou (O Lord) diddest me forgeue, and all my sinnes passe ouer.
                  
                     verse 6
                  The humble man shall pray therfore, and seke thee in due time:
                  So that the floudes of waters great, shall haue no power on hym.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 7
                  When trouble and aduersitie, doo compasse me about:
                  Thou art my refuge and my ioye, and thou doest rid me out.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Come hither and I shall thee teache, howe thou shalt walke a right:
                  And will thee guide as I my self, haue learnd by profe and sight.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  Be not so rude and ignoraunt, as is the horse and mule:
                  Whose mouth without a raine or bit, from harme thou canst not rule:
                  
                     verse 10
                  The wicked man shall manifolde, sorowes and grief sustayne:
                  But vnto him that trusteth in God, his goodnes shall remayne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  Be mery therfore in the Lorde, ye iust lyft vp your voyce:
                  And ye of pure and perfect hart, be glad and eke reioyce.
               
            
            
               ¶ Exultate iusti in domino. Psalm. xxxiii. I. H.
               
                  ¶ He exhorteth good men to prayse God, for that he hath not only created all thynges and by his prouidence gouerneth the same: but also is faythful in his promises. He vnderstandeth mans hart, and soattereth the counsell of the wicked. So that no man can be preserued by any creature or mans strength: but they that put their confidence in hys mercy, shalbe preserued from all aduersitie.
               
               
                  
                     YE rightuous in the Lorde reioyse, it is a semely sight: ¶ Sing this as the. xxx. psalme.
                     
                     That vpright men with thankfull voyce, should prayse the God of might.
                     
                        verse 2
                     Prayse ye the Lorde with harp and songe, in Psalmes and pleasant thinges:
                     
                        
With lute and instrument among, that soundeth with ten stringes.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     Sing to the Lord a song most new, with courage geue him prayes:
                     
                        verse 4
                     For why? his word is euer true, his workes and all his wayes,
                     
                        verse 5
                     To iudgement equitie and right, he hath a great good will:
                     And with his gifts he doth delight, the earth through out to fill.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 6
                     For by the worde of God alone, the heauens all were wrought:
                     Theyr hostes and powers euery chone his breath to passe hathe brought.
                     
                        verse 7
                     The waters great gathered hath he, on heapes within the shore:
                     And hid them in the depth to be, as in an house of store.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8
                     All men on earth both least and most, feare God and kepe hys lawe:
                     Be that inhabite in eche cost, dreade hym and stande in awe.
                     
                        verse 9
                     what he cōmaunded wrought it was, at once with present spede:
                     what he doth will, is brought to passe. with full effect in dede.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10
                     The counsels of the nacions rude, the Lorde doth drine to nought: No counsell cā preuaile against God, but shall haue ill succes.
                     
                     He doth defeate the multitude, of their deuise and thought.
                     
                        verse 11
                     
                        
11 But his decres continue still, they neuer slake or swage:
                     The motions of his mind and will, take place in euery age.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The secōd parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 12
                     And blest are they to whom the Lorde as God and guide is knowen:
                     Whom he doth chose of mere accorde: to take them as his owne.
                     
                        verse 13
                     The Lorde from heauen cast his sight, on men mortall by birth:
                     
                        verse 14
                     Considering from his seate of might, the dwellers of the earth.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     Te lord I say, whose hād hath wrought mans hart, and doth it frame:
                     For he alone doth know the thought, and working of the same.
                     
                        verse 16
                     A king that trusteth in his host, God only deliuereth and preserueth his people shall nought preuayle at length.
                     The man that of his might doth boast, shall fall for all his strength.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     The troupes of horsemen eke shall faile their sturdie stedes shall sterue:
                     The strength of horse shall not preuaile the rider to preserue.
                     
                        verse 18
                     But lo, the eyes of God intend, and watche to ayde the iust:
                     With such as feare him to offende, and on his goodnes trust.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     That he of death and all distres, may set theyr soule from dread:
                     
                        
And if that death the land oppresse, in houger them to fead.
                     
                        verse 20
                     Wherfore our soule doeth still depende, on God our strength and stay:
                     He is the shield vs to defende, and driue all dartes away.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 21
                     Oure soule in God, hath ioy and game. reioysing in his might:
                     For why? in his most holy name, we hope and muche delight:
                     
                        verse 22
                     Therfore let thy goodnes (O Lorde) still present with vs be:
                     As we alwayes with one accorde, doo onely trust in thee.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Benedicam domino. Psal. xxxiiii. T. Stern.
               
                  After Dauid had escaped Achis, according as is writtē in the 1. Sa. xxi whome in this title he calleth Abimelech (whiche was a general name to al the kings of the Philistenes) he prayseth God for his deliueraunce prouoking all others, by his example to trust in God, to feare and serue him, who defendeth the godly with his angels, and vtterly destroieth the wicked in theyr sinnes.
               
               
                  
                     I Will geue laud and honor both, Unto the Lorde alwayes: Sing this as the. xxx. psal
                     
                     And eke my mouth for euermore, shall speake vnto his prayes.
                     
                        verse 2
                     I doo delite to laude the Lorde, in soule and eke in voyce:
                     That humble men and mortified, may heare and so reioyce.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     Therfore see that ye magnifye, with me the liuyng Lorde:
                     
                        
And let vs now exalt hys name, together with one accorde.
                     
                        verse 4
                     For I my selfe besought the Lorde, he answered me agayne:
                     And me deliuered incontinent, from all my feare and paine.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     who so they be that him beholde, shall see his light most cleare:
                     Their countenaunce shall not be dashed they nede it not to feare.
                     
                        verse 6
                     This sely wretch for some relyef, vnto the Lorde did call:
                     who did him heare without delay, and rid him out of thrall. Gen, 19. 31. 32. 4. Reg. 6. Heb. 1
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     The angell of the Lorde doth pitche, his tentes in euery place:
                     To saue all suche as feare the Lorde, that nothing them deface,
                     
                        verse 8
                     Tast and consider well therfore, that God is good and iust.
                     O happy man that maketh hym, his onely stay and trust.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     Feare ye the Lorde his holy ones, aboue all earthly thing:
                     For they that feare the liuing Lorde, are sure to lack nothyng.
                     
                        verse 10
                     The Lions shall be hongerbit, and pinde with famine muche:
                     But as for them that feare the Lorde, no lacke shalbe to suche.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶ The seconde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     Come neare therfore my children deare and to my wordes geue eare:
                     I shall you teache the perfite way, how you the Lorde should feare.
                     
                        verse 12
                     who is that man that would liue long, 1. Pete. 5. b. and leade a blessed lyfe?
                     
                        verse 13
                     Se thou refrayne thy tong and lippes, from all disceipt and stryfe.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 14
                     Turne backe thy face from doing ill, Heb. iiii. c. Eccle. xv. d. and doo the godly dede:
                     Inquire for peace and quyetnes, and folow it with spede.
                     
                        verse 15
                     For why the eyes of God aboue, vpon the iust are bent:
                     His eares likewise do heare the plaint of the pore innocent.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16
                     But he doth frowne & bend his browes vpon the wicked trayne:
                     And cutt away the memory, that should of them remayne.
                     
                        verse 17
                     But when the iust doo call and cry, the Lorde doo heare them so:
                     That out of paine and misery, for the with he letth them go.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18
                     The Lord is kind and straight at hand to suche as be contrite:
                     He sauthe also the sorowfull, the meke and poore in spirite.
                     
                        verse 19
                     Full many be the miseries, that righteous men doo suffer:
                     
                        
But out of all aduersities, the Lorde doth them deliuer,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20
                     The Lorde doeth so preserue and kepe. his very bones alway:
                     That not so muche as one of them, doth pearish or decay,
                     
                        verse 21
                     The sinne shall slea the wicked man, whiche he him self hathe wrought:
                     And suche as hate the righteous man. shall soone be brought to nought.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 22
                     But they that serue the liuyng Lorde, the Lorde doth saue them sounde:
                     And who that put their trust in hym. nothing shall them consounde.
                  
               
            
            
               Iudica domine, Psalm. xxxv. I. Hop.
               
                  ¶ So long as Saull was enemie to Dauid, all that had ani auctoritie vnver him, to flater their king did also most Cruellie persecute David: against whome he prayeth God to plead & to aueng his cause, that thei maie be taken in their netts & snares, wich they laid for him, & his inocencie maie be declared. And that the inocent which taketh part with him maie reioice & praise the name of the lord that thus deliuereth his seruaunt. And so he promyseth to speake furth the iustice of the lord & to mangnisie his name all the dayes of his lyfe.
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      
                     LOrde pleade my cause against my 
                        〈♫〉
                      foes, confounde their force and myght: Fyght



                     
                        〈♫〉
                      on my part, against all those, that seke with 
                        〈♫〉
                      me to fight. Lay hand vpon thy speare & shild, 
                        〈♫〉
                      thy selfe in armour dres: stād vp for me & fight 
                        〈♫〉
                      the feld, to help me from distres.
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     Gird on thy sworde, and stoppe the waye, my enemies to withstande:
                     That thow vnto, my soule doo saye, lo I thy helpe at hande.
                     
                        verse 4
                     Confounde them with rebuke and blame, that seke my soule to spill:
                     Let them turne backe and flie with shame, that thinke to worke me ill.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     Let them disperse, and flie abrode, as winde doth driue the duste:
                     And that the aungell of our God, their might away may thrust.
                     
                        verse 6
                     Let all theyr wayes, be voide of light, and slipprie lyke to fall:
                     
                        
And send thine aungell with thy might to persecute them all.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     For why without my faulte they haue, in secret set their grinne:
                     And for no cause haue digd a caue: to take my soule therin.
                     
                        verse 8
                     when they think least and haue no care O Lorde destroy them all.
                     Let them be trapt in their owne snare, and in theyr mischief fall.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     And let my soule my harte and voyce, in God haue ioye and welthe:
                     That in the Lorde I may reioyce, and in his sauing health.
                     
                        verse 10
                     And then my bones shall speake & saye my partes shall all agree:
                     O lorde though they doo seme full gaie, what man is lyke to thee.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The seconde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     Thou doest defend the weake from thē that are bothe stout and stronge:
                     And ridde the poore from wicked men that spoyle and doo them wronge.
                     
                        verse 12
                     My cruell foes against me ryse, to witnes thinges vntrue:
                     And to acuse me they deuise, of that I neuer knew.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     where I to them did owe good will, they quite me with disdayne:
                     That they should pay my good with ill my soule doth sore complayne.
                     
                        verse 14
                     
                        
14  When they wer sicke I mornd therfore and clad my selfe in sack.
                     With fasting I did faint full sore, to pray I was not slacke.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     As they had ben my brethern dere, I did my selfe behaue:
                     As one that maketh wofull chere, about his mothers graue,
                     But they at my dissease did ioye, and gather on a route:
                     Yea abiect slaues at me did toye, with mockes and checks full stoute.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     The belly gods and flattering trayne, that all good thinges deride:
                     At me doe grin with great disdayne, and plucke their mouth a syde.
                     
                        verse 18
                     Lord when wilt thou amend this geare why doest thou stay and pause:
                     Oh rid my soule myne only deare, out of these Lyons clawes.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     And then will I geue thankes to thee, before thy churche alwayse:
                     And where as most of people be, there will I shew thy prayse.
                     
                        verse 20
                     Let not my foes preuayle on me, whiche hate me for no faulte:
                     Nor yet to winke or tourne theyr eye, that causeles me assaulte.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The third parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 21
                     Of peace no worde they think or say, theyr taulke is all vntrue:
                     
                        
They still consult and would betraye, all those that peace ensue.
                     
                        verse 22
                     With open mouth they run at me, they gape, thei laugh, thei flere:
                     Well wel, say they our eye doth see, the thyng that we desire.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 23
                     But Lorde thou seest what waies they take sease not this geare to mende:
                     Be not far of nor me forsake, as men that fayle their frend.
                     
                        verse 24
                     Awake, aryse, and stirre abrode, defend me in my right:
                     Reuenge my cause my Lorde my God, and ayde me with thy might.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 25
                     Accordyng to thy righteousnes, my Lorde God set me free:
                     And let not them their pride expresse, nor triumphe ouer me.
                     
                        verse 26
                     Let not their hartes reioyce and cry, there, there, this geare doth trime:
                     Nor geue them cause to say on hye, we haue our will of hym.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 27
                     Confound them with rebuke & shame, that ioy, when I do mourne:
                     And pay them home with spite & blame that brag at me with scorne.
                     
                        verse 28
                     Let them be glad and eke reioyce, which loue mine vpright waye
                     And they all times with harte & voyce, shall prayse the Lorde and saye.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 29
                     Greate is the Lorde and doth excell, for why he doth delyght:
                     To see his seruaunts prosper well, that is his pleasaunt sight.
                     
                        verse 30
                     Wherfore my tonge I will applye, thy righteousnes to prayse:
                     Unto the Lorde, my God will I, sing laudes with thankes alwayse,
                  
               
            
            
               Dixit iuiustus. Psalme. xxxvi. I. H.
               
                  ¶ Dauid greuously vexed by the wicked, doth complayne of their maiyce & wickednes. Thē he turneth to consider the vnspeakeable goodnes of God towardes all creatures: But specially towards hys children, that by faithe therof he maie be comforted and assured of his deliueraunce by this ordenary course of Gods worke, who in the ende destroyeth the wicked and saueth the ruite.
               
               
                  THe wicked with his workes vniust, doth thus perswade my hart: Sing this as the. xxxv. psalme.
                  
                  That of the Lorde he hathe no trust, his feare is set aparte.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Yet doth he ioye in his estate, to walke as he began:
                  So long till he deserue the hate, of God and eke of man:
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  His wordes ar wicked, vile and naught, his tong no truth doth tell:
                  Yet at no hand will he be taught, which way he may doo well.
                  
                     verse 4
                  When he should slepe then doth he muse, his mischife to fulfill:
                  No wicked wayes doth he refuse, nor nothing that is ill.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  But Lorde thy goodnes doth ascend, aboue the heauens high:
                  
                     
So doth thy truth it selfe extend, vnto the cloudie skie.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Much more then hilles, so high & steepe thy iustice is exprest:
                  Thy iudgments like to sease most deepe thou sauest both man and beaste.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Thy mercy is, aboue all thinges, O God it doth excell:
                  In trust wherof as in thy winges, the sonnes of men shall dwell.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Within thy house they shalbe fedde, with plenty at theyr will:
                  Of all delight they shalbe sped, and take therof their fill.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  For why the well of life so pure, doth ouer flow from thee:
                  And in thy light, we are full sure, the lasting light alwayse to see.
                  
                     verse 10
                  From such as thee desire and knowe, let not thy grace departe:
                  Thy righteousnes declare and shew, to men of vpright hart.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  Let not the proude on me preuayle, O Lorde of thy good grace?
                  Nor let the wicked me assayle, to throwe me out of place.
                  
                     verse 12
                  But they in their deuice shall fall, that wicked workes maintaine:
                  They shalbe ouerthrowne with all, and neuer rise agayne.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Noli emulari. Psalme. xxxvii. w. w.
               
                  ¶ Because the godly shoulde not wonder to see wicked men prosper in this world: the prophet sheweth that all thinge shal be graunted according to theyr harts desire, to them that loue and feare God: & they that do the contrary, although they seme to florish for a tune, shall at lengthe peryshe. Sing this as the. xxxv. psalme.
                  
               
               
                  
                     GRudge not to see the wicked men, in wealth to florish styll:
                     Nor yet enuie suche as to ill, haue bent and set their will.
                     
                        verse 2
                     For as grene gras & florishing herbes, are cut and wither awaye:
                     So shall theyr great prosperitie, sone passe, fade, and decay.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     Trust thou therfore in God alone, to do well geue thy minde:
                     So shalt thou haue the land as thyne, and there sure foode shalt find.
                     
                        verse 4
                     In God set all thy harts delyte, and loke what thou wouldst haue:
                     Or els canst wish in all the worlde, thou nedest it not to craue.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     Cast both thy selfe and thyne affayres, on God with perfect trust:
                     And thou shalt see with patience, theffect both sure and iust.
                     
                        verse 6
                     The perfect life and godly name, he will cleare as the light:
                     So that the sunne, euen at none daies, shall not shine halfe so bryght.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     Be still therfore, and stedfastly, on God see thou wayte then:
                     
                        
Nor shrinking for the prosperous state, of leude and wicked men.
                     
                        verse 8
                     Shake of despite, enuy and hate, at least in any wise:
                     Their wicked steppes, auoyd and flie, and folow not their guise.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     For euery wicked man, will God, destroy both more and lesse:
                     But suche as trust in him are sure, the lande for to posses.
                     
                        verse 10
                     Watch but a whyle, and thou shalt see, no more the wicked trayne:
                     No not so muche, as house or place, where once he did remayne.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The seconde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     But mercifull and humble men, enioy shall sea and land:
                     In rest and peace they shall reioyse, for nought shall them withstand.
                     
                        verse 12
                     The leud men and malicious, against the iust conspire:
                     They gnash their teeth at him, as men, whiche doo his bane desire.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     But while that leud men thus do think the Lorde laugh them to scorne:
                     For why he seeth their terme approche, When they shall sygh and morne.
                     
                        verse 14
                     The wicked haue their sword out drawē their bowe eke haue they bent:
                     To ouerthrow and kill the poore, as they the right way went.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 15
                     But the same sword shal pearse their harts which was to kil the iust:
                     Likewise the bow shal breake to shiuers wherin they put theyr trust.
                     
                        verse 16
                     Doubtles the iust mans poore estate, is better agreat deale more:
                     Then all these leud and worldly mens, rich pompe and heaped store.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     For be their power neuer so stronge, God will it ouerthrowe:
                     Where contrary he doth preserue, the humble men and lowe.
                     
                        verse 18
                     He seeth by his great prouidence, the good mens trade and way:
                     And will geue them inheritaunce, which neuer shall decay.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     They shall not be discouraged, when some are hard bested:
                     When other shalbe hungre bit, they shall be clad and fed.
                     
                        verse 20
                     For whosoeuer wicked is, and enemie to the Lorde:
                     Shal quaile, yea melt euē as lābs grease or smoke that flieth abrode,
                  
               
               
                  The thirde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 21
                     Beholde the wicked boroweth muche, and neuer paith againe:
                     wheras the iust by liberall giftes, makth many glad and faine.
                     
                        verse 22
                     For they whō God doth bles. shall haue the lande for heritage:
                     
                        
And they whom he doth curse likewise, shall pearysh in his rage.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 23
                     The Lord the iust mās waies doth guid and geuth him good successe:
                     To euery thing he taketh in hande, he sendeth good addresse.
                     
                        verse 24
                     Though that he fall, yet is he sure, not vtterly to quayle:
                     Because the Lord stretche out his hand, at nede, and doth not fayle.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 25
                     I haue ben yong and now am olde, yet did I neuer see:
                     The iust man left, or els his sede, to begge for miserye.
                     
                        verse 26
                     But geueth alwayes most liberally, and lendthe wheras is nede:
                     His children and posteritie, receiue of God their mede.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 27
                     Flee vice therfore and wickednes, and vertue doo embrace:
                     So God shall graunt thee long to haue in earth a dwellyng place:
                     
                        verse 28
                     For God so loueth equitie, and she wth to his such grace:
                     That he preserueth them euermore, but destroyth the wicked race.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 29
                     Where as the good and godly men, inherite shall the land:
                     Hauing as Lordes all thing therin, in their owne power and hand.
                     
                        verse 30
                     
                        
30 The iust mans mouth doth euer speake, of maters wise and hye:
                     His tong doth talke to edifie, with truth and equitie.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 31
                     For in his hart the law of God, his Lorde doth still abide:
                     So that where he goeth or walketh, his foote can neuer slide.
                     
                        verse 32
                     The wicked like a rauening wolfe, the iust man doth beset:
                     By all meanes seking him to kill, if he fall in his net.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The forthe parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 33
                     Though he should fall into his hands, yet God would succor send:
                     Though men against him sentence geue, God would him yet defend.
                     
                        verse 34
                     Wayt thou on God, and kepe his way, he shall preserue thee then:
                     The earth to rule and thou shalt see, destroyde these wicked men.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 35
                     The wicked haue I sene most strong, and placed in high degree:
                     Florishing in all wealth and store, as doth the Laurell tree.
                     
                        verse 36
                     But sodenly he passed away, and lo he was quite gone:
                     Then I him sought, but could scarse finde the place where dwelt such one.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 37
                     Marke and behold the perfite man, how God doth him increase:
                     
                        
for the iust man shall haue at length, great ioy with rest and peace.
                     
                        verse 38
                     As for transgressours, wo to them, destroyde they shall all be:
                     God will cut of theyr budding race, and ryche posteritie.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     But the saluation of the iust, doth come from God aboue:
                     Who in their trouble sendth them aide of mercy grace and loue.
                     
                        verse 40
                     God doth them helpe, saue and deliuer, from leud men and vniust:
                     And still will saue them whilst that they in him do put theyr trust,
                  
               
            
            
               ¶Domine ne in furore. Psalm. 38. I. H.
               
                  ¶ Dauid lying sicke of some greuous disease, acknowlegeth him selfe to be chastysed of the Lorde for his sinnes, and therfore prayeth God to tourne away his wrath, he vttereth the greatnes of his grief by many wordes and circumstances, as wounded with the arrowes of gods Ire, forsaken of his frends, euell entreated of his enemies, but in the ende with firme confidence he cōmendeth his cause to God, & hopeth for spedie helpe at hys hande,
               
               
                  
                     PUt me not to rebuke, O Lorde, in thy prouoked ire: Sing this as the xxxv. psa
                     
                     Ne in thy heauy wrath, O Lorde, Correct me I desire.
                     Thine arowes doo sticke fast in me, thy hand doth presse me sore:
                     And in my flesh no health at all, appeareth any more.
                  
                  
                     
                     And all thys is by reason of, thy wrath that I am in:
                     Nor any rest is in my bones. by reason of my synne.
                     For, loe my wicked doinges, Lorde, aboue my hed are gone,
                     As greater lode then I can beare, they lye me sore vpon.
                  
                  
                     My woundes stinck and are festred so as lothesome is to see.
                     Which all through mine owne folishnes betideth vnto me.
                     And I in carefull wise am brought, in trouble and distres:
                     That I go wayling all the day my dulfull heauines.
                  
                  
                     My loynes are fild with sore disease, my flesh hath no whole parte:
                     I feble am and broken sore, I rore for grefe of hart.
                     Thou knowst, Lord, my desire: my grones are open in thy syght:
                     My hart doth pant, my strēgth hath faild mine eyes haue lost theyr lyght.
                  
                  
                     My louers and my wonted frendes. stand lokyng in my woe:
                     And eke my kinesmen far away, are me departed froe.
                     They that did seke my life, layd snares, and they that sought the way:
                     
                        
To doo me hurt, spake lyes and thought, on treason all the day.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The secōd parte.
                  
                     But as a deefe man I became, that cannot heare at all:
                     And as one dumme that opens not, his mouth to speake withall,
                     For all my confidence, O Lorde, is wholly set in thee:
                     O Lord, thou Lorde that art my God, thou shalt geue eare to me.
                  
                  
                     This I did craue, that they, my foes, triumphe not ouer me:
                     For when my foote did slip then they, did ioy my fall to see.
                     And truly I poore wretch am set, in plage a wofull wight:
                     And eke my grefefull heauines. is euer in my sight.
                  
                  
                     For whyle that In my wickednes, in humble wise confesse,
                     And while I for my sinfull dedes, my sorow doo expresse,
                     My fooes doo still remayne alyue, and mighty are also:
                     And they that hate me wrongfully, in number hugely growe.
                  
                  
                     They stande agaynste me, that my God, with euell doo repay,
                     Because that good and honest thynges, I doo ensue alway.
                     
                        
Forsake me not, O Lolde, my God, be thou not far away:
                     Hast me to help, my Lord my God, my safety and my stay.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Dixi custodiam xxxix. Iohn Hop.
               
                  ¶ Dauid vttereth with what great gref and bitternes of mind he was driuen to these outragious complaynts of his infirmities, for he canfesseth that when he had determined sylence, that he brast forth yet in to words that he woulde not, through the greatnes of his greef. Thē be reherseth certayne requests which tast of infirmitie of man, & mixeth with them many prayers but all to shew a mind wōderfully troubled, that it may plainly appeare how he did stryue myghtiye agaynste deathe and desperatyon.
               
               
                  
                     I Sayde I will loke to my wayes, For feare I should go wronge: ¶ Sing this as the. xxxv. psalme.
                     
                     I will take heede all tymes that I, Offend not in my tounge.
                     
                        verse 2
                     As with a bit I will kepe fast, my mouth with force and might:
                     Not once to whisper all the whyle, the wicked are in sighte.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     I held my tonge and spake no word, but kept me close and still,
                     Yea from good tallke I did refrayne, but sore against my will.
                     
                        verse 4
                     My hart waxt whote within my brest, with musing thought and doubte:
                     Whiche did encrease, and stire the fire, at last these words brast oute.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     Lorde, number oute my lyfe and dayes whiche yet I haue not past:
                     So that I may be certifyed, how long my lyfe shall laste,
                     
                        verse 6
                     
                        
6 Lorde, thou hast poynted oute my lyfe, in length muche like a spanne:
                     Mine age is nothing vnto thee, so vayne is euery man.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     Man walketh lyke a shade, and doth in vayne him self annoye,
                     In getting goods, and cannot tell, who shall the same enioye.
                     
                        verse 8
                     Now lord sith things this wise do frame what helpe doo I desire:
                     Of truth my helpe doth hange on thee, I nothing elles require.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The secōd parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     From all the sinnes that I haue done, Lorde quyteme out of hand:
                     And make me not a scorne to fooles, that nothing vnderstand.
                     
                        verse 10
                     I was as dumme, and to complayne, no trouble might me moue:
                     Because I know it was thy worke, my patience for to proue.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     Lord take from me thy scourg & plage I can them not withstande:
                     I faynt and pine away for feare, of thy most heuy hand.
                     
                        verse 12
                     when thou for sinne dost man rebuke, he waxeth wo and wanne:
                     As doth a clothe that mothes haue fret so vayne a thyng is man.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     Lord heare my sute and geue good hede regarde my teares that fall
                     Soiourne like a straunger here



as did my fathers all.
                     
                        verse 14
                     Oh spare a litle geue me space, my strength for to restore:
                     Before I go away from hence, and shall be seene no more.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Expectans expectaui. Psalm. lx. I. H
               
                  ¶ Dauid deliuered from great daunger, doth magnifye and prayse the grace of God for his deliueraunce, and commendith his prouidence towardes all mankynd. Then doth he promyse to geue hym self wholy to Gods seruice, and so declareth how God is truly worshipped. Afterward he geueth thanckes and prayseth God, and hauing complained of his enemies wt good courage. he calleth for aide & cuccour.
               
               
                  
                     I wayted longe and sought the Lorde, and patiently did beare:
                     At length to me he did accorde, ¶ Sing this as the. xxxv. psalme. my voyce and cry to heare.
                     
                        verse 2
                     He pluckt me from the lake so deepe, out of the mire and clay:
                     And on a rocke he set my feete, and he did gide my waye.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     To me he taught a psalme of prayse, whiche I must shew abrode:
                     And sing new songes of thankes alwayse, vnto the Lorde our God.
                     
                        verse 4
                     When all the folke these thinges shall see, as people muche afrayde.
                     Then they vnto the Lorde will flee, and trust vpon his ayde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     O blest is he whose hope and hart, doth in the Lorde remayne:
                     That with the proude doth take no part, nor suche as lye and faine.
                     
                        verse 6
                     For Lorde my God thy wondrous dedes, in greatnes far doo passe:
                     
                        
Thy fauour towards vs excedes, all things that euer was.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     When I entend and doo deuise, thy workes abrode to shew:
                     To suche a reckning they doo ryse, therof no ende I know.
                     
                        verse 8
                     Burnt offringes thou delightste not in, I know thy whole desire:
                     With sacrifice to purge their sinne, thou doest no man require.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     Meate offering and sacrifice, thou woldst not haue at all:
                     But thou O Lorde hast open made, mine eares to heare withall.
                     
                        verse 10
                     But then said I behold and loke, I come a meane to be:
                     For in the volume of the booke, thus it is sayd of me.
                  
               
               
                  The second parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     That I, O God, should doo thy minde, whiche thyng doth like me well:
                     For in my hart thy lawe I fynde, fast placed there to dwell.
                     
                        verse 12
                     Thy Iustice and thy righteousnes, in great resorts I tell:
                     Beholde, my toung no time doth cease, O Lord thou knowest full well.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     I haue not hid within my brest, thy goodnes as by stelth,
                     But I declare and haue exprest, thy truth and sauing health.
                     
                        verse 14
                     I kept not close thy louyng minde, that no man shoulde it knowe:
                     
                        
The trust that in thy truth I finde, to all the churche I shewe.
                     
                        verse 14
                     For I with mischefes many one, am sore beset aboute:
                     My sinnes encrease and so com on, I can not spy them out.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     For why in number they excede, the heares vpon my head:
                     My hart doth faynt for very drede, that I almost am deade.
                     
                        verse 16
                     With speed send help and set me free, O Lorde I thee require:
                     Make hast with ayde to succour me, O Lorde at my desire.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     Let them sustayne rebuke and shame, that seeke my soule to spille:
                     Driue back my foes and them defame, that wish and would me ill.
                     
                        verse 18
                     For their ill feates doo them discrie, that wolde deface my name:
                     Alwayse at me they rayle and cry, fie on him, fie for shame.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     Let them in thee haue ioye and welth that seeke to thee alwayse:
                     That those that loue thy sauing health may say, to God be prayse.
                     
                        verse 20
                     But as for me I am but poore, opprest and brought full lowe:
                     Yet thou O Lorde wilt me restore, to health full well I know.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 21
                     For why thou art my hope and trust my refuge helpe and stay,
                     wherfore my God as thou art iust, with me no time delaye.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Beatus qui in telligit. Psalm. xli. T. S
               
                  ¶ Dauid being greuously afflicted, blessed them that pitie his case, and complayneth of the treason of his owne frendes & familiars, as came to passe in Iudas. Ioh. xv. After he felyng the great mercyes of god gently chastisyng him, and not suffring his ennemies to triumphe against him, geueth most hartye thankes vnto God.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  THe mā is blest ye careful is the nedie 
                     〈♫〉
                   to cōsider. For in the season perilous, the lorde 
                     〈♫〉
                   will him delyuer: The lord wil make him safe 
                     〈♫〉
                   and sound & happy in the land: And he will not 
                     〈♫〉
                   deliuer him, into his enemies hand.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3
                  And in his bed when he lieth sicke, the Lord will him restore?
                  And thou (O lord) will tourn to health his sicknes and his sore.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Then in my sicknes thus say I, haue mercy Lord on me:
                  And heale my soule whiche is full wo, that I offended thee.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Mine enemies wished me ill in hart, and thus of me did say:
                  When shall he die, that all his name, may vanish quite away?
                  
                     verse 6
                  And when they come to visite me, they aske if I doo well:
                  But in theyr harts mischief they hatche, and to their mates it tell:
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  They bite theyr lippes and whisper so, as though they woulde me charme:
                  And cast theyr fetches how to trappe me with some mortall harme.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Some greuous sin, hath brought him to, this sicknes, say they playne:
                  He is so low that without doubt, rise can he not agayne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  The man also that I did trust, Actes. l, c Heb. he lifte by his hele against me, or vsed deceitand therfore Iacob had hys name by taking by the heele and deceyuing. Gene, 15, 
                           •
                        , 17
                           •
                        
                      with me did vse disceite:
                  who at my table eat my bread, the same for me layd wayte.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Haue merry Lorde on me therfore, and let me be preserude:
                  That I may render vnto them, the things they haue deserude
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 11
                  By this I know assuredly, to be beloued of thee:
                  When that mine enemies haue no cause to triumph ouer me.
                  
                     verse 12
                  But in my right thou hast me kept, and maintained alway:
                  And in thy presence place assignde, where I shall dwell for aye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  The Lorde the God of Israell, be praysed euermore:
                  Euen so be it (Lord) will I say, euen so be it therfore.
               
            
            
               ¶ Quemadmodum desiderat. Psal. xlii. I. H
               
                  ¶ The Prophet greuously complaynech that being letted by his persecutours he could not be present in the congregation of Gods people, protesting, that although he was seperate in body from them: yet his harte was thither affectioned. And last of all he sheweth that he was not so far ouercomen with these sorowes and thoughtes, but that be continually put his confidence in the Lord.
               
               
                  LIke as the hart doth breath and bray, the well springs to obteyne: Sing this as the. xxxv. psa
                  
                  So doth my soule desire alway, with thee Lorde to remayne.
                  
                     verse 2
                  My soule doth thirst & would draw nere the liuing God of might:
                  O when shall I come and appeare, in presence of his sight?
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  The teares all times are my repast, which from mine eyes do slide:
                  When wicked men cry out so fast, where nowe is God thy guide,
                  
                     verse 4
                  Alas what grief is it to thinke, what fredome once I had?
                  
                     
Therfore my soule as at pits brinke, is moste heauy and sad.
               
               
                  When I did marche in good aray, furnished with my trayne:
                  Unto the temple was our way, with songes and harts most fayne.
                  
                     verse 5
                  My soule why art thou sad alwayes, and freatst thus in my brest?
                  Trust still in God, for him to prayse, I holde it euer best.
               
               
                  By him haue I succour at nede, against all payne and grief:
                  He is my God which with all spede, will hast to sende relyef.
                  
                     verse 6
                  And this my soule within me (Lorde) doth faint to thinke vpon:
                  The lande of Iordan, and record, the little hill Hermon.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  One grief an other in doth call, as cloudes burst out theyr voyce.
                  The floudes of euill that doo fall, runne ouer me with noyce. God tryeth his children by dyuers and often afflictions.
                  
                  
                     verse 8
                  Yet I by day felt his goodnes, and helpe at all assayes:
                  Lykewise by night I did not cease, the liuyng God to prayse.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  I am perswaded thus to say, to him with pure pretence:
                  O Lorde thou art my guide and stay, my rocke and my defence.
                  
                     
Why doo I then in pensiuenes, hanging the head thus walke:
                  While that mine enemies me oppres, and vexe me with their talke.
               
               
                  
                     verse 10
                  For why? they pearse myne inward parts with panges to be abhord:
                  When they cry out with stubburne harts, where is thy God, thy Lorde?
                  
                     verse 11
                  So sone why doest thou faint and quayle my soule with paines opprest?
                  with thoughts why dost thy self assayle, so sore within my brest?
               
               
                  
                     verse 12
                  Trust in the Lorde thy God alwayes, and thou the time shalt see:
                  To geue him thanks with laud and praise for health restorde to thee.
               
            
            
               ¶ Iudica me deus. Psalme. xliii.. T. S
               
                  ¶ He prayeth to be deliuered from them whiche conspire with Absolō, to thend that he might ioyfully prayse God in his holy congregatiō.
               
               
                  IUdge and reuenge my cause, O Lorde, From them that euell be: ¶ Sing this as the. xxxv. psalme.
                  
                  From wicked and deceitfull men, O Lorde delyuer me.
                  
                     verse 2
                  For of my strength thou art the God, why puttest thou me thee fro?
                  And why walke I so heauily, oppressed with my fo?
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Send out thy lyght, and eke thy trueth and leade me with thy grace:
                  which may conduct me to thy hyll, and to thy dwellyng place.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Then shal I to the aultar go,



of God my ioy and cheare:
                  And on my harpe geue thankes to thee O God, my God most deare.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Why art thou then so sad my soule, and fretst thus in my brest?
                  Still trust in God, for hym to prayse, I holde it alwayes best.
                  By him I haue deliueraunce, against all paines and grief:
                  He is my God, which doth alwayes, at nede sende me relief.
               
            
            
               ¶ Deus auribus nostris. Psal. xliiii. T. S.
               
                  ¶ A moste earnest prayer made in the name of the faithfull, when they are afflicted by theyr enemies, for sustayning the quarell of gods word accordyng to the exposition of S. Paule, Roma. viii.
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      
                     OUr eares haue hard our fathers tel, & 
                        〈♫〉
                      reuerently recorde: the wondrous works ye thou 
                        〈♫〉
                      hast done in alder time (O Lorde.) How thou 
                        〈♫〉
                      didst cast the Gentils out, & stroyost them with



                     
                        〈♫〉
                      strong hand, planting our fathers in theyr 
                        〈♫〉
                      place, & gauest to them their land.
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     They conquered not by sword nor strength, the land of thy behest:
                     But by thy hande, thy arme and grace, because thou louedst them best.
                     
                        verse 4
                     Thou art my king (O God) that holpe, Iacob in sundry wyse:
                     
                        verse 5
                     Led with thy power, we threwe downe suche, as did against vs rise.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 6
                     I trusted not in bow ne sword, they could not saue me sounde:
                     
                        verse 7
                     Thou kept vs from our enemies rage, thou didst oure foes confound.
                     
                        verse 8
                     And still we beast of thee our God, and prayse thy holy name:
                     
                        verse 9
                     Yet now thou goest not with our host, Selah. but leauest vs to shame.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10
                     Thou madest vs flee before our foes, and so were ouer trode:
                     Our enemies robde & spoilde our goods when we were sparst abrode.
                     
                        verse 11
                     Thou hast vs geuen to our foes,



as shepe for to be slayne:
                     Amongst the Heathen euery where, scartered we doo remayne.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12
                     Thy people thou hast sold like slaues, and as a thyng of nought?
                     For proffit none thou hadst therby, no gayne at all was sought.
                     
                        verse 13
                     And to our neyghbours thou hast made, of vs a laughing stocke:
                     And those that round about vs dwell, at vs doo grinne and mocke.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The secōd parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 14
                     Thus we serue for none other vse, but for a common talke:
                     They mock, they scorn, and nod their heds where euer they go or walke.
                     
                        verse 15
                     I am a shamd continually, to heare these wicked men:
                     Yea so I blush, that all my face, with red is couered then.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16
                     For why? we heare such sclaundrous words suche false report and lyes:
                     That death it is to see their wronges, their threatnings and their cryes.
                     
                        verse 17
                     For all this we forgot not thee, nor yet thy couenant brake:
                     
                        verse 18
                     We turn not back our harts from thee, nor yet thy pathes forsake.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     Yet thou hast trod vs downe to dust, where dennes of dragons be:
                     And couered vs with shade of death:



and great aduersitie.
                     
                        verse 20
                     If we had our Gods name forgot, and helpe of idols sought:
                     
                        verse 21
                     Would not god then haue tried this out for he doth know our thought.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 22
                     Nay, nay, for thy names sake, O Lorde alwayes are we slaine thus:
                     Aa shepe vnto the shambles sent, right so they deale with vs.
                     
                        verse 23
                     Up Lorde why slepest thou awake, and leaue vs not for all:
                     
                        verse 24
                     Why hidest thou thy countenaunce, and dost forget our thrall?
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 25
                     For downe to dust, our soule is brought and we now at last cast:
                     Our belly lyke as it were glude, vnto the ground cleaueth fast.
                     
                        verse 26
                     Rise vp therfore for our defence, and helpe vs Lorde at nede:
                     We thee bese the for thy goodnes, to rescue vs with spede.
                  
               
            
            
               Eructauit. Psalme. xlv. I. H.
               
                  ¶ The maiestie of Salomon, hys honour strengthe beauty, riches, and power are praysed, and also hys maryage with the Egiptian being an Heathen woman to blessed, if that she can renounce her people and thē loue other contrey and geue her selfe wholy to her husbande, Under the whyche 
                        •
                     ygu
                        •
                     e the wonderfull maiestie▪ and the increase of the kingdome of Christe and the Churche hys spouse now taken of the genuies is described.
               
               
                  
                     
                     MY hart doth now, take in hande, Sing this as the. xxv. psa Some godly songe to singe?
                     Thy prayse I shall shew therin, perteyneth to the kynge.
                     
                        verse 2
                     My tounge shalbe as quicke, his honor to endite:
                     As is the pen of any scribe, that vseth faste to wryte.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     O fayrest of all men, thy speache is pleasaunt pure:
                     For God hathe blessed thee with giftes, for euer to endure.
                     
                        verse 4
                     Aboute thee girde thy sworde O prince of might elect:
                     With honour glory and renoume, thy person pure is dect.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     Go forth with godly speede, in mekenes, truth and ryght:
                     And thy ryght hand, shall thee instruct, in workes of dredfull might.
                     
                        verse 6
                     Thyne arrowes sharpe and kene, theyr harts so sore shall stinge,
                     That folke shall fall and knele to thee, yea all thy foes, O kynge.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     Thy royall seate, O Lorde, for euer shall remayne:
                     Because the scepter of thy realme, doth righteousnes maintaine.
                     
                        verse 8
                     Because thou louest the ryghte, and dost the ill detest:
                     
                        
God euen thy God hath pointed thee, with ioy aboue the rest:
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     With mirth and sauours swete, thy clothes ar all be spreade:
                     when thou dost from thy palace pas, wherin to make thee glad.
                     
                        verse 10
                     Kinges doughters doo attend, in fine and riche araye:
                     At thy right hand, the queene doth stand, in goulde and garments gaye.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The second parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     O doughter take good heede, enclyne and geue good eare:
                     Thou must forget thy kindred all, and fathers house most dere.
                     
                        verse 12
                     Then shall the king desire, Thy beuty fayer and trim:
                     For why he is the Lorde thy God, and thou must worship hym.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     The doughters then of Tire, with giftes full riche to see:
                     And all the welthy of the lande, shall make theyr sute to thee.
                     
                        verse 14
                     The daughter of the king, is glorious to beholde:
                     within his closet she doth sitte, all dect in beaten goulde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     In robes well wrought with needle, with many a pleasaunt thyng:
                     With virgins faier on her to waighte, she cometh to the king.
                     
                        verse 16
                     
                        
16 Thus are they brought with Ioy, and mirth on euery side:
                     Into the palace of the king, and there doo they abide.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     In stede of parents lefte, O quene the chaunge so standes.
                     Thou shalt haue sōnes whō thou maist set as princes in all landes.
                     
                        verse 18
                     Wherfore thy holy name, all ages shall recorde.
                     The people shall geue thankes to thee, for euer more, O Lorde.
                  
               
            
            
               Deus noster refugium. Psalm. xlvi. I. H.
               
                  ¶ A songe of thankes geuyng for the delyueraunce of Ierusalem after Senacherib with hys army was driuen awaye, or some otherlyke so dayne and maruelous delyueraunce by the myghtye hande of God. Whereby the Prophet commendyng thys greate benefyte dothe exhorte the faythfull to geue them selues wholy into the hande of God, doubtyng nothyng but that vnder hys protection they shalbe safe agaynste all the assaultes of theyr enemyes.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  THe Lorde is oure defence and ayde, 
                     〈♫〉
                   the strength wherby we stand, when we with



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   wo are muche dismaide, he is our helpe at hand 
                     〈♫〉
                   Though thearth remoue we will not feare, though 
                     〈♫〉
                   hilles so high & stepe, be thrust and hurled heare 
                     〈♫〉
                   and there, within the sea so depe.
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  No though the waues, doo rage so sore, that all the bankes it spilles:
                  And though it ouer flow the shore, and beate downe mightye hilles.
                  
                     verse 4
                  For one fayer floud, doth send abrode, his pleasaunt streames a pace:
                  To fresh the citie of our God. and wash his holy place,
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  In middest of her the Lord doth dwel, she can no whit decaye:
                  All thinges against her that rebel, the Lord will truly staye.
                  
                     verse 6
                  The heathen flocke, the kingdoms feare the people make a noyse:
                  
                     
The earth doth melte and not appeare, when God puttes forth his voyce.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  The Lord of hostes, doth take our part to vs he hath an eye:
                  Our hope of health, with all our hart, on Iacobes God doeth lye.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Come here & see, with mind & thought, the working of our God:
                  what wonders he him self hath wrought through out the earth abrod.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  By him all warres are husht and gone, which countres did conspire:
                  Their bowes he brake & speares echone, theyr Charets brent with fier.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Leaue of therfore (saith he) and know, I am a God most stoute:
                  Among the heathen high and low, and all the earth throughoute,
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  The Lorde of hostes doeth vs defend, he is our strength and tower:
                  On Iacobs God doo we depend. and on his mighty power
               
            
            
               Omnes gentes. Psalme. xlvii. I. H.
               
                  ¶ The prophet exorteth all people to the worship of the true and euerliuing God, commending the mercyes of God towarde the posteritie of Jacob: and after prophecieth of the kingdome of Christ in this tune of the Gospell.
               
               
                  YE people all in one accorde, clappe handes and eke reioyce: Sing this as the. xlvi. Psa
                  
                  Be glad and sing vnto the Lorde, with swete and pleasaunt voyce.
                  
                     verse 2
                  
                     
2 For hie the Lorde and dredfull is, with wonders manifolde:
                  A mighty kynge he is truly, in all the earthe extolde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  The people shall he make to be, vnto our bondage thrall:
                  And vnderneth our fete he shall the nations make to fall.
                  
                     verse 4
                  For vs the heritage he chose, whiche we possesse alone:
                  The flouring worship of Iacob, hys welbeloued one.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Our God ascended vp on hye, with ioy and pleasaunt noyce,
                  The Lorde goeth vp aboue the skye, with trompets royall voyce.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Sing prayse to God, sing prayse, sing prayses to our kynge:
                  For God is king of all the earth, all skilfull, prayses syng.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  God on the heathen reignes and sittes, vpon his holy throne.
                  The princes of the people haue, them ioyned euery one.
                  
                     verse 8
                  To Abrams people, for our God, whiche is exalted hye:
                  Us with a buckler doth defende, the earth continually.
               
            
            
               Magnus dominus, Psal. xlviii. I. H
               
                  
                     
¶ A notable deliueraunce of Hierusalem frō the handes of many kings is mentioned, for the which thankes are giuen to God, and the estate of that citie is praysed, that hathe God so presently at all tymes redye to defende them, this Psalme semeth to be made in the tyme of Ahaz, Iosaphat, Asa or Ezechia, for in their times chiefly, was the citie by forayne Prynces assaulted.
               
               
                  GReat is the Lorde and with greate prayse, Sing this as the. xlvi. psalme. to be aduaunced styll:
                  Within the citie of our Lorde, vpon hys holy hyll.
                  Mount Sion is a plesant place, it gladdeth all the lande:
                  The cytie of the myghty kynge, on her northside doth stande.
               
               
                  Within the pallaces therof, God is a refuge knowen:
                  For loe the kings were gathered and together eke were gone.
                  But when they did beholde it so, they wondred and they weare:
                  Astonyed muche and sodenly, were driuen backe with feare.
               
               
                  Great terrour there on them did falle, for euery wo they crye:
                  As doth a woman when she shall, go trauayle by and by,
                  As thou with esterne winde the shippes vpon the sea doest breake,
                  So they were stayd and euen as, we harde oure fathers speake,
               
               
                  So in the citie of the Lorde, we saw as it was tolde,
                  
                     
yea in the citie which oure Lorde, for euer will vpholde:
                  O Lorde we wayte and doo attende, on thy good helpe and grace.
                  For whiche we doo all times attende, within thy holly place.
               
               
                  O Lorde according to thy name for euer is thy prayse:
                  And thy ryght hand, O Lord, is full, of rightuousnes alwayes.
                  Let for thy iudgements Sion mounte, full filled be with ioyes:
                  And eke of Iuda graunt O Lorde, the daunger to reioyse.
               
               
                  Goe walke about all Syon hyll, yea rounde about her go:
                  And tell the towres that theruppon, are bilded in a rowe.
                  And marke ye well her bulwarks all, beholde her towres there:
                  That ye may tell therof to them, that after shalbe here.
               
               
                  For this God is our God, our God, for euermore is he:
                  yea and vnto the death also, our guider shall he be.
               
            
            
               ¶ Audite haec omnes. Psal. xlix. T. S.
               
                  ¶ The holy Ghost calleth all mē to the consideration of mans lyft, shewing them not to be most happye that are most wealthy, and therefore not to be feared: but contrariwyse he lifteth vp our mindes to consider how al thinges are ruled by gods prouidence, who as he iudgeth these worldly miseryes to euerlastyng torments: so doeth he preserue his, & will rewarde them in the day of the resurrection, i. Thes. i.
               
               
                  
                     
                     ALl people herken and geue eare, Sing this as the. xlv. psalme. To that that I shall tell:
                     Both high and low, both riche and poore that in the worlde doo dwell.
                     
                        verse 3
                     For why? my mouth shall make discourse, of many thynges right wise:
                     In vnderstanding shall my hart, his study exercise.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 4
                     I will inclyne myne eare to knowe, the parables so darke.
                     And open all my doubtfull speache, in metre on my harpe.
                     
                        verse 5
                     why should I feare afflictions, or any carefull toyle?
                     Or els my foes whiche at my heles, are prest my life to spoyle?
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 6
                     For as for suche as ryches haue, wherin their trust is most:
                     And they which of their treasures greate, them selues doo bragge and boast:
                     
                        verse 7
                     There is not one of them that can, his brothers death redeme:
                     Or that can geue a price to God, sufficient for hym.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8
                     It is to great a pryce to pay, none can therto attayne:
                     
                        verse 9
                     Or that he might his lyfe prolong, or not in graue remayne.
                     
                        verse 10
                     They see wise men as well as foles, subiect vnto deathes handes:
                     
                        
And beyng dead, straungers possesse, theyr goods, theyr rentes, their lāds
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     Theyr care is to builde houses fayre, and so determine sure:
                     To make their name right great in earth for euer to endure.
                     
                        verse 12
                     Yet shall no man alwayes enioy, high honor, wealth and rest:
                     But shall at length tast of deathes cup, as well as the brute beast.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The seconde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     And though they try these folish thoughts to be most leud and vayne:
                     Theyr children yet approue theyr talke, and in like sinne remayne.
                     
                        verse 14
                     As shepe into the folde are brought, so shall they into graue:
                     Death shall them eate, and in that day the iust shall Lordship haue.
                  
                  
                     Their image, and theyr royall port, shall fade and quite decay:
                     When as from house to pit they passe, with wo, and weale away.
                     
                        verse 15
                     But God will surely preserue me, from death and endles payne:
                     Because he will of his good grace, my soule receyue agayne.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16
                     If any man waxe wonderous riche, feare not, I say, therfore,
                     Although the glory of his house, increaseth more and more,
                     
                        verse 17
                     
                        
17 For when he dieth, of all these thinges, nothing shall he receyue:
                     His glory will not folow hym, his pompe will take her leaue.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18
                     Yet in this lyfe he takth him selfe, the happiest vnder sunne:
                     And others likewise flatter him, saying, all is well done.
                     
                        verse 19
                     And presuppose he liue as long, as did his fathers olde:
                     Yet must he nedes at length geue place: and be brought to deathes fold.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20
                     Thus man to honor God hath calde, yet doth he not consider:
                     But like brute beastes so dothe he lyue, whiche turne to dust and pouder.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Deus deorum. Psalme L. I. H.
               
                  ¶ He prophecieth how God will call all nations by the Gospell, and require no other sacrifices of his people, but confession of his benefites, and thankes geuyng, and how he detesteth all such as seme zelous of Ceremonies, and not of the pure worde of God onely.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  THe god of Gods, the lord hath calde 
                     〈♫〉
                   the earth by name, from where the sonne doth
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   rise vnto the setting of the same. Frō Syon hys 
                     〈♫〉
                   faire place, hys glory bryght and cleare, The 
                     〈♫〉
                   perfect beutye of his grace, from thence it did 
                     〈♫〉
                   appeare.
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Our God shall come in haste, to speake he shall not doubte:
                  Before him shall the fire waste, and tempest rounde aboute.
                  
                     verse 4
                  The heauens from on hye, the earth below lykewise:
                  He will call forth to iudge and try, his folke he doeth deuise.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Bring forth my sainctes (sayth he) my faithfull flocke so dere:
                  Which are in band and league with me my lawe to loue and feare.
               
               
                  
                     verse 6
                  And when these thinges are tried, the heauens shall recorde:
                  
                     
That God is iust, and all must byde, the iudgment of the Lorde:
                  
                     verse 7
                  My people O geue heede, Israell to thee I crye:
                  I am thy God, thy healpe at neede, thou canst it not denye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 8
                  I doo not say to thee, thy sacrifice is slacke:
                  Thou offrest dayly vnto me, muche more then I doo lacke.
                  
                     verse 9
                  Thinkest thou that I doo nede, thy cattell yonge or olde:
                  Or ells so muche desire to feede, on goates out of thy foulde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 10
                  Naye, all the beastes are mine, in woodes that eate their filles:
                  And thousands more, of nete and kine, that runne wilde in the hilles.
                  
                     verse 11
                  The birdes that builde on hie, In hilles and oute of sight:
                  And the beastes that in the filds do lye are subiect to my might.
               
               
                  
                     verse 12
                  Then though I houngred sore, what neede I ought of thyne.
                  Sith that the earth, with her great store and all therin is myne.
                  
                     verse 13
                  To bullockes fleash haue I suche mind to eate it, doest thou thinke?
                  Or such a sweetnes doo I finde, the bloude of goates to drinke.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 14
                  Geue to the Lorde his prayse, with thankes doo him apply:
                  And see thou pay thy vowes alwaies, vnto the God most hie.
               
               
                  
                     verse 15
                  Then seke and call to me, when ought would work thee blame.
                  And I will sure deliuer thee, that thou maiest prayse my name.
                  
                     verse 16
                  But to the wicked traine, whiche talke of God eche daye:
                  And yet theyr works are foule and vain to them the Lorde will saye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 17
                  With what a face darest thou, my worde once speake or name:
                  why doth thy taulke my lawe alowe, thy dedes denie the same.
                  
                     verse 18
                  Where as for to amend, thy lyfe thou art so slacke:
                  My word the which thou doest pretend is cast behind thy backe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 19
                  When thou a thefe doest see, by theft to lyue in welthe:
                  with him thou runnest, and dost agree, lykewyse to thryne by stealthe.
                  
                     verse 20
                  When thou doest them beholde, that wiues and maides, defile:
                  Thou likest it well, and waxest boulde, to vse that lyfe most vile.
               
               
                  
                     verse 21
                  Thy lippes thou doest applye, to slaunder and defame▪
                  
                  
                     
Thy tonge is taught to crafte and lye, and still doth vse the same.
               
               
                  
                     verse 22
                  Thon studiest to reuile, thy frendes, to thee so nere:
                  With sclaunder thou woldst nedes defile thy mothers sonne moste deare.
                  
                     verse 23
                  Hereat while I doo winke, as though I did not see:
                  Thou goest on still, and so dost thinke. that I am lyke to thee.
               
               
                  
                     verse 24
                  But sure I will not let, to stryke when I beginne:
                  Thy faultes in order I will set. and open all thy sinne.
                  
                     verse 25
                  Matke this I you require, that haue not God in minde:
                  Least when I plage you in myneire, your helpe be far to fynde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 26
                  He that doth geue to me, the sacrifice of prayse:
                  Doth please me well, and he shall see, to walke in Godly wayse.
               
            
            
               ¶ 1. Miserere mei deus Psalm. li. w. w
               
                  ¶ When Dauid was rebuked by the Prophet Nathan for his greate offences, he did not onely acknowledge the same to God, with protestation of his naturall corruption, and iniquitie: but also left a memoriall therof to his posteritie. Therfore firste he desireth God to forgeue his sinnes, and renew in him, his holye spirite: with promise that he will not be vnmindfull, of those great graces. Finally fearyng lest god would punish the whole churche for, hys faute: He requireth that he woulde rather increase his graces towardes the same.
               
               
                  
                     
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      
                     O Lord consider my distres. And now 
                        〈♫〉
                      with spede some pitie take? My sinnes deface, 
                        〈♫〉
                      my fautes redresse, good Lorde, for thy great 
                        〈♫〉
                      mercies sake. Wash me (O Lord) and make 
                        〈♫〉
                      me cleane. Frō this vniust & sinfull act: & purifie 
                        〈♫〉
                      yet once againe: my hainous crime & blody fact
                  
                     
                        verse 2
                     Remorse and sorow doo constrayne, Me to acknowledge myne exces:
                     
                        verse 3
                     My sinne alas doth still remayne, Before my face without reles.
                     
                        verse 4
                     
                        
4 For thee alone I haue offended, committing euyl in thy sight:
                     And if I were therfore condemned, yet were thy iudgement iust & right.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     It is to manifest alas, that firste I was conceiued in sinne:
                     Yea of my mother so borne was, and yet vile wretche remaine therin.
                     
                        verse 6
                     Also beholde Lord thou doest loue, the inward truthe of a pure hart:
                     Therfore thy wisdome from aboue, thou hast reueld me to conuert.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     If thou with Hissope purge this blot, I shalbe cleaner then the glasse:
                     And if thou wash away my spot, the snow in whitenes shall I passe.
                     
                        verse 8
                     Therfore (O Lorde) suche ioy me send, that inwardly I may synd grace:
                     And that my strength may now amend, which thou hast swagd for my trespace
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     Turne back thy face and frowning ire for I haue felt inoughe thy hande:
                     And purge my sinnes I thee desire, which doo in number passe the sand.
                     
                        verse 10
                     Make new my hart within my brest, and frame it to thy holy will:
                     Thy constant spirite in me let rest, which may these raging enemies kil.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The secōd parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     Cast me not (Lorde) out from thy face, but spedely my tormentes ende:
                     
                        
Take not from me thy spirite and grace which may from daungers me defend
                     
                        verse 12
                     Restore me to those ioyes agayne, which I was wont in thee to fynde:
                     And let me thy free spirite retayne, which vnto thee may stirre, my mind
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     Thus when I shall thy mercyes know I shall instruct others therin:
                     And men that are likewise brought low by mine ensample shall flee sinne,
                     
                        verse 14
                     O God that of my health art Lorde, forgeue me thys my bloudy vice:
                     My harte and toung shall then accorde, to sing thy mercies and iustice.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     Touch thou my lippes, my tonge vntye, (O Lord) which art the only kay:
                     And then my mouth shall testifye, thy wondrous works & praise alway.
                     
                        verse 16
                     And as for outward sacrifice, I would haue offred many one:
                     But thou estemest them of no pryce, and therin pleasure takst thou none.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     The heauy hart, the mind opprest, O Lorde, thou neuer dost reiect:
                     And to speake truth it is the best, and of all sacrifice the effect.
                     
                        verse 18
                     Lorde vnto Sion turne thy face, poure out thy mercyes on thy hyll:
                     And on Jerusalem thy grace, buyld vp the walles, and loue it still,
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 19
                     Thou shalt accept then oure offrynges, of peace and righteousnes, I say:
                     Yea calues and many other thynges, vpon thyne altare will we lay.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Another of the same by T. N.
               
                  HAue mercy on me, God, after Sing this as the Lamentation, thy great abounding grace:
                  After thy mercies multitude doo thou my sinnes deface.
                  Yet wash me more from mine offence and clense me from my sin:
                  For I be know my fautes, and still my sinne is in mine eyen.
               
               
                  Against thee, thee alone, I haue offended in thys case:
                  And euell haue I done before the presence of thy face.
                  That in the thynges that thou dost say, vpryght thou mayst be tryed:
                  And eke in iudging, that the dome may passe vpon thy syde.
               
               
                  Beholde in wickednes my kinde and shape I did receyue?
                  And loe my sinfull mother eke in sinne did me conceiue.
                  But Loe the truthe in inward partes, is pleasant vnto thee:
                  And secretes of thy wisdome thou reueled hast to me.
               
               
                  
                  With hysope, Lorde, be sprincle me, I shalbe clensed so:
                  Yea wash thou me, and so I shall be whiter than the snow.
                  Of ioy and gladnes make thou me to heare the pleasing voyce:
                  That so the broosed bones, which thou hast broken, may reioyce.
               
               
                  From the beholding of my sinnes, Lorde turne away thy face:
                  And all my dedes of wickednes, doo vtterly deface:
                  O God creat in me a hart vnspotted in thy sight:
                  And eke within my bowels, Lorde, renew a stable sprite.
               
               
                  Ne cast me from thy sight, nor take thy holy sprite away:
                  The comfort of thy sauing help, geue me againe, I pray:
                  With thy free sprite establish me. And I will teache therfore,
                  Sinners thy wayes, and wicked shall be turnde vnto thy lore.
               
               
                  O God that art God of my health, from blood deliuer me:
                  That prayses of thy righteousnes my tonge may syng to thee.
                  My lippes that yet fast closed be, doo thou, O Lorde vnlose:
                  
                     
The prayses of thy maiestie my mouth shall so disclose:
               
               
                  I would haue offred sacrifice, if that had pleased thee.
                  But pleased with burnt offringes: I knowe thou wilt not be.
                  A trobled sprite is sacrifice delytefull in Gods eyes:
                  A broken and an humbled hart, God, thou wilt not despise?
               
               
                  In thy good will deale gently Lorde to Sion, and with all
                  Graunt that of thy Ierusalem, vpreard may be the wall.
                  Burnt offrings, giftes and sacrifice, of iustice in that day
                  Thou shalt accept, and calues they shal vpon thyne altar lay.
               
            
            
               ¶ Quid gloriaris. Psalme. lii. I. H
               
                  ¶ Dauid describeth the arrogante tyrannye of hys aduersarye Doeg, Saules chief shepherde, who by false surmyses caused Achimelech with the rest of the priestes to be slain. Dauid prophecieth his destruction, and encourageth the faithfull to put theyr confidence in God. whose iudgements are most sharpe against his aduersaryes. And fynally he rendreth thankes to God for his deliueraunce, In thys Psalme is lyuely set forthe the kingdome of Antichrist.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  WHy dost thou tyrāt boast abrode, thy



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   wicked works to prayse: dost thou not knowe 
                     〈♫〉
                   there is a God whose mercies last alwayes, 
                     〈♫〉
                   Why doth thy mind yet still deuise, suche wicked 
                     〈♫〉
                   wiles to warpe? Thy tong vntrue in forging 
                     〈♫〉
                   lies, is like a rasour sharpe.
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  On mischief why settest thou thy minde, and wilt not walke vpryght:
                  Thou hast more lust false tales to fynde, then bryng the truth to lyght.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Thou doest delyte in fraude and guile, in mischief blud and wrong:
                  Thy lyppes haue learnde the flateryng style, O false deceitfull tonge.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Therfore shall God for euer confounde, and pluck thee from thy place:
                  
                     
Thy sede rote out from of the grounde, and so shall thee deface.
                  
                     verse 6
                  The iust when they beholde thy fall, with feare will praise the Lorde:
                  And in reproche of thee withall, cry out with one accorde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Behold the man which would not take the Lorde for his defence:
                  But of his goods his God did make, and trust his corrupt sence.
                  
                     verse 8
                  But I an Oliue fresh and grene, shall spring and sprede abrode:
                  For why? my trust all times hathe bene, vpon the lyuing Ood.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  For this therfore will I geue prayse, to thee with hart and voyce:
                  I will set forth thy name always, wherin thy sainctes reioyce.
               
            
            
               Dixit in sipiens. Psalme. Liii. T. N
               
                  ¶ The Prophet describeth the croked nature, the crueltye, and punishment of the wicked, when they loke not for it and desireth the deliueraunce of the godlie that they may reioyce together.
               
               
                  THe foolish man in that whyche he, within his hart hath sayde: Sing this as the. xiv. psalme.
                  
                  That there is any God at all, hathe vtterly denyde.
                  They are corrupt and they also, a haynous worke haue wrought:
                  Amonge them all there is not one, of good that worketh ought.
               
               
                  
                  The Lorde loked downe on sons of men from Heuen all abrode:
                  To see if any were that would, be wise and seke for God.
                  They are gone all out of the way, they are corrupted all:
                  There is not one doth any good, there is not one at all.
               
               
                  Do not all wicked workers know, that they do fede vpon:
                  My people as they fede on breade, the Lorde they call not on.
                  Euen there they were afrayde and stode with trembling all dismayde
                  Where as there was no cause at all, why they should be afrayde.
               
               
                  For God his bones that thee beseged, hath scattered all abrode.
                  Thou hast confounded them, for they reiected are of God.
                  O Lorde geue thou thy people health, and thou, O Lord, fulfill:
                  thy promise made to Israell, from out of Syon hill.
               
               
                  When God his people shall restore, that erst was captiue lad,
                  Thou Iacob shall therin reioyse and Israel shalbe glad.
               
            
            
               ¶ Deus in nomine, Psalm. Liiii. I. H
               
                  
                     
¶ Dauid brought into Great daunger by reasō of Ziphius, calleth vpō the name of God to destroy e his enemies, promysing sacrifice and froe offerings for their delyueraunce.
               
               
                  GOd saue me for thy holy name, and for thy goodnes sake: Sing this as the. xlvi. Psa
                  
                  Unto the strength Lorde of the same I doo my cause betake.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Regarde (O Lorde) and geue an eare, to thee when I doo praye?
                  Bow downe thy sealfe to me and heare the wordes that I doo saye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  For straungers vp against me ryse, and tirauntes vex me still:
                  Whiche haue not God before theyr eies they seke my soule to spill.
                  
                     verse 4
                  But loe my God doeth geue me ayde, the Lorde is strayght at hand.
                  with them by whom my soule is stayed the Lorde doth euer stande:
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  With plages repay agayne all those, for me that lye in wayte:
                  And with thy truth destroy my foes, with theyr owne snare and bayte.
                  
                     verse 6
                  An offering of free hart and will, that I to thee shall make:
                  And prayse thy name for therin still, greate comfort I doo take,
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  O Lorde at length doo set me free, from them that craft conspire:
                  And now mine eye with ioye doeth see, on them my hartes desire.
               
            
            
               
               Exaudi deus. Psalme, Lv. I. H.
               
                  ¶ Dauid being in greate heauines and distres complayneth of the crueltye of Saule, and of the falshod of his familyar acquaintaunce vtteryng most ardent affections to moue the Lord to pitie hym. After being assured of deliueraūce, he setteth forth the grace of god as though he had all ready obtayned his request.
               
               
                  O God geue eare and do apply, To heare me when I praye: ¶ Sing this as the. xxxv. psalme.
                  
                  And when to thee I call and crye, hide not thy selfe awaye.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Take hede to me, graunt my request, and aunswer me agayne:
                  with playntes I pray, full sore opprest, greate grief doeth me constrayne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Because my foes with threates and cries, oppres me through despighte:
                  And so the wicked sorte lykewise, to vex me haue delighte.
                  
                     verse 4
                  For they in counsell doo conspire, to charge me with some ill:
                  So in their hasty wrath and ire, they doo pursue me styll.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  My hart doth faynte for want of breathe, it panteth in my breste:
                  The terroures and the dread of deathe, doo work me muche vnrest.
                  
                     verse 6
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      feare on me doth fall. 
                        〈…〉
                      with doo quake:
                  Suche 
                        〈◊〉
                      whelmeth me with all, that I 
                        〈…〉
                      can make.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  But I 
                        〈…〉
                      will geue me, 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  
                     
Of some, fayer doue that I may flee, and rest me from these thinges.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Lo then I woulde go farre awaye, to flye I woulde not cease,
                  And I woulde hide my selfe and staye, in some greate wildernes.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  I would be gon in all the hast, and not abide behinde:
                  That I weare quite and ouer past, these blasts of boisteous winde:
                  
                     verse 10
                  Deuide them Lord, and from them pul, their diuilish double tounge:
                  For I haue spied their citie full, of rapyne, stryfe, and wronge.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  Which things, bothe night & day throghoute doo close her as a wall:
                  In middes of her, is mischif stoute, and sorow eke with all.
                  
                     verse 12
                  Her priuie partes, are wicked playne, her dedes are muche to vyle?
                  And in her stretes there doth remayne, all crafty fraude and guile.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  If that my foes did seke my shame, I might it well abide:
                  From open enmies checke and blame, some where I coulde me hide.
                  
                     verse 14
                  But thou, it was my fellow dere, which frendship didest pretend:
                  And diddest my secrete counsell here, as my famillier frende.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 15
                  With whom I had delight to taulke, in secret and abrode:
                  And we to gether oft did walke, within the house of God.
                  
                     verse 16
                  Let death in hast vpon them fall, and send them quicke to hell,
                  For mischief rayneth in theyr hall, and parloure where they dwell.
               
               
                  
                     verse 17
                  But I vnto my God doo crye, to him for healpe I flee:
                  Ohe Lorde doth heare me by and by, and he doeth succour me.
                  
                     verse 18
                  At morning, noone, and euening tide, vnto the Lorde I praye:
                  When I so instantly haue tryed he doth not say me naye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 19
                  To peace he shall restore me yet, though warre be now at hande:
                  All though the number be full greate, that would against me stande.
                  
                     verse 20
                  The Lord, that first, & last, doth raigne bothe now and euermore,
                  will heare when I to him complayne, and punish them full sore.
               
               
                  
                     verse 21
                  For sure there is no hope that they, to tourne will once accorde:
                  For why they will not God obey, nor doo not feare the Lorde,
                  
                     verse 22
                  Upon their frends they laid theyr hands whiche weare in couenaunt knitte▪
                  
                  
                     
Of frendship to neglect the bandes, they passe or care no whyt.
               
               
                  
                     verse 23
                  while they haue war within their hart as butter are theyr wordes:
                  Although his words wer smothe as oyle they cut as sharp as swordes.
                  
                     verse 24
                  Cast thou thy care vpon the Lorde, and he shall nourish thee:
                  For in no wise wyll he accorde, the iust in thrall to see.
               
               
                  
                     verse 25
                  But God shall cast them deepe in pit, that thirst for bloud alwayes:
                  He will no guilefull man permit, to lyue oute halfe hys dayes.
                  
                     verse 29
                  Thoughe such be quite destroyde & gon in the (O Lorde) I trust:
                  I shall depende thy grace vpon, with all my hart and luste.
               
            
            
               ¶ Miserere. Psalme. Lvi. I. H
               
                  ¶ Dauid being broughte to Achis the kinge of Gath, Saum complayneth of hys enemyes, demaundeth succoure, putteth hys trust in God and hys promisses, and promiseth to performe hys vowes whyche he had taken vpon hym. Wherof thys was the effecte to prayse God in hys Churche.
               
               
                  HAue mercy Lorde on me I pray, for man woulde me deuoure: Sing this as the. li. Psa.
                  
                  He fyghteth with me day by daye, and troubleth me eche houre.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Myne enmies dayly enterprise, to swalowe me outeryghte:
                  To fyght agaynst me many ryse, O thou moste hygh of myghte,
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3
                  When they would make me most afraid with boast and bragges of pryde:
                  I trust in thee alone for ayde, by thee will I abyde.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Gods promise I doo minde and prayse O Lorde I sticke to thee:
                  I doo not care at all assayes, what flesh can doo to me.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  What thinges I eyther did or spake, they wrast them at theyr will:
                  And all the counsell that they take, is how to worke me ill.
                  
                     verse 6
                  They all consent them sealues to hyde, close watche for me to laye:
                  They spie my pathes & snares haue tred to take my lyfe awaye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Shall they thus scape on mischef set? thow God on them will frowne:
                  For in his wrath he doth not let, to throwe whole kingdomes downe.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Thou seest how oft they make meflee, and on my teares doest looke:
                  Reserue them in a glas by thee. and wryte them in thy booke:
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  When I doo call vpon thy name, my foes awaye doo starte.
                  I well perceaue it by that same, that God doeth take my parte.
                  
                     verse 10
                  I glory in the worde of God, to prayse it I accorde:
                  
                     
with Ioye will I declare abrode, the promise of the Lore.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  I trust in God and yet I saye, as I afore beganne:
                  The Lorde he is my healpe and stay, I doo not care for man.
                  
                     verse 12
                  I will performe with hart so free, to God my vowes alwayes:
                  And I O Lorde all times to thee, will offer thankes and prayse.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  My soule frō death thou dost me defēd and keepe my feete vpright:
                  That I before thee may ascend. with suche as lyue in lyght.
               
            
            
               ¶ Miserere. Psalme. lvii.. I. H
               
                  ¶ Dauid being in the deserte of Ziph where the in habitauntes did betraye hym, and at length in the same Caue with Sauil. Calleth most earnestly vnto God with full confidence, that he will perform his promis and take his cause in hand: Also that he wil shew his glory in the Heauens and the earthe agaynst hys cruell enemyes: Therfore doth he render laude and prayse.
               
               
                  TAke pitie for thy promise sake, haue mercy Lorde on me:
                  For why my soule doth her betake, Sing this as the. ill. psal. vnto the helpe of thee.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Within the shadow of thy winges, I set my selfe full fast:
                  Till mischief, malice, and lyke thyngs, be gon and ouer paste.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  I call vpon the God moste hye, to whom I sticke and stand.
                  
                     
I meane the God that will stand by, the cause I haue in hand.
                  
                     verse 4
                  From heauen he hath sent hys ayde, to saue me from theyr spighte:
                  That to deuoure me haue assayed, his mercy truth and myght.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  I leade my lyfe with Lyons fell, all set on wrath and ire:
                  And with such wicked men I dwell, that freate lyke flambes offyre.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Theyr teeth are speares & arrowes lōg as sharpe as I haue seene:
                  They wound & cut, with theyr quick toūg like swerdes and weapons kene,
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Set vp and shew thy selfe O God, aboue the heauens bryght:
                  Exalt thy prayse on earth abrode, thy maiestie and myghte.
                  
                     verse 8
                  They lay theyr net and doo prepare, a priuie caue and pitte:
                  Wherin they thinke my soule to snare, but they are fallen in it.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  My harte is set to laude the Lorde, in hym to ioye alwayes.
                  My hart I say doth well accorde, to syng hys laude and prayse.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Awake my ioy, awake I saye, my lute, my harpe and strynge:
                  For I my sealf before the daye, will rise, reioyre and syng
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 11
                  Amonge the people I will tell, the goodnes of my God:
                  And shew hys prayse that doeth excell, in Heathen landes abrode.
                  
                     verse 12
                  His mercy doeth extend as farre, as heauens all are hie:
                  His truthe is highe as any starre, that standeth in the skye,
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  Set fourth and shew thy self O God, aboue the heauens bryghte:
                  Extoll thy prase on earthe abrode, thy maiestie and might.
               
            
            
               ¶ Siuere vtique. Psalme. lviii. I. H
               
                  ¶ He describeth the malyce of hys enemyes, the flatterers of Saule, who bothe secretiye and openly sought hys dystruction, from whom he apealeth to Gods iudgement, shewing that the iust shall reioyce, when they see the punishment of the wicked to the glory of God.
               
               
                  YE rulers that are put in trust, to iudge of wronge and ryght: Sing this as the. lix. Psa.
                  
                  Be all your iudgements true and iust not knowing nede or might.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Nay, in your hartes ye marke and muse, in mischief to consent:
                  And where ye shoulde true iustice vse, your handes to brybes are bent.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  This wicked sorte from theyr birth day haue erred on this wise:
                  And from their mothers womb alwaie, haue vsed craft and lyes.
                  
                     verse 4
                  In them the poyson and the breathe, of serpents doo appeare:
                  
                     
Yea lyke the adder that is deafe, and fast doeth stoppe his eare.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Because he will not heare the voyce, of one that charmeth well:
                  No though he were the chefe of choice, and did therin excell.
                  
                     verse 6
                  O God breake thou their teeth at once, within their mouthe throughoute:
                  The tuskes that in their great chawbones lyke Liones whelpes hange oute.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Let them consume awaye and wast, as water renth fourth right:
                  The shafts that they doo shoute in haste, let them be broke in flight.
                  
                     verse 8
                  As snailes doo wast within the shell, and vnto slime doo runne:
                  As one before his time that fell, and neuer saw the sunne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  Before the thornes that now are yonge to bushes bigge shall growe:
                  The stormes of anger waxing stronge, shall take them ere they knowe.
                  
                     verse 10
                  The iust shall ioy, it doth them good, that God doeth vengance take:
                  And they shall wash their feete in bloud, of them that him forsake.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  Then shal the world shew forth and tel that good men haue rewarde.
                  And that a God in yearth doeth dwell, that iustice doeth regarde.
               
            
            
               
               Eripe me. Psalme. lix. I. H
               
                  ¶ Dauid being in great daunger of Saull, who sent to slaye him in his bed prayeth vnto God, declareth his innocency, and theyr furye, despryng god to destroye all those that synne of malityous wickednes. Whom thoughe he kepe a liue for a tyme to exercyse his people, yet in the ende he wyll consume them in his wrathe, that he maye be knowne to be the God of Iacob to the worldes ende, for thys he sing eth prayses to God, assured of his mercyes.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  SEnde ayde and saue me from my foes 
                     〈♫〉
                   O Lorde I pray to thee, defende and kepe me 
                     〈♫〉
                   from all those that ryse and stryue with me O 
                     〈♫〉
                   Lorde preserue me from those men, whose doings 
                     〈♫〉
                   are not good, and set me sure and saufe 
                     〈♫〉
                   from them that thursteth after bloud.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3
                  For loe they wayte my soule to take, they rage agaynst me styll:
                  Yea, for no faulte that I did make, I neuer did them ill.
                  
                     verse 4
                  They runne & do their selues prepare, When I no whit offende:
                  Arise and saue me from theyr snare, and see what they entend.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  O Lorde of hostes of Israell, arise vp and strike all landes:
                  And pittie none that doth rebell, and in their mischife standes.
                  
                     verse 9
                  At night they stirre and seke aboute, as houndes they houle and grenne:
                  And all the citie cleane throughoute, from place to place they renne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  They spake of me with mouth alway, but in theyr lyppes weare swordes:
                  They greed my death, and then wold saye What? none doth heare our wordes.
                  
                     verse 8
                  But Lord thou hast theyr waies espied and laught therat a pace:
                  The Heathen folke thou shalt deride, and mocke them to theyr face.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  The strength that doth my foes withstād O Lorde doth come of thee:
                  My God he is my healpe at hand, a forte of fence to me.
                  
                     verse 10
                  The Lorde to me doeth shew his grace, in greate abondaunce styll:
                  
                     
That I may see my foes in case. suche as my hart doeth wyll.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  Destroy them not at once O God, lest it from minde doo fall:
                  But with thy strength driue them abrode and so consume them all.
                  
                     verse 12
                  For theyr ill words and trutheles toung confounde them in theyr pryde:
                  Theyr wicked othes with lies & wrong let all the worlde deryde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  Consume them in thy wrath O Lordd, that naughte of them remayne:
                  That men may know throught the worlde Iacobs God doth raygne.
                  
                     verse 14
                  At euening retourne apace, as dogges they grinne and crye.
                  Throughoute the stretes, in euery place they renne aboute and spye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 15
                  They seke aboute for meate I saye, but let them not be fed:
                  Nor fynde an house wherin they may, be bolde to put theyr head.
                  
                     verse 16
                  But I will shew thy strength abrode, thy goodnes I will prayse:
                  For thou arte my defence and God, at nede in all assayes.
               
               
                  
                     verse 17
                  Thou art my strēgth, thou hast me staid O Lorde I synge to thee:
                  Thou arte my forte, my fence and ayde, a louing God to me.
               
            
            
               
               Deus repulsit. Psalme lx. I. H.
               
                  ¶ Dauid being now king ouer Iudah and hauing had many victories, sheweth by euydent signes, that God elected hym kyng, assuring the people that God will prosper them, yf they approue the same: After he prayeth vnto God to fynish that that he hathe begone,
               
               
                  O Lorde thou diddest vs cleane forsake, and scatteredst vs abrode: Sing this as the. lix psalme.
                  
                  Suche greate displeasure thou diddest take retourne to vs O God.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Thy might did moue the lande so sore, that it in sonder brake:
                  The hurte therof (O Lorde, restore, for it doothe bowe and quake.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  with heauy chaunce, thou plagest thus, the people that are thyne:
                  And thou hast geuen vnto vs, a drinke of deadly wyne.
                  
                     verse 4
                  But yet to suche as feare thy name, a token shall ensue:
                  That they may tryumphe in the same, because thy worde is true.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  So that thy might may keepe and saue, thy folke that fouour thee:
                  That they thy helpe, at hand may haue, O Lorde graunte thys to me.
                  
                     verse 6
                  The Lorde did speake from his owne place, thys was his ioyful tale:
                  I will deuide Sichem by pace, and mete oute Succothes vale.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Galaad is geuen to my hande: Manasses mine beside▪
                  
                  
                     
Ephraim the strength of all my lande, my law dothe Iuda guide:
                  
                     verse 8
                  In Moab I will wash my feete, ouer Edom throw my shoo:
                  And thou Palestine oughtst to seke, for fauoure me vnto.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  But who will brynge me at thys tyde, vnto the citie stronge:
                  Or who to Edom will me gide, so that I goo not wronge.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Wilt thou my God which didst forsake thy folke, theyr land and costes:
                  Our warres in hād, thou woldst not take. nor walke amonge our hostes.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  Geue ayde O Lorde, and vs releue, from them that vs disdayne:
                  The healp that hostes of men can geue it is but all in vayne.
                  
                     verse 12
                  But through our God, we shall haue to take great things in hand:
                  He will treade downe and put to flight might all those that vs withstand.
               
            
            
               ¶ Exaudi deus. Psalme. lxi. I. H
               
                  ¶ whether that he were in daunger of the Amonites, or beyng purfusued of Absalon, Here he crieth to be heard and delyuered. And confirmed in his kingdom, He promiseth perpetuall prayses.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  REgarde (O Lorde) for I complayne,



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   and make my sute to thee, let not my wordes returne 
                     〈♫〉
                   in vayne, but geue an eare to me, from of 
                     〈♫〉
                   the costes and vtmost partes of all the earth abrode, 
                     〈♫〉
                   in griefe and anguish of my harte I cry 
                     〈♫〉
                   to thee, O God.
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Upon the rocke of thy greate power, my woefull mynde repose:
                  Thou arte my hope my forte and tower, my fence against my foes.
                  
                     verse 4
                  within thy tent I lust to dwell, foreuer to endure:
                  vnder thy winges I know right well, I shalbe safe and sure:
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  The Lorde dueth my desire regarde,



and doth fulfill the same:
                  with goodly giftes will he rewarde, all them that feare his name.
                  
                     verse 6
                  The king shall he inhealth maintayne, and so prolong his dayes:
                  That he from age to age shall raygne, for euer more alwayse.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  That he may haue a dwelling place, before the Lorde for aye:
                  O let thy mercy truth and grace, defend him from decaye.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Then shall I singe for euer still, with prayse vnto thy name:
                  That all my voues I may fulfill, and dayly pay the same.
               
            
            
               ¶ Nonne deo subiecta. Psalm. lxii. I. H.
               
                  ¶ Dauid declareth by hys example, and by the nature of God, that he must truste in God alone: and thereunto exhorteth people, seyng that all is vanytie and withoute God all goeth to nought and we are allwayes taught that God only is of power to saue, and that he rewardeth man, according to hys workes.
               
               
                  MY soule to God, shall geue good hede ¶Sing this as the. lxi. psalme. and him alone entende:
                  For why? my health & hope to spede, doth whole on him depende.
                  
                     verse 2
                  For he alone is my defence, my rocke, my health, my ayde:
                  He is my stay that no pretence, shall make me much dismaide.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  O wicked folke how long will ye, vse crafts? sure ye must fall:
                  For as a rotten hedge ye be, and like a tuttering wall.
                  
                     verse 4
                  
                     
4 whom God doth loue ye seke alwayes, to put hym to the worse:
                  Ye loue to lye, with mouth ye prayse. and yet your hart doth curse.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Yet still my soule doth whole depend, on God my chief desire:
                  From all false feates, me to defend, none but him I require.
                  
                     verse 6
                  He is my rocke, my strength, my towre, my health is of his grace:
                  He doth support me that no powre, can moue me out of place.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  God is my glory and my health, my soules desire and lust,
                  My fort, my strength, my stay, my wealth. God is mine onely trust.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Oh haue your hope in him alway, ye folke with one accorde:
                  Poure out your harts to hym, and saye, our trust is in the Lorde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  The sonnes of men deceitptfull are, on balaunce but a sleyght:
                  with thinges most vayne doo them cōpare for they can kepe no weyght.
                  
                     verse 13
                  Trust not in wrong, robbry, or stealth, let vayne delytes be gon:
                  Though goods wel got flow in with welth set not your hartes theron.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  The Lorde long sith one thing doth tell, whiche here to minde I call:
                  
                     
He spake it oft, I hard it well, that God alone doeth all.
                  
                     verse 12
                  And that thou (Lorde) art good and kynd, thy mercy doth excede:
                  So that all sortes whiche thee shall finde, according to theyr dede.
               
            
            
               ¶Deus deus meus. Psalme. lxiii. T. S
               
                  ¶ Dauid after he had bene in greate daunger by Saule, in the deserte Ziph, made this psalme: wherein he geueth thankes to God for hys wonderfull deliuerance, in whose mercyes he trusted, euen in the middist of hys miseryes: prophecying the destruction of Gods enemies, & contrarywyse, happynes to all them that trust in the Lorde, i. Sa. iu.
               
               
                  O God, my God, I watche betyme, to come to thee in hast: Sing this as the. xliiii. ps
                  
                  For why? my soule and body bothe, doth thirst of thee to tast:
                  And in this baren wildernes, where waters there are none:
                  My flesh is partched for thought of thee, for thee I wish alone.
               
               
                  
                     verse 2
                  That I might see yet once agayne, thy glory strength and myght:
                  As I was wont it to beholde, within thy temple bryght.
                  
                     verse 3
                  For why? thy mercyes farre surmount, thys lyfe and wretched dayes:
                  My lyppes therfore shall geue to thee, due honor, laude and prayes.
               
               
                  
                     verse 4
                  And whylst I lyue, I wyll not fayle, to worship thee alwaye:
                  And in thy name I shall lyft vp,



my hands when I doo praye.
                  
                     verse 5
                  My soule is filled as with marow, whiche is bothe fat and swete:
                  My mouth therfore shall sing such songs as are for thee most mete.
               
               
                  
                     verse 6
                  When as in bed, I think on thee, and eke all the night tide:
                  For vnder couert of thy winges, thou art my ioyfull guyde,
                  
                     verse 7
                  My soule doeth surely stick to thee, thy ryghthande is my power:
                  
                     verse 9
                  And those that seke my soule to stroy, them death shall sone deuoure.
               
               
                  
                     verse 10
                  The sword shall them deuoure echone theyr carcases shall fede:
                  The hungry foxes, which doo ronne, theyr pray to seke at nede.
                  
                     verse 11
                  The king, and all men shall reioyse, that doo profes Gods worde:
                  For liers mouthes shall then be stopt, which haue the trueth disturbde.
               
            
            
               ¶ Exaudi deus vocem meam. Psal. lxiiii. I. H.
               
                  ¶ Dauid praieth against the false reportes and sklaunderers, he declareth theyr punishment and destruction, to the comfort of the iust, and the glory of God.
               
               
                  O Lord vnto my voyce geue eare, with plaint when I doo pray: Sing this as the. xviii. Ps
                  
                  And rid my lyfe and soule from feare, of foes that threat to slay,
                  
                     verse 2
                  Defend me from that sort of men, whiche in deceipts do lurke:
                  And from the frownyng face of them, that all ill feates doo worke.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3
                  Who whet theyr tongs as we haue sene, men whet and sharp theyr swordes:
                  They shote abrode theyr arrowes kene, I meane most bitter wordes.
                  
                     verse 4
                  With priuie sleyght shote they theyr shaft the vpright man to hit:
                  The iust vnware to strike by craft, they care or feare no whit
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  A wicked worke haue they decreed, in counsell thus they crye:
                  To vse deceit let vs not dread, what? who can it espie?
                  
                     verse 6
                  What wayes to hurt they talke and muse, all times within theyr hart:
                  They all consulte what feates to vse, eche doth inuent his part.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  But yet all this shall not auayle, when they thinke least vpon:
                  God with hys dart shall sure assayle, and wound them euery one.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Theyr crafts and their ill toungs withall, shall worke them selues suche blame:
                  That they whiche then beholde theyr fall, shall wonder at the same.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  Then all that see shall know ryght well, that God the thing hath wrought:
                  Shall prayse his wittie workes and tell, what he to pas hath brought.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Yet shall the iust in God reioyse, Stil trusting in his might:
                  
                     
So shall they ioy with minde and voyce, whose hart is pure and ryght.
               
            
            
               ¶Te decet hymnus. Psalm. lxv. I H.
               
                  ¶A prapse and thankesgeuing vnto God by the faithfull, who are signyfied by Sion, and Ierusalem, for the chosing, preseruation and gouernaunce of them, and for the plentyfull blessings powred forth vpon all the earthe.
               
               
                  THy prayse alone, O Lorde, doth reigne, in Sion thine owne hill:
                  Theyr vowes to thee they doo maintaine Sing this as the. xxx psalme. and their behestes fullfill.
                  
                     verse 2
                  For that thou doest theyr prayer heare and dost therfo agree:
                  Thy people al bothe far and neare, with trust shall come to thee.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Our wicked lyfe so farre excedes, that we should fall therin:
                  But Lorde forgeue our great misdeedes, and purge vs from out synne.
                  
                     verse 4
                  The man is blest whom thou doest chuse, within thy courte to dwell:
                  Thy house and temple be shall vse, with pleasures that excell.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Of thy great iustice heare vs God, our health of thee doth ryse:
                  The hope of all the earth abrode, and the sea coasts likewise.
                  
                     verse 6
                  With strength thou art beset about, and compasd with thy power:
                  Thou makst the mountayns strong & stout, to stand in euery shower.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 7
                  The swelling seas thou dost asswage, and make their streames full styll:
                  Thou dost restrayne the peoples rage, and rule them at thy will.
                  
                     verse 8
                  The folke that dwell full farre on earth, shall dread thy signes to see:
                  Whiche morne and euen in great mirth, doo passe with prayse to thee.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  When that the earth is chopt and drye, and thirsteth more and more:
                  Then with thy dropes thou dost applye, and muche encrease her store.
                  
                     verse 10
                  The floud of God doth ouerflow, and so doth cause to sprynge:
                  The seede and corne which men doo sow, for he doth guide the thing.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  With wete thou dost her forowes fill, wherby her cloddes doo fall:
                  Thy drops to her, thou dost distill, and bles her frute withall.
                  
                     verse 12
                  Thou deckst the earth of thy good grace, with fayre and pleasaunt crop:
                  Thy cloudes distill theyr deaw a pace, great plenty they doo drop.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  wherby the desert shall begin, full great encrease to bryng:
                  The litle hilles shall ioy therin, muche frute in them shall spryng.
                  
                     verse 14
                  In places playne the flocke shall fede. and couer all the earth:
                  
                     
The valies with corne shall so excede, that men shall sing for mirth.
               
            
            
               ¶ Iubilate deo omnis terra. Psal. lxvl. T. S.
               
                  ¶ He prouoketh all men to prayse the Lorde, & to considre his workes, rehersing two thinges most wonderful. He setteth forth the power of God to affray the rebels, and sheweth how God hath delyuered Israell from great bondage and afflictions▪ he promiseth to geue sacryfyce, and prouoke all men to heare what God hath done for hym and to prayse hys name,
               
               
                  
                     YE men on earth in God reioyce, Sing this as the. xviii. Ps with prayse set forth his name:
                     Extoll his might with hart and voyce geue glory to the same.
                     
                        verse 2
                     How wonderfull, O Lorde, say ye, in all thy workes thou art:
                     Thy foes for feare doo seke to thee, full sore agaynst theyr hart.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     All men that dwell the earth throughout doo prayse the name of God:
                     The laude therof the worlde about, is shewd and set abrode.
                     
                        verse 4
                     All folke come forth beholde and see, what things the Lord hath wrought
                     Mark wel the wōdrous works that he, for man to passe hath brought.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     He laid the sea like heapes on hye, therin away they had:
                     On fote to pas both fair and drye, wherof theyr harts were glad.
                     
                        verse 6
                     His might doth rule the world alwaye, his eyes all thynges be hold:
                     All suche as would him disobey, by hym shalbe controld.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 7
                     ye people geue vnto our God, due laude and thankes alwayes,
                     With ioyfull voyce declare abrode, and syng vnto hys prayse.
                     
                        verse 8
                     Whiche doth endue our soule with life, and it preserue with all:
                     He stayeth our fete so that no stryfe, can make vs slippe or fall.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     The Lord doth proue our dedes with fire if that they will abyde:
                     As workmen doo when they desyre, to haue theyr metals tryde.
                     
                        verse 10
                     Although thou suffer vs so long, in prison to be cast:
                     And there with chaines & fetters strong to lye in bondage fast.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The secōde part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     Although I say thou suffer men, on vs to ryde and raygne:
                     Though we through fyre and water ren of very grief and payne.
                     
                        verse 12
                     yet sure thou dost of thy good grace, dispose it to the best:
                     And bring vs out into a place, to liue in wealth and rest.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     Unto thy house resort will I, to offer and to pray:
                     And there I will my selfe applye, my vowes to thee to pay.
                     
                        verse 14
                     The vowes that with my mouth I spake in all my grief and smart:
                     
                        
The vowes I say whiche I did make, in dolor of my hart.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     Burnt offringe I will geue to thee, of Oxen fat and Rammes:
                     No other sacrifice shalbe, of bullockes goates and lamkes.
                     
                        verse 16
                     Come forth and harken here full sone, all ye that feare the Lorde:
                     what he for my poore soule hath done. to you I will record.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     Full oft I call vpon hys grace, thys mouth to him doth crye:
                     And thou my tonge make spede apace, to prayse hym by and by,
                     
                        verse 18
                     But if I fele my hart within, in wicked workes reioyce:
                     Or if I haue delyte to syn, God will not heare my voyce.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     But surely God my voice hath heard and what I doo require:
                     My prayer he doth well regarde, and graunteth my desire.
                     
                        verse 20
                     All prayse to him that hath not put, nor cast me out of mynde:
                     Nor yet his mercy from me shut, which I doo euer fynde.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Deus misereatur nostri. Psalme. lxvii. I. H.
               
                  ¶ A swete prayer for all the faythfull to obteyne the fauor of God, and to be lyghtened with hys countenaunce, to thende that hys way and iudgements may be knowne throughout the earth. A reioysing that God is the gouernor of all nations.
               
               
                  
                  HAue mercy on vs, Lorde, Sing this as the. xxx psalme. and graunte to ps thy grace:
                  To shew to vs doo thou accorde, the bryghtnes of thy face,
                  
                     verse 2
                  That all the earth may knowe, thy way to godly wealth:
                  And all the nations on a row, may see thy sauyng health.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Let all the worlde, O God, geue prayse vnto thy name:
                  O let the people all abrode, Extoll and laude the same.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Thoroughout the worlde so wyde let all reioyce with mirth:
                  For thou with truth & right dost guide the nations of the earth.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Let all the worlde, O God, geue prayse vnto thy name:
                  Oh let the people all abrode. extoll and laude the same.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Then shall the earth encrease, Great store of frute shall fall:
                  And then our God, the God of peace, Shall bles vs eke with all,
               
               
                  God shall vs bles, I say, and then bothe farre and neare,
                  The folke throughout the earth alway, of him shall stande in feare.
               
            
            
               Exurgat deus. Psal. lxviii, T. S.
               
                  
                     
¶ In this Psalm Dauid setteth forth as in a glas, the wonderfull mee mercyes of God towardes his people, who by all meanes, and moste straunge sorts declareth him self to them. And therfore Gods church by reason of his promises, graces and victoryes, doth excell without comparyson alworldly thyngs: he exhorteth therfore all men to praise God for euer.
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      LEt God aryse, and then his foes, wil turn 
                        〈♫〉
                      them selues to flyght: His enmies then will 
                        〈♫〉
                      runne abrode, and scatter out of syght, & as the 
                        〈♫〉
                      fire doth melt ye wax, & wind blow smoke awaye: 
                        〈♫〉
                      so in the presence of ye lord, the wicked shal decay
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     But righteous men before the Lorde, shall hartely reioyce:
                     They shalbe glad and mery all, and chearefull in their voice.
                     
                        verse 4
                     Sing prayse, sing prayse vnto the Lord who rideth on the skie:
                     Extoll this name of Iah our God, and him do magnifie:
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 5
                     That same is he that is aboue, within his holy place:
                     That father is of fatherles, and iudge of widowes case.
                     
                        verse 6
                     Houses he geuth and issue bothe, vnto the comfortles:
                     He bringeth bondmen out of thrall, and rebelles to distres.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     When thou diddest march before thy folk the Egiptians from among:
                     And brought thē through the wildernes, whiche was both wide and long
                     
                        verse 8
                     Thearth did quake, ye rain powred downe heard were great claps of thunder,
                     The mount Sinai shoke in such sort, as it would cleaue a sunder.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     Thine heritage with drops of rayne, aboundantly was washt:
                     And if so be it baren waxt, by thee it was refresht.
                     
                        verse 10
                     Thy chosen flock doth there remayne, thou hast preparde that place:
                     And for the pore thou dost prouide, of thine especiall grace.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The second parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     God will geue women causes iust, to magnifye his name:
                     When as his people triumphes make, and purchase brut and fame.
                     
                        verse 12
                     For puissant kinges for all their power shall flee and take the foyle.
                     And women whiche remayne at home, shall helpe to part the spoyle.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 13
                     And though you were as black as pots, your hew should pas the doue:
                     whose winges and fethers seme to haue, Or triuets. siluer and gold aboue.
                     
                        verse 14
                     when in this land God shall triunphe, ouer kynges bothe hyge and lowe,
                     Then shall it be lyke Salmon hyll, as whyte as any snowe.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     Though Basan be a frutefull hyll, The church of God doth excel all worldly thinges not in outward pomp but by the grace of God whyche there remaynth because of his promise. and in heyght others pas:
                     Yet Sion Gods most holy hyll, doth farre excell in grace.
                     
                        verse 16
                     why brag ye thus, ye hils most high, and leape for pride together?
                     This hill of Sion God doth loue, and there will dwell for euer.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     Gods army is two millions, of warriours good and strong:
                     The Lorde also in Sinai, is present them among.
                     
                        verse 18
                     Thou didst (O Lord) ascend on high, and captiues led them all:
                     whiche in times past thy chosen flock, in prison kept and thrall.
                  
                  
                     Thou madst them tribute for to paye, God toke not taxes to enriche himselfe, but to bestow them on his churche and therfore in the nu, to the
                              •
                           he. S. Paule saith he gaue gifts, folowing the grek translatiō Se
                              ••
                           th. and suche as did repine.
                     Thou didst subdue that they might dwell, in thy temple deuine.
                     
                        verse 19
                     Now praysed be the Lord for that, he powreth on vs suche grace:
                     
                        
From day to day, he is the God, of our health and solace.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The thirde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 20
                     He is the God from whom alone, saluation commeth playne:
                     He is the God by whom we scape: all daungers death and payne.
                     
                        verse 21
                     Thus god wil wound his enemies head and breake the heary scalpe:
                     Of those that in theyr wickednes, continually doo walke.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 22
                     From Basan will I brynge (sayd he) my people and my shepe: He meanth the victory whiche Dauid had of Og. king of Basan.
                     
                     And all mine owne as I haue done, from daunger of the depe,
                     
                        verse 23
                     And make them dip theyr fete in bloud, of those that hate my name:
                     And dogs shal haue theyr tongs embrude with licking of the same.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 24
                     All men may see how thou (O God) thyne enemies dost deface:
                     And how thou goest as God and kyng, into thy holy place.
                     
                        verse 25
                     The singers goo befrre with ioy, the minstrels folow after:
                     And in the midst the damsels play, with timbrell and with taber.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 26
                     Now in thy congregations, (O Israell) prayse the Lord:
                     And Iacobs whole posteritie, geue thankes with one accorde.
                     
                        verse 27
                     
                        
27 Their chief was little Beniamin, Because he was the yōgest of the Patriarches Iacobs sonnes, he callech hym lytell Beniamin. but Iuda made theyr host:
                     with Zabulon, and Neptalim, whiche dweld about theyr cost,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 28
                     As God hathe geuen powre to thee, so Lorde make firme and sure:
                     The thing that thou hast wrought in vs for euer to indure.
                     
                        verse 29
                     And in thy temple giftes will we, geue vnto thee (O Lorde:
                     For thyne vnto Ierusalem, sure promise made by word.
                  
               
               
                  The for the parte.
                  
                     Yea and straunge kings to vs subdued shall doo lyke in those dayes:
                     I meane to thee they shall present, theyr gifts of laude and prayes.
                     
                        verse 30
                     He shall destroy the spear mens rancks these calues and bulles of myght:
                     And cause them tribute pay, and daunt, all suche as loue to fyght.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 31
                     Then shall the Lordes of Egipt come, and presents with them bryng:
                     The mores most black shall stretch their hāds vnto their lord and king.
                     
                        verse 32
                     Therfore ye kingdomes of the earth, geue prayse vnto the Lorde:
                     Sing Psalmes to God with one cōsent, therto let all accorde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 33
                     who though he ryde and euer hath, aboue the heauens bryght:
                     
                        
Yet by the fearfull thunder claps, men may well know hys myght.
                     
                        verse 34
                     Therfore the strength of Israell, ascribe to God on hie.
                     whose mighte and power doth far extēd aboue the cloudy skye.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 35
                     O God thy holines and power, is dread for euermore:
                     The God of Israell geueth vs strength, praysed be God therfore.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Saluum me fac domine. Psalm. lxix, I. H
               
                  ¶ The complayntes, prayers, feruent zele, and great anguish of Dauid is set forth as a figure of Chryst, and all hys membres: the malicious crucitye of thenemies, and theyr punishment also where Iudas and suche traytours are accursed. Then gathered he courage in hys affliction and offereth prayses vnto God, whych are more acceptable then all sacrifyces: wherof all the afflicted may take comforte. Finallye he doth prouoke all creatures to prayses, prophecying of the kyngdome of Chryst, and the buildyng of Iuda, where all the faythful and their sede shall dwell for euer:
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      SAue me, O God & that with spede, the 
                        〈♫〉
                      waters flowe full fast: So nie my soule doo 
                        〈♫〉
                      they procede that I am sore agast. I sticke
                  
                     
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      full depe in filthe and clay, wheras I fele no 
                        〈♫〉
                      ground: I fall into suche flouds, I say, that I 
                        〈♫〉
                      am like be drounde.
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     With crying oft I faynt and quayle, my throte is horse and drye:
                     With loking vp my sight doth fayle, for helpe to God on hye.
                     
                        verse 4
                     My foes that giltles doo oppres, my soule, with hate are led:
                     In number sure they are no les, then heares are on my hed.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     Though for no cause they vexe me sore they prosper and are glad:
                     They doo compell me to restore, the thynges I neuer had.
                     
                        verse 6
                     What I haue done for want of wit, thou Lorde all times canst tell:
                     And all the same that I commit, to thee is knowne ful well.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     O God of hostes defend and staye, al those that trust in thee:
                     
                        
Let no man doubt or shrink awaye, for ought that chaunceth me,
                     
                        verse 8
                     It is for thee and for thy sake, that I doo beare this blame:
                     In spite of thee they would me make, to hyde my face for shame.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     My mothers sonnes my brethern all, forsake me on a rowe:
                     And as a straunger they me call, my face they will not knowe.
                     
                        verse 10
                     vnto thy house suche zeale I beare, that it doth pine me muche:
                     Theyr checks & taunts at thee to heare my very hart doth grutch.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The second parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     Though I doo fast my flesh to chaste, yea if I wepe and mone:
                     Yet in my teath this geare is cast, they passe not thereupon.
                     
                        verse 12
                     If I for grief, and payne of hart, in sackcloth vse to walke:
                     Then they anone will it peruert, therof they iest and talke.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     Both hie and lowe, and all the throng, that sit within the gate:
                     They haue me euer in theyr tong, of me they talke and prate.
                     
                        verse 14
                     The dronkards whiche in wine delyte it is their cheif pastime:
                     To seke whiche way to worke me spite, of me they sing and rime,
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 15
                     But thee the whyle (O Lorde) I pray, that when it pleaseth thee.
                     For thy great truth thou wilt alwaye, sende downe thyne ayde to me.
                     
                        verse 16
                     Pluck thou my feete out of the myre, from dro wning doo me kepe:
                     From suche as owe me wrath and ire, and from the waters depe.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     Lest with ye waues I should be drownd and depth my soule deuouer:
                     And that the pit should me confound, and shut me in her power.
                     
                        verse 18
                     O Lorde of hostes to me geue eare, as thou arte good and kynde.
                     And as thy mercy is most deare, Lorde haue me in thy mynde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     And doo not from thy seruaunt hyde, nor turne thy face awaye:
                     I am opprest on euery syde, in hast geue eare I say.
                     
                        verse 20
                     O Lorde vnto my soule draw nye, the same with ayde repose:
                     Because of theyr great tyrannye, acquite me fro my foes.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The thirde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 21
                     That I abide rebuke and shame, thou knowest and thou canst tell:
                     For those that seke and worke the same, thou seest them all full well.
                     
                        verse 22
                     When they with brags doo breake my hart I seke for helpe anone.
                     
                        
But finde no frendes to ease my smarte, to comfort me not one,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 23
                     But in my meate they gaue me gall, to cruell for to thynke:
                     And gaue me in my thirst withall, stronge vineger to dryncke.
                     
                        verse 24
                     Lorde turne their table to a snare, to take them selues therin.
                     And when they thinke full well to fare, then trap them in the gin.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 25
                     And let theyr eyes be darke and blynde that they may nothyng see:
                     Bow downe their back & doo thē binde, in thraldome for to be.
                     
                        verse 26
                     Powre out thy wrath as hoate as fyer, that it on them may fal:
                     Let thy displeasure in thyne yre: take holde vpon them all.
                  
                  
                     As desert drye theyr house disgrace, their offring eke expell:
                     
                        verse 27
                     That none therof posses their place, nor in their tents doo dwell:
                     If thou dost strike the man to tame, on him they lay full sore.
                     
                        verse 28
                     And if that thou do wounde the same, they seke to hurt him more:
                  
                  
                     Then let them heape vp mischief still. sith they are all peruert:
                     
                        verse 29
                     That of thy fauor and good will, they neuer haue no part,
                     
                        
And dash them cleane out of the boke, of life, of hope of trust:
                     That for their names they neuer loke, in number of the iust.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The forth parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 31
                     Though I, O Lorde, with wo & grief, haue bene full sore opprest?
                     Thy helpe shall geue me suche relief, that all shall be redrest.
                     
                        verse 32
                     That I may geue thy name the prayse, and shew it with a song:
                     I will extoll the same alwayes, with harty thankes among.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 33
                     Which is more pleasant vnto thee, (Such minde thy grace hath borne:)
                     Then either Oxe, or Calfe can be, that hath bothe hoofe and horne.
                     
                        verse 34
                     When simple folke doo this beholde, it shall reioyce them sure:
                     All ye that seke the Lorde, beholde, your lyfe for aye shall dure.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 35
                     For why the Lord of hosts doth heare, the poore when they complayne:
                     His prisoners are to him full deare, he doth them not disdayne.
                     
                        verse 36
                     Wherfore the skie and earth belowe, The sea with floud and stream:
                     His prayse they shall declare and showe with all that liue in them.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 37
                     For sure our God will Sion saue, and Iudaes cities builde:
                     
                        verse 38
                     
                        
38 Much folke possession there shall haue, her streate shall all be filde.
                     Her seruaunts sede shall kepe the same, all ages out of minde,
                     
                        verse 39
                     And there all they that loue hys name, adwellyng place shall fynde.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Deus in adiutorium. Psalme. lxx. I. H.
               
                  ¶ He prayeth to be ryght spedely delyuered as in the. ix. Psalm. Then he desireth the shame of hys enemyes, and the ioy full comforte of all those that seke the Lorde.
               
               
                  O God, to me take hede. of helpe I thee require: Sing this as the. lxxii. ps
                  
                  O Lorde of hosts with hast and spede helpe, helpe, I thee desire.
                  
                     verse 2
                  With shame confound them all, that seke my soule to spill.
                  Rebuke them backe with blame to fall that thinke and wish me ill.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Confounde them that applye, and seke to worke me shame:
                  And at my harme, do laugh and crye, so, so, there goth the game.
                  
                     verse 4
                  But let them ioyfull be, in thee with ioy and wealth:
                  Which only trust and seke to thee, and to thy sauing health.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  That they may say alwayes, in mirth and one accorde:
                  All glory, honor, laude and prayse, be geuen to thee (O Lorde.)
                  
                     verse 6
                  But I am weake and poore, come Lorde thine ayde I lacke:
                  
                     
Thou art my stay and helpe therfore, make spede and be not slack.
               
            
            
               ¶ In te domine speraui. Psalm. lxxi. I H.
               
                  ¶ He prayeth in sayth establyshed by the worde of the promise, and confirmed by the worke of God from his youth he desireth now to be deliuered from the wicked and cruell man (meanyng) his sonne Absolō, and his confederacy, and he promiseth to be mindefull and thankefull for the same.
               
               
                  
                     MY Lorde, my God in all distres, my hope is whole in thee: Sing this as the. lxix. psa
                     
                     Then let no shame my soule oppres, nor once take holde on me.
                     
                        verse 2
                     As thou art iust defend me Lorde, and rid me out of drede:
                     Geue eare, and to my suite accorde, and send me helpe at nede.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     Be thou my rock, to whom I may, for ayde all times resort:
                     Thy promise is to helpe alwaye, thou art my fence and fort.
                     
                        verse 4
                     Saue me my God, from wicked men, and from theyr strength and powre:
                     From folke vniuste, and eke from them, that cruelly deuoure,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     Thou art the stay wherin I trust, thou Lorde of hosts art he:
                     Yea from my youth I had a lust, still to depend on thee.
                     
                        verse 6
                     Thou hast me kept euen from my birth and I through thee was borne:
                     wherfore I will thee prayse with mirth, bothe euening and morne.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 7
                     As to a monster seldome seen, muche folke about me thronge:
                     But thou art now and still hast bene, my fence and ayde so stronge.
                     
                        verse 8
                     Wherfore my mouth no time shall lacke, thy glory and thy prayse:
                     And eke my tong shall not be slack, to honor thee alwayse.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     Refuse not me, O Lorde, I say, when age my limmes doth take:
                     And when my strength doth wast away doo not my soule forsake.
                     
                        verse 10
                     Amonge themselues my foes enquire, to take me through deceyt:
                     And they agaynst me doo conspire, that for my soule layd wayt:
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The second parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     Lay hand and take hym now they sayd for God from him is gone:
                     Dispatch him quyte, for to hys ayde, iwis there commeth none.
                     
                        verse 12
                     Doo not absent thy self away, O Lorde, when nede shalbe:
                     But that in time of grief thou may, in hast geue helpe to me.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     With shame confound and ouerthrowe, all those that seke my lyfe:
                     Oppres them with rebukes also, that fayne would worke me stryfe,
                     
                        verse 14
                     But I wilpatienly abide, thy helpe in all assayes:
                     
                        
Still more and more ec he time and tide I will set forth thy prayse.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     My mouth thy iustice shall recorde, that dayly helpe doth sende:
                     But of thy benefyts, O Lorde, I knowe no compt nor ende.
                     
                        verse 16
                     Yet will I goo and seke forth one, with thy Good helpe (O God)
                     The sauing health of thee alone, to shew and set abrode.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     For of my youth thou tokest the care, and dost instruct me styll:
                     Therfore thy wonders to declare, I haue great minde and will.
                     
                        verse 18
                     And as in youth from wanton rage, thou didst me kepe and stay:
                     Forsake me not vnto mine age, and tyll my head be gray.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     That I thy strength & might may show to them that now be here:
                     And that our sede thy power may know hereafter many a yere.
                     
                        verse 20
                     O Lord thy iustice doth excede, thy doinges all may see:
                     Thy workes are wonderfull in dede, oh, who is lyke to thee?
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 21
                     Thou madest me fele afflictions sore, and yet thou didst me saue:
                     yea thou didst helpe and me restore, and take me from the graue.
                     
                        verse 23
                     
                        
23 And thou mine honor dost encrease, my dignitie maintayne:
                     yea thou dost make all grief to cease, and comfort me agayne:
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 24
                     Therfore thy faithfulnes to prayse, I will bothe lute and sing:
                     My harp shall sound thy laude alwayes O Israels holy king.
                     
                        verse 25
                     My mouth will ioy with pleasant voyce when I shall sing to thee:
                     And eke my soule will muche reioyce, for thou hast made me free.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 26
                     My tonge thy vprightnes shall sounde, and speake it dayly still:
                     For grief and shame do them confounde, that sought to worck me ill.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Deus iudicium tuum. Psal. lxxi. I. H.
               
                  ¶ He prayeth that the kingdom of God by Christ may come vnder the parson of Salomen vnder whom shall be rightuousnes, peace & felicitie, vnto whom all kinges, and all nations shall doo homage, whose name and power shall in dure for euer.
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      
                     LOrd geue thy iudgmēts to the kyng, 
                        〈♫〉
                      therin instruct him well: And with his sonne
                  
                     
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      that Princely thyng. Lorde let thy iustyce 
                        〈♫〉
                      dwell. That he may gouerne vp ryghtly, 
                        〈♫〉
                      And rule thy folke a ryghte: and so 
                        〈♫〉
                      defende throughe equitie, the poore that 
                        〈♫〉
                      haue no myght.
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     And let the mountains that are hye, vnto their folke geue peace,
                     And eke let litle hils applye, in iustice to encrease.
                     
                        verse 4
                     That he may help the weake and pore, with ayde and make them stronge:
                     And eke destroy for euermore, all those that doo them wrong.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 5
                     And then from age to age shall they, regarde and feare thy might:
                     So long as Sunne doth shine by daye, or els the moone by night.
                     
                        verse 6
                     Lorde make the king vnto the iust, like rayne to fields new mowen:
                     And like to droppes that lay the dust, and fresh the land vnsowen.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     The iust shall florish in his time, and all shalbe at peace:
                     Untill the mone shall leaue to prime, wast, chaunge, and to encrease,
                     
                        verse 8
                     He shalbe Lorde of sea and sand, from shore to shore throughout:
                     And from the flouds within the land, through all the earth about.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     The people that in desert dwell, shall knele to him full thick:
                     And all hys enemies that rebell, the earth and dust shall lyck.
                     
                        verse 10
                     Their Lordes of all the yles therby, great giftes to him shall bryng:
                     The kings of Sabe and Arabie, geue many a costly thyng.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The second parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     All kinges shall seke with one accord, in his good grace to stand:
                     And all the people of the world, shall serue him at his hande.
                     
                        verse 12
                     For he the neady sort doth saue, that vnto him doo call.
                     And eke the simple folke that haue, no helpe of man at all,
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 13
                     He taketh pitie on the poore, that are with nede opprest.
                     He doth preserue them euermore, and bring their soules to rest.
                     
                        verse 14
                     He shall redeme theyr lyfe from dread, from fraud, fom wrong, from might:
                     And eke the bloud that they shall blead, is precious in his sight.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     But he shall lyue and they shall bryng, to him of Sabaes golde?
                     He shalbe honored as a kyng and dayly be extold.
                     
                        verse 16
                     The mightie mountaines of his land, of corne shall beare such throng:
                     That it lyke Cedre trees shal stand, in Libanus full long,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     Their cities eke full well shall spede: the frutes therof shall pas:
                     In plenty it shall far excede, and spring as grene as grasse.
                     
                        verse 18
                     For euer they shall prayse his name, while that the sunne is lyght:
                     And think them happy through the same all folke shall bles his myght.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     Praise ye the Lord of hostes and sing, to Israels God eche one:
                     For he doth euery wondrous thing, yea he him self alone.
                     
                        verse 20
                     And blessed be his holy name, all times eternally:
                     That all the earth may prayse the same, Amen, Amen, say I.
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Quam bonus deus. Psal. lxxiii. T. S.
               
                  ¶ The prophet teacheth by his example, that neyther the worldly prosperitie of the vngodlye, nor yet the affliction of the good, ought to discourage Gods children: but rather ought to moue vs to consider oure fathers prouidence, and to cause vs to reuerence Gods iudgementes for asmuche as the wicked vanysh away like smoke, and the vngodly enter into lyfe euerlastyng, in hope wherof he resigneth himselfe into Gods handes.
               
               
                  
                     HOw euer it be, yet God is good, Sing this as the. xliiii. psalme. and kynde to Israell:
                     And to all suche as safely kepe, theyr conscience pure and well.
                     
                        verse 2
                     Yet lyke a foole I almost slypt, my feete began to slide:
                     And or I wist euen at a pinch, my steps a wrye gan glyde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     For when I saw suche folysh men, I grudge and did disdayne:
                     That wicked men all thinges should haue, without turmoyle or payne.
                     
                        verse 4
                     They neuer suffer panges nor grief, as if death shoulde them smite:
                     Theyr bodyes are bothe stoute and strong, and euer in good plyte.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     And free from all aduersitie, when other men be shent:
                     And with the rest they take no parte, of plague or punishment,
                     
                        verse 6
                     Therfore presumption doth embrace, theyr necks as doth a chayne:
                     And are euen wrapt as in a robe, with rapine and disdaine.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 7
                     They are so fed, that euen for fat, their eyes oft times out start:
                     And as for worldly goodes they haue. more then can wish theyr hart,
                     
                        verse 8
                     Theyr lyfe is moste licentious, boastyng muche of the wrong:
                     Which they haue done to simple men, and euer pryde among.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     The heauens and the lyuing Lorde, they spare not to blaspheme:
                     And prate they doo on worldly thynges, no wight they doo esteme.
                     
                        verse 10
                     The people of God, oft times turne backe, to see theyr prosprous state:
                     And almost drynke the selfe same cup, and folow the same rate.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The second parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     How can it be that God (say they) should know and vnderstand:
                     These worldly thinges since wicked men, be Lordes of sea and land?
                     
                        verse 12
                     For we may see how wicked men, in riches still increase:
                     Rewarded well with worldly goodes, and lyue in rest and peace.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     Then why doo I from wickednes, my fantasy refrayne:
                     And wash my handes with innocentes, and clense my hart in vayne?
                     
                        verse 14
                     And suffer scourges euery day, as subiect to all blame:
                     
                        
And euery mornyng from my youth, susteyne rebuke and shame?
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     And I had almost sayd as they, misliking mine estate:
                     But that I should thy children iudge, as folke vnfortunate.
                     
                        verse 16
                     Then I bethought me how I might, thys matter vnderstande:
                     But yet the labor was to great, for me to take in hand,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     Untill the tyme I went into, thy holy place and then,
                     I vnderstode right perfectly, the ende of all these men.
                     
                        verse 18
                     And namely how thou settest them, vpon a slippery place:
                     And at thy pleasure and thy wyll, thou dost them all deface.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     Then all men muse at that straung sight to see how sodenly:
                     They are destroid, dispatche, consumde and dead so horribly.
                     
                        verse 20
                     Much like a dreame when one awakth so shall theyr wealth decay:
                     Theyr famous names in all mens sight shall ebbe and pas a way.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The thirde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 21
                     Yet thus my hart was greued then, my minde was much opprest:
                     
                        verse 23
                     So fond was I and ignorant, and in this point abeast,
                     
                        verse 23
                     
                        
23 Yet neuertheles by my right hand, thou holdest me alwayes fast:
                     
                        verse 24
                     And with my counsell dost me guyde, to glory at the last.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 25
                     What thyng is there that I can wishe, but thee in heauen aboue?
                     And in the earth there is nothyng, lyke thee that I can loue.
                     
                        verse 26
                     My flesh and eke my hart do fayle, but God doth fayle me neuer:
                     For of my hart God is the strength, my portion eke for euer.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 27
                     And lo, all suche as thee forsake, thou shalt destroy echeone:
                     And those that trust in any thyng, sauing in thee alone.
                     
                        verse 28
                     Therfore will I draw nere to God, and euer with him dwell,
                     In God alone I put my trust, thy wonders will I tell.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Vt quid deus. Psalme. lxxiiii. I. H.
               
                  ¶ The faythfull complayne of the destruction of the church and true relygyon, vnder the name of Sion and the aultars destroyed: And trustyng in the myght and free mercyes of God, by hys couenaunt they require help and succor for the glory of Gods holy name, the saluatyon of his pore afflicted seruaunts & the cōfusion of his proud enemies
               
               
                  
                     WHy art thou Lorde so longe from vs, in all this daunger depe? Sing this as the. lxxii. ps
                     
                     why doth thine anger kindle thus, at thyne owne pasture shepe?
                     
                        verse 2
                     Lorde call the people to thy thought, which haue ben thine so long:
                     
                        
The which thou hast redemd & brought, from bondage sore and strong.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     Haue minde and thinke vpon, remember it full well:
                     Thy pleasant place thy mount Sion, where thou wast wont to dwell.
                     
                        verse 4
                     Lift vp thy fote and come in hast, and all thy foes deface:
                     Whiche now at pleasure rob and wast within thy holy place.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     A mid thy congregations all, thine enemies roare (O God:
                     They set as signes on euery wall, theyr banners splayde abrod.
                     
                        verse 6
                     As men with axes hew the trees, that on the hils do grow:
                     So shine the bils and swords of these, within thy temples now.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     The selings sawde, the carued bordes, the godly grauen stones:
                     with axces, hammers, billes & swordes they beate them downe at ones.
                     
                        verse 8
                     Thy places they consume with flame, and eke in all this toile:
                     The house appointed to thy name, they race downe to the soyle.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     And thus they sayde within theyr hart, dispatche them out of hand:
                     Then burnt they vp in euery part, Gods houses through the land
                     
                        verse 10
                     
                        
10 Yet thou no sigue of helpe dost sende, our Prophets all are gone:
                     To tell when this our plage shuld ende among vs there is none.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     Whē wilt thou lord once end this shame and cease thyne enemies strong:
                     Shall they alway blaspheme thy name and rayle on thee so long?
                     
                        verse 12
                     Why dost with draw thy hand a backe? and hide it in thy lappe:
                     O pluck it out and be not slack, to geue thy foes a rappe.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The second part.
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     O God thou art my kyng and Lorde, and euermore hast ben:
                     yeathy good grace throughout the world for our good helpe hathe seen.
                     
                        verse 14
                     The seas that are so depe and dead, thy might did make them drye:
                     And then didst breake the serpents head, that he therin did dye.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     yea thou didst breake the heads so great of whales that are so fell:
                     And gauest them to the folkes to eate, that in the desertes dwell.
                     
                        verse 16
                     Thou madest a spring with streames to rise from rock both hard and hye:
                     And eke thy hand hath made lykewyse, depe riuers to be drye.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     Bothe day and eke the night are thyne, by thee they were begonne,
                     
                        
Thou settest to serue vs with theyr shine, the light and eke the sunne,
                     
                        verse 18
                     Thou doest appoint the endes and costs of all the earth about:
                     Both sommer heates, and winter frosts, thy hand hath founde them out.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     Thinke on (O Lorde (no time forget. thy foes that thee defame:
                     And how the folish folke are set, to rayle vpon thy name.
                     
                        verse 20
                     O let no cruell beast deuoure, thy Turtle that is true:
                     Forget not alwayes in thy powre, the poore that much doo rue.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 21
                     Regarde thy couenaunt and beholde, thy foes posses, the lande:
                     All sad and darke, for worne and old, our realine as now doth stand.
                     
                        verse 22
                     Let not the simple go away, with disapointed shame:
                     But let the poore and nedye aye. geue prayse vnto thy name.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 23
                     Ryse Lord, let be by thee mainteined, the cause that is thyne owne:
                     Remember how that thou blasphemde, art by the folysh one.
                     
                        verse 24
                     The voyce forget not of thy foes, for they presumyng hie:
                     Is more and more encreast of those, that hate thee spitefully.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Confitebimur tibi deus. Psalm. lxxv. N.
               
                  ¶ The faythfull doo prayse the name of the Lord, whiche shall come to iudge at the time appoynted, when the wicked shal be put to confusion, and drynke of the cup of his wrath, theyr prayer shall be abated, & the righteous shall be exaited to honor.
               
               
                  VNto the God we will geue thankes, Sing this as the. rliiii. psalme. we will geue thankes to thee:
                  Sith thy name is so nere, declare, thy wondrous workes will we.
                  
                     verse 2
                  I will vprightly iudge, when get, conuenient tyme I may.
                  The earth is weake and all therin: but I her pillers stay.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  I did to thee mad people say, deale not furiouslye:
                  And vnto the vngodliones, set not your hornes so hie.
                  
                     verse 4
                  I sayd vnto them, set not vp, your taysed hornes on hye,
                  And see that you doo with stiffe neck, not speake presumptuously.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  For neyther from the eastern part, nor from the westernside,
                  Nor from forsaken wildernes, protection doth procede.
                  
                     verse 6
                  For why the Lorde our God, he is, the righteous iudge alone:
                  He putteth downe the one, and sets another in the throne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  For why? a cup of myghtye wyne, is in the hand of God:
                  
                     
And all the myghtye wyne therin, himself doth poure abrode.
                  
                     verse 8
                  As for the lees and filthy dregges, that doo remayne of it.
                  The wicked of the earth shall drinke, and suck them euery whyt.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  But I will talke of God (I say) of Iacobs God therfore:
                  And will not cease to celebrate, his prayse for euermore.
                  
                     verse 10
                  In sunder breake the hornes of all, vngodly men will I:
                  But then the hornes of righteous men, shalbe exalted hye.
               
               
                  Gloria patri.
               
               To father, sonne, and holy ghost,
               all glory be therfore:
               As in beginning was, is now,
               and shalbe euermore.
            
            
               ¶ In Iudea. Psalme. Lxxvi. I. H.
               
                  ¶ This Psalme
                        •
                      setteth for the the power of God and care for the defence of hys people in Jerusalem, in the destruction of the armie Senacherib: And exhorteth the faythfull to be thankefull for the same.
               
               
                  TO all that now in Jury dwell, Sing this as the, lxix. psa the Lorde is clerly knowen:
                  His name is great in Israell, a people of his owne.
                  
                     verse 2
                  At Salem he his tents hath pighte, to tary there a space:
                  In sion eke he hathe delyghte, to make his dwellyng place.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3
                  And there he brake bothe shaft and bow the sworde the speare and shilde:
                  And brake the ray to ouerthrowe, in battell on the fielde.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Thou arte more worthy honour, Lord, more mighte in thee dothe lye:
                  Then in the strongest of the worlde, that rob on mountayes hye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  But now ye proud are spoyled through the and they are fallen on sleepe:
                  Through men of warre no helpe can be them selues they coulde not kepe.
                  
                     verse 6
                  At thy rebuke (O Iacobs God, when thou doost them reproue:
                  As halfe in slepe theyr charets, stoode, no horsman once doth moue.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  For thou arte fearfull Lorde in dede, what man the corage hathe:
                  To bide thy sight and doth not dreede, when thou art in thy wrath.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Whē thou dost make thy iudgmēts hard from heauen through the grounde:
                  Then al the earth, full sore, afearde. in silence shalbe founde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  And that when thou O God dost stand in iudgement for to speake:
                  To saue thafflicted of the lande, on earth that are full weake,
                  
                     verse 10
                  The fury that in man doth raygne, shall tourne vnto thy prayse:
                  
                     
Hereafter Lorde doo thou restrayne, theyr wrath and threates alwayes,
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  Make voues & paye them to your God, ye folke that nigh him bee:
                  Bring giftes all ye that dwell abrode, for dreedfull sure is he.
                  
                     verse 12
                  For he doth take bothe lyfe and might, from Princes great of birth:
                  And full of terroure is hys sighte, to all the kinges on earth.
               
            
            
               ¶ Voce mea ad dominum. Psalm. lxxvii. IH.
               
                  ¶ The Prophet in the name of the churche, rehearseth the greatnes of his affliction, and his greuous temptation, wherby he was driuen to thys end to consider his formore conuersacion, & the continuall cours of Gods worckes in the preseruation of his seruauntes, and so he confirmeth his sayth agaynst these temptacyons.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  I With my voyce to God do cry, with 
                     〈♫〉
                   harte and harty cheare, my voyce to God I 
                     〈♫〉
                   lyfte on hyghe and he my sute doth heare, in 
                     〈♫〉
                   tyme of grief I sought to God, by nyght
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   no rest I toke: But stretcht my hands to him 
                     〈♫〉
                   abrode, my soule comfort forsoke.
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  When I to thinke one God entend, my troble then is more:
                  I spake but could not make an ende, my breath was stopt so sore.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Thou houldst myne eys alwayse from rest, that I alwayes awake:
                  With feare am I so sore opprest, my speche doeth me forsake.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  The dayes of olde in minde I cast. and oft did thinke vpon:
                  The times and ages that are past, full many yeares agon.
                  
                     verse 6
                  By night my songes I call to mynde, once made thy prayse to shew:
                  And with my hart, much taulke I finde, my spirites doth searche to knowe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Will God (sayd I) at once for all, cast of his people thus?
                  So that hence for the no time he shall, be frendly vnto vs.
                  
                     verse 8
                  What, is hys goodnes cleane decayed, for euer and aday?
                  
                     
Or is hys promise now delayde, and doeth his truthe decaye?
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  And will the Lorde our God forget, his mercyes manifolde:
                  Or shall his wrath encrease so whot, his mercy to with holde:
                  
                     verse 10
                  At last I sayde my weakenes is, the cause of this mistrust.
                  Gods mighty hand, can healpe all thys, and chaunge it, when he lust.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  I will regarde, and thinke vpon, the workyng of the Lorde:
                  Of all his wonders past and gone, I gladly will recorde.
                  
                     verse 12
                  yea all his workes I will declare, and what he did deuise:
                  To tell his factes I will not spare, and eke his counsell wyse.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  Thy workes (O Lorde) are all vprghit and holy all abrod:
                  What one, hath strēgth to match ye mighte of thee O Lorde our God.
                  
                     verse 14
                  Thou art a God, that oft dost show, thy wonders euery hower:
                  And so doest make the people knowe, thy vertue and thy power.
               
               
                  
                     verse 15
                  And thine owne folke thou diddest defēd with strength and stretched arme?
                  The sonnes of Jacob that discend, and Josephes seede from harme.
                  
                     verse 16
                  
                     
16 The waters, Lorde perceued thee, the waters saw thee well:
                  And they for feare a side did flee, the depthes on trembling fell.
                  
                     verse 17
                  The clouds that were, both thick & black did rayne full plenteously:
                  The thonder in the ayer did cracke, thy shaftes a brode did flye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 18
                  Thy thunder in the fire was hearde, the lightening from aboue,
                  With flashes greate made men afearde, the earth did quake and moue.
                  
                     verse 19
                  Thy wayes within the sea do lye, thy pathe in waters depe:
                  Yet none can there, thy steppes espye. nor know thy pathe to kepe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 20
                  Thou leadest thy folke vpon the lande, as shepe on euery syde:
                  Through Moses & through Aarons hand thou didst them safely gide.
               
            
            
               ¶ Attendite popule. Psal. lxxviii. T. S.
               
                  ¶ He sheweth how God of his mercy chose hys church of the posteritie of Abraham, castyng in theyrteth the stubburne rebellion of theyr fathers that the children might not only vnderstand, that god of his fremercies made his couenant with theyr auncestors, but also seyng thē so malitious and peruerse, might be ashamed & so turn wholy to god. In this Psalme the holy Ghost hathe comprehended, as it were the sum of all Gods benefites, to thintent the ignoraunt and gros people mighte see in few wordes the effect of the whole historyes.
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      
                     ATtend my people to my law & to
                  
                     
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      my wordes inclyne. My mouthe shall speake 
                        〈♫〉
                      straunge parables, and sentences deuyne. 
                        〈♫〉
                      Which we our selues haue hard & lernd, euen 
                        〈♫〉
                      of oure fathers olde, & whiche for our instruction 
                        〈♫〉
                      our fathers haue vs tolde.
                  
                     
                        verse 4
                     Because we shoulde not kepe it close, from them that shoulde come after.
                     Who should Gods power to theyr race praise and all his workes of wonder.
                     
                        verse 5
                     To Iacob he commaundment gaue, how Israell should lyue:
                     willyng our fathers shoulde the same, vnto theyr children geue.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 6
                     That they and theyr posterytie, that were not sprong vp tho:
                     
                        
Should haue the knowledge of the law, and teache theyr seeede also.
                     
                        verse 7
                     That they may haue the better hope, in God that is aboue:
                     And not forget to kepe his lawes, and his precepts in loue.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8
                     Not beyng as theyr fathers were, rebellyng in Gods syght:
                     And would not frame their wicked harts to know theyr God a ryght.
                     
                        verse 9
                     How went the people of Ephraim, theyr neyghbours for to spoyle?
                     Shoting their dartes the day of warre, and yet they toke the foyle.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10
                     For why? they did not kepe with God, the couenant that was made:
                     Nor yet would walk or leade their liues, according to his trade.
                     
                        verse 11
                     But put into obliuion, his counsell and his will:
                     And all his workes most magnifique, which he declared styll.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The second parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 12
                     What wonders to our forefathers, did he him selfe disclose:
                     In Egipt land, within the field, that called is Thaneos?
                     
                        verse 13
                     He did deuyde, and cut the sea, that they might pas at once:
                     And made the water stand as styll, as doth an heape of stones,
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 14
                     He led them secret in a cloud, by day when it was bryght:
                     And in the night when darke it was, with fire he gaue them lyght.
                     
                        verse 15
                     He brake the rocks in wildernes, and gaue the people drynk:
                     As plentifull as when the depes, doo flow vp to the brynk.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16
                     He drew out riuers out of rockes, that were bothe drye and harde:
                     Of suche a boundaunce that no floudes, to them might be compard.
                     
                        verse 17
                     Yet for all this, against the Lorde, theyr sinne they did increase:
                     And styred hym that is most hygh, to wrath in wildernes.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18
                     They tempted hym within theyr harts, lyke people of mistrust:
                     Requiring such a kynd of meate, as serued to theyr lnst.
                     
                        verse 19
                     Saying with murmuration, in theyr vnfaythfulnes:
                     What can this God prepare for vs, a feast in wildernes?
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20
                     Beholde, he strake the stony rock, and floudes forthwith did slo:
                     But can he now geue to his folke, bothe breade and flesh also?
                     
                        verse 21
                     When God hard this, he waxed wroth with Iacob and his sede:
                     
                        
So did his indignation, on Israell procede.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The thirde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 22
                     Because they did not faithfully, beleue and hope that he:
                     Could alwayes help and succor them, in theyr necessitie.
                     
                        verse 23
                     Wherfore he did commaund the clouds forthwith they brake in sundre:
                     
                        verse 24
                     And raind down Manna for thē to eate a foode of mickell wondre.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 25
                     When earthly men with angels fode, were fed at theyr request:
                     
                        verse 26
                     He bad the east wynde blow away, and brought in the south west.
                     
                        verse 27
                     And raind downe flesh as thick as dust and foule as thick as sand:
                     
                        verse 28
                     Whiche he did cast amids the place. where all the tents did stand.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 29
                     Then did they eate excedingly, and all men had theyr fils:
                     Yet more and more they did desire, to serue theyr lusts and wils.
                     
                        verse 30
                     But as the meate was in theyr mouthes his wrath vpon them fell
                           
                              
                           
                           punctel
                        
                     
                     
                        verse 31
                     And flew the floure of all theyr youth, and choyse of Israell.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 32
                     Yet fell they to theyr wonted sinne, and still they did him greue:
                     For all the wonders that he wrought. they would him not beleue.
                     
                        verse 33
                     
                        
33 Theyr dayes therfore he shortned, and made theyr honor vayne:
                     Theyr yeares did wast and pas away, with terrours and with payne.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 34
                     But euer when he plaged them, they sought hym by and by:
                     
                        verse 35
                     Remēbring then, he was their strength, theyr help and God most hye.
                     
                        verse 36
                     Thoughe in their mouthes they did but glose and flatter with the Lord:
                     And with their tongs, & in theyr hartes, dissembled euery worde.
                  
               
               
                  The for the parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 37
                     For why? their harts were nothing bēt, to him nor to his trade:
                     Nor yet to kepe or to performe, the couenaunt that was made,
                     
                        verse 38
                     yet was he still so mercifull, when they deserued to dye:
                     That he forgaue them their misdedes, and would not them destroy,
                  
                  
                     Yea many atyme he turned his wrath, and did himselfe auise:
                     And would not suffer all hys whole, displeasure to aryse.
                     
                        verse 39
                     Considering they were but fleshe, and euen as a wynde:
                     That passeth away and cannot well, retourne by his owne hynde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 40
                     How often times in wildernes, did they their Lorde prouoke:
                     
                        
How did they moue and stir theyr Lorde to plage them with hys stroke?
                     
                        verse 41
                     yet did they turne agayne to sinne, and tempted God eftsone:
                     Prescribing to the holy Lorde, what thinges they would haue don,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 42
                     Not thinking of his hand and power, nor of the day when he:
                     Deliuered them out of the bondes, of the fierse ennemie.
                     
                        verse 43
                     Nor howe he wrought his miracles, as they them selues beheld:
                     In Egipt, and the wonder that he did in Zoan field.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 44
                     Nor how he turned by his power, theyr waters into bloud
                     That no man might receyue his drink, at riuer nor at floud.
                     
                        verse 45
                     Nor how he sent them swarmes of flies whiche did them sore annoy
                     And fild theyr countreys full of frogs, whiche should theyr lande destroy.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 46
                     Nor how he did commit theyr fruites, vnto the Caterpiller.
                     And all the labour of theyr handes, he gaue to the Grashopper.
                     
                        verse 47
                     with haylestones he destroid their vines so that they were all lost:
                     And not so much as wylde figge trees, but he consumde with frost.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 48
                     And yet with hailestones once agayne, the Lorde their cattell smote:
                     And all their flocks and heards like wise with thunderbolts full hote.
                     
                        verse 49
                     He cast vpon them in his ire, and in his fury strong:
                     Displeasure, wrath, and euill spirites, to trouble them amonge.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 50
                     Then to his wrath he made a waye, and spared not the least:
                     But gaue vnto the pestilence, the man and eke the beast.
                     
                        verse 51
                     He strake also the first borne all, that vp in Egipt came:
                     And all the chief of men and beastes, within the tents of Ham.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 52
                     But as for all his owne dearefolk, he did preserue and kepe:
                     And caried them through wildernes, euen lyke a flocke of shepe.
                     
                        verse 53
                     Without all feare, both safe and sound, he brought them out of thrall:
                     Where as theyr foes with rage of Sea were ouerwhelmed all.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 54
                     And brought them out into the costes, of his owne holy land:
                     Euen to the mount whiche he had got, by his strong arme and hand.
                     
                        verse 55
                     And there cast out the Heathen folke, and did theyr land deuyde:
                     
                        
And in the tentes he set their tribes, of Israell to abide.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 56
                     Yet for all this, theyr God most hygh, they stirred and tempted styll:
                     And woulde not kepe his testament, nor yet obey his will.
                     
                        verse 57
                     But as theyr fathers turned backe, euen so they went astray:
                     Muche lyke a bowe that would not bēd, but slipt and start away.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The. vi. parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 58
                     And greued him with their hil altars, with offerings, and with fire:
                     And with theyr Idols vehemently, prouoked him to ire.
                     
                        verse 59
                     Therwith his wrath began agayne, to kindle in his brest:
                     The naughtines of Israell, he did so muche detest.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 60
                     Then he forsoke the tabernacle, of Silo where he was:
                     Right conuersant with earthly men, euen as his dwelling place.
                     
                        verse 61
                     Then suffred he his might and power, in bondage for to stand:
                     And gaue the honor of his Arcke into his enemies hand.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 62
                     And did commit them to the sword, wroth with his heritage:
                     
                        verse 63
                     The yong men were deuoured with fire maids had nomariage.
                     
                        verse 64
                     
                        
64 And with the sworde, the priestes also, did pearish euerychone:
                     And not a widow left alyue, theyr deathe for to be mone,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 65
                     And then the Lorde began to wake, lyke one that slept a tyme:
                     Or lyke a valyant man of warre, refreshed after wyne.
                     
                        verse 66
                     With Emerods in the hinder partes, he strake his enemies all:
                     And put them then vnto a shame, that was perpetuall.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 67
                     Then he the tent and tabernacle, of Ioseph did refuse:
                     As for the tribe of Ephraim, he would in no wise chuse.
                     
                        verse 68
                     But chose the tribe of Iehuda, where as they thought to dwell:
                     Euen the noble mount Sion, whiche he did loue so well.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 69
                     Where as he did his temple build, both sumptuously and sure:
                     Like as the earth which he hath made for euer to endure.
                     
                        verse 70
                     Then chose he Dauid, him to serue, his people for to kepe:
                     Which he toke vp and brought away, euen from the foldes of shepe.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 71
                     As he did folow the ewes with yong, the Lorde did him auaunce:
                     
                        
To fede hys people of Israell, and his inheritaunce.
                     
                        verse 72
                     Then Dauid with a faithfull hart, his flocke and charge did fede:
                     And prudently with all his power, did gouerne them in dede.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Deus venerunt gentes. Psalm. lxxix. I. H
               
                  ¶ The Israelites complayne to God for the greate calamitie, and oppression that they suffered when Antiochus destroyed theyr temple, and citie Ierusalem, desiring God aide against his ragyng tyrannye, lest Gods name and religion shoulde be contemned amonge the Heathen, whyche should see them thus forsaken and peary she.
               
               
                  O Lorde the Gentils doo inuade, Thyne herytage to spoyle: ¶ Sing this as the. lxxvii. psalme.
                  
                  Ierusalem an heape is made, thy temple they defoyle.
                  
                     verse 2
                  The bodies of thy sainctes most dere, abrode to birdes they cast:
                  The fleshe of them that doo thee feare, the beastes deuoure and wast.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Their bloud throughout Ierusalem, as water spilt they haue:
                  So that there is not one of them, to lay theyr dead in graue.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Thus are we made a laughing stocke, almost the world throughout:
                  The enemies at vs iest and mock, whiche dwell our coastes about.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Wilt thou (O Lord) thus in thine ire, against vs euer fume?
                  And shew thy wrath as hoate as fyre, thy folke for to consume?
                  
                     
Upon those people powre the same, whiche did thee neuer know:
                  All realmes whiche call not on thy name consume and ouerthrow.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  For they haue got the vpper hand, and Iacobs sede destroyd:
                  His habytacion and hys land, they haue left wast and voyd.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Beare not in minde our former faultes, with spede some pitie shewe:
                  And ayde vs Lorde, in all assaults, for we are weake and low.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  O God that geuest all health and grace, on vs declare the same:
                  Mey not our works, oure sinnes deface for honor of thy name.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Why shall the wicked still alwaye, to vs as people domme:
                  In thy reproche reioyse and say, where is theyr God become:
               
               
                  Require (O Lord) as thou seest good, before our eyes in syght:
                  Of all these folke thy seruauntes bloud, whiche they spilt in despight.
                  
                     verse 11
                  Receyue into thy syght in hast, the clamours grief and wrong:
                  Of suche as are in prison cast, susteyning yrons strong.
               
               
                  Thy force and strength to celebrate, Lorde set them out of bande:
                  
                     
Whiche vnto deathe are destinate, and in theyr enemies hand.
                  
                     verse 12
                  The nations which haue ben so bolde, as to blaspheme thy name:
                  Into their laps with seuen fold, repay agayne the same.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  So we thy folke thy pasture shepe. will prayse thee euermore:
                  And teache all ages for to kepe, for thee lyke prayse in store.
               
            
            
               ¶ Qui regis Israell. Psalme. lxxx. I. H.
               
                  ¶ A lamentable prayer to God to helpe the miseryes of the Churche, desiring him to consider theyr firste estate, when his fauoure shined towardes them, to the entent that he might finish that worke that he had begon.
               
               
                  Thou hearde that Israell dost kepe, geue eare and take good hede:
                  Which leadest, Joseph lyke a sheepe, Sing this as the, lxvii. and doest him watche and feede.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Thou Lorde I say whose seate is set. on cherubins so bryght:
                  shew forth thy selfe and do not let, send downe thy beames of lyght.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Before Ephraim, and Beniamin, Manasses eke lykewyse:
                  To shew thy power doo thou begin, come healpe vs Lorde aryse.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Direct our harts vnto thy grace, conuert vs Lorde to thee.
                  Shew vs the brightnes of thy face, and then full safe are wee.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 5
                  Lorde God of hostes of Israell, Now long wilt thou I saye.
                  Agaynst thy folke in anger swell, and wilt not heare them pray.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Thou dost them fede with sorrowes depe their breade with teares they eate:
                  And drinke the teares that they do wepe in measure full and greate.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Thou hast vs made, a very stryfe, to those that dwell aboute:
                  And that our foes do loue of lyfe, they laugh and iest it oute.
                  
                     verse 8
                  O take vs Lorde vnto thy grace; conuert our mindes to thee:
                  Shew forth to vs thy ioyfull face, and we full safe shalbe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  From Egipt where it grew not well, thou broughtest a vine full deare:
                  The heathen folke thou diddest expell, and then diddest plant it here.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Thou diddest prepare for it a place, and set her rootes full fast:
                  That it did growe and sprynge a pace, and fill the land at last.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  The hilles were couered rounde about with shade that from it came:
                  And eke the Ceders high, and stoute, with braunches of the same.
                  
                     verse 12
                  Why then diddest thou her wal destroy her hedg pluckt vp thou hast:
                  
                     
That all the folke that pas therby, thy vine may spoyle and waste:
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  The bore out of the wodes so wilde, doeth digge and rote it oute:
                  The furious beastes out of the field, deuoure it all aboute,
                  
                     verse 14
                  O Lorde, of hostes retourne agayne, from heauen loke betime:
                  Beholde and with thy healpe sustayne, this poore vineyard of thyne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 15
                  Thy Plant I say, thyne Israell, whom thy right hand hath set:
                  The sonne whiche thou didst loue so wel, O Lorde doo not forget.
                  
                     verse 16
                  They loppe and cut it downe apace, they burne it eke with fyre:
                  And through the frowning of thy face, we perish in thine ire.
               
               
                  
                     verse 17
                  Let thy right hand be with them nowe, whom thou hast kept so longe:
                  And with the sonne of man whom thou, to thee hast made so stronge.
                  
                     verse 18
                  And so when thou hast set vs free, and saued vs from shame:
                  Then will we neuer fall from thee, but call vpon thy name.
               
               
                  
                     verse 19
                  Lord of hosts through thy good grace conuert vs vnto thee:
                  Beholde vs with a Pleasaunte face, and then full safe are wee.
               
            
            
               
               Exultate deo, Psalme. lxxxi. I. H.
               
                  ¶ An exhortation to prayse God bothe in harte and voyce for his benefytes, and to worship him only: God condemneth the ingratitude, and sheweth what greate benefites they haue loste thorowe theyr owne malyce,
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  BE lyghte and glad in God reioyce 
                     〈♫〉
                   which is our strength & staie be ioyfull and 
                     〈♫〉
                   lyfte vp your voyce, to Iacobs God I say, prepare 
                     〈♫〉
                   your instrumentes most mete some ioyfull 
                     〈♫〉
                   psalme to synge, stryke vp with harp and 
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ute so swete on euery pleasant stryng,
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3
                  Blow as it were in the new mone, with trumpets of the best:
                  As it is vsed to be done, at any solemne feast.
                  
                     verse 4
                  For this is vnto Israell, a statute and a trade:
                  A lawe that must be kept full well, which Iacobs God hath made.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  This clause with Ioseph was decreed, when he from Egipt came:
                  That as a witnes all his sede, shoulde still obserue the same.
                  
                     verse 6
                  When God I say, had so preparde, to bryng him from that land:
                  Where as the speach which he had heard, he did not vnderstand.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  I from his shoulders toke saith he, the burden cleane awaye:
                  And from the furnace quit him free, from burnyng bricke of claye,
                  
                     verse 8
                  When thou in grief, diddest cry and cal I holpe thee by and by:
                  And I did aunswer the withall, in thunder secretly.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  Yea at the waters of discorde, I did thee tempt and proue:
                  Wheras the goodnes of the Lorde, with muttering thou diddest moue,
                  
                     verse 10
                  Heare O my folke, O Israell, and I assure it thee:
                  
                     
Regarde and marke my wordes full wel if thou wilt cleaue to me.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  Thou shalte no God in thee reserue, of any land abrode:
                  Nor in no wise to bow or serue, a straunge and fortaine God.
                  
                     verse 12
                  I am the Lorde, thy God, and I, from Egipt set thee free:
                  Then aske of me aboundauntly, and I will geue it the.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  And yet my people woulde not heare, my voyce when that I spake:
                  Nor Israell would not obey, but did me quite forsake.
                  
                     verse 14
                  Then did I leaue them to their will, in hardnes of theyr hart
                  To walke in theyr owne counsels still, themselues they might peruert.
               
               
                  
                     verse 15
                  O that my people would haue hard, the wordes that I did say:
                  And eke that Israell would regarde, to walke within my waye.
                  
                     verse 16
                  How soone would I cōfound their foes and bring them downe full lowe:
                  And tourne my hand vpon all those, that woulde them ouerthrowe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 17
                  And they that at the Lorde doo rage, as slaues shoulde seke him till:
                  But of his folke the time and age, should florish euer stilll.
                  
                     verse 18
                  

                     
18 I would haue fed them with the croppe, and finest of the wheate:
                  And make the rock with hony droppe, that they theyr filles should eate.
               
            
            
               Deus stetit in Sinagoga. Psalm. lxxxii. I. H
               
                  ¶ The Prophet Declaring God to be present amongest the iudges and maiestrates, reproueth their parcialitie and vnrighteousnes, and exhorteth them to doo iustice but seeyng no amendemente, he desireth God to vndertake the matter, and execute iustice hym selfe.
               
               
                  A Mid the prease with men of might, Sing this as the lxxvui. Ps. The Lorde him selfe did stand:
                  To pleade the cause of truth and ryght, with iudges of the land.
                  
                     verse 2
                  How long (said he) will you procede, false iudgement to awarde?
                  And haue respect for loue of mede, the wicked to regarde?
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Whereas of due ye shoulde defend, the fatherles and weake:
                  And when the poore man doth contend, in iudgement iustly speake.
                  
                     verse 4
                  If ye be wyse defende the cause, of poore men in theyr ryght:
                  And ryd the nedie from the clawes, of tyrants force and myght.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  But nothyng will they know or learne, in vayne to them I talke:
                  They will not see or ought discerne, but still in darknes walke.
                  For so, euen now the tyme is come, that all thynges fall to nought:
                  
                     
And like wise lawes both all and some, for gayne are sold and bought.
               
               
                  
                     verse 6
                  I had decreed it in my syght, as Gods to take you all:
                  And children to the most of myght, for loue I did you call.
                  
                     verse 7
                  But not withstanding ye shall dye, as men, and so decay:
                  O tyrannes I shall you destroye, and plucke you quyte away.
               
               
                  
                     verse 8
                  Up Lord & let thy strength be knowne, and iudge the worlde with might:
                  For why? all nations are thyne owne, to take them as thy ryght.
               
            
            
               ¶ Deus quis Similis. Psalme. lxxxiii. I. H
               
                  ¶ The people of Israell pray vnto the Lord to delyuer them from theire enemies bothe at home and far of, which imagined nothing but their destruccyon: and they desyre that all suche wicked people maye, according as God was accostomed, be stricken with the stormye tempests of Gods wrathe, that they maye know that the Lord is most hye vpon the earthe.
               
               
                  DO not (O God) refrayne thy tounge, in silence, doo not staye:
                  Withholde not Lord thy selfe so long nor make no more delaye. Sing this as the. lxxvii. P
                  
                  
                     verse 2
                  For why, beholde thy foes and see. how they doo rage and crye,
                  And those that beare an hate to thee, holde vp theyr heades on hye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Against thy folke they vse disceate, and craftly they enquire:
                  For thine elect to lye in wayte, theyr councell doth conspire
                  
                     verse 4
                  
                     
4 Come on (sayd they) let vs expell, and plucke these folke awaye:
                  So that the name of Israell, may vtterly decay.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  They all conspire within theyr hart, how they may thee withstand:
                  Agaynst the Lorde to take a parte, they are in league and bande.
                  
                     verse 6
                  The tentes of all the Edomites, the Ismalites also:
                  The Hagarenes and Moabites, with diuers other more.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Geball with Ammon, and likewise, dothe Amalece conspire:
                  The Phillistines against thee ryse, with them that dwell at Cyre.
                  
                     verse 8
                  And Assur eke is well apaide, with them in league to be:
                  And doeth become afence and ayde, to Lots posteritie.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  As thou diddest to the Madianites, so serue them Lorde echeone:
                  As to Cicer and to Iabin, beside the broke kison.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Whom thou in Endor diddest descry, and wast them through thy might,
                  That they like doung on earth did lye, and not in open sighte.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  Make them now & theyr Lords appere, like Zeb and Oreb then:
                  
                     
As Zebah and Zalmana we are, the kynges of Madian.
                  
                     verse 12
                  Whiche said, let vs throughout the land, in all the costes abrode:
                  Posses and take into our hand, the fayer houses of God.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  Tourn them O God with storms as fast as wheeles that haue no staye:
                  Or lyke as chaffe, whiche men doo cast, with windes to flee awaye.
                  
                     verse 14
                  Lyke as the fire, with rage and fume, the mightye forest spilles:
                  And as the flame doth quyte consume, the mountaynes and the hilles.
               
               
                  
                     verse 15
                  So let the tempest of thy wrath, vpon theyr neckes be layde:
                  And of thy stormy wynde and shower, Lorde make them all afrayed.
                  
                     verse 16
                  Lorde brynge them all I thee desire, to suche rebuke and shame
                  That it may cause them to enquire, and learne to seke thy name.
               
               
                  
                     verse 17
                  And let them euermore dayly, to shame and sclaunder fall
                  And in rebuke and oblique, to perish eke with all.
                  
                     verse 18
                  That they may know & fele full well, that thou art called Lord
                  And that alone thou doest excell, and raygne throughout the worlde.
               
            
            
               
               Quam dilecta tabernacula. Psal. lxxxiiii. I. H.
               
                  ¶ Dauid driuen forth of his countrey desireth most ardently to come a gayne to the Tabernacle of the Lord, and the assembly of the saincts to prayse God, pronouncing them blessed that may so doo. Then he prayseth the courage of the people, that passe thorow the wildernes to assemble them selues in Sion. Finally with prayse of this matter & confidence of Gods goodnes he endeth the Psalme.
               
               
                  HOwe pleasaunt is the dwelling place Sing this as the. lxvii. psalme. (O Lorde of hostes) to mee:
                  The Tabernacles of thy grace, how pleasaunte Lorde they bee.
                  
                     verse 2
                  My soule doth longe, full sore to go, into thy courtes abrode:
                  My hart doth lust, my flesh also, in thee the liuing God.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  The sparrowes finde a rome to rest, and saue them selues from wrong:
                  And eke the swalow hath a neste, wherin to kepe her yong.
                  
                     verse 4
                  These birdes full nigh, thine aulter maye) haue place to sitte and synge:
                  O Lorde of hostes thou art I say, my God and eke my kynge.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Oh they be blessed that may dwell, within thy house alwayse:
                  For they all tymes thy factes doo tell, and euer geue thee prayse.
                  
                     verse 6
                  yea happy sure lykewise arthey, whose staye and strength thou art:
                  Which to thy house doo minde the way, and seke it in theyr hart.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  As they go through, the vale of teares, they digge vp fountaynes still:
                  
                     
That as a spring it all appeeres, and thou theyr pittes doest fill.
                  
                     verse 8
                  From strength to strength they walke full fast no fayntnes there shalbe:
                  And so the God of Gods at laste, in Sion they doo see.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  O Lorde of hostes, to me geue heede, and heare when I doo praye:
                  And let it through thine eares procede, O Iacobes God I saye.
                  
                     verse 10
                  O Lorde our shilde, of thy good grace, regarde and so draw nere:
                  Regarde (I say) beholde the face, of thyne anoynted deere.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  For why within thy courtes one daye, is better to abyde:
                  Then other where to keepe or staye, a thousand dayes beside.
                  
                     verse 12
                  Muche rather would I kepe a dore, within the house of God:
                  Then in the tents of wickednes, to settle mine abode.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  For God the Lorde light and defence, will grace and worship geue:
                  And no good thing shall he witholde, from them that purely lyue.
                  
                     verse 14
                  O Lorde of hostes, that man is blest, and happy sure is he:
                  That is perswaded in his brest, to trust all times in thee.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Benedixisti domine. Psalme, lxxxv. I. H
               
                  ¶ Because God with drewe not his roddes from his churche after the retorne from Babilon, first they put him in mind of theyr delyueraūce to the entent that he should not leue the worcke of his grace vnperfite: next they complaine of theyr long affliction: And thirdlye the reioyce in hope of felicytie promised for their deliueraunce, was a figure of Christes kingdome, vnder which should be perfit felycitie,
               
               
                  THou hast ben mercyfull in dede, Sing this as the. lxxxi. Ps. O Lorde vnto thy land:
                  For thou restoredst Iacobs sede, from thraldom oute of bande.
                  
                     verse 2
                  The wicked wayes that they were in, thou didst them cleane remitte:
                  And thou didst hide thy peoples sinne, full close thou coueredst it.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Thine anger eke thou didst asswage, that all thy wrath was gon:
                  And so didst tourne the from thy rage, with them to be at one.
                  
                     verse 4
                  O God, our health, doo now conuert, thy people vnto thee:
                  Put all thy wrath from vs aparte, and anger cese to be.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Why? shall thyne anger neuer ende, but still procede on vs?
                  And shall thy wrath it selfe extend, vpon all ages thus,
                  
                     verse 6
                  Wilt thou not rather tourne therfore, and quicken vs that we:
                  And all thy folke may euermore, be glad and ioy in thee.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  O Lorde, on vs doo thou declare, thy goodnes, to our welth:
                  
                     
Shew forth to vs and doo not spare, thine ayde, and sauing health.
                  
                     verse 8
                  I will hark, what God saith, for he, speaketh to his people peace,
                  And to his sainctes that neuer they, returne to folishnes.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  For why, his health is still at hand, to suche as him doo feare:
                  Wherby great glory in our lande, shall dwell, and florish there.
                  
                     verse 10
                  For truth, and mercy there shall mete, in one to take their place:
                  And peace also, iustice greete with kis, and there they shall imbrace.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  As truth from earth shall spring a pace, and florish pleasauntly:
                  So righteousnes, shall shew her face, and loke from heauen hye.
                  
                     verse 12
                  Yea-God him selfe shall take in hand, to geue vs eche good thinge:
                  And through the costes of all our land, the earth her frutes shall bringe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  Before his face shall iustice goe, muche lyke a guide or stay:
                  He shall direct his steppes also, and kepe them in the way.
               
            
            
               ¶ Inclina domine aurem. Psalm. lxxxvi. I. H.
               
                  ¶ Dauid sore afflicted and forsaken of all. prayeth feruently for delyueraunce: Somtimes rehearsing his miseryes, somtymes the mercyes receyued desiring also to be enstructed of the Lord that he may feare hym also and gloryfye his name. He complayneth also of his aduersaryes, and requyreth to be delyuered from them,
               
               
                  
                  LOrde bow thine eare to my request Sing this as the. lxxxi. Ps. and heare me by and by:
                  With greuous payn and gref opprest full poore, and weake am I.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Preserue my soule, because my waye, and doinges holly bee:
                  And saue thy seruaunte, O my Lorde, that puttes his trust in thee.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Thy mercy Lord on me expresse, defend me eke with all:
                  For through the day I doo not cease, on thee to crye and call.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Comfort O Lorde thy seruaunts soule, that nowe with payne is pinde:
                  For vnto thee Lorde I extoll, and lift my soule and minde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  For thou arte good and bountifull, thy giftes of grace are free:
                  And eke thy mercy plentifull, to all that call on thee.
                  
                     verse 6
                  O Lorde lyke wise when I doo pray, regarde and geue an eare:
                  Mark well the words that I doo say. and all my prayers heare.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  In time when troble doth me moue, to thee I doo complayne:
                  For why I know and well doo proue, thou answerest me agayne.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Among the Gods (O Lorde) is none, with thee to be comparde:
                  
                     
And none can doo as thou alone, the lyke hath not ben harde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  The Gentils and the peoples all, whiche thou didst make and frame.
                  Before thy face, on knees will fall, and gloryfye thy name.
                  
                     verse 10
                  For why thou art so muche of might, all power is thine owne:
                  Thou workest wonders still in sight, for thou art God alone.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  O teache me Lorde thy way, and I shall in thy truth procede:
                  O ioyne my hart to thee so nye, that it thy name may dreade.
                  
                     verse 12
                  To thee my God, wil I geue praise, with all my hart (O Lord:
                  And gloryfie thy name alwayse, for euer through the worlde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  For why thy mercy shewed to me, is great and doth excell:
                  Thou settest my soule, at libertie, out from the lower hell.
                  
                     verse 14
                  O Lorde the proude against me ryse, and heapes of men of might,
                  They seeke my soule, and in no wise, will haue thee in theyr sight.
               
               
                  
                     verse 15
                  Thou Lorde art mercyfull, and meeke, full slacke and slow to wrath:
                  Thy goodnes is full greate, and eke, thy truth no measure hathe.
                  
                     verse 16
                  
                     
16 O turne me, and mercy graunt, thy strength to me apply:
                  O help and saue thine owne seruaunte, thy handmaides sonne am I.
                  
                     verse 17
                  On me some signe of fauour shew, that all my foes may see:
                  And be ashamed because (Lorde) thou, doest helpe and comfort me.
               
            
            
               ¶ Fundamenta eius. Psalm. lxxxvii. I. H
               
                  ¶ The holy Ghost promiseth that the condicion of the Church, whiche was in miserye after the captiuitie of Babilon, shoulde be restored to great excelency, so that there should be nothing more comfortable thē to be nombred among the membres therof.
               
               
                  THat city shall full well endure, Sing this as the. lxxxi. Ps. her ground worke still doth staye:
                  vpon the holy hilles full sure, it can no time decaye.
                  
                     verse 2
                  God loues the gates of Sion best. hys grace doth there abyde:
                  He loued them more then all the rest, of Iacobs tents beside.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Full glorious thinges reported be, in Sion and abrod:
                  Great thinges I say, are sayd of thee, thou citie of our God.
                  
                     verse 4
                  On Rahab I will cast an eye, and beare in minde the same:
                  And Babilon shall eke applye, and learne to know my name.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Loe, Palestine and Tire also, with Ethiope likewise:
                  
                     
A people oulde full longe agoe, were borne and there did rise.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Of Sion they shall say abrod, that diuers men of fame:
                  Haue there sprong vp and the hie God, hath founded fast the same.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  In their recordes, to them it shall, through Gods deuise appere:
                  Of Sion that the chefe of all, had his beginning there.
                  
                     verse 8
                  The trumpetters with such as syng, therin great plenty be:
                  My fountayns & my pleasant springs are compast all in thee.
               
            
            
               ¶ Domine deus salutis. Psalme. lxxxviii. I. H
               
                  ¶ Agrieuous complaynt of the faythfull, sore afflicted by sicknes persecution and abuersitie: being as it were left of God without any consolation? yet he calleth on God by fayth and striueth against desperation, complayning him selfe to be forsaken of all yearthly healpe.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  LOrde God of health ye hope & staye thou 
                     〈♫〉
                   art alone to me, I call & cry throughoute the 
                     〈♫〉
                   daye, and all the nighte to thee. O let my
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   prayers sone ascende, vnto thy sight on hyghe, 
                     〈♫〉
                   enclyne thyne eare O Lorde entend, and herken 
                     〈♫〉
                   to my cry.
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  For why my soule with wo is filled; and doth in trouble dwell:
                  My lyfe and breath almost doth yelde, and draweth nye to hell.
                  
                     verse 4
                  I am estemd as one of them, that in the pit doo fall:
                  And made as one, among those men, that haue no strength at all.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  As one amonge the dead, and free, from things that heare remayne:
                  It weare more easy for me to be, with them the whiche are slayne.
                  
                     verse 6
                  As those that lye in graue I saye, whom thou hast cleane forgot,
                  The whiche thy hand hath cut away: and thou regardst them not.
               
               
                  Yea like to one, shut vp full sure, within the lower pit:
                  
                     
In places darke, and all obscure, and in the depth of it.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Thyne anger, and thy wrathe like wise full sore on me doth lye:
                  And all thy stormes agaynst me ryse, my soule to vex and trye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  Thou puttest my frends, far of frō me, and makst them hate me sore.
                  I am shut vp in prison fast, and can come forth no more.
                  
                     verse 10
                  My sight doth faile through grefe & wo I call to thee O God:
                  Throughout the day, my handes also, to thee I stretche abrode.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  Doest thou vnto the dead declare, thy wondrous workes of fame?
                  Shall dead to lyfe agayne repayre, and prayse thee for the same?
                  
                     verse 12
                  Or shall thy louing kindnes Lorde. be preached in the graue:
                  Or shall with them that are destroyd, thy truth her honor haue?
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  Shall they that lye, in darke full lowe, of all thy wonders wotte?
                  Or there shall they thy iustice knowe, where all thinges are forgot?
                  
                     verse 14
                  But I (O Lorde) to thee alwaye, doo crye and call apace:
                  My prayer eare it be daye, shall come before thy face.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 15
                  Why dost thou Lorde) abhorre my soule in grefe that seeketh thee?
                  And now O Lorde why dost thou hide, thy face awaye from me?
                  
                     verse 16
                  I am afflicte as dying still, from youthe this many a yere:
                  Thy terrours whiche doo vexe me ill, with troubled minde I beare.
               
               
                  
                     verse 17
                  The furies of thy wrathfull rage, full sore vpon me fall:
                  Thy terrours eke, doo not asswage, but me oppres with all.
                  
                     verse 18
                  All day they compas me aboute, as water at the tide:
                  And all at once with streames ful stoute beset me on eche side.
               
               
                  
                     verse 19
                  Thou settest far from me my frendes, and louers euery one
                  Yea and mine oulde acquaintance all, out of my sight are gone,
               
            
            
               ¶ Miserecordias domini. Psalme. lxxxix. IH.
               
                  ¶ With many words doth the prophet prayse the goodnes of God. for his testament and couenaunt that he had made betwene him and his elect by Iesu Christ the sonne of Dauid: Then dothe he complayne of the greate ruine and desolation of the kingdome of Dauid so that to the outward aperaunce. the promis was broken. Finally he prayeth to be delyuered from his aflictions. making mention of the shortnes of mans lyfe, and confirming him selfe by Gods promises,
               
               
                  TO syng the mercyes of the Lorde, Sing this as the. lxvii. my tounge shall neuer spare:
                  And with my mouth from age to age, thy truthe I will declare.
                  
                     verse 2
                  
                     
2 For I haue sayd that mercye shall, for euermore remayne:
                  In that thou dost the heauens stay thy truth appeareth playne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  To myne elect (sayth God) I made, a couenant and be hest:
                  My seruaunt Dauid to perswade, I swore and did protest.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Thy seede for euer I will stay, and stablish it full fast:
                  And still vphoulde thy throne alway, from age to age, to last.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  The heauens shew, with ioy and mirth, thy wondrous workes O Lorde:
                  Thy saincts within thy church on earth thy faith and truth recorde.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Who with the Lorde is equall then, in all the cloudes abrode?
                  Amonge the sonnes of all the Gods, what one is like our God.
               
               
                  God in assemble of the sainctes. is greatly to be drad:
                  And ouer all that dwell about, in terror to be had,
                  
                     verse 8
                  Lorde God of hostes, in all the worlde, what one is lyke to thee:
                  On euery side most mighty Lorde▪ thy truthe is sene to be.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  The raging sea, by thine aduice, thou rulest at thy wyll:
                  
                     
And when the waues therof aryse, thou makst them calme and still.
                  
                     verse 10
                  And Egipt thou Lord hast subdued and thou hast it destroyed.
                  Yea thou thy foes with mighty arme, hast scattred all abrode.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  The heauens thine and still haue ben, lykewyse the earth and laude:
                  The worlde with all that is therin. thou foundest with thy hand.
                  
                     verse 12
                  Both north and south, with est and west thy selfe didst make and frame:
                  Both Tabor mount and Hermon reioyse and prayse thy name,
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  Thyne arme is strong, and ful of power all might therin doth lye:
                  The strength of thy right hand eche houre thou liftest vp on hie.
                  
                     verse 14
                  In righteousnes and equitie, thou hast thy seate and place:
                  Mercy, and truthe are still with thee, and go before thy face.
               
               
                  
                     verse 15
                  That folke is blest that knoweth a right thy present power O God:
                  For in the fauoure of thy sight, they walke full safe abrode,
                  
                     verse 16
                  For in thy name, throughout the daye, they ioy and muche reioyce▪
                  
                  And through thy rightousnes haue they, a pleasaunt fame and noyse.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 17
                  For why theyr glory strength and ayde in thee alone doth lye:
                  Thy goodnes eke that hath vs stayed, shall lyfte our horne on hye.
                  
                     verse 18
                  Our strength, that doth defend vs well, the Lorde to vs doth brynge:
                  The holly one of Israell, he is oure gide and kyng.
               
               
                  
                     verse 19
                  Somtime thy will vnto thy sainctes, in visions thou didst show:
                  And thus then didst thou say to them, thy mind to make them know.
                  
                     verse 20
                  A man of might haue I erect, your king and gyde to be:
                  And set vp him whom I elect, amonge the folke to me.
               
               
                  
                     verse 21
                  My seruaunt dauid, I appoynte, whom I haue searched oute:
                  And with my holy oyle anoynte, him king of all the route.
                  
                     verse 22
                  For why my hand is redy still, with him for to remayne
                  And with mine arme also I will, him strengthen and sustayne
               
               
                  
                     verse 23
                  The ennemies shall not him oppres, they shall him not deuoure:
                  Ne yet the sonnes of wickednes, of him shall haue no power.
                  
                     verse 24
                  His foes likewyse will I destroy, before his face in sighte:
                  
                     
And those that hate him I will plage, and stryke them with my mighte.
               
               
                  
                     verse 25
                  My truth and mercy eke with all, shall still vpon him lye:
                  And in my name his horne eke shall be lifted vp on hye.
                  
                     verse 26
                  His kingdome I will set to be, vpon the sea and sand:
                  And eke the running flouds shall he, embrace with his right hand.
               
               
                  
                     verse 27
                  He shall depend with all hys hart, on me and thus shall saye:
                  My father, and (my God thou arte) my rocke of health and staye.
                  
                     verse 27
                  As one first borne I will him take, of all on earth that sprynges:
                  His might, and honour, I shall make, aboue all worldly kynges.
               
               
                  
                     verse 29
                  My mercy shalbe with him styll, as I my sealfe haue toulde:
                  My faythfull couenaunt to fullfill, my mercy I will houlde.
                  
                     verse 30
                  And eke his seede will I sustayne, for euer strong and sure:
                  So that his seate shall still remayne, whyle heauen doth endure.
               
               
                  
                     verse 31
                  If that his sonnes forsake my lawe, and so begin to swerue:
                  And of my iudgements haue none awe, nor will not them obserue.
                  
                     verse 32
                  
                     
32 Or if they doo not vse aryght, my statutes to them made:
                  And set all my commaundments light, and will not keepe my trade.
               
               
                  
                     verse 33
                  Then with the rod will I begin, theyr doinges to amend:
                  And so with scourging for theyr sin, when that they doo offend.
                  
                     verse 34
                  My mercy yet, and my goodnes, I will not take him froe:
                  Nor handle him with craftines, and so my truthe forgoe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 35
                  But sure my couenaunte I will hould, with all that I haue spoke:
                  No word the which my lippes haue told shall alter or be broke.
                  
                     verse 36
                  Once swore I by myne holynes, and that performe will I:
                  With Dauid I shall kepe promise, to him I will not lye,
               
               
                  
                     verse 37
                  His seede for euermore shall rayne, and eke his throne of might:
                  As doeth the sonne it shall remayne for euer in my sight.
                  
                     verse 38
                  And as the mone within the skye, for euer standeth fast:
                  A faythfull witnes from on hie, so shall his kingdom laste.
               
               
                  
                     verse 39
                  But now O Lorde thou dost reiect, and now thou chaungest chere,
                  
                     
Yea thou art wrothe with thine elect, thine owne anoynted dere.
               
               
                  
                     verse 40
                  The couenant which thy seruaūt made Lorde thou hast quite vndone:
                  And downe vpon the ground also, hast cast his royall crowne.
                  
                     verse 41
                  Thou pluckst his hedges vp with might his walles doest thou confounde:
                  Thou beatest eke his bulworkes downe and breakst them to the ground.
               
               
                  
                     verse 42
                  That he is sore destroyed and forne, of commers by throughoute:
                  And so is made a mocke and scorne, to all that dwell aboute.
                  
                     verse 43
                  Thou their right hand hast lifted vp, that him so sore annoy:
                  And all his foes that him deuoure, loe thou hast made to ioy.
               
               
                  
                     verse 44
                  His swerds edg thou doest take away, that should his foes withstand:
                  To him in warre no victorye, thou geuest nor vpperhand.
                  
                     verse 45
                  His glory thou dost also waste, his throne, his ioy, and mirth:
                  By thee is ouerthrowne, add cast, full low vpon the earthe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 46
                  Thou hast cut of, and made full short, his youth and lusty dayes:
                  And raysed of him an ill reporte, with shame and great disprayse.
                  
                     verse 47
                  
                     
How long away from me, O Lord, for euer wilt thou turne:
                  And shall thine anger still alwaye, as fire consume and bourne.
                  
                     verse 48
                  O call to minde, remembre then, my time consumeth fast:
                  Why hast thou the sonnes of men, as thinges in vayne to wast.
               
               
                  
                     verse 49
                  What man is he that liueth here, and death shall neuer see?
                  Or from the hand of hell his soule, shall he deliuer free?
                  
                     verse 50
                  Where is (O lord) thine oulde goodnes so oft declared beforne?
                  Whiche by thy truth and vprightnes, to Dauid thou hast sworne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 51
                  The great rebukes to minde doo call, that on thy seruauntes lye:
                  The rayling of the people all, borne in my brest haue I.
                  
                     verse 52
                  Wherwith O Lorde thyne enemies, blasphemed haue thy name,
                  The steppes of thine anoynted one, they cease not to defame.
               
               
                  
                     verse 53
                  All prayse to thee, O Lorde of hostes, bothe now and eke for aye:
                  Through skie, and earth in all the costes Amen, amen, I saye.
               
            
            
               ¶ Domine refugium. Psal. lxxxx. I. H
               
                  
                     
¶ Moyses in his prayer setteth before vs the eternal fauour of God towardes his, who are nether admonished by the breuitie of theyr lyfe, nor by his plages to be thanckefull. Therfore Moyses prayeth God to tourne their hartes and continew his mercies towardes them and theyr posteritie for euer.
               
               
                  THou Lorde hast ben our suer defence, Sing this as the. lxxviii. Ps. Our place of ease and rest:
                  In all times past, yea so longe sence, as cannot be exprest.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Or there was made mountaine or hill, the earth or worlde abrod:
                  From age to age and alwayse still, for euer thou art God.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Thou grindest man through gref & paine to dust or clay and then:
                  And then thou sayst agayne, returne, againe ye sonnes of men.
                  
                     verse 4
                  The lastyng of a thousand yeare, what is it in thy sighte:
                  As yester day it doth appere, or as a watche one nighte.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  So sone as thou doest scattre them, then is their life and trade:
                  All as a slepe and like the grasse. whose bewty soone doth fade.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Which in the morning, shines full bright, but fadeth by and by:
                  And is cut downe, ere it be night, all withered dead and drye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  For through thine anger we consume, our might is muche decayed:
                  
                     
And of thy seruent wrath and sume, we are full sore afrayed.
                  
                     verse 8
                  The wicked works yt we haue wrought, thou setst before thine eye:
                  Our priuie faultes, yea eke our thought. thy countenaunce doth espye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  For through thy wrath our daies do wast therof doth nought remayne:
                  Our yeres consume as wordes or blast and are not called agayne.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Our time is threscore yeare and ten, that we doo liue on molde:
                  If one see fourescore, surely then, we count him wonders oulde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  Yet of this tune the strength and chief, the whiche we counte vpon:
                  Is nothing els but painfull grief, and we as blastes are gone.
                  
                     verse 12
                  Who once doth know, what strength is there what might thine anger hath?
                  Or in his hart, who doeth the feare, according to thy wrath?
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  Instruct vs Lorde to know and try, how longe our dayes remayne:
                  That then we may our hartes apply, true wisdom to attayne.
                  
                     verse 14
                  Retourn O Lord, how long wilt thou fourth on in wrath procede:
                  Shew fauour to thy seruauntes now, and healp them at their nede.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 15
                  Refresh vs with thy mercy soone, and then our ioie shalbe:
                  All times so long as lyfe doth last, in harte reioyce shall we,
                  
                     verse 16
                  As thou hast plaged vs before, nowe also make vs glad:
                  And for the yeres wherin full sore, affliction we haue had.
               
               
                  
                     verse 17
                  O let thy worke and power appere and on thy seruauntes lyght:
                  And shew vnto their children dere, thy glory and thy might.
                  
                     verse 18
                  Lord let thy grace and glory stand, on vs thy seruauntes thus:
                  Confirme the workes we take in hand Lorde prosper them to vs.
               
            
            
               ¶ Qui habitat. Psalme. lxxxxi. I. H
               
                  ¶ Here is described in what assurance he lyueth that putteth his whole trust in God, and committeth him selfe whollye to his protection in all temptacyons. A promise of God to those that loue hym, know him and trust in him to deliuer them, and geue them immortall glory.
               
               
                  HE that within the secret place, of God most hie doth dwell:
                  In shadodw of the mightiest grace, at rest shall kepe him well.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Thou art my hope, and my strong hold I to the Lorde will say:
                  My God on hye, in him will I, my whole affiance stay.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  He shall defend thee from the snare, the whiche the hunter layde:
                  
                     
And from that deadly plage and care, wherof thou art afrayed.
                  
                     verse 4
                  And with his winges shall couer thee, and keepe thee safely there:
                  His fayth and truth thy fence shalbe, as sure as sheld and speare.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  So that thou shalt not neede I saye, to feare, or be afflighte,
                  Of all the shafts that flye by daye, nor terrours of the night.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Nor of the plage that priutlye, doth walke in darke so fast:
                  Nor yet of that whiche doth destroye, and at none dayes doth wast.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Yea at thy syde as thou doest stand, a thousand dead shalbe:
                  Ten thousand eke, at thy right hande, and yet shalt thou be free.
                  
                     verse 8
                  But thou shalte see it for thy parte, thyne eyse shall well regarde:
                  That euen lyk, to theyr desert, the wicked haue reward.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  For why (O Lorde) I only lust, to stay my hope on thee:
                  And in the hiest, I put my trust, my sure defence is he.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Thou shalt not nede, none ill to feare, with thee it shall not mell:
                  Nor yet the plage, shall once come nere, thy house where thou dost dwell.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 11
                  For why vnto his aungels all, with charge commaundeth hee:
                  That still in all thy wayes they shall, preserue and prosper thee.
                  
                     verse 12
                  And in thy handes, shall the beare vp, still wayting thee vpon:
                  So that thy foote shall neuer chaunce, to spurne at any stone.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  Upon the Lyon thou shalt go, the adderfell and longe:
                  And treade vpon the Liones yong, with dragons stoute and stronge.
                  
                     verse 14
                  For that he trusteth vnto me, I will dispatch him quite:
                  And him defend, because that he, dothe know my name a right.
               
               
                  
                     verse 15
                  When he for health on me doth crye, an aunswer I will geue:
                  And from his grefe take him will I in glory for to lyue.
                  
                     verse 16
                  2With length of yeres, & dayes of welth, I will fulfill his time:
                  The goodnes of my sauing health, I will declare to him.
               
            
            
               ¶ Bonum est confiteri. Psalm. lxxxxii. I. H
               
                  This Psalme was made to be soung on the sabaoth, to stir vp the people to acknowledge God and to prayse him in his workes: The Prophet reioyseth therin. But the wicked is not able to cōsidre, that the vngodlye, when he his most florishing, shall most spedely peryshe. In the end is discribed the felicitie of the iust, planted in the house of god to prayse the Lorde.
               
               
                  
                  IT is a thing, bothe good and meete, to praise the highest Lorde:
                  And to thine name O thou most hye, to sing in one accorde.
                  
                     verse 2
                  To shew the kindnes of the Lorde, betime ere day be light,
                  And eke declare his truth abrode, when it doth draw to nyght.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Upon ten strynged instrument, on lute and harpe so swete:
                  With all the mirth you can inuent, of instruments most meete,
                  
                     verse 4
                  For thou hast made me to reioyse, in thinges so wrought by thee:
                  And I haue ioy, in harte and voyce, thy handy workes to see.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  O Lorde (how glorious and how great are all thy workes so stoute:
                  So deeply are thy counsels set, that none can try them out.
                  
                     verse 6
                  The man vnwise hath not the wit, this geare to pas to bring:
                  And all such fooles are nothing fit, to vnderstand this thyng.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  When so the wicked at their will, as gras doo spring ful fast.
                  They when they florish in their ill, for euer shalbe wast.
                  
                     verse 8
                  But thou art mighty Lord most hye, yea thou dost raygne therfore:
                  In euery time eternally, both now & euermore.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 9
                  For why (O Lorde) beholde and see, beholde thy foes I say:
                  How all that worke iniquitie, shall perish and decay.
                  
                     verse 10
                  But thou like as an Unicorne, shall lift my horne on hie:
                  With freshe and new prepard oyle, thine ointed king am I.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  And of my foes before mine eyes, shall see the fall and shame:
                  Of all that vp against me rise, myne eare shall heare the same.
                  
                     verse 12
                  The iust shall florish vp on hie, as date trees bud and blowe?
                  And as the ceders multiplye, in Lybanus that growe.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  For they are planted in the place, and dwelling of our God:
                  within his courtes they spring apace, and florish all abrode.
                  
                     verse 14
                  And in their age more frute shall bryng bothe fat and well besene:
                  And pleasauntly both bud and spryng, with boughes and braunches grene.
               
               
                  
                     verse 15
                  To shew that God is good and iust, and vpright is his will:
                  He is my rocke, my hope, and trust, in him there is none ill.
               
            
            
               ¶ Dominus regnauit. Psalm. lxxxxiii. I. H
               
                  ¶ He prayseth the power of God in the creation of the world & beateth downe all people whiche lifte them vp against his maiestye, and prouoketh to consider his promises,
               
               
                  
                  THe Lorde as king a loft doth raygne, ¶ Sing this as the. lxxvii. psalme. in glory goodly dighte:
                  And he to shew his strength & mayne, hath girt him self with might.
                  
                     verse 2
                  The Lord likewise the earth hath made and shaped it so sure:
                  No might can make it moue or sad, at stay it doeth endure.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Eare that ye world was made or wrought thy seate was set before:
                  Beyond all time that can be thought, thou hast ben euermore.
                  
                     verse 4
                  The flouds O Lord the floudes do rise, they rore and make a noyse:
                  The flouddes I say did enterpryse, and lyfted vp theyr voyce.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Yea though the stormes before in sight though seas do rage and swell:
                  The Lord is strong and more of might, for he on hye doth dwell.
                  
                     verse 6
                  And loke what promise he doth make, his houshoulde to defend:
                  For iust and true they shall it take, all times withouten ende.
               
            
            
               ¶ Deus vltionum. Psalm. lxxxxiiii. I. H.
               
                  ¶ He praieth vnto God against the violence & arrogancie of tyrauntes, Then doth he comfort the afflicted by the good issue of their affectyons, as he felte in him selfe and did see in others, and by the ruine of the wicked, whom the Lorde will destroye.
               
               
                  O Lorde thou doest reueng all wronge, Sing this as the. 
                           〈…〉
                        . psalme. that office longes to thee:
                  Sith vengaunce doth to thee belonge, declare that all may see,
                  
                     
Set forth thy sealfe, for thou of ryght, the earth dost iudge and give
                  Reward the proud and men of might, according to theyr pride.
                  
                     verse 3
                  How long shal wicked men beare sway with lifting vp theyr voyce?
                  How long shall wicked men I say, thus trihumph and reioyce?
               
               
                  
                     verse 4
                  How long shall they with brags brust out and proudly prate theyr fill?
                  Shall they reioyce whiche be so stoute, whose works are euer ill?
                  
                     verse 5
                  Thy flocke (O Lorde) thine heritage, they spoyle and vex full sore:
                  Against thy people they doo rage, still dayly more and more:
               
               
                  
                     verse 6
                  The widdowes whiche are comfortles, and straungers they destroy
                  They slea the children fatherles, and none doth put them by.
                  
                     verse 7
                  And when they take these things in hād this talke they haue of thee
                  Can Iacobs God this vnderstand, tush no he can not see.
               
               
                  
                     verse 8
                  O folke vnwise, a people rude, some knowledg now discearne
                  ye fooles amonge the multitude, at length begin to learn.
                  
                     verse 9
                  The lord which made the eare of man he needes of right must heare:
                  He made the eyne, all things must then, before his sight appeare.
                  
                     verse 10
                  
                     
10 The Lorde doth all the world correct, and make men vnderstand:
                  shall he not then your deedes detect, how can ye scape his hand?
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  The lord doth know, the thoughts of mā his hart he setteth full playne:
                  The lord I say mens thoughts doth frame, and findeth them but vayne.
                  
                     verse 12
                  But Lorde that Man is happy sure, whom thou doest kepe in awe:
                  And through correction doest procure, to teache him in thy law.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  Wherby he shall in quyet rest, in time of trouble sitte:
                  When wicked men shalbe supprest, and fall into the pit.
                  
                     verse 14
                  For sure the Lorde will not refuse, his people for to take:
                  His heritage whom he did chuse, he will no time forsake.
               
               
                  
                     verse 15
                  Untill that iudgement be decrede, to iustice to conuert:
                  That all may follow her with spede, that are of vpright hart.
                  
                     verse 16
                  But who vpon my part shall stande, against the cursed trayne?
                  Or who shall rid me from their hand, that wicked workes maintayne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 17
                  Except the Lorde had ben myn ayde, mine enmies to repell:
                  
                     
My soule and lyfe had now ben layde, almost as low as hell:
                  
                     verse 18
                  When I did saye my foote doth slide, and now am lyke to fall:
                  Thy goodnes Lorde did so prouide, to stay me vp with all.
               
               
                  
                     verse 19
                  When with my selfe I mused muche, and could no comfort finde:
                  Then Lorde thy goodnes did me touch and that did ease my minde.
                  
                     verse 20
                  Wilt thou enhaunte thy selfe and draw with wicked men to sit:
                  Which with pretence in stede of lawe, muche mischief doo commit.
               
               
                  
                     verse 21
                  For they consoult against the lyfe, of righteous men and good.
                  And in theyr councells they are ryfe, to sheade the giltles bloud.
                  
                     verse 22
                  But yet the Lorde he is to me, a strong defence or locke:
                  He is my God to him I flee, he is my strength and rock.
               
               
                  And he shall cause their mischefe all, them sealues for to annoye:
                  And in their malice they shall fall, our God shall them destroye.
               
            
            
               ¶ Venite exultemus. Psalme lxxxxv. I. H
               
                  ¶ An earnest exhortaciō to prayse god for the gouernment of the world and the election of his church. An admonishion not to folow the rebellion of the olde fathers, that tempted God in the wildernes: For the which they might not enter into the land of promise.
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  O Come let vs lyfte vp oure voyce, 
                     〈♫〉
                   and synge vnto the Lorde, in him our rock of 
                     〈♫〉
                   health reioyce, let vs with one accorde, yea let 
                     〈♫〉
                   vs come before his face, to geue him thanks and 
                     〈♫〉
                   prayse, in singing Psalmes vnto his grace, let 
                     〈♫〉
                   vs be glad all wayes.
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  For why the Lorde he is no doubte, a greate and myghty God:
                  A kynge aboue all Gods throughout, in all the worlde abrode.
                  
                     verse 4
                  
                     
4 The secretes of the yearth so depe, and corners of the land:
                  The toppes of hilles that are so stepe, he hath them in his hand.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  The sea and waters all are his, for he the same hath wrought:
                  The earth and all that therin is, his hande hath made of nought.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Come let vs bow and prayse the Lorde, before him let vs fall:
                  And knele to him with one acorde, the whiche hathe made vs all.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  For why he is the Lorde our God. for vs he doth prouide?
                  We are his folke he doth vs fede, his shepe, and he our guide.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Today if ye his voice will heare, then harden not your hart:
                  As ye with grudging many a yeare, prouoked me in deserte.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  Wher as your fathers tempted me, my power for to proue:
                  My wondrous works whē they did see, yet still they woulde me moue.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Twise twenty yeare, they did me greue and I to them did saye:
                  They erre in heart and not beleue, they haue not knowne my waye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  Wherfore I sware, when that my wrath was kindled in my brest:
                  
                     
That they should neuer treade the pathe, to enter to my rest.
               
            
            
               ¶ Cantate domino. Psalme. lxxxxvi. I. H
               
                  ¶ An exhortacyon bothe to the Iewes and gentiles to prayse God for hys mercye. And this specyallye ought to be referred to the kingdom of Chryste.
               
               
                  Syng ye with prayse vnto the Lorde, ¶ Sing this as the. lxxvii. psalme. New songs of ioy and mirthe
                  Sing vnto him with one accorde, all people on the yearthe.
                  
                     verse 2
                  yea sing vnto the Lorde, I saye, prayse ye his holy name
                  Declare and shew from day to daye, saluation by the same.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Amonge the Heathen eke declare, hys honor round about
                  To shew his wonders doo not spare, in all the worlde throughout.
                  
                     verse 4
                  For why the Lord is much of might, and worthy prayse alway
                  And he is to be dred of ryght, aboue all Gods I saye.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  For all the Gods of Heathen folke, are idoles that will fade
                  But yet our God he is the Lord, that hath the heauens made.
                  
                     verse 6
                  All prayse and honor eke doo dwell, for aye before his face:
                  Both power and might likewise excell, within his holly place.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 7
                  Ascribe vnto the Lorde alway, ye people of the worlde:
                  All might and worship eke I say, ascribe vnto the Lorde.
                  
                     verse 8
                  Ascribe vnto the Lorde also, the glory of his name:
                  And eke into his courtes doo goe, with giftes vnto the same.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  Fall down and worship ye the lorde, with in his temple bright:
                  Let all the people of the worlde, be fearefull at his sight.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Tell all the world be not agaste, the Lorde doth raigne aboue:
                  Yea he hath set the yerth so fast, that it did neuer moue.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  And that it is the Lorde alone, that ruleth with princely might:
                  To iudge the nations euery one, with equity and right.
                  
                     verse 12
                  The heauens shall great ioy begin, the earth shall eke reioyce:
                  The sea with all that is theirin, shall shoute and make a noice.
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  The field shall ioye and euery thing, that spryngeth of the earth:
                  The wod and euery tree shall sing, with gladnes and with mirth.
                  
                     verse 14
                  Before the presence of the Lorde, and comming of his might:
                  
                     
when he shall iustly iudge the worlde, and rule his folke with right.
               
            
            
               ¶ Dominus regnauit. Psalme. lxxxxvii. I. H
               
                  ¶ The prophet exhorteth all to reioyce for the coming of the kingdome of Christ, dreadfull to the rebels and Idolaters, and ioyfull to the iust whom he exhorteth to innocency, to reioysing and thanks geuing,
               
               
                  THe lord doth raigne, where all ye earth Sing this as the. lxxxxv may ioy with pleasaunt voyce:
                  And eke the yles with ioyfull mirth, may triumphe and reioyce.
                  
                     verse 2
                  Bothe cloudes & darknes eke doo swell and rounde aboute him beate:
                  Yea right and iustice euer dwell, and byde aboute his seate.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Yea fier and heate at once doth runne, and go before his face:
                  Which shall his foes and ennemies burn abrode in euery place.
                  
                     verse 4
                  His lightnes eke, full bright did blase, and to the world appere:
                  Wherat the yearthe did loke and gase, with dreade and deadly feare.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  The hilles like war did melt in sight, and presence of the Lorde:
                  They fled before that rulers might, which gideth all the worlde.
                  
                     verse 6
                  The heauens eke declare and shew, his iustice forth abrode:
                  That all the world may see and knowe the glory of our god.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 7
                  Confusion sure shall come to suche, as worship Idols vayne:
                  And eke to those that glory muche, dome pictures to maintayne,
                  
                     verse 8
                  For all the Idouls of the worlde, whiche they as Gods doo call:
                  Shall feele the power of the Lorde, and downe to hym shall fall.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  With ioy shall Sion here this thyng, and Iuda shall reioyce:
                  For at thy iudgements they shall sing, and make a pleasaunt noyce.
                  
                     verse 10
                  That thou O Lorde art set on hie, in all the earth abrode:
                  And arte exalted wonderously, aboue eche other God.
               
               
                  
                     verse 11
                  All ye that loue the Lorde, doo thys, hate all thinges that is ill:
                  For he doth kepe the soules of his, from suche as would them spill.
                  
                     verse 12
                  And light doth spring vp to the iust, with pleasure for his part:
                  Greate ioye, with gladnes, mirth & lust to them of vpright hart,
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  Ye rigteous in the Lord reioyce, his hollines proclayme:
                  Be thankfull eke with hart and voyce, and mindefull of the same.
               
            
            
               ¶ Cantate domino. Psal, lxxxxviii, I. H
               
                  
                     
¶ An Earnest exhortacyō to all cratures to prayse the Lorde for his power, mercy and fydelitie in his promyse by Christ by whō he hath communicated his saluation to all natiōes.
               
               
                  OSyng ye now vnto the Lorde, a new and pleasaunt songe: Sing this as the. lxxxxv
                  
                  For he hath wrought throughout the world His wōders great & strong.
                  With his rigt hand full worthely, he doth his foes deuoure:
                  And get him sealf the victory, with his owne arme and power.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  The Lord doth make the people know his sauing health and might:
                  The Lorde doth eke his iustice shew, in all the Heathens sight.
                  
                     verse 4
                  His grace and truth to Israell, in minde he doth recorde:
                  That al the yearth, hath sene right wel the goodnes of the Lorde,
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Be glad in him, with ioyfull voyce, all people of the earth:
                  Geue thankes to God, sing and reioyce to him with ioy and mirth.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Upon the harp vnto him sing, geue thankes to him with psalmes:
                  Reioyce before the Lord our king, with trumpets and with shalmes.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Yea let the sea with all therin, with ioy bothe rore and swell:
                  
                     
The earth likewise let it begin, with all that therin dwell.
                  
                     verse 8
                  And let the flouddes reioyse theyr filles, and clap theyr handes apace:
                  And eke the mountaynes and the hilles before the Lorde his face.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  For he shall come to iudge and try, the world and euery wighte:
                  And rule the people mightely, with iustice and with right,
               
            
            
               ¶ Dominus regnauit. psalme. lxxxxix I. H.
               
                  ¶ He cōmendeth the power, equitie, and excellency, of the kingdome of God by Chryst, ouer the Iew and Gentils, and prouoketh them to magnyfye the same & to serue the Lord, folowing the example of the auncyent fathers, Mosies, Aaron, Samuel, who calling vpon God wer harde in theyr prayers.
               
               
                  THe Lord doeth raygne, although at it, The people rage full fore: Sing this as the. lxxxxv. p
                  
                  yea he on Cherubin doth sit, though all the world woulde rore.
                  
                     verse 2
                  The Lorde that doth in Sion dwell, is high and wonders great:
                  Aboue all folke he doth excell, and he aloft is set.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Let all men prayse thy mightye name, for it is featfull sure:
                  And let them magnifye the same, that holy is and pure.
                  
                     verse 4
                  The princely power of our king, doth loue iudgement and ryght:
                  Thou rightly rulest euery thing, in Iacob through thy might.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 5
                  To prayse the Lorde our God deuise, all honour to him doo:
                  His fote stole worship ye likewise, for he is holy too.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Moses, Aron, and Samuell, as priestes on him did call:
                  When they did pray he herd them well and gaue them aunswer all.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Within the cloude to them he spake, then did they labour still:
                  To keepe suche lawes as he did make, and pointed them vntill.
                  
                     verse 8
                  O Lord, our god thou diddest them here and aunswerst them againe:
                  Thy mercy did on them appere. theyr deedes diddest not maintayne.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  O laude and prayse our God and Lord, within this holy hill:
                  For why our God throughoute the world is holy euer styll.
               
            
            
               2 Iubilate deo omnis terra. Psalme. C.
               
                  He exhorteth all to serue the Lorde who hath made vs, and to enter into his courts and assemblies to prayse his name.
               
               
                  IN God the Lorde be glad and lyght, prayse him throughout the yearthe: Sing this as the. lxvii.
                  
                  Serue him and come before his sight, with singing and with mirth.
                  
                     verse 12
                  Know that the Lorde our God he is, he did vs make and kepe:
                  Not we our sealues for we are his, owne folke and pasture shepe.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 13
                  O go into his gates alwayes, geue thankes within the same:
                  within his courts set forth his prayse, and laud his holy name.
                  
                     verse 14
                  For why the goodnes of the Lorde, for euermore doth raygne:
                  From age to age throughout the world his truthe doth still remayne.
               
            
            
               ¶ Miserecordiam et iudicium. Psalm. Ci. N.
               
                  ¶ Dauid describeth what gouernment he will obserue in his house and kingdome. He will punish and correct by roting out the wicked, and cheryshing the godly persones.
               
               
                  I Mercye will and iudgement sing, O Lorde God vnto thee: Sing this as the. lxxxi. Ps.
                  
                  And wisely doo in perfect way, vntill thou come to me.
                  And in the middest of my house walke, in purenes of my sprite:
                  And I no kind of wicked thing, will set before my sight.
               
               
                  I hate their worke that fall away, it shall not cleaue to me,
                  From me shall part the froward hart: none euell will I see.
                  Him will I stroy that sclaundereth, his neyghbour priuely:
                  The lofty hart I can not beare, nor him that loketh hie.
               
               
                  Mine eyes shall be on them within, the land that faithfull be:
                  
                     
In perfect way who worketh, shall be seruant vnto me:
                  I will no guilefull person haue, within my house to dwell:
                  And in my presence he shal not, remaine that lies doth tell:
               
               
                  Betymes I will destroy euen all, the wicked of the lande:
                  That I may from Gods citie cut, the wicked workers band.
               
            
            
               Domine exaudi orationem. Psalm. C. ii. I. H.
               
                  ¶ It semeth that this prayer was apointed to the faithful to pray in the captiuitie of Babilon. A consolation for the buyldyng of the churche: wherof foloweth the prayse of god to be published vnto al posterities The conuersion of the Gentels: And the stabilytie of the churche.
               
               
                  
                     O Heare my prayer, Lorde, and let, my crye come vnto thee:
                     In tyme of troble doo not hide, thy face away from me.
                     Inclyne thyne eares to me, make haste, Sing this as the. lxvii. to heare me when I call:
                     For as the smoke doth fade, so doo my dayes consume and fall.
                  
                  
                     And as a herth, my bones are burnt: my hart is smitten dead,
                     And withers as the grasse, that I forget to eate my bread.
                     By reason of my groning voyce, my bones cleaue to my skinne:
                     
                        
As pellicane of wildernes, suche case now am I in.
                  
                  
                     And as an oule in desert is, loe I am suche a one:
                     I watch, and as a sparow on the house top am alone.
                     Loe dayly in reprochefull wise, mine enmies doo me scorne:
                     And they that doo against me rage, against me they haue sworne.
                  
                  
                     Surely with ashes, as with breade, my hunger I haue filld,
                     And mingled haue my drink with teares that fro mine eyes haue stild,
                     Because of thy displeasure, Lord, thy wrath and thy disdayne:
                     For thou hast lifted me aloft, and cast me downe agayne.
                  
                  
                     The dayes wherin I pas my lyfe, are like the fleting shade:
                     And I am withered like the gras, that sone away doth fade.
                     But thou, O Lord, for euer doest remaine in stedy place,
                     And thy remembrance euer doth abide from race to race.
                  
               
               
                  The second parte.
                  
                     Thou wilt aryse, and mercy thou, to Sion wilt extend:
                     The time of mercy, now the time foreset is come to end.
                     
                        
For euen in the stones therof, thy seruants do delighte,
                     And on the dust therof they haue, compassion in theyr sprite.
                  
                  
                     Then shall the Heathen peoples feare, the Lordes most holy name:
                     And all the kinges on earth shall drede thy glory and thy fame:
                     Then when the Lord the mighty God, againe shall Syon rere,
                     And then when he most nobly in, his glory shall appeare:
                  
                  
                     To prayer of the desolate, when he himself shall bend:
                     when he shall not disdayne vnto, theyr prayer to attend.
                     This shalbe written for the age, that after shall succede:
                     the people yet vncreated. the Lordes renome shall sprede.
                  
                  
                     For he from his hie sanctuarye, hath loked downe belowe,
                     and out of Heauen hath the Lord, beheld the earth also:
                     That of the mourning captiue he, might heare the woefull crye,
                     And that he might deliuer those, that damned are to dye:
                  
                  
                     That they in Sion may declare, the Lordes most holy name,
                     
                        
and in Ierusalem set fourth, the prayses of the same:
                     Then when the people of the land, and kingdomes with accorde,
                     Shalbe assembled for to do: theyr seruice to the Lorde.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The third parte.
                  
                     My former force of strength he hath, abated in the way,
                     And shorter he did cut my dayes: thus I therfore did say:
                     My God, in middes of all my dayes, now take me not away:
                     Thy yeres endure eternally from age to age for ay.
                  
                  
                     Thou the foundations of the earth, before all time hast layde,
                     And Lorde the heauens are the work, which thine owne hands haue made.
                     Yea they shall perish and decay, but thou shalt tary still:
                     And they shall all in tyme waxe olde, euen as a garment will.
                  
                  
                     Thou as a garment shalt then chaunge, and changed shall they be:
                     But thou doest still abide the same, thy yeares doo neuer flee.
                     The children of thy seruantes shall, continually endure,
                     And in thy sight their happy sede for euer shall stand sure.
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶ 1 Benedic anima mea. Psalm. Ciii. T. S.
               
                  ¶ This is a Psalme most excellent, wherin the Prophet doth prouoke men and angels, and all creatures to prayse the Lorde for his fatherly mercyes, and deliuerance of his people from all euils for his prouivence ouer all thinges and the preseruation of the faithfull.
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      
                     My soule geue laud vnto the lord my 
                        〈♫〉
                      sprite shall doo the same: and all the secrets of 
                        〈♫〉
                      my hart praise ye his holy name, Geue thanks 
                        〈♫〉
                      to god for all his gifts, shew not thy self vnkind
                  & suffer not his benefites to slip out of thy mind.
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     That gaue thee pardon for thy faults, and thee restored agayne:
                     For all thy weake and frayle disease, and healde thee of thy payne.
                     
                        verse 4
                     
                        
4 That did redeme thy life from death, from whiche thou couldest not flee:
                     His mercy and compassion bothe, he did extend to thee.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     That filled with goodnes thy desyre, and did prolong thy youth:
                     Like as the Egle casteth her bill, wherby her age renueth.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 6
                     The Lorde with iustice doth repaye, all suche as be opprest:
                     So that their suffrings & their wrongs, are turned to the best.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     his wayes and his commaundements to Moyses he did shew:
                     His counsels and his valiant actes, the Israelites did know.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 8
                     The Lorde is kinde and mercyfull, when sinners doo him greue:
                     The slowest to conceyue a wrath, and rediest to forgeue.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     He chideth not vs contiuually, though we be full of stryfe:
                     Nor kepeth our faultes in memory, for all our sinfull lyfe.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10
                     Nor yet according to our sinnes, the Lorde doth vs regarde,
                     Nor after our iniquities, he doth not vs rewarde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     But as the space is wondrous great, twixt heauen and earth aboue:
                     
                        
So is his goodnes muche more large, to them that do him loue.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 12
                     God doth remoue our sinnes from vs, and our offences all:
                     As farre as is the sunne rising, full distant from his fall.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The second part.
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     And loke what pitte parents deare, vnto their children beare:
                     Like pitie beareth the Lorde to suche, as worship him in feare.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 14
                     The lord yt made vs knoweth our shape, our mould and fashion iust:
                     Howe weake and frayle our nature is, and how we be but dust.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     And how the tyme of mortall men, is lyke the withering hay:
                     Or like the floure right fayre in field, that fadth full sone away.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 16
                     Whose glosse & beautie stormy windes, doo vtterly disgrace:
                     And make that after theyr assaults, suche blossomes haue no place.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     But yet the goodnes of the Lorde, with his shall euer stand:
                     Theyr childrens children do receyue, his righteousnes at hand.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 18
                     I incane which kepe his couenant, with all theyr whole desire.
                     And not forget to doo the thing, that he doth them require.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 19
                     The heauens hie are made the seate, and fotestole of the Lorde:
                     And by his power imperiall, he gouerneth all the world.
                     
                        verse 20
                     ye angels whiche are great in power, prayse ye and bles the Lorde:
                     Which to obey and doo his wyll, immediatly accorde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 21
                     Ye noble hostes and ministers, cease not to laude hym styll:
                     Which ready are to execute, hys pleasure and his wyll.
                     
                        verse 22
                     ye all his workes in euery place, prayse ye his holy name:
                     My hart my mynde, and eke my soule, prayse ye also the same.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶Benedic anima mea. Psalm. Ciiii, w. K
               
                  ¶ An excellent psalme to prayse God for the creation of the worlde, and the gouernance of the same by his maruelous prouidence: where in the Prophet prayeth againste the wicked, who are occasions that God diminisheth his blessings.
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      
                     My soule praise the lord: speake good 
                        〈♫〉
                      of his name. O lord our great god, how dost the
                        •
                     


                     
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      appeare, So passing in glory that great is thy 
                        〈♫〉
                      same: honour and maiestie in thee shine most 
                        〈♫〉
                      cleare. with light as a robe, thou hast thee beclad 
                        〈♫〉
                      wherby all the earth thy greatnes may see, the 
                        〈♫〉
                      heauens in such sort thou also hast spread, that 
                        〈♫〉
                     it to a curtaine compared may be.
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     His chamber beames lye, in the cloudes full sure,
                     Which as his charet, are made him to beare:
                     
                        
And there with much swiftnes his course dothindure,
                     Upon the winges riding of winde in the ayre.
                     He maketh his sprites: as herauldes to go:
                     And lightnings to serue we see also prest:
                     His will to accomplish they runne to and fro,
                     To saue, or consume thinges, as semeth him best.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     He groundeth the earth, so firmely and fast,
                     That it once to moue none haue shall sucke power
                     
                        verse 6
                     The depe afaire couering for it made thon hast,
                     Which by his owne nature the hilles wolde deuoure,
                     
                        verse 7
                     But at thy rebuke the waters doo flee,
                     And so geue due place, thy worde to obaye:
                     At thy voyce of thunder so fearfull they be,
                     That in theyr great raging, they hast sone away.
                  
                  
                     The mountaynes full hygh they then vp ascend:
                     If thou doo but speake,
                     
                        
So likewise the valleis moste quickely descend,
                     Where thou them appointest, remayne they doo still.)
                     
                        verse 9
                     Their bondes hast thou set how farre they shall runne,
                     So as in their rage not that pas they can:
                     For God hathe appointed, they shall not returne
                     The earth to destroy more, whiche made was for man.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 10
                     He sendeth the springs to strong streames or lakes,
                     Which runne doo full swyft amonge the huge hilles,
                     
                        verse 11
                     Where both the wilde asses, their thirst oft times slakes,
                     And beastes of the mountaynes therof drink their filles,
                     
                        verse 12
                     By these pleasant springs or fouutaynes full fayre.
                     The foules of the ayre abide shall and dwell:
                     Who moued by nature to hoppe here and there,
                     Among the grene branches their songs shall excell,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     The mountaines to moist, the cloudes he doth vse:
                     The earth with his workes are wholy repleat:
                     
                        verse 14
                     
                        
14 So as the brute cattell he dooeth not refuse,
                     But grasse doth prouyde them, and herbe for mans meate.
                     
                        verse 15
                     Yea breade, wine and oyle, he made for mans sake,
                     His face to refresh, and hart to make strong,
                     
                        verse 16
                     The ceders of Liban this greate Lorde dyd make,
                     Whiche trees he doeth nourish, that grow vp so long.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 17
                     In these may birdes buylde, and make there theyr nest:
                     In firre trees the storckes remayne and abyde:
                     
                        verse 18
                     The hie hilles are succours, for wilde goates to rest,
                     And eke the rocks stonye for conyes to hyde.
                     
                        verse 19
                     The moone then is set her seasons to runne,
                     The dayes from the nightes therby to discearne:
                     And by thee descending also of the sunne,
                     The colde from heate alway therby we do learne.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 20
                     When darkenes doth come by Gods will and power,
                     Then crepe forth doo all the beastes of the wood:
                     
                        verse 21
                     
                        
21 The lions range roaring their pray to deuoure.
                     But yet it is thou Lord, which giuest them foode.
                     
                        verse 22
                     Assone as the sunne is vp they retyre.
                     To touche in theyr dennes then are they full fayne,
                     
                        verse 23
                     That man doo his worke may: as right doth require:
                     Till night come and call him, to take rest agayne.
                  
               
               
                  The thirde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 24
                     How sondry, O Lorde, are all thy workes founde.
                     With wisdom full great, they are in dede wrought:
                     So that the whole worlde of thy prayse doth sounde,
                     And as for thy ryches, they passe all mens thought:
                     
                        verse 25
                     So is the great sea, which large is and broade,
                     Where thinges that crepe, swarme. and beastes of eche sorte:
                     
                        verse 26
                     There both mightie shippes saile, and some lye at roade:
                     The whale huge and monstrous there also doth sporte.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 27
                     All thinges on thee wayte: thou doest them relieue,
                     And thou in due tyme full well doest them fede.
                     
                        verse 28
                     
                        
28 Now when it doth please thee, the same so to geue,
                     They gather full gladly those thinges which they nede,
                     Thou openest thyne hand, and they finde suche grace,
                     That they with good thinges are filled we see:
                     
                        verse 29
                     But sore are they troubled, if thou turne thy face.
                     For if thou their breath take, vile dust then they be.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 30
                     Againe when thy sprite from thee doth procede,
                     All things to appoint, and what shall insue,
                     Then are they created, as thou hast decreed,
                     And doest by thy goodnes the drye earth renew.
                     
                        verse 31
                     The prayse of the Lorde, for euer shall last,
                     Who may in his workes, by right well reioyce.
                     
                        verse 32
                     His loke can the earth make, to tremble full fast,
                     And likewise the mountains to smoke at his voyce.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 33
                     To thys Lorde and God sing will I alwayes:
                     So longe as I liue, my God prayse wyll I
                     
                        verse 34
                     
                        
Then am I most certayne my wordes shall him please:
                     I will reioyce in him, to him will I cry.
                     
                        verse 35
                     The sinners, O Lorde, consume in thine ire,
                     And eke the peruerse them roote out with shame:
                     But as for my soule, now let it still desire.
                     And say with the faithful, prayse ye the Lordes Name.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Confitemini domino. Psalm. Cv. N.
               
                  ¶ He prayseth the singuler goodnes of God who hathe of all the people of the worlde chosen a peculier people to him selfe. and hauyng chosen them, neuer ceaseth to doo them good, euen for his promes sake.
               
               
                  
                     GEue prayses vnto God the Lorde, and call vpon his name:
                     Among the people eke declare, his workes, to spred his fame. Sing this as the. lxxxxv
                     
                     Singye vnto the Lorde, I say, and sing vnto him prayse,
                     And talke of all the wondrous workes, that he hath wrought alwayes.
                  
                  
                     In honor of his holy name, reioyse with one accorde,
                     And let the hart also reioyse of them that seke the Lorde.
                     Seke ye the Lord, and seke the strength of his eternall might,
                     
                        
And seke his face continually, And presence of his sight.
                  
                  
                     The wondrous works that he hath don, kepe still in mindfull hart,
                     Ne let the iugements of his mouth, out of your minde depart,
                     Ye that of faithfull Abraham, his seruant are the sede,
                     ye his elect, the children that of Iacob doo procede:
                  
                  
                     For he, he only is I say, the myghty Lord our God,
                     And his most rightfull iugements are through all the earth abrode.
                     His promise and his couenant, whiche he hath made to his
                     He hath remembred euermore, to thousandes of degrees.
                  
               
               
                  The. ii. parte.
                  
                     The couenant which he hath made, with Abraham long agoe,
                     And faithfull othe which he hath sworne to Isaac also,
                     And did confirme the same for law, that Iacob should obey:
                     And for eternall couenant to Israell foray,
                  
                  
                     when thus he said, loe I to you, all Canaan land will geue,
                     The lot of your inheritance wherin your sede shall lyue,
                     
                        
Although their number at that tyme, did very small appeare,
                     yea very small, and in the land they then but strangers were.
                  
                  
                     Whyle yet they walkt from land to lande, without a sure abode,
                     And while fro sondry kingdomes they did wander all abrode,
                     And wrong at none oppressers hand, he suffred them to take,
                     But euen the great and mighty kinges, reproued for their sake.
                  
                  
                     And thus he sayd, touche ye not those, that mine anoynted be,
                     Ne doo the prophets any harme, that doo pertayne to me.
                     He calld a dearth vpon the land, of death he stroyed the store:
                     But he against their time of nede, had sent a man before.
                  
               
               
                  The third parte.
                  
                     Euen Ioseph which had once ben solde to liue a slaue in woe:
                     Whose feete they hurt in stocks, whose soule, the iron pearst also.
                     Untill the tyme came when his cause, was knowne apparantly,
                     The mighty word of God the Lord, his faultles truth did trye.
                  
                  
                     The king sent and deliuerd him, from prison where he was:
                     
                        
The ruler of the people then, did freely let hym pas:
                     And ouer all hys house he made, him Lorde to beare the swey,
                     and of his substance made him haue, the rule and all the stay,
                  
                  
                     That he might to his will instruct the princes of his land,
                     And wisdomes lore his auncyent men, might teache to vnderstand.
                     Then into the Egiptian land, came Israell also:
                     And Iacob in the land of Ham, did liue a straunger thoo.
                  
                  
                     His people he excedingly, in number made to flowe:
                     And ouer all their enemies, in strength he made them growe.
                     whose hart he turnd, that they with hate his people did entreate:
                     And did his seruantes wrongfully, Abuse with false deceite.
                  
                  
                     His faithfull seruant Moses then. and Aaron whom he chose,
                     He did commaund to goe to them, his message to disclose.
                     The wondrous message of his signes, among them they did shewe:
                     And wonders in the land of Ham, then did they worke also.
                  
                  
                     
                     Darknes he sent, and made it darke, in dede of brighter day,
                     And vnto his commission they did not disobey.
                     He turnd theyr waters into bloud, he did their fishes slay:
                     Their land brought frogs, euē in yt place where their king Pharao lay.
                  
                  
                     He spake and at his voyce there came, great swarmes of noysome flyes,
                     And all the quarters of theyr land, were filld with crauling lyse.
                     He gaue them colde and stony hayle, in stede of milder rayne:
                     And firy flames within theyr land, he sent vnto theyr payne.
                  
                  
                     He smote their vines, and al theyr trees wheron their figges did growe,
                     And all the trees within their coastes, downe did he ouerthrowe,
                     He spake: then caterpillers did, and greshoppers abound,
                     Which eate the grasse in all their land and frute of all their ground.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The. v. parte.
                  
                     The first begotten in their land, eke deadly did he smite,
                     yea the beginning and first frute, of all theyr strength and might,
                     With gold and siluer he them brought, from Egipt land to passe,
                     
                        
And in the number of their tribes, no feble one there was.
                  
                  
                     Egipt was glad and ioyfull then, when they did thense depart:
                     For terrour and the feare of them, was fallen vpon theyr hart.
                     To shroude them frō the parching heat a cloude he did display:
                     And fire he sent to geue them lyght, when night had hid the day.
                  
                  
                     They asked and he caused quayles, to rayne at their request,
                     And fully with the bread of heauen, their hunger be represt.
                     He opend then the stony rock, and waters gushed out,
                     And in the drye and parched groundes lyke riuers ranne about.
                  
                  
                     For of his holy couenant, ay myndefull was he thoe:
                     Which to his seruant Abraham, he plighted long agoe.
                     He brought his people forth with mirth and his elect with ioy:
                     Out of the cruell land where they, had lyued in great anoye.
                  
                  
                     And of the heathen men he gaue, to them the frutefull landes,
                     The labors of the people eke they toke into theyr hands.
                     
                        
That they his holy statutes might, obserue for euermore.
                     And faithfully obey his lawes, prayse ye the Lorde therfore.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Confitemine domino. Psal. Cvi. N.
               
                  ¶ The people dispersed vnder Antiochus doo magnifie the goodnes of God emonge the iust and repentant: Desiring to be brought agayne into the lande by Gods mercyfull vysytacion. And after the manifold meruayles of God wrought in their deliueraunce forth of Egipt and the great ingratitude of the people rehearsed, they doo praye and dedesier to be gathered from among the Heathē to the entent they may prayse the name of the God of Israell.
               
               
                  
                     PRayse ye the Lod, for he is good, Sing this as the. lxxxxv his mercye dures for ay:
                     Who can expresse his noble actes, or all his prayse display.
                     They blessed are that iugment kepe, and iustly doo alwaye:
                     With fauour of thy people, Lorde, remember me I pray,
                  
                  
                     And with thy sauing health O Lorde, vouchesafe to visite me:
                     That I the great felicytie, of thine elect may see.
                     And with thy peoples ioy I may, a ioyfull minde posses:
                     And may with thine inheritance, a glorying hart expres.
                  
                  
                     Bothe we and eke our fathers all, haue sinned euery one:
                     We haue committed wickednes, and leudly we haue done,
                     
                        
The wonders great which thou O lord hast done in Egipt land:
                     Our fathers, though they saw them al, yet did not vnderstand.
                  
                  
                     Nor they thy mercies multitude, did kepe in thankfull mind?
                     But at the sea yea the red sea, rebelled most vnkind.
                     Neuertheles he saued them, for honor of hys name,
                     That he might make his power knowne and spred abrode with fame.
                  
                  
                     The red sea he did then rebuke, and forthwith it was dryed:
                     And as in wildernes, so through, the depe he did them guide
                     He saued them from the cruel hand, of their despitefull soo
                     And from the enmies hand he did, deliuer them also.
                  
               
               
                  The second parte.
                  
                     The waters their oppressors whelmd, not one was left alyue,
                     Then they beleued his wordes, & praise in song they did him geue.
                     But by and by vnthankefully, his workes they cleane forgat:
                     And for his counsell and his will, they did neglect to wayte.
                  
                  
                     But lusted in the wildernes. with fond and gredy lust,
                     
                        
And in the desert tempted God, the stay of all theyr trust,
                     And then theyr wanton mindes desire he suffred them to haue,
                     but wasting leannes ther withall into their soule he gaue,
                  
                  
                     Then, when they lodged in the tentes, at Moses they did grutch,
                     Aaron the holy of the Lorde, so did they enuie muche.
                     Therfore the earth did open wide, and Dathan did deuoure:
                     And all Abrams companye, did couer in that houre.
                  
                  
                     In their assemblie kindled was, the whote consuming fyre,
                     And wasting flame did then burne vp, the wicked in his ire.
                     Upon the hill of Horeb they an idole calf did frame,
                     And there the molten image they did worship of the same.
                  
                  
                     Into the likenes of a calfe, that fedeth on the grasse:
                     Thus they their glory turnd and all, their honor did deface.
                     And God their only sauiour, vnkindly they forgot,
                     Which many great and mighty things in Egip land hadt wrought,
                  
               
               
                  
                  The third parte.
                  
                     And in the land of Ham for them. most wondrous works had done
                     And by the red sea dredfull things performed long agone.
                     Therfore for their so shewing them, forgetfull and vnkind,
                     To bring destruction on them all he purposde in his minde.
                  
                  
                     Had not his chosen Moses stoode, before them in the breake:
                     To turne his wrath, lest he on them, with slaughter should him wreke.
                     They did despise the pleasant land, that he beheght to geue:
                     Yea and the workes that he had spoke, they did no whit beleue:
                  
                  
                     But in their tents with grudging hart, they wickedly repined,
                     Nor to the voyce of God the Lorde, they gaue a harkning mynde,
                     Therfore against them lifted he, his strong reuenging hand,
                     Them to destroy in wildernes, ere they should see the land.
                  
                  
                     And to destroy theyr sede among the nations with his rod,
                     And through the contrees of the world to scatter them abrode.
                     To Baal Peor then they did, adioyne themselues also,
                     
                        
And eate the offringes of the dead so they forsoke him tho.
                  
                  
                     Thus with theyr owne inuentions, his wrath they did prouoke,
                     And in his so inkindled wrath, the plage vpon them broke.
                     But Phineas stoode vp with zeale, the sinners vile to stay,
                     And iudgement he did execute, and then the plage did stay,
                  
               
               
                  The. iiii. parte.
                  
                     It was imputed vnto him. for righteousnes that day,
                     And from thenceforth so compted is from race to race foraye.
                     At waters eke of Meribah, they did him angry make,
                     Yea so far fourth that Moses was then punisht for theyr sake,
                  
                  
                     Because they vext his sprite so sore, that in impatient heate
                     His lippes spake vnaduisedly, his feruor was so greate,
                     Nor as the Lorde commaunded them. they slew the people thoe,
                     But were among the heathen mixt, and learnde their workes also,
                  
                  
                     And did their idoles serue, whiche were their ruine and decay,
                     To feends their sonnes & daughters they did offer vp and slay.
                     
                        
yea with vnkindly murdring knife, the giltles bloud they spilt,
                     yea theyr owne sons & daughters bloud without all cause of gilt,
                  
                  
                     Whom they to Canaan idoles then, offerd with wicked hand,
                     And so with blood of innocents, defyled was the land.
                     Thus wer they stayned with the works of their owne filthy way,
                     And with their owne inuentions, a whoring did they stray.
                  
                  
                     Therfore against his people was the Lordes wrath kind led sore,
                     And euen his owne in heritance therfore he did abhorre.
                     Into the handes of heathen men, he gaue them for a prey:
                     And made theyr foes the lords whō they were forced to obey.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The, v, parte.
                  
                     Yea and their hatefull enemies, opprest them in the land:
                     And they were humbly made to stoope as subiectes to theyr hand.
                     Full oftentimes from thrall had he, deliuerd them before,
                     But with their counsels they to wrath prouoked him euermore.
                  
                  
                     Therfore they by their wickednes, were brought full low to lye.
                     
                        
yet when he saw them in distres, he harkned to theyr crye.
                     He calld to mind his couenant, which he to them had swore.
                     And by his mercies multitude, repented him therfore.
                  
                  
                     And fauour he them made to finde, before the sight of those:
                     That led them captiue from their land, when erst they were their foes.
                     Saue vs, O Lorde that art our God, saue vs O Lord we pray,
                     And from among the Heathen folke, Lorde, gather vs away.
                  
                  
                     That we may spred the noble prayse, of thy most holy name,
                     That we may glory in thy prayse and sounding of thy fame.
                     The Lorde the God of Israell, be blest for euermore.
                     Let all the people say Amen. prayse ye the Lord therfore.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Confitemini domino. Psalme. Cvii. VV. K.
               
                  ¶ The Prophet exhorteth all those that are redemed by the Lord and gathered vnto hym, to geue thankes for this mercyfull prouidence of God, gouerning all thynges at his good pleasure, sending good and euill, prosperitie and aduersitie, to bryng men vnto him. Therfore as the righteous thereat reioyce, so shall the wicked haue their mouthes stopped.
               
               
                  
                     GEue thankes vnto the Lorde our God, Sing this as the. xxix. Psal. for gratious is he:
                     And that his mercy hath none ende,



all mortall men may se.
                     
                        verse 2
                     Suthe as the Lorde redemed hathe, with thanks should prayse his name
                     And shew how they from foes wet fred, and yow he wrought the same,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3
                     He gathered them forth of the landes, that lay so farre about:
                     From East to west, from north to south his hand did finde them out.
                     
                        verse 4
                     They wandred in the wildernes, and strayed from the way,
                     And founde no citie where to dwell, that serue might for theyr stay.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     Whose thirst and honger was so great in these desertes so voyde:
                     That faintnes did them sore assalt, and eke their soules anoyde.
                     
                        verse 6
                     Then did they crye in their distres, vnto the Lorde for ayde,
                     Who did remoue their troublous state, according as they prayde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     And by that way which was most right be led them like a guide:
                     That they might to a citie go, and there also abide.
                     
                        verse 8
                     Let men therfore before the Lorde, confes his goodnes then:
                     And shew the wonders, 'that he doth, before the sonnes of men.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     For he the emptie soule sustaynde, whom thirst had made to faynte:
                     
                        
The hungrie soule with goodnes fed, and did them eke acquainte:
                     
                        verse 10
                     Suche as doo dwell in darkenes depe where they of death do wayte,
                     Fast bound to tast such troublous storms as yron chains doo threate:
                  
               
               
                  The second parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     For that against the lords owne words they sought so to rebell.
                     Esteming light his counsels high, which doo so farre excell.
                     
                        verse 12
                     But when he humbled them full lowe, they then fell downe with grief,
                     And none was found, so muche to helpe wherby to get relief.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     Then did they crye in their distres, vnto the Lorde for ayde:
                     Who did remoue their troublous state, according as they prayde.
                     
                        verse 14
                     For he from darknes out them brought and from deaths dredfull shade,
                     Bursting with force the yron bandes, which did before them lade.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     Let men therfore before the Lord, confes his kindnes then:
                     And shew the wonders that he doth, before the sonnes of men.
                     
                        verse 16
                     For he threw downe their gates of bras and brake them with strong hand
                     Theyron barres he smote in two: nothing could him withstand.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 17
                     The foolish folke great plagues do fele and cannot from them wend:
                     But hepe on me to those they haue, because they doo offend.
                     
                        verse 18
                     Their soule so much did lothe all meat that none they coulde abyde:
                     Wherby death had them almost caught, as they full truly tryde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     Then did they crye in theyr distres, vnto the Lorde for ayde:
                     Who did remoue their troublous state, according as they prayde.
                     
                        verse 20
                     For he then sent to them his worde, whiche health did sone restore,
                     And brought them frō those dangers depe wherin they were before.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The thyrde parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 21
                     Let men therfore before the Lorde, confes his kindnes then,
                     And shew the wonders that he doeth, before the sonnes of men.
                     
                        verse 22
                     And let them offer sacrifice, with thankes and also feare,
                     And speake of all his wondrous works with glad and ioyfull cheare.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 23
                     Suche as in shippes or brittell barkes, into the seas descend,
                     Their marchandise through fearful flods to compas and to ende.
                     
                        verse 24
                     Those men are forced to beholde, the Lordes workes, what they be:
                     
                        
And in the dangerous depe the same, most marueilous they see.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 25
                     For at his worde, the stormie winde, ariseth in a rage:
                     And stirreth vp the surges so, as nought can them asswage.
                     
                        verse 26
                     Then are they lifted by so hygh. the clouds they seme to gayne:
                     And plunging downe the depth vntill, theyr soules consume with payne.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 27
                     And like a drunkard, to and fro, now here now there they reele:
                     As men with teare of wit bereft, or had of sense no feele.
                     
                        verse 28
                     Then did they cry in theyr distresse, vnto the Lorde for ayde:
                     Who did remoue their troublous state according as they prayde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 29
                     For with his word the Lord doth make the sturdie storme to cease:
                     So that the gret waues frō their rage, are brought to rest and peace.
                     
                        verse 30
                     Then are men glad when rest is come which they so muche doo craue,
                     And are by him in hauen brought, which they so fayne woulde haue.
                  
               
               
                  The forth parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 31
                     Let men therfore before the Lorde, confes his kindenes then:
                     And shew the wonders that he doth before the sounes of men,
                     
                        verse 32
                     
                        
32 Let them in presence of the folke, with prayse extoll his name:
                     And where the elders doo conuent, let them there doo the same.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 33
                     For running floods to dry desertes, he doeth oft change and turne:
                     And dryeth vp, as it were dust, the springing well and burne.
                     
                        verse 34
                     A frutefull land with pleasures deckt, full barren doeth he make.
                     When on their sinnes, which dwell therin he doeth iust vengeance take.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 35
                     Againe the wildernes full rude, he maketh frute to beare:
                     With pleasant springs of water cleare though none before were there.
                     
                        verse 36
                     Wherin suche hungrye soules are set, as he doeth freely chuse,
                     That they a citie may them buylde to dwell in for theyr vse.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 37
                     That they may sow theyr pleasant lād and vineyardes also plant:
                     To yelde them frutes of suche increase, as none may seme to want.
                     
                        verse 38
                     They multiplye exceadingly: the Lord doeth bles them so:
                     Who doeth also their brut beastes make by numbers great to growe.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 39
                     But whē the faithfull are low brought by the oppressors stoute:
                     
                        
And minish do through many plagues, that compas them about,
                     
                        verse 40
                     Then doeth he princes bring to shame, which did them so oppres,
                     And likewise caused them to erre, within the wildernes.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 41
                     But yet the poore he rayseth vp, out of his troubles depe:
                     And oft times doeth his trayne augmēt muche like a flocke of shepe.
                     
                        verse 42
                     The righteous shall beholde this sight, and also muche reioyce:
                     whereas the wicked and peruerse, with grief shall stop theyr voyce.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 43
                     But who is wise that now full well, he may these thinges recorde?
                     For certeinly suche shall perceyue, the kindnes of the Lorde.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Paratum cor meum. Psalme. Cviii. N.
               
                  ¶ This psalme is composed of two other psalmes before, the seuen and fyftye and the sixtie. The matter here conteyned is, That Dauid geueth himselfe with harte and voyce to prayse the Lorde, and assureth him selfe of the promes of God concerning his kingdome ouer Israell, and his power against other nations, who though he seme for to forsake vs for a time, yet he alone in the ende will caste downe our enemies.
               
               
                  O God, my harte prepared is, Sing this as the. lxxxxv and eke my tong is so.
                  I will aduaunce my voyce in song, and geuyug prayse also.
                  Awake my viole and my harp, swete melody to make.
                  
                     
And in the morning I my selfe, right early will awake.
               
               
                  By me among the people, Lorde, still praysed shalt thou be,
                  And I among the Heathen folke, will sing, O Lorde, to thee.
                  Because thy mercie, Lorde is great, aboue the heauens hie,
                  And eke thy truth doth reche the clouds within the lofty skye.
               
               
                  Aboue the sterry heauens heighth exalt thy selfe, O God,
                  And Lorde display vpon the earth, thy glory all abrode.
                  That thy derely beloued may, be set at libertie.
                  Helpe, O my God, with thy righte hand, and harken vnto me.
               
               
                  God in his holines hath spoke: wherfore my ioyes abound,
                  Sychem I shall diuide, and mete, the vale of Sucoth ground:
                  And Gilead shall be myne owne, Manasses mine shall be,
                  My hed strength Ephraim, and Law shall Iuda geue for me:
               
               
                  Moab my washpot, and my shoe, on Edom will I throwe,
                  Upon the land of Palestine, in triumph will I goo,
                  
                     
Who shall into the citie strong, be guide to conduict me,
                  Or who by whom to Edom land, conueyed shall I be?
               
               
                  Is it not thou, O God, which late, hadst vs forsaken quyte:
                  And thou O Lorde which with our host didst not goe fourth to fyght?
                  Geue vs, O Lorde, thy sauing ayde, when trouble doth assayle:
                  For all the helpe of man is vayne. and can no whit auayle.
               
               
                  Through God we shal do valiant acts and worthy of renowne:
                  He shall subdue our enemies, ye he shall treade them downe.
               
            
            
               ¶Deus laudem meam. Psalme, Cix. N.
               
                  ¶Dauid being falslye accused by flatterers vnto Sawl, prayeth God to helpe him and to destroye his enemyes. And vnder them he speaketh of Iudas the traitour vnto Iesus Christ, and of all the like enemyes of the children of God: And desireth so to be deliuered, that his enemies may know the work of God, Then doth he promise to geue prayses vnto God.
               
               
                  IN specheles silence doo not holde, O God thy tong alwayes, Sing this as the. lxxxxv
                  
                  O God, euen thou I say that art. the God of all my prayse.
                  The wicked mouth and gilefull mouth, on me disclosed be,
                  And they with false and lying tong, haue spoken vnto me.
               
               
                  
                  Euen so doo I departe away, as doth declynyng shade:
                  And as the grashopper, so I am shaken of and fade.
                  With fastyng longe from nedefull fode, enfebled are my knees:
                  And all her fatnes hath my flesh, enforced ben to lese.
               
               
                  And I also a vyle reproche, to them was made to be.
                  And they that did vpon me loke: did shake theyr heds at me.
                  But thou, O Lorde that art my God, myne ayde and succour be:
                  Accordyng to thy merycy, Lorde, saue and delyuer me.
               
               
                  And they shall know thereby, that thys (Lord) is thy myghty hand:
                  And that thou thou hast done it, Lorde, so shall they vnderstande.
                  Although they curse with spite, yet thou shalt bles with louyng voyce:
                  They shall aryse and come to shame, thy seruant shall reioyse.
               
               
                  Let them be clothed all with shame, that enmies are to me▪
                  
                  And with confusyon as a cloke, eke couerd let them be.
                  
                     
But greatly I will with mg mouthe, geue thankes vnto the Lorde,
                  And I among the multitude hys prayses will recorde.
               
               
                  For he with help at hys ryght hand, will stande the pooreman by,
                  To saue hym from the men that wold condemne his soule to dye.
               
            
            
               ¶ Dixit dominus domino. Plalm. Cx. N
               
                  ¶ Dauid prophecyeth of the power and euerlastyng kyngdome geuen to Chryste and of hys Pristhod whyche shoulde put an ende to the Pristode of Leuy.
                  ¶ Sing this as the. lxviii. Psalm.
               
               
                  THe Lorde did say vnto my Lorde, Sit thou at my right hande.
                  Till I haue made thy foes a stoule, wheron thy fete shall stande.
                  The Lorde shall out of Syon send, the scepture of thy myght:
                  A midde thy mortall foes be thou, the ruler in theyr syght.
               
               
                  And in the day on which they reigne and power they shall see:
                  
                     
Then hearby frewill offringes shall, thy people offer thee.
                  Yea with a holy worshiping, then shall they offer all:
                  Thy birthes dew is the dew that doth, from wombe of morning fall.
               
               
                  The Lorde hath sworne and neuer will, repent what he doth say,
                  By thorder of Melchisedech thou art a priest for ay.
                  The Lord thy God on thy righthand, that standeth for thy stay
                  Shal wound for thee the stately kings vpon his wrathfull day.
               
               
                  The Heathen he shall iudge and fill, the place with bodies dead,
                  And ouer diuerse contreyes shall in sonder smite the head.
                  And he shall drink out of the broke, that runneth in the way:
                  Therfore he shall lift vp on hye, his ryall hed that day.
               
            
            
               Confitebor tibi domine. Psalm. Cxi. N
               
                  ¶ He geueth thanks to the Lord for his mercifull works towards his church, & declareth wherin true wisdom & right knowledg cōsisteth.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  WIth hart I doo accord To praise & 
                     〈♫〉
                   laud the Lord Inpresence of the iuste; For
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   great his workes are founde. To search them 
                     〈♫〉
                   suche are bounde, as doo hym loue and trust, 
                     〈♫〉
                   Hys workes are glorious: Also his rightousnes 
                     〈♫〉
                   It doeth indure for euer, His wondrous works 
                     〈♫〉
                   he wolde we still remembre shoulde, his mercye 
                     〈♫〉
                   fayleth neuer.
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Suche as doo loue him beare, a portion full faire.
                  He hath vp for them laid:
                  
                     
For this they shall well finde,
                  He will them haue in minde, and kepe them, as he sayd.
                  
                     verse 6
                  For he did not disdayne, his workes to shew them playne,
                  By lightnings and by thunders. when he the Heathens land.
                  Did geue into their hand,
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Of all his workes insueth bothe iudgement, right and truth.
                  Wherto his statutes tend: they are decreed sure.
                  
                     verse 8
                  For euer to endure, whiche equitie doth end:
                  Redemption he gaue, his people for to saue,
                  
                     verse 9
                  And hath also required, his promes not to fayle,
                  But alwayes to preuayle. his holy name be feared.
               
               
                  
                     verse 10
                  Whoso with hart full layne, true wisdom wolde attayne,
                  The Lorde feare and obey. suche as his Lawes doo kepe,
                  Shall knowledge haue full depe, his prayse shall last for aye.
               
            
            
               ¶ Beatus vir. Psalme. Cxii. VV. K.
               
                  ¶ He prayseth the felicitie of them that feare God, and condemneth the 
                        ••
                     rsed state of the contemners of God.
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  THe man is blest that god doth feare 
                     〈♫〉
                   And that his lawes doth loue in dede: His sede 
                     〈♫〉
                   on earth God will vpreare. And bles such as 
                     〈♫〉
                   from him procede: His house with good he will 
                     〈♫〉
                   fulfill: His rightousnes endure shall still.
               
                  
                     verse 4
                  Unto the righteous doth aryse, In trouble ioy, in darkenes light:
                  Compassion in his eyes, and mercy alwayes in hys syght:
                  
                     verse 5
                  yea, pitie moueth suche to lend: he doeth by iudgement things expend.
               
               
                  
                     verse 6
                  And surely suche shall neuer fayle: for in remembrance had is he:
                  
                     verse 7
                  
                     
7 No tidings ill can make him quayle, who in the Lorde sure hope doeth se.
                  
                     verse 8
                  His hart is firme, hys feare is past: for he shall se his foes downe cast.
               
               
                  
                     verse 9
                  He did well for the poore prouide, his rightousnes shall still remayne,
                  And his estate with prayse abyde, though that the wicked man disdaine
                  
                     verse 10
                  yea, gnash his teeth thereat shall he, and so consume his state to see.
               
            
            
               ¶ Laudate pueri. Psalme Cxiii. VV. K.
               
                  ¶ An exhortation to prayse the Lorde for his prouidence, in that, that contrarye to the course of nature he worketh in hys Churche.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  YE childrē, which do serue ye lord, 
                     〈♫〉
                   prayse ye his name with one accord, yea, blessed 
                     〈♫〉
                   be alwayes his name: who from the rising 
                     〈♫〉
                   of the sunne, til it returne where it begonne,
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
is to be praysed with great fame. The Lord all 
                     〈♫〉
                   peoples doth surmount: As for his glory we may 
                     〈♫〉
                   counte, aboue the heauens hygh to be. With 
                     〈♫〉
                   God the Lorde who may compare, whose dwellyngs 
                     〈♫〉
                   in the heauens are? of such great power 
                     〈♫〉
                   and force is he.
               
                  
                     verse 6
                  He doeth abase him self, we knowe, thinges to beholde bothe here belowe,
                  And also in heauen aboue,
                  
                     verse 7
                  
                     
7 The nedie out of dust to drawe, And eke the poore, whiche helpe none saw,
                  
                     verse 8
                  His onlye mercy did him moue: And so him set in high degre,
                  with princes of great dignitie, That rule his people with great fame.
                  
                     verse 9
                  The barren he doth make to beare,
                  And with great ioye her frute to reare: therfore prayse ye his holy name.
               
            
            
               ¶ In exitu Israel. C. xiiii. VV. VVhit.
               
                  ¶ Howe the Israelites were delyuered out of Egipt, and of the wonderfull miracles that God shewed at that tyme, whiche put vs in remembraunce of Goddes great mercyes towardes his children, and of oure vnthankfullnes for the same.
               
               
                  WHen Israell by Gods addres, from Pharos land was bent: Sing this as the. ixxviii, psa.
                  
                  And Iacobs house the straungers left, and in the same trayne went.
                  
                     verse 2
                  In Iuda God his glory shewde, his holynes most bryght:
                  So did the Israelites declare, his kingdom, power and myght,
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  The sea it saw, and sodenly, as all amased did flee:
                  The roring streaimes of Iordans floud, reculed backwardly.
                  
                     verse 4
                  As rammes afrayde, the mountaines skipt, theyr strength did them forsake:
                  And as the sely tremblyng lambes, theyr toppes did beate and shake,
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 5
                  What ayled the sea, as all amased, so sodenly to flee?
                  Ye rowlyng waues of Iordans floud, why ran ye backwardly?
                  
                     verse 6
                  Why shoke ye hils as Rammes afrayd, why did your strength so shake:
                  Why did your tops as trembling lambs for feare quiuer and quake.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  O earth confesse thy soueraygne Lord and dread hys myghty hand:
                  Before the face of Iacobs God, feare ye both sea and land.
                  
                     verse 8
                  I meane the God which frō hard rocks doth cause many flouds appeare:
                  And from the stony flint doth make, gush out the fountaynes cleare.
               
            
            
               Non nobis domine. Psalme. Cxv. N.
               
                  ¶ A prayer of the faythful, oppressed by idolatrous tirants, against whō they desire that God woulde succor them: for asmuche as there is no comparyson betwene him and theyr false God, or Idoles, trustyng most constantly that God will preserue them in this theyr nede, seeyng that he hath adopted. and receaued them to hys fauoure: promising finally, that they will not be vnmindfull, of so greate a benefyte, if it would please God to heare theyr prayer, and delyuer them by his omnipotent power.
               
               
                  
                     NOt vnto vs, Lord, not to vs, but to thy name geue prayse,
                     bothe for the mercy and the truthe, that are in thee alwayes.
                     Why shall the Heathen scorners say, where is theyr God become?
                     Our God in heauen is, and what, he will, that hath he done.
                  
                  
                     
                     Their idols siluer are and gold, worke of mens handes they be:
                     They haue a mouth and do not speake: and eyes, and doo not see.
                     And they haue eares ioynd to their heds and doo not heare at all:
                     And noses eke they formed haue, and doo not smell withall.
                  
                  
                     And handes they haue, and handle not▪ and feete and doo not goo:
                     A throte they haue, yet through the same they make no sounde to blowe.
                     Those that make them be like to them, and those whose trust they be.
                     O Israell trust in the Lorde, their help and shield is he.
                  
                  
                     O Aarons house trust in the Lorde: their helpe and shield is he:
                     Trust ye the Lorde that feare the Lord▪ their help and sheld is he.
                     The Lord hath mindefull ben of vs, and will vs bles also:
                     On Israels and Aarons house, his blissing he will shew.
                  
                  
                     They did beset me round about, with wordes of hatefull spite:
                     Without all cause of my desert, against me did they fight,
                     For my good will they were my foes, but then gan I to pray:
                     
                        
my good with ill, my frendlynes, with hate they did repay,
                  
               
               
                  The second parte.
                  
                     Set thou the wicked ouer him, to haue the vpper hand:
                     At his right hand eke suffer thou, his hatefull foe to stand.
                     When he is iudged, let him then, condemned be therin:
                     And let the prayer that he makes, be turned into sinne.
                  
                  
                     Few be his dayes, his charge also, let thou an other take,
                     His children let be fatherles, his wyfe a wydow make:
                     Let his ofspring be vagabundes, to begge and seke theyr bread,
                     wandring out of the wasted place, where erst they haue ben fed.
                  
                  
                     Let couetous extorcionet, catch all his goods and store,
                     And let the straungers spoyle the frutes of all his toyle before.
                     Let there be none to pitie him, let there be none at all:
                     That on his children fatherles, will let their mercye fall.
                  
                  
                     And so let his posteritie, for euer be destroyed:
                     Their name out blotted in the age, that after shall succed.
                     
                        
Let not his fathers wickednes, from Gods remembrance fall,
                     And let thou not his mothers sinne, be done away at all.
                  
                  
                     But in the presence of the Lorde, let them remayne foray,
                     That from the earth their memorye, he may cut cleane away.
                     Sith mercye he forgat to shew, but did pursue with spite:
                     The troubled man and sought to slay, the woefull harted wight.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The third parte.
                  
                     As he did cursing loue, it shall, betide vnto him so:
                     And as he did not blessing loue, it shalbe far him froe.
                     As he with cursing clad himself, so it like water shall:
                     Into his bowels, and like oyle, into his bones befall.
                  
                  
                     As garment let it be to him, to couer him for ay,
                     And as a girdle wherwith he, shall girded be alwaye.
                     Lo let this same be from the Lord, the guerdon of my foe,
                     Yea and of those that euell speake, against my soule also.
                  
                  
                     But thou, O Lorde that art my God, deale thou I say with me.
                     
                        
After thy name: delyuer me, for good thy mercies be:
                     Because in depth of great distres, I nedy am and pore,
                     And eke within my payned brest, my hart is wounded sore.
                  
                  
                     Them that be fearers of the Lord, the lorde will blesse them all:
                     Euen he will blesse them euery one, the great and eke the small.
                     To you I say the louing Lord, will multiplie his grace,
                     To you and to the children that, shall follow of your race.
                  
                  
                     Ye are the blessed of the Lorde, euen of the lorde I say,
                     Which both the heauen and the earth, hath made and set in stay.
                     The heauens, yea the heauens hye, belong vnto the Lord:
                     The earth vnto the sonnes of men, he gaue of free accorde.
                  
                  
                     They that be dead doo not with prayse, setfourth the Lordes renoume,
                     Nor any that into the place, of silence doo goe downe.
                     But we will prayse the Lorde our god, from hencefourth and foray
                     Sound ye the prayses of the Lorde, prayse ye the Lorde I say.
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Dilexi quoniam. Psalme. Cxvi N,
               
                  ¶ Dauid being in great daunger of Saull in the desert of Mammon, perceiuing the great and inestimable loue of God toward him, mangnyfyeth suche great mercyes, and protesteth that he will be thankful for the same.
               
               
                  I Loue the Lord, because my voyce, and prayer hearde hath he: Sing this as the. lxxxxv
                  
                  When in my dayes I cald on him, he bowed his eare to me,
                  Euen when the snares of cruell death, about beset me round:
                  When paynes of hell me caught, & when I wo and sorow found.
               
               
                  vpon the name of God my Lorde, then did I call, and say:
                  Deliuer thou my soule, O Lorde, I doo thee humbly pray.
                  The Lorde is very mercyfull, and iust he is also,
                  And in our God compassion, doth plentifully flowe.
               
               
                  The Lorde in safetie doth preserue, all those that simple be:
                  I was in wofull miserye, and he releued me.
                  And now my soule, sith thou art safe, returne vnto thy rest:
                  For largely loe the Lorde to thee, his bountie hath exprest:
               
               
                  Because thou hast delyuered, my soule from deadly thrall,
                  
                     
My Moisted eien from mournful teares my slidyng fete from fall:
                  Before the Lorde I in the land, of life will walke therfore.
                  I did beleue, therfore I spake, for I was trobled sore.
               
               
                  I sayd in my distres and feare. that all men lyers bee:
                  What shall I pay the Lorde for all, his benefites to me?
                  The holsome cup of sauing health, I thankefully will take:
                  And on the Lordes name I will call, when I my prayer make.
               
               
                  I to the Lorde will pay the vowes, that I haue him behight,
                  Yea euen at this present time, in all his peoples sight.
                  Right deare and precious in his sight, the Lorde doth ay esteme:
                  The death of all his holy ones, what euer men do deme.
               
               
                  Thy seruant Lorde, thy seruant loe, I doo my selfe confes,
                  Son of thy handmayd thou hast broke the bonds of my distres.
                  And I will offer vp to thee, a sacryfyce of prayse:
                  And I will call vpon the name, of God the Lorde alwayes.
               
               
                  
                  I to the Lorde will pay the voues, that I haue him behight,
                  Yea euen at this present tyme, in all his peoples sight,
                  yea in the courtes of Gods owne house and in the middes of thee:
                  O thou Ierusalem I say. wherfore the Lorde prayse ye.
               
            
            
               ¶ Laudate dominum. Psalme. Cxvii. N. He exhorteth the Gentels to prayse God, because he hath accomplished as well to them as to the Iewes, the promys of lyfe euerlastyng by Iesus Chryst.
               O All the natyons of the worlde, Prayse ye the Lorde alwayes: Sing this as the. ixxxxv
               
               And all ye people euery where, set fourth hys noble prayse.
               For great his kindnes is to vs, his truthe endures for ay:
               Wherfore prayse ye the Lorde our God, prayse ye the Lorde I say:
            
            
               ¶ Confitemini domino. Psalme. CXviii. M. Dauid reiectid of Saule and of the people, at the tyme apoynted obtained the kingdome, for the whiche he biddeth all them that seare the Lord, tobe thankefull and vnder hys person, in all thys was Christ lyuely setforthe, who should be of hys people reiected.
               
                  O Geue ye thankes vnto the Lorde, Sing this as a 115. Psalme. for gratious is he:
                  Because his mercy doth endure▪ for euer towardes thee.
                  Let Israell confes and say, hys mercy dures for ay:
                  Now let the house of Aaron say, hys mercye dures for aye.
               
               
                  Let all that feare the Lorde our God; euen now confesse and say:
                  
                     
The mercye of the Lorde our God, endureth still for aye.
                  In trouble and in heuines, vnto the Lorde I cride:
                  Whiche louingly hard me at large, my sute was not denyde.
               
               
                  The Lorde hym selfe is on my syde, I will not stande in dout:
                  Nor feare what man can doo to me, when God standth me about.
                  The lord doth take my parte with them, that helpe to succour me:
                  Therfore I shall see my desire, apon myne enemye.
               
               
                  Better it is to trust in God, then in mans mortall sede:
                  Or to put confidence in kynges or princes in our nede,
                  All nations haue in closed me, and compassed me rounde:
                  But in the name of God shall I, myne enemies confounde.
               
               
                  They kept me on euery side, they kept me in I say:
                  But through the lords most mightie name, I shall worke theyr decay.
                  They came about me all like bees, but yet in the lordes name:
                  I quencht their thornes, that wer on fire and will destroy the same.
               
               
                  Thou hast with force, thrust fore at me, that I in dede might fall:
                  
                     
But through the lord I found suche help that they wer vanquist all.
                  The lorde is my defence and strengthe my ioy, my mirth and song:
                  He is become for me in dede, a sauiour most strong.
               
               
                  The right hand of the lord our God, doth bring to pas great thinges:
                  He causeth voyce of ioy and health, in rightous mennes dwellynges,
                  The right hand of the lorde doth bring most mighty thinges to pas:
                  his hand hath the preeminens, his force is, as it was,
               
               
                  I will not dye but euer lyue. to vtter and declare:
                  The lord his might, & wondrous power his workes and what they are.
                  The lorde himselfe hath chastened, and hath corrected me:
                  But hath not geuen me ouer yet, to death as ye may see.
               
               
                  Set open vnto me the gates', of truth and righteousnes:
                  That I may enter into them, the lordes prayse to confes.
                  This is the gate euen of the lorde, whiche shall not so he shut:
                  But good and righteous men alway, shall enter into it.
               
               
                  
                  I will geue thankes to thee O Lorde, because thou hast heard me:
                  And art become most louingly, a sauiour vnto me.
                  The stone whiche ere this time among the builders was refused:
                  is now become the corner stone, and chefely to be vsed.
               
               
                  Thys was the myghty work of God, this was the Lordes owne fact,
                  And it is maruelous to be holde, with eyes that noble act.
                  This is the ioyfull day in dede, which God himself hath wrought:
                  Let vs be glad and ioy therin, in hart, in mind and thought.
               
               
                  Now helpe me Lorde and prosper vs, we wishe with one accorde:
                  Blessed be he that comes to vs, in the name of the Lorde.
                  God is the Lorde that sheweth vs lyght: bynde ye therfore with corde:
                  Your sacrifice to the alter, and geue thankes to the Lorde.
               
               
                  Thou art my God I will confes, and render thankes to thee:
                  Thou art my God, and I will prayse, thy mercy towardes me.
                  O geue ye thankes vnto the Lorde, for gratious is he:
                  Because his mercy dothe endure, for euer towardes thee.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Beati immaculati. Psalm Cxix. VV. VV.
               
                  ¶ In thys psalme is contayned an exquisit art, and a wonderfull vehemencye in settyng forth the prayses of gods law: wherin the Prophet cannot satisfye hymselfe, nor sufficyently expres the affection whiche he beareth thereunto: adding moreouer manye notable complaynts & consolatyons, wherefore it is mete that all the faythfull haue it alway bothe in harte and mouthe, and in the Ebrue euery vii, verses begyn with one lerter of the Alphabet.
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                      
                     BLessed are they that perfect are, and 
                        〈♫〉
                      pure in mind & hart: whose liues and conuersation, 
                        〈♫〉
                      frō Gods lawes neuer start. 2. Blessed are 
                        〈♫〉
                      they that geue them selues hys statutes to obserue: 
                        〈♫〉
                      Sekyng the Lorde, with all theyr hart, 
                        〈♫〉
                      and neuer from him swerue.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 3
                     Doubtles such men go not astraye, nor doo no wicked thing:
                     Whiche stedfastly walke in his pathes, without any wandring.
                     
                        verse 4
                     It is thy wyll and commaundement, that with attentiue hede:
                     Thy noble and deuyne precepts, we learne and kepe in dede.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 5
                     Oh would to God it might thee please, my wayes so to adres:
                     That I myght bothe in hart and voyce, thy lawes kepe and confes.
                     
                        verse 6
                     So should no shame my lyfe atteyne, whylst I thus set myne eyes:
                     And bende my mynde alwayes to muse. on thy sacred decrees.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 7
                     Then will I prayse with vpright hart, and magnifye thy name:
                     When I shall learne thy iudgements iust, and lykewyse proue the same.
                     
                        verse 8
                     And wholy will I geue my selfe, to kepe thy lawes most ryght:
                     For sake me not for euer (Lorde) but shew thy grace and myght.
                  
               
               
                  The. ii. parte. MTH
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 9
                     By what meanes may a yong man best. his lyfe learne to amend:
                     If that he marke and kepe thy word, and therin his tyme spend.
                     
                        verse 10
                     Unfaynedly I haue thee sought. and thusse kyng abyde:
                     
                        
Oh neuer suffer me (O Lorde) from thy precepts to slyde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 11
                     Within my hart and secret thoughtes, thy wordes I haue hyd styll:
                     That I might not at any tyme, offende thy godly wyll.
                     
                        verse 12
                     We magnifye thy name (O Lorde) and prayse thee euermore.
                     Thy statutes of most worthy fame, (O Lorde) teache me therfore?
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 13
                     My lippes haue neuer ceast to preache and publysh day and nyght:
                     The iudgments all, whiche did procede from thy mouth full of might.
                     
                        verse 24
                     Thy testymonies and thy wayes, please me noles in dede.
                     Then all the treasures of the earth, which worldlings make theyr mede
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 15
                     Of thy precepts I will still muse, and therfore frame my talke:
                     As at a marke so will I aime, thy wayes how I may walke.
                     
                        verse 16
                     My only ioy shalbe so fixed, and on thy lawes so set:
                     That nothyng can me so far blynde, that I thy wordes for get.
                  
               
               
                  The thyrd parte. MMEL
                  
                  
                     Graunt to thy seruaunt now such grace as may my lyfe prolong:
                     Thy holy worde then will I kepe, bothe in my hart and tong.
                     
                        verse 18
                     
                        
18 Mine eies whiche were dim & shut vp, so open and make bryght:
                     That of thy law and merueilous works I may haue the cleare syght.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 19
                     I am a straunger in this earth, wandring now here, now there:
                     Thy worde therfore to me disclose, my fotesteppes for to cleare.
                     
                        verse 20
                     My soule is rauished with desyre, and neuer is at rest.
                     But seketh to know thy iudgments hie and what may please thee best,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 21
                     The proud men and malitious, thou hast destroyd echone:
                     And cursed are suche as doo not, thy hests attend vpon.
                     
                        verse 22
                     Lord turne me from rebuke and shame whiche wicked men conspire:
                     For I haue kept thy couenaunts, with zele as hote as fyre.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 23
                     The princes great in counsel sat, and did against me speake:
                     But then thy seruaunt thought how he, thy statutes myght not breake.
                     
                        verse 24
                     For why thy couenants are my ioy, and my great harts solace:
                     They serue in stede of counsellers, my matters for to pas.
                  
               
               
                  The. iiii parte. DALETH
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 25
                     I am alas, as brought to graue, and almost turnd to dust:
                     
                        
Restore therfore my lyfe agayne, as thy promise is iust.
                     
                        verse 26
                     My wayes when I acknowledged, with mercy thou didst heare:
                     Here now eftsones, and me instruct, thy lawes to loue and feare.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 27
                     Teache me once throughly for to know thy precepts and thy lore:
                     Thy workes then will Imeditate, and lay them vp in store.
                     
                        verse 28
                     My soule I fele so sore opprest: that it melteth for grief:
                     According to thy word therfore, hast Lorde to sende relyef.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 29
                     From lying and deceitfull lyppes, let thy grace me defend:
                     And that I may learue thee to loue, thy holy law me send.
                     
                        verse 30
                     The way of truth both straight & sure, I haue chosen and founde:
                     I set thy iudgement me before, whiche kepe me safe and sound.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 33
                     Since then (O Lord) I forced my selfe thy couenants to embrase:
                     Let me therfore haue no rebuke, nor check in any case.
                     
                        verse 32
                     Then will I runne with ioyfull cheare where thy worde doth me call:
                     When thou hast set my hart at large. and rid me out of thrall.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶ The. v. parte. H E
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 33
                     Instruct me (Lord) in the right trade of thy statutes deuyne:
                     And it to kepe euen to the end, my hart will I inclyne.
                     
                        verse 34
                     Graunt me the knowledge of thy law, and I shall it obey:
                     With hart and mind, and all my might, I will it kepe, I say.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 35
                     In the right path of thy precepts, guide me Lorde, I require:
                     None other pleasure doo I wishe, nor greater thing desire.
                     
                        verse 36
                     Inclyne my hart thy lawes to kepe, and couenants to embrace:
                     And from all filthy auarice, and shield me with thy grace.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 37
                     From vaine desire and worldly lustes turne backe myne eyes and syght:
                     Geue me the sprite of lyfe and power, to walke thy wayes a ryght.
                     
                        verse 38
                     Confirme thy gratious promise, Lorde, whiche thou hast made to me:
                     Which am thy seruaunt, and doo loue, and feare nothyng but thee.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 39
                     Reproche and shame whiche I so feare from me (O Lord) expell
                     For thou dost iudge with equitie, and therin dost excell.
                     
                        verse 40
                     Beholde my harts desire is bent, thy lawes to kepe for aye:
                     
                        
Lorde strēgthen me so with thy grace, that it performe I may.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The. vi. parte. VAV
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 41
                     Thy mercyes great and manifolde, let me obteyne (O Lorde)
                     The sauing health let me enioy: accordyng to thy word.
                     
                        verse 42
                     So shall I stop ye slaundrous mouths, of leud men and vniust:
                     For in thy faithfull promises, stand the my comfort and trust.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 43
                     The word of truth with in my mouth, let euer still be prest:
                     For in thy iudgements wonderfull, my hope doth stand and rest.
                     
                        verse 44
                     And while that breath within my brest doth naturall lyfe preserue:
                     yea till this world shalbe dissolued, thy law will I obserue.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 45
                     So walke will I, as set at large, and made free from all drede:
                     Because I sought how for to kepe, thy precepts and thy rede.
                     
                        verse 46
                     Thy noble actes I will describe, as thinges of most great fame:
                     Euen before kings I will them blase, and shrink no whit for shame.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 47
                     I will reioyse them to obey. thy worthy hests and will:
                     Which euermore I haue loued best, and so will loue them still,
                     
                        verse 48
                     
                        
48 My handes will I lyft to thy lawes, whiche I haue dearely sought:
                     And practise thy commaundementes, in will in dede and thought.
                  
               
               
                  The. vii. parte, ZAIN
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 49
                     Thy promise whiche thou madst to me thy seruaunt (Lorde) remember:
                     For therin haue I put my trust, and confidence for euer.
                     
                        verse 50
                     It is my comfort and my ioy, when troubles me assayle:
                     For were my lyfe not by thy worde, my lyfe would sone me fayle.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 51
                     The proude, and suche as God contemn still made of me a skorne:
                     yet would I not, thy law forsake, as he that were forlorne:
                     
                        verse 52
                     But cald to mind (lord) thy great works shewde to our fathers olde:
                     Wherby I felt the ioy surmount, my grief an hundred folde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 53
                     But yet, alas, for feare I quoke, seing how wicked men:
                     Thy law forsoke and did procure, thy iudgment: who knoweth when
                     
                        verse 54
                     And as for me, I framed my songs, thy statutes to exalt:
                     When I among the straungers dweld, and thoughtes gan me assalt.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 55
                     I thought vpon thy name, O Lorde, by nyght when others slepe:
                     
                        
As for thy law, also I kept, and euer will it kepe.
                     
                        verse 56
                     This grace I did obteyne, because, thy couenants swete and deate:
                     I did embrace, and also kepe, with reuerence and with feare.
                  
               
               
                  The. viii, parte. HETH
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 57
                     O God, which art my part and lot, My comfort and my stay:
                     I haue decreed, and promised, thy lawe to kepe alway.
                     
                        verse 58
                     Mine earnest hart did humbly sue, in presence of thy face:
                     As thou therfore hast promised, Lorde graunt me of thy grace.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 59
                     My lyfe I haue examined, and tryde my secrete hart:
                     Whiche to thy statutes caused me, my fete strayght to conuert.
                     
                        verse 60
                     I did not stay nor linger long, as they that slouthfull are:
                     But hastely thy lawes to kepe, I did my selfe beware.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 61
                     The cruell bandes of wicked men, haue made of me theyr pray:
                     Yet would I not thy law forget, nor from thee go astray.
                     
                        verse 62
                     Thy rightous iudgment shewd toward me so great is and so hie:
                     That euen at midnight will I ryse, thy name to magnifye.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 63
                     Companion am I to all them, whiche feare thee in theyr hart:
                     And neyther will for loue nor dread▪ from thy commaundements start:
                     
                        verse 64
                     Thy mercies (Lorde) most plentuously doo all the worlde fulfyll.
                     Oh teache me how I may obey, thy statutes and thy will.
                  
               
               
                  The, ix, parte. TETH
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 65
                     According to thy promise Lorde, so hast thou with me delt:
                     For of thy grace in sundry sorts, haue I thy seruaunt felt.
                     
                        verse 66
                     Teache me to iudge alwayes a ryght, and geue me knowledge sure,
                     For certenly beleue I doo. that thy precepts are pure.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 67
                     Yer thou didst touche me with thy rod, I erred and went astray:
                     But now I kepe thy holy word, and make it all my stay,
                     
                        verse 68
                     Thou art both good and gratious, and geuest most liberally:
                     Thy ordinaunces how to kepe, therfore (O Lord) teache me.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 69
                     The proud and wicked mē haue forged, against me many a lye:
                     yet thy commaundements still obserue, with all my hart will I.
                     
                        verse 70
                     Their harts are swolne with worldly welth as gras so are they fat:
                     
                        
But in thy law doo I delyte, and nothyng seke but that.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 71
                     Oh happy tyme may I well say, when thou didst me correct:
                     For as a guide to learne thy lawes, thy rods did me direct.
                     
                        verse 72
                     So that to me thy worde and law, is dearer manifold:
                     Then thousands great of siluer & golde, or ought that can be tolde.
                  
               
               
                  The. x. parte. IOD
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 73
                     Seing thy hands haue made me Lord to be thy creature:
                     Graunt knowledg like wise how to learne to put thy lawes in vre.
                     
                        verse 74
                     So they that feare thee shall reioyce, when euer they me see:
                     Because I haue learned by thy worde, to put my trust in thee.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 75
                     When with thy rods, ye world is plagd I know the cause is iust:
                     So when thou didst correct me Lorde, the cause iust nedes be must.
                     
                        verse 76
                     Now of thy goodnes I thee pray, some comforte to me send:
                     As thou to me thy seruaunt hetest, so from all ill me shend.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 77
                     Thy tender mercies power on me, and I shall surely lyue:
                     For ioy and consolation bathe, thy lawes to me doth geue.
                     
                        verse 78
                     
                        
78 Confound the proud whose false pretēce is me for to destroy:
                     But as for me thy hestes to know, I will myself employ.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 79
                     Who so with reuerence doo thee feare, to me let them retire:
                     And suche as doo thy couenants knowe and them alone desire.
                     
                        verse 80
                     My hart without all waueryng, let on thy lawes be bent:
                     That no confusion come to me, wherby I should be shent,
                  
               
               
                  The, xi, parte. GAPH
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 81
                     My soule doth faynt and ceaseth not, thy sauing health to craue:
                     And for thy wordes sake still I trust, my hartes desyre to haue.
                     
                        verse 82
                     Mine eyes doo fayle with loking for, thy word and thus I say:
                     Oh when wilte thou me comfort Lorde: why dost thou thus delay?
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 83
                     As a skin bottell in the smoke, so am I partcht and dryed:
                     yet will I not out of my hart, let thy commaundement slide.
                     
                        verse 84
                     Alas how long shall I yet lyue, before I see the houre.
                     That on my foes whyche me torment, thy vengeaunce thou wilt power.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 85
                     Presūptuons men haue digged pittes, thinking to make me sure:
                     
                        
Thus contrary agaynst thy law, my hurte they doo procure.
                     
                        verse 86
                     But thy commaundements are al true, and causeles they me greue:
                     To thee therfore I doo complayne, that thou mightest me relieue.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 87
                     Almost they had me cleane destroide, and brought me quite to grounde:
                     yet by thy statutes I abode. and therin succor founde.
                     
                        verse 88
                     Restore me, Lorde, agayne to lyfe, for thy mercyes excell:
                     And so shall I thy couenants kepe, till death my lyfe expell.
                  
               
               
                  The. xii. parte, LAMID
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 89
                     In heauens lord where thou dost dwel thy word is stablished sure:
                     And shall for all eternitie, fast grauen there indure.
                     
                        verse 90
                     From age to age thy truth abideth, as doth the earth witnes:
                     Whose ground work thou hast layd so sure as no tounge can expres.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 91
                     Euen to thys day we may well see, how all thynges perseuer:
                     Accordyng to thy ordinance, for all thinges thee reuere.
                     
                        verse 92
                     Had it not ben that in thy lawe, my soule had comfort sought:
                     Long time yere now in my distres, I had ben brought to nought.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 93
                     Therfore will I thy precepts aye, in memory kepe fast:
                     By them thou hast my lyfe restorde, when I was at last cast,
                     
                        verse 94
                     No wight to me can title make, for I am onely thyne:
                     Saue me therfore for to thy lawes, myne eares and hart inclyne.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 95
                     The wicked men doo seke my bane, and therto lye in wayte:
                     But I the while considered, thy notable actes and great.
                     
                        verse 96
                     I see nothyng in this wide world, at length which hath not ende:
                     But thy commaundement and thy word beyond all end extende.
                  
               
               
                  The. xiii. parte. MEM
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 97
                     What great desire and feruent loue, doo I beare to thy lawe:
                     All the day long my whole deuyse, is only on thy lawe.
                     
                        verse 98
                     Thy worde hath taught me far to pas, my foes in polycye:
                     For still I kepe it as a thyng, of most excellencye.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 99
                     My teachers whiche did me instruct, in knowledge I excell:
                     Because I doo thy couenauntes kepe, and them to others tell.
                     
                        verse 100
                     In wisdome I doo pas also, the auncient men in dede:
                     
                        
And all because to kepe thy lawes, I helde it aye best rede.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 101
                     My fete I haue refrayned eke, from euery euyll way:
                     Because that I continually, thy worde might kepe, I say,
                     
                        verse 102
                     I haue not swarued from thy iudgmēts nor yet shronk any dell:
                     For why? thou hast taught me therby to lyue godly and well.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 103
                     Oh Lorde howe swete vnto my tast, fynde I thy wordes alwaye?
                     Doubtles no hony in my mouth, fele ought so swete I may.
                     
                        verse 104
                     Thy lawes haue me such wisdō learnd that vtterly I hate:
                     All wicked and vngodly wayes, in euery kinde or rate.
                  
               
               
                  The. xiiii. parte. NVN
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 105
                     Euen as a lanterne to my fete, so doth thy word shine bryght:
                     And to my pathes, where euer I go, it is a flamyng lyght.
                     
                        verse 106
                     I haue both sworne and will perform, most certenly doubtles:
                     That I will kepe thy iudgments iust and them in lyfe expres.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 107
                     Affliction hath me sore oppressed, and brought me to deathes dore:
                     O Lorde as thou hast promised, so me to lyfe restore.
                     
                        verse 108
                     
                        
The offrings which with hart & voyce most frankly I thee geue:
                     Accept, and teache me how I may, after thy iudgements lyue.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 109
                     My soule is aye so in my hande, that daungers it assayle:
                     yet doo I not thy law forget, nor it to kepe will fayle,
                     
                        verse 110
                     Although the wicked layd their nets, to catche me at a bray:
                     yet did I not from thy precepts, once swerue or go astray.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 111
                     Thy lawe I haue so claymed alway, as mine owne heritage:
                     And why? for therin I delyte, and set my whole courage.
                     
                        verse 112
                     For euermore I haue ben bent, thy statutes to fullfill:
                     Euen so lyke wyse vnto the ende, I will continue styll.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The. xv. parte. SAMECH
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 113
                     The crafty thoughts and double hart, I doo alwayes detest:
                     But as for thy law and precepts, I loued them euer best.
                     
                        verse 114
                     Thou art my hid and secret place, my shield of strong defence:
                     Therfore haue I thy promises, loked for with pacience.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 115
                     Go to therfore ye wicked men: depart from me anone:
                     
                        
For the commaundments will I kepe, of God my Lorde alone.
                     
                        verse 116
                     As thou hast promisd so performe, that death me not assayle.
                     Nor let my hope abuse me so, that through distrust I quayle.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 117
                     Uphold me and I shalbe safe, for ought they doo or say:
                     And in thy statutes pleasure take, will I bothe night and day.
                     
                        verse 118
                     Thou hast trod suche vnder thy fete, as do thy statutes breake:
                     For nought auayleth theyr subtiltie, theyr counsell is but weake.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 119
                     Like drosse thou castes the wicked oute, where euer they go ordwell:
                     Therfore can I as thy statutes, loue nothyng halfe so well.
                     
                        verse 20
                     My fleshe alas, is taken with feare, as though it were benomde:
                     For when I see thy iudgmentses strayt I am as one astounde.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The. xvi. parte. AIN
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 121
                     I doo the thyng that lawfull is, and geue to all men right:
                     Resigne me not to them that would, oppresse me with their might.
                     
                        verse 122
                     But for thy seruaunt surty be, in that thing that is good:
                     That proudmen geue me not the foyle, which rage as they were wood.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 123
                     Mine eies with waiting are now blind thy health so muche I craue:
                     And eke thy righteous promise Lorde, wherby thou wilt me saue.
                     
                        verse 124
                     Intreate thy seruaunt louingly, and fauour to him shew:
                     Thy statutes of most excellence, teache me also to knowe.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 125
                     Thy humble seruaunt, Lorde I am, oh graunt me to vnderstand:
                     Howe by thy statutes I may know, best what to take in hand.
                     
                        verse 126
                     It is now time (Lorde) to begin, for truthe is quyte decayd:
                     Thy law lyk wyse they haue transgrest and none against them sayd.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 127
                     Thys is the cause wherfore I loue, thy lawes better then gold:
                     Or iewels fine which are estemd, most costly to be sold,
                     
                        verse 128
                     I thought thy precepts all most iust, and so them layd in store:
                     All crafty and malicious wayes, I doo abhorre therfore.
                  
               
               
                  The. xvii; parte. PE
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 129
                     Thy couenaunts are most wonderfull and full of thynges profound:
                     My soule therfore doth kepe them sure when they are tride and found.
                     
                        verse 130
                     when men first enter into thy wordes, they finde alyght most cleare:
                     
                        
And very idiots vnderstand, when they it reade or heare.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 131
                     For ioie I haue both gaped & breathed, to know thy commaundement:
                     That I might guide my lyfe therby, I sought what thyng it ment.
                     
                        verse 132
                     With mercy and compassion Lord, beholde me from aboue:
                     As thou art wont to behold suche, as thy name feare and loue.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 133
                     Direct my fote steppes by thy worde, that I thy will may know:
                     And neuer let iniquitie, thy seruaunt ouerthrow,
                     
                        verse 134
                     From slaunderous tonges and deadly harms preserue & kepe me sure.
                     Thy precepts then I will obserue, and put them eke in vre,
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 135
                     Thy countenaūce which doth surmoūt the sunne in his bright hew.
                     Let shine on me: and by thy lawe, teache me what to eschew.
                     
                        verse 136
                     Out of mine eyes great flods gush out, of drery teares and fell:
                     When I beholde how wicked men. thy law kepe neuer a dell.
                  
               
               
                  The. xviii, parte. ZADE
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 137
                     In euery point (Lord) thou art iust, the wicked though they grudge:
                     And when thou dost sentēce pronunce, thou art a righteous iudge,
                     
                        verse 138
                     
                        
To render right and flie from guile, are two chief pointes most hye.
                     And suche as thou hast in thy law, commaunded vs streightly.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 139
                     With zele and wrath I am consumde, and euen pyned awaye:
                     To see my foes thy wordes forget, for ought that I doo may.
                     
                        verse 140
                     So pure and perfect is thy word, as any hart can deme:
                     And I thy seruaunt nothing more, doo loue or yet esteme.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 141
                     And though I be nothing set by, as one of base degree:
                     Yet doo I not thy hestes forget, nor shrinke awaye from thee.
                     
                        verse 142
                     Thy righteousnes (Lorde) is most iust for euer to endure:
                     Also thy law is truth it selfe, most constant and most pure.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 143
                     Trouble and grief haue seased on me, and brought me wondrous lowe:
                     yet doo I still of thy precepts, delyght to heare and know.
                     
                        verse 144
                     The righteous of thy iudgements, doo last for euermore:
                     Then teache them me, for euen in them, my lyfe lyeth vp in store.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ The. xix. parte. 
                        
                           •
                        OPH
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 145
                     With feruent heart I callde and crid now answere me (O Lord:
                     
                        
That thy commaundement to obserue, I may fully accord.
                     
                        verse 146
                     To thee (my God) I make my sute, with most humble request:
                     Saue me therfore, and I will kepe, thy precept and thy hest.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 147
                     To thee I crye, euen in the morne, before the day waxe lyght:
                     Because that I haue in thy word, my confidence whole plyght.
                     
                        verse 148
                     Mine eyes preuent the watch by night and yere they call, I wake:
                     That by deuisyng of thy word, I might some comfort take.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 149
                     Incline thyne eares to heare my voice and pitie on me take:
                     As thou wast wont so iudge me Lorde, lest lyfe me should forsake.
                     
                        verse 150
                     My foes draw nere and doo procure, my deathe malitiously:
                     Which from thy law are far gone back, and straid from it leudly.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 151
                     Therfore (O Lorde) approche thou nere, for nede doth so require:
                     And all thy precepts true they are, then helpe I thee desyre.
                     
                        verse 152
                     By thy cōmaundements I haue learnd not now, but longe ago:
                     That they remayne for euermore, thou hast them grounded so.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The. xx, parte. RES
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 153
                     My trouble and affliction, consider and beholde:
                     Delyuer me, for of thy lawe, I euer take fast holde,
                     
                        verse 154
                     Defend my good and righteous cause, with spede me succor send:
                     From death as thou hast promised, Lorde kepe me and defend.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 155
                     As for the wicked farre they are, from hauing health and grace:
                     Wherby they might thy statutes know they enter not the trace.
                     
                        verse 156
                     Great are thy mercyes, Lord I graunt what tong can them atteyne?
                     And as thou haste me iudged yer now, so let me lyfe obteyne.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 157
                     Though many men did trouble me, and persecute most sore:
                     Yet from thy lawes I neuer shronk, nor went awry therfore.
                     
                        verse 158
                     And truth it is, for grief I dye, when I these traitors see:
                     Because they kepe no whit thy worde, nor yet seke to know thee.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 159
                     Beholde, for I doo loue thy lawes, with hart most glad and fayne:
                     As thou art good and gratious Lorde, restore my lyfe agayne.
                     
                        verse 160
                     What thy word doth decree, must be, and so it hath bene euer,
                     
                        
Thy rightuous iudgements are also, most true and decay neuer.
                  
               
               
                  The. xxi. parte. SCHIN
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 161
                     Princes haue sought by crueltye, causeles to make me crouche:
                     But all in vayne, for of thy word, the feare did my hart touche,
                     
                        verse 162
                     And certenly euen of thy word. I was more mery and glad
                     Then he that of ryche spoyles and pray, great store and plentye had.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 163
                     As for all lyes and falsitie, I hate most and detect:
                     For why? thy holy law doo I, aboue all thinges loue best.
                     
                        verse 164
                     Seuen times aday I prayse the Lord singing with hart and voyce:
                     Thy rightuous actes and wonderfull, so cause me to reioyse.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 165
                     Great peace and rest shall all such haue whiche doo thy statutes loue:
                     Nor danger shall theyr quiet state, impere or once remoue.
                     
                        verse 166
                     My only health and comfort Lorde, I loke for at thy hand:
                     And therfore haue I done those things, whiche thou didst me commaunde.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 167
                     Thy lawes haue ben my exercise, whiche my soule most desired:
                     So muche my loue to them was bent, that nought els I required.
                     
                        verse 168
                     
                        
Thy statutes and commaundements, I kept thou knowest a ryght:
                     For all the things that I haue done, are present in thy syght.
                  
               
               
                  The. xxii. parte. TAV
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 169
                     O Lorde let my complaynt and crye, before thy face appeare:
                     And as thou hast me promise made, so teache me thee to feare.
                     
                        verse 170
                     Mine humble supplication, toward thee, let find acces:
                     And graunt me Lord deliueraunce, for so is thy promes.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 171
                     Then all my lippes thy prayses speake, after most ample sort:
                     When thou thy statutes hast me taught, wherin standeth all comfort:
                     
                        verse 172
                     My tong shall sing and preache thy word and on this wise say shall:
                     Gods famous actes and noble lawes, are iust and perfect all.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 173
                     Stretch out thy hand I thee beseche, and spedely me saue:
                     For thy commaundments to obserue, chosen, O Lorde I haue.
                     
                        verse 174
                     Of thee alone, Lorde I craue health, for other I know none:
                     And in thy law and nothyng els, I doo delyte alone.
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 175
                     Graunt me therfore long dayes to lyue, thy name to magnifye:
                     
                        
And of thy iudgements mercifull, let me thy fauor trye.
                     
                        verse 176
                     For I was lost and went astraye, muche lyke a waydryng shepe:
                     Oh seke me, for I haue not fayled, thy commaundmentes to kepe.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ Dd dominum cum tribularer. Psal. cxx. T. S.
               
                  ¶ The praier of Dauid beyng now banished among the barbarious people of Arabia by the fasle reports of enuious flatterers. And therefore he lamenteth his long abode amonge those infidels, who were geuen to all kind of wickednes and contetion.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  IN trouble and in thrall, vnto the 
                     〈♫〉
                   Lord I call: & he doth me cōfort: deliuer me (I say) 
                     〈♫〉
                   frō liers lips alway, And tong of false reyort.
               
                  
                     verse 4
                  What vantage, or what thyng,
                  Getst thou thus for to sting.
                  Thou false and flattering lyer?
                  
                     verse 5
                  Thy tongue doth hurt I wene,
                  No les then arrowes kene,
                  Of whote consuming fire.
                  
                     verse 6
                  Alas to longe I slake,
                  Within these tentes so blake,
                  
                     
Whiche kedars are by name:
                  By whom the flocke elect,
                  And of Isaackes sect.
                  Are put to open shame.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  With them that peace did hate,
                  I came a peace to make,
                  And set a quyet lyfe:
                  
                     verse 8
                  But when my worde was tolde,
                  Causeles I was controld,
                  By them that would haue stryfe.
               
            
            
               ¶ Leuaui oculos meos. Cxxi. VV. VV.
               
                  ¶ The Prophet shewed by his owne example that the faythful ought to loke for all their succor of God alone, who will gouerne and giue good successe to all theyr godly enterpryses.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  I Lyfte mine eies to Sion hill, frō 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   whence I doo attend, that succor God me send. 
                     〈♫〉
                   The mighty God me succor will, which heauē 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   and earth framed, & all things therin named.
               
               
                  
3 Thy fote from slip he will preserue,
               And will thee safely kepe:
               For he will neuer slepe.
               
               Lo he that doth Israll conserue,
               No slepe at all can him catche?
               But his eyes shall euer watche,
               
               The Lorde is thy warrant alway,
               The Lorde eke doth thee couer,
               As at thy ryght hand euer.
               
               The sunne shall not thee parche by day,
               Nor the mone not halfe so bryght.
               Shall with could thee hurt by night.
               
               The Lorde will kepe thee from distres,
               And wyll thy lyfe sure saue:
               And thou also shalt haue.
               
               In all thy busines good successe,
               Where euer thou goest in or out,
               God will thy thinges bring about.
            
            
               ¶ Letatus sum. Psalme. Cxxii. VV. K.
               
                  ¶ Dauid reioyceth in the name of the faythfull that God hathe accomplished his promes, and placed his Arke in Sion, for the whiche he geueth thankes, and prayeth for the prosperitie of the Church.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  I did in hart reioyce, to heare ye peples 
                     〈♫〉
                   voyce, in offering so willingly: For let vs



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   vp say they, and in the Lordes house pray: thus 
                     〈♫〉
                   spake the folke full louingly. Oure fete that 
                     〈♫〉
                   wandred wide, shal in thy gates abide, O thou 
                     〈♫〉
                   Jerusalem full fayre, Which arte so semely 
                     〈♫〉
                   set, muche lyke a Citie net, the like wherof 
                     〈♫〉
                   is not els where.
               
               The trybes with one accorde,
               The tribes of God the Lorde,
               Are thither bent theyr way to take:
               So God before did 
                     •
                  ell
               
                  
That there his israell.
               Their prayers shoulde together make.
               
               For there are thrones erect,
               And that for this respect.
               To set forth iustice orderly.
               Which thrones right to mainteine,
               To dauids house perteine,
               His folke to iudge accordingly.
               
               To pray let vs not cease,
               For Ierusalems peace,
               Thy friendes God prosper mightely.
               
               Peace be thy walles about,
               And prosper the throughout,
               Thy places eke continually.
               
               I wish thy prosperous state,
               For my poore brethrens sake,
               That comfort haue by meanes of the.
               
               Gods house both me allure,
               Thy welth for to procure
               So much allwayes as lieth in me.
            
            
               Adte leuaui oculos Psalm. Cxxiii. Th. Stern.
               
                  ¶ A praier of the faithfull which are afflicted by the wicked worldelinges and contemners of God.
               
               
                  O Lord that heuen doest possesse, Singe this as the. xxiii. psal. I lift mine eies to the,
                  Euen as the seruant lifteth his, his maisters handes to see.
                  
                     verse 2
                  As handmaides watch there maistres handes, some grace for to atchiue,
                  So we beholde the Lord our God, til he do vs forgeue.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3
                  Lorde graunt vs thy compassion, and mercy in thy sight:
                  For we be filled and ouer comen, with hatred and despight.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Our mindes be stuffed with great rebuke, the rich and worldly wise:
                  To make af vs their mocking stock, the proude do vs despice.
               
            
            
               Nisi quia dominus, Psalm Cxxiiii. VV.
               
                  ¶ The people of God. beyng delyuered out of a great danger acknowledg not to haue escaped by their owne power. but throughe the fauour of God, and shew in how greate perill they were.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  NO we Israell may say, & that truly, 
                     〈♫〉
                   If that the Lord had not our cause mainteind. 
                     〈♫〉
                   If that the lord had not our right susteind. Whē 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   all the worlde against vs furiously, made their



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   vprors, and said we should all die.
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Now long a go they had deuoure vs all:
                  And swalowed quick, for ought yt we could deme,
                  Suche was their rage, as we might well esteme.
                  
                     verse 4
                  And as the flouddes, with mightye force do fall,
                  So had they now, our life euen brought to thrall.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  The raging stremes, most proud in roring noice
                  Had long a go, ouer whelmde vs in the depe,
                  
                     verse 6
                  But loued by God whiche doth vs safely kepe,
                  From bloudy teeth, and theyr most cruell voyce.
                  Which as a pray to eate vs woulde reioyce.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Euen as the birde out of the foulers grenne,
                  Escapth away? right so it fareth vs:
                  Broke are theyr nets, and we haue scaped thus,
                  
                     verse 8
                  God that made heauen, & earth, is our help thē,
                  His name hath saued vs from these wicked men.
               
            
            
               ¶ Qui confidunt. Psalm. cxxv. VV. K.
               
                  ¶ He describeth the assurance of the faithfull in their aflictions, and desireth their welth, and the destruction of the wicked.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  SUche as in God the lord do trust, as 
                     〈♫〉
                   Mount Sion shall firmely stande, and be remoued



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   at no hand, the Lorde will count them 
                     〈♫〉
                   right and iust, So that they shall be sure, For 
                     〈♫〉
                   euer to indure.
               
                  
                     verse 2
                  As mightye mountains huge and greate, Jerusalem about to close.
                  So will the Lorde be vnto those, who on his godly will doo wayte.
                  Suche are to hym so deare, they neuer nede to feare.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  For though the rightous trye doeth he, by making wicked men his rodde:
                  Lest they through grief for sake their God, it shall not as their lot still be.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Geue, Lorde, to those thy lyght, whose hartes are true and ryght.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  But as for such as turne a syde, by croked wayes which they out sought,
                  The Lorde will surely bryng to nought, with workes vile they shall abide:
                  But peace with Israell, for euermore shall dwel.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ In conuertendo. Psalm. cxxvi. VV. K
               
                  ¶ This Psalme was made after the returne of the people from Babylon, and sheweth that the meane of their deliuerance was wonderful, after the seuentie yeres of captiuitie forespoken by Ieremie. 25. 12. and. 29. 10.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  WHen that the Lorde again his Siō 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   had forth brought from bondage great, & also 
                     〈♫〉
                   seruitude extreme, his work was suche, as 
                     〈♫〉
                   did surmount mans hart & thought, so that we 
                     〈♫〉
                   were muche like to them that vse to dreame: 
                     〈♫〉
                   our mouthes were with laughter filled then, 
                     〈♫〉
                   and eke our tongues did shew vs ioyfull men.
               
                  
                  The Heathen folke were forced then, this to confes,
                  How that the Lord for them also great things had don,
                  
                     verse 3
                  But muche more we, and therfore can confes no les:
                  Wherfore to ioye we haue good cause as we begonne
                  
                     verse 4
                  O Lorde, go forthe, thou canst our bondage end,
                  As to desertes thy flowing riuers send.
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Full true it is, that they whiche sow with teares in dede,
                  A time will come, when they shal reape in mirth & ioye
                  
                     verse 6
                  They went and wept in bearing of their precious sede.
                  For that theyr foes full often times did them anoye:
                  But their returne with ioye they shall sure see,
                  Their sheaues home bryng, and not impered be.
               
            
            
               ¶ Nisi dominus. Palme. Cxxvii. VV.
               
                  ¶ It is not mannes wit, power, or labor, but the free goodnes of God that geueth ryches, preserueth townes and countrepes, graunteth noryshment and chyldren.
               
               EXcept the Lorde the house doo make,
               And therunto doo set hys hande: Sing this as the lords pra
                        ••
                     .
               
               What men doo build, it can not stand.
               
                  
Likewise in vayne men vndertake,
               Cities and holdes to watch and ward,
               Except the Lord be their safegard.
               
               Though ye ryse early in the morne,
               And so at night go late to bed,
               Feding full hardly with browne breade:
               yet were your labor lost and worne,
               But they whom God doth loue and kepe
               Receyue all thinges with quiet slepe.
               
               Therfore marke well, when euer ye see,
               That men haue heires to enioy their lād:
               It is the gift of Gods owne hand,
               For God him selfe doth multiplye,
               Of his great liberalitie,
               The blessing of posteritie.
               
               And when the children come to age,
               They grow in strength and actiuenes,
               In person, and comelines,
               So that a shaft shot with courage,
               Of one that hath a most strong arme,
               Flyeth not so swyft, nor doth lyke harme
               
               Oh well is him that hath his quiuer,
               Fournished with such altilerye:
               For when in perill he shalbe,
               Suche one shall neuer shake nor shiuer.
               When that he pleadeth before the iudge,
               Against his foes which beare him grudg
            
            
               ¶Beati omnes qui timent. Psalm. cxxviii. T. T
               
                  ¶ He describeth the prosperous estate of them that be maryed in the feare of God, ioyning with all the promises of Gods blessinges, to all them that lyue in thys honorable estate, accordyng to his commaundementes.
               
               
                  
BLessed art thou that fearest God, Sing thys as the. cxxxvii. and walkest in his way:
               
               For of thy labor thou shalt eate, happye arte thou (I say.)
               
               Like frutefull vynes on thy house sydes, so doth thy wyfe spryng out:
               Thy children stande lyke Oliue plantes, thy table round about.
               
               Thus art thou blest that fearest God, and he shall let thee see:
               
               The promised Ierusalem, and hys felicitye.
               
               Thou shalt thy childrens children see, to thy great ioyes increase:
               And likewyse grace on Israell, prosperitie and peace.
            
            
               ¶Sepe expugnauerunt Psal. cxxix. VV. VV
               
                  ☞ He admonisheth the churche to reioyce, though it haue ben afflicted in all ages, for God will delyuer it, and the enemies, for all their glorious shew, shall sodenly be destroyed.
               
               OF Israell thys may now be the song,
               euē frō my youth my foes haue oft me noted
               Athousand euils since, I was tēdre & yonge
               They haue wrought, yet was I not destroyed.
               
               As yet I beare the marks in bone and skyn.
               that one wold think yt the plow mē wt their plowes
               Upon my back haue made their balkes far in:
               for like plowd groūd, euē so haue I lōg forowes.
               
               But yet the Lorde, which doth all things iustly,
               Hath cut the ropes, & so stayd the wicked rage,
               
               Euen so shall all suche perish shamefully,
               Whiche hate Sion, or wish it any damage.
               
               
                  
5 Al such men shalbe lyke the gras that groweth
               Upon the wales, or tops of houses most hye,
               Whiche sodenly, or one bewar, widereth:
               So that no frute on such herbes can gathered be,
               
               Neuer man saw, that any mower mowed,
               Suche grasse as that, or therof his hand did fill:
               Much les that he, which glaineth of yt is sowed,
               Under his arme bare, some thing his house vntill.
               
               Nor yet that he, that passeth by that way
               Sayth to the repers, God saue you, or God spede,
               No no man doth wishe them good lucke, I saye,
               Or pray yt God, would for their work graunt thēmede
            
            
               ¶ Deprofundis clamaui. Psalme. cxxx. VV. VV.
               
                  ¶ An effectuous prayer of hym that for his sinnes had susteyned great afflictions, and not withstanding, he fully trusteth, and assureth him selfe to obteyne mercy and forgeuenes of his synnes, and at length deliuereth from all euilles.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  LOrd to the I make my mone. whē daūgers 
                     〈♫〉
                   me oppres. I call, I sigh plain and grone. 
                     〈♫〉
                   Trusting to finde reles. Heare now, O Lord, my



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   request. For it is full due tyme: And let thyne 
                     〈♫〉
                   eares aye be prest, vnto thys prayer myne.
               
               O Lorde our God if thou way, our sinnes and them peruse:
               Who shall then escape, and say, I can my selfe excuse?
               
               But Lord thou art mercifull, and turnest to vs thy grace:
               That we with harts most carefull, should feare before thy face.
               
               In God I put my whole trust, my soule wayteth on his wyll:
               For his promise is most iust, and I hope therin styll.
               
               My soule to God hath regarde, wishing for him alway:
               More then they that watch and ward, to see the dauning day.
               
               Let Israell then boldly, in the Lorde put his trust:
               He is that God of mercy, that his deliuer must.
               
               For he it is that must saue, Israell from his sinne:
               And all suche as surely haue, their cōfidence in him.
            
            
               
               Domine non est. Psalme. Cxxxi. M.
               
                  ☞ Dauid charged with ambytion and gredyc desire to raygne, protesteth his humilitie and modestye before God, and teacheth all men, what they should doo.
               
               
                  O Lorde I am not puft in minde, Sing this as the lamentatiō
                      I haue no skornfull eye:
                  I doo not exercyse my selfe, in thynges that be to hye.
               
               
                  But as a childe that wayned is, euen from his mothers brest:
                  So haue I Lorde behaued my selfe, in sylence and in rest.
               
               
                  O Israell trust in the Lorde, let hym be all thy stay:
                  From this tyme forth for euermore,
                  from age to age I say.
               
            
            
               Memento domine. Psalme. Cxxxii. M.
               
                  ☞ The faythfull, groundyng on Gods promise made vnto Dauid, desireth that he would establysh the same, bothe as touchyng hys posterytic and the buylding of the temple, to praye there as was fore spoken.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  REmēber dauids trobles lord how to 
                     〈♫〉
                   the Lord he sware, & voud a vow to Iacobs god



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   to kepe for euermore I wil not com within my 
                     〈♫〉
                   house, nor clyme vp to my bed, nor let my temples 
                     〈♫〉
                   take their rest, or the eyes in my hed.
               
                  Till I haue found out for the Lorde, a place to set theron:
                  An house for Iacobs God to be, an habitacyon.
                  We harde of it at Ephrata, there did we heare this sounde:
                  And in the fildes and forrestes there, these voyces fyrst were found.
               
               
                  We will assay and go in nowe, his tabernarle there:
                  Before his for stole to fall doune, apon out knees in feare.
                  Artic O Lorde aryse I say, into thy restyng place:
                  Both thou and the like of thy strengthe, the presence of thy grace.
               
               
                  
                  Let all thy prestes be clothed Lorde, with truthe and righteousnes:
                  Let all thy sayntes and holy men, sing all with ioyfulnes.
                  And for thy seruaunt Dauids sake, refuse not Lorde I say:
                  The face of thyne annoynted Lorde, or turn thy face away.
               
               
                  The Lorde to Dauid swore in truth, and will not shrink from it:
                  Saying, the frute of thy body, apon thy seate shall syt.
                  And if thy sonnes my couenant kepe, that I shall learne eche one:
                  Then shall theyr sonnes for euer syt, apon thy princely throne,
               
               
                  The Lorde himselfe hath chose Syon, and loue therein to dwell:
                  Saying thys is my restyng place, I loue and like it well.
                  And I will blesse, with great increase, her vittales, euery where:
                  And I will satisfye with bread, the nedy that be there.
               
               
                  Yea I will decke, and cloth her pristes, with my saluation:
                  And all her sainctes shall sing for ioye, of my protection.
                  There will I surely make the horne, of Dauid for to bud▪
                  
                  
                     
For I haue there, ordaynde for myne, alanthorne bright and good.
                  As for his enmyes, I will clothe, with shame for euermore:
                  But I will cause his crowne to shine, more fresh then here to fore.
               
            
            
               ¶ Ecce quam bonum. Psalm. cxxxiii. VV. VV.
               
                  ☞ This psalme conteyneth the commendation of godly and brother: therly amitie, which for thexcellencye therof is compared to the most pretious oyle, wherwith the Priestes only and instruments of the tabernacle wer annoynted, Exodus. xxx.
               
               
                  O How happye a thyng it is, Sing thys as the. cxxxvii. and ioyfull for to see:
                  Brethern together fast to holde, the bande of amitie.
                  
                     verse 2
                  It callth to minde that swete perfume, and that costly oyntment:
                  Which on the sacrifisers head, by Gods precept was spent.
               
               
                  It wet not Aarons head alone, but drencht his beard throughout:
                  And finally it did runne down, his ritche attire about.
                  
                     verse 3
                  And as the lower ground doth drynke, the dew of Hermon hill:
                  And Sion with his siluer droppes, the fields with fruite doth fill.
               
               
                  
                     verse 4
                  Euen so the Lorde doth poure on them, his blessings manifold:
                  Whose hartes and myndes without all guile, this knot doo kepe and hold.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Ecce nunc. Psalme. Cxxxiiii. VV. K
               
                  ☞ He exhorteth the Leuites that watch in the temple to prayse the Lorde.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  BEhold, & haue regard, ye seruants 
                     〈♫〉
                   of the Lorde, Which in his house by night do 
                     〈♫〉
                   watch, prayse him with one accorde.
               
               Lyft vp your hands on high, vnto his holy place,
               And geue the Lorde his prayses due: his benefites embrace.
               
               For why? the Lord, who did, both earth and heauen frame,
               Doeth Sion bles and will conserue, for euer more the same.
            
            
               ¶ Laudate nomen. Psalme. Cxxxv. M.
               
                  ¶ He exhorteth all the faithful, of what estate so euer they be, to praise God for his merueylous worcks, & specially for his graces towards his people, wherein he hath declared his maiestie, To the confession of all Idolaters and theyr Idolls.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  O Praise ye lord praise him praise him,



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   praise him with one accord, o praise him stil al ye 
                     〈♫〉
                   that be the seruaunts of ye lord, o praise him ye that 
                     〈♫〉
                   stand & be, in the house of the Lord, ye of his court 
                     〈♫〉
                   and of his house praise hym with one accord.
               
                  Prayse ye the Lord for he is good, syng prayses to his name:
                  It is a comly, and good thing, alwayes to doo the same.
                  For why the Lorde, hath chose Iacob, his very owne, you see:
                  So hath he chosen Israell, his treasure for to be.
               
               
                  For this I know, and am right sure, the Lorde is very greate:
                  He is in dede aboue all Goddes, most easy to intreate,
                  For what so euer pleased him, all that fulwell he wrought:
                  
                     
In heauen, in earthe, and in the sea, whiche he hath framde of nought.
               
               
                  He lifteth vp cloudes, euen from the earthe, he makth the lightnings and rayne:
                  He bringkth forth the windes also, He made nothing in vayne.
                  He smote the first borne of eche thing, in Egipt that toke rest:
                  He spared there, no lyuing thyng, the man, nor yet the beast,
               
               
                  He hathe in thee, shewde wonders great, O Egipt voyde of vauntes,
                  On Pharao thy cursed kyng, and his seuere seruauntes.
                  He smote then many nacyons, and did great actes and thynges,
                  He slew the great and mightyest, and chefest of theyr kynges.
               
               
                  Syhon king of Ammorites, and Og kyng of Basan:
                  He slew also the kingdomes all, that were of Canaan.
                  And gaue their lande to Israell, an herytage we see:
                  To Israell, his owne people, an heritage to be.
               
               
                  Thy name O Lorde, shall still endure, and thy memoriall:
                  Throughout all generations, that are, or euer shall,
                  The Lorde will surely auenge, his people all in dede.
                  
                     
And to his seruauntes, he will shewe, fauour in tyme of nede.
               
               
                  The Idols of the Heathen are made, in all theyr coste and landes:
                  Of syluer and of golde be they, the workes euen of mens handes.
                  They haue mouthes and cannot speake. and eyes to at haue no sight
                  They haue eares, that heare nothyng, Theyr mouthes, be breatheles quite.
               
               
                  Wherfore all they, are lyke to them, that so doth set them forth:
                  And lyke wyse those, that trust in them, or thinke they be ought worth.
                  O all ye house of Israell, see that ye prayse the Lorde,
                  And ye that be of Aarons house, prayse him, with one accord.
               
               
                  And ye that be of Leuis house, prayse ye lykewise the Lorde,
                  And all that stand in awe of hym, prayse him, with one accord.
                  And out of Syon, sound his prayse, the great prayse of the Lorde:
                  Whiche dwelleth in Ierusalem, praise him with one accord.
               
            
            
               Confitemini Psalme. Cxxxvi. N.
               
                  ☞ A most earnest exhortaciō to geue thanks vnto God for the creation and gouernaunce of all thinges, which standeth in confessing that he geueth vs all of his mere liberalitie.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  PRaise ye ye lord for he is good, for hys



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   mercy endureth for euer, Geue prayse vnto the 
                     〈♫〉
                   God of Gods, for his mercy endureth for euer 
                     〈♫〉
                   Geue prayse vnto the Lorde of Lordes, for his 
                     〈♫〉
                   mercy endureth for euer which only doth great 
                     〈♫〉
                   wōders work, for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  Which by his wisdome made the heauens, for his mercy endureth for euer:
                  
                     verse 6
                  Which on the waters stretcht the earth, for his mercy endureth for euer.
                  
                     verse 7
                  Which made great light to shine abrode, for his mercy endureth for euer:
                  
                     verse 8
                  As sonne to rule the lightsome day, for his merry endureth for euer
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 9
                  The mone and sterres to guide the night, for his mercy endureth for euer.
                  
                     verse 10
                  Whiche smote Egipt with their first-borne, for his mercy endureth for euer:
                  
                     verse 11
                  And Israell brought out from them, for his mercy endureth for euer.
                  
                     verse 12
                  With mighty hand and stretched arme, for his mercy endureth for euer:
               
               
                  
                     verse 13
                  Whiche cut the red sea in two partes, for his mercy endureth for euer,
                  
                     verse 14
                  And Israell made passe there through, for his mercy endureth for euer.
                  
                     verse 15
                  And drouned Pharao and his host. for his mercy endureth for euer:
                  
                     verse 16
                  Through wildernes hys people led, for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
               
                  
                     verse 17
                  He whiche did smite greate noble kinges, for his mercy endureth for euer:
                  
                     verse 18
                  And whiche hath slayne the mighty kynges, for his mercy endureth for euer.
                  
                     verse 19
                  As Sihon king of Amorites, for his mercy endureth for euer.
                  
                     verse 20
                  And Og the king of Basan land, for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
               
                  
                     verse 21
                  And gaue their land for heritage, for his mercy endureth for euer:
                  
                     verse 22
                  Euen to his seruant Israell, for his mercy endureth for euer.
                  
                     verse 23
                  Remembred vs in base estate, for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 24
                  And from oppressors rescued vs. for his mercy endureth for euer.
                  
                     verse 25
                  Which geueth fode vnto all flesh, for his mercy endureth for euer.
                  
                     verse 26
                  Praise ye the God of heauen aboue, for his mercy endureth for euer:
                  
                     verse 27
                  Geue thankes vnto the Lorde of Lordes, for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
            
            
               ¶ Super flumina Babilonis. Psal. cxxxvii. VV. VV
               
                  ☞ The people of God in their banishment, seing Gods true religion decaye, lyued in greate anguish and sorow of harte, the whiche grief the Eaideons did so litle pitie, that they rather increased the same dayly, with tauntes, reproches and blasphemies againste God, wherfore the Israelites desire God to punish the Edomites who prouoked the Babilonians againste them, and moued (by the spirite of God prophery the destruction of Babilon, where they were handeled so tirannously
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  WHen as we sat in Babylon, ye riuers 
                     〈♫〉
                   rounde about: and in remēbraunce of Sion the 
                     〈♫〉
                   teares for grief burst out. We hāgd out harps & 
                     〈♫〉
                   instruments, the willow trees vpon, for in that



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   placemen for their vse, had planted many one.
               
                  
                     verse 3
                  Then they to whom we prisoners were, sayde to vs tauntingly:
                  Now let vs heare your Ebrue songes, and pleasant melody.
                  
                     verse 4
                  Alas (sayd we) who can once frame, his sorowfull hart to syng:
                  The prayses of our louing God, thus vnder a straunge kyng
                        
                           
                        
                        punctel
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     verse 5
                  But yet if I Ierusalem, out of my hart let flyde:
                  Then let my fingers quyte forget, the warblyng harp to guyde.
                  
                     verse 6
                  And let my tong within my mouth, be tyde for euer fast:
                  If that I ioy; before I see, thy full deliueraunce past.
               
               
                  
                     verse 7
                  Therfore (O Lorde) remember now, the cursed noyse and cry:
                  That Edoms sonnes againste vs made, when they razed our citie.
                  Remember Lorde theyr cruell wordes, when as with one accorde.
                  They cryed, on sack, and raze their wals, in despite of theyr Lorde.
               
               
                  
                     verse 8
                  Euen so shalt thou (O Babilon) at length to dust be brought:
                  
                     
And happy shall that man be calld, that our reuenge hath wrought.
                  
                     verse 9
                  Yea blessed shall that man be calld, that taketh thy children yonge:
                  To dash theyr bones against hard stones, whiche lye the streates amonge.
               
            
            
               Confitebor tibi. Psalme. Cxxxviii. N.
               
                  ☞ Dauid with greate courage prayseth the goodnes of God toward hym, whiche is so greate, that it is knowne to forren prynces, who shall prayse the Lord together with hym. And he is assured to haue lyke comforte of God in the time folowyng, as he hathe had here to fore.
               
               
                  THee will I prayse with my whole hart, my Lorde my God alwayes: Sing thys as the. cxivii. Ps.
                  
                  Euen in the presence of the Gods, I will aduaunce thy prayse.
                  Towarde thy holy temple I will looke and worship thee:
                  And praysed in my thankfull mouth, thy holy name shall be.
               
               
                  Euen for thy louing kindnes sake, and for thy truth withall:
                  For thou thy name hast by thy worde, auaunced ouer all.
                  When I did call thou heardest me, and thou hast made also:
                  The power of encreasced strength, within my soule to grow.
               
               
                  Yea all the kynges on earth they shall, geue prayse to thee, O Lorde:
                  For they of thy most holy mouth, haue hard the mightye word.
                  
                     
They of the wayes of God the Lord, in singing shall entreate:
                  Because the glory of the Lorde, it is exceding great.
               
               
                  The Lorde is hye and yet he doth, beholde the lowly spirite:
                  But he contemning knowes a farre: the proud and lofty wight.
                  Although in middes of trouble I, doo walke, yet shall I stand:
                  Renued by thee, O my Lord, thou wilt stretch out thy hand.
               
               
                  vpon the wrath of all my foes, and saued shall I be:
                  By thy right hand. The Lord God wil performe his worke to me.
                  Thy mercy, Lorde, endures for ay, Lorde doo me not forsake:
                  Forsake me not that am the work, whiche thine owne hand did make.
               
            
            
               ¶ Domine probasti. Psalme. cxxxix. N.
               
                  ☞ Dauid to clense his harte from all hipocrisie sheweth that there is nothing so hye. whiche God seyth not, whiche he confirmeth by the creation of man. After declaryng his zeale and feare of God, he protesteth to be enemy to all them that contem God.
               
               
                  O Lorde, thou hast me tryed and knowne, my sitting doste thou knew:
                  And tysing eke, my thoughts a farre, thou vnderstandst also,
                  My pathes, yea and my lying downe, thou compassest alwayes,
                  And by familiar custome art,



acquaynted with my wayes.
               
               
                  No word is in my tong, O lorde, but knowne it is to thee,
                  Thou me behinde holdst and before, thou layst thy hand on me.
                  To wonderfull aboue my reache, Lorde is thy cunning skill:
                  it is so hie that I the same, can not atteyne vntill.
               
               
                  From sight of thy all seeyng sprite, Lorde whether shall I goo?
                  Or whether shall I flee away, thy presence to scape froe?
                  To heauen if I mount aloft, loe thou art present there:
                  In hell if I lye downe by lowe, euen there thou dost appeare.
               
               
                  Yea let me take the mornings winges, and let me goo and hide:
                  Euen there where ar the farthest partes where flowing sea doth slide.
                  Yea euen thether also shall, thy reaching hand me guide:
                  And thy ryght hand shall holde me fast, and make me to abide.
               
               
                  yea if I say the darknes shall, yet shrowde me from thy sight:
                  Loe euen also the darkest night, about me shalbe light.
                  yea darknes hideth not from thee, but night doth shine as day:
                  To thee the darknes and the light,



are bothe alike alway,
               
               
                  For thou possessed hast my reynes, and thou hast couerd me:
                  When I within my mothers wombe, enclosed was by thee.
                  Thee will I prayse, made fearfully, and wondrously I am:
                  Thy works are maruellous, right well my soule doth knowe the same.
               
               
                  My bones, they are not hid from thee, although in secret place:
                  I haue ben made and in the earth, beneth I shapen was.
                  When I was formeles, then thyne eye, saw me far in thy boke:
                  Were written all (nought was before) that after fashion toke.
               
               
                  The thoughtes therfore of thee (O God) bow dere are they to me?
                  And of them all how passing great, the endles nombers be?
                  If I should compt them, loe their summe more then the sand I see:
                  And whensoeuer I awake, yet am I still with thee.
               
               
                  The wicked and the blody men, of that thou woldest slaye:
                  Euen those O God to whom, depart, depart from me, I say.
                  Euen those of thee O lord my God, that speake full wickedlye:
                  
                     
These that are lifted vp in vayne, beyng enemies to thee.
               
               
                  Hate I not them that hate thee Lord? and not in earnest wise:
                  Contende I Lorde against them all, against thee that arise?
                  I hate them with vnfayned hate, euen as my vtter foes
                  Trye me O God, and know my hart, my thoughtes proue and disclose.
               
               
                  Consider Lorde if wickednes, in me there any be:
                  And in the way, O God my guide, for euer leade thou me.
               
            
            
               ¶ Eripeme. Psalme. Cxl. N.
               
                  ☞ Dauid complayneth of the crueltye falshed, and iniuryes of his enemies against whiche he prayeth vnto the Lorde, and assureth him selfe of hys helpe and succoure. Wherfore he prouoketh the iuste to prayse thee and to assure them selues of hys tuicion.
               
               
                  LOrde saue me from the euill man, and from the cruell wight:
                  Deliuer me, whiche euell doo, imagine in their sprite.
                  Whiche make on me continuall warre, their tonges loe they haue whet:
                  Like serpents, vnderneth their lyppes, is adders poyson set.
               
               
                  Kepe me, O Lorde from wicked handes, preserue me to a bide:
                  Free from the cruell man that meanes, to cause my steppes to slide.
                  
                     
The proud haue laid a snare for me, and they haue spred a net:
                  With cordes, in my path way, and ginnes, for me eke haue they set.
               
               
                  Therfore I said vnto the Lord, thou art my God alone:
                  Here me O Lorde, oh heare the voyce, wherwith I pray and mone.
                  O Lord my God thou only art, the strength that saueth me.
                  My head in day of battell hath ben couerd still by thee.
               
               
                  Let not O lorde the wicked haue, the end of his desire:
                  Perform not his wicked thought lest they, with pride be set on fyre.
                  Of them that compas me about, the chefest of them all:
                  Lord let the mischef of their lippes, vpon them selues befall.
               
               
                  Let coales fall on them, let him cast, them in consuming flame:
                  And in depe pittes so as they may, not rise out of the same.
                  For no backbiter shall on earth, beset in stable plight:
                  And euill to destruction still, shall hunt the cruel wight,
               
               
                  I know the lorde thafflicted will, reuenge and iudge the poore:
                  The iust shall prayse thy name, iust shall dwell with thee euermore.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Domine clamaui. Psalme. Cxli. N.
               
                  ☞ Dauid being greuouslye persecuted vnder Saull, onely flicth vnto God to haue succour, despring him to bridle his affections, that he may paciently abyde 
                        〈◊〉
                      God take vengeaunce of his enemies.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  O Lord vpon thee doo I cal, Lord hast 
                     〈♫〉
                   thee vnto me, and herken Lord vnto my voyce, 
                     〈♫〉
                   when I do crye to thee, as inscence let my praiyer 
                     〈♫〉
                   be directed in thine eyes, & the vplifting of 
                     〈♫〉
                   my hands as euening sacrifice:
               
                  My Lord for guiding of my mouth, set thou a watche before:
                  And also of my mouing lipppes, O lorde kepe thou the dore.
                  That I should wicked works commit, incline thou not my hart:
                  
                     
With ill men, of their delicates, Lorde let me eate no parte:
               
               
                  But let the righteous suite me Lorde, for that is good for me:
                  Let him reproue me, and the same, a precious oyle shall be.
                  Suche smiting shall not breake my hed, the time shall shortly fall:
                  When I shall in their miserye, make prayers for them all.
               
               
                  Then when in stony places downe, theyr iudges shalbe cast:
                  Then shall they heare my words, for then, they haue a pleasant tast.
                  Our bones about the graues mouth, loe scattred are they found
                  As he that heaweth wod, or he that diggeth in the ground.
               
               
                  But O my lorde my God, mine eyes, doo loke vp vnto thee:
                  In thee is all my trust, let not my soule forsaken be.
                  Whiche they haue layd to catch me in, Lorke kepe me from the snare:
                  And from the suttle grennes of them, that wicked workers are.
               
               
                  The wicked into their owne nets, together let them fall:
                  while I doo by thy help escape, the danger of them all.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Voce mea ad. Psalme. Cxlii. N.
               
                  ☞ Dauid neither a stonied with feare, nor caryed awaye with anger. nor forsed by desperation, would kyll Saule but with a quyet mind. directed his earnest prayer vnto God who did preserue hu
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  BEfore the lorde God with my voyce, did I send out my crye:
                  And with my streamed voyce vnto, the lorde God prayed I.
                  My meditation in his sight, to poure I did not spare,
                  And in the presence of the Lorde. my trouble did declare.
               
               
                  Although perplexed were my sprite, my pathe was knowne to thee:
                  In way where I did walke a snare, they slyly layde for me
                  I lookt and vewd on my ryghthand, but none there wold me knoo:
                  All refuge fayled me and for, my soule none cared thoo.
               
               
                  Then cryed I Lorde to thee, and sayde, my hope thou only art:
                  Thou in the lande of lyuing art, my portion and my part.
                  Harke to my crye for I am brought, full low: delyuer me.
                  From them that doo me persecute. for me to strong they be.
               
               
                  That I may prayse thy name my soule, from prison lord bringe oute:
                  
                     
When thou art good to me, the iust, shall prese me round about.
               
            
            
               ¶ Domine exaudi. Psalme. Cxliii. N
               
                  ☞ An earnest prayer for remission of synnes, acknowledging that the enemies did cruelly persecute hym by Gods iust iudgment. He desireth to be restored to grace to be gouerned by his holy spirite, that he may spende the rest of hys lyfe in the true fere and seruice of God.
               
               
                  LOrde heare my prayer, harke the playnte, That I doo make to thee:
                  Lorde in thy natiue truthe and in, thy iustice aunswer me.
                  In iugement with thy seruant, lorde, oh enter not at all:
                  For iustyfyed be in thy syght, no one that lyueth shall.
               
               
                  The enmie hath pursued my soule, my lyfe to ground hath throwne:
                  And layde me in the darke like them, that dead are longe agone,
                  Within me in perplexitie: was my accombred spryte,
                  And in me was my troubled hart, amased and afflight.
               
               
                  Yet I recorde time past, in all, thy workes I meditate:
                  Yea in the workes I meditate, that thy handes haue create.
                  To thee O lorde my God, loe I doo stretch my crauing hands:
                  My soule desyreth after thee, as doo the thirstye landes.
               
               
                  
                  Heare me with spede, my sprite doth faile hide not thy face me froe:
                  els shall I be like them that downe into the pit doo goe.
                  Let me thy louing kindnes in, the morning heare and know,
                  For in thee is my trust, shew me the way that I shall goe.
               
               
                  For I lift vp my soule to thee, O Lorde deliuer me:
                  From all mine enemies: for I haue hidden me with thee.
                  Teache me to doo thy will, for thou thou art my God I say:
                  Let thy good sprite vnto the land, of misery me conuey.
               
               
                  with thy names sake with quickning grace a lyue doo thou me make:
                  And out of trouble bring my soule, euen for thy iustice sake.
                  And for thy mercy slay my foes, O lorde destroy them all:
                  That doo oppres my soule for I thy seruaunt am and shall.
               
            
            
               ¶ Bene dictus dominus. Psalme. cxliiii. N.
               
                  ☞ Dauid prayseth the Lorde with greate affection, and humilitie for hys kyngdome restored, and for his victoryes obtayned, yet callyng for helpe, & the destruction of the wicked promisyng to acknowleg the same with song of prayses, and declareth wherin the felicytie of anye people consisteth.
               
               
                  
                  BLest be the lorde my strength that doth instruct my hand to fight:
                  The lord that doth my fingers frame, to battell by his might.
                  He is my Goodnes fort and toure, deliuerer and shield:
                  In him I trust my people he, subdues to me to yelde.
               
               
                  O Lord what thing is man, that him, thou holdest so in price?
                  Or son of man that vpon him, thou thinkest in such wyse.
                  man is but like to vanitie. so pas hys dayes to ende:
                  As fleting shade. Bow downe O Lorde thy heauens and descend.
               
               
                  The mountains touche, & they shal smoke cast fourth thy lightning flame,
                  And scatter them, thine arrowes shote consume them with the same.
                  Send downe thy hand euen from aboue O Lorde delyuer me:
                  Take me from waters great, from hand of strangers make me free,
               
               
                  Whose subtle mouth of vanitie, and fondnes doth entreate:
                  And their right hand is a right hand, of falshod and deceit.
                  A new song I will sing O God, and singing will I be.
                  
                     
On viole and on instrument, ten stringed vnto thee.
               
               
                  Euen he it is that only geues deliuerance to kynges,
                  Unto hys seruaunt Dauid helpe, From hurt full sword he bringes:
                  From strangers hand me saue and sheld, whoes mouth talkes vanitie:
                  And their right hand is a ryght hand, of guile and sutteltye.
               
               
                  That oure sonnes may be as the plants, whom growing youth doth reare:
                  Our daughters as carued corner stones, lyke to a palace fayre,
                  Our corners full, and plenty may, with sondry sortes be found,
                  Our shepe bring thousands, in our strets ten thousands may abound,
               
               
                  Our oxen be to labor strong, that none doo vs inuade:
                  There be no going out, no crye, within our strets be made.
                  The people blessed are that with such blessings are so stered:
                  Yea blessed all the people are, whose God is, God the lorde.
               
            
            
               ¶ Exaltabo te deus. Psalme. Cxlv. N.
               
                  ☞ This Psalme was made when the kingdome of Dauid florished. Wherein he describeth the wonderfull prouidence of God, as well in gouerning man as in preseruing al the rest of his creatures. He praiseth God for his iustice and mercie, but specially for hys louyng kindnes toward those that call vpon him, that feare hym and loue hym.
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  THee will I laude my God & kyng, & 
                     〈♫〉
                   bles thy name for aye, for euer wil I prayse thy 
                     〈♫〉
                   name and bles thee day by day, great is the Lord, 
                     〈♫〉
                   most worthy praise, his greatnes not cāreach frō 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   race to race they shal thy works praise and thy 
                     〈♫〉
                   power preache.
               
                  I Of thy gloryous maiestye, the beauty will recorde:
                  And meditate vppon thy workes, most wonderfull, O Lorde.
                  And they shal of thy power and of thy fearfull actes declare.
               
               
                  
                  And I to publish all abrode, thy greatnes will not spare:
                  And they into the mention shall, breake of thy goodnes great:
                  And I aloud thy righteousnes, in singing shall repete.
                  The Lorde our God is gratious, and mercifull also:
                  Of great abounding mercy and to angre he is slowe.
               
               
                  yea good to all, and all his workes, his mercy doth excede:
                  Loe all thy workes doo praise thee lord, and doo their honor sprede.
                  Thy sainctes doo bles thee and they doo thy kingdomes glorye shewe:
                  And blase thy power to cause the sonnes of men his power to know.
               
               
                  And of his mighty kingdome eke, to sprede the glorious prayse:
                  Thy kingdome Lorde a kingdom is, that doth endure alwayes.
                  And thy dominion through eche age, endures without decay:
                  The Lorde vpholdeth them that fall, the sliding he doth stay.
               
               
                  The eyes of all doo wayte on thee, thou doest them all releue:
                  And thou to eche sufficing foode, in season due dost geue.
                  Thou openest thy plentuous hand, and bounteously doest fill:
                  
                     
All thinges what euer liue, with giftes of thy good will.
               
               
                  The Lorde is iust in all his wayes, his workes are holy all:
                  Nere all he is that call on him, in truthe that on him cal.
                  He the desires whiche they require, that feare him will fulfill:
                  And he will heare them when they crye, and saue them all he will.
               
               
                  The Lorde preserues all those to him, that beare a louing hart:
                  But he them all that wicked are, will vtterly subuert.
                  My thankfull mouth shall gladly speake, the prayses of the Lorde,
                  All flesh to prayse hys holy name, for euer shall accorde.
               
            
            
               ¶ Lauda anima mea. Psalm. cxlvi. I. H
               
                  ¶ Dauid shewing the great desire he had to prayse God, teacheth that none should put theyr trust in men, but in God alone: who is almightye and deliuereth thafflicted nourisheth the poore, setteth prisoners at lybertie, comforteth the fatherles, widowes, and the straungers, and raygneth kinge for euer.
               
               
                  My soule prayse thou the Lord alwayes, My God I will confes: Sing thys as the. cxxxvii.
                  
                  Whyle death and lyfe prolong my dayes, my tonge no tyme shall cease.
                  
                     verse 3
                  Trust not in worldly princes then, though they abound in wealth:
                  Nor in the sonnes of mortall men, in whom there is no health.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 4
                  For why theyr breath doth sone depart to earth anone they fall:
                  And then the counsels of their hart, decay and pearysh all.
                  
                     verse 5
                  O happy is that man, I say, whom Iacobs God doth ayde:
                  And he whose hope doth not decay, but on the lorde is stayd.
               
               
                  
                     verse 6
                  Whiche made the earth & waters depe, the heauens hie with all:
                  Which doth his word and promise kepe In truth and euer shall.
                  
                     verse 7
                  With right alwayes doth he procede, for suche as suffer wrong:
                  The poore and hungry he doth fede, and lose the fetters strong.
               
               
                  
                     verse 8
                  The lord doth send the blind their sight, the lame to limmes restore:
                  The lorde, I saye, doth loue the ryght, and iust man euermore:
                  
                     verse 9
                  He doth defend the fatherles, the strangers sad in hart.
                  And quite the wydow from distres, and ill mens wayes subuert,
               
               
                  
                     verse 10
                  Thy lorde and God eternally, O Syon still shall rayne:
                  In tyme of all posteritie, for euer to remayne.
               
            
            
               ¶ Laudate dominum, Psalme. cxlvii. N.
               
                  
                     
☞ The Prophet prayseth the bountye, wisdom, power, iustice, & prouidence of God vpō all his creatures. But specially vpō his church whiche he gathereth together after theyr dispersion. Declaring hys word and iudgmēts so vnto them as he hath don to no other people.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  PRaise ye the Lord, for it is good vnto 
                     〈♫〉
                   our God to synge, For it is pleasante and to 
                     〈♫〉
                   prayse, it is a comely thyng, the Lord his owne 
                     〈♫〉
                   Ierusalem, he buildeth vp alone, and the disperst 
                     〈♫〉
                   of Israell, doth gather into one.
               
                  He heales the broken in their hart, theyr sore vp doth he bynde:
                  He countes the number of the starres, and names them in theyr kynde.
                  
                     
Great is our Lord great is his power, his wisdome infinite:
                  The Lord releues the meke, & throwes to ground the wicked wight.
               
               
                  Sing vnto God the Lord with prayse, vnto the Lord reioyse:
                  And to our God vpon the harp, aduaunce your singing voyce.
                  He couers heauen with cloudes, and for the earth prepareth rayne:
                  And on the mountaines he doth make, the grasse to grow agayne.
               
               
                  He geues to beastes their fode, and to, yong rauens when they crye:
                  His pleasure not in strength of horse, nor in mans legges doth lye.
                  But all in those that feare the Lorde, the Lord hath his delight:
                  And suche as doo attend vpon, his mercies shining light.
               
               
                  O prayse thy Lorde Ierusalem, thy God O Syon prayse:
                  For he the barres hath forged strong, where with thy gaie he stayes.
                  Thy children he hath blest in thee, and in thy borders he:
                  Doth settle peace and with the floure. of wheat he filleth thee.
               
               
                  And his commaundement vpon, the earth he sendeth out:
                  
                     
And eke his word with spedy course, doth swiftly runne about.
                  He geueth snow like woll, hore frost, like ashes doth he spreade,
                  Like morsells castes his ise, therof, the colde whoe can abide?
               
               
                  He sendeth fourth his mightye worde, and melteth them agayne.
                  His winde he makes to blow, and then, the waters flow amayne,
                  The doctrine of his holy worde. to Iacob doth he shewe.
                  His statutes and his iudgements he, geues Israell to knowe.
               
               
                  With euery nation hath he not, so dealt, nor they haue knowne
                  His secrete iudgementes, ye therfore, prayse ye the Lord alone.
               
            
            
               ¶ Laudate dominum. Psalme. cxlviii. I. P.
               
                  ☞ He prouoketh all creatures to prayse the Lode in heauen, in earth, and in all places. specially for the power that he hathe geuen to his people Israell, whom he hathe taken so nere vnto hym.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  GEue laude vnto the Lord, frō heauen, 
                     〈♫〉
                   that is so hie: Praise him in dede and worde,
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   Aboue the starry skie. 2. And also ye his angels 
                     〈♫〉
                   all, armies royall prayse him with glee.
               
               Praise him both mone and Sunne,
               Whiche are so cleare and bryght,
               The same in you be done,
               Ye glistring starres of lyght,
               
               And eke no les,
               De Heauens faire,
               
               And cloudes of the ayre,
               His laud expresse.
               
               For at his worde they were,
               All formed as we see:
               At his voyce did appeare,
               All thinges in their degree,
               Whiche he set fast,
               To them he made,
               A law and trade,
               For aye to laste,
               
               Extoll and prayse Gods name,
               In earth ye Dragons fell,
               All depe doo ye the same,
               For it becommeth you well.
               
               Him magnyfye,
               Fyre, Hayle, Ise, Snowe,
               
                  
And stormes that blow,
               At his decree.
               
               The hilles and mountaines all,
               And trees that frutfull are:
               The Cedres great and tall,
               His worthy prayie declare.
               
               Beastes and cattell,
               yea birdes fliyng:
               And wormes crepyng,
               That on earth dwell.
               
               All kinges both more and les,
               With all their pompons trayne:
               Princes and all iudges,
               That in the worlde remayne,
               Exalte his name.
               
               yong men and maides,
               Olde men and babes.
               Doo ye the same.
               
               For his name shall we proue,
               To be most excellent:
               Whose prayse is farre aboue,
               The earth and firmament.
               
               For sure he shall,
               Exalt with blisse,
               The horne of his:
               And helpe them all,
               His sainctes all shall forthtell,
               His prayse and worthines:
               The children of Israell,
               Eche one both more and les,
               
               And also they,
               That with good will,
               
                  
His wordes fulfyll,
               And him obey
            
            
               Cantate dominum. Psalme. exlix. N.
               
                  ☞ An exhortation to the churche to prayse the Lorde for hys victorye and conquest, that he geueth his fainctes against all mans power.
               
               
                  SIng ye vnto the Lorde our God, a new reioysing song:
                  And let the prayse of him be heard, his holy sainctes among.
                  Let Israell reioyse in him, that made him of nothing:
                  And let the sede of Sion eke, be ioyfull in their king.
               
               
                  Let them sound prayse with voyce of flut vnto his holy name:
                  And with the timbrell and the harpe, sing prayses of the same.
                  For why the Lorde his pleasure all, hath in his peoyle set:
                  And by deliuerance he will rayse, the meke to glory great.
               
               
                  With glory and with honor now, let all the sainctes reioyse:
                  And now aloude vpon their beds, aduaunce their singing voyce.
                  And in their mouthes let be the actes, of God the mighty Lorde:
                  And in their handes eke let them beare, a dooble edged sworde.
               
               
                  
                  To plage the Heathen and correct, the people with theyr handes,
                  To bind their stately kinges in chaines their lordes in iron bandes.
                  To execute on them the dome, that written is before:
                  This honor all his sainctes shall haue, prayse ye the lorde therfore.
               
            
            
               ¶ Laudate dominum Psalme. CL. N.
               
                  ☞ An exhortacion to prayse the Lorde without sease by all maner of wayes for all hys mightye, and wonderfull workes.
               
               
                  YElde vnto God the mightye Lorde, prayse in his sanctuarye:
                  And prayse him in the firmament, that shewes his power on hie.
                  Aduaunce hys name and prayse hym in, his mightye actes alwayes:
                  According to his excellencye, of greatnes geue him praise,
               
               
                  His prayses with the princely noyse, of sounding tropet blowe.
                  Praise him vpon the viole and, vpon the harp also.
                  Praise him with timbrell and with flute, orgaines and virginalles:
                  With sounding cimbals praise ye him: praise him with loud cimballs.
               
               
                  What euer hath the benefite, of breathing praise the lorde:
                  To praise the name of God the lorde, agree with one accord.
               
            
            ☞ The ende of the Psalmes of Dauid in meter.
         
         
            
            ¶ The. x. Commaundements of almightie God.
            
               ¶ Exodus. xx. VV. VV.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  AT tend my people & geue eare, of ferly 
                     〈♫〉
                   things I wil thee tel
                     
                        
                     
                     punctel
                   Se that my words in 
                     〈♫〉
                   mind thou bear, And to my precepts listen wel.
               
               I am thy Souerayne Lorde and God,
               Whiche haue thee brought from carefull thrall:
               And eke reclaymed from Pharos rod.
               Make thee no Gods on them to call.
               
               Nor facyoned forme of any thyng,
               In heauen, or earth to worship it:
               For I thy God by reuengyng,
               With greuous plages this syn will smite,
               
               Take not in vayne his holy name,
               Abuse it not after thy will:
               For so thou might soone purchase blame,
               And in his wrath he would thee spill.
               
               The Lorde from worke the seuenth day cest,
               And brought all thinges to perfect end:
               So thou and thyne that day take rest
               
                  
That to Gods hests ye may attend.
               
               Unto thy parents honor geue,
               As Gods commaundements doo pretende,
               That thou long dayes, and good maies liue,
               In earth, where God a place doth lende,
               
               Beware of muder, and cruell hate,
               
               All fylthy fornication feare:
               
               Se thou steale not in any rate,
               
               False witnes against no man beare,
               
               Thy neyghbors house with not to haue
               His wyfe, or ought that he caleth mine,
               His field, his oxe, his asse, his sclaue,
               Or any thing, whiche is not thine.
            
            
               ¶ A prayer.
               
                  The sprit of grace graunt vs (O Lord)
                  To kepe these lawes, our harts restore:
                  And cause vs all with one accorde,
                  To magnifie thy name therfore.
               
               
                  For of our selues no strength we haue,
                  To kepe these lawes after thy will:
                  Thy might therfore (O Christ) we craue,
                  That we in thee may them fulfyll,
               
               
                  Lorde for thy names sake, graunt vs thys
                  Thou art our strength, oh Sauior Christ:
                  Of thee to spede, how should we mis,
                  In whom our treasure doth consist.
               
               
                  To thee for euermore be prayse,
                  With thy father in eche respect:
                  And with thy holy sprite alwayes,
                  The comforter of thine elect.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The Lordes Prayer. D. Coxe.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  OUr father which in heauen art, And 
                     〈♫〉
                   makst vs all one brotherhod, to call vpon thee 
                     〈♫〉
                   with one harte. Our heauenly Father & our 
                     〈♫〉
                   God: graunt we pray not with lips alone, but 
                     〈♫〉
                   with the harts depe sigh and grone.
               
                  Thy blessed name be sanctifyed,
                  Thy holy worde mought vs inflame,
                  In holy lyfe for to abyde,
                  To magnifye thy holy name,
                  From all errours defend and keye,
                  the litle flock of thy poore shepe,
               
               
                  
                  Thy kyngdom come euen at this houre,
                  And henceforth euerlastyngly:
                  thine holy ghost into vs poure:
                  With all his gifts most plenteously,
                  From Sathans rage and filthy band,
                  Defend vs with thy mighty hande.
               
               
                  Thy will be donne with diligence,
                  like as in heauen in earth also:
                  In trouble graunt vs pacience,
                  thee to obey in wealth and wo,
                  let not flesh, bloud, or any ill,
                  Preueile againste thy holy wyll,
               
               
                  Geue vs this day our dayly bread,
                  And all other good giftes of thyne:
                  kepe vs from warre, and from bloudshed,
                  Also from sicknes, derth and Pine,
                  that we may liue in quietnes,
                  Without all gredy carefulnes.
               
               
                  Forgeue vs our offences all,
                  Releue oure carefull conscience:
                  As we forgeue bothe great and small,
                  which vnto vs haue done offence.
                  Prepare vs lorde for to serue thee,
                  In perfect loue and vnitie.
               
               
                  O lorde into temptacion,
                  Leade vs not when the find doth rage:
                  to with stande his inuasion:
                  Geue power and strength to euery age,
                  Arme and make strong thy feble host,
                  with fayth and with thy holy ghost.
               
               
                  
                  O Lorde from euill delyuer vs,
                  The dayes and times are daungerous,
                  From euerlastyng deathe saue vs:
                  And in our last nede comfort vs,
                  A blessed ende to vs bequeath,
                  Into thy hands our soules receyue.
               
               
                  For thou (O Lorde) art king of kinges,
                  And thou hast power ouerall,
                  Thy glory shineth in all thinges:
                  In the wide world vniuersall,
                  Amen, Let it bedone (O Lord)
                  That we haue prayd with one accord.
               
            
            
               ¶ The. xii. Articles of the christian Faythe.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  ALl my belief, and confidedce, Is 
                     〈♫〉
                   in the Lord of might, the father which al things 
                     〈♫〉
                   hath made the day & eke the night, the heauēs 
                     〈♫〉
                   & the firmament, and also many a star, the earth:



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   and all that is therin, which passe mās reason far.
               
                  And in lyke maner I beleue,
                  In Chryste oure Lorde, hys sonne:
                  Coequall with the deitie,
                  And man in flesh and bone.
                  Conceyued by the holy Ghost,
                  His word doth me assure:
                  And of his mother Mary borne,
                  yet she a Uirgin pure.
               
               
                  Because mankind to Sathan was,
                  For sinne in bonde and thrall:
                  He came and offred vp him selfe,
                  To death to saue vs all.
                  And suffering most greuous paine:
                  Then Pilate beyng iudge:
                  Was crucifyed on the cros,
                  And therat did not grudge.
               
               
                  And so he dyed in the fleshe,
                  But quickned in the sprite:
                  His body then was buryed,
                  As is our vse and ryte.
                  His sprit did after this descend,
                  Into the lower partes:
                  To them that long in darknes were,
                  The true lyght of theyr hartes.
               
               
                  And in the third day of his death,
                  He rose to lyfe agayne:
                  
                     
To thende he might be gloryfyed,
                  Out of oll grief and payne.
                  Ascending to the heauens hie,
                  To sit in glory styll:
                  On Gods right hand, his Father dere,
                  According to his will.
               
               
                  Untill the day of iudgement come,
                  When he shall come againe:
                  With Angels power, yet of that day,
                  We all be vncertayne,
                  To iude all people rightuously,
                  Whom he hath dearly bought:
                  The lyuing and the dead also,
                  Which he hath made of nought.
               
               
                  And in the holy spirit of God,
                  My fayth to satisfye:
                  The third parson in Trinitie,
                  Beleue I sted fastlye.
                  The holy and catholick Churche,
                  That Gods worde doth maintayne:
                  And holy Scripture doth alowe,
                  Which Sathan doth disdayne.
               
               
                  And also I doo trust to haue,
                  By Iesu Christ his death:
                  Release and pardon of my sinnes,
                  And that only by fayth.
                  What time all flesh shall ryse agayne,
                  Before the Lorde of might:
                  And se vim with theyr bodely eyes.
                  Whiche now doo geue them light.
               
               
                  
                  And then shall Christe our sauior,
                  The shepe and Goates deuide:
                  And geue lyfe euerlastyngly,
                  to those, whom he hath tride.
                  Whiche is the realme celestiall,
                  In glory for to rest:
                  With all the holy company,
                  Of Saincts and Angels blest,
               
               
                  Whiche serue the Lorde omnipotent,
                  Obediently eche houre:
                  To whom be all dominion,
                  and prayse for euermore.
               
            
            
               ¶ A Prayer vnto the holy ghost, to be song before the Sermon.
               
                  COme holy sprite, the god of might, Comforter of vs all:
                  Teach vs to knowe thy word a right Sing thys as the. cxix. Psal. that we doo neuer fall.
                  O holy Ghost, visit our coast, defend vs with thy shild:
                  Against all sinne and wickednes, Lorde helpe vs win the field.
               
               
                  Lorde kepe our Quene and her counsell, and geue them will and might:
                  To perseuer in thy Gospell, which can put sinne to flyght.
                  O Lorde that geuest thy holy worde, send preachers plenteouslye:
                  That in the same we may accorde, and therin lyue and dye.
               
               
                  
                  O holy Sprite, direct a ryght, the Preachers of thy worde:
                  Thot thou by them maist cut downe syn, As it were with a sworde.
                  Depart not from those pastors pure, but ayde them at all nede:
                  Whiche breake to vs, the breade of lyfe, wheron our soules doo feede.
               
               
                  O blessed spirit of truthe, kepe vs, In peace and vnitie:
                  Kepe vs from sectes and errours all, And from all papistrie.
                  Conuert all those, that are oure foes, and bryng them to thy lyght:
                  That they and we, may well agree, and prayse thee day and nyght.
               
               
                  O Lorde increase our fayth in vs, and loue so to abounde:
                  That man and wyfe, be voyde of strife, and neyghbours about vs rounde.
                  In oure tyme geue thy peace, O Lorde, to nations farre and nye:
                  And teache them all thy holy worde, that we may syng to thee.
               
               
                  All glory to the Trinitie, that is of mightes most:
                  The lyuing Father and the Sonne, and eke the holy Ghost.
                  As it hath bene in all the time, that hathe been here to fore:
                  
                     
As it is now and so shalbe. henceforth for euermore.
               
            
            
               ¶ Dapacem domine.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  Geue peace in these our daies o lord, great 
                     〈♫〉
                   daungers are now at hand, thine enemies with 
                     〈♫〉
                   one accorde: Christ name in euery lande: seke 
                     〈♫〉
                   to deface, route out and race: thy trew right 
                     〈♫〉
                   worship in dede: be thou the stay, lord we the pray, 
                     〈♫〉
                   thou helpest alone in all nede.
               Geue vs that peace▪ whiche we doo lack,
               Through misbelief and ill lyfe:
               
                  
Thy word to offer thou dost not slack,
               Whiche we vnkindly gainstriue.
               with fire and sword,
               This healthfull word,
               Some persecute and opprisse:
               Some with the mouth.
               Confes the truth,
               Without sincere godlines,
               Geue peace, and vs thy spirite downe send,
               With grief and repentaunce true:
               Do pearce our harts, our liues to amend,
               And by fayth, Chryst renue.
               That feare and dread,
               Warre and bloudshed,
               Through thy swete mercy and grace:
               May from vs slyde,
               Thy truth may byde,
               And shine in euery place.
            
            
               ¶ The complaint of a Sinner who craueth of Christ, to be kept vnder hys mercye.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  WHere rightuousnes doth say lord for 
                     〈♫〉
                   my sinfull part: in wrath y• shouldst me pay vē
                  gaunce 
                     〈♫〉
                   for 
                     〈◊〉
                   desart. I can it not deny, but nedes



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   I must confes, how yt continually thy lawes I 
                     〈♫〉
                   doo transgres. Thy lawes I do transgresse.
               
                  But if it be thy will,
                  With sinners to contend:
                  Then all thy flock shall spill,
                  And be lost without end.
                  For who liueth here so right,
                  That rightly he can say:
                  He sinneth not in thy sight,
                  Full oft and euery day.
               
               
                  Thy scripture plaine telth me,
                  The righteous man offendeth:
                  Seuen times a day to thee,
                  Wheron thy wrath dependth,
                  So that the rightwise man,
                  Doth walke in no such path:
                  but he falth now or than,
                  In daunger of thy wrath,
               
               
                  Then since the case so standes,
                  That euen the man rightwise:
                  Falth oft in sinfull bandes,
                  Wherby thy wrath may ryse.
                  Lorde I that am vniust,
                  And rightwisenes none haue:
                  
                     
Wherto then shall I trust.
                  My synfull soule to saue.
               
               
                  But truly to that post,
                  Wherto I cleaue and shall:
                  Whiche is thy mercy most,
                  Lorde let thy mercy fall.
                  And mitigate thy mode,
                  Or els we perish all:
                  The pryce of this thy bloud,
                  Wherin mercy I call.
               
               
                  Thy scripture doth declare,
                  No drop of bloud in thee:
                  But that thou didst not spare,
                  To shed eche drop for me.
                  Now let those drops most swet,
                  So moyst my hart so dry:
                  That I with sinne replete,
                  May liue and sinne may die.
               
               
                  That being mortifyed,
                  Thys synne of myne in me:
                  I may be sanctifyed,
                  By grace of thine in thee.
                  So that I neuer fall,
                  Into suche mortall sinne:
                  That my foes infernall,
                  Reioyse my death therin.
               
               
                  But vouchesafe me to keep,
                  From those infernall foes:
                  And from that lake so depe,
                  Wheras no mercy growes,
                  
                     
And I shall sing the songes
                  Confirmed with the iust:
                  That vnto thee belonges,
                  Whiche art mine only trust.
               
            
            
               ☞ Through perfecte repentaunce the sinner hath a sure trust in God that his sinne s shalbe washed away in Christes ēloud.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  O Lord in thee is al my trust, geue eare 
                     〈♫〉
                   vnto my wofull cry: Refuse me not that am vniust: 
                     〈♫〉
                   but bowing downe thy heauēly eye, behold 
                     〈♫〉
                   how I doo still lament: my sinnes wherin I do 
                     〈♫〉
                   offende O Lord for them shall I be shent: Sith



                  
                     〈♫〉
                   thee to playse I doo intend.
               
                  No no, not so thy will is bent, To deale with sinners in thine ire.
                  But when in hart they shall repent, Thou grauntst with sped their iust desire
                  To thee therfore still shall I cry, to wash away my sinfull cryme:
                  Thy bloud (O Lorde) is not yet drye, but that it may help me in time.
               
               
                  Hast thee O Lorde, hast thee I say, To power on me the giftes of grace:
                  That when this life must flit away, In heauen with thee I may haue place,
                  Where thou dost reigne eternally, with God which once did downe the sēd
                  Where angels sing continually, To thee be prayse world without end.
               
            
            
               ☞ A thankes geuing after the receyuyng of the Lordes Supper.
               
                  THe Lorde be thanked for his gyftes,
                  And mercy euermore:
                  That he doth shew vnto his saynctes Sing this as the. xxx vii. Psa
                  
                  To him be laud therfore.
                  Our tonges cannot so prayse the Lorde,
                  As he doth right deserue:
                  Our harts can not of hym so thynke,
                  As he doth vs preserue.
               
               
                  
                  His benefites they be so great,
                  To vs that be but sinne:
                  That at our handes for recompence,
                  There is no hope to winne.
                  O sinfull flesh, that thou shouldest haue,
                  Suche mercyes of the Lorde:
                  Thou doest deserue, more worthely,
                  Of him to be abhord.
               
               
                  Nought els but sinne▪ and wretchednes,
                  Doth rest within our heartes:
                  And stubburnely against the Lorde,
                  We dayly play oure partes.
                  The sunne aboue in firmament,
                  That is to vs a lyght:
                  Doth shew it selfe more cleane and pure,
                  Then we be in his sight.
               
               
                  The heauens aboue and all therin,
                  More holy are then we:
                  They serue the Lorde in theyr estate,
                  Eche one in his degree.
                  They do not stryue for mastership,
                  Nor slake theyr office set:
                  But feare the Lorde and do his will,
                  Hate is to them no let.
               
               
                  Also the earth and all therin,
                  Of God it is in awe:
                  It doth obserue the formers wyll,
                  By skilfull natures law.
                  The sea and all that therin is,
                  Doth bend, when God doth beck:
                  
                     
The spirtes beneathe doo tremble all,
                  And feare his wrathfull check.
               
               
                  But we alas, for whom all these
                  Were made them for to rule,
                  Do not so know or loue the Lorde,
                  As doth the Oxe or mule,
                  A law he gaue for vs to know,
                  What was his holy wyll:
                  He would vs good, but we will not
                  Auoyd the thing is ill.
               
               
                  Not one of vs that seketh out
                  The Lorde of lyfe to please:
                  Nor to the thyng that might vs ioyne
                  Our Christ and quiet ease,
                  Thus we are all his enemyes,
                  We can it not deny:
                  And he agayne, of his good wyll,
                  Would not that we should dye.
               
               
                  Therfore when remedy was none,
                  To bring vs vnto lyfe:
                  The sonne of God, our flesh he toke,
                  To mend our mortall stryfe:
                  And all the law of God our Lorde,
                  He did it full obey:
                  And for our sinnes vpon the crosse,
                  Hys bloud our dettes did pay.
               
               
                  And that we should not yet forget,
                  What good be to vs wrought:
                  A signe he left our eyes to tell,
                  That he our bodyes bought.
                  
                     
In breade and wine here visible,
                  Unto thyne eyes and tast,
                  His mercyes great thou maist record,
                  If that his spryte thou hast.
               
               
                  As once the corne did liue and grow,
                  And was cut downe with sith,
                  And threshed out with many stripes,
                  Out from his huske to dryue,
                  And as the mill with violence
                  Did teare it out so small,
                  And made it lyke to earthly dust,
                  Not sparing it at all.
               
               
                  And as the ouen with fyre hot,
                  Did close it vp in heat:
                  And all this done that I haue sayd,
                  That it should be our meat:
                  So was the Lorde in his ripe age
                  Cut downe by cruell death:
                  His soule he gaue in torments great,
                  And yelded vp his breath.
               
               
                  Because that he to vs might be,
                  An euerlasting bread,
                  with muche reproche and trouble great,
                  On earth his lyfe he led.
                  And as the grapes in pleasant tyme
                  Are pressed very sore,
                  And plucked downe when they be rype,
                  Nor let to grow no more,
               
               
                  Because the ioyse that in them is,
                  As comfortable drynke,
                  
                     
We myght receyue and ioyfull be,
                  when sorowes make vs shrinke.
                  So Christes bloud out pressed was,
                  With nailes and eke with speare:
                  The ioyse wherof doth saue all those,
                  That rightly do him feare.
               
               
                  And as the cornes by vnitie,
                  Into one lofe is knit:
                  So is the Lorde and his whole churche,
                  Though he in heauen sit.
                  As many grapes make but one wyne,
                  So shoulde we be but one:
                  In fayth and loue, in Chist aboue,
                  And vnto Christ alone.
               
               
                  Leading a lyfe without all stryfe,
                  In quyet rest and peace,
                  From enuye and from malyce both,
                  Our heartes and tonges to cease.
                  Which if we doo then shall we shew,
                  That we his chosen be:
                  By fayth in him to leade a lyfe,
                  As alwayes willed he.
               
               
                  And that we may so doo in dede,
                  God send vs all his grace:
                  Then after death we shall be sure,
                  With him to haue a place,
               
               
                  Robert Wlsdom.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  PReserue vs Lorde, by thy deare word.
               
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   From Turk and Pope defend vs Lord whiche 
                     〈♫〉
                   bothe would thrust oute of his throne, our Lorde 
                     〈♫〉
                   Iesus Christ thy deare sonne.
               Lorde Iesus Christ shew forth thy myght,
               That thou art Lorde of Lordes by ryght:
               Thy poore afflicted flocke defend,
               That they may prayse thee without end,
               God holy Ghost, our comfortor,
               Be our Patron, helpe, and succor:
               Geue vs one minde, and perfect peace:
               All giftes of grace in vs encrease.
               Thou liuing God, in parsons three.
               Thy name be praysed in vnitie:
               In all our nede so vs defend:
               That we may prayse thee, world without end.
            
            
               ☞ A formst of proyer to be. vsed in priuate houses, euery mornyng and euening.
               Morning prayer.
               ALmightie God, & most mercifull Father, we do not present our selues here before thy maiestie, trusting in oure owne merites or worthines,



but in thy manifolde mercyes, which haste promised to beare our Prayers, and graunt our requestes, which we shal make to the in the name of thy beloued sonne Iesus Christe our Lorde: who hath also cōmaunded vs to assemble ourselues together in his name, with ful assurance that he wil not only be amongst vs, but also be our mediator, and aduocate towards thy maiestie, that we may obteyne all thinges which shall seme expedient to thy blessed will for oure necessities: therfore we beseche thee, most mercifull Father, to turne thy louyng countenaunce towards vs, and impute not vnto vs our manifold sinnes and offences, wher by we iustly deserue thy wrath & sharp punishmēt: but rather receyue vs to thy mercy for Iesus Christes sake, accepting his death and passion, as a iust recompence for all our offēces, in whom only thou art pleased, and through whom thou canst not be offended with vs. And seing that of thy great mercyes, we haue quietly passed this nyght, graunte (O heauenly father,) that we may bestowe thys day wholly in thy seruice, so that al our thoughts, wordes, and dedes, may redounde to the glorye of thy name, and good ensample to all men, who seeyng oure good workes, may gloryfye thee oure heauenly father. And for as much as of thy mere fauour, and loue, thou hast not onely created vs to thine owne similitude and likenes, but also haste chosen vs to be heyres with thy deare sōne Iesus Christ of that immortal kingdom which thou preparedst for vs before the beginning of the worlde, we beseche thee to encrease oure faythe and know ledg, and to lighten our harts with thy holy spirit



that we may in meane time, liue in godly conuersatyon and integritie of lyfe: knowing that Idolaters, adulterers, couetous men, cōtentious persōs drunkards glottons, and such like: shall not in herite the kyngdome of God.
               And because thou hast commaunded vs to pray one for another, we doo not only make request (O Lord) for ourselues, and them that thou hast alreadie called to the true vnderstanding of thy heauenly wil: but for all people and Nations of the world who as they knowe by thy wonderfull workes: that thou art god ouer al: So they may be instructed by thy holy spirite, to beleue in thee theyr only Sauior and redemer. But for as much as they cā
                  not beleue except they heare, nor can not heare but by preachyng, and none can preache, excepte they be sent, therfor (O Lorde) raise vp faithfull destributers of thy misteries, who setting apartal worldly respectes, may bothe in their life and doctryne, only seeke thy glorye. Contrarylye confound Sathan, Antichriste, with all hierlinges, whom thou hast already cast of, into a reprobate sēce: that they may not by sectes, schismes, heresies, and errours disquiet thy littell flocke. And because (O Lorde) we be fallen into the latter dayes, & daungerous tymes, wherin ignoraunce hathe gotten the vpper hande, and Sathan by his ministeres seke by all meanes to quenche the light of thy Gospel, we besech the to maintaine thy cause against those rauening wolues, and strengthen all thy seruauntes whom they keepe in prison and bondage. Let not thy long suffryng be an occasion, either to encrease theyr tirannye, or to discourage thy childrē, nether



yet let our sinnes and wickednes be a hinderance to thy mercies, but with spede (O Lorde) consider these great miseries. For thy people Israel many times by theyr sinnes prouoked thine anger, and thou punishedst them by thy iust iudgemente, yet though their sinnes wer neuer so greuous, if they once returned from their iniquitie, thou receiuedst them to mercye. We therfore, moste wretched synners, be wayle our manifolde sinnes, and earnestly repent vs for our former wickennes and vngodly behauior towards thee: and where as we cannot of our selues purchase thy pardon, yet we humblie beseche thee, for Iesus Christes sake, to shew thy mercyes vpon vs, and receyue vs agayne to thy fauour. Graunt vs, deare father these oure requests and all other thinges necessary for vs, & thy whole churche, according to thy promise in Iesus Christ our Lorde. In whose name we beseche thee as he hath taught vs, saying: Oure father. &c.
            
            
               ¶ A prayer to be sayde before meales.
               ALl thinges depende vpon thy prouidence (O Lord) to receiue at thy handes, due sustenāce in time conuenienie. Thou geuest to them, & they gather it, thou openest thy hand, and they are satisfied with al good things. O heauenly father, whiche art the fountaine & ful treasure of all good nes, we besech thee to shew thy mercyees vpon vs thy children, and sanctifye these giftes whiche we receiue of thy merciful liberalitie graunt vs grace to vse them soberlye and purely according to thy blessed wyll, so that hereby we may acknowledge thee to be the author and geuer of all good things and aboue all, that we may remember continually,



to seke the spiritual fode of thy word, wherwith our soules may be norished euerlastingly throughe oure sauior Christe: who is the true breade of lyfe, whiche came downe from heauen, of whom, whoso euer eateth, shall lyue for euer, and reigne with, him in glory worlde without ende. So be it.
            
            
               ☞ A thankes geuing after meales,
               LEt all nations magnifye the Lorde, let all people reioyce, in praysing & extollyng his great mercyes. For his fatherly kindnes is plentyfully shewed forth vpon vs, and the truth of his promise indureth for euer.
               We render thankes vnto thee (O Lorde god) for the manifold benefites, whiche we continually receaue at thy bountifull hande, not only for that it hath pleased thee to fede vs in this present life, geuyng vnto vs, all thinges necessary for the same, but especially because thou hast of thy free mercies facioned vs a new, into an assured hope of a farre better lyfe, the whiche thou hast declared vnto vs by thy holy Ghospell. Therfore we humbly besech thee (O heauenly father) that thou wilte not suffer oure affections to bee so intangled or roted in these earthly and corruptible thinges, but that we maye alwayes haue oure mindes directed to thee on high continually watching for the comming of oure Lorde and Saiuour Chryste, what tyme he shall appeare for oure full redemption, To whom with thee, and the holye Ghoste, be all honor and glory, for euer and euer. So be it.
            
            
               A nother thankes geuing before meate.
               
                  
ETernall and euer liuing God, Father of oure Lord Iesus Christ, who, of thy most singular loue whiche thou bearest to mankinde, haste appointed to his sustenance, not only the frutes of thearth: but also the foules of the ayre, the beastes of thearth, and fishes of the sea, and hast commaū
                  ded thy benefites to be receyued, as from thy hāds with thanks geuing, assuring thy children, by the mouth of thy Apostle, that to the cleane, all things are cleane, as the creatures, which be sanctified by thy word and by prayer, graunt vnto vs so moderatly to vse these thy giftes present, that the bodies beyng refreshed, the soules may be more hable to procede in all good works, to the prayse of thy holy name, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Sobeit.
               ¶ Oure Father whiche art in heauen. &c.
            
            
               ¶ Another.
               THe eyes of all things doo loke vp and trust in thee (O Lord) thou geuest them meat in due season, thou openest thy hand, and fillest with thy blessinge euery liuing creature: good Lorde, bles vs and all thy giftes which we receyue of thy large liberalitie, through Iesus Christ our Lorde Sobeit. Our father. &c.
            
            
               ¶ Another thanks geuing after meat,
               GLorye, prayse and honor, be vnto thee moste merciful & omnipotent Father, who of thyne infinite goodnes, hast created man to thyne owne image & similitude: who also hast fed, & dayly fedest of thy most bountiful hand, all liuing creatures graunt vnto vs, that as thou hast norished these oure mortall bodies with corporall foode, so thou woldest replenish our soules with the perfet



knowledge of the liuely word of thy beloued sonne Iesus, to whom be prayse, glorye, and honor for euer. Sobeit.
               ☞ God saue the Church vniuersall: our Quene and Realme. God comforte all them that be comfortles. Lord increase our faith. O Lord, for christ thy sōnes sake, be mercifull to the cōmon wealths where thy Gospell is truely preached, and harbor graunted to the afflicted members of Christes body, and illuminate, according to thy good pleasure, all nations with the bryghtnes of thy word.
               So beit.
            
            
               ¶ Another.
               THe God of glory and peace, who hath created redemed, and presently fed vs, be blessed for euer and euer. Sobeit.
               ¶ The God of all power, who hathe called frō death, that great pastor of the shepe, our Lorde Iesus, comfort and defend the flock, whiche he hathe redemed by the bloud of the eternall Testamente increase the number of true Preachers: repres the rage of obstinate tirants, mitigate and lightē the hartes of the ignorant relieue the paynes of suche as be afflicted, but especially of those that suffer for the testimony of thy truth: and finally, cōfoūd Sathan, by the power of our Lord Iesus Christ.
               Amen.
            
            
               ¶ Euening prayer.
               O Lorde God, Father euerlasting, & full of pitie, we acknowledge and confesse, that we be not worthy to lyft vp our eyes to heauē, muche les to presente our selues before thy maiestie with confidence that thou wilt heare our prayers, and graunt our requestes, if we consider o
                     ••
                  e



owne deseruinges, for oure conciences doo accuse vs, and our sinnes witnes against vs, & we know that thou art an vpright iudge, which dost not iustifye the sinners and wicked men, but punishest the fautes of all such as transgres thy commaundements. Yet most mercifull father, since it hathe pleased thee to commaunde vs to call on thee in aloure troubles and aduersities, promising euen thē to help vs, when wefele our selues (as it wer) swalowed vp of death and desperation, we vtterly renounce all worldly confydence, and flee to thy so-souerayne bountie, as our only stay and refuge: beseching thee, not to call to remembraunce our manifolde sinnes and wickednes, wherby we contynuallye prouoke thy wrathe and indignation againste vs: neyther oure negligence and and vnkindnes, whiche haue neyther worthely estemed, nor in our liues sufficiently expressed, the swete cō
                  fort of thy Gospell reueled vnto vs: but rather to accept the obedience and death of thy sonne Iesus Christ, who by offring vp his body in sacrifice once for all, hathe made a sufficient recompence for all our sinnes. Haue mercy therfore vpon vs (O lord) and forgeue vs our offences. Teache vs by thy holy spirite, that we may rightly wey them, and earnestly repent for the same. And so much the rather (O Lorde) because that the reprobate, and suche as thou hast for saken, cannot prayse thee, nor call vpon thy name, but the repenting hart, the sorow full minde, the conscience oppressed, hungring and thirsting for thy grace, shal euer set forth thy praise and glory. And albeit we be but worms and dust: yet thou arte oure creator and we be the worke of



thy handes: yea, thou art oure father, and we thy children: thou art oure shepeherd, and we thy flock thou art our redemer and we the people whō thou hast bought: thou art oure God, and we thyne inheritaunce, Correct vs not therfore in thine anger (O Lorde) neither according to our desertes punish vs, but mercifully chastyce vs with a fatherly affection, that all the worlde may knowe, that at what time soeuer a sinner doth repent him of hys sinne, from the bottom of his hart, thou wilt put a way his wickednes out of thy remembraunce, as thouhast promised by thy holy prophet.
               Finally for asmuche as it hathe pleased thee to make ye night for mā to rest in, as thou hast ordayned him the day to trauel, graunt, (o deare father) that we may so take our bodely rest, yt oure soules may continually watch, for the time that our lord Iesus christ shall appeare for our deliuerance out of this mortall lyfe, (and in the meane season that we, not ouercomen by any fantasies, dreames, or other temptations) may fully set our mindes vpon thee, loue thee, feare thee, and rest in thee: furthermore that our slepe be not excessiue or ouermuche after the insaciable desires of our flesh: but onelye sufficient to contente oure weake nature, that we may be better disposed to lyue in all godly conuersatyon to the glory of thy holy name, and profit of oure brethren. Sobeit.
            
            
               A godly Prayer to be sayd at all tymes.
               HOnor and prayse, be geuen to thee (O Lorde God almightie) most deare Father of heauē for all thy mercies and louing kindnes shewed
 vnto vs, in that it hathe pleased thy gratious goodnes frely, and of thine owne accorde, to elect and chose vs to saluation before the beginning of the worlde, and euen like continull thankes be geuē to the for creating vs after thine owne image, for redeming vs with the precious bloude of thy deare some, when we were vtterly lost, for sanctifying vs with thy holy spirit in the releuing and succoring vs, in all our nedes and necessities, for sauing vs from aldaungers of body and soule, for comforting vs so fatherly in all oure tribulations and persecutions, for sparing vs so long, and geuyng vs so large a tyme of repentance. These benefites (O most mercifull father) like as we know ledg to haue receyued them of thy only goodnes, euen so we beseche thee, for thy dere sonne Iesus Christes sake: to graunte vs alwayes thy holy spirite, wherby we may continually grow in thankfulnes towardes thee, to be led into all truth, and comforted in all our aduersities. O Lorde, strengthen our faith, kindle it more in feruentnes & loue towardes thee (and our neyghbours) for thy sake. Suffer vs not most deare Father, to receyue thy worde any more in vaine: but graunt vs alwayes the assistance of thy grace and holy spirite, that in hart, worde and dede we maye sanctifye and doo worship to thy name. Helpe to amplifie & increase thy kingdome, and what so euer thou sendest, we may be hartely well contente with thy good pleasure and will: Let vs not lack the thynge (O Father) without the whych we can not serue the, but blesse thou soo all the workes of our handes, that we may haue sufficiente, and not to be chargeable



but rather helpefull vnto others: be mercifull (O Lord) to our offences, and seyng our det is great, whiche thou haste for geuen vs in Iesus Christe, make vs toloue thee and our neyghbors so muche the more. Be thou our Father, our captayne and defender: in all temptations holde thou vs by thy mercyfull hand, that we may be deliuered from all inconueniences, and end our lyues in the sanctifying & honor of thy holy name through Iesu Christ our Lord, and only sauior. Sobe it.
               Let thy mightie hand and out stretched arme (O Lorde) be still oure defence, thy mercy and louyng kindnes in Iesu Christ thy deare sonne our saluation, thy true and holy woord our instruction, thy grace and holy spirit our comforte and consolatiō, vnto the ende and in the ende Sobe it.
               ¶ O Lorde increase our fayth.
               
            
            
               ¶ A confession of all estates. and tymes.
               O Eternall God and most mercifull father we confesse, and acknowledg, heare before thy diuine maiestie, that we are miserable synners, conceyued and borne in sinne and iniquitye, so that in vs there is no goodnes. For the flesh euermore rebelleth agaynst the spirite, wherby we continually transgres thy holy precepts, and commaundemēts, & so purchase to our selues, through thy iust iudgement, deathe and damnation. Notwithstanding (O heauenly father) for asmuche as we are displeased with oure selues for the synnes that we haue committed against thee, and do vnfeynedly repent vs of the same: we most humblye



beseche thee, for Iesus Christes sake, to shewthy mercy on vs, to forgeue vs al our sinnes, and to increase our holy spirite in vs: that we acknowledgyng, from the botome of our hartes, our owne vnrighteousnes, may from henceforth not only mortifie our sinful lusts and affections, but also bring forth such frutes, as may be agreable to thy moste blessed will, not for the worthines thereof, but for the merites of thy dearelye beloued sonne Iesus Christ our only Sauior, whom thou hast already geuen an oblation, and offering for oure sinnes: & for whose sake, we are certenlye perswaded, that thou wilte denie vs nothing, that we shall aske in his name, according to thy will. For thy spirit doth assure our consciences, that thou art our mercifull father, and so louest vs thy children through hym, that nothing is able to remoue thy heauēly grace and fauoure from vs: to thee therfore (O father) with the sonne and the holy Ghoste be all honor & glory, worlde without ende. Sobeit.
            
            
               ☞ A Prayer to be sayde before a man begin his worke.
               O Lorde God most mercifull father and Sauiour, seyng it hath pleased thee to cōmaūd vs to traueil, that we may releue our nede, webeseche thee of thy grace so to blesse our labour that thy blessing may extend vnto vs, without the whiche we are not able to continue: and that this great fauour may be a witnes vnto vs of thy boū
                  tifulnes & assistance, so that therby we may know the fatherly care that thou hast ouer vs.
               Moreouer, O Lord, we beseche thee that thou woldest strengthen vs with thine holye spirite,



that we may faithfully trauaill in oure estate and vocation without fraude or deceit: & that we maye indeuour our selus to folow thine holy ordinance, rather then to seke to satisfye our gridie affectiōs or desire to gayne. And if it please thee, O Lorde, to prosper our labour, geue vs a mind also to help thē that haue nede, according to that abilitie that that thou of thy mercy shalte geue vs: and knowing that all good things come of thee, graunt that we may humble oure selues to our neyghbours, & not by any meanes lift our selues vp aboue them, whiche haue not receyued so liberalla portion as of thy mercy thou haste geuen vnto vs. And if it please thee to try and exercise vs by greater pouertie, and nede then our flesh would desire, that thou woldest yet, O Lorde, graunt vs grace to knowe that thou wilt nourish vs continually through thy bountifull liberalitie, that we be not so tempted that we fall into distrust: but that we may paciētly wayte tyll thou fill vs not only with corporall graces and benefites, but chiefly with thine heauē
                  lye and spirituall treasures, to the intent that we maye alwayes haue more ample occasion to geue thee thankes, and so wolly to rest vpon thy mereyes. Heare vs, O Lorde of mercy, through Iesus Christ thy Sonne our Lorde.
               Amen.
            
            
               ¶ A Prayer for the hole state of Christes church.
               ALmyghtye God and most mercifull father, we humbly submit ourselues, and fal downe before thy Maiestie, beseching thee from the botome of oure hates, that thys sede of thy worde nowe sowen amongest vs, may take suche deepe



rote, that neyther the burning heat of persecution cause it to wither, neither thorny cares of thys life choke it, but that as sede, sowen in good ground, it may brynge foorth thirtie, sixtie, and an hundreth folde: as thy heauenly wysdom hath appointed.
               And because we haue nede cōtinually to craue many thyngs at thy handes, we humbly beseche thee (O heauenly father) to graunt vs thy holy spirite, to directe our petitions, that they may procede frō suche a feruente minde, as may be agreable to thy most blessed will. And seing that our infirmitie is hable to doo nothing withoute thy helpe, and that thou art not ignorant with how many and great temptations we poore wretches are on euery syde enclosed, and compassed: Let thy strength (o lord) sustayne oure weaknes, that we being defended with the force of thy grace, may be safely preserued against all assaults of Sathan: who goeth about continually like a roring Lion, seking to deuoure vs. Encrease our fayth (o merciful father) that we do not swarue at any time frō thy heauenlyword: but augment in vs hope and loue, with a carefull keping of all thy commaundements: that no hardnes of harte, no Ipocrisie, no concupiscence of the eyes, nor inticements of the world, do draw vs away from thy obedience. And seyng we liue now in these most perilous times: let thy fatherly prouidence defend vs againste the violence of our enemies, whiche doo seke by all meanes to oppres thy truth. Furthermore for as much as by thy holy apostle we be taught, to make our prayers and supplication for all menne. We pray not only for oureselues here present, but beseche thee also, to reduce



all such, as be yet ignorant from the miserable captiuitie of blindnes and errours, to the pure vnderstanding and knowledge of thy heauenly truthe, that we all with one consent and vnitie of mindes may worship thee our only God and sauior. And that all pastors, shepeheards & ministers, to whō thou hast committed the dispensation of thy holye worde, and charge of thy chosen people, may both in theyr lyfe & doctrine, befound faythfull, setting onely before theyr eyes thy glory, and that by thē all poore shepe, which wander and go astray, may be gathered and brought home to thy folde.
               Moreouer because the hartes of rulers are in thy handes: We beseche thee to direct, and gouern the harts of all kinges, princes and maistrats, to whō thou hast committed the sword, especially (O lord) according to oure bounden dutye we beseche thee to mainteine and encrease the honorable estate of the Queenes maiestie, and all her most noble coū
                  sellers, and maiestrates, and all the whole bodye of thys commune weale. Let thy fatherly fauor so preserue them, and thy holy spirit so gouerne their harts, yt they may in such sort execute theyr office, that thy relygion may be purely mainteined, maners reformed, and sin punished accordynge to the precise rule of thy holy word. And for that we be all members of the mistical body of Iesus Christ, we make our requests vnto thee, (O heauenly father) for all suche as are afflicted with any kind of cros or tribulation, as warre, plage, famyne, sicknes, pouertie, imprisonmente, persecution, banishment, or any other kinde of thy rods, whether it be



calamitie of body, or vexatiō of mind that it wold please the, to geue them pacience, and constancye, til thou send them full deliuerance of all theyr troubles. Rote out from hence (O Lorde) all rauening wolues, which, to fyll theyr bellyes, seke to destroy thy flock And shew thy great mercyes vpon those our brethren in other countreis, which are persecuted cast into prison, and daily condemned for the testimony of thy truth. And though they be vtterlye destitute of all mans aide, yet let thy swete cō
                  fort neuer depart from them: but so inflame theyr hartes with thy holy spirit, that they may boldlye and chearfully abyde such triall, as thy godly wisdome shall appoynt. So that at length as wel by theyr deathe as by their lyfe, the kingdome of thy deare sonne Iesus Christ, may increase and shine throughe all the worlde. In whose name we make hurt humble peticions to thee as he hathe taught vs. Our Father whiche arte in Heauen halowed by thy. &c.
            
            EINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Table.
            
               ¶ A Table bothe for the number of the whole Psalmes, & olso what leafe you may fynde euery of them.
               
                  
                     
                        A
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        Psal.
                         
                        Fol.
                     
                     
                        30
                        ALl laud & praise.
                        61
                     
                     
                        40
                        All people her.
                        III
                     
                     
                        78
                        Attend my people to my law.
                        186
                     
                     
                        82
                        A mid the prease.
                        204
                     
                     
                        B
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        81
                        Be light and glad.
                        201
                     
                     
                        119
                        Blessed are they.
                        302
                     
                     
                        128
                        Blessed art thou.
                        337
                     
                     
                        134
                        Beholde and haue.
                        344
                     
                     
                        142
                        Before the Lorde.
                        360
                     
                     
                        144
                        Blest be the.
                        363
                     
                     
                        D
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        83
                        Do not O Bod re.
                        205
                     
                     
                        E
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        127
                        Except the Lord
                        335
                     
                     
                        G
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        29
                        Geue to the Lorde ye
                        59
                     
                     
                        37
                        Grudge not to see
                        81
                     
                     
                        48
                        Great is the Lord.
                        109
                     
                     
                        54
                        God saue me for thy
                        127
                     
                     
                        105
                        Geue prayses vnto.
                        261
                     
                     
                        107
                        Geue thankes vnto
                        275
                     
                     
                        147
                        Geue laud vnto
                        271
                     
                     
                        H
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        12
                        Helpe Lorde, for.
                        22
                     
                     
                        13
                        How longe wylte.
                        23
                     
                     
                        Psalm.
                         
                        Fol.
                     
                     
                        51
                        Haue mercy on.
                        121
                     
                     
                        56
                        Haue mercy Lord
                        131
                     
                     
                        67
                        Haue mercy on vs.
                        153
                     
                     
                        73
                        How euer it be, yet
                        173
                     
                     
                        84
                        How pleasant is.
                        208
                     
                     
                        91
                        He that within
                        228
                     
                     
                        I
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        5
                        Incline thine eares.
                        8
                     
                     
                        11
                        I trust in God.
                        21
                     
                     
                        20
                        In trouble and aduercitie
                        40.
                     
                     
                        25
                        I lyft mine hart
                        50
                     
                     
                        34
                        I will geue laude.
                        71
                     
                     
                        39
                        I said I will loke.
                        89
                     
                     
                        40
                        I wayted longe and
                        91
                     
                     
                        43
                        Iudge and reuenge.
                        98
                     
                     
                        77
                        I with my voice
                        183
                     
                     
                        92
                        It is a thyng bothe.
                        231
                     
                     
                        100
                        In God the Lord.
                        245
                     
                     
                        101
                        I mercy will and
                        246
                     
                     
                        109
                        I specheles scilence.
                        281
                     
                     
                        116
                        I loue the Lorde.
                        296
                     
                     
                        120
                        In troble and in.
                        326
                     
                     
                        121
                        I lift myne eyes.
                        327
                     
                     
                        122
                        I did in harte.
                        328
                     
                     
                        L
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        6
                        Lorde in thy wrath re. proue me not.
                        9
                     
                     
                     
                        Psal.
                         
                        Fol.
                     
                     
                        16
                        Lorde kepe me for.
                        27
                     
                     
                        26
                        Lorde be my iudge.
                        84
                     
                     
                        35
                        Lord plead my cause.
                        74
                     
                     
                        42
                        Like as the hart.
                        96
                     
                     
                        68
                        Let God aryse.
                        154
                     
                     
                        72
                        Lord geue thy iudg.
                        169
                     
                     
                        86
                        Lord bow thine eare.
                        212
                     
                     
                        88
                        Lord God of health.
                        215
                     
                     
                        130
                        Lorde to thee I.
                        338
                     
                     
                        140
                        Lorde saue me.
                        356
                     
                     
                        143
                        Lord heare my.
                        361
                     
                     
                         
                        M
                         
                     
                     
                        23
                        My sheperd is the
                        48
                     
                     
                        45
                        My hart doth now
                        10
                     
                     
                        62
                        My soule to God
                        143
                     
                     
                        71
                        My Lord, my God.
                        166
                     
                     
                        103
                        My soule geue.
                        251
                     
                     
                        14
                        My soule prayse
                        254
                     
                     
                        146
                        My soule prayse.
                        367
                     
                     
                         
                        N
                         
                     
                     
                        115
                        Not vnto vs.
                        291
                     
                     
                        124
                        Now Israll.
                        331
                     
                     
                         
                        O
                         
                     
                     
                        3
                        O Lord how are my.
                        5
                     
                     
                        4
                        O God that art my.
                        6
                     
                     
                        7
                        O Lord my God.
                        13
                     
                     
                        8
                        O god oure lord, how
                        14
                     
                     
                        15
                        O Lord within thy ta.
                        29
                     
                     
                        17
                        O Lorde geue eare.
                        28
                     
                     
                        18
                        O God my strength.
                        31
                     
                     
                        21
                        O Lorde how ioyful
                        41
                     
                     
                        22
                        O God my God.
                        44
                     
                     
                        31
                        O Lorde I put my.
                        64
                     
                     
                        44
                        Our eares haue hard.
                        99
                     
                     
                        51
                        O Lord consider my.
                        118
                     
                     
                        55
                        O God geue eare.
                        128
                     
                     
                        62
                        O Lord thou didest.
                        140
                     
                     
                        63
                        O God my God.
                        145
                     
                     
                        64
                        O lord vnto my voy.
                        146
                     
                     
                        70
                        O God to me take.
                        165
                     
                     
                        79
                        O Lord the Gentils.
                        196
                     
                     
                        94
                        O Lord thou dost.
                        233
                     
                     
                        95
                        O come let vs.
                        237
                     
                     
                        98
                        O syng ye now.
                        243
                     
                     
                        102
                        O here my prayer.
                        247
                     
                     
                        108
                        O God my hart.
                        279
                     
                     
                        117
                        O all the nations.
                        298
                     
                     
                        118
                        O geue ye thankes.
                        298
                     
                     
                        123
                        O Lorde that
                        330
                     
                     
                        129
                        Of Israell this.
                        337
                     
                     
                        131
                        O Lord I am not.
                        340
                     
                     
                        133
                        O how happy a.
                        343
                     
                     
                        135
                        O praise the Lorde.
                        344
                     
                     
                        139
                        O Lorde thou hast.
                        353
                     
                     
                        141
                        O Lorde vpon thee.
                        358
                     
                     
                         
                        P
                         
                     
                     
                        38
                        Put me not to rebuk.
                        86
                     
                     
                        106
                        Praise ye the Lord.
                        267
                     
                     
                        136
                        Prayse ye the Lord.
                        347
                     
                     
                        147
                        Praise ye the Lorde.
                        369
                     
                     
                         
                        R
                         
                     
                     
                        61
                        Regard O Lord for.
                        141
                     
                     
                        132
                        Remember Dauids
                        340
                     
                     
                         
                        S
                         
                     
                     
                        59
                        Sende ayde and saue.
                        137
                     
                     
                        69
                        Saue O God.
                        159
                     
                     
                        96
                        Sing ye with
                        239
                     
                     
                        125
                        Such as in God.
                        332
                     
                     
                     
                        Psal
                         
                        Fol.
                     
                     
                        T
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        1
                        The man is blest.
                        1
                     
                     
                        14
                        There is no God.
                        24
                     
                     
                        19
                        The heauens and the.
                        38
                     
                     
                        24
                        The earth is all.
                        49
                     
                     
                        27
                        The Lorde is bothe.
                        56
                     
                     
                        28
                        Thou art O Lorde.
                        58
                     
                     
                        32
                        The man is blest
                        67
                     
                     
                        36
                        The wicked with
                        79
                     
                     
                        41
                        The man is blest.
                        94
                     
                     
                        46
                        The Lord is oure
                        105
                     
                     
                        50
                        The God of Gods.
                        113
                     
                     
                        53
                        The foolish man.
                        125
                     
                     
                        57
                        Take pitie for thy.
                        133
                     
                     
                        65
                        Thy prayse alone.
                        149
                     
                     
                        76
                        To all that now
                        181
                     
                     
                        80
                        Thou Lord that Isra
                        198
                     
                     
                        85
                        Thou hast ben.
                        210
                     
                     
                        87
                        That citie shal.
                        214
                     
                     
                        89
                        To syng the mor.
                        218
                     
                     
                        90
                        Thou Lorde haste.
                        226
                     
                     
                        93
                        The Lorde as kyng
                        233
                     
                     
                        97
                        The Lord doth rain
                        241
                     
                     
                        99
                        The lord doth raine
                        244
                     
                     
                        110
                        The Lorde dyd.
                        283
                     
                     
                        112
                        The man is blest.
                        283
                     
                     
                        138
                        Thee will I prayse.
                        352
                     
                     
                        145
                        Thee will I laude
                        365
                     
                     
                        V
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        75
                        Unto the God we.
                        186
                     
                     
                        2
                        why did the Gentils.
                        3
                     
                     
                        9
                        with hart and mouth.
                        15
                     
                     
                        10
                        what is the cause.
                        18
                     
                     
                        52
                        why dost thou tirant.
                        123
                     
                     
                        74
                        why art thou Lord.
                        176
                     
                     
                        111
                        with hart I doo.
                        284
                     
                     
                        114
                        when Israell by.
                        296
                     
                     
                        126
                        when that the Lord.
                        334
                     
                     
                        137
                        when as we sat.
                        350
                     
                     
                        Y
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        33
                        ye righteous in.
                        68
                     
                     
                        47
                        ye people all in.
                        107
                     
                     
                        58
                        ye rulers that
                        135
                     
                     
                        66
                        ye men on earth.
                        150
                     
                     
                        113
                        ye children, which.
                        288
                     
                     
                        150
                        yeld vnto the.
                        375
                     
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ These folowe after the Psalmes.
               
                  Attende my people.
                  Oure Father whiche art.
                  All my belefe.
                  Come holy spirit,
                  Geue peace in these.
                  where righteousnes doth.
                  O Lorde in thee is all my.
                  Preserue vs Lorde.
                  The Lorde be thanked.
                  ¶ Also serten godly praiers.
               
            
            
               ☞ These ye shall haue in the beginning of the boke.
               
                  Venicreator spiritus.
                  Tedeum laudamus.
                  Benedicite.
                  Benedictus dominus.
                  Magnificat anima.
                  Nunc dimittis.
                  The Lamentation of a.
                  The humble sute of a sinner
                  Quicunque vult.
                  The Pater noster.
                  
                  The. x. Cōmaundements
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               
               
                  POST FVNERA VIRTVS
                  VIVET TIMEN
                  ETSI MORS. INDIES ACCELERAT
               
            
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Iohn Day, dwelling ouer Aldersgate, beneath Saincte Martines.
            ¶ Cum gratia & priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis. perseptennium.
            
            ¶ These bookes are to be solde at his shop vnder the Gate. 1562.
            
         
      
   