
      
         
            
            
            THE
FIERIE TRYALL
OF
GODS SAINTS;
¶ (Theſe Suffered for the witnes of Ieſus, and for
the word of God, (vnder Queene Mary,) who did
not worſhip the Beaſt, nor his Image, nor had taken
his marke vpon their foreheads, or on their hands,
or on their Garments, and theſe liue and raigne with Chriſt:
Reuel: 20. 4.) As a Counter-poyze to I. W. Prieſt
his Engliſh Martyrologe. AND
THE DETESTABLE ENDS
OF
POPISH TRAYTORS:
¶ (Theſe are of Sathans Synagogue, calling themſelues
Iewes (or Catholiques) but lie and are not: Theſe
worſhipped the Beaſt ſaying, who is like vnto the Beaſt? who
is able to warre with him. Reuel. 13. 4. and theſe ſhall
drinke of the wine of Gods wrath, and ſhall be tormented with fire
and brimſtone before the holy Angells, and before the Saints, becauſe
they worſhipped the Beaſt and his Image. Re. 14. 10. & 11). Set downe in a comparatiue Collection of
both their ſufferings. Herewith alſo the Concurrance and agreement of the raignes of
the Kings of England and Scotland, ſince the firſt yeare of
Q. Mary, till this preſent, the like before not extant.
            
               AT LONDON,
Printed by T: P: for Arthur Iohnſon. 1612.
         
         
            
            TO THE PRINCE.
            
               ENglands faire Hope, (borne, Downe to quell
               the rage of Rome; That proud Babell;
               Which in its ſwelling-madde Deſires,
               to Worlds ſole Empire ſtill Aſpires;)
            
            
               Deigne (Sir) to reade this little Booke,
               at leaſt with milde aſpect to looke
               Vpon't. The pledge of Loyaltie,
               and Subiects loue to Royaltie,
it is.
            
            
               Vouchſafe your Princely Grace
               to me, that humbly place,
               my Faith and Dutie;
               Firſt to God, then my King
               (Who Vnitie did bring)
               then to my Countrie.
            
            
               The faithfull Subiect of my Lord the
               King, and your Highneſse,
            
         
         
            
            TO
THE PATRONAGE AND
protection of the high and mightie
Prince, Henry, eldeſt Sonne of our
Soueraigne Lord the King, Prince
of Wales &c.
            
               AS that in one place was well ſayd by
Heathen Tullie; Non nobis ſolùm
nati ſumus, ſed partē patria, partem
parentes, partem liberi, partem
amici, partem propinqui &
familiares, peculiaritèr ſibi vendicant: So elſewhere
was it ſpoken no leſse Chriſtian-like. Non
quid quis fecerit, ſed quo animo & ſtudio fecerit,
ponderandum eſt. Of theſe ſayings, the firſt
ſeemed vnto me, to Challenge at my hands A ſpeciall
Dutie to my Prince and Country, which I knew
not how to performe, but in this kind: The ſecond I
aſsumed as an Apologie for my weake and ſlender
performāce of that Duty. If my deſire (noble Prince)
to pay that debt for which by obligation Diuine, Naturall
and Nationall I ſtand obliged, hath tranſported
me beyond that wherevnto I am able, of your
Princely Clemency, I humbly beſeech you, winke at
that amiſse, and of your Heroicall and Magnanimous
Spirit, Shield me from the Darts of the mightie and
maleuolent. Your Kingly Father out of the goodnes
of his nature, (for to iudge the worſt, as diſsonant to
a good Diſpoſition) hath been obſerued to conceiue of
things ill ment, (or which at leaſt might be doubtfully
taken) well: you certainly being the true Heire as

of his Kingdomes ſo alſo of his vertues, cannot adiudge
of that which is well ment, ill. The cauſe which I
handle is not mine owne, but my Prince and Countryes,
wherein what I haue done, I the rather vndertooke
to publiſh at this time and in this Kind by
reaſon of theſe encouraging Woordes of the reuerend,
then Biſhop of Chicheſter, now of Ely, in his
Booke, Cuititulus eſt, Tortura Torti, in Epiſtola
dedicatoria ad Regiam Maieſtatem, his wordes
are theſe, I am, vbi in Diſcrimen adducta cauſa
communitatis, Spectator nemo ſit, Actor quiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
&c. My Intentions herein are right, wherein I deſire,
prodeſſe principi & patriae, non obeſſe: If I
faile in my purpoſe, that is not want of will, but of
power: If I haue performed ought herein that good
is, that ſame alſo is, Multò plus votis, quam factis.
Therefore for that ſometimes noble Q. Elizabeths
ſake, (for ſhe deſerued to be loued, etiam poſt mortem)
whoſe fame ſhall neuer die, (nam virtus poſt
funera viuit:) For the King your Fathers ſake,
who according to his names ſignification is, a Maintainer
(of our peace): for the Common wealths ſake,
which is the Crowne of your Glory: For your owne
ſake who are our Hope, yeald me, as the reading hereof,
ſo alſo your fauourable and Princely protection;
then ſhall I not care for the faces of mine enemies.
            
               The Faithfull Subiect of my Lord the
King, and your Highneſſe.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE WELL
affected, and loyall hearted
Reader.
            
               AS to the ſpirit and ſoule
of man nothing internally
then a good conſcience
can bee more
comfortable; ſo externally,
then a good
report from others nothing
can be more precious.
And as for the
firſt, euery one that will enjoye it, muſt himſelfe
alone by the vprightneſſe of his owne actions,
aſſure it vnto himſelfe in the ſincerity of his own
heart; ſo, for the ſecōd, as it depends not vpō ones
ſelfe alone, but vpon the tongues and reports of
others, euery Chriſtian by the rules of his profeſſion
is chargeable to his power to ſeeke the preſeruation
thereof towards others, whome hee
knoweth to be wronged. This being graunted
(as it cannot be denyed) if euery priuate mans
good name ſo neerely touch him, as that for the

preſeruation thereof wee are all of vs to others
reciprocally bound, and by law diuine obliged.
How much more ſtrictly then are all faithful ſubiects
tyed, as much as in them lyeth, to maintaine
the good name, honour, and reputation of their
lawfull Soneraignes, by traytors, rebels, And antichriſtians,
ſo vniuſtly, jmpiouſly, and jmpudently
taxed both in words and writings. For
as his Majeſtie is our King, by God appoynted
to rule ouer his Britiſh and Iriſh Iſraell, both in
Church and common wealth: and as in dignity
he is nulli ſecundus, nay more (for that may ſeeme
to admit an equall) Primus inter omnes, without a
mate, higheſt: euen ſo the blemiſh of good
name, honour, and reputation in his Majeſtie, is
of all others moſt diſhonourable, moſt ſcandalous;
as his Majeſty is of all others moſt eminent,
moſt conſpicuous; and therefore by euery good
ſubiect as occaſion offereth it ſelfe (pro viribus)
to be maintained. If a naturall father haue a bad
name, though vndeſernedly, yet is that in the
worlds eye (that cannot iudge thereof, but by
report) a ſcandall vnto the children. Our King
is more, for he is not onely Pater familiae, a father
of a priuate family, but he is, Pater Patriae, a father
of our Country; nay more, he is, Pater multorum
gentium & regnorum, a father of many
Kingdomes England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
and which is moſt, hee is a good Chriſtian, &


Chriſtianae fidei Defenſor, the chiefe Champion for
defence of Chriſtian faith, through whoſe ſides

the enemy ſeeketh to wound the whole Church
of Chriſt, and to lay aſperſions of bloud and tyrany
vpon all ſuch as with him profeſſe the goſpell
of Chriſt.
            The conſideration whereof (as alſo a feruent
deſire to doe my Country ſome publique ſeruice,
in helping (as much as in me lyeth) to ſtop the
mouths of our common aduerſaries the Papiſts,
whoſe lauiſh tongs haue ſpit out aboundance of
venome, and their pennes ſtung like Scorpions,
not onely our late moſt gracious and woorthy
Queene Elizabeth (of euer-bleſſed memorie, for
the many vnſpeakeable bleſsings that God with
and through her beſtowed vpon this and other
Kingdomes) But alſo our preſent Soueraigne
Lord and King, with both their ſtate Miniſters,
by charging them as falſely, ſo maliciouſly with
cruelty, breach of promiſe, bloud, and bloudy
perſecution for conſcience) hath mooued mee
to jmploye the beſt talent of my ſmall ability to
convince them of jmpudent and lying malicious
ſlaunders and reproachfull vntruths. Firſt in a
few following lynes directed vnto all Romiſh
fauorites, clearing my preſent gracious Soueraigne
of breach of promiſe with Recuſants, for
toleration of Popery, wherein alſo I haue touched
the ground of that ſlaunder, with the occaſion
and Authors thereof, with ſome other matters
of ſpeciall moment. Secondly, in a tabular
computation; by a comparatiue collection of all
ſuch Martyrs as were burned in Queene Maries
               
days, with all ſuch Prieſts, Ieſuites, & popiſh Recuſants,
as their Pſeudomartyrologiſt I. W. Prieſt
pretends (& but pretends) to haue byn executed
in England (Religionis ergò) ſince the beginning of
Q. Elizabeths raigne vntill this preſent yere 1608.
I haue cleared the ſecond accuſation of cruelty,
bloud, and bloudy preſecution for conſcience,
evidently proouing by their owne account, vnto
the vnderſtanding of the moſt ſimple, that is not
wilfully blind, that many more of the firſt ſort ſuffered
death, and were in fire conſumed onely
for their conſcience, within the leſſe then ſix
yeares raigne of Queene Marie, then of the ſecond,
third and fourth ſort (to wit, Prieſts, Ieſuites,
and Recuſants) in 52. yeares ſince, and
that not for Religion, but
                  Ʋide Torturam Torti. paginis. 131. 132. Treaſon. Whereby
it appeareth how vnjuſtly our late woorthy
Queene, our preſent gracious King & their Stateminiſters,
haue been and are moſt jmpudently &
falſely of bloud & cruelty accuſed & taxed.
            Nor haue I ought herein written to giue ſatisfaction
to any ſuch (for let them ſincke in their
owne ſinnes) as being ouer deeply bewitched
with Romes jdolatry, doe hold that all Treaſons,
all Rebellions, all Attempts, vi, aut fraude, againſt
the perſons and ſtates of our late Queene Elizabeth,
and our now preſent King, both were and
are not only lawfull, but meritorious: But to enforme
ſuch of them as being of a milder temper,
(and yet looking that way) willingly confeſſe
and acknowledge, that all ſuch as haue beene or

are guilty of ſuch crimes, haue deſeruedly been
puniſhed; but yet doe, or at leaſt ſeeme to conceaue
that their Prieſts and Ieſuites haue ſuffered
onely for their Conſciences, and therefore their
perſecution (they being many in nomber) is (in
their judgement) great and lamentable. Which
were it graunted, or could (as it neuer can) bee
prooued that they all dyed for their conſcience
onely, (which yet is a conſcience miſ-enformed)
yet doth the nomber of our true Martyrs in leſſe
then 6. yeres of Queene Maries raigne, (although
it ſhould be permitted vnto them to take alſo into
their number thoſe fifty and two lay perſons,
(for ſo many I thinke there are) regiſtred with the
Prieſts and Ieſuites in their owne Martyrologe)
not onely equallize, but exceed the number of
theirs in full fifty yeares ſince, by the number of
almoſt 100. perſons. Inſomuch, that if the numbers
of perſons ſuffering, and the number of
yeeres of both ſorts wherein they ſuffered bee
compared, and the cauſe of all their ſufferings admitted
to be alike juſt or vnjuſt (of which there
is no compariſon) yet did the cruelty of Queene
Marie and her popiſh Clergie, out-ſtrip Queene
Elizabeth and king Iames conjoyned, more then
tenne for one; and therefore learne, you that
haue any ſparke of grace remaining in you, to be
good ſubiects to your King, and ceaſe now at
laſt to taxe your ſoueraigne any more of perſecutiō,
whoſe heart bleeds that he is forced to draw
bloud from others for their jntollerable demerits.
            
               
As for the truth of theſe collections whereat
perhaps (and not vnlike) ſome popiſh ſpirits will
takeThree converſions of Eng: part 3. in many places. exception; vnderſtand that Mr. Foxe that
ſometime reuerend Father of our Church, is my
Author, whome for the number of ſuch profeſſors
of the Goſpell as were burned in Queene
Maries dayes, I haue ſoly followed, who albeit
happily (for it is almoſt jmpoſsible to bee otherwiſe)
in ſome things in ſo large a volume, hee
might commit ſome ſmall errour in ſome particular
cicumſtances, becauſe no Hiſtorian can
poſsibly be preſent euery where with his owne
eyes and eares, but muſt of neceſsity giue credite
vnto the relations of others in many poynts;
Yet the granity of his perſon, his excellent learning,
his great reading, his worthy and ſober cariage,
his ſound judgement, and therein his wiſe
choyce of Authours, and the generall report of
his honeſt and religious mind, by an vniforme
conſent of all ſuch as knew him, freeth him from
taxation of any wilfull and groſſe errour, or willing
miſtaking, and from any malicious aſlertion
againſt the Papiſts without a probable ground,
throughout his worthy woorke, in whoſe behalfe
I thinke it needleſſe to beſtowe much
paines, becauſe the honeſter and greater ſort
are honeſtly already of him perſwaded, and
for the reſt as they are for number fewer, and
their honeſty little worth, ſo ate they many of
them wilfully obſtinate and will not bee perſwaded.
            
               
As for the other ſort, to wit, popiſh Prieſts,
Ieſuites, and Recuſants, ſuch as haue beene
executed ſince the beginning of Queene Elizabeths
raigne (as I. W. pretendeth for religion) vntill
the yeare 1608. they are coppyed word for
word out of a booke called The
               Engliſh Martyrologe by J. VV. Prieſt Anno. 1608. 
               Engliſh Martyrologe,
by the authority of the popiſh ſuperviſors (as
it ſhould ſeeme) allowed, vnles the nameles author
thereof I. W. Prieſt doe belye them. Wherin
I haue dealt as truely with them to a letter as I
could, ſaue onely that I haue left out one perſon,
and in ſteed thereof added two, to wit, William
Watſon and William Clarke, both Prieſts executed
at
                  VVatſon, and Clarke, executed at VVincheſter in An. 1603. Novemb. 29. 
               Winchester Novemb. 29. 1603. I know not
how by the Pſeudomartyrologiſt omitted, for he
might as well haue enrolled them as thoſe which
he hath done, being all alike, traytors to their
Prince and Country. Noram I diſpoſed to cauill
for that I find diuers of their Prieſts noted in that
his Martyrologe by one name which yet I find
ſet downe in our Chronicles by an other name,
as for example, in An. 1585. Ianuary 21. Edward
Tranſam,
               Stowe. and Nicho. Wodfine, ſo by this our Martyrologiſt
noted, are by others named Edmund
Barbar and Nicholas Deuorax, which I note chiefly
for this end, that none might be deceiued in
thinking that more haue been executed, then in
deed haue been, becauſe one and the ſame perſons
are in their and our writings noted by different
names, for they haue ſo many falſe names,
that amongſt them all I find not one good and

true. He that atHenry Garnet had 6. names, to wit, Ganet, VValley, Darcy, Roberts, Farmer, and Phillips. Likewiſe Edward Hall alias Oldecorne. Likewiſe Oſwa
                     •
                  d 
                     •
                  eſmund alias Greenway. Likewiſe Thomas Garnet alias Rookwood, alias Sayer, with many others.
                
               London is called Richard, at Rome
is called Iohn, he that at Rheſmes and Doway is
called Peter, in England is called Saul; he that in
the Ieſuites cells is Sainted for his reſolution, is at
Tyburne hanged for his treaſon. I haue I confeſſe
tranſpoſed ſome of both ſorts, both of our
Martyrs and their traytors, but only for this end
that I might reduce them to our account, which
beginneth the yeare on the 25. of March, according
to the tabular Regiſter following, whereas
both Mr. Foxe & the Pſeudomartyrologiſt began
the yeare the firſt of Ianuary; As for example,
Mr. Foxe hath noted Iohn Rogers the firſt Martyr
in Queene Marie her dayes, to haue ſuffered
February 4. 1555. which yet according to our
account was in the yeare 1554. Likewiſe the
Pſeudomartyrologiſt hath in his Martyrologe
noted William Richardſon to haue beene executed
Feb. 27. 1603. which might ſeeme to be in the
firſt yeare of King Iames, which yet was in the latter
end of Queene Elizabeth, and in the yeare of
our Lord 1602. according as in that yeare in the
table following you may ſee.
            Now hauing compared their numbers together,
I could not but admire their jmpudency in
that voyde of ſhame, modeſty, religion, chriſtianity,
they dare ſo publiquely and vnjuſtly without
bluſhing, reuile and ſlaunder ſo gracious a
Princeſſe as was noble Q. Elizabeth, and ſo mercifull
a King as is our Soueraigne Lord K. Iames,
conſidering that ſo many more ſuffered in the leſſe

then ſix yeares raigne of Queene Marie onely for
religion, then haue ſithence by their owne account
beene executed in fiftie yeares of two
ſucceeding Princes (and thoſe not for religion
but for their treaſons) the number of
the true Martyrs noted in print, being in all by
this account almoſt 300. and the number of their
Seminary Prieſts, Ieſuites, and Recuſants, by their
own account not fully 200. which (number and
time conſidered) is more then tenne for one. Nor
is there a greater diſproportion in the number,
then in the cauſes of their ſufferings, the former
ſuffering only for their conſcience, the latter for
their treaſons.
            I am not ignorant that our aduerſaries do taxe
Mr. Fox of manyThree converſions of England in page 426. and many pages therof beſides vntruths and many ſtrange
matters, whoſe errors, if any ſuch were, I will not
maintaine, but ſomewhat excuſe by way of recrimination,
by cyting out of this my popiſh Author
ſome ſuch ſtories of his Saints Miracles, as I
find in his ſayd Martyrologe expreſſed (which he
hath diuided according to the moneths of the
yeare) leauing the truth and likely-hoode to thy
cenſure.
            
               ¶ Popiſh Miracles.
               ANd firſt in the moneth of Ianuary;Ianuary 7. Page 7. I find
this ſtorie, that when Saint Chad Biſhop of
Litchfield dyed, his brother Ceds ſoule (who was
before Biſhop of London) was ſeene to deſcend

from heauen with a troupe of Angels, to accompany
the ſame to heauen.
            
            
               Another.
               ST. Egwine Biſhop of Worceſter,
                  Ianuary. 11. Page 10. made a payre
of Iron ſhackles, locked them cloſe about his
legges, then caſt the keyes therof into the Riuer
of Seuerne, and ſo went to Rome with Offa King
of Mercia: deſiring of God, that the ſaid ſhackles
might not be looſed from his legges, vntill he had
made ſatisfaction for all the ſinnes of his youthfull
yeares: and in his returne backe, as he came ouer
the ſea, vpō a ſoden a fiſh leaped into the Ship
wherein he ſayled, which being taken and killed,
the foreſayd keyes of the ſhackles that hee had
throwne into the Riuer, were found in the fiſhes
belly, which hee applying to his ſhackles, forthwith
vnlocked them.
            
            
               Another.
               IN North-wales the commemoration of S. Beno
Prieſt,Ianuary 14. Page 12. who leading an Eremiticall life in the
weſt parts of England, was by an Angell admoniſhed
to goe into Wales to a Noble man called
Trebuith, S. Wenefrides Father, who gaue him a
part of his lands and poſſeſsions to build a Monaſterie,
as alſo his Daughter Wenefride to be inſtructed
and brought vp in a religious manner: whoſe
head being ſoone after cut off by Cradocus ſonne

to Alane King of the ſame Country, for not
yeilding to his vnlawfull luſt, he miraculouſly ſet
on againe, ſhee liuing fifteene yeares after.
            
            
               Another.
               ST. Elſted virgin,Ianuary 20. Page 18. and afterward Abbeſſe; it
happened vnto her that before ſhee was choſen
Abbeſſe, ſhee being in the Church at Mattins
before day, with the reſt of her ſiſters, going
into the middeſt according to the cuſtome, to
reade a leſſon, the candle wherewith ſhee ſawe
to read chanced to be put out, and therevppon
wanting light, there came from the fingers of her
right hand ſuch an exceeding brightneſſe vppon
the ſuddaine, that not onely her ſelfe, but all the
reſt of the Quire might ſee to read by it alſo. And
hauing another time giuen much to relieue the
poore, whereby her cheſts were emptyed, being
therefore for her lauiſhnes checked by the
Procurator of the houſe, ſhe made moane to the
Lord, and her Cheſts were againe myraculouſly
filled as before.
            
            
               Another.
               ST. Wereburge;
                  February 3. Page 32. ſhe vpon her death bed commanded
her body to be buried at Hamburge,
but contrary to her will it was carried to the monaſtery
of Trickingham, where (the gates faſt locked)
the ſame was kept and watched very carefully.

But ſee a woonder, they that kept it fell
into a ſleepe, ſo as the people of Hamburge comming
in the night to fetch the bodie away, the
gates of the Church and Monaſterie were opened
without hands, of themſelues, and ſo they
carryed the bodie and buried it at Hamburge, as
before ſhe requeſted.
            
            
               Another.
               ST. Patrick:
                  March 17. Page 17. he obtained by his Prayers, that
no venomous creature ſhould liue or breed
in Ireland.
               
            
            
               Another.
               ST. Richard Biſhop of Chicheſter:
                  Aprill 3. Page 86. he dyed at
Douer in Kent, his body being brought to Chicheſter,
ſo ſhined with Miracles that (beſides others)
he rayſed vp three dead men againe to life.
            
            
               Another.
               ST. Frithſtan;
                  Aprill 9. Page 92. one euening as hee was ſaying
Maſſe, as he walked in the Churchyard, when
he came to the words, Requieſcant in pace, the
voyces in the graues round about, made anſwere
aloud and ſaid, Amen.
            
            
               Another.
               ST. Pyran:
                  May 2. Page 116. he ſuſtained tenne Armies of men
for eight daies with the fleſh of three Kine,
and alſo rayſed diuers dead men to life.
            
            
               
               Another.
               ST. Sewell:
                  Maye 18. he for his integritie and innocency
of life was ſuch, and ſo acceptable to God, that
it pleaſed his diuine Maieſtie in ſigne thereof, to
worke miracles by him both aliue and dead; and
among others, it is recorded, that lying on his
death-bed he turned water into wine, by onely
bleſsing it.
            
            
               Another.
               KIng Henrie the ſixt:Maye 22. Page 134. his veluet Hat which he
vſed to weare, being put on mens heads that
were troubled with the head-ache, they were
preſently cured.
            
            
               Another.
               ONe of the ſouldiers that led S. Alban to his
death,Iune 22. Page 167. repented when he ſaw the conſtancy
of the Martyr, & asked him forgiuenes, which
the perſecutors beholding, they grieuouſly tormented
him for the ſame, but he following S. Alban
to his death when S. Albans head was cut off,
he tooke it vp and embraced it in his armes, and
thereby was immediatly cured of all his wounds.
            
            
               Another.
               ST. Swithine:
                  Iuly 2. Page 178. he, when by a miſchance a woman
had broken all her egges, made the ſigne
of the croſſe ouer the ſame egges, and immediatlie
they all became whole againe.
            
            
               
               Another.
               THe heads of Wiaman,
                  Iuly 25. Page 202. 
                  Vnaman, and Sunaman,
being cut off and caſt into a poole by the enemies
of Chriſt, S. Sigfride on a time walking by
the poole and deploring their deaths, on a ſuddaine
there appeared three miraculous lights vppon
the water, which encompaſſed the veſſell
wherein their ſayd heads were; which he ſeing,
preſently leaped into the poole, and embracing
them wept and ſayd, Vindicet Deus. Whereto
one anſwered, Vindicatūerit; another replyed, in
quem? the third added, in filios filiorum.
               
            
            
               Another.
               A Monke of a certaine Monaſtery whereof
S. Alexander was,Auguſt 6. Page 216. comming to the ſaid Alexanders
tombe to pray, and hauing an vlcer in
his breaſt which was now growne to a fiſtula; Alexander
appeared vnto him brighter then the
Sun, with two Crownes, one on his head, and
another in his hand. The Monke demaunded
what that double Crowne meant? he anſwered:
The Crowne in his hand is for the temporall
Crown which he forſook for Chriſts loue (for he
ſhold haue bin king of Scotland, being next heire
thereto, as the ſtory reporteth) the other on my
head, is that which I haue receaued common
with other Saints. And that you may be aſſured
of the verity of this viſion, you ſhall be preſently
cured of your infirmity; and hauing thus ſpoken

and the other jmmediatly healed, he vaniſhed away.
            
            
               Another.
               ST. Decuman firſt paſſed ouer the Riuer of Seuerne
miraculouſly with a faggot in ſteed of a
boate,Auguſt 27. Page 233. and afterwards was ſlaine by a Pagan and
his head cut off, which hee tooke vp from the
ground and carryed it to a fountaine where hee
was woont to waſh it.
            
            
               Another.
               ST. Dunſtan:
                  September 7. Page 244. hee on a time, when the diuell
appeared vnto him in the likeneſſe of a yong
woman tempting him to vncleaneſſe, tooke
a paire of pincers which lay by him, and caught
the diuell by the vpper lippe, and ſo holding him
faſt, and leading him vp and downe his chamber,
after diuers jnterrogatories droue him away.
            
            
               Another.
               ST. Oſith: ſhee after that the Danes had cut off
her head,October 7. Page 372. tooke it vp in her hands and carryed
it three furlongs to a Church of S. Peter, and S.
Paul, whither when ſhe came all jmbrued in her
owne innocent bloud, ſhe fell downe, and ſo ended
the courſe of her Martyrdome.
            
            
               Another.
               ST. Keyna:
                  October 8. Page 374. ſhe by her prayers turned a wood
full of Serpents into ſtones, ſtill retayning the
likeneſſes of Serpents: Alſo ſhe being ready

to depart out of this world, an Angel came downe
from heauen, and put vpon her a white garment
wrought with Gould, bidding her to be in readineſſe
to enter into the kingdome of her celeſtiall
Spouſe.
            
            
               Another.
               ST. Edmund:
                  Nouēber 20. Page 320. hee hauing his head cut off by
the Danes, and caſt into a wood neere by amongſt
bryars and buſhes, the Chriſtians afterwards
ſeeking for the ſame, loſt themſelues in
the ſame wood, and calling one to another, where
art? where art? the head anſwered, Here, Here,
Here, by which they found out the ſame.
            
            
               Another.
               ST. Inthware:
                  Decēber 23. Page 350. ſhe hauing her head cut off by
her owne brother Bana vppon a day as ſhee
came from Church, becauſe ſhee was accuſed
by her ſtepmother to be an harlot, her jnnocency
was preſently teſtified by this, for that ſhe
preſently tooke it vp in her owne hands and carryed
it to the Church from whence ſhee came.
Adde hereto alſo their late coyned (Death deſeruing
for the fact) woonder of Garnets face in a
wheat ſtrawe. Vide librum cuius titulipars eſt, Vera
hiſtoria de admirabili ſpica. Rightly engliſhed,
A fabulous ſtory of a fained ſtraw, firſt divulged
by a fooliſh Iack-daw.
               Many more ſuch groſſe and palpable lying
woonders are therein expreſſed, which I am

weary to recount, and I almoſt wonder that
they themſelues are not aſhamed to record for
truths; but as herein, ſo alſo in their falſe accuſations
of Queene Elizabeth and King Iames, by vnjuſtly
and maliciouſly taxing them with bloud,
breach of promiſe, and bloudy perſecution for
conſcience, they are moſt jmpudent and ſhameleſſe,
yea paſt ſhame and paſt grace; for as a Reuerend
D. Barlow in his anſwere to M. Broughton.
                   Father of our Church elſewhere vpon
another occaſion (though more rightly applyable
to this generation) ſaid, Qui ſemel modestiae
limites tranſilijt, knauiter fit impudens. But the
Prieſts and Ieſuites in this poynt of jmpudency
ſurpaſſe, and one maine reaſon hereof, as I take it,
is becauſe they hold the laye Papiſts, of whome
they haue their maintenance, in ſuch a thraldome
of jgnorant obedience, as that they dare not for
feare of damnation read any booke whereby to
enforme them in the truth, but only ſuch as their
traiterous and ſeditious vn-ghoſtly leaders ſhall
permit: And ſo if they can hold the good opinions
of their maintainers, they will neuer bluſh at
whatſoeuer themſelues ſay, or whatſoeuer bee
ſaid of them by others.
               If any friend ſhall thinke that this my labour
might well haue beene ſpared, becauſe the liues
of the Martyrs, the proceedings againſt them, &
the times and cauſes of their ſufferings are already
by Mr. Foxe in his large Booke thereof
more fully expreſſed; or otherwiſe ſhould thinke
that I do the Papiſts too great a grace, by placing

them in the ſame Booke with the true Martyrs of
Chriſt; to him in friendly manner I thus replye,
and firſt to the firſt. That though his allegation
bee indeed true (for I willingly confeſſe that hee
hath deſerued much for his extraordinary paines
that wayes, and hath compaſſed ſo much and
ſuch variety of matter therein, as that I cannot
ſay whether were greater,1610. his labour or the Readers
profit) yet cannot euery mans purſe reach
ſo great price as is thatThe booke at large (worthy to be writtē in letters of gould) is this yeare newly and well printed by the Companie of Stationets in London. Booke at large; and beſides
I haue not medled with any matter of Hiſtorie
contained therin, but only haue borrowed
out of him the names of ſuch as were in Queene
Maries daies burned, as I haue likewiſe out of their
Martyrologiſt the names of their Prieſts, Ieſuites,
and Recuſants, for vnleſſe I ſhould ſet downe
their names, I could make no good compariſon
of their numbers in oppoſition one to the other;
which is the eſpeciall end whereat I aime.
               Secondly, although that twentie or thirtie
yeares, ſince many hundreds of Thouſands of
perſons were liuing that could viva voce beare
record how cruelly and vnmercifully the Profeſſors
of Chriſts truth were dealt withall in
Queene Maries daies, and could alſo (if any ſeducing
Prieſt or Ieſuite had accuſed their Soueraigne
of cruelty) haue thus replyed, Away
vild harlots, belie her not, fox Queene Elizabeth was
a mercifull Queene, but mine eies haue ſeene the aboundance
of bloud ſhed in Queene Maries raigne
onely for conſcience, wherwith ye were neuer glutted,
                  
but now theſe Viue-ſpeakers in Chriſts cauſe being
by time conſumed, it is more needfull to preſerue
by theſe neuer-dying memorials, the remembrance
of their ſufferings, eſpecially ſeeing
the aduerſarie is ſo buſie by all meanes that the
Pope, the Diuell, or hell it ſelfe can poſsibly deuiſe
to exalt their faction, and to bring a ſcandall
both vpon our Soveraignes, vs, and them.
               And to the ſecond poynt; That it is a Grace
vnto the Papiſts and Romaniſts to haue their
Prieſts and Ieſuites ranked with the true Profeſſors,
I anſwere thus: It is not the puniſhment,
nor the place, but onely the cauſe that maketh
a man famous for vertue, or for vice jnfamous,
loued of God for his owne free graces, or hated
of God and good men for their villanies.
               If the Iron barres whereon Catesbies and Percies
heads are fixed and nailed on the Parliament
houſe, be a grace vnto them or any of their fauorites,
becauſe they poſſeſſe the higheſt places of
that Honourable houſe; ſuch grace haue all the
kings enemies. If Garnets ſcaffold becauſe it was
rayſed aloft for more publique view, were an honour
vnto him or any of his Ieſuited ſociety, ſuch
honour haue all that are, were, or hereafter ſhall
be his partakers. If London bridge or Newgate
grace that faction, becauſe their friends diſmembred
limbes are ſo highly thereon aduanced; let
Crowes and Rauens likewiſe deuour all them
that deſerue the like grace for the like jnfidelity.
Laſtly, if Iudas their fellow-traitor can any whit

at all grace them becauſe he is noted in the booke
of God, (but with this foule addition, Traitour)
let them likewiſe take him and make him a brother
of their Company, or rather jncorporate
themſelues into his Society, but let all that beare
ill will to the Church of England, and the Kings
Majeſtie as a principall member thereof; let I
ſay, their ends (oh God) be like vnto their maſter
Iudas, and let their bowels breake in ſunder that
would eat out the bowels of thy Church of England;
and let this blacke word of Traitour bee
the jndelible ſpot, neuer to bee waſhed away,
wherewith I brand all Engliſh Italionated Prieſts
and Ieſuites, and their Abbettors. Adde to theſe
alſo the Iacobine Fryer and Rauilack, the two murtherers
of two French kings Henry 3. & Henry 4.
(for theſe are alſo Sons of one Father the Pope,
the Deuill their Grandfather, and thoſe before,
their brethren in iniquity, neuer to be ſpoken of
but to their ſhame with poſterity,) the felicity of
whoſe Raigne (namely Henrie the 4.) and peaceable
gouernment, free from danger of any deſperate
attempt of ſtabbing or poyſoning, or other
attempt of perill to his perſon by any of Romes
fauourites, our engliſh Popiſh Recuſants (ſcienter
loquor) before that inhumane and helliſh fact
committed pleaded and ſtrongly argued to proceed
from that lenitie of his, in permitting a freedome
of conſcience to his ſubiects in matter of
Religion; whereby they would inferre, that if our
Kings Maieſtie would deſire to liue ſecurely

from any ſuch attempts, not needing to feare perill
either by ſtabbing, poyſoning, powder, or otherwiſe,
then let a toleration begraunted; but
how ſound their concluſion is, France hath felt,
England may feare, and all the world is amazed
thereat.
               For if the King of France being a Papiſt, and at
moſt but ſuſpected to affect the Proteſtant Religion,
could not yet be ſecure in his perſon, how
much leſſe can our King expect any aſſurance
of ſaftie by a toleration, his Majeſty being himſelfe
a profeſſed Proteſtant, and directly oppoſite
in Faith and Religion. Nay it might rather
bee much feared, that it would bee a meanes to
pull Gods juſt judgements vpon him and vs, for
permiſsion of ſuch falſe worſhippe of the true
God; for ſo wee may read in diuers places of
the Old Teſtament, that when the Rulers of the
people fell away from God, God ſent vpon them
many plagues, miſeries, and oppreſsions by
their enemies. And thus much in anſwere
to the ſecond poynt, which
my friend may obiect.
               
                  Thine in all Christian loue, 
                        monogram incorporating the letters 
FRANCIS BTO (?and U)
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE WHOLE
rabble of Engliſh-borne, Romiſh
male-contents, and diſturbers of
this State.
            
               NOT HOPING
hereby to reclaime you
(that are already by Sathans
witchcrafts ſeduced)
from your many
dangerous and pernitious
errors, which cleaue
more faſt vnto you then
the skinne vnto the fleſh, or the fleſh vnto the
bones, for that were Extra ſpem ſperare, a hope
without any ground: Nor yet in bitterneſſe of
ſpirit (onely) purpoſing to rayle vpon you as many
of you moſt jmpudently haue done againſt
your owne Mother, for that were want of charity:
nor any waies intending to giue ſatisfaction
vnto your vnſatisfiable obſtinacy and wilfull-willing
blindneſſe, by reaſoning ſcholaſtically,
or propounding and framing logicall (or as you
vſe ſophiſticall) arguments to conuince your follies,
for that would be in me preſumption; For
what am I that after ſo many rare wits, and vnrefutable
iudgemēts in matters Diuine, as haue already
laboured your converſion, I ſhould hope

of better ſucceſſe therein then they before haue
had?
            I rather conclude with Abraham, who told
the rich man that deſired a meſſenger to be ſent
from the dead to the liuing to warne them that
they might auoyd the like daunger of comming
there, That if they will not belieue the Prophets, neither
would they belieue though one came frō the dead:
ſo if you will not be perſwaded by the ſcriptures,
and the ſtrong and vn-anſwerable arguments of
ſuch excellent Diuines as haue already laboured
your conveſion, neither will you be perſwaded
though Chriſt himſelfe ſhould deſcend from heauen
in perſon to confute you.
            But my ſcope and drift herein is, (pro viribus)
Firſt to preuent the fall of thoſe who yet ſtand but
are ready to fall. Secondly, to free my late Soueraigne
Queene Elizabeth, that ſometimes peereleſſe
Prince, and my now dread Soueraigne the
Kings Majeſtie, and their State-miniſters from
many falſe and Serpentine jmputations, layd vppon
them by men of your rancke, of bad ſpirits,
whoſe throats are open Sepulchres, wherein
to burie true Honour, Faith keeping, Grace,
Mercie, Pittie, Piety, Protection, Truth and Religion
in eternall obliuion; breathing out from
thence (as from the fournace of Hell) inſteed
thereof nothing but Diſhonour, Breach of promiſe,
Diſgrace, Crueltie, Bloud, Want of deuotion,
Oppreſsion, Hereſie, and Irreligion.
            Theſe are the motiues that enforced my pen▪
               
theſe the reaſons of my non-ſilence, who otherwiſe
could haue been contented quietly and ſecurely
to haue repoſed my ſelfe in the joyfull contemplation
of Gods manifold bleſsings and mercies
of an extraordinary nature towards this Nation,
by continuance of the Goſpell amongſt vs,
Which, that it is the Truth, and that he himſelfe
with his owne right hand hath planted it, and
defended it by the power of his owne arme, the
many ſtrange Miracles (for ſuch ſay you muſt
needs approoue the Truth) which himſelfe from
time to time ſince before the beginning of Q. Elizabeths
raigne vntill this preſent hath wrought,
doe euidently confirme and prooue.
            For is it poſsible that our late famous Queene
of euer-bleſſed memorie,The Miracles that god hath wrought for confirmation of his goſpell. and our now Soueraigne
the Kings Maieſtie, ſhould haue eſcaped
the many pitts that haue beene digged for them,
and not haue fallen therein? Is it poſsible that
Queene Elizabeth, full of yeares but fuller of Renowne,
ſhould haue liued vnto a gray-headed
age, and quietly dying in her bed, to be maugre
all her enemies, brought in peace vnto her graue?
Is it poſsible that this preſent State wherein wee
liue ſhould now haue a Being, ſeeing that Hell,
the Pope, [Vt obiter notē. The word Recuſant,
(now ſo common) vntill the Eleauenth yeare of
Queene Elizabeths Ragine, was altogether vnknowne,
(as may appeare by all Statutes and
Acts of Parliament before that time made, wherin
there is not a word thereof at all) vntill which

time all Papiſts, ſome very few excepted, (notwithſtanding,
that the Religion then profeſſed
in the Church of England, was the very ſame
that it was in the former yeares of her Raigne)
came ordinarily to our Churches, nor was diſparitie
of religiō any cauſe of Recuſancy, vntil ſuch
times that the roaring Bull of Pope Pius 5. (for
then the land began to ſwarme with Recuſants)
was publiſhed, and Queene Elizabeth by him Anathematized:
Then the caſe was ſuddenly altered,
thoſe who before frequented our Churches,
now withdraw themſelues from our Society;
Thoſe who before yeilded obedience to
his Maieſtie, now would not acknowledge her
for their lawfull Queene; herevpon followed
jmmediatly the rebellion in the North, and other
dangerous conſpiracies by your faction. And
to proue that Religion was not the cauſe of their
Recuſancy (beſides that which hath beene aboueſayd)
Scotland will teſtifie, wherein albeit
there haue beene and are many knowen Papiſts
both men and women, yet in all the time of King
Iames his Raigne there, nor yet ſince he raigned
here, haue any of thē abſented thēſelues or refuſed
to come to our Churches in Scotland, & yet I make
no queſtion but you will ſay that the Romiſh religion
is one and the ſame there that it is here:
you muſt needs then graunt, that not religion
but the Popes pleaſure (vnto whoſe girdle you
are tyed) is the cauſe of Recuſancy, and it behooueth
his Maieſtie to haue ſpeciall regard vnto

you that are Recuſants, and by all good meanes
that he can to aſſure his owne eſtate, in another
regard then only that you will not, intereſſe ſacris,
with vs, for Recuſancy and Treaſon are ſo linked
one in the other, and compacted, that hardly
can hee bee a Recuſant that is not a Traitour
likewiſe. See more hereof if you pleaſe in
the 130 and 131. pages of Tortura Torti.] Seminarie
Prieſts and Ieſuites, Traitors and ſeditious
perſons haue conſpired againſt it, had not
the Lord himſelfe miraculouſly defended it, and
maintained his Truth?
            I need not inſtance particular deliuerances, for
who is he amongſt vs that remembers not many?
But yet I cannot without ingratitude to God,Two miracles of miracles. our
moſt gracious preſeruer, ouer-ſlip in ſilence thoſe
two myracles of myracles,The 1. to wit, Our deliuerance
from Spaines (ſo falſely by them tearmed, but bleſſed
be God therefore) inuincible Armado, An. 1588. and
from the mynes of fire and Gunpowder prepared
by ympes of Hell,The 2. for Englands Funerall An.
1605. which latter but that mine own eyes haue
ſeene their preparations, I ſhould (with Thomas)
ſcarcely haue belieued:The Ieſuits reported in Spaine that there was no ſuch matter as the gun-powder Treaſon. Related by the L. Cooke at the Earle of Northumberl. conviction, in the Star-chā
                  ber. Iune 27. 1606. And no maruell though
in Spain the report therof can with many hardly
be credited, for ſome at our own home that haue
not with their owne eyes ſeene it, or with their
eares heard the Delinquents, Viva voce, confeſſe
it, can hardly, yet conceaue halfe the malice therof,
it ſeemes to thoſe that haue any ſparkes of humanitie,
ſo paſsing cruell and incredible. Theſe

if the Goſpell muſt needs be confirmed by myracles,
are true myracles.
            
               Theſe are no counterfait jugling trickes, or
Popiſh impoſtures to delude the ſimple,
               Childiſh and ſtrawiſh Myracles. 
               ſuch as
were the Sickneſſe-healing Child, or the Picture of
the Traitour Garnets face in a wheat ſtrawe, found
perhaps amongst a Popiſh Taylors wiues ſhreds, or
brought in in the belly of a Griffin or Gryfō, intēding
thereby the ruine of Troynovant, as were the armed
men of Yore in the bellie of Synons woodden horſe,
for Troye the old its Deſtruction: ſuch as theſe
we leaue to you to inſert into your Legenda Aurea,
or Legend of lyes.
            
            As for perſecution for conſcience,In your ſupplication to the kings Maieſtie, Anno. 1603. & An. 1604 in many places thereof: as alſo in diuerss other treaſonable bookes ſince by you ſet forth and diſperſed. againſt
which in diuers of your pamphlets you ſo loudly
cry, the compariſon of times for continuance
wherein, of perſons for numbers in thoſe times,
how many, whoſe bloud on both ſides haue been
ſhed, and the cauſes (partly) wherefore, in the
following Table will appeare. But the grounds
of religion, contained in the holy Scriptures of
the old and new Teſtament, penned by the Prophets
and Apoſtles, on which we build our faith,
and the refutation of errors and falſe doctrine
maintained by Romiſh Recuſants, Prieſts, and Ieſuites
which in former times and in theſe times
alſo haue & do cauſe ſo great diſturbances & perſecutions
of the Church of Chriſt, I leaue to bee
defended by thoſe graue and ſtrong pillars of our
Church, and learned Fathers of our Clergie,
whoſe foundneſſe in doctrine all the Papiſts in

the world are vnable to evince.
            Concerning that diſhonour wherewith very
frequētly but falſely (as is wellTortura Torti. Page 83. approued by the
then Biſhop of Chicheſter) you taxe your Soueraigne
Lord the Kings Maieſtie for breach of
promiſe with Recuſants, concerning a toleration
of Popiſh religion, that (quantum in me eſt) I may
confute ſuch vnjuſt exclamations againſt his Majeſties
Perſon and his Honour, I will brieſly touch
that poynt, by declaring not onely vnto you, but
vnto all the world that ſhall take notice hereof,
what mine owne eares heard in an open Court
(of mercy I may ſay rather then of juſtice in this
caſe) debated and cenſured.The Starre-chamber.
            
            The caſe ſtood betweene the Kings Majeſtie
& a great Peere of this Land, amongſt whoſe many
groſſe ſlippes and juglorious acts, this poynt
was as the reſt (all which his Majeſtie was pleaſed,
nay (as ſayd the Lord Cooke then the Kings
Attourney) commanded that they ſhould not otherwiſe
bee handled then as matters of Contempt)
ripped vp and ſcanned. His name I could
particularly inſtāce, but becauſe it pleaſed my Soveraigne
to deale with him not in rigor of law &
juſtice but meerly in Grace, I hold it not my part
(othewiſe then what for clearing of the truth I
needſly muſt) him by name to diſgrace.
            Wherfore that I may helpe to waſh away thoſe
aſpertions of diſhonour, vnjuſtly throwen vpon
his ſacred Majeſty by men of bad ſpirits, and that
like ſpots and ſtaines neuer to be done away▪ they

may ſeat themſelues within the muddy Circle of
the duskie Moone, their true Centre, and not eclipſe
the bright honour of our ſplendant Sun &
glorious North-ſtar, I will here relate frō whence
by much probabilitie, this error at firſt ſprange.
            This noble fore-remembred Perſonage,Omne animi vitium tanto conſpectius i
                     •
                   ſe crimē habet, quanto maior qui peccat habetur. whoſe
greatneſſe addes a greatnes to his fault, (if I may
linke Nobilitie with ſuch jgnoble actions) ambitiouſly
(as it ſhould ſeeme) affecting a ſingular
greatneſſe, not at all regarding Religion (as ſome
haue thought) further then as it might ſerue him
as a ladder to promotion, was in ſhew outwardly
a ſeeming Proteſtant, but vnder-hand and couertly,
willing to be held a Papiſt, jnſomuch that
by his cloſe carriage hee was very honourablie
thought of by his Majeſtie, & choſen by his Majeſtie
to be very neere vnto him, and yet neuertheleſſe
highly accompted of and reſpected amongſt
the Romaniſts for a ſure friend of theirs,
vpon whom they might hold a Dependance; Teſtified
hereby, that with his owne hands he deliuered
and preſented their Popiſh Supplication
vnto his Majeſtie at Theobalds, for a toleration in
Anno. 1603.
            And that I may not ſeeme maliciouſly of my
ſelfe without a ground to taxe him herein of ambition,
The now 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Cooke.
                obſerue with me, that at his tryall (by one
for his learning judicious, for his knowledge experienced
in matters of State) it was by euident
arguments prooued that his proceedings argued
a manifeſt Diſcontentmēt, and withall that all

diſcontentments proceeded from either want,
diſgrace, or ambition; but not from want, for his
poſſeſsions and yearely revenues were exceding
great; not frō diſgrace, for his Majeſtie had many
waies graced & highly honoured him; (which
graces as he then did, ſo I now could particularly
jnſtance, but that thereby I muſt needſly diſcouer
his perſon) and therefore of neceſsitie from
Ambition.
            Likewiſe as then by one was obſerued his ambition
in his jntentions and thoughts, ſo by another
of higher rancke and dignitie was noted his
diſsimulation in his actions,The Lord Archbiſhop of Cant.
                for ſaid he, there are
in all his proceedings, Veſtigia manifeſta, & veſtigia
occulta, giving withall an jnſtāce herein, That this
great perſonage had admitted T. P. that Archtraitor
to be a Pentioner,
               The word thē vſed was, To hold an Axe ouer the Kings head. but yet without hauing any oath
adminiſtred him, either for his allegeance, or yet
for his particular diſcharge of that place whereunto
he was admitted, and yet vnderhand giuing
out that he was ſworne, wherevpon he jnferred
thus, That whereſoeuer things were palliated which
were, or fayned to be which are not, there alwaies is
ſome deceit. At which time he was by a third honourable
perſonage taxed expreſlie for his Hippocriſie,
as being Iacke on both ſides, whereby hee
had made himſelfe odious to both Proteſtants (ſo
tearmed) and Papiſts:The L. Zouch.
                nor yet (though theſe are
jnough) are theſe all. But to returne to our purpoſe
and matter in hand.
            
               Before he aſcended vnto that height of honor

(which then by the Kings ſpeciall favour he was
advanced vnto) I meane in Queene Elizabeths
time, when his predeceſſours carriage had givē
juſt occaſion of the ſucceſſours further diſgrace,
then [at this very time was the ſame perſon imployed
vnto his maieſtie with letters from Garnet the
Ieſuites Prouinciall, who had about that time receaued
the Popes Breues to this purpoſe, Quandocun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
contigerit miſeram illam faeminam (meaning Q.
Elizabeth) ex hac vita exire, &c. that whenſoeuer
that wretched woman ſhould die, the papiſts ſhould not
admit of any other to inherite, how neere ſo euer in
bloud, vnleſſe he were a (Romiſh) Catholique, and not
ſo onely, vnleſſe he would alſo ſweare to vphold to his
power the popiſh Religion. But the Kings happie acceptation
with his good Subiects, cauſed thoſe to bee
converted into aſhes, and then come other Breues enioyning
their obedience to his Maieſtie, but Coacta
virtus non eſt virtus, Gramercy horſe when you cannot
chooſe, then obay. This is that Obedientia, ex
neceſsitate, nempe ferreâ jlla & coactâ, which Bellarmine
noteth Recognitionum, pag. 16. And
how long this? vntill they be able to caſt him out whō
they were forced to receaue. And your Watſon
ſoone attempted that which hee knew his vnholy Father
the Pope hartily wiſhed. Hee was a lowe man in
perſon, but he aſpyred high when he thought to bee
Lord Chancellor of England: but miſsing that, hee
was aduanced to the Gallowes for preferment, but I
thinke being purblind, he miſſed the waye that hee
meant] I ſay did this double-hearted Lord jmploy

T. P. the Traytor vnto the Kings Majeſtie
then King only of Scotland, with certain letters
of adviſe, but much in the behalfe of the Engliſh
Romiſh Catholicks, aduiſing him that he ſhould
at ſuch time as it ſhould pleaſe the Lord to call
him to the poſſeſsion of this his kingdome (which
as now he doth, ſo long Lord grant he may quietly
enjoye) giue faire promiſes and hopes of tolleration
vnto the Papiſts, thereby (as he therein
pretended) to prepare a more eaſie entrance for
his Majeſtie when time ſhould ſerue.
            
            The Kings Majeſtie (not as then ſuſpecting
the depth of this his Councellors drifts, but vnderſtanding
him ſimply) returned him an anſwere,
with thankes for his adviſe, but withall jnferring
a clauſe directly (as ſince it appeareth) contrarie
to his Councellors expectation. His Majeſties
words in anſwere to the letter, were in effect as
followeth.
            
               Whenſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe GOD in his due
time to call mee to the poſſeſsion of my right in
England, I purpoſe not to make any jnnovation in
the State, or to alter the Lawes and Ordinances
thereof, &c. Wherevppon a wiſe man would
(as the L L. did) haue thus jnferred: No alteration
in the State, no changing of Lawes and Ordinances
therein eſtabliſhed; why then no toleratiō
of Poperie, no allowance of Recuſancy; &
not becauſe it pleaſed the kings Majeſtie out of
the meekneſſe of his Spirit (voyd of guile and
double dealing) to returne him thankes for his

aduiſe (although hee did not ſo much as make
ſhew that he liked thereof) therefore to conclude
that a toleration ſhould be granted.
            But he in his ambition beſotted with his own
follie, not expounding his Majeſties words as he
meant, but as he himſelfe conceited them, becauſe
he ſo (as it ſhould euidently appeare) wiſhed
that it might bee, did ſo farre exceed the
limits of his commiſsion, and was ſo farre vainely
tranſported,
                  Ʋide Tortûrā Torti Pag. 83. Prom
                     •
                  ſſa neſcioquae commē
                  ti ſunt quae tamen nulla ſuerunt & quod factū nunquā eſt, id fuiſſe tamen factium in vulgus ſpargebant. as that at T. P. his returne from the
Kings Majeſtie, it was amongſt the Papiſts divulged
(though falſely) that the King had alſo by the
ſayd T. P. giuen directions to the afore-remembred
great Perſonage, by word of mouth to
wind himſelfe into their favours, (for that was
the word) and to giue hopes of toleration in his
Majeſties name vnto Recuſants, and herehence
chiefly aroſe that ſcandall of the kings Honour,
that he had broken promiſe with Recuſants. For
the better confirmation whereof, and that his
Majeſty neuer intended any ſuch matter of toleration,

                  vide the Earle of Northamp. printed ſpeech at Garnets arraignment in pag. 1. of A aa Conferre herewith Watſon the Prieſt his
confeſsion vnto the Honourable Lord the Lord
of Northampton at Wincheſter; who being by the
Earle (by his Majeſtie therevnto appoynted) examined
vpon the poynt of promiſe of toleration,
freely confeſſed that albeit he were by ſome falſly
accuſed to be the Author of that report, yet it
was moſt true that hee could neuer at any time
draw any comfort from his Maieſtie in the point
of conſcience.
            
               
All which notwithſtanding (beſides the juſt
cauſe that the Powder-treaſon, and other dangerous
conſpiracies againſt his Maieſties life and
kingdomes, hatefull to God and all good men,
gaue, of an hard hand ouer the Papiſts) yet let any
of you (that I may vſe the words of an Honorable
Counſellor) even the moſt jmpudent & brazen
faced amongſt you,The Earle of Salisburie in his anſwere to certaine ſcandalous papers. ſhew any the leaſt prints
(if you can) of bloudy ſteppes in his Majeſties
Courſe: Nay rather I may much more truely
ſay, hee is a man compoſed all of mercy, and
not of any earthly element, ſubiect to paſsions
and diſturbance, but in a farre more diuine manner
then ordinary men, reſembling his Maker, for
good Kings and mercifull are the moſt liuely repreſentatiue
jmages of the Deitie, which cauſeth
as the wicked without warrant, vpō Gods mercies,
ſo Traitors and miſcreant without reaſon
vppon his Majeſties Clemency jmpudently to
preſume, to their more juſt condemnation.
            And here let me tell you (yet voyd of any deſire
of bloud or bloudy courſes, as God can beare
record vnto my ſoule, but onely admiring the
mercies of our King) That I greatly doubt
whether any Prince in the world (King Iames
excepted) if the like treaſon as was the Powdertreaſon,
had been plotted againſt him by perſons
of another religion or ſect whatſoeuer, would
haue ſuffered either man, woman, or child of ſo
dangerous and damnable a profeſsion, to haue
breathed within his Dominions, eſpecially if the

grounds of their religion (as doth that of yours
by euident proofes elſwere convinced) do allow
of any ſuch doctrine and enterpriſes.D. Reynolds in his preface before his cō
                  ference with Hart. D. Morton, M. Stocke, with many more.
            
            This Powder-plot-treaſon was in it ſelfe, in
the eyes of ſome of the actors therein, ſo horride
and deteſtable, as that one of your owne Ieſuites
from an apprehenſion of the jmmane cruelty
thereof, (not mooued with any commiſeration
of their miſeries, who were by their deſignes
deſtinated to the rage thereof, but proceeding
from a trembling feare leaſt it ſhould be diſcouered)
could ſay to his fellow in profeſsion and action,
Greenewell, & Garnet. 
               That if it were diſcouered it would be the vtter
ruine and diſſolution of their Society.
            
            Remember alſo Robert Winters dreame and
the horror thereof,Reported at his arraignmēt in VVeſtminst. Hall Ianu 27. 1605 mentioned in the Earle of Northamptōs ſpeech in the firſt pag of L. how it terrified his very ſoule
with the gaſtly appearance of ſome of his conſorts.
And forget not the fearefull vengeance of
God in ſuffering their faces to be ſo vgly disfigured
with Gunpowder in Littletons houſe, who
had prepared a Deſtructiō for this whole kingdome
with the ſame matter and Subſtance; and
then conclude that God is iuſt, and therefore in
his juſtice did puniſh their wickedneſſe with the
inventions of their owne braines.
            Was it not time to lop thoſe ambitious aſpyring
thoughts of Watſon the Prieſt and his confederates,
Confeſſed vnder his owne hand in an examination openly read in the Star-chā
                  ber at the cō
                  viction, of the Earle of Northumberl. Iun. 27. 1606. as alſo to clippe the winges of the Powder-Treaſon
contriuers and their fauorites, the
firſt affecting in his owne perſon the high Chancelorſhip
of England; and the latter building

their hopes aboue the Moone,Confeſſed in diuers examinations vnder their hands openly read the time and place aforeſayd. amongſt themſelues
concluding to ſet vp a Protector of their
own chooſing out of the number of thoſe Popiſh
Lords, that by them were intended ſhould bee
preſerued from that generall deſtruction of their
ſulphurious fire, all of them directlie ayming at
the vtter ruine and deſtruction of this noble and
renowned Iland, and to make deſolate the moſt
glorious Kingdome that is couered by the Heauens.
            But as the moſt fruitfull trees beare their tops
loweſt,Simile. and the moſt barren and vnfruitfull ſhoote
vp higheſt, euen ſo is it amongſt men. Thoſe
that are moſt emptie of vertue and laudable qualities,
aſpire in their ambition to places of higheſt
honour vncalled, whereas the more worthy and
vertuous would in their humility refuſe them being
jmpoſed, were it not onely for this, that they
may thereby be the better jnabled to do good.
            Admit that the Kings Majeſtie had in a religious
pollicy promiſed a toleration, before he were
fully ſeated in his kingdome, or come into this
Kingdome, nay that hee had ſo alſo meant indeed,
as ſome of you haue falſely and jmpudently
giuen out; yet had he not, for your extreame
ill carriage and diſloyall demeanour, juſt cauſe to
haue reuoked it? For before that liberty could
be eſtabliſhed for you, there muſt needes haue
beene a repeale made of thoſe Lawes and Statutes
formerly made againſt Recuſancy, which as
they were by act of Parliament confirmed, ſo

muſt they haue been by the like authority diſanulled.
Theſe forward ſpirits (as they wold be thought) for the Kings Succeſſion would yet haue bereft vs of his head before the Crowne had adorned it. But your Watſon and Clarke thought to make
a ſhorter cut then ſo, by preventing the King in
the performance of that which Watſon himſelfe
knew full well the King neuer purpoſe nor promiſed,
albeit it ſhould ſeeme by Watſons owne
confeſsion, that he had much laboured and jmportuned
his Majeſtie therein. Since which
time alſo, if his Majeſtie had promiſed the like (as
ſome of your faction haue falſely giuen out) was
not that matchleſſe Powder-treaſon plotted,Tortura Torti. Page 84. contriued,
See the Catholique ſupplication to the kings Maieſtie in Ann. 1604 neere beginning thereof. furthered, and aſsiſted by beaſts (for men
I cannot call them, but rather deuils) of your religion,
both Prieſts, Ieſuites, and (as you ſtile your
ſelues) lay Catholiques, a ſufficient warrantiſe
without prejudice to his honour, to recall ſuch
a grant as might giue protection to Caterpillers,
Degenerate perſons, Miſcreants, Vipers, Monſters,
and not men, and whatſoeuer name more
odious, that alſo; yea vnworthy to bee called
by the name of any of Gods creatures, for they
perſiſt in their created natures, but the other do
not but are degenerated from men to Devils.
            That their damnable practiſe doth rightly moralize
the tale of the Husbandman, wherein hee
is fabled to haue found a Snake ſtiffe and almoſt
dead with cold, and to haue brought him home
in his boſome and warmed him by the fire, which
after recouering began to hiſſe at the good man
of the houſe for his paines, and would with his
venomous tongue haue ſtung him to death, who

had before ſaued his life; which plainely bids
King Iames beware that he nouriſh not vipers in
his own Kingdome, I pray God not in his Court.
            You ſeeme in ſome places of your writings to
taxe Queene Elizabeth, and in her all true profeſ
               
                  •
               ors
of religion for a backward and frozen zeale
towards the Kings Majeſties rightfull ſucceſsion
in theſe his kingdomes,See your ſupplication to his Maieſtie, Anno. 1604. chap. 5. & to blazō your own forwardneſſe
in his Majeſties behalfe: but know,
you falſe-hearted and degenerate men, that king
Iames knowes how to judge of ſpirits,Alſo in the firſt part of Engl. three Converſions, neere the beginning thereof. and to hold
you but hollow-hearted vnto him now, becauſe
whiles you were yet Queene Elizabeths ſubiects,
you were then ſo vnto her, and to eſteeme of
our late Queene Honourably, and of vs as faithfull
Subiects then vnto her, ſo now no leſſe vnto
him. And albeit that for ſome reaſons of State
vnto her ſelfe beſt knowen, and which no doubt
but his Majeſtie now very well vnderſtandeth, it
pleaſed her to conceale the kings right from the
multitude, yet I verily perſwade my ſelfe that his
Majeſty did neuer ſo much as conceiue a thought
that Queene Elizabeth did euer purpoſe or intend
to debarre him in his right of lawfull ſucceſſion.
And in this poynt your fellow Catholiques
thought to caſt a Bone between his Majeſty and
his good ſubiects, but you are made to ſwallow
it your ſelues, and ſome whoſe throats were to
little it choaked. Nor may I here let paſſe vntouched
that Propheticall ſpeech of that worthy
Matriarke (Honourable amongſt women) Q. Elizabeth,
               
who when in the firſt yere of her raigne
ſhee was motioned to diſpoſe her ſelfe to Marriage;
that her ſubiects might enioy an happy iſſue
of her own body, like as Abraham when his
Sonne Iſaac ſayd Behold the fire and the wood, but
where is the Lambe for the burnt offring? Gen. 22. 7.
replyed, Deus providebit mi fili; So ſhee (Abrahams
daughter by fayth) likewiſe, Fideles mei ſubditi,
my louing and faithfull Subiects, although
you may juſtly fear what may be the euent of my
diſpoſednes to a Virgin life, yet be not depreſſed
with care that way, nor dejected with ſorrow,
but truſt in God, for Deus providebit, hee euen
God, euen that God who made Sarahs barren
wombe fruitfull, and he who, although I ſhould
marrie, can cauſe my wombe to be barren, He,
who had another meat to eat that his Diſciples knew
not of, Ioh. 4. 32. Euen he I ſay will provide you
a king of his owne chooſing, whome you do not
ſo much as dreame of, My Fathers Will muſt bee
done, Ioh. 4. 34. I the Lord will bee their God, and
my ſeruant David ſhall be the Prince amongſt them.
I the Lord haue ſpoken it, Ezech. 34. 24. Which
that your eyes haue, after 44. yeares after that,
ſeene accompliſhed, do ye and your vn-holy father
the Pope fret out your heart-ſtrings, (for ſo
God bleſſe, curſe ye and ſpare not) but let all good
and faithfull ſubiects ſay alwaies, The Lords name
be praiſed. Her own words (worthy to be written
in letters of gold) are recorded by Io. Stow in
his Annalls of Eng. in the beginning of her raign.
            
               
And to draw to an end with you, becauſe you
harpe ſo much vppon two ſtrings, to wit, breach
of promiſe and bloudſhedding;Mentioned in M. Fox his booke of Martyrs in the very beginning of Q. Maries Raigne. remember the
vowes that Queene Marie made to the Suffolke
men (by whoſe ayd ſhee was ſetled in her Kingdome)
and her violation thereof, although not
forced therto by any Conſpiracy of the Goſpellers
then, or any attempt (by perſons different to
her in religion) againſt her perſon after her right
once proclaimed; and withall forget not how
much bloud her breach of promiſe coſt, and hauing
waighed both in an equall ballance of an
jmpartiall and not prejudicate judgement, If
then you juſtly can, vrge both and ſpare not, but
in the meane ſpace view in the Table following
with the eyes of pittie the Catalogue of them,
whoſe bloud was by her and her bloudy Miniſters
ſo cruelly, only for religion, ſhed and exhauſted.
And ſo wiſhing that you would be, but little
hoping that you will be, good Subiects vnto
his Majeſtie; as I found you ſo I leaue you, voyd
of Religion, emptie of honeſty.
            
               By him that affoords you as good means to know me,
as your Martyrologist hath done me to know him. 
                     monogram incorporating the letters 
FRANCIS BTO (?and U)
                  
               
            
            
               
                  This knot doth ſhowe
                  (If thou would'ſt know)
                  The Authors name;
                  Then it vntye
                  (And him deſcrye)
                  Or your Prieſt blame.
                  For had he ſet his name to his
                  Then had I mine alſo to this.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ 
               A Briefe Collection of ſuch Martyrs
as within the (leſse than ſix yeares) Bloudy Raigne
of Queene Mary were burned in England for the
profeſsion of the Goſpell of Chriſt Ieſus.
            
               ¶ Oppoſed to the following Engliſh-Romiſh Martyrologe
of I. W. Priest.
               ❀ Drawen jnto ſuch an order as that at one viewe
you may behold the yeare of our L: God, the yeares
of the Princes Raignes both of England and Scotland,
the Names of thoſe that ſuffered, the day and moneth
wherein they ſuffered, and the places of their ſuffering.
               ¶ A Table very neceſſary for all Lawyers, Scriueners,
Clarkes, or whoſoeuer elſe deſire vpon any occaſion to know how
the double account of the yeares of the Raignes of the Princes
of England and Scotland, ſince the firſt yeare of Queene Marie,
vntill this preſent yeare of our Lord 1611. doe agree and
concurre. The like before not extant.
               ¶ But more eſpecially publiſhed to prooue, vnto
the vnderſtanding of the moſt ſimple, that Poperie is a falſe
Bloudy, Antichriſtian and Mercileſſe Religion, whoſe profeſſors
delight in ſhedding the Bloud of Gods Saints; and
on the contrary, that the Goſpell which we now in England
profeſſe is the Truth, and hath for truth beene confirmed
with the bloud of many more Martyrs (in leſſe then ſixe
yeares ſpace) then this Popiſh Prieſt in his Martyloge with
any ſhew of truth can (though falſely) pretend to haue
ſuffered in England for Religion in 50. yeares ſince.
            
            
               THE FIERIE TRYALL OF GODS SAINTS:
            
               ¶ Theſe are they who were killed for the word of God,
and for the Teſtimonie which they maintained,
               
                  Revel. 6. 9.
            
            
               
                  Who crye with a loud Voyce.
               
            
            
               ❀ How long Lord which art holy and true! doeſt thou
not judge and auenge our bloud on them that dwell
on the Earth. 
               
                  Reuel. 6. 10.
            
            
               ❀ And theſe liue and Raigne with Chriſt, and are Bleſſed
becauſe they Dyed in the Lord. 
               
                  Revel. 14. 13.
            
            
            
               
                  
                     The yere of our L. God begining by this account Mar. 25
                     Q. Mary her Rai. of Engl. beginning Iuly 6. 1553.
                     
                        Q. Mary her Raig. of Scotlād begining Decē. 18 1542.
                     The Names of ſuch Martyrs as were burned in Eng. in Q. Maries Raign, for the profeſsion of the Goſpell.
                     The day of the mō
                        neth wherin they ſuffered.
                     The places where they ſuffered.
                  
                  
                     1553.
                     Iuly 6. Mariae Angli. 1
                     Decē. 18 Mariae Scot. 12.
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1554.
                     Iuly 6. Mariae Angli. 2
                     Decē. 18. Mariae Scot. 13
                     Iohn Rogers, burned.
                     Feb. 4.
                     in Smithfield.
                  
                  
                     Lawrence Sanders, burned.
                     8.
                     at Coventry.
                  
                  
                     Io: Hooper Biſh: of Worceſt: and Glouceſt: bur.
                     9.
                     at Glouceſter
                  
                  
                     D. Taylor, burned.
                     eodem. die.
                     at Hadley.
                  
                  
                     Tho: Tomkins, burned.
                     Mar. 16.
                     in Smithfield.
                  
                  
                     1555.
                     Iuly 6. Mariae Angli. 3
                     Decē. 18 Mariae Scot. 14.
                     William Hunter, bur.
                     Mar. 26.
                     at Burntwod.
                  
                  
                     Tho: Higbed, bur.
                     eodem die.
                     at Horndon
                  
                  
                     Thomas Cawſton, bur.
                     eodem die.
                     at Rayly.
                  
                  
                     William Piggot, burned.
                     28
                     at Braintree.
                  
                  
                     Stephen Knight, bur.
                     eodem die.
                     at Mauldon.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Lawrence, bur.
                     29
                     at Colcheſter.
                  
                  
                     D. Farrar Biſh: of S. Dauids, bu.
                     30
                     at Carmarthē
                     
                  
                  
                     Rawlins White, bur.
                     eod. fe. tēp.
                     at Cardiffe
                  
                  
                     George Marſh, bur.
                     Aprill. 24
                     at Weſtcheſt.
                  
                  
                     William Flower, bur.
                     eodem die.
                     at Weſtminſt.
                  
                  
                     Io. Cardmaker, & Io. warne, b.
                     May 30.
                     in Smithfield.
                  
                  
                     Io. Simſon, bur.
                     June 10.
                     at Rochford,
                  
                  
                     Io. Ardley, bur.
                     June 10.
                     at Rayly.
                  
                  
                     Tho Hawkes, bur.
                     June 10.
                     at Coxhall.
                  
                  
                     Tho. Wats, bu.
                     June 10.
                     at Chelmsford
                  
                  
                     Iohn Tooly digged out of his graue, & bur.
                     eod fe. tēp.
                      
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Chamberlaine, bur.
                     June 14.
                     at Colcheſter.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Oſmund, bur.
                     15.
                     at Māniugtre.
                  
                  
                     William Bamford, bur.
                     15.
                     at Harwicke.
                  
                  
                     Io. Bradford, & Io Leafe, bur.
                     15.
                     in Smithfield.
                  
                  
                     Ioh. Bland, Io. Frankeſh. Nicholas Sheterden, & Hum Middleton, bur.
                     July. 12.
                     at Cāterbury.
                  
                  
                     Margerie Pullie; Nicho. Hall, & 
                      
                     at Tunbridge
                  
                  
                     Chriſto Waide, bur.
                     19.
                     at Rocheſter.
                  
                  
                     Dirrick Caruer, bur.
                     22.
                     at Lewis in S
                  
                  
                     Tho. Iueſon, bur.
                     eod. ſe. tēp.
                     at Chicheſter
                  
                  
                     
                        Iames Abbes, bur.
                     Auguſt. 2.
                     at Bury.
                  
                  
                     Ioh. Denly, bur.
                     8.
                     at Vxbridge.
                  
                  
                     George Tankervile, bur.
                     26.
                     at S. Albons.
                  
                  
                     Patrick Packhingham, bur.
                     28.
                     at Saffronwalden.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Newman, bur.
                     31.
                      
                  
                  
                     Rich: Hooke, bur.
                     eodē mēſe.
                     at Chicheſter.
                  
                  
                     Rich: Colliar, Wil: Cooker, Wil: Hooper, Henry Lawrence, Rich: Wright, and Wil: Store, bur.
                     eodē mēſe.
                     at Cāterbury
                  
                  
                     Ely: Warne, bur.
                      
                     at Stratf: Bow
                  
                  
                     Robert Smith, bur:
                      
                     at Vxbridge.
                  
                  
                     Steph: Harward, bur.
                     eodē mēſe.
                     at Stratf: Bow
                  
                  
                     Thomas Fuſt, bur:
                      
                     at Ware.
                  
                  
                     Wil: Haile, bur:
                      
                     at Barnet.
                  
                  
                     Wil: Allen, bur:
                      
                     at Walſigham
                  
                  
                     Roger Coo bur:
                      
                     at Yexford.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Cobbe, bur:
                     mēſe S
                           •
                        pt.
                     at Thet̄ord.
                  
                  
                     Rob: Streater, George Catmer, Anth: Burward, Geo: Bradbrige, and Iames Tutty, bur:
                     eodē meſe.
                     at Cāterbury
                  
                  
                     Io: Goreway, and Tho: Hayward, bur:
                     eodē mēſe.
                     at Lichfield.
                  
                  
                     Rob: Glouer, and Correlius Bongey, bur:
                     Septēb. 20
                     at Coventry.
                  
                  
                     Biſhop Ridley, and Biſh: Latimer, bur:
                     Octob. 16.
                     at Oxford.
                  
                  
                     Wil: Wolſey, and Robert Piggot, bur:
                     eodem die.
                     at Ely.
                  
                  
                     Iohn webb, George Roper, & Gre: Parke, bur:
                     Nouē. 30.
                     at Cāterbury.
                  
                  
                     Io: Philpot Archdeacon, bur:
                     Decē. 18.
                     in Smithfield.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Whittle, Barthelet Greene, Iohn Tudſon, Io. Went, Thomas Browne,
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        Iſabell Foſter, and Ioane Warren, bur:
                     Janu. 27
                     in Smithfield.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Lomas. Anne Abbright, Ioane Catmer, Ioane Soke, and Agnes Snoth, bur:
                     31.
                     at Cāterbury.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Cranmer Archbiſh. of Canter. bur:
                     March. 21
                     at Oxford.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Spicer, Wil: Cobberley, & Io: Maundrell, bur:
                     24.
                     at Salisbury.
                  
                  
                     Ioane Trunchfield, and Agnes Potten, bur:
                     eodē mēſe.
                     at Ipſwich.
                  
                  
                     1556.
                     Mariae. Ang. 4.
                     Mariae Scot. 15.
                     Iohn Harpoole, and Ioane Beech, bur:
                     Aprill. 1.
                     at Rocheſter.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Hulliar, bur:
                     2.
                     at Cambridge
                  
                  
                     Rob: Drakes, Wil: Tymmes, Rich: Spurge, Tho: Spurge, Io: Cauell, & George Ambroſe, bur:
                     24.
                     in Smithfield.
                  
                  
                     Chriſtopher Lyſer, Io: Mace, Iohn Spencer, Simō Ioyne, Rich: Nichols, and Iohn Hamund, bur:
                     28.
                     at Colcheſter
                  
                  
                     Thomas Drury, and Thomas Crooker, bur:
                     May 5.
                     at Glouceſter
                  
                  
                     Hughe Lauerhoke, and Ioh. ap Rice, bur:
                     15.
                     at Stratford-Bowe.
                  
                  
                     Katherine Hull, Ioane Horns, Eliz: Thackvell, and Margery. Ellys, bur:
                     16.
                     in Smithfield.
                  
                  
                     Tho: Spicer, Ioh: Denny, & Edmund Poole, bur:
                     21.
                     at Beckleys in Suffolke.
                  
                  
                     Tho: Harland, 
                           •
                        oh: Oſwald. Tho: Auington, and Tho: Read, bur:
                     Iune. 6.
                     at Lewis in Suffolke.
                  
                  
                     Tho: Whood, and Thomas Mylles, bur:
                     20.
                     at Lewis in Suffolke.
                  
                  
                     
                        Thomas Moore, bur:
                     June. 26.
                     at Leiceſter.
                  
                  
                     Henry Adlington, Lawrence Pernham, Henry Wye, Wil: Halliwell, Tho: Bowyer, George Searle, Edm Hurſt, Lyon Cawch, Ralph Iackſon, Iohn Derrifall, Iohn Rowth, Elyz: Pepper, and Agnes George, bur:
                     27.
                     at Stratford Bowe.
                  
                  
                     Roger Bernard, Rob: Lawſon and Adam Foſter, bur:
                     30.
                     at Bury.
                  
                  
                     Iulius Palmer, Io: Gwyn, & Thomas Askine, bur:
                     Iuly 16.
                     at Newbery.
                  
                  
                     Katherine Cawches, Guilian Gilbert, Perotine Maſſey, and the ſaid Maſſeys Infant breaking violently out of the Mothers wombe into the fire, was taken out once and preſently throwne againe into the fire, & bur.
                     18.
                     in the Iſle of Garnſey.
                  
                  
                     Tho▪ Dungale, Iohn Foremā, & Anne Try, bur.
                     eodem die.
                     at Greenſted.
                  
                  
                     Ioane Waſt, bur:
                     Auguſt. 1.
                     at Darby.
                  
                  
                     Edw: Sharpe, bur▪
                     
                     Septem. 8.
                     at Briſtow.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Hart, Tho: Rauenſdale; as alſo a Shoomaker and a Currier, bur:
                     24.
                     at Mayfield.
                  
                  
                     A Carpenter, bur:
                     25.
                     at Briſtow.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Horne, and a woman, bur:
                     27.
                     at Wooton-vnderhedge.
                  
                  
                     Wil: Waterer, Steph: Kempe, Wil: Hay, Tho: Hudſon, Wil: Lowicke, and William Prouting, bur:
                     Janua. 15
                     at Cāterbury.
                  
                  
                     Ni: Final & Mat: Brabridge, b:
                     16.
                     at Aſhford.
                  
                  
                     
                        Io: Philpot, & Thomas Stephens, bur:
                     in Janu.
                     at wye.
                  
                  
                     Martine Bucer, & Paulus Phagius bones digged vp and with their bookes bur: alſo Peter Martyrs wiues bones remooued and buried in a dunghill.
                     Febru. 16.
                     at Cābridge.
                  
                  
                     1557.
                     Mariae Ang. 5.
                     Mariae Scot. 16
                     Tho: Loſeby, Henry Ramſey, Tho: Thirtle, Marg: Hyde, & Agnes Stanly bur:
                     Aprill 12.
                     in Smithfield.
                  
                  
                     Rich: Sharpe, & Tho: Hale, bu:
                     May 7.
                     at Briſtow.
                  
                  
                     Steph: Gratwicke, Wil: Monāt, & one King, bur:
                     eodēmēſe.
                     in S. Georges field.
                  
                  
                     Ione Brabridge, Wal, Aplebly, & Petronell his wife, Edm: Allen, & Kath: his wife Ioa: Manings, & a blind maid, bu:
                     Iune 18.
                     at Maidſtone.
                  
                  
                     Ioane Fiſhcoke, Nich: White, Nich: Pardue, Barbara Finall, Brabridge his widdow, wilſons wife, & Alice Benden, bur:
                     19
                     at Cāterbury.
                  
                  
                     Rich: Woodmā, George Stephēs, Wil: Mainard, Alex: Hoſmā, Thomaſine Wood, Mar: Morris, Iames Morris, Denis Burgis, Aſhdōs wife & Groues wife, bu:
                     22.
                     at Lewys in Suſſex.
                  
                  
                     Simō Myller, & Elyzab: Cooper, bu:
                     July 13.
                     at Norwich.
                  
                  
                     Wil: Bongor, Wil: Purcas, Th: Benold, Agnes Siluerſide, alias Smith, Helene Euring, Elyzab: Folkes, Wil: Mount, Alice his wife; Roſe Allyn,
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        and Ioh: Iohnſon, bur:
                     August. 2.
                     at Colcheſter.
                  
                  
                     Rich: Craſhfield bur:
                     5.
                     at Norwich
                  
                  
                     A woman, and one named Fryar, bur:
                     20.
                     at Rocheſter.
                  
                  
                     Tho: Benyon, bur:
                     27.
                     at Briſtow.
                  
                  
                     Ralfe Allerton, Iames Auſtoo, Marge: Auſtoo, and Rich: Rooth, bur:
                     Septem. 17
                     at Iſlington.
                  
                  
                     Agnes Bongor, & Margaret Thurſton, bur:
                     eodem die.
                     at Colcheſter
                  
                  
                     Ioyce Lewis, bur:
                     eodē mēſe.
                     at Litchfield.
                  
                  
                     Iohn▪ Kurd, bur:
                     20.
                     at Northamp.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Noyes, bur:
                     eodē mēſe.
                     at Layfield
                  
                  
                     Cycely Ormes, bur:
                     23.
                     at Norwich.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Halingdale, Wil: Sparrow, & Rih: Gibſon, bur:
                     Nouem. 18
                     at Colcheſter.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Rough, & Margery Mearing, bur:
                     Decem. 22
                     in Smithfield.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Warner, Tho: Athoth, Io: Mylles, Nich: Holden, Iohn Aſhdon, & Tho: Spurdance, bur.
                     eodem An.
                     in Chicheſter Dioceſſe.
                  
                  
                     1558.
                     Mariae Ang. 6.
                     Mariae Scot. 17.
                     Hugh Fox, Iohn deueniſh, & Cuthbert Simſon, bur:
                     March. 28
                     in Smithfield.
                  
                  
                     Wil: Nicholne, bur:
                     Aprill. 9.
                     at Hereford.
                  
                  
                     Wil: Seaman, Thomas Carman, & Tho: Hudſon, bur:
                     May. 19
                     at Norwich.
                  
                  
                     Wil: Harris, Richard Day, & Chriſtian George, bur:
                     26.
                     at Colcheſter
                  
                  
                     Henry Pond, Raynold Eaſtland, Robert Southam, Mat: Richardby, & Roger Holland, bur:
                     June 27.
                     in Smithfield.
                  
                  
                     Richard Yeoman, bur:
                     July 10
                     at Norwich.
                  
                  
                     Robert Mylles, Steph: Cottō, Robert Dynes, Ste: Wight,
                  
                  
                     
                        Iohn Slade, & Wil: Pikes, bur:
                     Iuly. 14.
                     at Brainford.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Cooke, Robert Myles, Alex: Lane, & Iames Aſhley, bur:
                     eodē mēſe.
                     at Bury.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Bembridge, bur:
                     eodē mēſe.
                     in Wincheſter Dioceſſe.
                  
                  
                     Alex: Gowch, and Alice Driuer, bur:
                     Nouē. 4.
                     at Ipſwich.
                  
                  
                     Phil: Humfrey, Iohn David, Hen: Dauid, and a woman named Preeſt, bur:
                     eodē mēſe.
                     at Exceter.
                  
                  
                     This yere the 17. of Nouem: dyed Q. Marie.
                     
                     Iohn Corneford, Chriſtopher Browne, Io: Herſt, Alice, Snoth, and Kathe: Knight, (alias Tynley) being (as ſayth M. Fox) the laſt that ſuffered in Queene Maries Raigne, were burned.
                     10.
                     at Cāterbury
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                     The whole number of Martyrs burned in 5. yeres of Qu. Maries Raigne, by this account is about 260.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            A Beadroll of all ſuch traiterous Prieſts,
Ieſuits, and Popiſh Recuſants, as by I. W. Priest in
his Engliſh Martyrologe are by him recorded for Martyrs
in this Kingdome, ſince the firſt yeare of Queene
Elizabeth vntill the latter end of the ſixt yeare of
King Iames our now Soueraigne Lord his Raigne.
            
               ❀ Drawen jnto ſuch an order as that at one viewe
you may behold the yeare of our L: God, the yeares
of the Princes Raignes both of England and Scotland,
the Names of thoſe that ſuffered, the day and moneth
wherein they ſuffered, and the places of their ſuffering.
               ¶ A Table very neceſſary for all Lawyers, Scriueners,
Clarkes, or whoſoeuer elſe deſire vpon any occaſion to know how
the double account of the yeares of the Raignes of the Princes
of England and Scotland, ſince the firſt yeare of Queene Marie,
vntill this preſent yeare of our Lord 1611. doe agree and
concurre. The like before not extant.
               ¶ But more eſpecially publiſhed to prooue, vnto
the vnderſtanding of the moſt ſimple, that Poperie is a falſe
Bloudy, Antichriſtian and Mercileſſe Religion, whoſe profeſſors
delight in ſhedding the Bloud of Gods Saints; and
on the contrary, that the Goſpell which we now in England
profeſſe is the Truth, and hath for truth beene confirmed
with the bloud of many more Martyrs (in leſſe then ſixe
yeares ſpace) then this Popiſh Prieſt in his Martyloge with
any ſhew of truth can (though falſely) pretend to haue
ſuffered in England for Religion in 50. yeares ſince.
            
            
               THE DETESTABLE ENDS OF POPISH TRAYTORS:
            
               ¶ Theſe are thoſe vncleane Spirits, who like Frogges
came out of the mouth of that Dragon, and out of the mouth
of that Beaſt, and out of the mouth of that falſe Prophet.
               
                  Revel. 13. 16.
            
            
               ¶ Whoſe Damnation is iuſt.
               
                  Rom. 3. 8.
            
            
               
            
            
               ❀ For they are the Spirits of Deuils, working Myracles,
to go vnto the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole
world, togather them to the Battle of that great Day
of God Almighty.
               
                  Reuel. 16. 14.
            
            
               ❀ And theſe worſhipped the beaſt.
               
                  Revel. 13. 4▪
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  
                     The yere of our L. God beginning by this account Mar. 25.
                     Qu Elizab. her Raig. of Eng: beginning No. 17. 1558.
                     
                        Q. Mary her Raig. of Scotlād begining Decē. 18. 1542.
                     The Names of Traitors as were executed in England in Queene Elizabeths Raigne.
                     The days of the moneth wherein they were executed.
                     The places where they were executed.
                  
                  
                      
                     Nouēb. 17. Eliz. Angl. 1.
                      
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1559.
                     Elizab. Angl. 2.
                     Mariae Scot. 18.
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1560.
                     Elizab. Angl. 3.
                     Mariae Scot. 19
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1561.
                     Elizab: Ang. 4.
                     Mariae Scot. 20
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1562.
                     Elizab. Ang. 5.
                     Mariae Scot. 21
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1563.
                     Elizab. Ang. 6.
                     Mariae Scot. 22.
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1564.
                     Elizab. Ang. 7.
                     Mariae Scot. 23
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1565.
                     Elizab. Ang. 8
                     Mariae Scot. 24. This yere Iuly 28. H. L. Darly was proclaimed Ki. and on the morrow after hee married the Qu. 
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1566.
                     Elizab. Angl. 9.
                     
                        Mariae S
                           •
                        ot. 25. In this yeare of our L. God Iune 19 was our (now) Kings Maieſty Borne, & Chriſtenned the 18. day of Decem. following. The 10 of Febr. following the K. was murthered by traitors
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        1567.
                     Elyzab. Ang. 10
                     This yeare in the moneth of Iuly Q. Mary being priſoner in Lochleui
                              •
                           e willingly reſigned her Crown vnto
                      
                      
                      
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     The yere of our L God beginning by this account Mar. 25
                     Qu Elizab. her Raig. of Eng: beginning No. 17. 1558.
                     K. Iames his Raig. of Scot: begining Iuly 29. 1567.
                     The Names of ſuch Traytors as were executed in England in Q. Elizabeths Raigne.
                     The dayes of the moneth in which they were executed.
                     The places where they were executed.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     
                        James the yōg Prince, our now Soueraigne Lord & King, he was thē but two yeares old.
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     K. Iames his Rai. of Scot. being the 6. King of that name.
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                      
                      
                     Iuly 29 Iacobi. Sexti Scoto. 1.
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1568.
                     Elyzab. Ang. 11
                     Iacob. Scoto. 2.
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1569.
                     Elyzab. Ang. 12
                     Jacob. Scoto. 3.
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1570.
                     Elizab. Ang. 13
                     Jacob. Scoto. 4.
                     Iohn Felton.
                     Auguſt. 8.
                     in Paules Church yard.
                  
                  
                     1571.
                     Elyzab. Ang 14
                     Jacob. Scoto. 5.
                     Iohn Story.
                     June 1.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     1572.
                     Elyzab. Ang. 15
                     Jacob. Scoto. 6.
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        1573.
                     Elyz: 16
                     Iacob: 7.
                     Thomas Woodhouſe.
                     June 19.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     1574.
                     Elyz: 17
                     Iacob. 8.
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1575.
                     Eliz: 18
                     Iacob: 9.
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1576.
                     Elyz: 19
                     Iaco: 10
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1577.
                     Elizab: Ang: 20
                     Iacob: Scot: 11
                     Cuthbert Mayne.
                     Nouem: 29
                     at Launſton.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Nelſon.
                     Feb. 3.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     1578.
                     Elyzab: Ang: 21
                     Jacob: Scot: 12
                     Thomas Sherwood,
                     Febru. 7.
                      
                  
                  
                     1579.
                     Elyzab: Ang: 22
                     Iacob: Scot, 13
                     Anno. 1577. in the moneth of Ianuary, was publiſhed a Proclamation againſt Seminary Prieſts and Ieſuits, and for calling home the Queenes ſubie&s from forraigne Seminaries, where they remained vnder colour of ſtudie.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1580.
                     Elyzab: Ang: 23
                     Iacob: Scot: 14
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1581.
                     Elyzab: Ang: 24
                     Iacob: Scot: 15
                     Euerard Hanſe.
                     July 31.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     Edmund Campion. Alexander Bryant. Ralphe Sherwyn.
                     Decem. 1
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     1582.
                     Elyzab: Ang: 25
                     Iacob: Scot: 16
                     Iohn Paine.
                     Aprill 2.
                     at Chelmsford
                  
                  
                     Thomas Ford. Iohn Shert. Robert Iohnſon.
                     May. 28.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Cottam. William Filby. Luke Kirby. Lawrence Iohnſon.
                     May 30
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     William Lacy. Richard Kirkman.
                     August. 22
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     Iames Tompſon.
                     in Nouem:
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     1583.
                     Elyzab: Ang: 26
                     Iacob: Scot: 17
                     Richard Thirkhill.
                     May. 29
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     William Hart.
                      
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     Iames Laburne.
                      
                     at Lancaſter.
                  
                  
                     William Carter.
                     Janu: 11.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     
                        George Haddocke, Io: Mundine, Iames Fen, Thomas Emerford, & Iohn Nutter.
                     Feb. 12.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     1584.
                     Elyzab: Ang: 27
                     Jacob. Scot. 18
                     Iames Bele. Iohn Finch.
                     Aprill 20.
                     at Lancaſter
                  
                  
                     Richard White.
                     Octo. 18.
                     at Wrixam.
                  
                  
                      
                      
                      
                     This yeare alſo were 21. Ieſuits and Seminary Prieſts baniſhed the Realme, Ianu: 21.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1585.
                     Elyzab: Ang. 28
                     Jacob. Scot. 19
                     Thomas Aufield. Thomas Webley.
                     July 6.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     Hugh Taylor. Marmaduke Bowes:
                      
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     Margaret Clitherow.
                     in March.
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     N. Hamelton. Rob: Bicardine.
                      
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     Edward Tranſam. Nich: Woodfine.
                     Janu. 21
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     This yeare alſo were 32. Prieſts & Ieſuits baniſhed the Realme, Sep. 19.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1586.
                     Elyzab: Ang: 29
                     Jacob. Scot: 20.
                     Richard Sergeant. William Tompſon.
                     Aprill 20.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Adams. Iohn Low. Rob: Debdale Rob: Anderton.
                     Octo. 8.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     William Marſden.
                      
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     Francis Ingleby.
                      
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     Stephen Rowſam.
                      
                     at Glouceſter
                  
                  
                     John Finglow.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1587.
                     Elyzab: Ang: 30
                     Jacob. Scot: 21.
                     Thomas Pilchard.
                     in March.
                     at Dorceſter.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Sands.
                      
                     at Glouceſter
                  
                  
                     Iohn Hamly.
                      
                     at Chard.
                  
                  
                     Alexander Crowe.
                      
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     Robert Sutton.
                      
                     at Stafford.
                  
                  
                     
                        Edmund Sykes.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     Gabriell Thimbleby.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     George Dowglas.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1588.
                     Elyzab: Ang: 31
                     Iacob. Scot: 22
                     William Deane. Henry Webley.
                     Auguſt. 28.
                     at Myle-endgreene.
                  
                  
                     William Gunter.
                     eodem die.
                     at the Theat:
                  
                  
                     Robert Morton. Hugh More.
                     eodem die.
                     at Lincolns-Inne Fields.
                  
                  
                     Tho: Acton, alias Holford.
                     eodem die.
                     at Clarkēwel
                  
                  
                     Richard Clarkſon. Thomas Felton. 
                     eodem die.
                     at Hownſlow
                  
                  
                     Rich: Leigh, Edward Shelley, Hugh Morgan, Rich: Flower, Robert Martyn, Iohn Rocke, & Margaret Wade.
                     Aug. 30.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     Edward Iames. Ralph Crochet.
                     Octob. 1.
                     at Chicheſter.
                  
                  
                     Robert Wilcockes. Edward Campion. Chriſto: Buxton. Rob: Widmerpoole.
                     eodem die.
                     at Cāterbury.
                  
                  
                     William Wigges.
                     eodem die.
                     at Kingſton.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Robinſon.
                     eodem die.
                     at Iſpwich.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Weldon.
                     October 5.
                     at Milēdgreen
                  
                  
                     William Hartley. Rich: Williams.
                     eodem die.
                     at Halliwell.
                  
                  
                     Robert Sutton.
                     eodem die.
                     at Clarkēwel.
                  
                  
                     William Spencer.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     Edward Burden.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     Iohn Hewyt.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     Rob: Ludham. Richard Simpſon. Nicholas Garlicke.
                      
                     at Darby.
                  
                  
                     William Lampley.
                      
                     at Glouceſter
                  
                  
                     1589.
                     Elyzab: Ang: 32
                     Iacob. Scot. 23
                     George Nicols, Rich: Yaxley, Tho: Belſon, Hū: vp-Richard.
                     July 5.
                     at Oxford.
                  
                  
                     
                        Iohn Annas.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     Robert Dalby.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     Chriſtopher Bales.
                     March. 4.
                     in Fleetſtreet.
                  
                  
                     Alexander Blake.
                     eodem d
                           •
                        e.
                     in Gr
                           ••
                        n-lane
                  
                  
                     Nicholas Horner.
                     eodem d
                           •
                        e.
                     in Smithfield.
                  
                  
                     1590.
                     Elyzab: Ang. 33
                     Jacob. Scot. 24.
                     Myles Gerrard. Francis Dickinſon.
                     Aprill. 30.
                     at Rocheſter.
                  
                  
                     Anthony Myddleton.
                     M
                           •
                        y. 6.
                     at Clarkēwel
                  
                  
                     Edward Iones.
                     May 6.
                     in Fleetſtreet.
                  
                  
                     1591.
                     Elyzab. Ang. 34
                     Jacob. Scot. 25
                     Edmund Gennings.
                     Decem. 10
                     in Grays Inn Fields.
                  
                  
                     Swithin Welles.
                  
                  
                     Euſtach White.
                     Decem. 10
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     Polydor Plaſden.
                  
                  
                     Bryan Lacy.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Maſon.
                  
                  
                     Sidney Hodgſon.
                  
                  
                     Momfort Scot.
                     Iuly. 2.
                     in Fleetſtreet.
                  
                  
                     George Biſley.
                  
                  
                     William Dickinſon.
                     July. 7.
                     at Wincheſter
                  
                  
                     Ralph Milner.
                  
                  
                     Edmund Ducke.
                      
                     at Durham.
                  
                  
                     Rich: Holiday.
                      
                  
                  
                     Ioh: Hagge.
                      
                  
                  
                     Rich: Hill.
                      
                  
                  
                     William Pykes.
                      
                     at Dorceſter.
                  
                  
                     William Partiſon.
                     Iann. 22.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     Tho: Portmore.
                     Feb. 21.
                     in Paules Church yard.
                  
                  
                     This yeare alſo in the moneth of Octob: was publiſhed a Proclamation againſt Prieſts and Ieſuits.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1592.
                     Elyz. 35
                     Iaco. 26.
                     Roger Aſhton.
                     June. 23.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     1593.
                     Elyzab. Ang 36
                     Jacob. Scot. 27.
                     Iames Burden.
                     March 25
                     at Wincheſter.
                  
                  
                     Anthony Page.
                     Aprill 30
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     Ioſeph Lampton.
                     Iane. 23.
                     at Newcaſtle.
                  
                  
                     William Dauis.
                     in Sep
                           •
                        em.
                     at Beumaris.
                  
                  
                     
                        Edward Waterſon.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     William Harrington.
                     Feb. 18.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     1594.
                     Elyzab: Ang: 37
                     Iacob. Scot. 28
                     Iohn Cornelius Mohum.
                     July 4.
                     at Dorceſter.
                  
                  
                     Tho: Boſgraue
                  
                  
                     Patricke Samon.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Carey.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Ingram.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     Thomas Boaſt.
                      
                     at Newcaſtle.
                  
                  
                     Iames Oldbaſton.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     Robert Southwell.
                     March 3.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     1595.
                     Elzyab. Ang. 38
                     Jacob.Scot. 29
                     Henry Walpole.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     Alexander Rawiins.
                     Aprill 
                           •
                        7.
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     George Errington.
                      
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     William Knight.
                      
                  
                  
                     William Gibſon.
                      
                  
                  
                     Henry Abbots.
                      
                  
                  
                     William Freeman.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1596.
                     Elizab Ang. 3
                           •
                        .
                     Iacob.S
                           •
                        ot. 30
                     N: Auleby.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     N: Thorpe.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1597.
                     Elyz: 40
                     Iaco. 31
                     Iohn Buckley, alias Iones.
                     Iuly. 12.
                     at S. Th: Wa:
                  
                  
                     1598.
                     Elizab. Ang. 
                           •
                        1
                     Iacob. Scot. 32
                     Thomas Snow.
                      
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     Chriſtoph: Robinſon
                      
                  
                  
                     Rich. Horner.
                      
                  
                  
                     N: Grimſton
                      
                  
                  
                     N: Britton.
                      
                  
                  
                     1599.
                     Elyz: 42
                     Iaco: 33.
                     Math. Hayes.
                      
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     1600.
                     Elizab. Ang. 
                           •
                        3
                     Jacob Scot. 34.
                     Chriſtopher Wharton, with a nameleſſe Woman.
                     May. 18.
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Rigby.
                     July 21
                     at S: Th Wa:
                  
                  
                     Robert Nutter.
                     in June.
                     at Lancaſter
                  
                  
                     Edward Thwinge.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Sprot
                     in Iuly.
                     at Lincolne.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Hunt.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Palaſer.
                     eode mēſe.
                     at Durham.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Norton.
                  
                  
                     N: Talbot.
                  
                  
                     
                        Iohn Pibuſh.
                     Febr. 11.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     Roger Filcocke
                     Feb. 
                           •
                        7.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     Marke Barkworth.
                  
                  
                     Anne Lyue.
                  
                  
                     1601.
                     Elyzab: Ang: 44
                     Iacob. Scot: 35
                     Robert Middleton.
                      
                     at Lancaſter.
                  
                  
                     Thurſtan Hunt.
                      
                  
                  
                     1602.
                     Elyzab: Ang: 45
                     Iacob. Scot. 36
                     Francis Page.
                     Aprill 29
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Tichborne.
                  
                  
                     Robert Watkinſon
                  
                  
                     Iames Ducket.
                  
                  
                     N: Harriſon.
                     in Aprill.
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     N: Bates
                  
                  
                     William Richardſon.
                     Feb. 27.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                      
                     Mar: 24 being the laſt day of the yere 1602 by the account of Eng: dyed Queene Elizab.
                     
                      
                     The whole number of ſuch Prieſts, Ieſuits, and Recuſants, as were executed in all the time of Queene Elizabeths Raigne, being 44. yeares and 4. moneths, according to the Martyrologiſts owne account, (as he falſely pretends for religion) amounts but to 180.
                      
                      
                  
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  
                     The yere of our L. God beginning by this account. Mar. 25
                     K. Iames his Rai: of Engl: beginning Mar: 24 16
                           •
                        2.
                     K. Iames his Rai. of Scot. begining Iuly. 29. 15
                           •
                        7.
                     The Names of ſuch Traytors as were executed in England in K. Iames his Raigne.
                     The day of the moneth in which 
                           •
                        hey were exe
                        
                           •
                        uted.
                     The places where they were executed.
                  
                  
                      
                     1602. Mar: 24 Iacob: Ang: 1.
                      
                     KING IAMES HIS Raigne of England.
                     
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1603.
                     Iacob: Ang: 2.
                     Iacob: Scot. 37 Stowe.
                     William Watſon.
                     Nouem: 29
                     at Wincheſter
                  
                  
                     William Clarke.
                  
                  
                     This yere alſo was publiſhed a Proclamation againſt Prieſts and Ieſui
                           •
                        s, that they ſhould depart the Land.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1604.
                     Iacob. Ang. 3.
                     Iacob: Scot: 38
                     Lawrence Bayly.
                     in March.
                     at Lancaſter.
                  
                  
                     Iohn Shuker.
                     in August.
                     at Warwicke.
                  
                  
                     Robert Griffold.
                  
                  
                     1605.
                     Iacob: 4.
                     Iaco: 39.
                     Thomas Wilborne.
                      
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     1606.
                     Iacob: Ang 5
                     Iacob: Scot: 40
                     Edward Oldcorne.
                     Aprill 7.
                     at Worceſter. in Paules
                  
                  
                     Ralph Aſhley.
                  
                  
                     Henry Garnet.
                     May 3.
                     Churchyard.
                  
                  
                     Robert Drury.
                     Febru. 26.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     This yeare alſo was publiſhed a Proclamation that all Ieſuites and Seminary Prieſts, ſhould depart the Land.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1607.
                     Iacob: 6.
                     Iaco. 41
                     Mathew Flathers.
                     March 21
                     at Yorke.
                  
                  
                     1608.
                     Iacobi. Ang. 7.
                     Jacob: Scot: 42
                     George Germs.
                     Aprill 11
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     Thomas Garnet.
                     June 23.
                     at Tyburne.
                  
                  
                     1609.
                     Iaco: 8.
                     Ia
                           •
                        o: 43
                     And thus endeth J: VV: Prieſt the Pſeudo-Martyrologiſt, by whole account there haue ſuffered ſince the firſt yeare of King James, of theſe Popiſh Traytors (as he falſely pretends for Religion) to the number of 13.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1610.
                     Iaco. 9:
                     Iaco: 44.
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1611.
                      
                     Iaco: 45
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1612.
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1613.
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1614.
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     1615.
                      
                      
                      
                      
                      
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  The Popes charge to his Bratts.
                  Eſtote proditores. Goe kill your Prince.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            A POST-SCRIPT
TO THE WEL AFFECTED
READER.
            
               IT may bee that ſome of Antichriſtes
broode will here crye out with open
mouthes and ſay, 
                  •
               ut, there are many
of our Catholique Martyrs, who haue
ſuffered perſecution for their conſciences
that are not here mentioned.
Here is a Collectiō indeed, to ſet down
ſome, and leaue out the reſt: where are thoſe Earles of
Northumberland and Weſtmerland with their followers?
where theBriſtow in his motiues 15. Chap. 73 calleth theſe Martyrs. Aboue 1000 of thes ſaythe lay Catholiques in their Suplicatiō to the Kings Maieſtie 1604. abandoned their liuīgs rather then they would chāge their religiō. Alſo the three cōuerſions of England, part the firſt, page 264. Biſhops, Deanes, Archdeacons, Canons, and
other Eccleſiaſtical perſons? where Doctor Lopez, Party?
where many of the Gentry, as Abington, Babington,
Tichborne, Sauadge and their fellowes? and of late where
the Lords Cobham and Gray? where Digbie, Percy, Cateſbie,
Treſham, Rookewood, the Winters, Litletons & their
followers, With diuers others both of the Nobilitie and
Gentrie, who for their conſciences in ſeeking to aduance
the (By them ſo falſely called) Catholique religion, haue
ſuffered Martyrdome, ſome by death, ſome by impriſonment,
ſome by baniſhment, ſome by loſſe of liuings, ſome
one way, ſome another? So condemning theſe collections
with the author thereof to the fire, as ſometimes their
forefathers did the Goſpells confeſſors before regiſtred.
            
            
                To ſtoppe whoſe mouthes let this ſuffice: Firſt, that I neither
propounded to my ſelfe, nor promiſed to them, to ſet
downe herein the names of any other in Queene Mary
her Raigne, then onely of ſuch as meerely for their conſciences
in profeſſing CHRISTS Goſpell were in thoſe
dayes with fire and fagot martyred and burned, not at
all medling with ſuch as either were attainted or executed
for treaſons and rebellions, either againſt her perſon, ſtate
or dignitie, whom no good Chriſtians wil ſeeke to excuſe,
in ſo doing, nor of any other in Q. Elizab. or King Iames
their raignes, thē only of ſuch SeminaryThree conuerſions page 265. Of Prieſts aboue 100. haue Sealed the confeſſion of their faith with blood within 40. yeeres. Prieſts Ieſuits &
Recuſants, as I find recorded by their martyrologiſt I. W.
Prieſts whom many ſimple Papiſts being ſeduced by their
falſe teachers giue out to haue ſuffered onely for Religion
and their conſciences, although that in all of theſe Prieſts
and Ieſuites, men of iudgement may eaſily diſcerne the
contrarie, and as for many of them, the moſt ſimple cannot
be ignorant that knoweth any thing, nor the moſt
ſhameleſſe denie, that is not paſt all ſhame, that they were
executed for plotting and contriuing, for knowledge of,
and concealing moſt barbarous & the like before vnheard
of treaſons, whereas true martyrdome indeede conſiſteth
ferendo & patiendo,
               A ſmall nū
                  ber in compariſon of 278. martyrs in leſſe then ſixe yeeres. 
               non in agendo, in bearing patiently, and
ſuffering afflictions for CHRISTS cauſe, but not in
plotting and attempting the liues and ouerthrowes of
Kings and Countries, their lawfull and Liege Soueraignes
and natiue (though of them hated) habitations and
byrth-place: witneſſe for proofe hereof, 1. Ballard, 2.
Watſon, 3. Clarke, 4. Garnet the Ieſuites Prouinciall, 5.
Hall with others, the firſt of theſe was a chiefe actor
and plotter▪ in Abingtons and Babingtons Conſpiracie.
Anno 1586. the ſecond & third in Cobhams and Grayes,
but more properly (for they are the firſt mouers alwaies)
in Watſons and Clarkes their owne conſpiracie, Anno,

1603. The fourth and fift in the Gunpouder treaſon,
which onely to name is instar omnium the moſt damnable
bloodie plot that euer was contriued (and I hope in time
will proue as their owne Greenwell propheſied, the very
breakneck of all Papiſts that will not bee recalled) Anno,
1605. although I greatly feare that there are many in
this Kingdome, who, now GOD in his mercie hath defeated
them, ſeeme to condemne the plotte, but yet
would with all their hearts haue wiſhed that it had taken
effect, Talia etenim nunquam probata antequàm acta,
for ſuch attempts as theſe (to wit the Gunpouder and others
treaſons,) are neuer liked of, vnleſſe they bee acted,
but if performed, then applauded with
                  Vide Pope Sixtus the 5. his oration vpō the death and murther of Henry the 3. French King, by a Fryar. Panegyricke
Orations.
            Well, that Papiſtes haue found ſo much mercie at
the Kinges handes (notwithſtanding this their more
then heatheniſh crueltie) as they haue, let them bleſſe
God and thanke his Maieſtie, and I pray God they may
make a good vſe thereof, but let vs that are his faithfull
ſubiects, reioyce in God for his and our owne deliuerance
from ſo eminent danger, aſcribing all glorie and thankfulneſſe
to God therefore, and vnſpeakeable mildnes and
forbearance in our King, whom no barbarous attempted
cruelties, (for then the Gunpouder treaſon neuer was
any more horrid, more helliſh) can prouoke vnto rigor,
hee is ſo loath to bee of his very enemies accounted cruell.
Ne miſericordia in inimicos fit crudelitas in ſe ſuoſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                But Lord grant thou Ne incidat in Scillam cupiens vitare
Carybdim, that his mercy towards his foes proue not crueltie
to himſelfe, his Friends and good ſubiects. For this
I may iuſtly ſay, that for a mercifull King in forgiuing
his enemies, whom yet hee hath power to deſtroy,
England may boaſt her ſelfe aboue all the nations of the
world.
            
                Secondly if Papiſts will haue, beſides theſe Prieſtes, 

Ieſuits & Recuſants by their Pſeudomartyrologiſt noted,
all other traitors and rebels to bee likewiſe enrolled, let
them name as many as they can, and regiſter them
themſelues, and take them into their number, for well
I knowe that (vnto honeſt men) the more they name,
the more infamous will they bee, becauſe their horrible
and damnable treaſons are vnto all good men (to whom
onely I intend this Poſt-ſcript) ſo odious, and vnto the
world ſo apparant and palpable, that their names cannot
but with diſgrace bee recorded, whereas none, who were
in Queene, Mary her raigne burned, did ſuffer for any
other cauſe (as the Papiſts themſelues cannot deny, but
that they falſely call vs heretiques) but onely for matter
of religion; nor can they bee iuſtly accuſed of any to
haue attempted againſt the life of their then Soueraigne
Lady Queene Mary, or to haue denied her for their lawfull
Queene, but ſo (Non obſtante religionis diſparitate, although
they differed in religion) to haue acknowledged
her, ſo to haue prayed for her, in all humilitie ſubmitting
their neckes, as good ſubiects, to the yoake of temporall
obedience to her Maieſtie, and like true Chriſtian
martyrs, their bodies to the fire, for the onely profeſſion
of the Goſpel of Chriſt Ieſus, whom in their bodies,
goods and ſpirits they ſerued.
            
                Thirdly, as I take not vpon mee to ſet downe preciſely
the name of euery particular Prieſt, Ieſuite, and Recuſant,
that ſuffered in Queene Elizabeths, and King
Iames their raignes, nor yet the iuſt number of thoſe
bleſſed Martyrs that were burned in Queene Mary her
raigne, but ſo many onely of both ſortes as are for
them in I. W. Prieſt, his EngliſhPrinted in Anno 1608. as hee ſaith, Permiſſu ſuperiorum. Martyrologe, and
for vs by that worthy man Maiſter Iohn Fox in his
booke of Martyres recorded: So I am moſt certainely
aſſured, that if I ſhould nominate all thoſe perſons who

in leſſe then ſixe yeeres raigne of Queene Mary were
Vide Fox his booke of Martyres in Queen Maries raigne. famiſhed for want of meate, impriſoned, dyed in priſon,
forced to flye, whipped, tortured and tormented
onely for matter of religion, and ſome of theſe by the
very handes of bloodie Biſhoppe Bonner himſelfe, they
would farre exceede the number of all ſuch Prieſtes and
Ieſuites, as the Papiſtes can produce to haue endured in
England any kinde of torture or corporall puniſhment
whatſoeuer for religion, (as they falſely pretend) or otherwiſe
for theſe fiftie and odde yeeres ſince.
            
                Fourthly, and laſtly, no Prieſtes areVide the Lord Burleigh late Lord Treaſurer his booke intituled, Execution of Iuſtice for treaſon and not for Religion. condemned 
ſimply for being Prieſts, but if being borne his Maieſties
ſubiects, they ſhall take that order vppon them by
authoritie deriued from the Sea of Rome, and afterwards
ſhall returne into his Maieſties KingdomesEarle of Northampton in his prīted ſpeech at Garnets arraignemēt in the fourth page of the letter GG. to
withdrawe and alienate the hearts of his ſubiectes, (for
ſo they all doe) from their due allegeance.) And for this
lawe there is great reaſon. For as Queene Elizabeth was
formerly (nominatim) by the Pope Excommunicated,
and therevpon by the ſeducing of Prieſtes and Ieſuites,
(the firebrands of Chriſtendome) expoſed both in her
perſon and ſtate to all daungers and treaſonable practiſes
that could by villaines bee deuiſed, and her Kingdomes
as the Papiſts hold,Their refuſall of the Oath of allegeance proueth what they hold in this point, and the Popes gift of Ireland to the King of Spaine, mentioned by Azorius the Ieſuite in his inſtitut. moral. confirmeth it. ſubiect to the Popes diſpoſing,
ſo likewiſe the Kings Maieſtie although hee bee
not for ought I knowe, by the Pope, by name excommunicated
as yet, as Queene Elizabeth was, Yet by
the generall excommunication whereby all Heretickes
(for ſuch a one they hold his Maieſtie to bee directly) are
anathematized, hee ſtandes at this inſtant excommunicated.
            
               
And therefore Papiſts holding opinions, as they doe,
that it isVide Faux his confeſſion with others mentioned in the afore quoted page by the Earle of Northāpton. Confer al, therewith Cat
                     •
                  sbies anſwere to Garnet in the laſt page of R. and alſo in the laſt page of T. of the former booke. his words are; If it were lawfull not to admitte of the Kings Maieſty at firſt warranted by the Popes Breeues then was it alſo lawfull to caſt him out.
                lawfull for ſubiects to kill their Soueraignes,
and take armes againſt them, ſo by the Pope excommunicated,
holding him no longer to bee their King
by lawfull right of ruling, then the Pope pleaſeth; which
is onely thus qualified, Rebus ſic ſtantibus; cùm deerunt
vires, as long as they needes muſt, and that they dare
doe no otherwiſe for feare of their neckes. Is it not then
great reaſon (to you that in CHRIST haue learned to
obey I ſpeake) that his maieſtie ſhould as neere as hee
can, preuent ſuch daungers to himſelfe and his State? But
here it may bee the Prieſts will reply and ſay: Wee are
bound by oath, and therefore in conſcience, to goe whether ſoeuer
thoſe of whom wee receiue our Prieſtly Orders, ſhall enioyne
vs.
            
            But firſt anſwere me; who enforced you thereto, either
to leaue your country or to take that order? Did Queene
Elizabeth? doth King Iames? doe you not that of your
owne voluntarie wils contrarie to your own known countrie
lawes.
            Secondly, whether that ſingle (ſinnefull I may ſay)
Oath bee of ſufficient authoritie to diſſolue that treble
bond of allegeance, in which by being his Maieſties borne
ſubiects, you are bound by laweThis trebble bond thē
                  ſelues whiles they laboured to ſeeme good ſubiects, acknowledged in their ſupplication to the Kings Maieſtie, chap. 5. neere the end thereof. Agreeable hereto is the Earle of Northamptons ſound maxime in the laſt page of FF. in his ſpeech to Garnet. diuine, naturall and nationall.
            Thirdly, if you before knowing the daunger thereof
will yet voluntarily take ſuch oaths; where then is the
fault? in the Prince that vppon good and warrantable
grounds ſhall in a religious policie, to preuent the hazard
of his owne, and his ſubiects ſtates and liues, cauſe
ſuch a lawe to bee enacted, or in the Prieſtes that ſhall

               Scienti & volenti, non ſit iniuria. wilfully and in a reſolute determination of working
their countries ouerthrowe take ſuch an oath? And here
for a ſhutting vp of all, giue me leaue, (becauſe the Papiſts
hold ſo much of the Popes authoritie againſt Princes
by him excommunicated,) to inſertBeſides this Prieſtes confeſſion agaīſt themſelues, ſee alſo for thy better confirmation in this point, the iudgement of two great Counſellors of ſtate in their ſeuerall writings publiſhed by the Earle of Salisbury in his anſwere to certaine ſcandelous papers in the third page of C. and the Earle of Northampton in his ſpeech at Garnets Arraignement, in the letter HH. in diuers pages thereof. two queſtions
with their anſweres, propounded by the right reuerend
father in God the late Lord Biſhoppe of London, vnto
Thomas Garnet, Aliàs Roockwood, Aliàs Sayer a Seminarie
Prieſt, at the time of the ſaide Garnets arraignement
at the Seſſions-houſe without Newgate in London
vpon Thurſday the 16. of Iune 1608.
            
               The firſt queſtion was this. Whether the ſaide Garnet
had euer read any authors whatſoeuer, vntill ſome hundreds
of yeares after Chriſts time, that did hold that the ende of
Excommunication tended to a depriuation of life.
            
               The ſecond queſtion was this. Whether if the ſaide
Garnet himſelfe helde lands, which by lawfull and lineall inheritance
had deſcended from his aunceſtors vnto him, it
were lawfull for the Pope, Garnet being by him excommunicated,
to giue the lands vnto whom hee pleaſed? Garnets
anſwere vnto the firſt was vncertaine, for ſaide hee, I
remember not well what I haue reade concerning this
point▪
               
            
            
               But vnto the ſecond queſtion hee anſwered directly,
Noe. Why then, mildely replied the Biſhoppe, what
reaſon haue you Maiſter Garnet, to hold that the Pope hath
more authoritie ouer the Kings Maieſtie, being your Soueraigne,
then ouer you being but a priuate perſon, and his Subiect.
            
               This Thomas Garnet is the last that our Pſeudomartyrologiſt. I. W. Prieſt hath noted in his Beadroll to haue ſuffered in King Iames his raigne. Garnet reioynder was ſilence, hauing firſt by a conceſſion
in his owne caſe graunted, that the Popes authorities
was of no force herein. Thus much for ſatisfaction

in this point vnto all men out of the mouth of Thomas
Garnet Seminarie Prieſt. To this purpoſe ſee alſo Iohn
Hart Seminary Prieſt, his wordes in his Preface before
hisD. Reignolds conference with Harts, in Harts owne Preface therto. conference with Doctor Reignolds. Nor may I here
neglect that offer which Pope Paulus the fourth made
vnto Queene Elizabeth in the beginning of her Raigne,
who when he perceiued that his vſurped authoritie and
Primateſhip grew in England contemptible, condicionally
that hee might hold that power here that vniuſtly hee
had before done when this land was drowned in Poperie,
would haue beene contented, and cauſed the Queenes
Maieſtie to vnderſtand that hee would be pleaſed, that all
matters for religion ſhould be adminiſtred in the ſame manner
that then they were, (being the very ſame then per omnia,
that now it is) onely his Supremacie muſt bee acknowledged,
for that indeed, not Religion, not godlineſſe,
not any thing but pride and ambition to be in the eyes of
the world aboue all, both was and is the cauſe of his raging
madneſſe.
            But that noble ſpirited Queene, whoſe religion was
founded vpon a rock, Chriſt Ieſus being the chiefe corner
ſtone, by whom all her building was ioyned together,
ſcorned to be beholding to that Italian Prieſt for the exerciſe
of that religion, which were it lawfull by his diſpenſation,
ſhe would and could by the power of God and her
owne authoritie, maintaine againſt him, and all the power
of darkeneſſe and hell it ſelfe, without being beholding
to him.
            Let thoſe Princes whoſe either Puſillanimitie, or weaknes
of their eſtates, or ſmall aſſurance of their ſubiects
loues, or want of courage to withſtand his yoake of intruſion,
or whoſe vnlawfullRelation of the ſtate of religion in the weſt part of the world, neere the beginning therof. mariages and thereby illicite
iſſue and ſucceſſion, muſt bee legitimated by a more
illegitimate diſpenſation from his vnholineſſe, that the

power and ſword of the one, may vphold the authoritie
of the other, that his authoritie may reciprocally helpe
to keepe that Crowne vpon the head of him and his ſucceſſors,
who otherwiſe were thereof by their owne and
Gods lawes vncapable, verifying thereby that olde Prouerbe,
Clawe me and I will claw thee: Let they vſurped authoritie
maintaine my illicite mariage, and my power and purſe ſhall
maintaine thy vſurped authoritie. Let ſuch as expectAzorius in his inſtitutions, part. 2. booke 11. chapt. 5. Donations
of other Princes Kingdomes from their grand trā
               ſlator
of Empyres the Pope, the diuels ſubſtitute, as Philip
the ſecond of that name King of Spaine did, vpon whom
Pius Quintus, (or rather Impius intus) the diuels vicegerent
then at Rome, conferred the Kingdome of England (but
all the craft was in the catching) inſtanced and approued
as an act lawfull, by Azorius the Ieſuite in his morall inſtitutions,
part ſecond, booke eleuenth, chapter the fiſt,
circa medium capitis.
            
            Let ſuch Princes I ſay adhere to the Pope, & ſubiugate
their neckes to his trampling, but let thoſe, whoſe cauſe
is good, ſucceſſion lawful, ſpirits more magnanimous, and
of a better mettall, their ſubiects hearts generally, firmely
aſſured, the word of God which is trueth it ſelfe on their
ſide, power and abilitie to withſtand (and offend) him and
all his vnholy confederates, free Princes next vnder God
in their owne Dominions. Let theſe I ſay all learne of that
renowned Queene Elizabeth this reſolute ſaying, rare amongſt
men, but not to be paralleld by any woman, If my
religion be allowable? (if my mariage lawfull, if my ſucceſſion
rightfull,) by the Popes Diſpenſation, then is it ſo alſo without
it, and God willing, I will maintaine it without him, who of his
power can make it no more lawfull or vnlawfull then of it ſelfe it
is without him? for againſt the word of God there lieth no
Diſpenſation. And let great, Great Brittaines King make it
known for an honour to him and his poſteritie that great,
            
               
               Elizaes ſpirit lodgeth in his Brest,
               Though happie ſhe, in peace with God doth reſt.
            
            Thus holding Poperie to be an hotch-poch of new religion
coyned in the mints of the Babyloniſh whore, who
contendeth to aduance her KingdomeA ſtrange thing that the Pope claiming to bee but Chriſts Vicar, ſhould yet challenge a larger power thē euer Chriſt himſelfe did, for Chriſt confeſſed, that his Kingdome was not of this world, and yet the Pope will be a diſpoſer and 
                     •
                  etter vp and puller downe of Kings and Kingdomes at his pleaſure. aboue the Kingdome
of Chriſt, by all meanes that themſelues, or hell it
ſelfe can inuent, by crueltie, by blood, by deceit, by abuſing
the word of God, by equiuocation, by what not? yea ſhe
hath ſo taught her brats, the Prieſtes and Ieſuites, and infinite
others by them ſeduced, to ſweare and forſweare, to
promiſe and proteſt, by whatſoeuer can bee named, (although
they haue no purpoſe to make good any of their
vowes: in this kind) as that they haue almoſt left no means
whereby a man may be aſſured of anothers intentions, although
he vowe it neuer ſo ſeeming ſeriouſly.
            Call to minde the great and ſerious proteſtations that
In his booke of Quodlibets. Watſon the Prieſt made in his Quodlibeticall queſtions,
Here was, Mel in ore, fel corde: a ſmooth tongue, but a treacherous heart. 
               That albeit he differed in religion from that which was profeſſed
in the Church of England, yet if either Pope or Spaniard
ſhould ſeeke by hoſtile meanes to inuade his countrie, hee would
willingly ſpend his ſubſtance, nay his deareſt blood againſt any
ſuch as ſhould attempt it, and yet he himſelfe was the firſt afterwards
as I remember that came to the gallowes for
violating it. If I could find any thing that good is in either
Prieſts or Ieſuites, I would commend them for it, but becauſe
I cannot, holding them all to bee traytors in heart
vnto his Maieſtie, and their fauourers to be ſcarcely good
ſubiects, I will end for their cōmendations with the words
of a late, but wittieConclaue Ignati, in Apologia pro Ieſuitis, ad finem libri adiecta. Satyriſt; F
                     •
                  uet illis, quiſquis de illis
tacet.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   