
      
         
            
            
            CONCERNING
THE HOLY
EVCHARIST,
and the Popiſh
BREADEN-GOD,
TO
THE MEN OF ROME,
as well
LAIQVES as CLERIQVES,
By
THOMAS TUKE.
            ANNO M.DC.XXV.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
            WHil'ſt Sunne doth ſhine,Amāt eam (id eſt veritatem) lucentē: oderunt eam redarguentem. Quia enim falli nolunt, & fallere volunt, amant eam, cum ſeipſam indicat: & oderunt eam, cum ſeipſos indicat. Auguſt Conf
                     •
                  ſſ. lib. 10. cap 23. and does not burne,
            Men willingly to it doe turne:
            But, if it once wax hot, they fly,
            And hide themſelues from't by and by.
            So truth, that's pleaſing, giuing light,
            Is grieuous, if it once doe bite,
            And oftentimes procures a foe,
            Whereas baſe flattring does not ſo.
            For man would haue full ſcope in's wayes,
            And gladly haue of all men praiſe.
            He would not be ſuppoſ'd to ſtray,
            Although he be quite out of's way.
            Truth's like hony, put to a ſore,
            Which makes the place to ſmart the more.
            Of carnall mindes ſuch is the caſe,
            So faine they would hold on their race.
            To be diſcover'd, fann'd, and tried,
            Grieues them as much, as to be tied.
            Yet welcome medicine, that does heale,
            And welcome they, that truly deale.
            Sore eyes indeed the light do ſhunne,
            And Batts, and Owles loue not the ſunne▪
            
            The Thief delighteth in the night,
            But honeſty does loue the light.
            The honest heart, the ſingle 
                  •
               ye
            Is very loath to tread awry:
            
               
And therefore deemes the light full deare,
            And him, that ſpeaks the truth, will heare,
            It ſtudies to be truly wiſe,
            And would not be abuſ'd with lyes.
            It therefore giues it ſelf to pray,
            To read, heare, ſearch, both night and day.
            And, when the truth it has found out,
            To loue't, and own't, it does not doubt.
            Glory, and greatneſſe, and feare, and ſhame,
            Gaine, that's ſo lou'd, and worldly fame,
            Carnall pleaſure, and contentment,
            Friendſhip of men,Amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, magis amica veritas, dixit, Aristoteles. to errors bent,
            The honeſt heart, the ſingle eye,
            To truth doeth theſe things vilifie.
            Yea life, that is ſo deare to man,
            To keepe the truth,Nil addēdum legi, nihil auferendum Scripturae, Cyril. Alex. in Iohan lib. 11 cap. 23. forgo it can.
            And that is trueth, to be belieued,
            Which from the Scriptures is derived.
            For that in faith makes but a breach,
            Which holy Scriptures do not teach.
            All Teachers ſhould their teachings ſquare
            By them:Per ſcripturam Deus loquitur omne quod vult, Gregor
                     •
                  Moral. li. 16 cap. 16. for they Gods will declare.
            THEY fully ſhew the Church, and truth lay out:
            To follow other Guides is to ſtray out.
            They, they are Faiths perfit Rule, and Meaſure,
            The Touch-stone of truth,Chriſost. ſcripturā vocat exactiſſimam trutiuam, & guomo
                     •
                  em, ac regulam, in 2 Cor. homil. 13. in fine. and Matchleſſe Treaſure▪
            
            
               Thine in the trueth, truely,
THO. TUKE.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            TO
THE MEN OF ROME,
as well
LAIQVES, AS CLERIQVES.
            PRieſts make their Maker Chriſt, yee
muſt not doubt.
            They eat, drink, box him vp, and
beare about.
            Subſtance of things they turne: nor is
this all;
            For both the Signes muſt hold in ſeverall.
            Hee's wholeVnder the ſhewes, as they ta
                     •
                  ke of bread and wine. ith' bread, whole ith' cuppe.
            They eat him whole: whole they ſuppe;
            Whole ith' Cake, and whole ith cuppe.
            This with you all doeth goe for veritie▪
            
            To hold contrary is meer hereſie.
            This is, pure, pure Catholique, pure divine.
            And thus feaſt ye; he with his Chriſt, thou with thine;
            Without bread and wine indeed:
            For this is your Roman Creed;
            Whom ye make, on him ye feed.
            
               
The bread and wine themſelues away are gone.
            Shewes of them tary ſtill, but Subſtance none.
            They make their God, and then they eat him vp.
            They ſwallow downe his fleſh, and blood vp ſup.
            They'll taſte no fleſh on frydayes (that's not good)
            But of their new-made God, and of his blood.
            And as the Whale did Ionas, ſo they eat
            Him vp aliue, body and ſoule, as meat.
            As men eat Oyſters, ſo on him they feed;
            Whole, and aliue, and raw, and yet not bleed.
            This cookerie, voyed of humanitie,
            Is held in Rome for ſound divinitie.
            And is not this ſtrange to heare,
            That God, whom, ye ſay, ye feare,
            Ye ſhould eat, as belly cheare?
            The Graver, Painter, Baker, euen theſe three,
            Your Prieſts haue reaſon for to magnifie.
            Perhaps the Baker thinks, he merits more▪
            
            Yet both advance their honor, and their ſtore.
            For they with their gentle feat
            Help them to mony & meat,
            Making Gods, to begge and eat.
            And now me thinks I heare old Laban ſay,Gen. 32.
            
            See, they haue ſtolne and borne my Gods away.
            Me thinks,Iudg. 18. 2. 24. I heare and ſee that mountineer,
            Michah of Ephraim; who did idols feare,
            Chiding with the Danits, for that they had
            Took's Prieſt, and Gods away, which made him mad▪
            
            Mee thinks I ſee the Philiſtins bereft2 Sam. 5. 21
            
            Of their vaine Gods,1 Chron. 14. 12. which they to Dauid left:
            And how that noble Worthy made them bee
            Deſtroyed of his ſouldjers preſentlie.
            
               
Both men and beaſts (a thing to be deplored)
            May bear away the things, of you adored.
            The things yee worſhip with your heart and minde,
            Men like your ſelues, can burne, can melt, can grinde.
            Baruchs baſe things (a ſhame it is to think)Bar. 6. 12. 22.
            
            Can marre the things, ye worſhip, and make ſtinck.
            And is not this great folly,
            More then childiſh vanity,
            To dote on things ſo ſilly?
            The fooliſh Heathens were not all ſo mad:
            For they devoured not the Gods, they had.
            TheVid Baſil. ſchol in Pſal. 11
                     •
                  . Lactan. lib 2 cap 2. Aug. in Pſal. 113. 
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  . C. 2. wiſer knew their Vanities were wood,
            Or ſuch like ſtuffe: not Gods, nor fleſh and blood.
            But yee, as if bewitcht, do count, and call
            That poore thing God, Maker, and Lord of all,
            Which is plaine bread in ſubſtance, very bread,
            Made of wheat-flower, ground, with mans hand, and
knead.
            This, which is bread, which all men ſo will ſay,
            Which haue not loſt all ſenſe, or thrown't away,
            This ye do ſay, ye do belieue it is,
            Not bread in trueth, but the true God of bliſſe;
            Euen Ieſus Chriſt, God-Man, fleſh, blood, and bones,
            Wherein y'are ſtupider then they, then ſtones.
            O God! What is a man, euen at his beſt,
            If not of thee with heauenly wiſedome bleſt?
            Grievous errors doth he ſwallow,
            And in ſin perverſly wallow,
            Not regarding what may follow.
            Poore Laique! There is one thing more for thee;
            The Cuppe of Bleſſing thou art forc'd to flee.Concil. Constant. ſeſſ. 1
                     •
                  
               
            
            Eat thou mayeſt by law: but thou mayeſt not ſuppe;
            
               
The Prieſt is he, that's worthy of the cuppe.
            Take Chriſt thou mayſt under the breaden ſigne:
            But not touch him under the ſhew of wine.
            A Prince perhaps by favour with his lippe
            Is ſuffer'd after's Prieſt to take a ſippe.
            And is this a Prieſtly feat,
            Thus the people for to cheat,
            Who ſhould drink as well, as eat?
            But Lay-men are not Prieſts: (who ſayes they are?)
            And therefore ought not in that Cuppe to ſhare,
            Why? Are not Princes lay men? yet They may,
            And do drink of the cup, as men do ſay.
            T
                  •
               'eleuen, or twelue, (for chuſe ye whether)
            When they firſt receiued altogether,
            Their Maiſter being by, then were they all
            As Sheep: the text Diſciples does them call.
            And furthermore, If lay-men may not drink,
            Becauſe th'are ſuch, Why may they not then think
            It lawfull for them to refuſe to eat,
            For the ſelfe ſame reaſon, of that ſacred meat?
            Or, who can juſtly ſay, and not deluded,
            That Laiques from the Cuppe are quite excluded,
            When Chriſt ſayes, Drinke ye All of this, as tho
            He ſpake to Prieſts alone, and to no moe;
            And yet that, when he ſayd thoſe Words, Take, Eate,
            
            To Prieſts and people too he meant that meat?
            At Rome no drink's allow'd, but only meat:
            Yet Paul doth bid men drink,1 Cor. 11. as well, as eat.
            There ſits one with brazen face,
            That uſurps a Biſhops place,
            Who dares thus Chriſts flock diſgrace.
            Now to the Man of Might, who ſayes, he can
            
               
Doe that, which is not in the power, of man;
            Who can make Chriſt of bread (hee's ſo diuine)
            As Chriſt of water once did make true wine.
            Angell, nor King, nor Artizan of ſkill
            Can this; the Prieſt alone, and he at's will.
            Others, who can make bread out of their griſt,
            Muſt leaue their bread to him, to make it Chriſt.
            Make ſtones to be men we know that God can:
            And the Prieſt braggs he can make bread a man.
            Make a God of a man we know men can:
            But his art lyes in making God a man;
            So, as if Chriſt had not took fleſh before,
            Yet without fleſh he ſhould be now no more.
            Nor can the nimbleſt Baker work a cake
            So ſoone,Per v
                     •
                  rba cō
                  ſ
                     •
                  cr 
                     〈◊〉
                   ver
                     •
                   & 
                     〈…〉
                   panis, ita producitur & quaſi generatur Christus i
                     •
                   altari, ade
                     •
                   potenter & effica
                     ••
                  ter, ut ſi C
                     •
                  ristas necdum eſſet incarnatus, per haec verba Hoc eſt corpus me
                        •
                     m, inc
                     •
                  rna
                     •
                  ctur, cor
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   huma
                     •
                  um aſsumeret, 
                     〈◊〉
                   graves theologi docent. Cornelius Cornelij a lapide Comm
                     ••
                  . in E
                     •
                  a
                     •
                   7. 14. as he his cake a man can make.
            Four words, repeated with a voyce ſubmiſſe,
            Will ſerue to make vp's man and God, I wiſſe.
            Theſe four alone, Hoc Eſt Corpus Meum,
            
            Will work the feat: there needs no greater ſumme.
            Indeed, the Prieſts intention ſhould concurre,
            Or els the work may chance to take a blurre.
            For, as they do ſay, This moſt Rare Invention
            
            Will ſcarcely take without the Prieſts intention.
            But yet here we muſt all know,
            That all Prieſts can not thus doe;
            The Roman can: but no moe.
            Naturall Parents, be they nee'r ſo good,
            Are Gods inſtruments but of fleſh and blood.
            To get, or make a Soule's not in their power:
            But he a perfit ſoule can make each houer.
            Both ſoule and body are alike to him:
            That ſhall not want a power, nor this a limme.
            
               
Paren
                  •
               s their children get: they make them not.
            They get them like themſelues, with ſtaine and ſpot,
            But he no gett
                  •
               r is allow'd to bee,
            And wife he does by vow with horror flee.
            Hee's only a maker, and but of one:
            If he make not that one, he makes juſt none,
            And, whereas children by degrees do grow,
            That, which he makes, is made at once: not ſo,
            Full holy alſo, pure, voyd of all ſin,
            Hauing no ſoyle without, no fault within.
            Yet he, that makes him, is not without both:
            Which if not he, yet others often loth.
            And which is ſtrange, he may not get a man:
            But yet make God he may, and thinks he can▪
            
            And, whereas others works may be deſtroyed,
            His, he belieues, is not to be annoyed.
            I ask then of this man, this man of might,
            
            Who does ſo farre ſurmount each mortall wight;
            Is thy mouth the virgins womb? Is bread her ſeed?
            Are thy words the Holy Ghoſt? Is this our Creed?
            What? Does a Temple make the Architect,
            That thou of bread thy maker the ſhould'ſt erect▪
            
            Or does a Servant vſe to make his Lord,
            That Prieſts to theirs a beeing do afford;
            O preſumptuous Vndertaker!
            Neuer Cake could make a Baker:
            And ſhall a Prieſt make his Maker?
            Indeed, we ſee ſome men by Prieſts made ſtones:
            But who ſees them make bread fleſh blood, and bones▪
            
            They rather merit fayth, that ſay, they can
            Sooner make a man bread, then bread a man.
            That, though Vnnaturall, has often been:
            
               
This, Supernaturall, was yet neuer ſeen.
            Tell me: Was not Chriſt before thy bearing?
            And hundreds of yeers afore thy ſheering?
            Was he not a man before thine annointing?
            And muſt he yet be made at thine appointing?
            Does he not ſtill abide in humane fleſh,
            That yet he muſt be made of thee afreſh?
            And ſooner too, then thou thy ſelf waſt made,
            Eyther man, or of this Man-making trade.
            What a kinde of brow haſt thou,
            That doeſt ſay, Thou mak'ſt him now,
            Since thou took'ſt thy Prieſtly vow?
            Haſt thou Prieſts power from the man Chriſt receiu'd?
            So thou wilt ſay, or els I am deceiu'd.
            With what face then dar'ſt thou ſay, Thou him makeſt,
            
            Of whom thy ſelfe and power, thou ſay'ſt, thou takeſt?
            As if a Iuſtice ſhould ſay, he makes the King,
            Of whome he does receiue his Iuſticing:
            As if a childe ſhould ſay, he makes his ſire,
            Or color'd clothes ſhould ſay, they make their diar.
            Thus ye dimme the noone-day-light,
            And gainſt ſenſe and reaſon fight.
            Holding, Writleſſe, what's not right.
            Perhaps you'll ſay, Chriſt Ieſus is not made
            Of bread: but that the bread away does fade,
            And that his body followes in it's ſtead,
            It beeing onely there now, and not bread.
            Well: be it ſo, yet thus his bodie's made
            Here ſtill on earth to be: which is gainſayd,
            By Chriſt himſelfe, by Peter,Iohn 12 and 17. Act. 3. and our Creed:
            To whom we could adde more, if there were need.
            For Auſtin, Vigill, and others agree,
            
               
That Chriſt is not now on earth bodilie.
            And vaine it is to plead the power divine,
            Which out of darknes can make light to ſhine.
            Which of juſt nothing can make things to bee,
            And can make dead things liue, and ſtone-blinde ſee,
            And moſt eaſily doe the things, which can
            Be comprehended of no braines of man.
            Make it appear by holy Scriptures light,
            That God does will and work theſe things, ye fight
            For, with ſuch earneſtneſſe, and then we will
            Confeſſe your power, and applaud your ſkill.
            But till ye proue by Written word,
            That God to theſe things does accord,
            To make fayth of them were abſurd.
            We read of Chriſt twice made: and that is all;
            Of Woman, and vnder Law, Is this ſmall,
            Vnleſſe thou alſo make him at thy willGal. 4.
            
            By thine high creating power, and thy ſkill?
            Is't not ynough for him, and for us all,
            That he was Once borne, and Once vnder thrall,
            But that he muſt yet alſo, day by day,
            By you be made, and offred, as ye ſay?
            So, for fayth ye fancy teach,
            And for truth mens dreames ye preach,
            Making in Gods Church a breach.
            What a ſilly thing is this, thou makeſt,
            Which for the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, thou takeſt?
            Which, Idol-like, can neyther heare, nor talk,
            Nor ſee, nor feele, nor ſmell, nor one jo
                  •
               t walk,
            Which can do nothing for ought does appear:
            But's fit all wrong, that's offer'd, for to bear.
            Which can not ſaue it ſelf from catte, nor Dogge,
            
               
From Rat, nor Mouſe, nor from the grunting Hogge.
            Fy that ſuch a ſorry thing,
            A mouſe can in danger bring,
            Should be counted for thy King,
            Hezekiah ſayes the Aſſyrian king
            The Gentiles Gods into the fire did fling,
            Becauſe they were not Gods: for ſo he ſayth;Iſ. 37. 19.
            
            Which plainly ſhewes the fondneſſe of your fayth.
            For this, ye ſay the Prieſt hath made, ye call
            God almightie: and yet the ſame may fall,
            Or by plaine force be caſt into the fire,
            By Turks or Moores, or flung into the mire.
            May not men then boldly ſay,
            It does your handy-work bewray,
            When they ſee it hurl'd away?
            What a kinde of vile ſervitude is this,
            Thou mak'ſt him ſerue, of whom thou look'ſt for bliſſe;
            To coop him in a piece of bread in ſhow,
            Where he muſt ſtay a time, and muſt not goe?
            A pretty Godlin ſure; now in thine hand,
            Then boxed vp, to carry by ſea, or land.
            Now in thy mouth, and by and by ith' maw:
            Oth' Altar now, then in ſome ſolemne ſhaw,
            Riding about ith' ſtreets, to grace that man,
            Who dares do that, which juſtly no man can.
            Yet more; This God, ye ſeeme ſo to adore,
            Ye baſely proſtitute to knaue and Whore;
            Teaching that the Wicked his fleſh may eat,
            Whereas Chriſt Ieſus is to ſuch no meat.Ioh. 6. 51.
            
            For he,Ioh. 6. 56. that eats his fles;h and drinks his blood,
            Shall liue:Aug. de civi. dei. li. 21. ca. 25 Bedain and therefore ſure he muſt be good.
            Yea he,1. Cor. 6. that eats Chriſts fleſh, in Chriſt doeth dwell:
            
               
But they in him do dwell, that's kept for hell.
            He muſt be of Chriſts fleſh, that eats his fleſh:
            And onely thoſe with it he does refreſh.
            Indeed,Aug. in Ioh. tract 26. the Sacrament thereof ill men
            May eat: but bane it is vnto them then.
            But it it ſelfe Whoſoever does eat,Ambroſ. de ſacram. lib. 5. cap. 4.
            
            To him it is no bane, but wholeſome meat;
            Able to nouriſh, & preſerue the ſpirit,
            And to do that, which no man can by's merit.
            He,Iohan. 6. 57. that eats of this bread, that eats of mee,
            
               Shall liue by me, ſayth Chriſt, eternallie.
            
            And he eats Chriſt,Aug. trac. 26 in Iohan. & ſerm. circa ſacr. fer. paſc. that does aright belieue,
            And being knit unto him does receiue,
            And draw forth of him that by fayth, which may
            Suſtaine, preſerue, and feed him night and day.
            Whereas your Chriſt, ye ſay, ye take and eat
            With hand and mouth, both good and bad, as meat,
            I ween, ye ſay not now, ye teare and grinde
            Him with your teeth in pieces, as I finde.
            But, that ye mouth him, that ye all profeſſe,
            All, all of you alike, both more and leſſe.
            O the great ſtupidity
            In abſolute foolery,
            And ſenceleſſe impietie!
            What's become of all thoſe Chriſts, Prieſts haue made?
            Doe all thoſe hoſtes of wonder bide? or fade?
            Doe they ſtay below? Or aſcend on high?
            Or turne they back to bread, and wine? Or die?
            Or are any by digeſtion wrought,
            And into mens ſpirits, or bodies, brought?
            Or is not he, that yet in heauen does ſtay,
            Able to feed and keep vs every way,
            
               
But that there muſt be ſtill a new creation
            Of him, after your ſtrange imagination?
            One Chriſt bides: but all thoſe fly.
            One Chriſt liues: but all thoſe dy.
            One is true: the reſt a ly.
            When ye haue eat them,Exod. 14.ye may ſay, as of yore;
            The eye,Ioh 20. that hath ſeen them, ſhall ſee them no more.
            He abides, that is aboue.
            Him we feare, and him we loue.
            Theſe below doe nothing proue.
            Alas, alas, there needs no fabrication
            Of him ſtill by Prieſts for mans ſuſtentation.
            Ieſus Chriſt both yeſterday,Hebr. 13. and to day,
            Is our food, and rock, the Selfe-ſame, for ay.
            Great need we haue all to take him,
            And feare, leaſt we ſhould forſake him:
            But can not, nor need not make him.
            Hony we read found in a Lyon dead:Iudg. 14.
            
            But not of Wormes in God incarnate bred.
            Yet in this thing, for Chriſt ye doe adore,
            And whoſe almightie ayd ye do implore,
            Euen in this very thing a worme hath bred,
            Euen on this very thing a worme hath fed▪
            
            The ſilly Ientles may in theſe things breed:
            Plain cralling Magots may on theſe things feed.
            For ſhame then forſake this toy,
            Which the Church does ſo annoy,
            And in truth delight and joy.
            Ye ſhew vs clothes, which▪ ye ſay, Saints haue worne,
            As ye would perſwade vs, which are not torne▪
            
            As yet with time, but uncorrupt, as were
            Th'Izraelites in their walk of fourty yere.Nehe. 9. 21.
            
            
               
And yet many an age is come, and gon,
            Since the Saints did laſt put them off, or on,
            Whereof I finde your reaſon to be ſuch;
            Forſooth, their ſacred bodyes did them touch.
            Why then ſhould putrefaction at all
            Theſe Accidents, ye talk ſo off, befall?
            How is't that vermine are in them ingendred,
            Seeing Chriſts bleſſed body's in them tendred?
            How is't, that filthines is there diſcouer'd,
            Where Ieſus Chriſt, our Lord, God-Man lyes cover'd.
            Is't, becauſe his body can not them touch?
            Or for that of vertue it has not much?
            Or is't, becauſe theirs his did farre exceed?
            Or els for that no other Wonders need?
            Yet ſuch a Wonder, ſhowen vnto the eye,
            Would with men be of no ſmall potencye,
            Being voyd of fraud, and no forged tale:
            Whereas your, ſo much talk'd of, Wonders fayle;
            Things, which neyther ſenſe, nor Scriptuees doe teach:
            But which euen ye your ſelues do feigne, & preach.
            Indeed, we would confeſſe you made,
            If ſenſe or Scriptures lent you aid:
            But by both them ye are gainſayd.
            Saint Auſtin writes,Tract. 59 in Iohan. euen what himſelf belieued,
            That the Diſciples Ieſus Chriſt receiued,
            That they that heauen-come bread of life did eat,
            Which is to true Belieuers drinck, and meat.
            Yet Iudas, who to avarice was wed,
            Ate not the Lord, but onely ate his bread.
            But by your learning, ſeeing that the bread
            Is turn'd into Chriſts fleſh, on's fleſh he fed.
            
               
For ſeeing Chriſt vnder thoſe ſhowes doth lye,
            Eate Chriſt he muſt, which Auſtin does denye;
            Saying that he ate the bread of the Lord
            Againſt the Lord, A thing to be abhorr'd.
            Neither are bare ſhewes of bread bread in kinde,
            And therefore Auſtin was not of your minde.
            For he held the Traytor on bread did feed:
            Whereas yee ſay, There's nought, but ſhewes, indeed.
            Yet one word more,Abſit a nobis vt 
                     •
                  a, qu
                     •
                  e per ſenſus corporis didicimus, vera 
                     •
                  ſſe dubitemus. Aug. de Trinit. li. 15. cap. 12. Becauſe ye doe from hence
            Send packing with diſdaigne all humane ſenſe.
            Far be it from vs, ſayes the ſelfe-ſame Father,
            That we ſhould be at all in doubt, or waver,
            But reſt aſſured that, what ſenſes pure,
            And vncorrupt, doe teach vs, that is ſure,
            And true, the very ſelfe-ſame things, they ſeem:
            No other things, then thoſe, we do them deem.
            I pray you, ſhew then, why we ſhould not truſt
            Our ſenſes here, as if they were accurſt,
            Sith that in other precepts of the Lord
            They ſtand us in great ſtead to keepe his word.
            For by our ſenſe we can put difference
            Twixt man and man: and ſo doe reverence.
            By ſenſe twixt man and beaſt diſcerne we can,
            Betweene a father and an other man.
            By ſenſe we may perceiue they are but ſtocks,
            Which fools adore, who are themſelues but blocks.
            By ſenſe men are let ſee how for to keep
            Their fingers from their neighbours oxe, & ſheep.
            And finallie, by ſenſe men learne much good,
            And avoide the ſhedding of guiltleſſe blood.
            Now tell me, Why ſhould ſenſe be truſted here,
            
               
And yet ſo vtterly denyed there?
            For tho to ſenſe it does appeare,
            That bread and wine are truely there,
            Yet ye ſay Nay, and nothing feare.
            We are not certayn that Chriſts Diſciples did
            Receiue the Euchariſt, whiles he lay hid
            In's ſepulcher, ſtarke-dead: but yet they might
            Haue boldly took it then, and done but right.
            And ſay they had: if that, ye hold, were good,
            Then had they eate and drunke him fleſh and
            blood,
            Hot, and aliue, when as in trueth he lay,
            Not quick but dead, as doe the Scriptures ſay.
            Or, will ye ſay the Sacrament did lack
            Its vertue, as being for a time kept back,
            Or quite extinct, vntill he roſe againe?
            Or that his body, as voyd of life, as paine,
            Was really, and ſubſtantially,
            Preſented in that ſacred Myſtery?
            Eyther of which ye ſhall as ſoone make cleere,
            As make the Sunne at midnight to ſhine here.
            Whereas to fayth Chriſt abſent preſent is,
            And dead, might liue to fayth, w'are ſure of
            this.
            Whilſt here he was, he preſent was to ſence:
            But abſent from it now he is gone hence.
            His bleſſed body preſent was, from dayes
            Of old, to true belieuers fayth alwayes.
            He ever with them was by the power of fayth,
            By which he dwelleth in them,Epheſ. 3. 17. th' Apoſtle ſayth.
            Not come in fleſh, yet was he come to fayth,
            Slayne from the beginning,Rev. 13. 8. as Scripture ſayth.
            
               
And hence it is, that they of old by Paul
            Are ſayed the verie ſame ſpirituall1. Cor. 10. 
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
            
            Both meat to eat, and drink to drink, which we
            Our ſelues receiue by fayth, not carnallie.
            For meat and drink, which are ſpirituall,
            Are not to be eaten and drunck as carnall.
            This food, they fed on,Gen 3. 15. and 
                     •
                  2▪ 18. is that Promiſſ'd Seed,
            Which they receiu'd by fayth, and ſo did feed.
            And ſtill by fayth,Gal. 3. 19. if true, is to be ta'en,
            And not with hand, or mouth, as ye would faine.
            For fayth can ſee things a farre off with eaſe,
            And on them, as vpon things preſent, ſeize.
            Faith for the ſoule is as much, as the eye,
            Hand, mouth, throat, and mawe are for the
            body.
            But ſome of you ſtick not to ſay, The Lord
            Deceiu'd you,As one 
                     〈◊〉
                   Pauls croſſe i
                     •
                   Queen Maries da
                     •
                  es▪ D. Leſſius de ſum. bono l. 4 c 2 pag 568 lin. 23. if deceiu'd ye be, with's word.
            Forſooth, becauſe he ſayes, This is my body.
            A bold conceipt it is: both blinde, and frothy.
            For, if it pleaſe you to weigh this Scripture
            With other Scriptures, or in peace endure
            To ſee it for you done in loue by others,
            (Who are, if ye be Chriſtes, in truth your Brothers)
            Ye may cleerely ſee, if ye will permit
            Your will to be directed by your wit,
            That theſe ſame words do beare an other ſenſe,
            Then that, ye go about to fetch from thence,
            View well the places, ye ſee quoted here,
            And ye may plainly ſee what IS meanes there.Geneſ. 17. 10. and 41. 26. Exod. 12. 11. and 13. 9. and 31. 13. 16. Eſay. 5. 7. Ezek. 37. 11. Zach. 1. 9. Math. 13. 37. Luke 8. 11. Gal. 4. 24. Rev. 1. 20.
and 4. 5. and 5. 8. and 11. 4.
            
            
               
To putte IS for SIGNIFIES is not rare,
            As he ſoone may ſee, that to ſee does care.
            Neyther is this expoſition new,
            But old: no youth, as that, that's brought by you.
            For herein your Mothers wit,
            Neither ſenſe, nor holy Writ,
            Nor antiquitie does fit.
            As for that Offering of Chriſt, ye hold,
            I wonder much wherefore ye are ſo bold.
            Search the Scriptures: ye can not finde it there.
            Or look to reaſon, and y'are ne'er the neare,
            His owne One's ynough,Heb. 10, 10. & 7, 27, & 9, 28. all-able and good.
            Nor is ſin pardon'd without ſhedding blood.
            And therefore yours,Hebr. 9, 22. without ſuch effuſion,
            Is nought els at all but mere deluſion.
            Yours eyther is the ſame with his, or not:
            If it be not the ſame, then haue ye got
            An other Goſpell beſides that he tought.
            But if it be the ſame with that he wrought,
            Then doe ye offer him in blood, and ſlayen,
            Which ye can not,Rom. 6, 9. would ye never ſo faine.
            Chriſt is no more on earth, but is aboue.
            He ſayes as much:Iohn 12, 8. & 17, 11. and that doth you reproue▪
            
            I ſay again, that muſt haue conſecration,
            Which vnto God is made a right oblation.
            And who dare ſay, that's not a divels limme,
            That Ieſus Chriſt is conſecrate by him.
            By one offring hath he conſecrated
            For ever them,Heb. 10, 14 that are ſanctified.
            He conſecrates vs, and his act is ſtable.
            
               
To conſecrate him we are all vnable.
            See then the ſtraits, whereinto ye are brought,
            Whiles yee forſake the wayes inth' Scriptures
tought.
            To the Scriptures then giue eare:
            And, what God ſpeaks in them, heare;
            Holding faſt the truth in feare.
            Now do I ſpeak to all you men of fire,
            Who hotter are, then reaſon does require:
            There's one thing, I would gladly haue you ſhow,
            Wherefore your choler ſhould ſo ſtrangely flow,
            That nothing will ſuffice you, but the blood
            Of ſuch, as think your doctrine is not good,
            But new, and naught, concerning your Oblation▪
            
            Of Chriſt, and of your Tranſſubſtantiation?
            And yet both yee and wee agree in this,
            That Ieſus Chriſt, our life, in heauen now is.
            We both belieue he died vpon the Tree,
            And offer'd up himſelfe moſt willinglie.
            We both acknowledge his owne one oblation,
            Made on the Croſſe, is our propitiation▪
            
            We neither of vs doubt, but hold he is
            A true and perfit man, God, Lord of bliſſe.
            More, Both of vs affirme, and not deceived,
            That hee's giuen ith' Euchariſt, and receiued;
            Giuen of God, and receiu'd of the godly,
            Which come fitted for that ſacred Myſt'ry.
            And yet, forſooth, this will not ſerue our turne,
            But that as Heretiques we needs muſt burne.
            And why as Heretiques? Becauſe we ſay,
            There's no ſuch offring of him day by day.
            (Yet confeſſe we that a Repreſentation
            
               
Is in the Sacrament, of his oblation,
            Who Once offer up himſelfe for ſin,Hebr. 9. 28. and 10. 12.
            
            But ſince that Once hath never offer'd bin;
            Not properly, but in a type, or, figure,
            Whereof we certain are: of yours not ſure.)
            And for becauſe we ſay, as ſenſe does teach,
            And as both Scriptures and old Doctors preach,
            That bread and wine doe truly there remaine,
            And not in ſhew onely, as ye do faigne,
            Teaching men to belieue vnder a curſe,
            That their ſubſtance is gone: and which is worſe,
            Turn'd into the fleſh and blood of our Lord:
            Which ye preſſe vpon men with word and ſword.
            Now for becauſe we do not hold this turning,
            Ye hold vs, as heretiques, worthy burning.
            Well, what's paſt, let that ſuffice.
            Wake, and learne for to be wiſe.
            Hate not men for hating lies.
            The great and mightie God, that hath made all,
            Chriſtians and others, both great and ſmall,
            Allowes you not to take away mans life
            Through bitter zeale and vnadviſed ſtrife:
            Allowes you not his creatures blood to ſpill,
            For croſſing of your priuate thoughts and will.
            Foule ſhame it is that mens owne fonde opinions,
            In Chriſtendome ſhould cauſe ſo great diviſions.
            A ſhame it is, ſuch Boaſters of Antiquitie
            Should be ſo faultie in deviſing Novitie.
            O that all humane vnderſtanding might
            Once become ſubject to the Scriptures light:
            That all would truly yeeld, and nothing grudge,
            
               
To make them their Sole Rule of fayth, and Iudge,
            
            O that charitie, ſo much talk'd off, might
            Once among Chriſtians obteyne her right.
            O that God, whoſe Great Name we all confeſſe,
            Were better ſerued, and offended leſſe.
            If filthie Lucre, Pride, and baſe Ambition,
            
            Which are the Workers of ſo great confuſion,
            Were once abandon'd, and that men would go
            Roundly to work, the naked trueth to know,
            Preferring it to all things els beſide,
            Then ſhould our Lord be better glorified.
            Then factions ſoone would ceaſe:
            They, that vex, would ſeek to pleaſe,
            And Chriſts kingdome would increaſe.
            Then they, that now the holy Church do rend,
            Would all their wits and labors for it ſpend,
            Then factious Nick-names ſoone would all be
left,
            Neyther ſhould men of peace be ſo bereft
            The trueth, that now is baniſh'd,
            True loue, which now is vaniſh'd,
            Would both be better cheriſh'd.
            Now to the plaine, and wel-minded Romane,
            Who is miſled, I am returnd' againe.
            The truth, ye ſhould be taught, I will not tell,
            That which your learned Prieſtes do knowe full
well.
            The Cuppe is yours all as well as the Bread,
            As in the ſacred Scriptures ye may read.Mat. 26. 27▪
               
            
            The Subſtance of the bread and wine remaineMar. 14. 23.
            
            After their Conſecration,1 Cor. 11. 28▪ 29. that's plaine.
            They are Afterwards, what they were Afore:
            
            
               
And yet afterwards they are ſomething more.
            
            Euen as the Prieſt, now order'd will confeſſe,
            
               Hee's what he was, yet more by this acceſſe.
            As for theyr Eſſence, They are the Same, they
Were:
            
            But for Vſe, an other
               I mean ſervice, office, or condition. nature they beare.
            Tho then their proper nature does endure,
            Yet in their ſervice they are chang'd it's ſure.
            For, once hallow'd, they are a Sacrament
            
            Of Chriſts body and blood, vpon vs ſpent.
            
               Bare Signes they are not: they are alſo Seales,
            
            And exhibit the grace, the word reveales.
            The ſignes thou tak'ſt at the hand of a man:
            But God giues thee his Son; for no man can.
            And, when thou comm'ſt vnto this Sacrament,
            Belieuing, humbled, and true penitent;
            Thou art hereby put into ſure poſſeſſion
            Of Ieſus Chriſt, and of his bleſſed paſſion.
            As truly as thou tak'ſt the bread and wine,
            So truely are Chriſts fleſh and blood made thine.
            His benefits alone thou doeſt not take:
            But Chriſt withall, who dyed for thy ſake.
            The fruits are thine: the tree is alſo thine,
            Euen as the ſubſtance of the bread and wine.
            Yea faſt thou art united to thy Lord,
            Who does himſelfe, and his to thee afford.
            To ſay That Men Prepair'd Doe Eat His Fleſh,
            
            
               And drinck his blood, their ſoules for to refreſh,
            
               Euen his very fleſh, and his very blood,
            
            
               May well be ſayde, if't be well vnderſtood.
            
            And ſauing fayth, by which we do belieue,
            Is that, by which we eat him, and receiue.
            
               
Or ſay, how this is done, we doe not know:
            Yet the faithfull doe it, although no moe.
            But, if thou doeſt not thither come prepared,
            Then, though thou tak'ſt this holy Cuppe and
Bread,
            Yet doeſt thou not the Bread of life receiue:
            But doeſt in truth thy fooliſh heart deceiue.
            For, who ſo comm's without due preparation,
            He eats and drinks vnto his own damnation;
            It being certeinly no ſmall offence
            To ruſh on theſe things without reverence.
            And yet too many doe, as may appeare
            By their ill liues, after they haue been there;
            Following the courſes, they ran before,
            Whereby they anger God ſo much the more.
            Too many alſo themſelues doe occupy,
            Not in themſelues, but in this Myſterie,
            Searching and ſifting it with carnall wit:
            Whereas to trye themſelues were farre more fit:
            But chiefly now, ſith God has drawen his ſword,
            And does not to us ſpeak alone by word.
            The grievous judgments, which make many cry,
            Should moue us all our ſelues in time to trie.
            But yet more, know that holy Writ doeth teach,
            (That which the holy men of old did preach)
            That the ſignes themſelues are dignified
            With the names of the things ſignified.
            And this is for their honor done, and more;
            Euen for to raiſe our hearts, from things before
            Our eyes, vnto the things, that are aboue,
            Which here are tendred to us of free loue.
            This is trueth: it is no lie.
            
               
This is true Antiquitie.
            The other's new, and ſilly.
            Glorie be to God on high, and to men truth,
And loue, and peace, through Ieſus Chriſt,
by the mightie working of the
Holie Spirit,
Amen, and Amen.
March vii. 1624.
               Tho. Tuke.
            
         
         
            A
POSTSCRIPT
To the Reader.
            THeſe lines ſubnexed were brought me by a friend
ſome eighteene months agoe, from an author vnknowne
vnto us both. Which occaſioned me to
write theſe, thou ſeeſt. If I haue vſed, or abuſed
any of them, or all, I craue pardon of their Author,
& giue him free leaue to doe ſo with mine, if he be in
vivis, as I hope and wiſh, and be ſo pleaſed.
            
               
PRiests make Christs body and ſoule, you muſt not doubt.
            They eate, they drink, they box him vp, and bear about.
            One is too litle, bread and wine holds him ſeverall.
            So we dine; I with my Christ, thou with thine.
            Is thy mouth the virgins womb? is bread her ſeed?
            Are thy words the Holy Ghoſt? is this the Creed?
            O preſumptuous vndertaker,
            Never cake could make a baker,
            Yet the Prieſt can make his maker.
            What's become of all thoſe Chriſts, which Priests haue
made?
            Doe all thoſe hoſtes of Hoaſtes abide? or doe they fade?
            One Chriſt bides, all theſe flye.
            One Chriſt liues, all theſe dye,
            One is true, the reſt a lye.
            FINIS.
         
      
   