
      
         
            
            
               A TRIALL
OF SVBSCRIPTION,
BY WAY OF
A PREFACE VNTO CERTAINE
SVBSCRIBERS;
AND,
Reaſons for leſſe rigour againſt non-ſubſcribers.
Both modeſtly written;
that
Neither ſhould offend.
            
            ESAY. 44. 5.
            One ſhall ſay, I am the Lordes: another ſhalbee called by
the name of Iaacob: and another ſhall ſubſcribe with his
hande vnto the Lorde, and name himſelfe by the name
of Iſraell.
            1599.
         
         
            
            
            To ſuch Miniſters of
the Goſpell as would ſeeme deſirous of
reformation; and yet haue ſubſcribed
to the Arch-Biſhop
of Canterburie his
Articles.
            
               
                  REVEREND Fathers,
The reaſons
following were writen
(as I am perſwaded)
vpon occaſion of that
godlie, wiſe, and peaceable
motion, which
was made in the laſt
Parliament for convenient fauour to be ſhewed
to godlie & profitable Miniſters, touching ſubſcription
and vſe of ceremonies. Whether
the author be a Miniſter or no, or what he is, I
am not for my part, any whit inquiſitiue; and
doe wiſh, That all they who doe loue peace and
trueth, would diligentlie and charitablie conſider
the reaſons without hearkening after the
reaſoner, Leaſt they occaſion trouble to him,
who ſeemeth to deſire the good of our Church.
But whoſoeuer he bee, I preſume on his patience
to publiſh his labours, For that (in the iudgement
of ſundry wiſe, and learned both Preachers

& other, they be thought worthy (for their
pith and modeſtie) ſuch publication, and may
prooue (through Gods bleſsing) an happie
meane ſomewhat to calme that tempest, which
(too long) hath toſſed the little Arke of Chriſte
his Church. And therfore, I hope, that none will
be offended, if I help forward that good which
(no doubt) the author intended. If none: Then
why ſhould I feare that any of you will be offended
with mee?
               Matth. 26. 41. 
               And yet I knowe the weaknes
of the fleſh, bee the ſpirit neuer ſo willing,
to doe well.
               Rom. 8. 7. 
               For the wiſedome of the
fleſh (which is enemitie againſt God) will
readilie ſuggeſt; That theſe apologeticall reaſons
will cauſe you to be worſe thought of; except
yee either diſclaime your ſubſcription,
or publickly iuſtifie the ſame with ſound reaſons
from Gods worde. One of which I pray God
ye may haue grace to doe, That ſincere teachers
of the ſame trueth, may either bee conformable
togither, or ſeeke reformacion togither. I will
not preiudice your iudgement, much leſſe with
Aquila preſume to expound vnto Apollos
the waye of God more perfectlie:Act. 18. 24. 25 26. 2. 3.
               Yet, ſeeing Apollos humbled himſelfe to the
informacion of a tentmaker; I perſuade my
ſelfe, That miniſters of the Goſpell will giue me
leaue (being none of the greateſt clearks) to ſeeke
reſolutiō of this my doubt. For I freelie confeſſe,
That as yet I cannot ſee, but that ye haue ſinned
againste the trueth by your conformitie. Yet
ſo, That I reuerence you as Fathers for your

worke ſake; and regard you as brethren for your
profeſsion ſake, your ſinne of conformitie (if it
be a ſinn) notwithſtanding. For we are taught,
to conſider one another,Heb. 10. 24, 25. to prouoke
vnto loue, and good workes; and not
to forſake the fellowſhippe which we
haue among our ſelues, as the manner
of ſome is.
            
               The groundes (if I may ſo ſpeake) of my doubting
be two: Firſt, The euidence (ſo ſeeming to
mee) of certaine ſcriptures. Secondlie, The
weakneſſe (in my poore opinion) of your excuſes.
I meane not to quote manie places for my purpoſe;
and I cannot knowe all, you pretend for
your ſelues. I muſt and will therefore content
my ſelfe with ſome fewe: yet the moſt pregnant
(as I iudge) of either.
            
            
               From the former (quoted in the margent)
I take occaſion (and I thinke vpon good ground)
to ſpeake to your conſciences in theſe wordes: If
woe be vnto them,Eſay. 5. 20. & 445. that ſpeake good of
euill, and euill of good; If hee that ſubſcribeth
ſhould ſubſcribe to the Lorde,
that is, By ſubſcription profeſſe himſelfe to bee
the Lordes; If hee,
               Gal. 2. 18. and 3. 3. that buildeth againe
the things, that he hath deſtroyed, maketh
him ſelfe a treſpaſſer; If they bee
fooliſh that after they haue begunne
in the Spirite; (that is, inſinceritie of the
Goſpell,
               Reaſon. 1 
               (as the Reaſoner ſpeaketh) would
now bee made perfect by the fleſh; and
if halting betweene two opinions,1. King. 18. 2
                     •
                  . 
               deſerue

a iuſt reproofe: Then I may admoniſh
you,
               1. Tim 5. 1. as Fathers, to make ſtraight ſteppes
vnto your feete, leaſt that which is halting
bee turned out of the way.Heb. 12. 13. 
               For in
the wiſedome of the fleſh you ſpeake good (by
ſubſcription) of carnall rites; whiche heretofore
ye haue reprooued in the ſpirite, and yet
miſlike in your beſt iudgemente: So that yee
build againe the thinges yee haue deſtroyed, and
ſeeme (with ſome ſcandall) to halt betweene
two opinions. But I pray you, let vs enter with
humble heartes into conſideration of your excuſes.
            
            
               Firſt, It is auowed by ſome, That they haue
not ſubſcribed ſimplie; but with proteſtations
and exceptions, Though they be not recorded.
Which (ſay they) is not their fault. And
(ſay I vnder correction) The Bb. of Canterburie
and his aſſociates doe well in not recording
ſuch proteſtations and exceptions. For;
If they require a lawfull and godlie ſubſcription;
Why then ſhould they blemiſh their proceedings
with recorded proteſtations? But,
Suppoſe their vrged ſubſcription bee vnlawfull,
doe ye not perceiue, How the not recording
of proteſtations doeth checke the weakeneſſe
of ſubſcribers, who (by proteſtation doe ſolemnelie
accuſe their preſent ſubſcription? Trulie (me
thinkes) you ſhould either ſubſcribe without proteſtation;
Or, if you proteſt, you ſhould not ſubſcribe.
For, Is not this Proteſting againſte
ſome thinges, and Subſcribing to all, to halt

betweene two wayes, and to haue an heart and
an hearte? One hearte for the mouth, and an
other for the hande?
               Eſa. 29. 13. 14 If the wiſedome of
wiſe mē ſhall periſh, when people come
neere vnto God with their mouth, and
remooue their heart farre from him:
May not I aduiſe you to repent, That yee haue
ſuffered your mouth to increaſe the ſinn
of your hand;Ecclef. 5. 5. 
               and to take heede, That yee
ſay not before the Angell, That it was
with proteſtation? For why ſhould God be
angry with your voyce, & deſtroy the
worke of your handes?Rom. 14. 22. o bleſſed is hee
that condemneth not himſelfe in that
thing, which he alloweth.
            
               Other woulde iuſtiſie themſelues, Becauſe
(as they ſay) It is not affirmed by their ſubſcription,
That all thinges in the Bookes of
Common prayer, and of ordeyning Biſhoppes,
Prieſts, and Deacons, be agreeable to the worde
of God; but onelie ſaide, That thoſe Bookes
conteyne nothing contrarie to the worde of
God. I might appeale to your conſciences, Whether
you thinke not ſome thinges in thoſe Bookes
to bee contrarie to Gods worde? But in my
conſcience (as I am yet perſwaded) This diſtinction
cannot ſatisfie your conſcience. For, If
Chriſt doeth ſay,
               Luc. 11. 23. He that is not with me,
is againſt mee: May it not bee ſaide, That
whatſoeuer is not according to the word, in
Gods publike worſhip and ſeruice, is contrarie
to the ſame? And the rather, becauſe Eſay hath

ſet it down for a rule;
               Eſay. 8. 20. If any ſpeak not according
to this word; it is becauſe there
is no light in them? I pray ye conſider, That
howſoeuer, hee bee a good ſubiect, who doeth nothinge
contrarie to the lawes of his Prince, becauſe
the poſitiue lawes of men be imperfect, as
their makers bee: Yet a good Chriſtian ought to
indeauour in t
                     •
                  e obedience of faith, That all his
actions in Gods worſhippe (which ſhall be ſurely
iudged in the day of Ieſus) bee iuſtifiable by the
word:
               Pſal.19. 7. 
               becauſe The Lawe of the Lorde is
perfect: and the Scriptures are ſo ſufficient,
That thereby the man of God may bee
made abſolutely wiſe vnto ſaluation.2. Tim. 3. 15. 17. 
               I
can hardlie withhold my ſelf from diſputing this
caſe; Becauſe I ſee, That this diſtinction openeth
a gate to ſinne and ſuperſtition. For, as he
who teacheth, That all thinges in Gods worſhip
(for which we muſt aunſwere before God) muſt
be according to the word: reſtraineth mans inuentiōs,
& occaſioneth the godly more throughlie
to reley on the ſcriptures: ſo, he, who teacheth,
That it is ſufficient that nothing be contrary
to the word, giueth too much occaſion of libertie
to mans inventions, and cauſeth wiſe men (according
to the fleſh) to be leſſe zealous in ſearching
and depending on the ſcriptures. But I deſire
the humble and godly to conſider, whether
ceremonies, and an eccleſiaſticall gouernement
may be thruſt vpon Chriſt his Church (which is
his kingedom) without any warrant from Gods
word?
               Exod. 25. 28. 40. and 31. 
               Seeing Moſes (that extraordinarie

Lawgiuer) and Bezaleel,1, 2, 6, 7. and 39. 42. 43. 
               & Aholiab (miraculouſlie
inſpired with cunning) coulde not
make any thing about the Tabernacle (no not a
payer of ſnuffers), by their owne invention;
but according to the patterne which God himſelfe
had ſhewed vpon the mountaine: and ſeeing
our ſtate and Church doeth forbidde ſetting
vp of candles,Iniunction 3. 
               Becauſe it is a worke deuiſed by
mans phantaſie beſides ſcripture; condemneth
Reſeruation of the Sacrament, Becauſe
it is not by Chriſte his ordinance,
               Articles of Religion artic. 2
                     •
                  
                
               and is earneſt
againſt ſetting vp of Images in temples,
though they be not worſhipped,
               Homil. of perill of Idolat. 
               Becauſe it is not
lawfull & agreeable to Gods word, ſo to doe. To
come ſomewhat neerer the point: Suppoſe ſuch a
diſtinctiō in God his matters may be admitted:
yet examine your hearts, whether that figg leafe
will couer your nakedneſſe: Sith the Biſhoppes,
Prieſts, and Deacons of our Church are ſaide in
the Booke of Conſecration to bee called to their
ſeuerall miniſtrations according to the will of
our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: And by your ſubſcription
to the thirde of the ArchBb. Articles ye proſeſſe,
That ye beleeue all the articles conteined in the
Book of Articles of Religiō ſet forth Anno 1562
(the 36. whereof allowed Biſhopps &c.) to bee
agreeable to God: yet notwithſtanding ye haue
bene & ſtill ſeeme to be perſwaded in your conſcience,
That our Biſhops haue not their calling
from God; but were ſet vp by man, and ſetled by
cuſtome for vnities ſake.
            
            
               A thirde ſorte of ſubſcribers would couer

their heads with the ſhield (not of faith,) but of
humaine pollicie and ſtand to it, That of two
euils the leſſe is to be choſen: And therfore
ſome things are to be tolerated, rather than
the Church ſhould loſe the benefite of their miniſterie.
               Reaſon. 5.
               Wherevnto though the Reaſoner
hath well aunſwered by oppoſing the wiſedom of
the Spirite, which forbiddeth vs to lye, Howſoeuer
thereby the veritie of God might more abounde
vnto his glorie, and by ſhewing, Howe
this lye, or politique ſubſcription draweth a
curſe, and not a bleſsing vppon the miniſterie of
ſubſcribers againſt their owne conſcience: Yet
giue me leaue to ſpeak ſomewhat to this excuſe.
I will not vrge the opiniō of that moſt reuerend,
learned,
               Epiſt.12. 
               and godlie diuine Maiſter Beza; who
can giue no other coūcel, than that Miniſters hauing
teſtified their innocencie, and tried all remedies
in the feare of the Lord, ſhould giue place
to manifeſt violence when they be commaunded
not onlie to tollerate the ceremonies, and eccleſiaſticall
gouernement of our Church, but alſo to
allowe them by their hand writing. For there
is great difference betweene toleration, and
ſubſcription. But I would learne, whether that
ground of pollicie be not to be vnderſtood rather
of the euils of payne and puniſhment,
than of the euils of ſinne and guiltines:
Sith by the doctrine of our Church, No ſinne is
veniall or pardenable in it ſelfe. And I make
this Quaere, Whether ſilence inforced, or temporizing
ſubſcription, be the greater euill? Concerning

the former, This is my perſwaſion, That
as God,Iob. 13. 7. 9 (who needeth not the lye of politique
ſubſcription, but can butide his Church as hee
will) doeth not giue an ordinarie bleſsing to the
miniſterie of ſuch ſubſcribers: ſo the very ſilencing
of faithful miniſters that ſtād faſt in the
libertie,Gal. 5. 1. Co
                     •
                  l 2. 20. wherewith Chriſte hath made
vs free againſt the bondage of mans
inventions,Philip. 1. 12. 
               doeth turne rather (as Paules
bands) to the furthering of the Goſpel.
For, If an hundred godlie ministers were ſuſpended
for not ſubſcribing to all the ArchBiſhoppes
Articles, I doubt not but that their ſilencing
would preach reformation very effectuallie:
Wheras your temporizing ſubſcriptiō doth hurt
many wayes. For therby the ArchBb. is ſo hartened
in his courſe, that he hath reſolutelie ſaid:
That ſith God hath ſo bleſſed him therin,
that fewe of any accoumpte withſtand
the ſame, hee would not giue it
ouer now. Is not then your politique ſubſcribing
the cauſe, why thoſe few be ſo hardlie dealt
with, That no mediation can prevaile in their
behalfe? To ſay nothing of proſeſſours, who
ſeeing you (who haue ſtood in the gappe) to ſubſcribe
at the laſt, do thinke thoſe few that now
ſtand, more preciſe than wiſe, and become therfore
leſſe comfortable to them than they haue
bin. But anſwer me: Is not this affliction added
to their ſufferings by your fault? I ſay more, By
your ſubſcripriō 
               ye may ſeeme (in ſome ſort)
guilty of preiudicing your brethren, not onely for

the time preſent, but for euer hereafter; except
by the ſtanding out of ſome, preſcription be interrupted.
For as many things enacted by Law,
are antiquated by non vſage: ſo many thinges
not cōmanded by law are eſtabliſhed by cuſtome
and preſcription. This is not all: For as Peters
example
               Gal. 2. 12, 13. drew not onely the Iewes, but
Barnabas alſo into diſſimulation with
him: ſo your temporizing ſubſcription hath
bene and daily will be an occaſion to many weak
ones, if not of falling, yet of ſtumbling; if not of
going backe into Egypt, yet of looking backe toward
Sodome. So that few be now ſo zealous
for reformation, as they haue bene. Which muſt
needes be a great offence, and that giuen by you,
If (in your iudgement) there be neede of reformation.
Shall I tell you, That hee who
               1. Cor. 8. 12. 
               woundeth
weake conſciences, doeth ſinne againſt
Chriſt, who pronounceth an heauie iudgment
againſt him,
               Mat. 18. 6. 7. that offendeth any of his
litle ones? Nay rather I beſeech you by the
mercies of God, That
               1. Ioh. 3. 20 If your own heart
condemne you for ſubſcribing againſt your
conſcience: ye would feare him that is greater
than you hearte:Reuel. 2. 5. remember from
whence yee be fallen, repent, and doe
the firſt workes.
         
      
      
         
            
            REASONS, why
faithfull Miniſters should
not be depriued or ſuſpended,
for peaceable omiſsion of preſcribed
ceremonies; much leſſe for not ſubſcribing
to thē, and all other partes
of eccleſiaſticall policie, as to ordinances
not contrarie to the worde
of God.
            
               FIRST,Reaſon I. their
omiſſion and
ſcruple of ſuch
ſubſcription,
               Reſpect of a cōſcience probably informed. is
meerely of a cō
               ſcience
fearfull
to offend, in allowing
by acte
or hande, any thing not warrantable
by the worde; and therefore a meere
invention of man: According to that
of zealous Dauid,
               Pſal. 119. 113. 
               I hate vaine inuentions,
but thy Lawe doe I loue. For in
a godly ielouſie of that ſpiritual whordome,
(Num. 15. 39. whereof the people of GOD
ought carefullie to take heede) they

holde; That what ſoeuer is not according
to the expreſſe ſcripture, or ſound
concluſion from the ſame, is contrary
to the worde. Which their opinion; &
omiſſion aunſwering therevnto, ſeemeth
vnto them grounded vppon the
worde and iudgement of authoritie.
But ſith it is not anſwerable to my preſent
purpoſe, here to ſett down manie
of their reaſons, drawne from theTim. 3. 16, 17. ſufficiencie
of the ſcriptures, (which can
ſuffer neitherDeut. 4. 2. & 5. 32. adding nor diminiſhing,
declining to the right nor to the
lefte hande); from theGal. 2. 3, 4, 5. & 3. 2, 3. Ioh. 4. 21, 22, 23. ſinceritie of
the Goſpell, (whiche can not brooke
Iewiſhe, much leſſe Romiſhe ceremonies)
And from ſundrie other good
cōſiderations generall and particular;
I onely craue fauour to ſett down one
or two, That the tendernes of their cō
               ſcience
may ſomwhat appeare to proceede,
not from conceipted ſcrupuloſitie
without at leaſt ſome probable
perſwaſions.
            THE generall precept of the Apoſtle,
Ephe 5. 8, 10, 11. 
               Walke as children of the light,
approuing that which is pleaſing to the
Lorde, and haue no fellowſhip with vnprofitable

workes of darkneſſe, concerneth
not onely corrupt manners, but
vnprofitable ceremonies deuiſed by
man without warrant of the worde, at
leaſt by good conſequence. For it is
an Apoſtolicall canon,1 Cor. 14. 26. 
               Let all things
be done vnto edification. And it is a
Propheticall direction, To the Lawe
and to the Prophetes: If they speake
not
               Eſa. 8. 20. 
               according to this worde, it is becauſe
there is no light in them. But the
ſaide faithfull Miniſters ſee not howe
ceremonies preſcribed, are profitable;
notwitſtanding their godly ſignifications
pretended. For if Christ,
               Heb. 1. 1. Act. 2. 17. Rom. 16. 25, 26. who in
theſe laſt dayes ſpeaketh euidently by
his Goſpell and ſpirit, had iudged ſignifying
ceremonies convenient vnto edification;
he would not haue aboliſhed
ſo many preſcribed by Moſes,Gal. 3. 23, 24, 25. and 4, 3, 4. as
being fitt for children; and appointed
ſo few, and thoſe not onely for ſignification,
but principallie to be ſeales of
ſpirituall graces. And therefore this
addition of ſignifying ceremonies, ſeemeth
vnto them to eclipſe the glorie
of Christ his wiſedome and faithfulnes
in providing for the full inſtruction

of his people; contrarie to the ſcriptures;
which giue him teſtimonie that
he is (asMat. 23. 8. onely ſo) aIoh. 4. 25. Ephe. 4. 8, 11, 12, 13, 14 Heb. 3. 2 ſufficient Teacher
of his Church: Neither doe they
ſee, how the ſignifying ceremonies bee
(otherwiſe) according to the worde;
And the rather, becauſe that other cā
               non
of the Apoſtle,1 Cor. 14. 40. 
               Let all things bee
done honestlie and by order, (ſo much
vrged in their defence) doeth onelie
commaund decent diſpoſing of ceremonies
(of order, not of figure) and
not, that what ſoeuer may ſeeme tending
to decencie, is therefore to bee
thruſt into the Church. In conſideration
of which (ſo conceiued) vnprofitablenes,
and vnwarrantablenes, the
ſaide Miniſters dare not haue fellowſhip
with preſcribed ceremonies, In giuing
allowaunce by vſing or ſubſcribing.
Againe, this fearfulneſſe of preſcribed
ceremonies, and generall ſubſcriptiō,
ſeemeth to them to be groū
               ded
1 vpon the ſecond commandment,
2 the ſecond petition, & 3 an vſe of the
Lords ſupper, aunſwerable to that article
of our Creede, where we ſay, I beleeue
that the Church is an holy cōmunion

of Sainctes. For the ſeconde commandement
forbidding vs to bowe, or
yeeld to any Idoll of mans invencion,
(vnder the name of Grauen Imaege, the
chief Idoll; as all vncleannes is forbidden
vnder the name of adulterie, the
groſſeſt pollucion of the fleſhe) doeth
withall commaund all thinges in and
about the ſeruice of God, to be according
to his revealed will. As appeareth
by the oppoſition or relatiue reſpect
of theſe wordes: Thou ſhalt not make
to thy ſelfe any grauen Image; to theſe,
of them that loue me & keepe my commaundements.
And further, by conferring
the vſe of Fringes, whiche the
children of Iſraell were to make vpon
the border of their garments ſet down
in theſe wordes:Nom. 15. 39. 
               And yee ſhall haue
the fringes, that when yee looke vppon
them, yee may remember all the commaundementes
of God, and doe them;
And that ye ſeeke not after your owne
heart, nor after your owne eyes, after
which ye goe a whoring. In the ſecond
petition we pray,Heb. 12. 28. Mat. 13. 19. 1. Lu. 9. 2, 6. That GOD would
raigne in his Church by the worde of
his Kingdome; whiche teacheth vs,
Iohn 19. 15 That as a worldly kingdome cannot

brooke two Monarches: So Chriſt (Pſal. 2. 6. 7. Ioh. 5. 22. to
whom the Father hath committed all
iudgement) is onelyMat. 23. 8. Maiſter among
his Diſciples, & onely1 Tim. 6. 14 15. Prince among
his people. And therefore the Apoſtle
(Col. 2. 20 &c and 3. 1. hauing reprooued the vnprofitable
traditions of men; As, touch not, taſte
not, handle not) exhorteth the Coloſſians,
to ſeeke thoſe things which are aboue,
where Chriſt ſitteth at the right
hande of God. As if hee ſhould ſaye;
Chriſt onely ruleth: Therefore ye are
not to obey the commaundements of
men, but to be ruled by him onely.
The vſe of the Lordes Supper before
mencioned, Saint Paule him ſelf maketh,
when he thus argueth:1 Cor. 10. 16, 17, 20. Wheras
the bread which we breake, is the cō
               munion
of the body of Chriſt, that is,
a ſeale of that communion, which we
haue with Chriſt, and one with an other
in him. Therefore we muſt be ſo
farr from hauing any fellowſhip with
Idolaters, that how ſo euer we pretend
the ſafe keeping of our hearts for God;
yet we muſt not (no not onely in bodie)
be preſent at Idolatrous ſeruice.
From all which, they thinke (verilie)
that the ſpirit of God it ſelfe maketh

this argument:1 Cor. 6. 14 15, 16, 17. b This forbiddeth ye whole corruption in religiō of heathen or Antichriſt, althogh principallie, their falſe doctrine. What communion
hath the light of the worde, with the
darknes of mans inventions? What cō
               corde
hath Chriſt our Sauiour, with
Beliall, the Antichriſt of Rome? And
what agreement hath the Temple of
God (which is our ſelues) with Idolls
of humane traditiōs? WherforeReue, 18. 2. 3, 4. come
out of Babilon (that is, the confuſion,
or confuſed worſhip and gouernment
of Rome) & touch no vnclean thing,Pſal. 51. 5.
But as man him ſelfe (who is borne in
ſinne and conceyued in iniquitie,Eccleſ. 7. 3
                     •
                  .) ſo
his own inventions which make him
more ſinfull,Ioh. 17. 17. Deut. 4. 5, 6. 1 Cor. 3. 12. Iere. 23. 22, 28, 29. can not bee ſanctified,
but by the worde; The hypotheſis or
ground of this concluſion is a perſwaſion;
That the ceremonies which they
ſtumble at, bee not onelie the inventions
of man; but parte alſo of theReu. 17. 4, 5. ſcarlet
woman her fornications: yea notwithſtanding
they were in vſe before
Antichriſt was exalted; AsIohn 7. 2. circumciſion
was parte of the ceremoniall law,
notwithſtanding it was not of Moſes,
but of the Fathers; And therefore ſuch
ceremonies are by thē (in their zeale)
iudged to be more fitting the whore of
Babylon, then beſeeming the chaſte

ſpouſe of Chriſt;10 Cor. 11. 2. Pſal. 45. 10, 11. Col. 2. 18, 19, 20. who ſhould be conformable
to her huſbande in ſimplicitie
and ſinceritie.
            That their diſlike of preſcirbed ceremonies
may 
                  〈…〉
                to them grounded,
as on 
                  〈…〉
                ſo on the iudgement
of authoritie, Let the reaſons of
remouing other ceremonies bee well
conſidered:Preface 2. to the book of common prayer. which be theſe; They obſcured
the glorie of God; they were vnprofitable;
they blinded the people; they
turned to vanitie and ſuperstition; they
were abuſed by the vnlearned, and beſeeme
not Chriſtes Goſpell; which is not
a ceremoniall lawe (as much as Moſes
was) but a religion to ſerue God,
not in bondage of the figure or ſhadowe;
but in the freedome of the ſpirit.
To apply by particulars;
                  Hom. 8. 
               Piping
and chaūting,
               
                  part. 2. are ſaid to haue diſpleaſed
God ſo ſore, & filthilie defyled his
holy houſe and his place of prayer,
That for them he hath iuſtlie deſtroyed
manie Nations.
                  Iniunct. 3. and 23. And ſetting vp of
candles; couering of ſhrynes, candleſtickes,
and all monumentes of ſuperſtition;
yea in the glaſſe windowes, not
onelie of Churches, but of houſes too,
are ſaide, as to be taken away, ſo to be

deviſed by mans fantaſies (not contrarie
but beſides ſcripture; And therfore
haue not onely no promiſe of reward,
but contrariwiſe great threatninges &
maledictions of God, for that they be
thinges tendinge to ſuperstition. If all
theſe notes of condemnation may bee
ſett, aſwell on ceremonies reteyned, as
theſe remoued; Then tender conſciences,
which thinke them ſelues forbidden
to beDeut. 7. 5, 6. and 14, 1, 2 conformable to Idolaters,
aſwell in cutting the haire, as in vpholding
altars, haue (at leaſt) probable
cauſe to feare, how they allow
by acte or hand ceremonies reteyned.
            To cōclude this firſt Reaſon, wherin
I am of neceſſitie longer, thē I need
to be in the reſt; I humbly referre to
conſideration, That whereas reſolved
conſciences are vncompellable, & her
Maieſtie of her own Princely clemencie,
did permitt (among other) Biſhop
Heath,
               Execution of iustice in England. a popiſh recuſant (but of conſcience:
not of a trayterous obſtinacy)
to continew Lord Chauncellor; Whether
it were not cōvenient, that faithfull
Miniſters ſhould continewe their
godlie and profitable Miniſterie, the
omiſſion only of ceremonies notwithſtāding

Prouided that ſuch omiſſion
be with peace to others knowledge; as
it ſeemeth to be in truth to their own
conſciences; Leaſt (otherwiſe) the reuerend
FathersEphe. 4. 30. greeue the holy Spirit
of GOD by whom they are ſealed
vnto the day of redemptiō, andMat. 23. 8. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. ſhew
them ſelues to bee (not brethren) but
Lordes ouer Gods inheritance.
            SECONDLIE,Reaſon II. Cōſideration of indiſſerent things let it be ſuppoſed,
that their conſcience (all the premiſſes
notwithſtanding) is erronious.
But let it bee withall conſidered, that
the errour is onely in ceremonies;
which by the nowe Archb. of Yorke
ſince he was a L. Biſhop were accounted
the blemiſhes of our Church, and
(in their beſt regard) are but thinges
indifferent. And therfore the Church
is not to be defrauded of the benefite
of faithfull Miniſters their ſound inſtructions,
for only omitting ſuch ceremonies,
and that of conſcience with
peace; Except it be religion toMat. 23. 25 tythe
Mynt and Commyn, and to neglect
the greater things of the Lawe. Saint
1 Cor. 7. 36. 
               Paul would not by his Apoſtolicall
authoritie, reſtreyne the libertie of diſciples

touching Mariage, becauſe it
was an indifferent thing, and he ſtraitlie
forbiddeth the weake to bee condemned,Rom. 14. 2, 3, 17. and 15 1, 2, 3.
for not eating of all thinges
conſidering the Kingdome of God is
not meate nor drinke; and wee are to
pleaſe our neighbour in that that is
good to edification, So that heGa. 5. 11, 12 and 6. 12, 23 wiſhed
them cut of, who diſquieted the
Churche by vrgingePaul finallie renoūced, not only the neceſſarie, but alſo the indifferent vſing of Circumciſion. Circumciſion
with Chriſt, That they might reioyce
in the fleſhe of their brethren, that is,
in their conformitie in carnall rites.
            All this beeing true, theyPhil. 2. 3, 4, 16, 17, 18, 19. & 1. 18. bee no
right followers of bleſſed Paule, who
thruſt out of the Churche profitable
teachers, for only omiſſion of indifferent
ceremonies. AgaineArt. of Religion, art. 34. if euerie
particular Churche maye ordaine,
change, and aboliſh rites or ceremonies;
It may bee adiudged no capitall
offence for faithfull Miniſters (in their
ſeuerall charges) onely to omitte indifferent
ceremonies; And the leſſe capitall,
conſidering vnitie in doctrine,
and conformitie in diuine ſervice, yea,
all ready obedience otherwiſe to the
Prince & State is faithfully obſerued.
Laſtly if ſuch onely are openly to bee

rebuked,Eod. & Praefac. 2 to the booke of cō
                  mon prayer. Iniunct. 22. as opēly break the traditiōs
of the Church through private iudgement,
and contemptuous wilfulneſſe;
then onely omiſſion (and that of conſcience
with peace) deſerueth not ſo
publique and extreame puniſhments
as depriuation and ſuſpenſion. For the
ſentence of ſingularitie can not (with
wiſedome and equitie) bee pronounced
againſt them, who, not only haue
iuſtified their omiſſiō with arguments
2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. out of Gods worde, which are publiſhed;
and (thinke they) vnaunſwered
(write neuer ſo manie) ſo long as Maſter
Cartwrights ſecond Replie remaineth
vnconfuted; but alſo haue the
ſuffrages of reformed Churches (Scottiſh,
Dutch, and French) round about
vs; which haue abandoned ſuch ceremonies.
Yea by the obſeruation of
ſomeR. Dolemās conference, lib. 2. ca. vlt. Popiſh (though politike) there
be fewe Proteſtantes in Englande (beſides
ſuch as depende vpon eccleſiaſticall
dignities) which are not puritans,
that is,Fulk Retent. 16 concer
                     •
                  a. eccle. catho. ſuch as deſire to haue the
Church throughly reformed. As for
cōtemptuous wilfulnes, Their not inveying
againſt ceremonies reteyned;
their brotherlie converſation with other

of contrarie iudgement concerning
them; their patient enduring extremities
for ſuch omiſſion; their ſilence
when they are ſuſpended, and
mainteining the vnitie of our church,
theſe ceremonies and great affliction
for them notwithſtandinge: (beſides
the ſaid arguments which teſtify their
omiſſion to be meerelie of cōſcience)
doe ſufficientlie cleare them of contempt
and wilfulnes.
            THIRDLY,Reaſon III. Question of warrant by lawe. It may ſeme to them
(indeed no great Lawyers) a quere,
Whether their ſo greeuous puniſhmentes
be iuſtifyable by the1 Eliſ. cap. 2 ſtatute,
which puniſheth ſuch as refuſe to vſe
the forme preſcribed for Prayers & Sacramentes,
or obſtinatelie vſe anie other
either forme or ceremonie; but
provideth not againſt diſcreet omiſſiō
of the ceremonie though the forme
be obſerued. As for enforcing general
ſubſcription, all men may ſee and ſay:
It is beſides lawe. For the ende of the
onely13. Eliz. 
                     ••
                  
                  pit. 12. Statute for ſubſcription, is to
Keepe Papiſtes and other heretiques
out of the Miniſterie; As is evident by
theſe words of the preamble: That the

Churches of the Queenes Maieſties dominions
may bee ſerued with Pastours
of ſounde religion, Bee it enacted, &c.
Againe, the Statute requireth Subſcriprion
to the Articles of Religion; and
not to all, but ſuch as onely concerne
the cōfeſſion of the true Christian faith,
and the doctrine of the Sacramentes.
Yea that the exception of ſome Articles
might be more manifeſt, (and for
no other cauſe) is this word onely inſerted.
Laſtlie, the Bb. of Canterburie,
would not haue made a ſpeciall article
for the approuing of the booke of
common Prayer, &c. by ſubſcription;
if ſuch ſubſcription were by that Statute
required. Nowe further, where
there is no commaundement,Rom. 4. 15. there
is no tranſgreſſion; wher no tranſgreſſion,
no puniſhment. But wiſhing the
tollerating of peaceable and proffitable
Miniſters, and not the hurt of our
Church-gounernours; I forbeare to
ſhewe what danger they may incurre
by lawe, who puniſh faithfull Miniſters
and loyall ſubiectes without law,
for refuſing to ſubſcribe further then
lawe requireth; notwitſtanding they
willinglie offer to ſubſcribe ſo farre.

Onely this I ſaye (as a Profeſſor of the
worde,Hab. 1. 13, 14 and no ſtudent in lawe) That
whereas Habacuc compareth wicked
men devouring men more righteous
then they, to fiſhes of the ſea that haue
no ruler ouer them; wee may learne,
that were there is a ſoueraigne, one
ſubiect is not to tyrannize ouer an other,
without lawfull authoritie.
            FOVRTHLIE,Reaſon IIII. Complaint of vnequal iudgement let it be ſuppoſed,
That peaceable omiſſiō (not of diuine
ſeruice) but of Ceremonies, bee
puniſhable in ſome ſorte by ſome law
or other; And that the Bb. of Canterburie
his generall ſubſcription were to
be inforced by law; Yet ſith no ſtatute
(ſo farre as they knowe) doeth expreſlie
ſet downe what puniſhment is due
to either offence; they thinke, that (in
equitie) their fault, and (in diſcretion)
their calling, is ſo to be regarded, that
puniſhment deſerued, exceede not the
fault committed: But loſſeEcclus 34. 23. of liuing
by depriuation or ſuſpencion, is the
next puniſhment to death; Therefore
they complaine that more then ſeveritie
is done againſt them. For if it bee
a grieuous puniſhment to fyne a laye

man (ſo called) 10. 20. or 30. pound:
May not the greeued ſpirites of faithfull
Miniſters, ſigh; yea crie vnto God
for that their bondage is ſuch, That
onelie omiſſion, and that of cōſcience
with peace, is corrected with no leſſe
puniſhment, than loſſe of liuing.Iniunct. 28. Authoritie
doeth not eſteeme them (as
Ieroboams Prieſtes) the baſeſt of the
people; And theTheſ. 5. 12, 13. word doeth exhorte
vs to knowe them, and to haue them
in ſingular loue for their workes ſake;
YeaPſal. 105. 14, 15. it ſtraightlie forbiddeth vs to
touch his anoynted, or to doe his Prophetes anie
harme; becauſe God hath
reproued Kings for their ſakes. Bee it
therefore farre from vs, to admitt it
to be the pleaſure of our gracious and
Chriſtian Queene, That diſcreet and
able Teachers (of her own profeſſion)
ſhould be ſubiect to ſuch extremities,
without ſufficient lawe, or ſo deſeruing
faultes. Againe, vnlearned
Prieſtes that can but read (and therefore
not to be admitted to take charge
of ſoules by anie warrant ofHoſ. 4. 6. 
               God or
Iniunct. 23. lib. conſ. in ye h. queſt. to Archd. Man) are generally tollerated, not
onely for want of Miniſters, but alſo
in pitifull regard of them ſelues, their

wiues, and their children. If there be
greater want of Preachers thē of Readers,
If as great pitie to bee ſhewed to
Preachers brought vp in learning fiō
their infancie; and therefore leſſe able
to ſhift for them ſelues & theirs than
Readers, that may liue by their trades
or occupations, ſeruices, or other labours
from which they came; And if
there be no1 Tim. 5. 21, 22. partialitie in Church gouernours;
Then Preaching Miniſters
may expect tolleration of peaceable
omiſſion, or (at leaſt) mitigation, of ſo
grecuous extremities.
            LASTLIE,Reaſon V. Great incō
                  veniences. the due conſideration
of manie and great inconveniences
which accompanie or followe ſo
extreame proceedinges, may mooue
ſuch as loue1 Cor. 10. 24. Chriſt and the ſheepe of
his paſture more then them ſelues,Phil. 2. 22. or
priuate reſpectes; to allowe or conſent
to tolleration or mitigatiō in theſe caſes.
For (firſt) ſuch proceedinges conſtreyne
manie to vſe ceremonies, and
generallie to ſubſcribe againſt their
owne conſciences. As may appeare by
their proteſtations, or limitations before;
and by their concealing or excuſing

after ſubſcription: Whereby they
Rom. 14. 5. 23. ſinne, and ſo drawe vppon them ſelues
and their labours, a curſe, and not
a bleſſing. For their pretence of chooſing
the leſſe of two euills (according
to the counſell of politiques) will not
iuſtifie them againſt the doctrine of
the Apoſtle, which is;Rom. 3. 7, 8. That how ſoeuer
the veritie of God might more abounde
through our lye vnto his glorie,
yet we muſt not doe euill, that good may
come of it. Therefore1 Sam. 15. 24. and 16. 
                     •
                  . 14. as the ſpirit of
God departed from Saul, and an euill
ſpirit vexed him after hee had ſinned
againſt his conſcience vnder pretence
of a good ende; So all ſuch cōformers
may feare (that which is ſeene in too
manie) leaſt the good graces of Gods
ſpirit decay in them, and they prooue
as ill, or worſe, in negligent teaching;
heaping vp of liuings; and inveighing
againſt ſuch as ſtande for reformatio,
than they that neuer pretended like
ſinceritie. Secondlie, ſuch ſtopping of
the mouthes of painefull and profitable
Preachers for ceremonies ſake, is
no leſſe puniſhment to the Church it
ſelfe, thā to the Preachers; yea ſo much
the greater, becauſe feare of troubles

for ceremonies, make manie convert
their ſtudies to Phiſicke, Lawe, or otherwiſe;
& idoll ſheepheardes, or idle
Nonreſidentes, are for the moſt parte,
thruſt into the places of faithfull Paſtours
remoued. So that the proverbe
is fulfilled:Pro. 29. 1
                     •
                   Ezek. 34. 2, 3, 4, 5. Zach. 13. 7. 
               Where Propheſie faileth,
the people are ſcattered. Thirdlie, ſuch
thruſting out of faithfull Miniſters &
Watchmē for ceremonies, is occaſion,
as of muchHoſ. 4. 1, 2, 6 ſinne, ſo of manie papiſts,
who are increaſed or confirmed, partlie
through want of that diligent teaching
whiche is in Cities and good
Townes (as one of themſeluesR.Dolemā
                  
                     •
                   conf. &c. lib. 2. cap. vlt. obſerueth),
partlie by impunity. For as the
Turkes haue leſſe feared Croyſadoes,
euer ſince the Pope & his vaſſalls haue
fet them ſelues againſt the Lutherans;
ſo Papiſtes doe leſſe feare the high Cō
               miſſion,
when they ſee the B. of Canterburie
and his Colleagues, moſt earneſt
againſt Puritanes, ſo called. And
therefore (as it is generallie to be obſerued)
ſincere Preachers, are (for the
moſt parte) accuſed and perſecuted by
Church-papistes; and partlie, by that
conceipt which Papiſtes take of the
reſt of their religion, when they ſee

ſuch zeale for their ſuppoſed ceremonies.
For Bristow makes it a ſpeciall
motiue to Poperie:Motiue 34. That in ceremonies,
and our booke of common prayer,
we apiſhlie imitate, (ſo apiſhlie hee
writeth) Catholiques, and the Maſſe
booke. And therefore ſome Engliſh
proteſtantes are ſcornefullie termed,
Concertatio eccle. cathols. 
               Caluin-papistes, for ſuch conformitie.
Fourthlie, ſuch vrging of ceremonies
hath bene, and is likelie to be the
occaſion of ſciſme and contention amongeſt
profeſſours of the ſame faith
and religiō. For they that ſuffer, think
them ſelues bound to followe the example
of Christ, inMat. 15. 2,3 9, 10, 11. approuinge (as
they may) the omiſſiō of ceremonies,
leaſt theirMa.. 11. 4, 5, 6. 2 Cor. 6. 3. 4, 5, 8. ſuffering ſhould bee ſcandalous,
& they them ſelues for ſo ſuffering,
traduced as ill doers. Agayne,
Act. 28. 17, 22. profeſſours occaſioned by ſuch ſuffering
diligentlie to conſider the cauſe,
finde thē ſelues bound, as well as their
Teachers, to iuſtifieMat. 11 16. 17, 18, 19. wiſdome in ſuch
ſorte as becometh her childrē. Hence
it is thatAct. 14. 4. the multitude is deuided,
ſome holding with the Iewes, ſome
ſtanding with the Apoſtles; whereas if
vrging on the one ſide, and confuting

on th'other ſide, were giuen ouer, our
Church would be at vnity in it ſelf, As
the reformed Churches in France,
Scotland, and the low coūtries are: for
there is no generall differēce amongſt
vs, but about Romiſh (ſo reputed) Policie.
Otherwiſe, it is not to be expected
(though wiſhed) that contention
will ſo ſurceaſe. For (to ſaye nothing
of the ſchiſme of the Brownistes, to
whō theſe ceremonies are great ſtumbling
blockes, and therforeRom. 14, 13. 16. 19: to be remooued,
or not ſo grievouſlie vrged,
leaſt the rent of our Church prooue
greater and greater) I am perſwaded;
That howſoeuer theIer. 10 9. 10 & 28. 1. 2. 6. 13. rayling of manie,
and feare on euerie ſide inforce Ieremie
to ceaſe ſpeaking in the name of
God; and the cunning, but counterfet
propheſie of Hannaniah, make him
laye his hande vppon his mouth for a
time; yet the worde of God will be in
his heart, as a burning fire; ſo that he
ſhalbe wearie of forbearing, and not
able to ſtay from prophecying yokes
of yron, in ſteed of thoſe wodden ones
which Hananiah did or would break.
And the rather, becauſe Maiſt. Hooker
(too friendlie a cenſurer of Papiſtes)

hath (byEzek. 13. 10. 5. dawbing ouer, not onelie
the walles of ceremonies, but alſo the
groſſeſt corruptions, and that with vntempered
Morter) provoked Ieremie,
or ſome of the Prophetes, toEzek. 22. 30. ſtand in
the gappe, toEſa. 59. 4. 16 contend for the trueth;
and ſo to1. Cor. 4. 19. 20. knowe, not his wordes but
his power. For the kingdome of GOD
is not in worde, but in power. Laſtlie,
it is to be feared, That ſuch cōtention
only about ſuppoſed reliques of Rome,
Such ſtopping of the paſſage of Gods
word, which ſhould be1 Theſ. 3. 1. free and glorified;
and that to vphold but mans inuentions;
And ſuch extreame dealing
with brethren (yea Fathers to be1 Tim. 5. 1. reſpected)
onely for ceremonies helde
but as indifferent thinges; will at laſt,
drawe vpō the whole lande, moſt heauie
iudgements, if it bee not by better
courſes prevented. For if by contention
we byte one another, let vs take
heede leaſt we be cōſumed one of another.
For ſo adviſeth theGal. 5. 12. 13. 15. Apoſtle in
a like contention. Againe, if God caſt
away1. Sam. 15. 23. 
               Saul from being King, becauſe
he caſt away the worde of the Lord, &
followed his owne device; If God deſtroyed2. Kings. 23. 24. children, onely for mocking

a Prophet; And if he that is leaſt in the
kingdome of GodMat. 11. 9, 11. is greater then
John Baptist, who was more then a
Prophet, Thē if rulers ofMat. 24. 45. 49. Gods houſeholde,
neglecting their proper duetie,
of giuing each one his porciō of meat
in due ſeaſon, beginne to ſmite their
fellowes; and that more ſeuerelie then
can ſtande with mercie & iudgement;
Deut. 25. 2, 3. Thereby manifeſtinge greater contempt
of their brethren, then childiſh
mocking: It is (I ſaye) to bee feared,
That he byMat. 10. 14 Act. 13. 50. 51. whoſe preſcription Paul
and Barnabas (expelled by the Iewes)
ſhooke off the duſte of their feete in
witnes againſt thē,Mat. 22. 6. 
                     •
                  
                will in time ſende
foorth his wrath to deſtroy them, that
ouer ſharpelie intreat his ſeruants.
            TO CONCLVDE,EPILOGVS. If Miniſters make
ſcruple of conformitie in preſcribed
ceremonies, and of generall ſubſcription,
merelie of conſcience, groū
               ded
(as it may ſeeme to them ſelues &
to others) vpon Gods worde, and our
Churches iudgement; And cōvenient
reſpect is to be had of ſuch conſciences:
Secondlie, if by the practiſe and
precept of the Apoſtle, indifferent

things are not to bee inforced againſt
the conſcience of anie, and by the doctrine
of our Church, traditions of
men, are but indifferent things; And
therefore onely open and wilfull contemners
are openlie to be rebuked, &
the ſaid Miniſters are freed from wilfull
contempt, by manie argumcntes.
Thirdlie, if the extreeme cenſures of
deprivation and ſuſpencion, onely for
peaceable omiſſion (not of diuine ſeruice)
but of ceremonies, bee without
lawe, As it is conceiued probably; and
inforcing generall ſubſcription be beſides
the ſtatute ſo perceyued evidentlie,
and the rather becauſe ſubſcription,
according to the Statute, is tendered
willingly. Fourthly, if harder meaſure
ſhould not be offered to faithfull
Miniſters (not the worſt of her Maieſties
ſubiects) then to ciuill men in ciuill
cauſes and to vnlearned Prieſtes,
tollerated for perſonall pitie and the
churches neceſſitie; And learned Preachers
be as needfull as bare Readers:
And fifthly, If many and great inconueniences
accompanie or follow ſuch
extreame dealing, As, first, inforcing
manie to cōformitie againſt their conſciences,

whereby they prouoke Gods
curſe vppon their giftes and labours.
Secondlie, Expoſing the Church to the
daunger of the wolfe and theefe; by
thruſting or keeping out faithfull Paſtours,
and enterteyning idoll ſheepeheardes,
& idle Non-reſidents. Thirdlie,
Confirmation of Papiſtes through
want of teaching, not proſecuting thē
for zeale againſt Puritans, and countenaūcing
their ſuppoſed ceremonies.
Fourthlie, Occaſioning ſchiſme and
contention preſent, and to come. And
fifthlie, Confuſion threatned by contention,
or ſome heauie iudgement of
GOD for ſtopping the paſſage of his
word and mouthes of his Meſſengers,
only for omiſſion of mans inventions:
Then there may ſeeme to bee reaſon,
why faithfull Miniſters ſhould not be
depriued or ſuſpended for peaceable
omiſſion of preſcribed ceremonies;
much leſſe for not ſubſcribing to thē
& all other partes of eccleſiaſticall policie,
as to ordinances not contrarie to
the worde of God.
         
         
            
            Inducements to make a
Quaere, whether peaceable
omiſſion, onely of ceremonies, be puniſhable
by 1o Eliz. Cap. 2o.
            
               When that ſtatute was made, the law makers
did not imagine, That any (willing
to obſerue the forme of ſeruice & Sacraments)
would make ſcruple of ſo few ceremonies
reteyned, conſidering Poperie
was but then reformed: And therfore (as
it may be probably coniectured) they neuer
thought of prouiding puniſhment for
omiſſion only of ceremonies. Which may
be the rather ſuppoſed, if theſe Inducements
from the ſtatute it ſelfe be well conſidered.
            
            
                VVHEREAS the ſaid ſtatute prouiding
againſt 3 offences touching
the booke of cōmon prayer, To wit, 1.
Refuſing: 2. Wilful vſing anie other. And
3. Deprauing the ſame, expreſſeth rites &
ceremonies in the 2. latter; but in the 1.
ſpeaketh onely of forme & order of prayer,
and Sacramentes; In all likelihood it
was not intended to puniſh peaceable omiſſion
only of ceremonies, ſo the forme
bee obſerued. For if there had ben anie

ſuch meaning, ceremonies would have
bin mēcioned eſpecially in the firſt place.
            
                But the Law makers (who in that ſtatute
appoint degrees of puniſhments) wiſely
conſidered: That how ſoeuer wilfull vſing
anie other forme or ceremonie, and
deprauing either forme or ceremonie preſcribed
were daūgerous in policy; Yet peaceable
omiſſion only of ceremonies could
not be daūgerous; and therefore not to be
puniſhed with like ſeueritie.
            
                AND the rather, becauſe ceremonies
are ſubiect to inconueniences. For which
cauſe authority is giuē vnto her Majeſtie,
to add or alter by aduice. So that it appeareth,
that ceremonies, were not ſo eſtabliſhed,
as the forme. And therefore reaſon
why the law-makers ſett downe no puniſhment
for peaceable omiſſion only of
ceremonies, ſo the forme be obſerucd.
            
                THAT by forme and order, the ſtatute
underſtandeth (not ceremonies) but the
texte, wordes, or matter, to be read in ſeruice
and adminiſtration of Sacramentes;
Appeareth by authorizing the forme and
order of King Edwardes booke (ſet forth
in the fifth and ſixt yeares of his raigne)
with one alteracion or addicion of certen
leſſons, &c. But no word of alteration

or addition of ceremonies in that place, as
afterward: Where wee are referred to the
ſecond yeare of his raigne. Which is to be
noted.
            
                LASTLY, vſing another forme, is not
puniſhed by that ſtatute, but as it is wilfull,
and ioyned with refuſing the forme
preſcribed. Therefore it may be probably
conceiued, that peaceable omiſſion (not
of diuine ſeruice), but onely of ceremonies,
is not puniſhable by the ſtatute with
ſo great ſeueritie.
            THE Hypotheſis of theſe Inducements is a perſwaſion,
That where the minde of the lawe is not
manifest, there a fauorable conſtruction, (not contrary
to expreſſe words) is to be made for the beneſitt
of the ſubiect: But that ſtatute doth not
cleerely prouide puniſhment for omiſsion of ceremonies,
when the forme is obſerued: Therefore
Miniſters, (ſubiectes not of the worſt ſort) diſtreſſed
by the priuation and ſuſpenſion (puniſhmentes
not of the leaſt ſorte) moſt humbly deſire an explanation
of the ſaid ſtatute.
            FINIS.
         
      
   