
      
         
            
            
            A goodly treatiſe of faith, hope, and charite neceſſary for all Chriſtē mē to know and to exercyſe thē
               ſelues therin trāſlated into englyſhe.
            Prynted in South warke, For Iames Nicolſon.
            Anno M. D. xxxvii
            1537.
         
         
            
            The tranſlatoure.
            
               THer are many now a dayes that vſe greate diſputacions and reaſonynge of fayth, thinking to haue faith whā they can reaſon muche of it. They know that by fayth only a man is iuſtifyed, or made ryghteous, but yet they knowe not the grounde & pyth of faith, wherby a man is made righteous. Yee true fayth can better be felt inwardly, than it can be expreſſed with wordes. It is plāted in at the eare by hearynge of the worde of God, it is groūded and roted in mans harte, by the operacyon of the ſpirite, workynge in the ſame worde, and finally (ſeynge it can not be hyd) it breſteth out in doynge of charitable dedes, the which the faythfull knoweth to be acceptable vnto God. And by thys workynge or endeuoure to pleaſe God, he conceaueth an hope to optayne euerlaſtynge lyfe, wherin he ſhall reſt in ioy with God: not of dewtye, as one that were hyred therto, but only of Gods bounteous goodneſſe and mercye. The dyuels alſo haue an hyſtoricall fayth of Chriſte, and beleue al to be true yt is ſpoken of hym thorow out all the ſcrypture: for they can not improue nor denye the treuth of it. But ſeynge they conceaue not ſuche an opinion of God, as namely, that God is theyr redimer that by hym and by none other (be he neuer ſo holy) they be ſaued, that in hym only they oughte to reioyce, to truſte, and to be conforted: therfore is not theyr 
                  •
               ayth auaylable or an occaſyon vnto ſaluacyon but rather (as ſayeth ſaynte Iames) a cauſe to feare and tremble. It is not ynough to be baptyſed, and to know by harte all yt articles of oure faith although euery one that wyl be called a Chriſtian is bounde to beleue & to know the
                  •
               ) but he muſt alſo expreſſe them in hys lyuynge. Yf I be leue God to be a father, and a creator or maker of heauen and earth, and al that is therin of nought, and yet do not ſeke all ayde, conforte, and goodneſſe at hym: how can I haue a true fayth or beleue in hym? howe can I ſaye truely: I beleue in God the father almyghtye?

&c. Herken how God complayneth by hys prophet Micue. 1. Shulde not a ſonne honoure hys father (ſayeth he) and a ſeruaunte hys mayſter? Yf I be now a father, where 
                  ••
                myne honoure? Yf I be the ZORDE where I am feared? ſayeth the ZORDE of hooſtes. As though he wolde ſaye: who declareth hys fayth that he hath to me? who ſoueth me as a ſon hys ather? not for ony reſpect or regarde of auauntage that he can optayne by it: but of the inwarde and naturall mocyon of loue that he hath to my goodneſſe Or who feareth me as a ſeruaunt? that dredeth punyſhment for tranſgreſſynge of his lordes commaundemente. For as ſayeth Dauid: They are all gone out of the waye, they are all become vnprofytable, ther is none that doth good: no not one By thys is it euydēt what ſmall fayth is founde in the world now a dayes and how lyttell declaracyō of the ſame: ſpecialy of thoſe that can and do mooſt reaſon, & diſpute of it. Thys I ſaye, and that in verbo domini that I wolde of god they vttered leſſe wordes of fayth, hope, and charyte: but declared them more by outward dedes of ye ſame. To ſpeake diuinite maketh not a diuine, but to lyue diuinite. Yf wyſhyng? myghte do good, I wolde hartelye wyſhe euery one that can ſpeake muche of diuinite the ſame mynd, that ſaynt Auguſtine was in whā he ſayde: The vnlearned ſtonde vp, and take in ye kingdome of heauen, and we ſynke to hell with all out learnynge. Yf we dyd take once hartye grace to vs and buſyed oure ſelues to lyue the Goſpel, than ſhuld not we need to be aſked a counte of our fayth, than ſhulde we go on progreſſe from vertue to vertue, than ſhuld out lyghte lyghten the weakelynges, leſt they do offende at Chriſte the heade corner ſtone But alas for pytye, the greate punyſhmentes wherewith God doth and wyll punyſh vs comme vpon vs becauſe ther is no faithful neſſe, ther is no mercye, ther is no knowlege of god in the londe: but ſwe
                  •
               tynge lyeng manſlaughter thefte, and aduoutrye haue the ouer hand, and one bloudſhed dyng ſo! oweth another. &c. Dſe. 4. Loke thorowe the

whole flock of them that wyl be ſeyers of god, that is y• cyteſyns of Ieruſalē: Seke thorow hyr ſtretes alſo yf ye cā fynd one man yt doth equal & right, or yt laboureth to be ſaythfull: and I ſhall ſpare hym (ſayeth the LORD) For though they can ſay: The LORD lyueth, yet to they ſwear to deceaue. Where as thou: o LORD lokeſt only vpō ſaith & treuth. Chriſt himſelf hath prophecyed theſe peryllous tymes of oures ſayenge: Whā the ſon of mā cōmeth, ſuppoſe ye y• he ſhal fynd faith vpō earth? As though he wold ſay, no. Yee where faith is not, there is an vnbermēt of wyckedneſſes: as ſayeth Eſay. 59. There is equite gone aſyde, 
                  •
                rightcouſneſſe ſtōdeth afarte of. Treuth is falledown in y• ſtrete, & the thynge y• is playn & open, may not be ſhewed. Yee y• treuth is layed in preſon, & he y• refrayneth hymſelfe frō euell, muſt be ſpoyled. Is it not a pyteous caſe to heare ye prophetes thus complayne vpō oure wyckedneſſe, yee Chriſte hymſelfe? What do we thynke that ſhal become of vs after thys vapoure rather thā lyfe? What and yf one man had gotten al the worlde, ſhulde it profyte oughte vnto hys ſoule after hys departynge hēce? ſeing he is come naked into this worlde, & muſt depart naked out of it agayn. Why do mē ſet ſo lytie by faith? & regard 
                  〈◊〉
                or charite as a thing lyttel worth? where as. 
                  •
                Paul not 
                  •
               ſtondinge dot cal loue the greateſt of the thre theological vertues
            That thou mayeſt therfor (good te
                  •
               der) crercyſe theſelfe in theſe thre holy vertues, as namelye faythe, hope & charite or loue: I haue trāſlated to thy behofe this lyttel treatyſe, treatinge of the ſame: whoſe brefeneſſe I truſt ſhal draw thy mind to ye reading of it. For by manifeſt ſcriytures (the which be here ſufficientlye brought forth) thou mayeſt perceaue y• power of fayth whereby man is ſaued y• which cauſeth mā to cōceaue an hope of y• lyfe euer laſting. And thus of inward ioy & gladneſſe he breaketh forth vnto dedes of charyte, wherby he declareth his in warde gyft of fayth. So y• finally he cā not chuſe but hope to come vnto lyfe eternal y• which greūt vs he yt created & redimed vs. Amē.
         
      
      
         
            
            The treatiſe of fayth
            
               ¶ The fyrſte chapter treateth of the Fayth in Chriſte, and what is a true Fayth.
               
                  FAyth is deſcribed playn ly vnto vs in the epiſtle to the Hebrewes after this maner. Fayth is a ſure confidence of thynges Hebre 11 which are hoped for, and a certainte of thinges which are not ſene Herby we mayeſe which is the true fayth, namely, that we abyde & loke to optayne mercy of the LORDE: where as we fynde nought in vs yt is worthy of Gods mercy, nor ſe the good that God hath promyſed vs, but onely truſt in hym, becauſe he is mercyfull. Wherfore receauynge the worde that wytneſſeth vnto vs and beareth record of his goodnes, we haue a ſure hope in God by faith that he ſhall ſhewe his goodneſſe & tenderneſſe toward vs by his boūte ous mercy. But hereto is requyted of vs that we reſte wt our whole

harte vpon this promyſe of mercy, reioycynge in ſprete therin, and by fayth rendre vs in loue and thankfulneſſe to God.
               Thus haue we a ſure teſtymony that we are come to a good fayth for we can fynde none other fundament wheron the ſynfull ſoule may teſt, ſaue onely yf we can hope that God wyll be a mercyfull father, thorowe the death of IESV CHRISTE. This is it that Paul ſayeth: No mā can laye another fundament, ſaue 1. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 3. that which is layed already, that is CHRIST IESV. Suche fayth cauſeth a man to walke confidently & to be ſure mynded to Gods goodneſſe, wherin he can reioyce, ſo farre as he can beleue to optayne ſo much as God hath declared and promyſed by his worde. Now becauſe he beleueth the ſame, therfore is his ſpirite endued with godly ioye by the ſprete of God, whiche dyd appeare and teache hym the ſame by fayth.
               
                  
Wherfore ſayeth Paul: Ye haue not receaued the ſprete of bondage Rom. 
                        •
                     . to feare ony more, but ye haue receaued the ſprete of adopciō, whereby we crye Abba deare father. The ſame ſprete certifieth our ſprete that we are the chyldren of God. Whan a man feleth this by fayth, and his harte reioyceth therin, then hath he reſt and quyetneſſe in his conſciēce, hauynge no reſpecte to his owne workes or deſeruynges, but onely to CHRISTE: which hath ſet hym atone with the father, throughe his bytter paſſyon and death. Thus geueth he onely CHRIST the glorye of his redēpcyon, & beholdeth hence forth no creatures more. It is ſufficient to hym to knowe God in his goodneſſe, beleuynge that mercy & goodneſſe ſhalbe ſhewed vnto hym of God, & reioyceth in that he hath a mercyfull father in heauen, & in all thynges he cōceaueth a good opinion of God & his goodneſſe. Suche

fayth cauſeth hym to reſt & to be cō
                  tent, with all that the LORDES wyl is to do wt hym. Whether it be deth, hell, ſynne or deuell, none can make hym abaſhed. For as longe as a mā clyueth to Gods worde, beleuyng yt God hath ouercome all euel thorow his loue to warde mankynde, thē is he at reſt and peace in all yt can betyde or chaūce vnto hym, beyng certified, that ſeynge God loueth hym, he ſheweth mercy & kyndneſſe in all that he doth vnto hym: and all man kynde. Whether it be thā anguyſhe, painfulneſſe, or ony daūger that can happen vnto man other in body or ſoule, yt cōmeth al to his auayl. Onely yf he cā beleue, & be perſuaded in himſelfe yt God loueth him. For one frēde forbeareth much of another y• which natural loue cauſeth. Wherfore yf naturall loue can forbeare wrōge of a frende: how muche more ought we to forbeare y• good, that is ſent vs of God to our ſaluacyon.
               
                  
Seynge fayth is a gyfte geuē of God, it is neceſſarye we turne oure ſelues lowly vnto the LORDE, deſyrynge hym humbly to prepare oure hartes and make them wyllynge to accepte his worde with ioye. As muche as we loue Gods worde, ſo muche ſhal we be conforted & made glad in ſprete by fayth in all that ye worde hath promyſed vs. Seynge God is hyd in his worde, yee & is the worde it ſelfe, therfore yf we receaue the worde then by fayth and with ioye, we ſhall receaue ſo much as God hath ſayd and promyſed by his worde. CHRIST, which is the bleſſed worde of the father, geueth hym ſelf with his goodneſſe in to al faythfull hartes, and maketh hym ſelfe with all his goodneſſe cōmune, takynge vs to his grace: yee with all the wyckedneſſe that is in vs.
               Whan we haue ſynned, than wyll God haue vs to admonyſſhe hym of his promyſe: yf we than praye

with a faythfull harte, he ſhall remembre all that he hath promyſed, and ſhal haue mercy vpon vs, to fulfyll hys promyſe and worde.
               Thys knewe Dauid what tyme he ſayde: The worde of the LORDE 
                  Pſal. 32. is treue, and al his workes are faithful. Upon thys truſted the ſame Dauid whan he had ſynned, he put god in mynde of his wordes, ſayenge: Agaynſt the onely haue I ſynned, & Pſal. 50. done euell in thy ſyghte: that thou myghteſt be iuſtifyed in thy ſayenges, and ſhuldeſte ouercome whan thou arte iudged. As though he wolde ſaye: LORDE. I haue treſpaſſed, I praye the remembre thy word that thou haſte promyſed vnto the ſynners which turne agayne from theyr ſynnes, namely, that thou wilt receaue a ſorowfull ſprete vnto thy mercy. Wherfor thou oughteſt to receaue me vnto thy grace, that thou myghteſte be founde ryghteous. Shewenge ſuche mercye vnto the

ſynner accordynge to thy promyſe, than ſhalt thou diſcomfyte thyne enemyes wyth the treuth, which wyl iudge and eſtyme the as one that doth not accordynge to hys worde.
               Whan Dauid nowe knewe inwardlye that he had optayned mercy of the LORDE, than dyd he prayſe and thanke God in al his wordes and dedes ſayenge: The LORDE is gracious and mercyfull, longe ſufferynge, Pſal. 144 and of greate goodneſſe. The LORDE is louynge vnto euery man, and hys mercye is ouer all hys workes. The LORDE is ryghteous in all hys wayes, and holy in all hys workes. The LORDE is nye vnto all them that call vpon hym: Yee all ſuch as cal vpon him faythfully. And euen thus is it wyth vs: We can prayſe and thanke God ſo earneſtlye, and reioyce ſo greatlye in hys goodneſſe, as we can beleue that mercye, and kyndneſſe can be ſhewed by hym. Though the lawe

dyd vtterlye dāne vs, & hel wold ſwalow vs vp, & though all ſyn, and other enmyes wolde ouerrunne vs: yet muſte we abyde ſure vpon God, and ſe what CHRISTE hath deſerued and geuen vs by hys bytter paſſyon, and what he hath promyſed, & & thā ſhal faith worke hyr worke. Yf we haue receaued the worde in fayth through the holy gooſt than ſhal we optayne mercye, and lyfe in the myddes of death, and of ſynne. Wythout hope dyd holde vp oure head, and the promyſes ſonke in oure hartes, we muſte nedes be drowned in deſpayre. Hope ſayth: My ſonne deſpyſe not the ſelfe in thy ſykneſſe, but 
                     
                        •••
                     ll. 38. praye vnto the LORDE and he ſhal make the whole. The ſynfull man beholdyng God, and knowyng him by hys worde (that is) that he is mercyfull, not wyllynge the death of a ſynner, he lyfteth vp hys heade wt a luſty corage ſayenge: I ſhall not Pſal. 118.
                  
dye, but lyue, and ſhewe forth the workes of the LORDE. The LORDE chaſtenynge hath chaſtened me and not delyuered me vnto deathe. Open vnto me the gates of ryghtwyſneſſe, and whan I am entred than ſhall I confeſſe the LORDE. That is the gate of the LORDE, and the ryghtwyſe ſhall entre in thorow it. All thys fayth and confydēce had de Dauid, for he was ſure fyxed vppon Gods promyſes. Whan his ſinnes wolde oppreſſe hym, than turned he vnto the LORDE, and hys worde, the whiche whan he truſted vnto, he reioyced in the LORDE. All this cauſed the worde that was beleued: Yf he had ben weake in the faith, he wolde haue thought continually that he muſte be damned.
               Wherfore he ſayde. Wythout the LORDE had holpen a lyttell whyle Pſal. 117. my ſoule ſhulde haue dwelled and abyden in hell. Dauid ſought none other comforte, ſaue onely, that he

wolde fulfyll that vnto hym, which he had promiſed him, and beleuyng this he was conforted, ſayenge: Pſa. 118. Thynke vpon thy ſeruaunt as concernynge ye worde wherin thou cauſedeſt me to put my truſt, that conforted me in my lowlyneſſe: ye thy worde hath relyued me.
               Herby may we diſcerne the true fayth, namely, that a man is fixed & groūded vpon God and his word, that is to ſaye, that he ſhall and wyl geue ſo much, as his promyſe is, & yt ye ſynfull ſoule can be conforted therin: or els is it not poſſible to knowe God in his goodneſſe. Yf God be not knowē in his goodneſſe by his worde, how ſhulde ony man reioyce in his goodneſſe, or conceaue ony Exo. 15. 16 and. 17. hope to come to his mercy? What tyme as the chyldren of Iſrael had ſynned greueouſly agaynſte God, murmurynge agaynſte hym, and ſo prouokynge hym to anger, and after that worſhippynge the golden

calfe, ſo yt he wolde haue deſtroyed the whole multitude of them: Moſes lyke a true and faythfull ſeruaūt of God, ſeing that God was angry, and beynge wyllynge to apeace his wrath agayne, he knewe no nearer nor feater waye to reconcyle the people agayne vnto God, than to offre a faythfull harte: wherwith he dyd knowlege God to be mercyful, kind and longeſufferynge, ſhewyng mercy in thouſandes. Moſes was ſurely fixed vpon this grounde, that is, that the LORDE was mercyfull: But ſeynge his mercy was turned in to wrath by reaſon of the multytude and greatneſſe of the ſynnes, he perceaued that it was not poſſible vnto Exo. 32. mā to fynde grace by God: Wherfore he beganne to admonyſhe hym of his kynde and fatherly loue, & to remembre all that which he had promyſed vnto Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob. Thus was the LORDE pacyfied, ſo that he dyd not the euell

that he hadde ſpoken agaynſte the people. This hadde Dauid ſene in ſpre
                     •
                   (that is) that God in his wrath ſhulde remembre his conuenaunt ſayenge: My conuenaunt wyll I Pſal 88. not breake, nor diſanull the thynge that is gone out of my lyppes. Dauid Crod. 32 Pſal. 98 wytneſſeth of faythful Moſes, which brake and turned the wrath of God whan he admonyſſhed hym of his promyſe. The LORDE (ſayd he) wolde haue deſtroyed the people hadde not his choſen and electe Moſes ſtonde for them agaynſt the myſdedes.
               Whan the ſynnes be accomplyſſhed, and the ſynner knoweth not whether to turne hym, than is ther no counſell better then to ſubmytte hym ſelfe before God, praynge that he maye take his Godly worde to harte, and to knowe therby what mercy and forgeueneſſe God wyll ſhewe vnto the, that truſt in hym, & knowlege him by his fatherly loue,

The LORDE requyreth nought of vs for oure ſynnes but an heuy and contrite ſprete, a wyllynge harte to leaue ſynnynge, and an hūgry ſoule to fulfyll the wyll of God. More ouer whan we be mooſt forſaken, and whan oure ſynnes and the iudgement of God do mooſt greuouſly oppreſſe vs, then is it tyme for vs to knowe whiche be the true fayth, & whan we ought to haue our ſyght and mynde mooſt ſureſt fixed vpon God. Unto the ſynner is God mercyful, wherfore ſayeth Paul: This 1. Tim. 1 is a true ſayenge, and by all meanes worthy to be receaued, that CHRIST IESV came in to the worlde to ſaue ſynners, of whom I am chefe. Notwithſtandynge, for this cauſe optained I mercy, yt 
                  IESVS CHRIST might pryncypally ſhewe in me all longe pacyence, to the enſample of all thē whiche ſhulde beleue in hym vnto eternall lyfe. Furthermore ſayeth Paul: Where abūdaūce of ſyn was Rom. 5
                  
there was yet more plenteouſneſſe of grace. Nowe where true fayth cō
                  meth, there ſhall it not be enquyred, what ther is deſerued. or what a mā is worthy to haue, or howe impoſſible it is for a man to come vnto the mercye of God. For ther is nothyng in man that is worthye of mercyfulneſſe: and fayth beholdeth God onely, and that whiche he hath promyſed with hys worde, and that the LORDE is mercyful, and wyl ſhew mercy vnto all them that ſeke hym in the treuth. Thys cauſeth the ſynner to conceaue an hope to optayne mercye by oure LORDE though to hymſelfe it ſeme impoſſible. Thys maye we ſe by Abrahā, which beyng 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 17. olde hūdreth yeares, and Sara his wyfe foure ſcore and ten, herde that they ſhulde haue a ſōne in theyr olde age. Which thynge whan he herde it, it ſemed vnto hym impoſſyble, as it myght alſo to ony man: for ther was no hope of ony frute. But ſeing

it was God that promyſed it, and that Abraham gaue fayth vnto the worde: therfore dyd he hope contrarye to hope, and beleued agaynſt nature, Roma. 
                        •
                     
                   and thys fayth is rekened hym for ryghtwyſneſſe. Not becauſe of of hys workes, nor becauſe of the circumciſyon or vncyrcumcyſyon: but ſeynge he beleued, he dyd geue God the glory, and optayned mercye.
               Thys is not onely written to know howe Abraham became ryghteous by hys faith, but alſo for our inſtruccyon, yf we beleue. CHRIST dyed for oure ſynnes, and is ryſen agayn for oure iuſtyfycacyon. Thys thyng earneſtly beleued ſhal alſo ſaue vs: for fayth conſydereth onely howe much God maye and wyll geue of hys goodneſſe.
               Wherfore, let vs that be faythful reſt onely vpon CHRISTE IESV that hath ſaued vs, although oure myſdedes be many and greate. Let vs truſt and leane harde to Gods

worde, it is ynough that God hath promyſed it: Thys doynge we be ſure and may reioyce that we be come to the trewe fayth. Thys fayth had Abraham. He was promyſed that thorowe hys ſonne Iſaac hys ſede 
                     Gene. 22. ſhulde ſo encreaſe, as the ſtarres of the ſkye. After thys dyd God commaunde hym to offre the ſame ſonne and to ſtaye hym. Abraham beynge ſtayed in God and his promiſe, was redy to accomply ſhe Gods wyll.
               Thus is Abraham become ryghteous by the dede (that is) Abraham by thys worke hath teſtifyed, and declared hys fayth to be good & trewe before God, thus be hys workes coū
                  ted ryghteous before God thorowe fayth: As wytneſſeth Saynt Iames Thys all is ſpoken now to knowe a Iac
                        •
                     . 1. trewe and good fayth, namely. Not onely to beleue God to be a mercyfull and good father: but alſo to beleue that God through hys mercye wyll receaue a ſynner to grace: and

that he maye come to the fauour of God. Suche fayth cauſeth a man to reſte and 
                     •
                  cane on God only, and ſo earneſtlye to reioyce in the goodneſſe of God, as doth he that fyndeth a treaſure of greate value.
               We ſpeake not of a fayned faith, as the deuels haue, or as the wycked do beleue, nor of ſuche an hyſtorycall faythe as to beleue, that CHRISTE was crucyfyed: but we ſpeake of ſuche fayth, and confydence, wherebye we are aſſured that the goodneſſe, and mercye of God is oures, and that all is oures that is in God: that he is mercyfull vnto vs: that we can reioice in him, and walke confydently in hym, all thys is the operacyon of faythe.
               Suche faythe cauſeth mortyfycacyon of the fleſhe wyth all hys concupiſcence, Gala, 5. whan he hath felte once by faythe the exeeadynge goodneſſe, that he hath founde by the LORDE.
                  
Shulde not ſuche a faythfull ſoule reioyce in the LORDE his God by true loue? & vſe all ſpirituall glory? Suche fayth cauſeth a man to captiuate and preſone his witte, vnderſtonding, & wyl wholy vnder Gods worde, and reioyce only in God, ſayenge with Dauid: My ſoule wayteth Pſa. 61. onely vpon God, for of hym cō
                  meth my helpe. He onely is my ſtrength, my ſaluacyon, my defence, ſo yt I ſhall not greatly fal. And agayn: Turne agayne then to thy reſte (O Pſal. 114. my ſoule) for ye 
                  LORD hath geuen the thy deſyre. And why? thou haſt delyuered my ſoule from death, myne eyes from teares, and my fete from fallynge. I wyll walke before the LORDE in the lande of the lyuynge.
               Paul, what tyme he was come to ſuch earneſt fayth, ſayd very ioyfully: I ſhewed not my ſelfe amonge 1. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 2. you as though I knewe ony thinge ſaue onely IESVS CHRIST, euen the ſame that was crucyfied. It is not

ſufficient to ſaye: I beleue that the Note. holy church beleueth, or as myne elders haue beleued, but a man muſte ſearche and proue how he beleueth. For by his owne fayth ſhall a man be acceptable to God. Yf he wyl procure to optayne ought of God, he muſt turne hym to God and knowlege hym by his owne fayth, that he is his LORDE and redimer. Abrahā ſaw God in ſprete through his lyuely fayth and reioyced. This fayth 
                     •
                  orageth a man agaynſt death, in it a man ſeyth his lyfe: For (according to the wytneſſe of all ſcriptures:) The iuſt lyueth by his fayth. Abat. 2. Rom. 1. G
                        •
                     l. 3. Heb. 10 11. Tim 1 Gal. 5
               
               & This fayth is not ſubdued vnto the lawe: for the faythfull accompliſſheth the LORDES wyll in the ſprete, through loue. So that he fulfylleth all that the lawe cōmaundeth. Not 
                     •
                  ecauſe it is a commaundement of 
                     •
                  he lawe: (for the lawe geueth onely knowlege of ſynne) but becauſe he 
                     •
                  ath a loue to the commaundementes,

and is ready to do all that is acceptable to God. Wherfore ſayeth Paul: Thorow the lawe I am dead Gal. 2. vnto the lawe, that I myghte lyue vnto God. I am crucyfyed with CHRIST, yet do I lyue: Neuertheles now not I, but CHRIST lyueth in me for the lyfe which I lyue now in y• fleſhe, I lyue in the fayth of the ſōne of God, whiche loued me and gaue himſelfe for me. Agayn ſayeth Paul that God hath made vs accepted in Ephe. 1. the beloued ſōne, in whom we haue redempcyon thorow his bloude, namely, the forgeueneſſe of ſynnes accordyng to the ryches of his grace.
               Seynge then that (accordyng to theſe teſtimonies of ſcripture) the worke of our redempcyon is accomplyſhed in vs by CHRIST: therfore muſt oure ſynfull ſoule knowlege yt excellēt worke in CHRIST only, and in hym only reſt by fayth. For CHRIST ſayd: No man commeth to the father, but only by me. And: yf Ioh 14.
                  
ye are the father ought in my name Ioh. 1
                        •
                     . he ſhal geue it you. But ſeyng faith is a gyfte of God, therfore muſte we lowly and humbly praye the LORD to haue pyte vpon vs, and increaſe oure faith, yt we may know his goodneſſe dewly by fayth, and reioyce in hym. Of this gyft ſpeaketh Paul ſayeng. By grace are ye ſaued thorow fayth, and that not of youre ſelues. Ephe. 2. For it is the gyft of God, not of workes, leſt ony man ſhulde boaſt hymſelfe. For weare his workemanſhip created in CHRIST IESV vnto good workes, to the which God ordeyned vs before, that we ſhulde walke in them. Whan man fyndeth reſt, and quietneſſe in his conſcience by fayth beleuynge that all that is in God, is to mans behofe, that is a ſure token that ſuch a man is come to the faith whiche geueth health. For fayth certifyeth hym that CHRISTE hath ouercome death, hell, ſynne, and the deuyll for hym.
               
                  
As great as his faith is, ſo much alſo can he reioyce in God, Prayſe God, and thanke God whiche hath receaued his ſynfull ſoule to mercy, not for the workes of ryghtwyſneſſe that we haue done, but accordynge to hys mercye hath he ſaued vs.
               Thus muche nowe is ſayde to knowe the trew faith: namely, to reſt onely vpon CHRIST, and to knowlege oure redempcion, and ſaluacion by CHRISTES death, according to hys worde. The whiche graunte vs the father thorowe hys welbeloued ſonne CHRIST.
               
               Amen.
            
            
               ¶ The ſecōd Chapter treateth of yt ineſtimable, greate mercye, that we do purchaſe, and optaine by the lyuely fayth For true ſaith cā not be ydle, but bryngeth vnto hym that poſſeſſeth her plenteous ſaluation.
               
                  WHan Paul wolde comforte the ſycke, or ſtablyſhe the weake in faith more & more than dyd he ofte rehearſe and (as a man myghte ſaye) bette in them the

glad tydinges of the Goſpell: Certifienge them to what greate mercye they were called, whan God geueth them a good wyll to receaue hys worde with ioye, and to reioyce ouer all the goodneſſe that the Goſpel aſſureth vs of. Thys frute which the Goſpel bringeth with it, and geueth vs oughte we hyghelye to thanke God for, and to reioyce for cauſe of ſo manyfolde gyftes, and treaſures minyſtred, and geuen vs by hym, thankynge, and prayſynge God whiche hath opened oure eyes, and inwarde ſyghte: So that we maye dewlye knowlege oure ſaluation by CHRIST IESV & reioyce in him only.
               This is the intent now wherfore Paule doth ſo earneſtly admonyſhe vs not to receaue ſuch gyftes in 
                     •
                  ayne, but that the worde of God be frutefull in vs by fayth, and loue, that God myghte be prayſed, thanked, and honoured for hys workynge ſo wonderfullye, mercyfully,

and gloriouſlye in all faithfull hartes. Therfore ſayeth Paull: We are bounde to geue thankes al waye 2. Teſſ. 2. vnto God for you brethren beloued of the LORDE, becauſe that God hath from the beginninge choſen you to ſaluation in the ſanctifyenge of the ſpirite, and in beleuinge of the treuth, whereunto he hath called you by oure Goſpell, to optayne the glorye of oure LORDE IESVS CHRIST. Farther more ſaieth Paul After that ye herd ye worde of treuth, Ephe. 1. namely, the goſpell of youre ſaluation, wherin whan ye haue beleued ye were ſealed with the holy ſprete of promeſſe, whiche is the earneſte of oure enheritaunce to oure redemption, that we mighte be his owne to the praiſe of his glorye. And agayn: Becauſe we knowe (brethren beloued 1. Teſſ. 1. of God) howe that ye are electe. For oure Goſpell hath not ben with you in worde only, but both in power, and in the holy gooſt, and muche

certainte. In all theſe foreſaide reaſons are we exhorted, to receaue the godly worde with greate luſte, and loue, prayenge the LORDE humbly to geue vs grace that we maye take it to harte, and receaue it as a gladde tydinge that is ſhewed, and promyſed vs by the worde. Paule what tyme he preached the worde of God, he thanked hym, and ſayde: for thys cauſe we thanke God wythout 1. Teſ. 1. ceaſſynge, becauſe that whan ye receaued of vs the worde of the preachynge of God, ye receaued it not as the preachynge of men, but (euen as it is of a treuth) the worde of God, whiche worketh in you that belefe.
               It is not ſufficiente that we can Nota bable muche of the worde, and haue many treatyſes and bokes thereof: but we muſte alſo be chaunged and renewed in the ſpirite through faith of the worde in oure lyuyng, ſo that we can reioyce in ſpirite, beyng ſure

that the worde of God hath ended a greate glorious worke in vs. By faythe of the worde muſte we be renewed in ſprete, and in conuerſacyon: ſo ye we can reioyce in ſprete beynge aſſured that the worde of God hathe fullended a glorious worke in vs. By fayth in the worde muſte we be certyfyed that muche is geuen vs of the LORDE.
               
               By fayth muſte we trye oure lyues. Thys worde worketh myghtelye, whan it is receaued in faythe: for Roma. 5. 
                  CHRISTE reconcyled vs by the father, whan we were yet enemyes vnto hym. We are approched and Ephe. 2, come neare vnto God by the faythe in the worde, where as afore we were ſtraungers: ſo that we be euen electe, and choſen chylderen. Ioh. 15.
               
               
                  CHRISTE ſayeth: Nowe are yecleane, becauſe of the worde that I haue ſpoken vnto you. Abyde ye in me, and I in you. Alas we be all dettours, our ſynnes will depreaſſe

vs, oure conſcyence is of tymes greued, whan ſhe douteth whether to turne herſelfe. We fynde nought in oure ſelfe, whereof we myghte haue ayde, or comforte. But yf we coulde beholde CHRISTE only in oure trouble, and pondre by oure ſelfe the profyte of hys paſſyon, and remembre the mercye promyſed vnto vs by Gods goodneſſe: Howe earneſtlye ſhulde we than ryſe from oure ſynnefull lyfe? ſayenge wyth a luſtye corage: Wherfore ſhulde I myſtruſte? he dyed for me whiche ſhall iudge me, and he hath alſo were ſafe to call me, I wyll ryſe and ſeke my LORDE my God. He may dāne, but I am ſure he wyll Eſa. 3. ſaue. The LORDE is oure iudge, the LORDE is oure lawe geuer, the LORDE is oure kynge, he ſhall come hymſelfe, and ſaue vs. yf Rom. 
                        •
                     . God be wyth vs, who can be agaynſte vs? whyche dyd not ſpare hys owne ſonne, but hym hath he

geuen for vs all: howe ſhall not he geue vs all thynges with hym alſo? Who wyll laye ony thynge to the charge of Gods choſen? It is God that maketh ryghteous, who wyll than condempne? It is CHRISTE that dyed, ye rather which is rayſed vp agayne, whiche is alſo on the ryghthande of God, and maketh in terceſſion for vs. We haue CHRIST for aſpecheman, for a mediator, and 1. Timo. 2. 1 Iohan. 2 an apeacer of Gods wrath, whoſe bloude calleth for mercye for vs. By CHRISTE haue we a ſure, Ephe. 2. and fre entraunce to the father.
               Whan the ſynner ſeyeth all this in the ſcrypture, and can ſtonde ſted faſte vpon theſe wytneſſes, than maye he perceaue ryghte well that they be wrytten to oure comforte, that the ſynner myghte hope to optayne Rom. 15. mercy by the father. Yf he ſubmytte hymſelfe vnto God, the LORDE ſhall accomplyſhe hys promyſe in hym, and ſteare the ſynner to

repentaunce. All this commeth by the worde which the ſynner heareth, and taketh to harte: for ſo myghtely worketh it in a man. Therfore doth Paul call the worde or goſpell y• power of God, ſaynge: I am not aſhamed of the Goſpell of CHRIST: for it Rom. 1. is the power of God, whiche ſaueth al that beleue theron, the Iewe fyrſt and alſo the Greke: For in it y• ryghteouſneſſe yt is of value before God is opened, which cōmeth out of faith into fayth, as it is written: The iuſt ſhal lyue by his fayth. Agayn ſayth Paul: The worde of the croſſe is folyſhneſſe 1. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1 to them that peryſhe, but vnto vs that are ſaued it is the power of God. In theſe aforeſaid ſcriptures is it euident that God doth & wyll worke a myghtye and bleſſed worke: namely, that he wyll turne & conuerte a ſynner through his wordes. Let vs therfore cal earneſtly vpon hym, deſyryng hym to poure out his worde feruētly vpon vs, and to

worke therwith mightely in our hartes. Peter preachyng the worde dyd I. tu. 2 conuerte thre thouſande men at one tyme. Scripture ſayeth that what 2. Par. 14 yt tyme the chyldrē of Iſraell fought agaynſt the Morians, in theyr anguyſhe they called vpō God, and he herde them becauſe they beleued on hym. And agayne ther is wrytten: The eyen of the LORDE beholde the 2. Par. 16. whole earth, and geue ſtrength vnto them that truſt in hym with a perfecte harte. And agayne ther is wrytten: And Iuda was greatly conforted, 2. Par. 13: for they truſted in the God of theyr fathers. And of Aſa ſayeth the ſcripture that he called vpon ye 
                  LORDE 
                  2. Par. 14 his God, and ſayd: LORDE, it is no difference with the to ſaue by fewor by many. Helpe vs O LORDE our God: for our truſt is in ye, & in thyne name we come forth agaynſt this multitude. Such lyke prayer made kynge Ioſaphat in his anguyſhe, & 2. Par. 20. ye 
                  LORD dyd help hym. By this may

we perceaue ye power of faith, which he requyreth of vs: namely, that we muſt loke vpō his worde & what he requyreth of vs: Agayne what he hath promyſed vs, how faythful he is of his promyſſe, and true in his worde. Conſyderynge this we maye be ſtedfaſt in his worde, and folowe the counſell of Syrak, writynge in Eccleſi. 2. his boke called Eccleſiaſticus: Beleue in God, and he ſhall helpe the: ordre thy waye aryght, and put thy truſt in hym. Holde faſt his feare & growe therin. O ye yt fear ye 
                  LORD, take ſure holde of his mercy: ſhrenk not away frō him, yt ye fal not. O ye yt feare ye 
                  LORDE, beleue hym, & your rewarde ſhal not be emptye. O ye yt fear the LORD put your truſt in him & mercy ſhal come vnto you for pleaſure. O ye yt fear the LORD, ſet youre loue vpō him, and your hartes ſhal be lyghted. Cōſydre ye olde generacyns of men (O ye chyldrē) & marke them well: was ther euer ony one

cōfoūded ye put his truſt in ye 
                  LORD? Who euer continued in his feare, and was forſaken? Or whom dyd he euer deſpyſe, that called faythfully vpon hym? &c. And agayne in the ſame chapter: They that feare the LORDE, wyll not myſtruſte his worde: and they that loue hym wyll kepe his cōmaundements. &c.
               Thus is it euydent that fayth muſte nedes be a worke glorious & puyſſaunt, wherby man optayneth ſo much of the LORDE. How coulde ony mā comprehende and perceaue the power of faith? and that by Ioh. 1. fayth we are one with God. Ihon ſayeth: That God hath geuen all mē power to be the chyldrē of God. Matt
                        •
                     . 9 Chriſt ſayd: All thynges are poſſible Ioh. 11. vnto hym that beleueth. And agayn Yf ye beleue, ye ſhall ſe the glorye of Math. 17. God. And agayne: Yf ye haue fayth as a grayne of muſtarde ſede, ye maye ſaye vnto this mountayne: Remoue hence to yonder place, and

he ſhall remoue, nother ſhall ony thynge be vnpoſſible vnto you.
               Now ſeynge God worketh ſo gloriouſly in all faythfull hartes: then is it conuenient that we humbly beſeke hym to teach vs to truſt in his worde. For we ſhall reioyce ſo much in his goodneſſe, & loke for ſo much aide & cōforte at his hāde, as we can Suſān
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   truſt in hym, and in his worde. We 
                     •
                  ede of Suſāna, that what tyme ſhe was in hir mooſt diſtreſſe & anguiſh beyng iudged wrongfully to death, ſhe ſyghed and prayed to God, truſtyng ſtedfaſtly in him, and ye 
                  LORD delyuered her. Daniel alſo whan he Bel. 
                        •
                     
                   was caſt in ye Lyōs denne was not hurte of them: for he truſted in God.
               The godly worde commeth not for nought, it worketh wonderfully whan it is receaued in fayth. Therfore doth ſaynt Iames erhorte vs Iac
                        •
                     . 1. to receaue with mekeneſſe the word that is grafted in vs, whiche is able to ſaue our ſoules. A man can not

erre, ſo longe as he can teſtyfye hys lyfe to be led accordynge to Gods worde. Yf a man haue his myndefixed vpon mans inuencyons, or inuented holyneſſe: he maye ſurely be dyſquyete and confortleſſe. But ſo longe as a man hath his eyen fixed vpon God and his worde, bearynge Gods commaundementes in his harte: ſo longe doth that man walke in ſekerneſſe, beynge aſſured of all ye is expreſſed by Gods worde and is ſure of his ſauegarde and cō
                  forte: accordynge as Paul ſayeth:
               All men are lyars, but God is true. The ſonne of God is the wyſedome Rom. 3 of ye father, Who ſo now doth yelde hym ſelfe vnto the word, receauyng therby the wyſedome of the father: the ſame is dryuen from death vnto lyfe by the ſprete of God. Syrak ſayeth: Eccl
                        •
                     . 4 that wyſedome breatheth lyfe in to hyr chyldren, & receaueth them that ſeke her. It foloweth then that they which haue once aſſayed god by

his worde in the wyſedome of God: that thoſe I ſaye maye come to complete lyfe. But it is contrarye with the worldly wyſedome, as wytneſſeth Paul, ſayenge: In ſo muche 1. Cor. 1 as the worlde by the wyſedome ther of knewe not God in his wyſedome it pleaſed God thorowe folyſhe preachynge to ſaue them that beleue.
               Whan Paul was mynded to conuerte ony man, then wolde he laye nothynge before hym, ſaue onely Gods worde, ſayenge: I haue begotten you in CHRIST IESV thorowe the goſpell. Wherfore I exhort you, be ye my folowers, as I am IESV CHRISTES.
               
               So longe as a man redreſſeth hys lyfe accordyng to Gods worde, ſo longe ſhall he come walkynge the ryghte waye of ſaluacyon, and reioyce in his conſeyence: For all that the worde of God doth vtter is concernynge ether mercy or

in warde conſolacyon. Peter ſayeth: Ye knowe of the preachynge yt God 
                     
                        •
                     ct
                        •
                     . 10. ſent vnto the chyldrē of Iſrael, preachyng peace thorow IESVS CHRIST. Of hym beare al the prophetes wytneſſe, that thorow his name, all they that beleue in hym, ſhall receaue remiſſion of ſynnes. Luke alſo wrytyng CRISTES wordes ſaieth: Thus Luct. 24 is it wrytten, and thus it behoued CHRIST to ſuffre, and the thirde day to tyſe agayne from the dead, and to let repentaunce and remyſſiō of ſynnes be preached in his name amōgeal nacions. This knewe Eſay afore hande whan he ſayde: Lyke as the rayne and ſnowe commeth downe Eſay. 55. from heauen, and returneth not thy ther againe, but watereth the earth, maketh it frutefull and grene, that it maye geue corne and bread vnto the ſo wer: So the worde alſo that cō
                  meth out of my mouth, ſhall not turne vnto me voide agayn, but ſhal accomplyſhe my wyll, and proſper in

the thynge whereunto I ſende it. Hereby we are taughte, that like as the earthe is made frutefull of the rayne that God ſendeth: ſo ſhall we alſo be renewed and be frutefull, yf we knowlege God a ryghte by hys worde, and reioice in al that he hath wyteſafe to warne vs of by hys worde. Yee we ſhall mortifye the fleſhe wyth all hys deſyres, and he ioyned to God.
               He that cleueth vnto god, becommeth one ſprete wyth hym: and optayneth all goodneſſe wyth hym. A man reioyceth ſo muche in God, as he is knytte wyth him by fayth, and is diligent in all thynges to forther hys glorye. The olde father Symeon beholdynge the lytle babe, and Luce. 2. beynge ſure in wardlye that he was hys ſaueoure: (for he loked for hym by hys fayth) reioyced in hys harte, deſyrynge to go to hys reſte by bodely death: for his eyen had ſene the ſaue garde of men. Euen ſo lykewyſe

we, yf we had ſene by fayth the loue which God beareth to ward vs, how hartelye ſhulde we then yelde oureſelues vnto death? For fayth certyfyeth the harte that God is a mercy full father, and that mercye ſhall be ſhewed vnto vs by ye death of IESV CHRISTE. We can optayne no greater rewarde than to beleue that God is wyth vs, and we beynge wyth the LORDE are ſafe. Steuen Actuū. 7. ſeynge heauen open by fayth, ſayde incontinentlye. LORDE receaue my ſprete. For thys cauſe ſayde Paule: Becauſe therfore that we are iuſtyfyed by faythe, we haue peace wyth Roma. 5. God thorow oure LORDE IESVS CHRISTE, by whom alſo we haue an entraunce in faythe vnto thys grace, wherein we ſtonde. Here lo is no mencyon of workes, or of y• lawe: for by the workes is noman iuſtyfyed. But the workes muſte breake oute thorowe loue, and declare oure inwarde fayth, by workynge of charitable

dedes. Iob was aſhamed of all hys workes, and was not ſo bold Iob. 9. as to lyfte vp hys heade before hys LORDE God, but ſubmitted hymſelfe lowly vnto him: ye though ther had ben founde ſome right wy ſucſſe in hym. Dauid alſo ſayde: LORDE 
                  Pſal. 142 entre not in to iudgemente with thy ſeruaunte, for in thy ſyghte ſhall noman lyuynge be iuſtifyed. Neuertheleſſe God wyllynge to certifye vs what we maye optayne by fayth, he ſhewed vs that by pure, and onely loue, and mercye he taketh the ſynner to grace, wythoute ony regarde of dedes: ſo that mercye ſhulde be ſhewed to vs of promyſe, and not of Roma. 4 dewtye. Therfore ought we to geue all glorye vnto God onely. Dauid P wytneſſeth thys ſame ſayenge: Bleſſed are they, whoſe vnryghteouſneſſe is forgeuen, and whoſe ſinnes are couered. Bleſſed is the man vnto whome the LORDE imputeth no ſyn, and in whoſe ſprete ther is no gyle.

Herin maye you perceaue the maner of tuſtifienge, namely, that God wyll of pure mercye forgeue the ſynnes, requyrynge but onely ſtedfaſte fayth of vs. Wherfore, a ſynner perceauynge that by the goodneſſe of God onely he is come to grace, he oughte to geue hym onely for it all prayſe and honoure Paul ſaieth: Yf Abraham were made righteous thorow Rom. 4. workes, then hath he wherin to reioyce, but not before God. But what ſayeth the ſcrypture? Abrahā beleued God, and it was coūted vnto him for righteouſneſſe. Unto him that goeth aboute with workes, is the rewarde not rekened of fauour, but of dewty. But vnto him yt goeth not aboute wt workes, but beleueth on hym that iuſtifyeth the vngodly, is fayth counted for ryghteouſneſſe, for by the law commeth but knowlege Rom. 3. of ſynne. But nowe wythoute addynge to of the lawe is the ryghtwyſneſſe whiche auayleth before

God declared, hauynge wytneſſe of y• lawe and prophetes: but I ſpeake of the ryghtwyſneſſe before God, whiche commeth by the fayth on IESVS CHRISTE, vnto all, and vpō all them that beleue. Here is no difference: for they are all ſynners, and wante the prayſe that God ſhulde haue of them. Wythout deſeruynge are they made ryghteous, euen by grace, thorowe the redempcyon that is done by CHRISTEIESV: whō God hath ſet for a mercyſeate thorowe fayth in hys bloude, to ſhewe the ryghteouſneſſe which auayleth before hym, in that he forgeueth the ſynnes, which were done before vnder the ſufferaunce of God. And agayne: We holde therfore that a man is ruſtifyed by fayth, wythout the workes of the lawe. &c. Thus farre be the wordes of ſaynt Paull, wherein he teacheth vs, that by faythe we optayne all ryghteouſneſſe, and not by oure owne procuryng

of ſuche ſtrengthe is the grace of fayth.
               Whan God perceaueth in vs a faythfull harte whiche ſeketh hym earneſtlye, dredynge, and fearynge hym: thā doth he communicate, and ioyne hymſelfe vnto ſuche one, geuynge hymſelfe wholye ouer vnto hym, with all that is in hym. For a man optayneth by faythe all that, which God hath promyſed vnto the y• faythful ſaiēg. I wil ſpouſe ye vnto me foreuer. I wyll marye the vnto Dſee. 2 me in ryght wyſneſſe & mercy. I wyl mary the vnto me in fayth, & trueth and thou ſhalt knowe the LORDE. All the lawe, and commaundementes ſtretche therto, namely, that we ſhulde fulfyll them, and lyue ſo, that oure good workes maye teſtyfye, and declare oure faythe, and loue, that we haue towarde God.
               But ſeyng we be frayl, and oftymes fall through weakneſſe of the fleſh: therfore ſhall we endeuoure oure

ſelfes to ryſe agayne wyth a good wyll, ſyghynge for oure myſdedes, aſkynge mercye wyth a ſorowfull ſprete. Whan we beholde oure ſynnes, then let vs humblye beſeke God to geue vs a faythfull harte. For yf God ſyeth an hungrye ſoule in vs, whiche longeth for the ryghteouſneſſe of faythe, and that we do ſo procure grace by God, as by one whiche can comforte the ſynner: than ſhall the LORDE receaue ſuche a faythfull harte vnto hys grace. For faythe and loue cauſe a man to haue alwaye a good opynyon of God.
               Yee it is the beſte, and mooſte excellente gyfte that we can haue to be comforted in God, and in hys gyfte. For as our opinion is of him, ſo ſhall he pleaſe vs. And euen as fayth is a gyft of God, geūe frely to man: ſo muſte thys opinion of God come frely of him alſo. Yf we knowlege hym for a mercyful father, than

ſhall we reioyce in hys mercye, truſtynge in hys goodneſſe, and are mercye at hym with a chearefull mynde. But yf we knowlege hym for a dredefull iudge: than ſhall we not reioyce in hys goodneſſe, but euer feare, and tremble before hym: for we fele no certentye of hys goodneſſe. Such men can not reioyce in God, nor loke for ony comforte of hym. Wherfore Paull doth exhorte vs very earneſtlye to loue, that thereby we myghte know God a right, reioycynge in all hys goodneſſes, and ſo to prayſe and thanke hym, ſayenge: But aboue all thynges put 
                     
                        •
                     oioſ. 3. on loue, whiche is the bonde of perfectneſſe. And the peace of God rule in youre hartes, to the whyche peace ye are called alſo in one bodye, and ſe that ye be thankefull.
               Let the worde of CHRISTEIESV dwell in you plenteouſlye, in all wyſedome. Teache, and exhorte youre owne ſelues wyth Pſalmes,

and hymnes, and ſpirituall ſonges, which haue fauoure with them, ſyngynge in your hartes to the LORD. And what ſo euer ye do in worde or dede, do all in the name of the LORD IESV, & geue thākes vnto god the father by hym. All this muſt come by fayth. For as a man reioyceth in God: euen ſo ſhall he prayſe hym, thanke hym, and euen breſt out in ſyngynge to hym, as to one by whō health and ſaluacyon is happened vnto hym: Yet though the fleſh wyll cauſe hym to ſynne, and greue hym inwardly. But yf he knowlegeth God for a mercyfull father: then is he conforted agayne by his goodneſſe, as wytneſſeth Paul ſayenge: God which is rych in mercy, thorow his great loue wherwith he loued vs, euen whan we were dead in ſynnes, hath quickened vs wt 
                  CHRIST. Than is God mercyfull vnto vs, & a father of mercy, geuen vnto vs wt al his goodneſſe, and then are we ſaued

by his goodneſſe: whan we can beleue thorow fayth y• redēpcyon & iuſtifycacyō declared by his worde. Therfore ſayeth Paul: Yf a man beleue Rom. 10. from the harte, he ſhalbe made ryghteous: and yf a man knowlege with the mouth, he ſhalbe ſaued.
               For the ſcripture ſayeth: Who ſo Eſay. 28. euer beleueth on hym, ſhall not be confounded. Seynge then that fayth was ſo neceſſary, therfore was CHRIST ſo diligent, euen to beate it in vs: As for an enſample, to the ſyke of the palſey he ſayde: My Math. 9 ſonne be of good cheare, thy ſynnes are forgeuen the. And to the woman of Canaā: O woman, great is Math. 15. thy fayth: be it vnto the, euē as thoudeſyreſt. And agayne to Martha he ſayeth: I am the reſurreccyon Ioh. 11. and the lyfe, he that beleueth on me, ſhall lyue, thoughe he were dead already: And who ſo euer lyueth and, belyueth on me, ſhall neuer dye. Item to the woman that was

ſyke of the blody yſſue, he ſayde: Doughter be of good conforte, thy Matt
                        •
                     . 9 fayth hath made the ſafe. Thus is it euident that all is aſcribed vnto fayth, and not vnto vs. For oure workes can ſtretch no farther, ſaue onely to ſhewe oure wyllynge harte, and to yelde thankes vnto hym whiche throughe vnoutſpeakeable loue hath ſaued vs. And thus doynge we geue only God the honour for all y• good which he worketh in vs. Loke vpon the ſeconde to the Hebr
                     •
                  es. And in the elenenth chapter he ſayeth: Without fayth it is vnpoſſible to pleaſe God. For Heb. 11. he that commeth vnto God, muſte beleue that God is, and that he is a rewarder of thē that ſeke hym. And agayne: We knowe yt a man is not 
                     
                        •
                     al. 1. made righteous by y• dedes of ye law but by ye faith on IESVS CHRIST. We haue beleued alſo on IESVS CHRIST, that we myght be made ryghteous by the fayth on CHRIST,
                  
and not by the dedes of the lawe. Ihon alſo ſayeth: All that is borne 1. Ioh. 1 of God, ouercōmeth the worlde: and this is the victory that ouercōmeth the worlde, euen our fayth. Who is it that ouercōmeth the worlde, but he which beleueth that IESVS is the ſonne of God? And further in the ſame chapter: Theſe thynges haue A writtē vnto you, which beleue on the name of the ſonne of God, that ye maye knowe how that ye haue eternall lyfe, and that ye maye beleue on the name of the ſonne of God.
               And this is the fre boldneſſe whiche we haue towarde hym, that yf we aſke ony thynge accordyng to his wyl he heareth vs. Lo, how yf a man beleueth, (that is) yf he ſetteth his truſt vpon the goodneſſe of God only, he is herde, and optayneth all that he requyreth of the LORDE, as Marke Matt. 11. alſo wytneſſeth. Paul what tyme he preached the forgeueneſſe of ſynnes 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 13. 14, 16. he dyd alwaye aſcribe it vnto faith:

that we myght knowe the vertue & power of CRISTES death, and that we ſhulde geue all glorye and praiſe vnto hym, which hath receaued vs vnto the fayth by his goodneſſe. IESVS preached the Goſpell of ye kyngdome M
                        ••
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   of God, ſayenge: The tyme is 
                     •
                  ulfylled, and the kyngdome of god 
                     •
                  s at hande, amende your ſelues, & beleue the goſpel.
               Here myght ſome men ſaye: ye ſpeake ſo much of fayth, & that man 
                     •
                  s iuſtified by fayth onely, and not by workes: Where as ſaynt Iames neuertheleſſe ſayeth, that fayth with but workes is dead. Trueth it is, & he ſayeth well: For without ther enſue Nota. forſakynge and lothſomneſſe of ſynnes, and without a man reſt and reioyce onely in God, hauynge reſpecte to none other creature, ſekyng helpe or conforte at the ſame: Then is it a tokē that he is not wholy fixt vpon God, nor putteth his truſt in hym. So longe as a man reioyceth

in ſynnynge, ſo longe is not God his ioye. As longe as man cōmeth not to God with more loue & thankfulneſſe, nor can quyete hym ſelfe with God: ſo longe hath he not the trewe fayth. The trew fayth mortifyeth the ſynnes, that the outward workes maye teſtifye of the inward fayth. Thus doynge optayneth God the glorye, whiche wyll worke wonderouſly in all them, in whom he hath poured his worde by fayth. Therfore ſayd CHRIST: Let youre lyght ſo ſhyne before men, that they Math 5 1. Pet, 2 mayeſe your good workes, and glorifye youre father which is in heauen. Scripture wytneſſeth euery wher yt fayth muſt make new creatures, Pha. 2 orels ſhuld it not work, ye worke wherfore God ſent his worde. Not that workes iuſtyfye a man: But ſeynge man is iuſtyfyed by fayth, therfore is he called iuſtifyed or ryghteous for doynge the workes of fayth: For the workes be called

ryghteous before God, by reaſon of fayth. Here vpon bryngeth ſaynt Iacob. 1 Iames Abraham and Rahab as proues, ſayenge: Wylte thou vnderſtonde O thou vayne man, that fayth without dedes is dead? Was not oure father Abraham iuſtyfyed thorowe workes, whan he offred Iſaac his ſonne vpon the altare? Thou ſeyſt how that faith wrought with his dedes, through the dedes was the fayth made perfecte: and the ſcripture was fulfylled, whiche ſayeth: Abraham beleued God and it was reputed vnto hym for ryghteouſneſſe, and he was called the frende of God. &c. Yf Abraham had douted on Gods promyſe, whan he wolde haue offered his ſonne: then hadde not his faythe bene ryghte nor ſufficyent. Rahab Ioſu. 2 alſo ſhewed hyr fayth, where by ſhe let the ſpyes go, ſhewynge them whiche waye they ſhulde go. She beleued ſtedfaſtly that God

ſhulde cauſe the chyldren of Iſraell to wynne the cytie of Iericho, and by yt fayth was hyr faythfull worke accepted before God. God loked firſt vpon Abell and then vpon his 
                     Gene. 4. gyfte. The ſcripture hath ſhut vp al 
                     Gal 3. vnder ſynne, that the promyſe ſhuld come by fayth on IESVS CHRIST, geuen vnto them that beleue. Hereby we maye ſe that fayth only iuſtifieth (that is:) Whan we forſake all creatures, ſubmyttynge out ſelues, and paſſe by all mans inuencyons or holyneſſe, fallynge and leanynge to CHRIST only, ſayenge: O LORDE I knowlege health to be happened vnto me by the. LORDE augmēt thou my fayth. CHRIST ſayd: I am Ioh. 5. the lyght of the worlde he that foloweth me ſhall not walke in darkeneſſe, but ſhal haue the lyght of lyfe. And agayne in the ſame chapter: Yf ye continue in my worde, then are ye my diſciples, and ye ſhal knowe the trueth, and yt trueth ſhal make you

fre. Though the faythfull fell to ſynnynge, yet remayneth God a frende vnto the fayth and loue that he fyndeth in a mā: his promyſes vnto thē that beleue are ſo manyfold. Dauid Pſal. 36 ſayeth: Yf the ryghteous falleth, he ſhall not be bruſed: for the LORDE doth ſtaye hym with his hāde. Paul ſayeth: Then is ther now no damna Rom. 8. cyon vnto them that are in CHRIST IESV, which walke not after ye fleſh, but after the ſprete. For the lawe of the ſprete (yt bringeth lyfe in CHRIST IESV) hath made me fre from yt lawe of ſynne and death. Saynt Ihon alſo 1. Ioh. 3. wrytteth ſayenge: Who ſo euer is borne of God, ſynneth not, for his ſede remayneth in hym: & he can not ſynne, becauſe he is borne of God.
               Though a man be weake after the fleſhe, and thereby fall to ſynne: yet Nota. doth God loue a man for the fayth wherby he loueth God. Whan he falleth, his fall is not vnto dead: for his ſprete is without gyle. The

                  LORDE ſuffereth the ryghteous to fall, leſte he ſtonde to muche in hys owne conceate: but that he aſke mercy with all his harte. The ryghteous falleth ſeuen tymes in one daye, and ryſeth agayne. The LORDE taketh the faythfull for his beſt beloued, and reſerueth hym to his mercy. Salomon ſayeth: The ryghteous Prou. 10 laboureth to do good, but the vngodly vſeth hys increaſe vnto ſinnes. Oure prayer is that we maye abyde by the gladde and ioyfull tydynges of the goſpell. For he that Matt. 16. beleueth, and is baptyſed ſhall be ſaued. I brynge you tydynges of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 2 great ioye which ſhal happē vnto al people: for vnto you is this daye borne the Saueoure, euen CHRIST the LORDE.
               
               Thus farre is now ſayde of the mercy, which we vptayne by fayth: For true fayth ioyfuily receaued, excludynge al ye is contrary to CHRIST bryngeth a greate health wyth her.
            
            
               
               ¶ The thyrde chapter ſhall treate how hurtefull vnbelefe is, and what is the cauſe that men be ſo colde and ſtraunge in Godly matters and in loue towarde God.
               
                  WHan we conſydre our fyrſte progeny, then is it euydent vnto vs, that the nature of man is created to ye lykeneſſe of God in wyll, reaſon, and vnderſtandyng: folowynge God through wyſedom, and by knowledge of the creatures, And that man was ioyned wt a perfecte hart vnto God, vſynge hym wt a cōplete knowlege. Upon this hath Gene. 
                        •
                     . God ſet him in the paradyſe of pleaſure, geuynge hym a cōmaūdement, namely, ye he ſhuld not eat of the tre of knowlege of good & euell. This cōmaūdemēt was geuē vnto Adā by God, to ye entent ye he wolde proue, whether he wolde abyde ſtedfaſt by his word & cōmaūdmēt, or not. But ye deuel, which was minded to bring ſynne & deathe in to the worlde thorow vnbelefe, occaſioned to it by his

enuye to mankynde, he hath ſtered the ſerpent (which was the ſotyleſte creature of all creatures) to ſaye vnto the woman: Yee, hath God ſayd Gene. 3 in dede: Ye ſhall not eate of all maner trees in the garden? Then ſayd the woman vnto the ſerpent: We eate of the frute of the trees in y• garden: But as for the frute of the tre that is in the myddes of the gardē, God hath ſayde: Eate ye not of it, & touche it not, leſt ye dye. Whan the Serpent now perceaued that Euaſtode weakely vpon Gods worde, for ſhe ſayde: leſt we dye (where God neuertheleſſe hadde ſayde: Loke in what daye ſo euer thou eateſt therof thou ſhalt dye the death:) he dyd aſſault Eua fyrſt, to make her dout in Gods worde, and to brynge her frō it. Now whan he had her ſo farre: than brought he her yet farther, ſayenge: Tuſh ye ſhall not dye ye death. For God knoweth that in what daye ſo euer ye eate of it, youre eyes

ſhalbe opened, and ye ſhalbe as God, and knowe both good & euell. And the woman ſawe that the tre was good to eate of, and luſty vnto ye eyes, and a pleaſaunt tre to make wyſe: and toke of the frute of it, and dyd eate, & gaue vnto hit huſbande alſo therof, and he dyd eate. Thus haue they both lefte Gods worde, and haue done theyr wyl, and fulfylled theyr deſyre and luſt. Thus hath man caſt hym ſelfe awaye thorowe myſbelefe tranſgreſſyng gods worde and cōmaundement.
               The luſt and deſyre that Adam conceaued in his fyrſt appetite doth yet remayne in hym: for we are of the ſame fleſhe and ſubſtaunce and alſo folow thē ature of it. We are ſo ſore wrapped in myſbelefe, that it is alſo vnto vs the cauſe and occaſyon of all ſynne: ſo that we be naturaly chyldren of wrath, by inſpiracyon of yt prynce of the ayre, which is a ſprete, workynge in the chyldren Ephe. 2.
                  
of myſbelefe, fulfyllynge the pleaſure of the fleſhe: for the whiche Tollo
                        •
                     . 3 the wrath of God commeth vpō the chyldren of vnbelefe. Whan man now leauynge the worde of God, regardeth not God, folowynge hys owne wytte and wyſedome: than is his harte and mynde darkened and drawen awaye, truſtynge more to his owne wyſedome, then to his LORDE his God. And his harte conceaueth nothynge ſaue the luſt and deſyre of the fleſhe, of the which he is ledde captyue: ſo that he axeth no more counſell at God. This doth Dauid complayne ſayenge: The Pſal. 13 foolyſh bodyes ſaye in theyr hartes: Tuſh, ther is no God. They are corrupte and become abhominable in theyr doynges, ther is not one that doth good. The LORDE loked downe from heauen vpon the chyldren of men, to ſe yf ther were ony that wolde vnderſtand and ſeke after God. But they are all gone out of the waye, they are altogether become

vnprofitable, ther is none that doth good: no not one. All this commeth by myſbelefe, and whan man ſetteth no more by God & his worde, nor hath no more luſt vnto hym. For yf man dyd abyde by God, & beheld alway the wonderous and glorious workes, whiche the LORDE hath declared vnto vs by his benefytes and goodneſſe: it were not poſſible that he ſhulde forſake his LORDE his God, but ſhulde alwaye be gyded of God and his worde, ſekynge at hym onely all his comforte and health. But ſeynge he is deceuered from God and his worde, and wyll ſtande to his owne wyſedom, which is but playne 
                     •
                  oly: therfore is he reſt leſſe, and to his LORDE his God is he vnfaythfull: as wytneſſeth Eſaye ſayenge: He that is vnfaythfull dealeth vnfaythfully. Dauid alſo ſayeth: Eſay. 21. They kepte not the cōuenaūt of Pſal. 77 God, and wolde not walke in hys law. They forgat what he had done

and the wonderfull workes that he Aba
                        •
                     ut. 2. hadde ſhewed for them. In all this haue they ſynned, and dyd not beleue in his wonderfull workes: for the ſoule of the vnfaythfull is not ſtedfaſte nor trewe in hyr ſelfe. By all theſe euydences and reaſons are we taught, that all wyckedneſſe is come in the worlde by myſbelefe: for thorowe myſbelefe hath man but ſlender knowlege of God: and accordynge as he hath knowlege of God, ſo muche loueth he God, and reioyceth in his goodneſſe. This myſbelefe doth ſo kepe a man boūd in ſynfulneſſe, that he can not fele or perceaue ony goodneſſe to come vnto hym from the bleſſed LORDE.
               
               Thoughe he ſaye that he beleueth CHRIST to be crucyfyed, and that he hath ſuffred the paynfull death, which the deuyls alſo beleue: yet beleueth not he ſo, as one yt can reſt in this deth only, & as one yt is fully per ſuaded to haue mercy & forgeuenes

therby of ye 
                  LORDE. For yf he coulde beleue this, he ſhuld both loue God, and reioyce wholye in hym, not lokynge aboute for to optayne ony other mercye of what creature ſoeuer it were. It ſhuld ſuffiſe him to know God which will receaue him to hys mercy. Wherfore, the cauſe why mē be ſo coulde in loue towarde God, and ſo ſtraunge from him is, that they knowe him ſo lytle, & that they haue ſo ſmal perceueraūce of yt loue that he hath towarde vs. Lo, what vnkindneſſe commeth by myſbelefe as whan man is not fully certyfyed in his harte, that God will geue vs ſo much, as he hath promyſed vs by hys worde: yee ſo litle is mā inwardlye reioyced, and comforted, as he doth beleue, and is aſſured in his cō
                  ſcience that God is, & will be good vnto vs. For yf he knoweth not God in hys goodneſſe, howe can he reioyce in hys goodneſſe? Thus is it euydent that man abydeth preſoned of

hys owne wytte and wyſedome thorowe vnbelefe. Thys cauſed Eſaye to ſaye. Therfore commeth my people Eſa. 5 alſo in captyuyte, becauſe they haue no vnderſtondynge. Dauid alſo ſpeaketh of thus myſerable eſtate ſayenge. O LORDE, howe glorious Pſal. 91. are thy workes, thy thoughtes are very depe. An vnwyſe man wyll not knowe thys, and a foole wyll not vnderſtonde it. And agayne in another place. They wyl not be learned Pſal. 
                        •
                     1. and vnderſtonde: but walke on ſtyll in darkneſſe. Who ſo is not lyghtened thorowe the worde of the LORDE to knowe the LORDES waye, and to perceaue hys ſaluacyon by the faythe in God, that man walketh in darkneſſe altogether, fyndynge no reſtynge place for hys ſynfull ſoule, hauynge a weake hope to fynde ſaluacyon by the LORDE. Thys is it that Dauid ſayde. They beleued not in God, and put Pſal. 77. not theyr truſte in hys helpe. Eſaye

calleth vs oute of thys darkneſſe ſayenge: Eſaye, 50, Who ſo walketh in darknes, and no lyghte ſhyneth vpon him, let hym hope in the LORDE, and hold hym by hys God. How could a man haue ony hope or truſte in hys hart, ſeynge he is not ſtedfaſtlye perſwaded that mercy can be optayned, for the whiche he maye hope: ſeynge ye hope & lōgyngefor cōmeth by fayth.
               Becauſe now that man doth not beleue, therfore can he alſo not hope ony ſuch good as is promyſed hī by faith, nother cā he loue dewly the geuer of ye good, yt hath promiſed hym ſo much of it: this may we perceaue by ye childrē of Iſrael: ye 
                  LORD promiſed to geue Abrahā al ye lōd of Canaā 
                  Gene. 15. & afterward whā he wold haue ſent Moſes vnto Pharao, to deliuer the ſame people, he promiſed vnto Moſes Exod. 3. Deut. 1. to geue thē ye lond yt flowed with milke & hony. Now yt god was mynded thus to do, yt did he ſhew euidētly in deliueryng yt people frō Pharaos hādes, leadyng thē ſtraūgly thorow

the reede ſee, and fedinge them with heauenlye bread. But howe happened it? For whan they had ony lettynge by the way, by reaſon of theyr myſbelefe and vnthankfulneſſe, and had forgotten the benefytes ſhewed vnto them of God: than fell they to murmurynge, and deceuerynge frō God, and hys worde. Agayne, what 
                     
                        •
                     u. 13. 14 tyme as the ſpyes had ſearched out
                     •
                   the londe of promyſe, and came, and ſhewed all thynges vnto the chylderen of Iſraell, howe they had ſene greate giauntes in compariſon of whom they were but greſhoppers, and that the indwellers of the lond were ſtronge and myghty men, and that theyr cyties were hygh walled. The chylderen of Iſraell hearynge thys were ſore aſtonnyed, murmured agaynſte God, Moſes, & Aaron, ſayenge: that they wolde turne back agayne in to Egypte. All thys murmurynge came of myſbelefe. For yf they had ſtād ſtedfaſtly to his worde

and bydden ſure by hys promyſes, they ſhulde haue anſwered & ſayde: We ſhall ouercoeme that nacyon ryght well, and take the londe in poſſeſſyon, though they were thouſand tymes ſtronger: For the LORDE hath promyſed and geuē it vs. But ſeynge they fel frō gods word, & hys promyſes, leanynge to theyr owne polyce and ſtrength, therfore ſemed it vnto them vnpoſſible. Neuertheleſſe it was poſſible wyth God, and thorowe God, as hys worde dyd aſſure them.
               Seynge than yt God made ſuche a promyſe vnto them, and that they decyuered from hys beheſtynges: therfore had they no hope to take in the londe of promyſe: Wherfor they were vnworthye of it, and haue not entred in to the reſt, which God promyſed them. For thys cauſe cōmeth Paull and warneth vs of thys wycked vnbelefe, ſayenge: Let vs feare Heb. 4. therfore leſte ony of vs forſakynge

y• promyſe of entrynge in to his reſt, ſhulde ſeme to come behynde: for it is declared vnto vs as well as vnto them. But the worde of preachynge helped not them, whan they yt herde it beleued it not. By theſe reaſons is it declared vnto vs euydently howe hurtefull myſbelefe is vnto vs. We cā do God no more wrong, nor bring more loſſe vnto oure ſoule, than in yt we geue no more credēce to his wordes, which not withſtōding is faith full vnto vs in all hys promyſes.
               Thys alſo complayned CHRIST to ye Iewes ſayenge: The father which Iohan. 5. ſente me beareth wytneſſe hymſelfe of me. Ye haue nother herd his voyce, norſene hys ſhape at ony tyme: You haue not hys worde abydynge in you, for ye beleue hym not, whom he hath ſente. I am come in my fathers name, and ye receaue me not: Yf another come in hys own name, hym ſhall ye receaue. How can ye beleue, which receaue prayſe one of an

other, and ſeke not the prayſe which is of God onely? Yf ye beleued Moſes, ye ſhulde beleue me alſo: For he hath written of me. But yf ye beleue not hys wrytynges, how ſhall ye beleue my wordes? ye wyll not come vnto me that ye myghte haue lyfe. He yt beleueth not God, hath made 1 Ioh. 5. hym a lyar: becauſe he hath not beleued the recorde that God hath teſtyfyed of hys ſonne. And this is the recorde: euen that God hath geuen vs euerlaſtyng lyfe. And thys lyfe is in hys ſonne. He that hath the ſonne of God, hath lyfe. Hereby is it euydent, that yf we couet to be conforted in God, thā ſhal we ſeke it in his word, and take recorde of the ſame, howe we maye come to hys mercye. So muche fayth as we geue to his wordes, ſo muche ſhall oure knowlege be alſo of hys goodneſſe, and ſo muche ſhall we be comforted of hym. Howe can we be fully comforted, ſeynge we do ſo ſore wauet &

ſtonde not ſtedfaſte in hys worde, whiche hys goodneſſe doth declare vnto vs? For all that doth conforte vs commeth of God. The father loueth Iohan. 13. the ſonne, and hath geuen all thynges in hys handes. Whoſo beleueth Ioan. 3. in the ſonne, hath lyfe euerlaſtynge: But he that beleueth not in the ſonne, ſhall not ſe lyfe, but the wrath of God abydeth vpon hym. Thys doth ſcrypture ſpecifye vnto vs, that we ſhulde knowe the cauſe and occaſyon of all euel: that is myſbelefe, and it is the cauſe yt we know not God, nor haue ony loue toward hym. Nowe whan the loue of God is banyſhed, than doth man lyghtelye fall to all maner of wyckedneſſe. Therfore ſayde CHRISTE: Whan the holy gooſt commeth he ſhall rebuke the worlde of ſynne, of ryghteouſneſſe, and of iudgemente. Of ſynne, becauſe they beleued not on me. Of ryghteouſneſſe, becauſe I go to the father. Wo be vnto them Eccli. 2.
                  
that are lowſe or harte, whiche put not theyr truſt in God, and therfore ſhall they not be defended of hym. Againe: They that fear the LORDE, 
                  Prou. 18. wyll not myſtruſt his worde: & they that loue hym wyll kepe his cōmaū
                  dementes. Thus maye we ſe how yt whan man knoweth not what God hath cōmaunded hym, nor ſtandeth ſtedfaſtly vpon God thorow fayth: how then (I ſaye) he falleth vnto extreme vnkindneſſe, without ony dredyng of God. Myſbelefe therfore is the cauſe and occaſion of al ſynnes, wherof man ſhalbe iudged. For yf ye fyrſt man had bydden faſt by Gods worde, he ſhulde not haue fallen to ſynnynge: Therfore ſayd CHRIST: The workes yt I do in my fathers Ioh. 10. name, they bear wytneſſe of me: but ye beleue not, becauſe ye are not of my ſhepe. Baruch alſo ſayeth: But Baruch 3. how happeneth it Israell that thou art in thyn enemyes lande? thou art waxen olde in a ſtraūge contry, and

defyled with yt dead. Why art thou become lyke vnto them yt go downe to theyr graues? Euen becauſe thou haſt forſaken the well of wyſedome. Truely, yf thou haddeſt walked in the waye of God, thou ſhuldeſt haue remayned ſtyll ſafe in thyne owne lande. Euen this ſame complaineth the LORDE alſo by Ieremy the prophete, Ierem. 2 ſayenge: What vnfaythfulneſſe founde youre fathers in me, yt they wente away ſo farre fro me, fallynge to lyghtneſſe, and beynge ſo vayne? They thought not in theyr hartes: Where haue we left the LORDE, that brought vs out of the lande of Egipte? that ledde vs thorow the wyldernes, thorow a deſert & rough lande. &c. And continently after in ye ſame place: For my people hath done two euels: They haue forſaken me the wel of the water of lyfe, and dygged them pyttes: Yee vyle and broken pyttes that holde no water. And it foloweth alſo: Thyne

owne wyckedneſſe ſhal reproue the, and thy turnynge awaye ſhall condempne the: that thou mayeſt know and vnderſtande how hurtefull a thynge it is that thou haſt forſaken the LORDE thy God, & not feared hym ſayth ye 
                  LORD God of hooſtes.
               Wherfore, whan we beholde oure ſelues duely, remembrynge the worthynes and excellency of y• choſen ſoule, whiche of ryght ſhulde be a bryde of IES VS CHRISTE: for of nature can not ſhe be refreſſhed nor comforted but, onely of God.
               What ſo euer ſhe ſeketh beſyde hym, that maketh her diſquyete and comfortleſſe. For this cauſe is it nedefull for vs to lyfte oure eyen vp towarde heauen, beſekynge hym humbly to conforte vs wyth his owne preſence. Nother is this accomplyſhed, but onely whan the LORDE declareth his goodneſſe vnto vs by his word, and that we then reioyce in all the goodneſſe

which he hath promyſed vs therin. Yf we forſake ye worde, then ſhal the ſoule become cold & ſtraūge frō god This confirmeth Ieremy ſayenge: I wyll caſt you out of this lande, in Ierem. 16. to a lande that ye, nor your fathers knowe not: and there ſhall ye ſerue ſtraunge goddes day & nyght, there wyll I ſhewe you no fauoure. That man verely hath no reſt whiche falleth to ony ſhapē creature, or to ony inuencion & ymaginacyon of man. Where mā doth yet procure ryghteouſneſſe & ſaluacyō by his owne mother wytte & wyſedome, there doth not god work his worke. This may be tried by many places of ſcripture CHRIST dyd not ſhewe many tokēs Rom. 1. there where was no faith, becauſe ye they knowynge yt ther is one God, haue not prayſed hym as God, nor thanked hym, but became vayne in theyr ymaginacyōs, & theyr folyſhe hart was blinded. Whā they coūted thēſelues wyſe, they became fooles.

And why? Euē becauſe (ſaith Paul) Rom. 10. they knowe not the ryghteouſneſſe which auayleth before God, & go about to mayntayne theyr owne righteouſneſſe: & thus are not they ſubdued vnto ye ryghteouſneſſe whiche is of value before God. CHRIST is ye ende of the law vnto-ryghteouſneſſe for euery one yt beleueth. For God ſo loued the world, that he gaue his Ioh. 3. only ſonne, that wo ſo euer beleueth in hym ſhulde not peryſhe, but haue euerlaſtynge lyfe. Lo how ſaluacyō commeth by fayth. Who ſo therfore doth not receaue the worde by fayth the ſame abydeth in darkneſſe & dāynacion: as CHRIST wytneſſeth in the ſame place, ſayenge: But he that beleueth not, is condempned already: becauſe he beleueth not on ye name of the onely ſonne of God. But this is the condemnacion: that the lyght is come in to the worlde, and men loued the darckneſſe more then the lyght, for theyr workes were euell.

Who ſo euer doth euell, hateth the lyght, and commeth not to ye lyght, that his dedes ſhulde not be reproued. Here in are we enformed that it is Gods wyll, that all men be ſaued: and that we ſhall knowlege the fathers loue, whiche hath geuen vs CHRISTE to be oure Saueoure: and that we ſhulde knowlege oure ſaluacion to come by hym, whiche hath accomplyſhed the worke of oure health in vs. But ſeynge many men do not turne them ſelues to God warde, walkynge after theyr owne wyll and deſyre: therfore cannot they haue knowlege of the ſaluacyon that is promiſed and geuen vs by CHRIST. Man muſte vtterly forſake hym ſelfe, with all that is in hym, and reſt vpon CHRISTE onely: by whoſe death we maye fynde ſauynge health. But alas Lollo. 2. for pytie ther be many vayne and pufte vp in theyr fleſhly myndes, which holde not them ſelues to the

heade and worde, nother come to CHRISTE to be humbly taught of hym. This is the cauſe why ye Phariſes came not to God, but ſayde it that Iob dyd prophecy aforehande, ſayenge: They ſaye vnto God: Go Iob. 21. frō vs, we deſyre not the knowlege of thy wayes. What maner of felowe is ye Almyghty, that we ſhulde ſerue hym? What profyte ſhuld we haue to ſubmytte oure ſelues vnto hym? Eſaye alſo ſayeth: Thou haſt Eſaye. 57. hadde trouble for the multitude of thyne owne wayes, yet ſaydeſt thou neuer: I wyll leaue of. Thou thynkeſt to haue health or lyfe of thy ſelf and therfore thou beleueſt not that thou arte ſycke. Yee, heare what O ſee the prophete ſayeth: I droue Ephraim, Iuda plowed, and Iacob O ſee. 10 played the huſbandman, that they might ſo we vnto righteouſnes and reape the frutes of weldoynge: that they myghte plowe vp theyr freſſhe & new tylled lande, and ſeke

the LORD tyll he came, & taught thē ryghteouſneſſe. But now they haue plowed them wickedneſſe, therfore ſhall they reape ſynne, and eat ye frut of lyfe. Seynge thou putteſt thy cō
                  fidence in thyne owne wayes, & leaneſt to the cōfidēce of thy worthies, ther ſhall growe a ſedicyon amonge thy people. By this is it euidēt that man remayneth in his vnfaythfulneſſe thorow his owne wyſedome. For the LORDE wyll teache vs wt his worde only, yf we couet to walk aryght in his way. Al is but foolyſhneſſe, be man neuer ſo well learned, yf he knewe nought of God. Therfore ſayeth Paul: The worde of the 1. Corin. 1 croſſe is foolyſhneſſe vnto thē yt periſh, but vnto vs that are ſaued it is the power of God. For it is written: I wyl deſtroye the wyſedome of the Eſay. 29 wyſe, and wyll caſt away the vnderſtandyng of the prudēt. For ſo much as the worlde by the wyſedome therof knewe not God in his wyſedom.

it pleaſed God thorowe foolyſh preachynge to ſaue them that beleue. Yf 2. Cor. 4. oure Goſpell be yet hyd, it is hyd in them that are loſte: amonge whome the God of thys worlde hath blynded the myndes of them, whiche beleue not, that the lyghte of the Goſpell of the glorye of CHRISTE (whiche is the ymage of God) ſhuld not ſhyne vnto them. And in another place ſaieth Paul: Becauſe they receaued not the loue of the treuth, 2. Teſſa. 2. that they myghte haue bene ſaued: therfore ſhall God ſende thē ſtronge deluſyon, that they ſhulde beleue lyes, that all they myghte be damned, whiche beleued not the treuthe, but had pleaſure in vnryghteouſneſſe. It hath bene the LORDES wyll alwaye to draw euery man vnto hym both by benefytes, and wordes. But whan he ſeyth the hartes to remayne ſtyll harde, and peruerted, than threateneth he the vnbeleuynge, yt they ſhall come to naught,

yf they do not receaue hys worde, ſayenge: The kyngdome of God ſhall Math. 21. be takē from you, & ſhalbe geuē vnto y• Heythen, which ſhal bryng forth ye frutes of it. And who ſo falleth vpō thys ſtone, (that is CHRIST) ſhalbe broken
                     ••
                   peces: and loke vpon whō it falleth, it ſhal grynde him to poul
                  
                     ••
                  r. This is fearful to heare of him, that i
                     •
                   offended at Goddes worde thorow myſbelef, nother doth knowlege thorowe loue hys ſaluacyon to be therein: but withſtandeth it by al meanes poſſyble. They that be offended and daſhe at the ſtone (that is CHRISTE) they be not drawen to hym through hys goodneſſe, but be rather peyered, peruerſe, & myndleſſe. Yee and they become enemies of God by the lawe: whereby they be broughte to greater feare, than can wel be ſwaged and redreſſed againe by Gods worde.
               Whan the ſtone (that is the bleſſed Nota. 
                  CHRIST) ſhall fall vpon the miſ

beleuing, & forſake y• ſinner truſtyng in his blindneſſe, beynge deſpyſed of God for his obſtinacie, and beating his iudgemente wythout mercye at the daye of dome: than ſhall the vnbeleuynge ſe how greuous it is vnto hym, that he hath not receaued CHRIST in his worde. The LORDE ſayd: He yt is not with me, is againſt Math. 12. me. He that gathereth not with me, ſcattereth. For he that ſeketh righteouſnes, notbeholding CHRIST only wt a pure minde, he daſheth agaiſt y• ſtone. Now greuous it is to offēd at y• ſtone, & to be offēded at CHRIST, do many places of ſcripture ſpecifie vnto vs. CHRIST is ſet to a fall, & to an Luce. 2. vpriſing agayn of many. But well is him whoſe truſt is in ye 
                  LORD hys god. Be it knowē vnto you therfore Actu
                        •
                     . 13. ye mē & brethrē, ye thorow this mā (y• is CHRISTE) is preached vnto you ye forgeueneſſe of ſynnes, and from al the thinges, wherby ye might not be iuſtified in the lawe of Moſes. But whoſoeuer beleueth on thys man

is iuſtifyed. Beware therfore that it come not vpon you, which is ſpoken in the Prophetes. Beholde ye deſpyſers, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 2. and wonder at it, and peryſhe: For I do a worke in youre tyme, which ye ſhall not beleue yf ony mā tell it you. And agayne in the ſame place ſayde Paull and Barnabas to the Iewes: It behoued fyrſte the worde of god to be ſpoken vnto you, but now that ye thruſte it from you, & counte youre ſelues vnworthye of euerlaſtynge lyfe: lo, we turne to the Gentyles. Oh LORDE who cā perceaue how hurtefull the worldly wyſedome is? The Byſhoppes, Phariſees, Preſtes, and Lawers thorowe theyr owne wyſedome wold not ſubmitte them ſelues to the humble, and meke fayth of CHRISTE, but rather drewe the other people from the fayth in CHRISTE, ſayenge: Doth ony of the rulers or Phariſees beleue on hym? But the commune Iohan. 7. people whiche knowe not the lawe,

are curſed. Thus were the Publicans and open ſynners (whiche beleued in CHRISTE) deſpyſed of them. Yee becauſe the commune people Luce. 7. Iohan. 12. folowed CHRIST, therfor haue the Byſhoppes and Preſtes takē coū
                  ſell how to ſlaye CHRIST. CHRIST alſo whan he ſaw that the couetous Phariſees dyd mocke hym, he ſayd: Ye are they that iuſtyfye youre ſelues Luce. 16. before 
                     ••
                  n, but God knoweth youre hartes. For that which is hye amonge men, is abominacyon before God. And agayn ſayd CHRIST: Why know ye not my ſpeche? Euen Iohan. 8. becauſe ye can not abyde the hearynge of my wordes. And agayne: I am come to iudgement into hys Iohan. 9 world, that they which ſe not, might ſe: and that they which ſe. myght be made blynde. And ſome of the Phariſees that were wyth hym, herde thys, and ſayde vnto hym. Are we then blynde alſo? IESVS ſayde vnto them: Yf ye were blynde, ye ſhulde

haue no ſynne: But now that ye ſay weſe, therfore remayneth youre ſynne: That is as muche, as though CHRISTE wolde ſaye: He that wyll ſe hys ſaluacyon by hys owne wyſedom, he is blynde: For he loketh not vpon God, but is blynde in himſelf. But he that loketh not vpon hymſelfe, but ſeketh hys ſaluacyon in CHRISTE, he is lyghtened of God. Thys wytneſſeth ſaint Paul, ſayēg Roma. 9. The Heythen whiche, ſolowed not ryghteouſneſſe, haue ouertakē righteouſneſſe. But I ſpeake of the righteouſneſſe that commeth by faythe. Iſraell folowed the lawe of ryghteouſneſſe, and attayned not vnto the lawe of righteouſneſſe. Why ſo? euē becauſe they ſoughte it not oute of faith, but as it were out of deſeruing of workes. For they haue ſtōbled at the ſtomblynge ſtone, as it is writtē. Beholde, I laye in Syon a ſtone to Eſaye. 28. ſtomble at, and a tocke to be offended at: and whoſoeuer beleueth on

hym, ſhall not be confounded.
               Here haue we now herd what hurt vnbelefe bryngeth, whereby a man becommeth coulde and ſtraunge frō God. For thorowe vnbelefe hath a man ſmall perceuenaunce of God or godlyneſſe. Yee where God is not duely knowen, there is man ydle, & can haue no godly luſt, nor fauoure vnto God. But yt father hath geuen vs CHRIST hys only ſonne, accordynge to hys loue towarde vs (euen hys godly worde) that we ſhulde herken to him, & learne to know y• waye of ſaluaciō thorow hys word. Thus hath CHRIST called vs louingly namely vs yt were of a diſquiete & troubelous hart, geuingvs knowlege of his fatherly wil thorow faith, yt we ſhuld be cōforted in his word, which brigeth al mercy wt it. Yf our hart be ready to accōpliſh yt wil of god accordinge to his worde, & not to departe thorow ony ſtraung learnīg, thā are we ſurely called of hi. For Ihō ſaith.

Whoſoeuer tranſgreſſeth, and abydeth 2. Iohan. 1 not in the doctryne of CHRIST, hath not God. He that abydeth in the doctryne of CHRISTE hath both the father, and the ſonne. And agayn: Yf no man wyl receaue you, Math. 10. nor heare youre preachynge, depart out of that houſe or cytie, and ſhake the duſte from youre fete. Treuly I ſaye vnto you: It ſhall be eaſyer for the loude of Sodoma, and Gomorra in the daye of iudgement, thā for yt cuie. Thus may youſe y• damage Math. 9 and hurte of myſbeleſe, the whiche cauſeth a diſquyeted harte, and remorſe of conſcieure, and an harte ye is comfortleſſe, yee a continuaunce in ſynfulneſſe. Wherfore CHRISTE ſeinge the multitude, hauyng blind leaders, he is moued with pitye vpō them: for they were pined away, and diſperſed, as ſhepe hauyng no ſhepe herde. And CHRISTE ſayde vnto his diſciples. The harueſt is great, but the laborers are few. Wherfore

praye the LORDE of the harueſte to ſend forth labourers into his harueſt. Now louyngly wyll the LORDE haue pytye vpon vs, ſeynge he calleth vs ſo ſwetelye to hys godlye worde, that we abyde not in damnacyon. 2. Teſ. 3 Paul ſayeth: Brethren, praye for vs, that the worde of God maye haue fre paſſage, and be glorified as it is with you, and that we maye be delyuered from vnreaſonable, and euell men. Thys graunte vs y• heauenlye father, thorow IESVS CHRISTE his ſonne.
               Amen.
            
            ¶ Here endeth the treatyſe of fayth and hope.
         
         
            
            Here foloweth the treatyſe of loue and charite.
            
               ¶ Of the loue that God hath towarde vs, howe ſtronglye loue worketh in vs, and howe hurtefull the worldlye loue is.
               
                  PEace and mercye from God the father thorow IESV CHRIST. Ye entyerlye beloued, ye that hūger to come to ye knowlege of ye loue yt God hath to vs ward ye muſt turne youre ſelues humblye to the bleſſed LORDE, deſyrynge hym to make youre hartes wyllinge to receaue his worde ioyfully, and to knowlege that loue in the ſpirite by fayth, the whiche the LORDE ſhewed vs ſo frendlye thorow his worde. Hys loue is not knowen, but onely thorowe hys worde, the which onely geueth vs true wytneſſe that God loueth vs. So farre ſtretcheth oure knowlege of hys loue, as we haue gotten it oute of hys wordes by

fayth. The LORDE ſheweth vs ſuffycyentlye in hys wordes that he loueth vs.
               As God is trewe and faythful in hys promiſes, ſo maye we lyghtelye gette perceueraunce of hys loue by hys own wordes. Yee euen that god hath promyſed, that he loueth vs, were ynoughe to reioyce in, yf we coulde beleue dewly, and not to ſeke about for ony other louers. It ſhuld be ynough for vs that God loueth vs, and we ſhuld reioice in his loue: For hys loue is onely trewe, bounteous, holye and good. That the worlde, and al men do loue me, that doth not auayll me, nother doth it comfort, nor ſaue me: but that God doth loue me, yt is a cōfort vnto my ſinful ſoul. For god geueth ſaluaciō holyneſſe, righteouſneſſe, & redēptiō thorow his loue. The world with al hyr louelyneſſe, geueth nought ſaue dānacion, hell, ſynne, & death. Therfore can ye ſoule finde nother reſt nor

peace therin. For the ſoule maye be comforted in hyr owne nature, and ſtrengthe with God onely, and with his loue. Nowe whan man heareth this, and perceaueth it, than muſte his harte leap vp for ioye towarde God, whiche loueth him. Thus becommeth be equall, and lyke vnto God, ſo y• he is ſo mynded in loue to Godwarde, as God agayne is mynded to him, ſayenge with chearefulneſſe: Is it not a greate thinge, that ſuch a LORD loueth me, that draweth all men to him: and that becauſe I ſhulde be partaker of all the good that of hys loue he hath promyſed to geue vnto all them, that knowlege hym by hys loue. He that is ſure of thys loue, ſayeth boldelye: Who can now daunger me? Who cā condemne me? For God ſo loueth me y• he will ſaue me. Now do I feare no ther death nor hell: For God that loueth me hath ouercome death, hell, and ſynne for me. Let aryſe nowe agaynſte

me caſtels, ſtronge holdes, yee the gates of hell, and though I were i y• middes of death, yet ſhal not they hurte me. For God, that hath al powers in his hande, doth loue me. Them that God hath electe, & choſen, Roma. 
                        •
                     . them hath he called: and whome he hath called, thē hath he alſo made righteous, and whom he hath made righteous, them hath he glorified alſo. What ſhall we ſay than vnto theſe thinges? yf God be on oure ſyde, who can we be agaynſt vs? whiche ſpared not his owne ſonne, but hath geuen hym for vs all: howe ſhal not he geue vs all thynges alſo wyth hym? Who wyll laye ony thynge to the charge of Gods choſen? It is God that maketh ryghteous, who wyll then condemne?
               For as muche than as the chylderen Hebre. 1. haue fleſhe & bloude, he alſo hymſelfe lykewiſe toke parte with them: that he thorowe death, myghte take awaye the power of hym, which had

lordſhyppe ouer death that is to ſay the deuyll: and that he myghte delyuer them, whiche thorowe feare of death were al theyr lyfe tyme in daū
                  ger of bondage. For he in no place taketh on hym the angels, but y• ſede of Abrahā taketh he on hym. Wherfore in all thynges it became hym to he made lyke to his brethren, that he myght be mercyfull, and an Hyghe Preſte in thynges concerninge god, to make agrement for the ſynnes of the people. For us that he hymſelfe ſuffered, and was tempted, he is able to, ſuccurre them that are tempted. Who coulde now be comfortleſſe, yf he were perſwaded in hys mynd hereof? Who could not reioice in ſpret hauynge founde ſuche a redemer? Who ſawe euer ſuch a loue? Herein 1. Iohā. 4. is loue, not that we loued god, but ye he loued vs, & ſente his ſon to make agrement for oure ſinnes. The loue Roma. 5. of God is ſhed a brode in our hartes by the holy gooſt, which is geuen vn

to vs. For whan we were yet weake according to the tyme, CHRIST dyed for vs vngodly. Whan we were yet enmyes, CHRIST recōcyled vs vnto Roma. 4. the father, which was geuē for oure ſynnes, and rayſed vp for oure ryghteouſneſſe ſake.
               Oboūteful LORD, how dyd loue driue you to vs ward, what tyme ye dyd loke ſo louingly vpō vs wt your fatherly pitie? For, becauſe ye might ſhew your mooſt excellent loue yt ye beare toward vs, therfor dyd ye yeld your ſelues vnto ye bitter death: yt we might knowlege al our ſaluacion, & redēptiō in you only, & reioycei you. Oh who cā fele ye bottō of your loue, what tym as we ſe, & perceaue what ineſtimable price ye gaue for our redēciō? wt your faithful & trew worde haue ye aſſured vs of youre loue: wt your precious bloude haue ye ſcaled it: wt your death haue ye cōfirmed it: & bequiethed & left vs the teſtament of loue, to the forgeueneſſe of ſynnes

O howe glorious are we eſtymed in roure ſyghte father? euen as electe and choſen chylderen, had in greate reputacyon of you thorowe loue.
               Lo, what loue the father hath ſhewed vs, that we ſhulde be called the 1. Iohan. 3 chylderen of God, and alſo be the ſame. We are nowe the childeren of God, and yet hath it not appeared what we ſhall be. But we know that whan he ſhall appeare, we ſhall be lyke him: for we ſhal ſe hu
                     •
                   as he is.
               O wonderful loue? Who coulde Nota. comprehende and vnderſtande, that the naturall man, (which was ſo pytyfully deſtroyed thorowe Adams ſynne, and comme in the deuils power) ſhulde ſo be lykened vnto God, and to haue optayned ſuche fellowſhyppe and communiō with hys ineſtimable goodneſſe. By nature we were chylderen of the wrath of God, and coulde not ryſe agayne by oureſelues. But God not wyllynge to be wroth foreuer vpō his handy worke

hath called to remembraūce his naturall loue and pytie: and thought how that he hadde created vs after his lykeneſſe, after he had once poured hym ſelfe in vs thorowe his tender loue. Thus was he myndefull of vs thorow hymſelfe, & dyd ſhewe mercy: his loue ſteared hym to it, & our fraylneſſe hath he taken to his mercy. For he ſawe we were fleſhe & faydynge heye, not beynge able to ſtande, without ye aſſyſtaunce of his goodneſſe. He was alſo myndful of that which he promyſed vnto man, hearynge the depe deſyres, and the humble ſyghinge of the ryghteous: which longynge for his cōmynge, did cal for him, yt he ſhuld ſhe we his loue to the ſtrayeng and loſt nature. Wherfore the father hath opened his fatherly harte, ſendynge vs his worde, his only ſōne: that he myght be for vs y• onely mediatour, ſpeche man and ſwager of Gods wrath, which ſhulde ouercome death, hell,

ſynne and the deuell, whiche ſhulde accomplyſhe for vs the worke of ſaluacyon thorowe his death, whoſe fleſhe and bloude ſhulde call for mercy for vs vnto ye father. Who ſhuld not now knowlege his glorious ſtate, where vnto the LORDE hath called vse. Who can now fele and perceaue this loue, and not reioyce inwardly? For he hath geuē euery one power to be the chyldrē of God, that Ioh. 1. beleue in his name. Who can come to hygher eſtate, thē to be electe chyldren of hym, that onely hath power to exalte his frendes?
               When CHRIST had called his beloued diſciples to his loue, thē cō
                  forted he them alwaye in theyr paſſions, ſaynge: I am amonge you as a myniſter. As for you, ye at they that Luce. 22. haue bydden with me in my temptacyons. And I wyl apppoynt ye kyng dome vnto you, euen as my father hath appoynted me, that ye may eat and drynke at my table in my kyng

doine, and ſyt vpon ſeates, & iudge the twelfe trybes of Iſraell. No mā
                  hath Ioh. 15. greater loue, thē to ſet his lyfe for his frend. Ye are my frēdes, yfye do ye I cōmaūde you. I call you not ſeruauntes: for a ſeruaunt knoweth not what his lord doth. But I haue ſayd that ye are frendes. For al that I haue herde of my father, haue I ſhewed vnto you. Ye haue not choſe me, but I haue choſen you, and ordyned yt ye go & brynge forth frute, & that youre frute continue: yt whatſo euer ye aſke ye father in my name, he ſhulde geue it you. Unto you it is geuen to knowe ye miſtery of ye kingdom Math. 1
                        •
                     
                   of heauē, but vnto thē it is not geuen. With theſe aforeſayd ſayenges are we greatly cōforted, in yt we ſe how much the LORD wyl do vnto them ye he loueth. Now cōmune maketh he hym ſelfe with all his kingdome? wyllynge vs all to haue his loue, and ye we all ſhulde knowlege all our ſaluaciō to come of his loue,

the which he declareth ſo plenteouſly vnto vs. Therfore ſayeth Paul: The LORDE hath choſen vs by hym 
                     
                        •
                     yhe. 1 (that is CHRIST) or euer the foundacyon of the worlde was layed, that we ſhuld be holy and without blame before him in loue: and ordeyned vs before to receaue vs as ehyldrē thorow IESVS CHRIST, accordyng to ye pleaſure of his wyll vnto the prayſe of the glory of his grace, wherby he hath made vs accepted in the beloued: in whom we haue redempcyon thorow his bloude (namely) the forgeueneſſe of ſynnes, accordynge to ye ryches of his grace, which he hath ſhedde vpon vs abundauntly in all wyſedome and prudence. The fatherly hart was ſo moued with loue to vs warde, that all his thoughtes were employed how he myght ſhew mercy vnto his poore ſhepe. Thoughe ye ryghteouſneſſe of God myght tuſtly haue condemned vs: for Adā and we haue both tranſgreſſed hys

commaundement in one fleſhe. And though the LORD myght haue kept vs ſtyl in deaths daunger: yet hath his loue and pytie ſo moued hym, yt he dyd ioyne his mercy with iuſtice, and peace with trueth, ſo that theſe beynge aſſēbled, dyd call vpon loue deſyrynge that God wolde declare his loue. This dyd Dauid knowlege in ſprete and ſayd: I wyll herkē 
                  Pſal. 84 what the LORDE God wyll ſaye, for he ſhall ſpeake peace vnto his people, & to his ſayntes, that they turne not them ſelues vnto foolyſhneſſe. For his ſaluacyon is nye them that feare hym, ſo that glorye ſhall dwel in our lande. Mercy and trueth are met together, righteouſneſſe & peace kyſſe eche other. Trueth ſhall ryſe out of the earth, and ryghteouſneſſe ſhall loke downe from heauen. And why? the LORDE ſhall ſhewe louyng kyndneſſe, and our lande ſhall geue hir encreaſe. Righteouſneſſe ſhal go before hym, and prepare the waye

for his cōmynge. And agayne: The Pſa. 144. 
                  LORDE is gracyous and mercyfull, longe ſufferynge and of great goodneſſe. The LORDE is louynge vnto euery man, and his mercy is ouer al his workes. Turne agayne then to Pſal. 114. thy reſt (o my ſoule) for the LORDE hath geuē the thy deſyre. And why? Thou haſt deliuered my ſoule from death, myn eyes frō tears, & my fete frō fallynge. Hereby is it euident yt yf we deſyre ony inwarde goodneſſe wheron our ſynful ſoule myght teſt thē ſhall we loke ſtedfaſtly vpō this loue, & alwaye cōſider what CHRIST hath geuē vs thorow his loue. whā we haue ye knowlege of his loue in vs, then haue we fyrſt a cauſe to reioyce. For only in his loue may we knowlege our ſaluacyon. Therfore ſayth Paul: We haue not receaued Rom. 1. y• ſprete of bōdage to fear ony more, but we haue receaued y• ſprete of adopcyō, wherby we crye, Abba, dear father The ſame ſpret certifieth our

ſprete, yt we are y• chyldren of God. Peter alſo cōfirmeth this, ſayenge: 2. Pet. 
                        •
                     
                   For ſo muche as his Godly power hath geuē vs al thynges yt pertaine vnto lyfe & Godlynes, thorowe the knwlege of hym yt hath called vs by his owne glory & power, wherby the excellēt & mooſt great promyſes are geuē vnto vs: namely, yt ye by ye ſame ſhuld be partakers of ye godly nature, yf ye flye ye corrupte luſt of the worlde. He now that doth reioyce in this loue, and can perceaue what is geuen hym by the ſame, he (I ſaye) coulde lightely withdrawe hymſelfe from all, that is no trewe loue, and ſuffre not hym ſelfe to be deceaued with falſe loue. For God hath made vs ſo lyke vnto his godly nature thorowe loue, he hath yelded hymſelfe ſo louyngly vnto ye nature of mā: he hath drawē it ſo frendly to him ward, making of it a choſē tēple clenſed by his bloude, that his ſprete myght reſt in it wt al his goodneſſe:

and that man myght vſe God as a frende.
               Now whan we perceaue ye loue of God onely to be perfect, holy and good, wherby redempcyon and ſaluacyon is geuen vs: then of dewtye ought ſuch loue only to be our ioye, glory and comforte. For God which Ephe. 2 is ryche in mercy, thorow his great loue, wherwith he loued vs, euen whan we were dead in ſynnes, hath quyckned vs with CHRIST. And for cauſe of this, nother lawe nor ſynne lyue in vs, but CHRIST, which hath powred hym ſelfe in vs thorow his worde: ſo that God is in vs, and we in God. The lawe doth not now cō
                  pell vs ony more, but it is God that hath ſo moued oure hartes thorowe his loue, that we by the helpe and aſſiſtaunce of his ſprete ſhall do all yt is acceptable vnto hym. This inwarde mocyon of our harte cōmeth by fayth: For whan we know verely that God loueth vs, then doth i
                     •
                  
                  
worke in vs, cauſyng vs to fixe our mynde on nothynge, ſaue howe we maye reioyce in hym that doth loue vs. It is ſure a greate grace geuen vs of God, yt we knowlege his loue towarde vs, felynge in oure entrayles by fayth peace, glorye, reſte, and ioye: wherby only we perceaue that thorowe hys loue all mercye and for geueneſſe is happened vnto vs.
               This wytneſſeth Paull ſaieng. But after that the kindneſſe, and loue of Titum 3. God oure ſaueoure towarde man appeared, not for the dedes of ryghteouſneſſe which we wroughte, but after hys mercye he ſaued vs by the fountayne of the newe byrth, and renewynge of the holy gooſt, which he ſhed on vs abundauntly, thorow IESVS CHRIST oure ſaueoure, that we beynge made ryghteous by hys grace, ſhulde be heyres of eternall lyfe, accordynge to hope. Therfore hath god declared his loue vnto vs, that he onely ſhulde haue the glorie

of our ſaluaciō by fayth, wherby we are aſſured, yt of oure ſelues we haue nought: but ye al is geuen vs frely of his fatherly loue and goodneſſe. By ſayth only are we aſſured of gods loue, & ye we may walke confidently in this loue. Therfore ſayde CHRIST: God ſo loued ye worlde, that he gaue Ioh. 3. his only ſonne, that whoſoeuer beleueth in hym, ſhulde not peryſhe, but haue euerlaſtynge lyfe.
               The ioy & cōforte of our cōſcience ſhal endure ſo longe, as his loue is had in price & worthyneſſe of vs: but yf it begyn once to fayde and waxe coulde, ſo yt we can nother fele reſte, nor ioye in his loue, thā do we drede god as a tyraūt or a ſtrayght iudge, not truſtyng to optayn mercy of his loue & goodneſſe, nor ye we be made worthy of hys loue, & goodneſſe by his bitter paſſion & death. This is ye mooſt blaſhhemie & wrong ye can be done vnto God. Where ſuch knowlege of god is, there do men beginne

to ſeke health & cōforte in creatures, in mās inuēciōs, in ſtraūg holyneſſe & in ye workmāſhip of ye craftiſman. Thus waxeth mā could & ſtraūg frō god, hauing nother faith of god, nor ſauoure of godlyneſſe, the which not withſtōding did loue vs for his own ſake. Euē as our opiniō is of him, ſo ſhal he pleaſe vs, as CHRIST ſayeth: This is ye lyfe euerlaſting, that they Ioh. 17 know ye (ye thou art only ye true God) & whō thou haſt ſent IESVS CHRIST. This loue doth ye boke of wyſdō cō
                  mende vnto vs, eſtyminge it to be a precious treaſure ye we be come to ye knowlege of ye ſame, ſaiēg: But thou Sap
                        •
                     . 15. (o our god) art ſwete, long ſuffering and true, and in mercy ordreſte thou all thinges. Though we ſyn, yet are we thyne, for we know thy ſtrength. Yf we ſynne not, ſhan are we ſure that thou regardeſt vs. For to know the, is perfecte ryghteouſneſſe: Yee to knowe thy ryghteouſneſſe, and power, is the rote of immortalyte.

By thys knowlege is God hyhglye praiſed and thanked of his loue. Yee he hath cauſed to geue teſtimony of his loue thorow out all ſcriptures, y• we ſhulde be certifyed of it, and to runne confidentlye to hym thorowe the ſame. By Ieremye the prophete Iere. 31, he ſayeth: I loue the with an euerlaſtynge loue, therfore do I ſprede my mercy before the. I wyll repayre the agayn, that thou mayeſt be faſt and ſure. Now whan mā doth perceaue (by reaſon of many places of ſcrypture) ye 
                  Nota. God doth loue vs, thā ought he to lyft vp hys eyen towarde heauen vnto hym, that onely can lyghten oure eyen, and that can geue vnderſtandynge of all that, whiche he teacheth by hys worde. Wolde God we dyd receaue hys worde by faythe in the ſpirite, that we myghte fele, and beleue his loue therin, and how we maye optayne mercy, grace, and ſaluacyon by the ſame: than ſhulde oure ſynfull ſoule be comforted in al

the goodneſſe, the which the LORDE hath promiſed and declared vnto vs ſo louyngly by hys worde. O LORD I can perceaue nother the, nor thy goodneſſe, ſaue onely by thy worde, wherebye thou ſaydeſt that thou loueſt me. Poure therfore a clean hart wythin me, and I ſhall be conforted in all thynges, whereby thou declareſte thy loue. My ſoule is reſtleſſe, vntyll I can reſt in the. Encreaſe my fayth (for it is thy gyfte) and I ſhall haue perceueraunce of the. My ſoul ſhall be cōforted in thy loue, for thou arte my ſaueoure, my glorye, my reioycynge and ioye.
               Whan the LORDE doth heare the hongrie ſoule ſyghing after this maner, lōging and hoping for hym, than doth he turne hymſelfe ſpedely and meteth man, comforting him wt himſelf ſayenge: Come to y• waters all ye that be thyrſtye, and ye yt haue Eſaye. 55. no monye, come, bye, yt ye may haue to eate. Come bye wyne and mylke,

wythout ony mony or mony worth. Come to me all ye that laboure, and Math. 11. are laden, and I wil eaſe you, & learn of me: For I am meke and lowlye of hart, & ye ſhal find reſt vnto your ſoules. It is al touching mercy & forgeneſſe wher wt god doth cal his ſhepe.
               Hereby is it euident vnto man, ye gods loue is vnto hym a ſure fundament a ſtrong hold, a rock & an hard ground, wherevpon he may buylderightwel. Wherfore he bringeth his ſhip to his hauen, he caſteth out hys anker vpō this ſure groūd, tyeng al his diſeaſes and grifes at this ſtony rocke, he eſcapeth thorow god onely all the wawes and peryls of the ſee, euen as God dyd promyſe by Eſaye the prophete, ſayenge: Whan thou Eſaye. 45. wenteſt in the water, I was with the that the ſtronge floudes ſhulde not plucke the awaye. Whan thou walkeſt in the fyre, it ſhal not burne the, and the flamme ſhal not kyndle vpō the: for I am the LORD thy God, y•
                  
holyone of Iſraell, thy ſaueour. And Salomon alſo ſayeth: The name of Pro. 1
                        •
                     . the LORDE is a ſtronge caſtell, the righteous flyeth vnto it, and ſhal be ſaued. He that loketh ſtedfaſtly vpō the LORD, ſhall not be broughte to cōfuſyon: for the loue that he knowlegeth in God ſhal cauſe him to walke confidently and aſſuredly. And wt ſuch a faythfully harte is God well apayed, ye hongereth alway to come vnto farther knowlege of his wyll. Such hartes ſhal yt 
                  LORD cal vnto hym, ſhewynge them his loue, ſayeng: Sonne be of good cheare and comforte, all that is in my is for the. Yf thou haue ſinned, yf thou haue offended me, remēbre ye I loue ye, truſte vnto my loue, I haue payed thy det, I haue geuē myſelf ouer vnto death for thy ſake, ye thou ſhuldeſt knowlege thy ſaluacion to be of my loue.
               Whan man doth begyn to perceaue this, thā fideth he cōfort & reſt, & doth vnderſtood how ſtrong ye loue was,

the which dyd ſubdue death. Thys loue hath God to oure behofe, that in oure nede we maye runne to hys loue, and admonyſh hym of y• ſame. And ſeynge God is loue, therfore cā
                  he not forſake hymſelf: but wyl geue after the power of hys loue, and all that of his loue he hath promiſed by hys godlye worde.
               This teacheth vs to know CHRISTES death in hys power, glorye, and victory, in whoſe loue we maye ſe ſo clearly our redempcion, and reioyce therin. O wonderfull gyftes, O incōprehenſible treaſure. How happy is ye man, to whō it is geuē to haue a perceueraūce of thys? Who came euer to hygher ſaluaciō? Who reioyced euer more, thā he ye fād god (wich loueth vs) euen a father? Fulfeatlye doth Salomon ſaye: Sett me as a 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 8. ſeale vpon thyne harte, & as a ſeale vpon thyn arme: for loue is as mighty as the death, & gelouſy as the hel. Hyr coales are of fire, & a very flāme of the LORDE: ſo that many waters

are not able to quenche loue, nother maye the ſtreames drowne it. Yee yf a man wolde geue all the goodes of his houſe for loue, he ſhulde counte it nothynge. He that confeſſeth that IESVS is the ſonne of God, in hym 1. Ioh. 14. dwelleth God, and he in God: & we haue knowen and beleued the loue that God hath to vs. God is loue, & he that dwelleth in loue, dwelleth in god, & god in hym. Herin is the loue perfect with vs, that we ſhuld haue a fre boldneſſe in the daye of iudgement. Herby is the ſynful conſcience cōforted, namely yf we can perceaue by fayth, that the LORD wyl receaue the ſinner to grace thorow his loue. And agayn, yf we haue made vs vnworthy of his loue, then let vs humble ourſelues before ye 
                  LORDE, ſyghynge for our myſoedes, and his loue ſhall conforte vs agayne. Unto him that loued vs, and clenſed vs from ſynne by his bloude, and hath made vs kynges and preſtes, namely,

vnto God and his ſonne, be glory & prayſe for all his goodneſſe. Amen. Hetherto haue we ſayde how well God loueth vs, and how—we maye truſte in his loue: Now ſhall we ſhewe, that as God hath wrought and done great mercy vnto vs, euē ſo muſt ye ſame loue worke in vs alſo toward God, & our neghboure, wherby loue is vttered what ſhe is. This namely is, whan we rendre prayſe, honoure and than kes vnto ye 
                  LORDE God which hath made our hart wyllynge in his loue thorow the worde, ſo that we beleue to receaue hym, & to knowlege his loue therin. The loue of God doth worke ſo much in vs to our ſaluacyon, as we can beleue and be perſuaded, that God loueth vs, & that we can reioyce in his loue onely, beyng aſſured, that we can optayne nother mercy nor fauout, ſaue only thorow his loue: yt whiche he declared ſo louyngly toward vs in ſuffring death

Wherby we may be aſſured, that he doth loue vs without gaynſaynge: & yt he wyll geue vs ſo muche goodneſſe, as he hath promyſed by his worde. As we knowlege our ſaluacyon & redēpcion by his loue, ſo ſhal we yelde hym only ye glory of our ſaluacyon. Seynge he only is a geuer of al goodnes thorow his loue, therfore ought we to glorye & reioyce in hym onely. He yt could vnderſtande this duely in ſprete by fayth, ye ſame ſhuld reſt vpō 
                  CHRIST in al peaceablenes, knowleging his ſaluacyō to come by him only, & require mercy & grace of hym onely. For this cauſe wyll God thus declare his loue to vs, yt we ſhuld know, how to reioyce namely, yt god loueth vs, & that we know our redēpciō to be by his loue
               Wold God euery mā knewe ye power of ye loue yt god hath toward vs Not
                        •
                     , for then ſhulde we be euer prayeng, and euer readyng ſcripture, that we might learne how to knowe God in

his loue by his word, and to reioyce in hym. For nother of God, nor his loue are we aſſured inwardly, ſaue onely by the worde, where vnto we geue faith and credence. And as the loue of God is in our harte, and as we knowlege his loue perfectly: ſo is oure harte agayne ſteared with loue towarde God, beynge ready & wyllynge to do all that is acceptable vnto hym: that all loue & thankfulneſſe myght be recompenſed him agayne, which hath heaued and exalted vs ſo hyghly by hym thorowe great loue: hereby do we know that God hath wrought a wōderful glorious worke in vs. Seynge the ther is no goodneſſe in mā, therfore muſt all his dedes be aſſured and ſealed with fayth, yf they ſhalbe acceptable vnto god. And in this fayth we ſhal beleue yt God doth worke in vs both to wyll and to fulfyll. It is God yt hath accomplyſhed the worke of ſaluacyon in vs. What worke of ſaluacyon

that euer we can deuyſe or requyre, that hath CHRIST accōplyſſhed in vs. Yf we beleue this, & thorowe loue vtter it, then are we iuſtified & ſaued, not for the dede or workynge, but becauſe we are ryghteous thorow fayth, thefore be the dedes of loue or charite ryghteous alſo. For a faythfull man doth alway beholde his owne ryghteouſneſſe in god, aſcrybyng to his goodnes only all honoure: and vnto hym ſelfe nothynge but ſynne & confuſyon that God onely maye haue the glorye. Paul doth demaunde & ſaye: What 1. Cor. 4. haſt thou that thou haſt not receaued? yf thou haſte receaued it, why makeſt thou thē thy boaſt, as thoughe thou haddeſt not receaued it? Agayne ſayeth Paul: Suche truſt haue we thorow CHRIST to God 2. Cor. 3 warde, not that we are ſufficient of our ſelues to thynke ony thynge, as of our ſelues, but our ableneſſe commeth of God. The LORDE alſo exhorteth

vs by Ieremy ſaieng: Let not y• wyſeman reioyce in his wyſedome, Ieremi. 9. nor the ſtronge man in his ſtrength nor the rych man in his ryches: But who ſo euer wyl reioyce, let hym reioyce in this: that he vnderſtandeth & knoweth me: for I am the LORDE which do mercy, equyte & ryghteouſneſſe vpon earth. All theſe places teſtify that we muſt loke vpō 
                  CHRIST beleuynge that we be ſaued only by his loue, yf we couet to ſeke reſt and peace in oure conſcience. Therfore doth Ieremy agayne ſpeake confortably ſayeng: The mercyes of ye 
                  LORDE are not clene gone, & his louinge 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 3 kyndneſſe ceaſſeth not. His faythfulneſſe is great, & reneweth it ſelfe as the mornynge. The LORDE is my porcyon (ſayeth my ſoule,) therfore wyll I hope in him. O how good is the LORDE vnto thē, that put theyr truſt in hym, & to the ſoule yt ſeketh after hym. Seyng now that God is alwaye workynge wt his loue, therfore

muſte we cōfeſſe and knowlege all our ſaluacyon to be onely by the workynge of his loue: & ſo doynge we geue hym onely the glorye of all the goodnes that is in vs.
               This loue ſhall ſtear our hartes to fulfyll the LORDES wyll, & cauſe man not to remayne ydle in yt loue, where vnto ye worde of ye 
                  LORD doth exhort him ſo louyngly. Loue coueteth to come to perfectnes, deſyryng alway to be ſo mynded ī loue to god ward, as god by his loue is minded to vs, hōgeryng alway to be equall wt God in loue. The ſpret exhorteth vs to end euoure vs thorow loue to pleaſe God, euen as he thorowe his loue hath done well by vs. A o
                     •
                  e is mery, & cōmeth frō a ioiful hart. For loue cauſeth a mā to haue a good opinion of God, namely, yt god of his boūteous goodnes hath geuē hi reſt & hartes eaſe, ſo ye he muſt reioyce euē frō his whole hart. How cā he be ſory, yf whan he loketh vpon God.

he is fully perſuaded yt God loueth hym? And this is the t
                     •
                  ken wherby he knoweth it: yt is, whā he feleth his harte to be drawen in loue towarde God. For he is ſure of a great and in eſtimable treaſur, that he can reſt in the loue of God, beleuynge God to be a mercyfull father vnto hym by reaſon of his tender loue. And ſure he is, that God ſhal geue hym ſo pleteous goodneſſe, as he hath promyſed hym by his louynge worde. Yf God fynde loue in man (ſeynge he hymſelfe is loue) then fyndeth he godlyneſſe in hym, wherfore he loueth hymſelfe in man: and as lōge as a man continueth in this loue ſo longe can not God hate hym, nor ſeperate hymſelfe from mā. For God is knytte and ioyned with man by hymſelfe, and can not forſake hymſelfe ſo longe as he perceaueth hymſelfe in man.
               Now, ſeynge mā is become godly thorowe loue, yf God the father

wolde of his ryghteouſneſſe cōdene hym, then muſt the godlyneſſe be cō
                  dempned alſo. Wherfore, becauſe God is the glorye, therfore of neceſſite muſt thys damned man lyue wt God in glorye thorowe his loue. By loue haue we felowſhippe with god and all that is in hym: lykewyſe alſo hath he felowſhip with vs, hydynge our ſynnes with hym ſelfe, not ſufferynge that ſuche a veſſell (wherin he reſteth hym ſelfe thorow loue) be brought to confuſyon.
               By loue vſe we God to our pleaſure, with all his gyftes, and al that is in God: for loue wylleth none otherwyſe then God wyll. Man hath it not of him ſelfe, yf he do ony good accordynge to the wyll of God: but ſeynge he hath the loue of God, the ſame is conſtrayned by the ſprete of God to do nothyng ſaue it that pleaſeth God, whom he endeuoureth euer to pleaſe thorow loue. And as God alwaye delyteth in hym ſelfe, &

in all that he doeth: euen ſo wyll he alſo haue a pleaſure in all that, whiche is done in mā thorow loue. God of his loue hath made all thynges good: wherfore all muſte be good yt man doth of loue. Loue is pure and cleane, and can ſeke none other reſt or peace, ſaue onely in hym whiche hymſelfe is reſt & peace, which hath fylled his harte with ioye ſo louyngly. Loue is ſatiſfied with God only, ſekynge nothynge but God. For he hath ſoughte God onely thorowe loue, that he myghte enioye hym in trueth.
               No man can vſe due loue in God, without he be ſure fyrſt by fayth inwardly how wel God doth loue vs, reioycyng in the ſame loue, and put tynge all his ſaluacyō therin. Thus doynge he ſhall paſſe by all creatures, eſtymynge them as donge, coū
                  tynge CHRIST onely his ioye, glorye, & hartes deſyre. He now that vttereth ye loue, (for true loue cānot

be ydle) he vttereth it, yt which God the louer of loue wyl haue ye louyng mā to do. Paul ſayth: Owe nothing Rom. 13. to ony man, but to loue one another for he ye loueth another, hath fulfylled the lawe. And agayn. The chefe 1. Tim. 1 ſūme of ye cōmaundementes is loue of a pure harte, and of a good conſcience, & of fayth vnfayned. That is: Yf we deſyre ony goodneſſe inwardly, we ſhall praye humbly, that we maye haue loue: for onely loue is a wytneſſe that we haue fayth in CHRIST. Loue is a power wherby all oure workes are acceptable vnto God, and ſufficiently tryed. Wherfore ſayeth Paul: In CHRISTIESV 
                  Galat. 5. nother is circumciſion ony thynge worth, nor vncircumcyſion, but fayth: whiche by loue is myghty in operacyon.
               And yt we ſhuld knowe ye better ye power of loue, & ſo yeld oure ſelues to ye ſame, therfore doth Paul ſhewe ful featly, what worthy dede of loue

                  CHRIST hath wrought in vs, (yt we ſhulde the better knowlege our ſaluacyon to be optayned by loue, and ſo folowynge and conterfaytynge CHRISTES loue) ſayenge: Therfore doth God ſet forth his loue towarde Rom. 5. vs, in that CHRIST dyed for vs whā we were yet ſynners: muche more then ſhall we be ſaued from wrath by hym, ſeynge we are nowe made ryghteous thorow his bloude Yf we now deſyre to folow CHRIST & to fulfyl his lawe, cōmaūdemētes & goſpell: thē is ther no nearer way thē to folow him in loue. Paul doth exhorte vs to ye ſame very hartely, ſayenge: Be ye folowers therfore of God as deare chyldren, & walke in Ephe. 5. loue, euē as CHRIST loued vs, & gaue hymſelfe for vs an offerynge and ſacrifice of ſwete ſauour vnto God. The cauſe now why man is ſo colde in loue toward God, & ſo ſore deuyded frō the ſame, ſo that he hath nother pleaſure nor ſauour in God is,

becauſe he hath not fully yelded his harte to God, to be taught of hym, ye ſo he myght knowe how well God doth loue hym. Of this maketh god none preuy ſaue onely ſuche as ſeke hym with all theyr harte, and be alwaye hongerynge to knowe God in his goodneſſe.
               The vnfayth fulneſſe & lytle perceueraunce Nota. that men haue of God, doth cauſe thē to abyde in ſynfulnes and to hange vpō creatures. They can not reſt duely vpō God, nor his benefites, by reaſon of theyr ſmall vnderſtandynge in godly matters: for ye benefytes of God do not ſynke in theyr entrayles. Yf man could entre euen to the grounde of the benefites of God, and beholde the wonderfull & glorious workes of God, then ſhulde he no doute geue ſentēce & verdite, that vnto ſuch a god, and ſuche a LORDE onely is due all prayſe, honour, and glory.
               Therfore oughte man to yelde

al his wytte, wyl and wyſedome to Gods maieſty, eſtemyng in hymſelf nothynge ſaue ſynne and foly, with out God dyd ſteare oure hartes inwardlye with his loue: ſo that we ſhulde perceaue nor deſyre noughte with all our harte and mynde, ſaue onely CHRIST our louer. With out this wyſedome is it al folyſhnes that is in man. For without God ther is nothyng to ſeke nor to fynde wherin man maye reioyce by ony meane. It is God onely that can ſatiſfye mans harte, and brynge hym to loue. Paul was ioyfull in God a ryghte, what tyme he was come to this knowlege, ſayenge: For I ſhewed 1. Corin 2. not forth my ſelfe amonge you that I knewe ony thinge, ſaue only IESVS CHRIST, euen ye ſame yt was crucyfyed. Oh let vs humbly beſeke the LORDE, that we maye knowe hym by his loue, and reioyce ouer all the good ye he hath weteſafe ſo louynglye to declare vnto vs by

his worde. For as we knowe God by his worde in his loue, ſo ſhal our harte agayne be kyndled in loue towarde God, and ſhall not paſſe this bande. For fayth conſyſteth in this, namely, that we can beleue all mercy, ſaluacyon, and health to come frely by only loue: and yt we agayne vtter the ſame fayth thorow loue in the ſyght of all men. To this exhorteth vs CHRIST, ſayenge: Let your lyght ſo ſhyne before men, Math. 5 that they maye ſe youre good workes, and gloryfy your father which is in heauē. ſ. Peter alſo exorteth vs 1. Pe
                        •
                     t i. 
                        •
                     . to lede an holy lyfe amōg ye heythē.
               Loue doth declare herſelfe by fayth, workyng wonderouſly, to the ryghteouſneſſe and ſaluacyon of all ſuch men, as knowlege God in his loue, ready alwaye to rendre hym loue and thankes agayne. Paul what tyme he hadde a tayſte of this loue, and felte the power of the ſame, he gaue vnto thys holye loue

the glorye of all the good that is acceptable before God in mā, ſaynge: Thoughe I ſpake with tunges of 1. Cor. 13. men and angels, and yet had not loue, I were euen as ſoundyngebraſſe, or as a tynklyng cimbal. And though I beſtowed al my goodes tofede the poore, & though I gaue my body euē that I burned, & yet haue not loue, it profyteth me nothynge. Loue is pacyent and curteous, loue enuyeth not, loue doth not frowardly, is not pufte vp, dealeth not diſhoneſtly, ſeketh not hyr own, is not prouoked vnto anger, thynketh not euell, reioyceth not ouer iniquite, but reioyceth ouer the trueth, beareth al thynges, beleueth all thynges, hopeth all thynges, ſuffereth all thynges. Thus much ſuffyſeth to be ſpoken of the loue that God hath towarde vs, & how man is ioyned vnto God by loue. For true loue muſte worke by fayth in ſuch as god hath elect & choſe therto, & it cauſeth man

to optayne al thynges lawful, wherfore we ſhall treate farther wherein we oughte to declare, and vtter oure loue agayne.
               Seynge that we haue here ſufficientlye ſhewed that god loueth vs, and that the ſame loue worketh alwaye; therfore ſhall man examyne hymſelfe, and ſearche hys entrayles whether he be come to a true loue by faythe. Faythe muſte declare it ſelfe thorowe loue and mortyfycacyon of the fleſhe. S. Ihon exhorteth vs earneſtlye to a renewynge of our ſin ful lyfe, after that we haue receaued the worde of the LORDE with ioye, beinge aſſured by faith that we may optayne mercye thorowe IESV CHRISTE, ſayeng: God is light, and in hym is no darkneſſe at all. Yf 1. Iohan. 1. we ſaye that we haue felowſhyppe wyth hym, and yet walke in darkneſſe, we lye, and do not the treuthe. But yf we walke in lyghte, euen as he is lyghte, than haue we felowſhyppe

together, and the bloude of IESVS CHRIST hys ſonne clenſeth vs from all ſynne. CHRIST alſo ſayeth: I am the lyghte of the Iohan. 8. worlde, he that foloweth me ſhal not walke in darkneſſe, but ſhall haue the lyghte of lyfe. And agayne: The Iohan. 12. lyght is a lytle whyle with you, walke whyle ye haue the lyghte, that the darkneſſe fall not vpon you. He that walketh I darkneſſe woteth not whether he goeth, Beleue ye on the light whyle ye haue it, that ye maye be the chylderen of lyghte. It foloweth: I am come a lyghte in to the worlde, ye whoſoeuer beleueth on me ſhulde not abyde in darkneſſe. By all theſe aforeſayde ſayenges are we taught, that God hath geuen hymſelfe alyghte in oure hartes, yf we haue learned to knowe hym in hys loue by hys worde. The worde is y• lyght and foode of the ſoule, whereby the loue of God is clearlye ſet forth vnto vs. That we therfore be founde,

trutefull and thankefull before the LORDE, it is hys wyll to leade, yee to dryue vs wyth hys lyghte to lyghten vs, and to teache vs al that, whereby oure ſynfull ſoule maye be conforted, and reioyce in God oure louer. Whan Dauid knewe thys lyghte, he was gladde thereof, and ſange: Howe precious is thy mercye (O God) that the chylderen of men Pſal. 35. maye put theyr truſte vnder the ſhadowe of thy wynges? They ſhall be ſatyſfyed wyth the plenteouſneſſe of thy houſe, and thou ſhalte geue them drinke of the ryuer of thy pleaſures. For by the is the well of lyfe, and in thy lyghte ſhall we ſelygthe.
               Whan we haue nowe receaued CHRISTE ſo rychelye, and ioyfully by hys worde, than ſhall alſo the Godly worde onely be our light, guyde, and mayſter, ſo that we ſhall herken diligentlye what God hath commaunded, admonyſhed, and

taughte vs in hys worde. Noman feleth inwarde ioye, or comforte of the Goſpell, wythout he be ſure that it hath wroughte euidentlye in hym the mortyfycacyon, and ſubduynge of hys owne ſynfulneſſe, and ye loue towarde hys neghboure. Whan it hath wroughte thus in man, than perceaueth he fyrſte the incomparable loue and fauoure the which god doth declare by hys worde. Moreouer, whan he hath tryed the ſame wt the renewynge of hys lyfe, than is he sure that God hath wroughte a paſſynge greate worke of mercye in hym. Thys knewe Dauid whan he ſayde: I wyll herken what the LORDE 
                  Pſal. 14. God wyl ſaye, for he ſhal ſpeake peace vnto hys people.
               Now is it euidente, and playne that God doth ſende his worde, and lyghte in oure hartes, that we thorowe the lyghte in hys worde ſhuld knowlege all oure ſaluacyon, and redempcyon, reioycynge in hym only.

Yf man do not yet fyxe hys ſyghte only vpon God, and hys loue, but ſeketh comforte ether of mens inuencyons, or ony creatures, not reioycynge in God onely: than is it to be doubted, leſt ſuch one be not foūded a ryghte on God onely. Paull ſayeth: But we wayte in the ſpirite of E
                        •
                     l
                        •
                     . 5. hope to be made righteous by faith. The faythfull lyueth alway in ioye. Aba
                        •••
                     . 2. for the iuſte lyueth by fayth. Scripture Roma 
                        •
                     . Heb. 10. wytneſſeth euery where, yt God doth call vs, and ſayeth: I am, I only am he that putte awaye ſynne, wythoute Eſaye. 43 me ther is no ſaueoure. In y• tyme of trouble, and in the ſtrayghtneſſe of ſynfulneſſe, than doth god be holde vs mooſte of all, yf ſo be we ſeke hym wyth oure whole hartes. The ſoule can reioyce in nothynge yt is wythout God. Therfore ſeynge God loueth vs, he exhorteth vs to putte oure confidence in hym onely, ſayenge. Yf ye fyxe youre ſyght vpō an other, than ſhall ye remayne confortleſſe,

and ye ſhall ſerue ſtraunge goddes daye, and nyghte, that wyll ſhewe you lyttell fauoure. But my Eſaye. 32. people ſhall dwell in the ynnes of peace, & in my tabernacle, and pleaſure, where ther is ynoughe in them all. For thys cauſe ſhall man trye hymſelfe whether he be mortifyed in hys owne ſynfulneſſe, and carnal deſyres. For Paull ſayeth. They that are CHRISTES, haue crucifyed theyr Gala. 5. fleſhe with the luſtes and deſires. He ſhall alſo ſearche howe he oughte to behaue hymſelf in loue toward god, doynge it that he is ſure to be acceptable vnto God, that the father may be glorifyed thereby: the whiche wyl worke wonderouſly thorow his loue in all them, in whome he hath powred hys worde ſo louynglye. Of this maye the auncyent father Symeon be an enſample, the whiche ſeynge Luce. 2. the lytle babe reioiced in ſprete. The two diſciples alſo herde CHRIST, and they learned to know him with Luce. 24.
                  
ioyfull and mery hartes.
               Now ſhal we procede and ſhewe that al oure thoughtes, wytte, & wyl ſhall be enployed, howe we maye agayne tendre ye 
                  LORD al ſeruice, loue & thankfulneſſe, after that we know what vnoutſpeakeable loue, & mercy is ſhewed vs by him. It were vndoutedlye a greate loſſe yf god ſhuld loue vs for naught: yf his loue ſhuld not worke in vs, nor bryng forth the frutes of y• ſame: or yf it ſhulde haue wrought no ſaluaciō in vs, whereto god hath alwaye geuen it: For than ſhuld god be ydle in vs wt his loue, wt his holy word, wt his goodneſſe, yee wt al his precious giftes: Thā (I ſay) ſhulde not god haue ony glorye, nor praiſe in vs for al ye benefites, which we do poſſeſſe by his boūteous goodneſſe. By ye frutes may it be euident what a great act god hath wrought in a faithfull harte. Therfore ſayde CHRIST: I am come to kindle a fyre vpō earth, & what wold I rather thā 
                  Luce. 12.
                  
that it were kyndled alreadye? Is Iete. 23. not my worde fyre (ſayeth the LORDE,) and lyke an hammer that breaketh the harde ſtone? It is ſure a cō
                  ſumynge fyre bryngyng to naughte the iuſtes of ye fleſhe, and kyndlynge man to charitable dedes. Thus muſte it be workynge, and maye not come agayn voyde, as ſayeth Eſay.
               As for the frutes of the ſpirite, yt 
                  Eſaye. 55. be wroughte by fayth in loue, thoſe maye we fele in oure ſelues. Fyrſte, Yf we do reſte vpon CHRISTE IESV onely, reioycynge in hym onely, truſtyng to hys goodneſſe onely, the which he hath promiſed by his word Secondarly may we know thē by ye mortifycacion of the fleſhe wyth hys deſyres, namely. Yf we haue conquered oure ſelues by the loue of God, and lyue nowe in all mekeneſſe, and clenlyneſſe of harte. Thyrdlye, yf we be kyndled by the aforeſayde loue wt mercye, and kyndneſſe to warde oure nedy neghbour. To the which Pau

doth exhorte vs, ſayenge: Now therfore as the electe of God, holye, and 
                     
                        •
                     olloſ. 3. Ephe 4. beloued, put on tender mercye, kyndneſſe, humbleneſſe of mynde, mekeneſſe, longe ſufferynge, forbearinge one another, and forgeuynge oue another, yf ony man haue a quarell agaynſt another. Lyke as CHRIST hath forgeuē you, euen ſo do ye alſo. But aboue all thynges put on loue whiche is the bonde of perfectneſſe. And the peace of God rule in youre hartes, to the whiche ye are called in one body: & ſe yt ye be thākful. Loue 1 Petri. 4. couereth the multitude of ſynnes.
               Hereby haue we perceaued loue, yt he gaue hys lyfe for vs: and therefore Iohan. 3. oughte we alſo to geue oure lyues for the brethren. But he that hath thys worldes goode, and ſeyng hys brother haue nede ſhutteth vp hys harte from hym, howe dwelleth the loue of God in hym? My lytle chylderen, let vs not loue with worde, nother wyth tunge: but wyth the dede,

and with the treuthe. And agayne: Dearlye beloued, let vs loue one another, 1. Iohā. 4. for loue cōmeth of God: and euery one that loueth is born of god and knoweth God. He that loueth not, knoweth not God: for God is loue. We knowe that we are tranſlated 1. Iohā. 3. from death vnto lyfe, becauſe we loue the brethren. He that loueth not hys brother, abydeth in deathe. Whoſoeuer hateth hys brother is a manſlayer. And ye know that a man ſlayer hath not eternall life abyding in hym. Iames ſayeth that ther ſhal Iacobi. 2. be iudgemente mercyleſſe to hym, that ſheweth no mercye. CHRISTE 
                  Math. 25. in the daye of iudgemente ſhall verye rouglye requyre of vs y• dedes of charite. Wherfore lyke a true watch man, he doth admonyſhe vs of hys loue, that he myghte draw vs to the ſame, ſayenge: Be ye therfore mercyfull, Luce. 16. as youre father alſo is mercyfull. And agayne: A newe commaundemente geue I you, that ye loue together Iohan. 13.
                  
as I haue loued you, euen ſo loue ye one another. By thys ſhall euerye man knowe that ye are my dyſcyples, yf ye haue loue one to another.
               By all theſe afore ſayed places of ſcrypture doth the LORDE, admonyſhe vs, howe we oughte ſo be lyke hym in loue. For fayth doth declare herſelfe openly by loue. As God is the loue hymſelfe, euen ſo is man lyke vnto God, yf he be louynge. And as God of hys loue hath redymed vs wythout oure helpynge handes, euen ſo muſt we vtter the ſame loue to our neghboures behofe. He therfore that hath no loue to warde his neghbour, how cā he haue ony goodneſſe in him, wherby he might be acceptable vnto god, or wherin he may be equal wt god by loue? He yt fulfylleth not it yt god hath commaunded howe ſhall he optayne it of god, that which god hath promiſed? It is loue ye cauſeth mā, & al yt he doth to to be acceptable

vnto God. Therfore ſpeaketh Iames ſo muche of workes.
               Fayth muſte declare it ſelfe by dedes of charite, not that the workes are an occaſyon of oure ryghteouſneſſe: for than ſhulde God be depryued of hys glorye, the which maketh vs ryghteous in the fayth thorowe CHRISTE, leſte we ſhulde boaſte oure ſelues, but rather make oure boaſte of CHRISTE IESV, which maketh ye ſynner ryghteous by faith workinge loue in man. Of thys treateth Paull very muche. Whan workes come from a beleuynge harte, than are they acceptable vnto God thorowe fayth: the whiche a mā doth vtter by the workes of loue. God loked Gene. 4. fyrſt vpon Abel, and than vpon hys gyftes. For thys cauſe ſayeth Iames: What auayleth it my brethren, Iacob. 2. thoughe a man ſaye he hathe fayth, whan he hath no dedes? For ſayth yf it haue no dedes, is dead in it ſelf, Abraham is made ryghteous

thorowe workes (that is) the workes were coūted ryghteous by faith, and gaue teſtymonye that he hadde fayth, what tyme he wolde haue offered hys ſonne Iſaac. Therfore ſayth ſcrypture. Abraham beleued God, Gene. 15. Roma. 4. Galat. 3. Iacobi. 2. and it was counted hym for ryghteouſneſſe. For thys cauſe ſhall man ſearche, and examine hymſelfe, whether he hath declared hys faythe by dedes Nota. of charite, or not: leſt he deceaue hymſelfe, thynkyng to haue faith and loue whan he can talke and vtter many wordes of the ſame. Who ſo therfore fyndeth himſelfe without loue, beynge yet fleſhlye mynded, grauntynge the fleſhe hys requeſte, he (I ſaye) is not yet come to ye true faith. Yf we now be come to the true loue, than are we caried by death vnto lyfe, and can reioyce duely in hym 2 Teſſa. 1. that loueth vs. For this cauſe ſayde Paule: We praye alwayes for you, that oure God make you worthy of the callynge, and fulfyll all delectacyon

of goodneſſe, and the worke of fayth in power, that the name of our LORDE IESVS CHRISTE maye be prayſed in you, and ye in hym, accordynge to the grace of oure God, & of the LORDE IESVS CHRISTE
               
               I beſeke the LORDE entierlye (which is onely the geuer of al goodneſſe), that he wyll ſo lyghten and ſteare our hartes inwardly, that we maye reioyce a ryghte in hys loue, & rendre hym agayn thākes & prayſe with a feruēt loue: though oure ſynfull ſoules be not worthye of ſuche loue. But thys agayne is oure comforte, namelye, that the father hathe geuen vs CHRISTE, the whiche hath geuen hymſelfe ouer vnto the bitter death to declare hys excellent loue vnto vs, that we myghte knowlege our ſaluaciō in his loue by faith accomplyſhynge hys wyll, and pleaſure. Unto hym that of his loue hath called vs ſo gentelye by hys worde vnto all mercye, vnto hym (I ſay) be

thankes, prayſe, honoure, and glorye, both by vs, and by all other creatures nowe and for euer.
               Amen.
            
            
               ¶ Hereafter ſhall we treate howe hurtefull the loue of the worlde is, and howe we maye deſpyſe it.
               
                  SEynge that we haue ſpoken ſo largely of the loue ye God hath towarde vs, and howe ſtronglye the ſame loue worketh in vs, we ſhall therfore now treate how daungerous worldlye loue is: that is, that ether the worlde loueth vs, or that we loue it.
               Whan man doth conſydre the worlde, and all that is therin, than findeth he nought for hys ſoule to cō
                  forte, to reſt, or to ſatiſfye herſelfe in. He that doth beholde the world duely, maye ſe that it is hurtefull, & faydyng, with all that belongeth thereto: Yee al ſuch as wil ether ſeke, folowe, loue, ſerue or pleaſe ye world muſt ſtayne & ioyne thē ſelues wt the ſame. It is al vanyte & vexacion of mynde Eccls. 1.
                  
that is vnder the ſkye. What ioye or glorye ſhulde man fele inwardlye, whan he conſydereth that he ſerueth ſuch a lord as bryngeth nought ſaue damnacion, hel and ſinne with him. As the ſoule is noble, and heauenly, euen ſo can ſhe fynde nothynge amonge theſe earthlye creatures wherein ſhe myghte vſe true glorye, and ioye. And ſeynge the ſoule cā refreſh herſelfe in nothynge that is tranſytory, therfore muſt ſhe forſake al creatures, and knowledge God to be glotious in all that he hath declared, and wroughte in hys creatures: for he is wonderfull in hys power, wyſedome, and goodneſſe: wherebye al creatures haue receaued theyr bewty, growynge, faſhyon and lyfe. The creatures call to vs ſayēg: We geue nothinge that may ſatiſfye you, ſaue onelye the eye ſyghte: By vs may ye perceaue God to be wonderfull, and glorious in all hys workes. Yf ye re mayne, and abyde wt vs, and go not

vnto God by vs: (For he wyll be knowen in his loue by vs) than ſhal ye be reſtleſſe ſurely, ſeynge we geue nought wheron youre ſoules maye reſt. Yf man coulde conſyder this dewly, then ſhulde he ſe euidently, yt he was neuer aryght conforted, that ſought to fulfyll his luſt and pleaſure in ony creature. The worlde ſmyleth and promyſeth a mā much: but ſeynge ther is nothynge ſtable in it, therfor can not it alſo geue ony thynge to reſt vpon. Thoughe all the worlde dyd loue vs, yet ſhulde it not be profytable and auaylynge to our ſaluacyon: but rather a ſtoppe or lette of the ſame, makynge man vnworthy of the loue of God. For God doth not poure his loue in that Sap. 1. harte, wherin the worlde with his loue is abydynge. This wytneſſeth ſaint Ihon, warnyng vs, leſt we ſuffre vs to be begyled of the worlde, ſayeng: Se that ye loue not y• world 1. Ioh. 1. nother the thynges that are in the

worlde. Yf ony man loue the worlde the loue of the father is not in hym: for all that is in ye worlde (namely ye luſt of the fleſh, the luſt of the eyes, & the pryde of lyfe) is not of the father, but of the worlde. And the world paſſeth awaye, and the luſt therof: but he that fulfylleth the wyll of God abydeth for euer. Iames confirmeth thys ſayenge: Who ſo euer wyll be Iaco. 4. a frende of the world, is made the enemye of God. This is the profyte that we haue by ye loue of the world, namely, that for the loue of the ſame we do become enemyes to God. For this cauſe ſayd Paule: Yf I ſhulde 
                     
                        •
                     ala. 1. yet pleaſe men, I were not the ſeruaunt of CHRISTE. The apoſtles alſo what tyme they were choſen and ſundered, they were hated of the worlde. For it coulde not agre to be atone wyth God, and to haue frendſhippe wyth the world. Yf ther ſhal be an atonement wyth ye world,

then muſte ther be alſo a conſente to his ſynfulnes. And bycauſe that nother CHRIST nor his diſciples were of the worlde, nor conſented to the luſt of the ſame, therfore doth he admoniſhe and conforte his diſciples at his departynge, ſayenge: Yf the Iohan. 15. world hate you, thē knowe ye it hath hated me before you. Yf ye were of the worlde, the world wolde loue his owne. Howbeit becauſe ye are not of the worlde, but I haue choſen you from the worlde, therfore the worlde hateth you. And the prophetes all though they were hated of ye worlde, yet were not they ſory for it. For yf they wolde haue procured the loue of the worlde, then ſhulde not they haue rebuked the ſynnes of ye world but lyued in ſynfulneſſe with them, and forſakē God, nother ſhulde they haue reioyced in his ſpret. The loue of God no doute ouercame the loue of the worlde. This is euident in many patriarches, prophetes and

holy men and wemen, ye which were al ſlayne for rebukyng of the world, and becauſe they folowed not the luſtes of it: as namely Abell, Eſay, Ieremy, Helyas, Micheas, Suſanna, Daniel with diuers other that haue bene ſlayne and perſecuted of the worlde.
               The world therfore is a wycked thynge, for it geueth nought wherin mā myght reioyce by ony meanes, but his rewardes be, ſynne, hell, and damnacyon: and itſelfe is altogether ſet on wyckednes. The nature 1. Ioh. 5 of man is cōmunely ſuch, that it is chaunged in to it, where his loue is mooſt ſet on. But what ioye can a man vſe in that thynge that is wycked of itſelf? The worldly wyſedom coulde not brouke CHRIST, nother coulde the worldly holyneſſe rendre all glorye vnto CHRIST only: Yee becauſe CHRIST dyd rebuke wyckedneſſe, and fayned holyneſſe, therfore roſe y• worldly men agaynſt CHRIST
                  
and haue determined to ſlaye hym. This one thynge myght of ryght open the eyen of many men. Seynge the loue of ye world was neuer good nor profytable, how myght we then get ony goodneſſe by fulfyllyng his luſtes? as Paul ſayeth: What frute Rom 6. had ye at that tyme in thoſe thinges wherof ye are now aſhamed? for the ende of ſuche thynges is death. O death, how bytter is the remēbraūce Eccl
                        •
                      4, of the to a man, that ſeketh reſt and comforte in his ſubſtaunce and ryches: for death is the rewarde of ſyn. Whan luſt hath conceaued, ſhe bringeth Rom. 6. Iacobi. 1. forth ſynne: and ſynne whan it is fynyſhed, bryngeth forth death.
               Whan a man now hath well cō
                  ſydered the worlde, and begynneth to perceaue that it is nothynge but vanite and hartes grefe, then beginneth he to withdrawe his hart from it. Wherfore yf he can then praye to God entierly and hartely, he ſhall ſe how glorious and nobell he is eſty|

med in the ſyghte of God, namely, that he is a veſſel of ſynne, where as God notwithſtandynge hath created hym to be a tabernacle or a temple, wherin he wyl dwel wt his ſpret, and all his gyftes. Yf he can beleue this with a ſtedfaſt fayth, than ſhall his harte reoyce in God, truſtynge to vſe ſuche gyftes more frely with hym. By fayth doth man ſe where to he is created and called, & what is promyſed and geuen hym. And ſeynge that by fayth he doth loke for a better worlde, then this wretched worlde and vale of myſery is, therfore is not he cōtente with it: for ye world geueth his hart nothing to reioyce in. Whan man hath dont longe and trewe ſeruyce vnto the worlde, he fyndeth none other rewarde, ſaue great grefe and heuyneſſe of harte. For man is made a ſtraunger from God, and colde in loue, whā he goeth about to ſerue 
                     •
                   pleaſe the worlde. Now whan h
                     •
                  
                  
hath once a tayſt of this, and is ſure that it is ſo, then doth he wende his harte from the worlde, ſayenge: Fare well all tranſytory creatures, fare it well all that euer deceaued me, fare well with all thy luſtes. I wente aſtraye whan I ſoughte the, I was begyled whan I tande the, I was blynde whan I ſet my loue vpon the, I was amaſed whan I pleaſed the, I was cōfortleſſe whan I occupyed the, I was parted from God whan I ſerued the, I was in 
                     •
                  eath whā I lyued with the, I was 
                     •
                  eſteleſſe whan I behelde the, I was ſorye whan thou gaueſt me 
                     •
                  oughte, I was not ſuffiſed whan 
                     •
                  hou gaueſt me muche, I was myſaryed whan thou madeſt my glad. Oh thy wyſedome is folyſhneſſe be
                  
                     •
                  re God, thy glyrye is heye, thy 
                     •
                  ylynge is deceate, thy bewtye is 
                     •
                  lthyneſſe, thy ryches are vnſta
                  
                     •
                  e, thy preſence is without reſt, 
                     •
                  y rewarde is but death, thy ioye

endeth with ſorow. He that fyndeth the leſeth hymſelfe, and commeth in deaths daunger. He that loued the was neuer dealt faythfully withall. He was not conforted aryghte that ſought thy frendſhippe. He that buſyed hym to pleaſe yt was neuer ioyfull. He neuer reioyced aryght that reioyced in the. He neuer happened wel that was ſeruiable vnto the. He that folowed the dyd neuer happen well. He that knewe the aryght dyd neuer paſſe greatly vpon thyne amyte or frēdſhippe. Thou deceaueſt al thy louers. Thy loue is vntruſty Thy dealyng is craftyneſſe. O how happy is he that neuer ſoughte for the: but happye is he whoſe hope is in the LORD his God. He that ſeketh God, cōmeth from death vnto lyfe: But he that loueth the worlde, falleth from lyfe vnto death. CHRIST therfore not wyllynge vs to be damned thorowe the worlde, hath warned vs of the daungers of it, ſayeng

What helpeth it a man thoughe he Math. 1
                        •
                     . wanne the whole worlde, and yet ſuffered harme in his ſoule? Whan CHRIST dyd cal ony body, thē dyd he drawe hym from the ſnares and peryls of the world, as namely, Mathew, Zache, Mary the opē ſynner. CHRIST ſayd vnto the yongeman: Math. 
                        •
                      Luce. 9 Let the dead bury theyr dead. But go thou thy waye and preache the kyngdome of God. And to another that wolde haue folowed hym he ſayd: Who ſo purteth his hande to the plowe, and loketh backe is not mete for the kingdome of God. And agayne whan another that deman̄
                  ded of hym, what he ſhulde do to come in to the kyngdome of heauē, he ſayd: Yf thou wylt be perfecte, go thy waye and ſel that thou haſt, and Math. 19. Matti. 10 Luce. 12. geue it vnto the poore, & thou ſhalte haue a treaſure in heauen, and come and folowe me. Whā the yongemā herde that worde, he wente awaye

ſory, for he had great poſſeſſions. IESVS ſayd vnto his diſcyples: Uerely I ſaye vnto you, It ſhall be harde for a ryche mā to entre in to ye kyngdome of heauen. Hereby maye it be euidente that ryches drawe a man ſomtyme to ſynnynge, wherfore he can not folowe his LORDE his God, to ſerue hym humbly. For ryches & worldly loue cauſe man ſomtyme to fall to pryde and obſtinacy. Yf the Nota. ryche mā coulde vſe his ryches well (that is) to diſpend them charitably to the behofe of his neyghboure, & in the meane ſeaſon prouydyng for h
                     •
                  s owne neceſſite, releuinge ye nedy with the reſt: then ſhulde not his ryches be hurtefull vnto hym. Abraham, Iſaac. Iacob, Iob, Dauid, & many other holy men and wemen haue had great ryches. But ſeynge they haue worſhipped & ſerued God & ſhewed kyndnes vnto theyr neghbures with theyr ſubſtaūce: therfore were theyr ryches a furtherauce rather

thē a let vnto theyr ſaluacyō, accordyng to ye mynde of Tobias ye elder. Nabal though he was rych, and 1. Reg. 25. Dauid hauynge nede, requyrynge only what it pleaſed hym to geue, wold depart frō nothyng. The rych glutton alſo wolde ſhewe no mercy Luce. 16 vnto Lazarus. Becauſe of ſuche abuſe were theyr ryches hurteful vnto thē. Therfore ſayd Paul: They yt 
                  1. Tim. 6 wyl be rych fal in to ye rēptacion and ſnare, & into many folyſh & noyſome luſtes, which drowne mē in deſtruccyō & dānacyon. For couetouſnes is the rote of al euel. Ieſus Sirak coū
                  feleth euery man alſo, ſayeng: My Eccler. 11. ſōne, medle not wt many maters: Yf thou wylt be rych thou ſhalte not be without wyckednes. For this cauſe ſayd Paul: Charge them which are rych in this worlde, that they be not 1. Tim. 6 proude, nor truſt in ye vncertayne ryches, but in ye lyuynge God (whiche geueth vs abundauntly all rhynges to enioye them:) that they do

good, y• they be rych in good workes that they geue & deſtribute wt a good yt wyl, gathering vp treaſure for thē ſelues, a good fundacyon, agaynſt the tyme to come, that they may lay hande on eternall lyfe. The cauſe why ſaynt Paul doth thus exhorte vs, is: For we brought nothynge in 1. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 6 to the worlde, therfore is it a playne caſe, that we can cary nothyng out. Whan we haue foode and rayment let vs therewith be content. CHRIST lykewyſe exhorteth vs not to be ſo carefull for this ſhort ſeaſon, nother to ſet an outragious loue vpon ony creatures, ſayenge: Se that ye gather you not treaſure vpon earth, Math. 6 where ruſte and mothes corrupte, & where theues breake throughe and ſteale: but gather you treaſure together in heauen, where nother ruſte nor mothes corrupt, & where theues nother breake vp, nor yet ſteale.
               That man myghte withdrawe his

hart the better from theſe creatures, he ſhulde call oftymes to remembraunce how trāſitory and faydyng all it is, that is without God. All yt he beholdeth with his bodyly eyen, geueth his harte nother reſt, peace, nor eaſe, yee it geueth nothyng ſaue hartes grefe. Man ought alſo to remember that we haue here no abydynge Hebre. 10 cytie, but we hope and loke for another, the which is better by a thouſande partes then all that is in this worlde. Whan dyuerſe ſaintes dyd conſyder this, they haue ſet the worlde at nought, ſekinge theyr glorye in CHRIST only: which can ſatiſfye his frendes with the trueth, and make them ryche with hym ſelfe: ſo that whan his frendes ſhal haue plē
                  ty, his enmyes ſhal ſuffre great ſcarceneſſe. For ye world geueth nothing wherin ye louer of ye ſame cā reſt and ſatle his mind. They y• haue oppreſt the ſymple, they that haue vſed policyes

and craftes to auaunce them ſelues in worldly dignities: thoſe ſhall be brought to confuſion at the daye of dome, and ſhall ſe that they haue procured nothynge ſaue hell & ſynne. For they wold geue no eare vnto the trueth of Gods wordes. At that tyme ſhall they ſaye: Tedious wayes haue we gone, but as for the waye of the LORD, we haue not knowen it. What good hath our pryde done vnto vs? Or what profite hath the pompe of ryches brought vs?
               All thoſe thynges are paſſed a waye lyke a ſhadowe, and as a meſſaūger rūnynge before. &c. Euery mā ought well to conſidre this, for the worldly ſeruice cōmeth to a bytter ende. Herken what ſcripture ſayeth: Yf a man lyue many yeares and be gladde in Eccles 11. them all, let hym remembre yt dayes of darckneſſe, whiche ſhalbe many: and whan they come, all thynges ſhalbe but vanite. Be glad then (O

thou yonge man) in thy youth, & let thyn hart be mery in thy yōge daies folowe ye wayes of thyne owne hart and ye luſt of thyne eyes. but be thou lure, that God ſhall brynge the in to iudgement for all theſe thynges.
               This is ment of the louers of this worlde. For though it ſeme to be ſō
                  what, truly it is nothyng (yee thoughe man lyued a thouſande yeares) in compariſon to it that is euerlaſtynge. Whan we thynke in our ſelues: where are the myghtye? where are the great mē? where are y• wyſe men? whoſe name and fame hath all the worlde maruayled at. At 
                     •
                   ende haue they concluded all with death. Salomō perceaued ryghtwell, that for all his wyſedome and ryches, he was equall in dyenge vnto all other men: Therfore hath he coūted it al foolyſhneſſe yt is vnder the ſkye Eſay alſo ſayeth: O my people, they Eſay. 3.
                  
that call the happy, do deceaue the. As though he wolde ſaye: They that prayſe you here of oughte that is in you, they deceaue you. For ther is nought in man that is worth prayſe, or glory. Be not proude of thy raymente, and exalte not thy ſelfe in the daye of thyne honoure: for the workes Ecc
                        ••
                     . 11. of the Hygheſte onely are wonderfull: yee glorious, ſecrete, and vnknowen are his workes. Many tyrauntes haue bene fayn to ſyt down vpon the earthe, and the vnlykelye hath worne the crown. Many mighty men haue bene brought lowe, and the honorable haue ben delyuered in other mens handes. They that be nowe exalted, ſhall be brought lowe tomorow. And they that be nowe broughte lowe, ſhall be exalted tomorowe. It is greate folye that man hath confydence in that thynge that is vnſtable and geueth no goodneſſe from it ſelfe. Suche one buyldeth

vpon a ſandy grounde, whereby his houſe muſt ſodenly fall, and periſhe. Suche a foolyſhe body ſaieth: Now Ec
                        •••
                      
                     
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . haue I gotten reſt, and nowe will I eate and drynke of my goodes myſelf alone. And yet he cōſydereth not, that the tyme draweth nye that he muſte leaue all theſe thynges vnto other men, and dye hymſelfe. CHRIST ſayd: Ther was a rych mā 
                  Luce. 12. whoſe feldes had broughte forth trutes plenteouſlye, and he thoughte in hymſelfe: What ſhall I do? I haue nothynge wherein to gather my frutes. And he ſayde: thys wyll I do: I wyll breake downe my barnes, and buylde greater, and therin wyl I gather all myne encreaſe and my goodes, and wyll ſaye vnto my ſoule: Soule, thou haûe muche goods layed vp in ſtoare, for many yeares, take now thyne eaſe, eate, drynke, and be mery. But God ſayde vnto hym: Thou 
                     •
                  oole, thys nyghte ſhall they

requyre thy ſoule from the, & whoſe ſhall it be that thou haſte prepared?
               Seyng that the end of the ſeruyce of this world is ſo bytter, and that it rewardeth his ſeruauntes with remorſe of conſcience, therfore dothe God ſhewe vs ſo greate mercye in drawynge vs ſo louynglye from the loue of the worlde: & that doth he, becauſe we ſhulde reioyce with hym in the treuth. It is a ioyful thyng to folowe CHRIST: for he maketh hys ſeruauntes glad with hymſelfe. But he that foloweth the worlde, fulfylling the ſynful deſyres of the ſame: becommeth a ſeruaunt of ſynne. And Iohan. 9. Paul ſayeth: that the rewarde of ſyn Roma. 6. is death. Faſhion not youre ſelues (then) lyke vnto thys worlde, but be Roma. 1
                        •
                     . chaunged thorow the renewynge of your mynd, that ye may proue what thynge that good, that acceptable, and perfecte wyl of God is. And this is the wyll of God, euen your ſanctifienge, 1. Teſſa. 4
                  
that ye ſhulde abſtayne from whoredome, that euery one of you ſhulde know how to poſſeſſe his veſſel in holyneſſe & honor, & not in the luſt of cōcupiſcence. And that no man go to farre, nor defraude his brother in bargenyng. For the LORDE is the auenger of all ſuche thynges, as we haue ſayde and teſtified afore tyme. Nowe as the worlde and the wyſedome thereof haue alwaye perſued CHRISTE and hys, ſeparatyng thēſelues frō god, & fallyng to ſynnynge, from the leaſte vnto the mooſte: therfore maye we thynke ryghte wel that we alſo ſhal optayne but lyttell goodneſſe of it. For thys cauſe dothe Syrack warne vs ſayenge: My ſonne, yf thou haſte ſynned, Ecc
                        ••
                     . 21 do it no more: but praye for thy foreſynnes, that they maye be forgeuen the. Flye from ſynne, euen as from a ſerpente. For yf thou cōmeſt▪ to nye hee ſhe wyll byte the. The

teth therof, are as the teth of a lyon, to ſlaye the ſoules of men. The wyckedneſſe of man is as a ſharpe twoegged ſwearde, which maketh ſuche woundes, that they can not be healed. Iob alſo ſpeakynge very largly of the welthe of the wycked, ſayeth: They ſpende theyr dayes in welthyneſſe, but ſodenlye they godowne to Iob. 21. hell. They ſaye vnto God: go from vs, we deſyre not the knowlege of thy wayes. &c. Dſe lykewyſe ſayeth: They are gone to Baal Peor, and 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 9. runne awaye fro my to the ſhameful Idoll, and are become as abhominable as theyr louers. For the vngraciouſneſſe of theyr owne inuencions wyll I dryue them out of my houſe. Yf we were now enfourmed of ye wickedneſſe of the worlde, and knewe it well, than ſhulde we lyghtelye forſake it and ſeke CHRIST, whoſe loue calleth vs to the lyfe eternal: and thā ſhulde it be to vs that Paule ſayeth:

Yf ye be now ryſen with CHRIST, 
                  Co
                        •••
                     . 
                        •
                     
                   than ſeke thoſe thynges whiche are aboue, where CHRIST is ſittynge on the righthande of God. Set your mynde on the thynges which are aboue, not on thē thynges that are vppon earthe. For ye are dead, & youre lyfe is hydd wyth CHRIST in God. But whan CHRISTE oure lyfe ſhall appeare, than ſhall ye alſo appeare wyth hym in glorye.
               Thus haue we nowe ſhewed vnto you howe God loueth vs, wyth what ſtrengthe and power hys loue worketh in vs, how we agayn ſhuld vtter loue to oure neghboure, and finally howe hurtefull the loue of this worlde is. I praye God now, that we maye ſo folowe him in loue, that our good conuerſacyon and lyfe prayſe the heauenlye father, that hath declared hys boūteous loue ſo wyllyngly, in ſedyng vnto IESVS VS CHRISTE hys ſonne.
               AMEN.
            
            
         
         ¶ Here ende the two frutefull treatyſes, namely, of fayth and hope, and of loue, and charite.
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprynted in South warke for Iames Nicolſon, Anno, M. D. xxxvii.
            
         
      
   