
      
         
            
            
            
               A MOCHE
PROFITABLE
TREATISE
AGAINST
THE
pestilence, translated into
ēglyshe by Thomas Paynel
Chanon of Martin
Abbey. 1534.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            REMEDY AGAYNST THE
PESTILENCE.
            
               FOr the conseruatyon of
these that are in helth, &
reformation and amendmente
of these that are
sicke. I intende vnder ye
correction of my auncyente
maysters and doctours,
to write and declare
certayne profitable thynges for the cō
               mon
weale, and agaynst pestilence, the which
dothe very often inuade, trouble, & vex mens
bodys. And agaynst these thinges after my
poore lernynge, I wyll ordinatly wryte, as
here after dothe folowe.
            
               Of the pronosticate sygnes of pestilence.
cap .i.
               THe signes, by the which a mā may pronosticate,
speke, and knowe the pestilence,
are after this worke but .vii.
               The fyrste is, whan that in the selfe same sū
                  mers 
day, the wynde doth often tymes vary
and chaunge: as when that in the mornynge
hit appereth rayny, and afterwardes obscure
and cloudy, and that doth principally procede

and come of the south wynde.
               
                   ¶The seconde is, whan that in summer the
dais do often tymes apere obscure and dark,
and as thoughe hit wolde rayne, and yet hit
rayneth not at all: the whiche disposition is
to be feared: and if the wether do contynewe
and endure longe so, it is a token of greatte
pestylence.
               
                   ¶The third is, whan that in summer we do
see vpon the erthe great abundaunce of flies:
the whiche thynge betoknythe that the aire is
infected.
               
                   ¶The fourthe is, whan that the starres do
apere and seme to fall, and departe fro their
places: the whiche thinge dothe also signifie,
that the aire is infectyd & charged with infectyd
and poyson vapours.
               
                   ¶The fyfte is, whan that it semethe to man
that the cometes or blasynge starres do flee
abrode. For as the philosopher dothe wryte
in his Metero. the aperyng of a comete doth
betokyn and bryng maruaylous sygnes: for
why suche apperance dothe often tymes signifie
furious deathe, rape, distruction, & spoysynge
of cities and townes, danger of the see,
darknes of the sonne, change of kyngdomes,
& afflictiō of the people by pestilēce & famine.
               
                   ¶The syxte is, when there is moche lyghtenynge
procedynge out of the southe parte.
               
                  ¶The seuenth is, whan there bloweth moch 
wynde from the southe parte: the whiche is
very noyfull and greuous to the people: in so
moche, that none other medycyne can helpe
and succour them, but onely the mercie of almyghtye
god.
            
            
               The causes of pestilence. cap .ii.
               THe causes of pestylence are diuyded in
thre. For at somtymes they procede fro
beneth, and somtyme fro aboue, & other
while from both. Pestilence may be caused &
come from beneth, whan there is nyghe vnto
our chambre some priuey, or stynkynge sinke,
by the whiche the ayer may be corrupte and
infectyd: & this pestilence is called a particuler
pestilence: the which maye chaunce & happen
dayly. And of this procedethe a pestilent
feuer, by the which many a phisition is deceyuyd,
not knowynge the sayde feuer to be pestiferous.
And sumtymes such pestilence chancethe
by the corruption of deed carreyne, the
whiche dothe fortune oftentymes in corrupte
places. This pestilēce cometh very often fro
aboue, and that through the vertue and operation
of the celestiall bodies, by the whiche
the lyuely spirite of mā is corruptyd. Of this
speaketh Auicenna in his fourth boke saying,

By the ayre and influence of the celestiall bodies
aboue, the bodies benethe ar oftentymes
and very sone corrupted and infectyd. For
the celestiall impression doth corrupt the aire,
and by suche corruption the lyuely spirite of
man is corrupted aswell by the inferior rote
as by the superior: that is to saye, that the
pestilence is caused as welle by the inferiour
bodyes, as by the superiour impression, whan
the ayre is through deed careyn so corrupted
that it infecteth man, and ingendrethe siknes,
as feuers and impostumes. For why, the ayre
is then open, whose attraction is often venemons
and corrupte, the whiche is ryght greuous
for the harte, and nature is there with
diuers maners of wayes feblysshed and sore
greued.
               ¶Apon these thynges before declared, two
questions may be asked. Fyrst why that some
do die and peryshe of the foresayde sycknesse,
and some not: and beynge in the sayde same
citie or howse, why one dothe dye, and a nother
dyeth not?
               Vnto this fyrst question I aunswere and say,
that hit maye so fortune and chaunce by two
diuers reasones. And fyrste bycause that the
action and operation of the bodis aboue, haue
more respecte to one place then to a nother.
               The second reason and cause commeth of the

patient. For seinge it is so, that euery man is
not of lyke complection, one may be disposed
to that infirmitie and sicknes, wherevnto an
other is nothynge inclined or dysposed. And
ye shall note, that all suche as be disposed to
the pestilences, are of a whotte complection,
and their conduites are wyde and large, their
poores open, and replenisshed with dyuers
humours.
               ¶Item all suche bodyes as be moche resoluyd,
as these that do often tymes companye
with women, and these that vse moche baynynge,
and these whiche by great labour and
vehement angre are chased and hotte: al such
are moche more disposed to haue the pestylence
than any other.
               ¶The seconde question is, whether such pestilente
sicknes be contagious or no.
               ¶To this question I aunswere and say, that
suche pestylente sicknes is contagious. For
from suche infected bodies commethe infectious
and venemous fumes and vapours, the
whiche do infecte and corrupte the aire. And
therfore it is very necessarie to auoyde and eschewe
all suche as be infected with any suche
infirmite: and also in tyme of pestilence to auoyde
greate multitude and congregation of
people. For in a greatte multytude maye be
some one infectyd, the which may infecte many

other. And therfore the wyse and experte
phisitions, whan they vyset any suche infecte
persones, stand farre from them, turnynge &
holdyng their facys toward the dore, or some
other wyndowe: and so shulde their seruantes
do, and also they that kepe them.
               ¶Ye shall also note, that yt is very good &
profitable to recouer helthe, al sumtymes to
change chambers, and to open the north and
este wyndowes of the sickemās chambre, and
to kepe the southe wyndowes therof close &
shytte. For the southe wynde hathe two causes
of infection and putrifaction.
               ¶The fyrst is, that it feblyssheth as well the
hole and sounde bodies, as the sycke.
               ¶Secondely it is written in the thirde boke
of the Aphorismie, that it inflatethe and can
sethe a man to swell, and noyeth the hering,
and doth hurte the harte. For it dothe open
the pipes and conduites of man, and persethe
vnto the harte. And therfore it is very conueniente
and mete for a hole man, in tyme of
pestilence, and whan the southe wynde dothe
blowe, to kepe hym selfe within: or elles (if
a man muste nedes go forth) that he departe
not from his house, tyll the sonne be hotte,
and of a good heyghte.
            
            
               ¶The remedies agaynst the forsayd
pestilence. Cap .iii.
               
                  FOr asmoche as we haue sene the causes
of the pestilence, it is nowe conuenient to
declare certayn remedies to withstāde it.
Wherfore ye shall note after the mynde of the
supernatural phisition, spekyng by the mouth
of Iheremie, that if a man wyll be surely cured,
and haue a sure medecine, he muste leaue
his synnes, and confesse hym selfe with humilitie
and greate repentaunce. For in tyme of
sykenes confession and penaunce shulde be preferred
aboue al other medecines. But to kepe
and conserue the bodye, the moste soueraynste
thynge is to auoyde and fle suche places and
persones as be infected. But yet for as moch
as there be many that can not conuenientely,
nor with their ease or profyte chaunge their
habitation, I wolde counseyll them as moche
as shalbe possible, to eschewe and fle al suche
thynges as maye ingendre or cause putrifaction,
and to absteyne from moche bodely frequentation
and companye of women.
               ¶Also in suche daungerous season and tyme
of sicknes, we shulde auoyde the southe windes,
for naturally they cause moche infection
and daungerous putrifaction. And therfore
we haue tolde you before, that the south windowes
of your house shuld be shut, til it were
prime, and that they shuld be opē northward.
¶Also we haue sayde, that all maner of infection

and stynch shuld be anoyded and fled,
as the infection of stables, pryueys, and aboue
all other the infection of deed carein, and
of longe standynge waters, the infection of
olde sinkes, that cause such corruptions, that
the inhabitours of suche houses do die, theyr
neyghbours continuyng in helth & prosperite.
¶In lyke wyse we shulde flee those places,
where that putrified ware is solde: for suche
putrified thynges do ingender infection and
sauers moch contrary vnto helthe. For as aromatike
swete odours and sauours do comforte
the harte, so dothe yll and infectious sauours
greue the harte, and cause it to be weke
and feble, wherfore it is ryghte necessary to
withstande suche infections, and to beware,
that they doo not perce and entre in to oure
chambers, and that we haue good and clere
fiers, and that these herbes here folowynge
be not to seke, Bayberies, Ieneper, Vbery,
Organy, wormwod, Isope, Rue, Muggeworte,
and specially this wodde Aloes, the
which is very dere, whose fumygations must
be receyuyd by the mouthe and nose, for they
do strengthe, fortifie, and comforte the hart,
and the interyour parties of man.
               ¶Also ye muste eschewe and fle the excesse
of meates and drynkes: for suche repletion
dothe cause and ingender ylle humours, the

which are easely and sone corrupted & infectid.
And therfore Aui. saith in his .iiii. canon,
that all such as vse great repletion, do abrige
& shorten their daies & the ende of their lyfe.
¶In lyke wise a man shulde not bayne nor
wasshe him amonge moche company, for the
breth of one infectid persō may infect a hole.
¶Farthermore all maner of multitude and
congregation of people is to be sled and auoidyd.
But for asmoche as it is very harde for
many a man to auoyde and absteyne fro company,
let all suche receyue and vse these medicines
that here after folowe.
               ¶In the mornyng at your vprysyng, ye shal
eate a lyttell Rue well wette & depte in clere
water, with a lytel salte, and one or two walnuttes
well pylde. If so be yt ye can not haue
these forsaid thinges, take a tofte wette in vineger,
& specially whā the wether is clowdy.
¶Also ye muste se and take hede, that your
house be ouer sprincled with vineger of losis,
& that in somer it be strewde with vine leues.
¶Item it is very good for a man to washe
his handes in water & vinegre, and than to
smell to his handes.
               ¶Also it is helthsome to smel to suche thinges,
as be sharpe & tarte, wherof I had experience
& prouyd it my selfe at Moūtpeller. For
through pouertie I was inforced & constraynyd

to be amonge theym, and to goo frome
howse to howse to helpe the sycke and dysesyd,
and soo toke a sponge in my hande deped
and wel wet in vinegre, or elles a toste, the
whiche I helde vnto my mouth. For all that
is sharpe and sower, doth replenyshe the pypes
and conduites of the body, and lettethe
the ylle ayre to entre into the bodye, and soo
it is excluded.
            
            
               The confortation of the harte and other
principall membres of man.
Capi .iiii.
               THe thinges which do comfort the hart,
are Saffron, Cherfile, and plantayne,
the whiche do solide and confirme the
interiour spirites.
               ¶Also ye shall vnderstande, that the eies
throughe the infection of the ayre doo waxe
obscure and dimme, except a man carie about
hym these foresayde thynges. It is a ryghte
holsome thyng for a mā to washe his hādes,
eies, & his mouth with rose water and wine.
But if all these forsayde thynges can not be
had, take aysel: for so ye maye bothe dwelle
and haūte the more surely amōge moch companye:
the whiche medicine is laxatyue, and
moche profytable for the bellye. Or elles ye

may take pylles named pestilētions, the whiche
ye shall fynde at the potycaris. And as
considering metes, I say that Triacle is very
good: and therfore it is not yl to vse therof
twyse a daye the quantitie of .ii. sponfulles
wel mynglyd with clere wyne, or rose water,
or ale. And after it is well myngled & beten
together, and that ye haue receyued it, ye must
absteyne from all other meates til it be none.
¶Also it shal be very good ons in the day to
eate good meates, and moderately to drynke
good wyne, or elles it shuld putrifie and corrupt
the humours. Men must beware of hot
meates, as pepper, and garlyke, notwithstandynge
that the pepper dothe purge the braine
of fleme, and other principall members of al
superfluous and vicious humours, nor that
is not throughe his heate, the which hete ingendrethe
putrifaction, whose bytternes plesythe
me moche more than his sauour.
               ¶And garlyke in lyke maner, dothe purge &
auoyde fleme, prouokyng mans appetite, and
chaceth awaye yll ayers. Yet for as moche
as it troublythe the eies, and dothe hete their
heades that do moche vse it, I thynke it therfore
nother holsome, nor the vse therof very
plesant. For the pestilence throughe naturall
heate, is often tymes incresyd and augmentyd.
All meates of lyght digestion are moste

holsome. And it is good to vse boylde meate
in the mornynge, and roste at nyghte. Suppynges
and cawdelles, if they be tarte and
sharpe, aare profitable. For in tyme of pestylence
suche egre and sower meates are better
for mans body, then any other medicine.
               ¶Item all fruites at hurtful, except they be
sowre & sharpe, as cheris, poumgarnades, or
in stede and place of a medicine, a littel pece of
a naple, or of a pere. For all maner of fruite
ingender putrification. The most profitablest
spice in tyme of pestilence are these, Cmamum,
Gynger, Comyn, Nutmegges, and Saffron:
of the whiche men do make sawses for ryche
men: But if so be pouertie wyl not suffre you
to bye these foresayd spyces, make your sauce
of rue, sage, walnuttes, and parcely, depte in
vineger. Yf so be they be of meane estate, let
them take for their sawce saffron and cummyne,
the which muste be put in vinegre.
               This sawce is a very good sawce auoydyng
all corruption, and with all this a man muste
be merye and nothynge melaneolyous: For
that is cause of good helthe. And therfore in
tyme of pestilence a manne shoulde not feare
to dye, but rather truste and hope to lyue
longe.
            
            
               Of lettynge of bludde.
               
                  FLeubothomye, that is lettynge of blud,
maye be done and vsed ones in a monthe,
if it soo be that iorneinge or no nother
thynge do lette it: as in pylgrymmes,
and other feble personnes, or they that are
laxatiue. And whether that this fleubothomia
be in the righte Basilyke, or in the
lyste it muste be done fastynge. And after
the incisyon, he that is lette bloudde muste
be merye, and vse moderatelye good wyne,
or elles good ale, and kepe hym selfe frome
slepe that daye that his basilyke is cut.
               And if a manne fele hym selfe to be greuyd
with any impostume, he muste auoyde slepe,
And seke for good merye companye, or elles
walke: for by slepe the interyour and inward
heate drawethe the poyson so vnto the harte
and the other pryncypalle members of the
bodye, that hardly a man shall eyther by herbes,
or any other medycine restore the bodye
to his fyrste condytyon and estate agayne,
the whiche thynge shoulde not chaunce, yf
he wolde eschewe slepe. And therfore slepe
muste be differred for a whyle by walkynge
in to some plesaunte feldes or gardeynes.
               After suche walkynge a manne maye slepe
the space of a good houre. And to this
purpose Auicen saythe, that whanne we purpose
to slepe, we shulde before drynke some

good wyne, or elles some other good drynkes
for by slepe a man gethereth yl humours, the
whiche good drynke do expell.
               ¶Here it maye be inquired, howe one shulde
know, when he is smitten with the pestilence,
where to I aunsere and say, that who so euer
be infected, that daye he shall eate very lyttel
meate: for he is fulle of ylle humours, and
a none after he hathe eaten, he shall desyre to
slepe, and vnder a spyce of colde, he shall fele
a vehemente heate, in the fore parte of his
hedde. The whiche thynge maye be auoyded
and holpen by meane mouinge of him
selfe, or walkynge. For the pondorosite of
the body, wyll not suffre hym to walke, or to
ryde moche at that tyme: for he shall couette
to slepe at euery howre. For the poyson that
is in his body dothe so trouble the lyuely spirites,
yt he shall require nothing els but slepe.
¶And by these foresayd signes a manne shal
welle perceyue whan he is infectyd with the
sycknes. And he that wyll not beleue it, may
tarye the space of halfe a day, and knowe it to
be so by experience. For he shall fele the sores
vnder his armes, or about his eres, his neck.
and shulders, or elles aboue his reynes.
               Therfore the moste souereynste remedy is in
tyme of pestilence, to fle and refrayne slepe.
               For whan the spirites of man be at reste, the

venym and poyson dothe extende and sprede
it selfe throughout all the bodye: of the whiche
thynge I haue had experience and prouyd
it by my selfe. And therfore whan any man
doth fele hym selfe smytten and infectid with
the pestilence, he shulde be let bloud in greate
quantite. For the euacuation of a lyttell blud
dothe onely moue and styrre the venym. And
who so wyll not let hym selfe bludde by many
veynes, muste be let bloudde by one, and
that abundauntly. But whether he that is let
bloudde be sycke or hole, he muste nedes (for
the reasones afore rehersyd) eschewe and auoyde slepe.
And if he haue a sore, he muste
be let bloudde vpon he selfe same side that he
hath his sore, and not vpon the contrary side,
for suche causes as here after shall folowe.
And therfore it the sore be vpon the ryghte
arme, he muste be let blud vpon the veyne in
the myddes of the selfe same arme: and lyke
wyse it muste be done, if it be vppon the lefte
arme. And if the postume be benethe towarde
the priuey membres, he muste be lette bludde
on the lefte syde, towarde his great too: But
if the sore be in the necke, he muste be let blud
in the hande vpon the selfe same syde, nyghe
vnto the thumme, and nyghe vnto the lyttell
fynger. But if the sore do appere nyghe vnto
the eares of Cephalica, then he muste be lette

blud vpon that syde where he dothe fele his
grefe in the vaine yt is betwyxt the thūme and
the next fynger, whiche is called Basilica. If ye
sore do appere vpon the shulders, he muste be
let blud with vētosities, & first in the veyn called
mediane. If it appere on the backe, he must
be let blud in the veine called perdica magna.
And let al these thynges be done, yf the pacient
slepte not before he knewe of the sore, for
yf he fele hit after that he hathe slepte, then
he must be let bloudde cleane contrary: that is
to saye, yf the sore do appere vpon the ryghte
arme, he muste be let bloudde vppon the lefte
arme, in the veyne of the lyuer, or in the veyn
named Basilica mediana. And yf hyt appere
vppon the lefte arme, ye muste do as ye dyd
when it appered vpon the ryghte arme, and
so consequently where so euer it doth appere.
               ¶If the patient after suche diminution of
bloudde be weyke and seble, then he maye
slepe and take his rest at after none: for vntill
it be none he must nedes be in continuall and
moderate motion. And if the sore do increce,
yet a man shulde not feare it, for the soore is
the cause of helthe. And to rype and to breake
the sore, make this medicyne that here after
folowethe.
               ¶Bruse the leaues of Ellerne with a lytle
mustarde, and make a plaster therof, to laye

vpon the sore. Some Surgiens wyll put triacle
vnto it, the whiche thynge in no maner
of wyse I wolde ye shulde do: for the nature
of triacle, is to repell poyson, and therfore it
were better that the paciente shulde drinke it
to auoyde out the poyson.
               ¶Another medicine to ripe a pestilence sore.
Take an herbe called herbaiouis, pellytory,
plantayne, and a lyttellrye, and stampe them
together, vntyll there come water from it:
after that wete it in womans mylke, & drinke
thereof fastinge, & before ye go to your reste:
for so it shall haue the better operation.
               ¶Also he that hath a soore, may take hasell
nuttes, fygges, and rue, and make a playster
to lay to his sore.
            
            
               ¶To knowe vrines.
               IF ye wyll knowe vrines, ye muste fyrste of
all marke, whether the vrine be scummye,
ye shall see a cercle aboute it, and therby ye
shall knowe, that there are greatte ventosyties
in the guttes and reygnes.
               ¶Whan ye se that the vrine is as thoughe it
were full of bloudde, it betokenethe grefe &
peyne throughe out all the body, and yf it be
in the botum of the water, yt sygnyfiethe
peyne in the reygnes.
               
                  ¶Whan ye se that there is moche vryne, and
that it is as clere as water, it signifieth the
virginitie of a mayde.
               ¶Whan ye se in any vryne lytle bryghte and
flamynge sparcles, as appere in the sonne
beames, in a man it signifieth yll humours:
in a woman it betokeneth that she is with
chylde, and yf those sparcles be redde, it is a
shrewde token.
               ¶Whan ye se the vryne redde, and in colour
lyke vnto wyne, & as there were smal bubles
in the botome, it signifieth yt the patient dothe
suffre great peyne through out all his body.
¶Whan ye se the vryne discoloured, & darke
in the myddes, it signifieth that the pacient is
full of fleme, but yet without any feuer: and
that he hath a swellyng in the belye, and that
he is peyned in the raynes, in the syde, and in
the heed. And if it be a womans water, she is
peyned in the nauyll, in the raynes, and in her
knees, and that the suffreth colde in her handes,
and in her feete.
               ¶To all suche persones, ye may gyue good
stronge wyne, well mengled with hoote water:
in the whiche water ye muste put sodden
sage, wherof ye muste gyue them euery mornyng
halfe a noūce. Also ye must make them
a bathe of Peny reall, Camamyll, and baye
leues: and whether it be men or women, they

must be therin a longe season, and anoynte
theyr raynes & theyr bellyes with the same,
and with oyle of bayes.
            
            
               ¶A remedy for the frenche pockes.
               I Fynde that this sickenes began in the yere
of the creation of the worlde .MM.ccccxxxvi.
And nowe I say, that the infortunate
cōiūction of Saturne and Mars (in the
whiche this disease had his begynnynge and
course) the coniunction & yll respect of those
planets was the begynnynge therof. In the
yere a .M.cccc.xcvi. re .vi. of Ianuer, in
the thirde face called Piscis: the whiche infortune
and yll respecte of the forsayde planettes
impressyd in mannes body, disposed to
corruption, this forsayde disease. For Saturne
is the cause of the passion and peynefulnes
of the legges and other membres: and
Mars is the cause of the ingendryng therof,
as it is noted in the boke intitled Initium sapientie.
cap .4. of the nature and sygnification of
planets. And therfore I saye, that the dede
of the forsayde cōiunction, is the cause of this
sikenes: the whiche coniunction is paste, and
shall come no more. For in the yere .M.cccc.
xc.vii. the forsayde planettes dyd holly conioyne
them selfe all in theyr contrarye signe.

And therfore if any mā chaūce to be infected
agayne with this syckenes, it is not by the influence
of any constellation, nor by the influence
of any yll respecte of the forsayde coniūction:
but bicause it is of his propre nature
very contagious. And therfore yet suche as
kepe good dyet, may be sone eased.
               ¶This malady is cronique, longe sence, and
extendyd through the nature of Saturne,
whose scabbes, pusshes, and inwarde & outward
goutes, whiche ar of ye nature of Mars
shalbe shortely in Aries. But as touching this
matter, ther are foure thynges to be cōsiderid.
¶Fyrst that they, which be infected with this
sycknes, must vse no great abstinēce in meates
nor drynkes. For abstinence causethe greate
debilitie of nature, & feblenes of body. They
must ete suche meates as be light of digestion,
and drinke swete wynes with rayne water.
               ¶Secondarily they must be purged ones or
twyse in the weke with pylles conuenient and
mete to purge the heed: bicause that this malady,
whiche is of Saturnus, procedeth from
the heed. ¶Thyrdly to remoue this sycknes
and the peynes therof, ye muste anoynte hym
with oyle made of swete almandes, and with
terpentine: the whiche two must be mengled
well together. ¶Fourthly he muste drynke
euery mornynge womans mylke, and sucke it

from the dugge, for that is most conuenient:
or els he must take asses or gotes mylke, and
that the forsayd bestes be norished after the
vse and forme of phisicke. The maner of receyuynge
of this mylke, is by the dugge: and
the cause is this. In this sickenes there are
thre thinges, sores, bledyng, and consumtion.
Vlceration must be healed, bledynge must be
mundified, & consūption recouered & restored.
¶There is a medicine, ī the whiche are these
thre, that is mylke, the whiche naturally doth
clense, the chese doth fasten, & the butter dothe
nouryshe, and restore the forsayde consolidation.
And therfore I saye, that who so wyll
vse this thynge euery mornyng fastyng, shall
by the grace of god recouer his helthe, and so
I praye god he may.
            
            
               To the reder.
               ¶It may be, that this remedy for the frēche
pockes before wryten, was at the begynnyng
the beste that men had by experience proued:
but I thynke it is nothyng nowe comparable
to that that Hutten wryteth de ligno guaiaco,
yet not withstandynge we haue put it to, that
men may se what thynges are good, if the other
coulde not be had.
               Finis.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            LONDINI IN AEDIBVS
THOMAE BERTHELET
REGII IMPRESSORIS.
            CVM PRIVILEGIO.
            
         
      
   