
      
         
            
            
               
               A breefe Treatiſe Of the vertue of the Croſſe: And the true manner hovv to honour it.
Tranſlated out of French into Engliſh.
            
               1. Cor. 1. ver. 23.
We preache Chriſt crucified.
            
               St. Chriſoſtome.
The Croſſe of Chriſt is to vs the Sunne of Iuſtice, that beeing lightened by the mercie thereof, wee may glorific the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſte.
            AT LONDON, Printed for Edward Ʋ
                  Ʋhite, and are to be ſolde at the little North doore of S. Paules Church, at the ſigne of the Gun▪ 1599.
         
         
            
            
               
               TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Sr, STEPHEN SOAME, Knight, Lord Maior of the Cittie of London: And to the vertuous Ladie his wife, all happineſſe and hearts content vnfainedly wished.
            
               MY good Lord, in reſpect of ſome fauors from you receiued, as alſo in regard of the dutious affection I beare you, I am bolde to preſent you and

your Ladie with this little remembrance, though ſimple and ſmall in shew, yet of ineſtimable valew in ſubſtance. Ingratitude is the moſt abiect ſinne in the worlde, and caniuſtly challenge no excuſe for it ſelfe, bee it in how great or meane perſons ſoeuer: And therefore leaſt my ſelfe should therewith bee tainted, hauing found ſuch extraordinarie gentleneſſe both in you and my good Ladie your wife, I haue made a learned and diuine French man my interceſſour, to tell you in rude English, that I forget not ſuch fauours.
            And the rather made I choice of his furtherance heerin, becauſe

on good Fryday laſt, your Honour with the reſt of your Brethrē, heard at Paules Croſſe, a verie learned Sermon tending to this purpoſe, I meane the croſſe, death, & paſsion of Chriſt Ieſus, which iumping ſo neere with this Argument, and well worthie to be continued in remembrance: I could finde no fitter meanes for the ſame, then this moſt excellent and learned French Treatiſe, which handles both the ſacred vertue of the croſſe, and alſo what worshippe ought to be giuen thereto.
            I beſeech you my good Lord and Lady, when leiſure from weightie occaſions vvill ſo permit

it, that you would but vouchſafe this Treatiſe the reading: happily you shall finde ſomewhat therein well worthie noting, and I hope vvithall, the true ſinceritie of my affection toward you, which being but ſo found, and by you as kindly accepted, I shall remaine alvvaies yours for any further imployement, be it euen to the vttermoſt of all my endeuours.
         
         
            
            Since in this world nothing can perfect bee, Pardon I pray, if you theſe faults do ſee.
            B. pag. 1. lin 13. for haue plunged, read, hauing plunged. Pag, 7. lin 21. for, 1. Cor 1 verſe. 23, read, 1. Cor. 2. verſe 2. Pag 9 lin. 20 for▪ oneſ aith▪ read▪ one ſaith Pag 13. lin. 5. for, Coloſl. 5. verſe 15. read, Phil. 3. verſe 3.
            C. Pag. 14. lin: 1▪ for, ſo phiſtically, read, ſophiſtically. and lin. 26, for, Chirſt. read Chriſt.
            D. Pag. 2. lin 24. for, Apoſtaſta, read, Apoſtata. Pag. 3, lin. 15, for, begit, read beg it. Pag 4. lin. 21. for, 2. Cor. 7. read 1. Cor 7. Pag. 7. lin. 20▪ and 21. for, was in honour, &c. read, is in honor and at his end▪ at his end in reſpect of puniſhment: but remaineth in glorie.
            E. Pag. 13. lin 24. for, others beleeue it ſhould: read, but that other croſſes ſhould.
            F. Pag. 9. lin 27. for, Conſtiantne, read Conſtantine.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
A briefe Treatiſe of the vertue of the Croſſe, and the manner how to worſhip it.
            
            
               WHen I conſider the differences, which at this daye are in the Chriſtian church, the conference which our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt had with the woman Samaritaine, in the 4. of S. Iohn. ver. 22. may very well be called to remembrance. You (ſaid he to the Samaritaine) worſhip yee know not what: we Iewes worſhip that which we know. So that ſeeing on the one ſide, the iuſtice of God diſcouers it ſelfe in ſuch as loue ſhaddowes better then trueth, haue plunged themſelues of long time, and yet wade further more and more in ignorance: and on

the cōtrarie part, his mercie ſhines on ſuch, whoſe eyes it pleaſeth him to vnſeale, that they may behold the ſtrength of truth made manifeſt, we may be good reaſon reioyce in our ſelues, and ſay, that being of this latter number, we worſhip what we know, becauſe God himſelfe ſpeaking to vs in his word, makes vs therby to haue knowledge of him.
            Nowe on the contrarie ſide, whereas they of the Romiſh Church erroniouſly led, or perhaps by ſimplicitie, confirmed therin through ignorance, and carried onely with ſelf-wild obſtinacie, worſhippe that wherof they but preſume, and haue (indeed) no knowledge of at all. For ſeeing that in the moſt part of their ſeruice, there is nothing elſe contained but humaine traditions, it is moſt euident, that there can likewiſe bee nothing beſide but opinion: that is to ſay, wauering and doubtfull thoughts, tending either to good or euill, & vnconſonant or diſagreeable to God. And ſince it is ſo, that where there is no faith, there can be no certainetie: it muſt needes follow, that in whatſoeuer they introduce, there can be no aſſurance, conſidering therein is no faith

contained. But let vs go a litle further, thoſe things which haue nether faith nor certaintie, muſt needs bee matters much diſpleaſing to God, becauſe what ſoeuer is done without faith, is ſinne. Yet notwithſtanding ſeeing it hath pleaſed God to giue vs ſuch grace, as to hold his worde in price and eſtymation, addicting our ſelues wholly to the ſeruice thereof, as neither ſpeaking or thinking any thing, but what is therein vttered and preſcribed to vs, that wee might embrace the verie leaſt particle therin contained, wee may ſay and ſpeake it by good right, that we knowe, namely by a knoweledge more firme, then are all the ſciences and demonſtrations induced by humaine ſence or diſcourſe. For our ſaith beeing grounded on the woorde of God, holdeth more ſtrictly thē all elſe in the world beſide can do: it is firme and ſtable, ſubiect to no kinde of alteration whatſoeuer. Following then the contents of this word, we beleeue in our hearts, & confeſle with our mouths, that God only is to be ſerued & honored, & that the ſeruice due to his Maieſtie, ought to be giuen according to his good pleaſure & ordenance.
            
               
Now the manifeſt will of God concerning this point, is, that wee ſhould worſhip and ſerue him in ſpirit and trueth, according to S. Iohn the 4. ver. 24. and therefore not onelie ought we to reiect the auncient iudaicall ceremonies, but all other beſide, that offer themſelues ouer and aboue the worde of God in the Chriſtian Church, for it were no point of reaſon, to forſake thoſe ceremonies inſtituted by God: neuertheleſſe, in regarde they were to endure but for a certaine time onely, and then afterward grew faſtened to the manners of men, and were accepted or neglected after their opinions. Such (for the moſt parte are thoſe, which the Romaine Church practiſeth in inuocation on deceaſed Saintes, the Images of God and of thoſe Saintes, the adoration of the Croſſe, and ſuch like: which haue no other foundation, but onely mens vanitie and no veritie, Now we intend not at this preſent to ſpeake of other points, for they are appointed and ſhall be (God willing) handled elſe where in ample manner: but this inſtant occaſion impoſeth a needefull taske, to ſpeake of inſupportable abuſe committed by them, concerning the Croſſe, to the

ende all men may learne how to furniſhe them ſelues againſt the poyſon of idolatric, which the deuill comes to vomite foorth againe in this time of neere neighbourhood, furthering his purpoſe with the iuglings of diuers his inſtruments, who by wordes and writing, labour to rebuilde vp idolatrie againe, as the walles of Iericho, which notwithſtanding, by the ſound of Gods trumpets are fallen, and that by good numbers in theſe quarters.
            We conſider, that they who brought hither & diuulged thoſe two writings, which they ſend flying abroad in forme of Placards, doubted not to greeue & make many good Chriſtians among vs ſhed teares: for whatis he, who beholding the follies, abſurdities and idolatries in them contained, that can refraine from lamenting, ſeeing the ſonne of God diſhonored, a number of ſoules withdrawne from true chriſtianitie, & an infinite multitude to fortifie thēſelues in ignorance and falſhood? Yet this lamentation marcheth not alone, for we accōpany it with our daily ſighes and prayers, drawne frō the entire depth & bottom of our harts, to the onely true God, by the interceſſion

of him that was crucified, dyed for our ſinnes, and roſe againe for our iuſtification: that hee will confirme in his trueth, ſuch as it pleaſed him alreadie to call thereto, and withdrawe from errour, thoſe whome the falſe preachers of idolatrie labour to blinde therewith.
            Firſt then it is to be noted, that the word Croſſe ſignifieth ſometime a kinde of libbit, which in elder times they vſed for the greateſt and moſt infamous malefactours. Sometime it ſignifieth the puniſhment, which thoſe offendours were to endure. In the hiſtorie of our redemption, theſe two ſignifications are oftentimes found. For, when it is ſaid, that Chriſt caried the croſſe, and was faſtened thereon: it is eaſie to be gathered, that it was the Croſſe of wood he bare, and that thereto hee was nayled and faſtened. In like manner, when it is ſaid▪ 
               Coloſ. 1. ver. 20. That by the blood of the Croſſe of Chriſt, our peace is made: it cannot bee doubted, but that theſe wordes haue reference to thoſe ſufferings, which it pleaſed the ſonne of God to endure for vs. This diſtinction being well obſerued, wee ſhall the more eaſilie and Chriſtianlie determine,

the matter handled in thoſe placards. For if by the word Croſſe, the death and paſſion of Chriſt is vnderſtood: it will follow by the confeſſion of all true Chriſtians, that the vertue of that Croſſe is ſuch, as is no way to bee comprehended by the vnderſtanding of men nor Angels. For it is the Croſſe and death of Chriſt Ieſus, that witneſſeth the loue which God beares to his elect, which Loue paſſeth all vnderſtanding, ſaith Saint Paule, Philipi. 4. ver. 7. In this Croſſe is our life, light, health, defence, ſtrength▪ joy, perfection, and our all whatſoeuer: for there is no good or hope for vs elſewhere, but in the Croſſe of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt. Heereof may wee ſaye with S. Paule, Galat, 6. ver. 14. God forbid wee ſhould glorie in any thing, but in the Croſſe of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, whereby the worlde is crucified to vs, and we to the world, wherevppon, the ſame S. Paul ſaith, 1. Cor. 1. ver. 25. That he deſired to know nothing but Chriſt Ieſus, and him crucified.
            
            But if by the worde Croſſe, we vnderſtand the wood or libbit, whereon the ſonne of God was hanged for the ſinnes of the elect, we may boldly ſay, that wee finde no teſtimonie

in the word of God, written by the Prophets & Apoſtles, nor any examples or practiſe of theirs, that either may or ought induce vs, to attribute any vertue to the wood it ſelfe. For albeit wee doubt not of Gods omnipotencie, to whom nothing is impoſſible: yet ought wee to conceiue of this almightineſſe, by that which appeares to vs of his owne will, according to that in the 115. Pſalme. God hath done all whatſoeuer him pleaſed. Then ſafely may wee conclude, that God had no will ſuch vertue ſhould be adherent to the wood or croſſe of h
                  •
               s ſonne: for then hee woulde doubtleſſe haue witneſſed the ſame by his word. Among true Chriſtians, whatſoeuer is not written in the worde of God, is helde as a matter of no eſtate or beeing, as wee may gather from the 7. to the Hebrues, verſe 3. where it is ſaid, That Melchiſedech was without father, without mother, &c. for this only reaſon, becauſe the ſcripture no where at all ſpeaketh of his father or mother: although it be moſt certaine, that he had a father & mother like to other men. Of the Croſſe we read, that Ieſus Chriſt carried it, ſo likewiſe did Simon the father of Rufus
               
beare it: that Ieſus went out ofthe cittle of Ieruſalem bearing it, that it was brought to the mount of Caluarie, where it was prepared, Ieſus nayledthereon, and likewiſe the inſcription, Ieſus of Nazareth king of the Jewes, that thereon Ieſus had his ſide pearced, rendred vp his ſpirit thereon, and when night came, that the bodie of Ieſus was taken downe from the croſſe: ouer and beſide theſe poynts, we read nothing whereby appeareth, that God was willing to foreſtall idolatrie, which neuertheleſſe Sathan wold needes bring into the world. For as he had no will, that the Sepulchre of Moyſes, ſhould be knowne: ſo is there not any witneſſe recorded, that God was willing his ſonnes croſſe ſhuld haue any notice among men, for to ſay that it was kept, or enterred in the place where it had beene erected, which was, as oneſ aith, the place where Adam was buried, this hath no ſemblance of any certaintie, for if we ſhall beleeue our elders, Adam was buried in Hebron, & not neere Ieruſalem. Likewiſe, ſeeing the Diſciples & Apoſtles of Ieſus Chriſt, were ſcattered at his death, & that after his aſcention they were prohibited to ſpeake of or name

Ieſus Chriſt, that they were made priſoners and ſcourged: that Saint Stephen was ſtoned: that great perſecutiō was in the church of Jeruſalem: and ſoon after that, Jeruſalem was brought to totall extremitie and ruine; what apparance can there bee, that this croſſe was hidden and honoured by them that followed Chriſt Ieſus▪ In like maner, we reade not any where that the Diſciples and Apoſtles of Ieſus, did euer recommend this croſſe: and yet they ſaid in the 13. of the Hebrues, verſe 13. Let vs go foorth after Jeſus out of the campe, bearing his reproach. And Chriſt himſelfe ſaid: That whoſoeuer would be his Diſciple, muſt take vp his croſſe & follow him. Math. 16. verſe 24. And as for that where he ſaith, the enemies of Chriſt haue gone about to aboliſh his croſſe, and yet they could not do it, ſuch would lightē darkeneſſe by darkneſſe. For where one reports, that they endeuoured to burne the croſſe, it is altogither vncertaine: Another maintaines, they threw it into the ſea, how can that hold, whō 
               Jeruſalem was not a ſeabordering cittie? Perhappes then (ſaith he) they tooke paines to bring it to the porte of Japhet, which is diſtant from the ſaid Cittie

about two daies iourney: but heerein it is to be doubted likewiſe.
            And concerning what others haue ſaide, that the ſelfe ſame enemies of Chriſt, after al theſe other trials to deſtroy the croſſe, did laſtly (yet cunningly) burie it verie deep in the earth, and with it, the images of Venus and Adonis▪
                who would not vtterly reiect this fable, ifhe but cōſider▪ what hatred the Iewes bare to al kinde of Images? Can it any way ſeeme likely, that they which reſiſted the Romaine Gouernors, yea the Emperour of Rome himſelf, not permitting the Eagle▪ which was the Romaines Enſigne, ſhould be receiued into the cittie of Jeruſalem, offering themſelues to all daungers whatſoeuer, ratherthen to ſuffer ſuch a banner be diſplaide among them: that they of ſo ſtearne nature, would make or ſearch for the images of Venus and Adems, to make in ſerue them for ſuch a purpoſe▪ Such reckonings do indeed ſeeme no otherwiſe, but onely to annihilate the vertue of the croſſe of Chriſt.
            The holy Hiſtorie enſtructs vs in far better manner, what was to be vnderſtood by the enemies to the croſſe of Chriſt, as their

reiecting the preaching of the Goſpell, and perſecuting thē that ſaid they were Chriſts Diſciples, not ſuffering him to be named among them, Acts. 4. and 5. And as for vs, we ſay, that the paſſion and vertue of Ieſus Chriſt, ought to be ſought for in himſelfe, and not in a tree of wood. If yee obiect the linnen cloaths and handkercheifes of Saint Paul, Acts. 19. verſe 12. the anſwere is eaſie: that god was willing by thoſe miracles to honour the Apoſtleſhip of Saint Paul, to the end that ſuch as neuer ſawe his face, might yet be perſwaded of him, and that God had authorized ſuch miracles by him, as beeing the true ſeruaunt of Ieſus Chriſt. But heere is the poynt whereon wee ſtand, to wit, that thoſe miracles are teſtified by the word of God: which cannot ſo be ſaid of the woode of the croſſe of Chriſt, the ſcripture not making any mention thereof. For it is moſt certaine, that if God had pleaſed to work by ſuch an inſtrumēt or means, the ſpirit of God would not haue beene ſilent therein: the rather making mention of things concerning the ſeruant, doubtleſſe he would neuer haue forgotten the maiſter.
            It ſeemes moſt euident, if it were for no

other reaſon, but that God would not limit men to ſuch earthly thinges, as likewiſe S. Paul hath taught vs by his example, 2. Cor. 5. verſe 16. That we ought not to know Chriſt Jeſus after the fleſh. And to the Coloſsians 5. verſe 15. We ſerue God in ſpirit, glorifying vs in Chriſt Jeſus, not beleeuing at all in the fleſh. Now before wee paſſe any further, it is neceſſarie to declare in this place, what is to be vnderſtood by the ſigne of the croſſe. If by the word croſſe, wee vnderſtande the ſufferings which the ſonne of God endured, both in ſoule and bodie, as Eſaye 55. verſe 3. Being filled with ſorrowes, and full of heauineſſe in ſoule, euen to the death, as hauing drunke the cup of Gods anger, wheron he cried, My God, my god, why haſt thou forſaken me? it is moſt certaine, that ſuch ſufferings exceede repreſentation▪ For our ſence cannot comprehend thē: but by faith we vnderſtand, that they were infinite and vnſpeakable. Therfore we ſay in our Creed, that wee beleeue Chriſt Ieſus did ſuffer, that he was crucified, dead, and buired, that he deſcended into hell: all theſe then beeing vnſpeakable, muſt needes be likewiſe irrepreſentable.
            
               
But if by the worde Croſſe, wee vnderſtand the wood, wheron the ſonne of God oftered himſelfe a ſacrifice to his Father, for the propitiation of our ſinnes: it is caſie then to be painted or figured, yet ſuch a figure can be but the portraite of thoſe inſtruments, wherewith the hangmen were furniſhed to torment our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt: if then thoſe inſtruments can haue no vertue in them, that which is but the image thereof muſt needes haue much leſſe. Nowe it is moſt apparent, that the wood had no vertue in it, but what was naturall, neither could the Iewes giue it any, for themſelues had none, but a readines to cuill dooing: why then it remaines, that if it can haue any at all, it muſt be by touching the body of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt. But how ſuch touching could confer any grace to the wood▪ we are not able to ſaye, becauſe (as hath beene declared) it is not expreſſed in the worde of God: why then we may likewiſe affirme, that thoſe lippes of Iudas which kiſſed Ieſus, the hands of them that layde holde on him, led, buffeted, nailed and crucified him, receiued likewiſe ſome vertue from him. Which being moſt

abſurde, much more is it then to ſay: that wood hauing no life, by a meere touch only, ſhould bee ſuſceptible of holineſſe and vertue: for if ſuch vertue had been giuen to the Croſſe of wood, becauſe Chriſt ſuffered thereon, like vertue would haue beene beſtowed on them, by whome he ſuffered. For they were thoſe, which ſhould performe what the defined Counſell of God had before determined. Actes 4. ver. 28. Nor are ſuch allegations worthy receiuing, in nothing ſome difference in diſſemblable inſtrumentes, to wit: that Iudas and the Iewes could be bad, and yet the Croſſe not. For euermore this is to be graunted, that if the touching drew vertue and ſanctity to it, cheefely becauſe it was as the Alter for ſacrifiſing the Sauiour of the worlde: it ſtandeth not with reaſon, that the Croſſe being a life-leſſe thing, could bee endued with vertue and ſanctity, ſooner then men liuing and moouing. Hence then eaſily may bee deriued, that if the Croſſe of wood could not receiue any vertue or holineſſe: the ſigne or Image therof (doubtleſſe) was farre leſſe capable of ſuch grace. And this is the reaſon, why Saint Paule attributed all the power

of the Croſſe, to the word, and not vnto the ſigne thereof, when he ſaid, 1. Corinth. 1. ver 18. The preaching of the Croſse, is the power of God, to vs which are ſaued. For God enſtructed his Church by his worde, and the ſignes and Sacraments inſtituted by him, which Sacraments could not bee Sacraments, except the worde of God were vnited with them: according as S. Auguſtin ſaith, The worde is conioyned to the Element, and then it is made a Sacrament.
            
            Seeing then the ſigne of the Croſſe, neuer was ordayned by God, and that neither the worde of God, nor the hiſtorie of the Paſſion & Croſſe of Chriſt, haue made any mention of ſuch vertue in the ſigne: wee ought not ſtretch our wit beyond the wiſdome of God: for to outſtep the limittes preſcribed by God, is to eate the fruite forbidden by God, and to tempt God by bold preſumption.
            Likewiſe it is infallible, that God neuer workes by ſole figures or carracters▪ for in things naturall, the vertue proceedeth from the eſſence and qualitie of themſelues: in things ſupernaturall, God helpes him-ſelfe by miraculous vertue, not faſtened to the

ſigne or figure▪ Nor do we read, that when Ieſus Chriſt wrought his miracles, he did them by Carracters, but that he ſpake, and impoſed his hands theron, and his Apoſtles did the ſame. When our Sauiour raiſed Lazarus: he cryed with a lowde voice. Come foorth Lazarus▪
                Iohn 11. ver. 45. When S. Peter healed the lame Cripple, he ſaid. In the name of Ieſus Chriſt of Nazareth, riſe vp and walke. Actes 3. ver. 6. When he raiſed Tabitha, he ſaid: Daughter, I ſay to thee ariſe▪
                but we read not that hee vſed any ſigne of carracter. We are not ignorant, that diuers of olde haue ſpoken of the ſigne of the Croſſe, and of the vertue thereof: but it was not with any ſuch intention, or to the end which at this day is pretended▪ for they vſed it as a publique profeſſion, and confeſſion of their Chriſtianitie, whether it were in priuate or publique. For becauſe the perſecutions were great and greeuous, the Chriſtians would not diſcouer themſelues but to their Chriſtian bretheren: & ſo they knew each other by that ſigne, and would to one another make the croſſe, which declared them to be of one and the ſame religion in Chriſtianitie.
            
               
On the other ſide, although the Pagans made a mocke of the croſſe of Chriſt, ſaying, it was fooliſhneſſe to beleeue and hope in one who was crucified & dead: yet notwithſtanding, the Chriſtians (knowing that all our glorie conſiſteth but in the Croſſe of Ieſus Chriſt, wherein is the great power and wiſedome of God, with aſſurance of health to all beleeuers) would ſhew that they were not aſhamed thereof, but made openly the ſigne, to witneſſe, that they were the croſſed Knights, that is to ſay, the diſciples and followers of Ieſus Chriſt. Heereto may bee attributed that which Saint Chriſoſtome ſpake, in his ſecond Homilie on the Epiſtle to the Romaines. If thou heareſt any one ſay: Woorſhippeſt thou one crucified? neuer bee aſhamed there of, nor eaſt downe thy lookes to the ground: but glorie and reioyce in thy ſelfe, anouching confeſsion thereof, with free lookes and bolde countenance.
            
            
               Saint Auguſtine in his eight Sermon on the Apoſtles words, Chap. 3. The wiſe of this worlde, ſaith he, aſſaile vs concerning the croſſe of Chriſt, and ſay: what vnderſtanding haue you, to worſhip a crucified God? we will

thus anſwere them. We haue no parte of your vnderſtanding, wee are not aſhamed of Chriſt Ieſus nor his Croſſe: we fixe it on our foreheads, which is the ſeate of ſhamfaſtneſſe, where doe we place it, euen there, to giue inſtance, that in the place where ſhame appeareth, it being there fixed, we ſhall never thereof be aſhamed.
            But the ſame Saint Auguſtine handleth another cauſe, in the booke hee made as a Catechiſme for the vnlearned, Chap. 20. namely, that the Chriſtians deſired in ſo dooing, to imitate the action of the Iſraelites, before theyr departure out of Aegipt: for as they ſigned their doore poſtes with the blood of the Paſchall Lambe, euen ſo the Chriſtians would bee ſigned on their foreheads; the wordes of Saint Auguſtine are theſe. The paſsion of Chriſt was moſt plainelie ſigured by this people, when they were commaunded to kill a ſheepe, and 
                     ••
                   eate it, and to marke with the bloud thereof the doores of their habitations. Now the Prophet manifeſtlye ſpeaketh of our LORDE IESVS CHRIST, that hee was ladde as a Sheepe to the ſlaughter▪ and thou oughteſt at this day to be ſigned

in the forehead, as the doore of thy hearts moſt noted dwelling, with the ſigne of his croſſe and paſſion. Which is confirmed by the ſaying of Lactantius, in his 4. booke of true wiſdome, at the end of the 26. chap. The forehead (ſaith he) is the doore of a mans vnderſtanding, and the ouerthwart ariſing there of the blood, hath ſome ſignification of the Croſſe. How euer it be, this was a matter brought in by imitation and example of the Iewes, and not by commaundement: neuer then ſhould any foundation be made on mens examples, but on generall rules drawne from the commandement of God. The Jſraelites had commaundement from God, to do what they did vpon their dwellings: but the Chriſtians were neuer commaunded to ſigne themſelues on the forehead. In like manner, it hath proceeded from a moſt pernitious errour, firſt borne by ſimplicitie, encreaſed afterwarde by ignorance, and at this preſent debated by ſelfe-wilde obftinacie: to attribute to the Croſſe of wood, what onely is proper to him crucified thereon. In breefe, ſeeing God onely is the authour of all goodneſſe, to him onely ought be aſcribed all the good

and welfare that can be recoiued: for albeic he conferreth his giftes and graces in this manner, and by ſuch inſtruments as are beſt liking to him▪ yet is it but our dutie, to ſeeke after his will in his inſtitution, and not elſe where: otherwiſe, it is a fordging of a God and a religion to our ſelues, and that by very bolde preſumption.
            Now it cannot bee denyed, but many meruailous things haue beene doone vnder the name and ſigne of the Croſſe: although it be likewiſe as certaine, that the greater parte of them left to bee read, hath beene licentiouſlie maintayned and inuented. For who will not count this as a fable, when hee reades, that a Maiden eating a Lettice, and not making the ſigne of the Croſſe thereon, ſwallowed downe a deuill? That a conuerted brother, drinking a Cup of Wine, and not vſing the ſaid ſigne of the Croſſe, was likewiſe poſſeſſed with a Deuill? With infinite other ſuch reportes.
            Saint Paul telleth vs▪ 
               That meates are ſanctified to vs by the worde of God and prayer. 1. Tim▪ 4. ver. 5. That is to ſay, we may vſe them with a good conſcience, when we

receiue them with prayer and thankes giuing, not ſpeaking of the ſigne of the creſſe, or any elſe beſide; but howſoeuer it be, we muſt ſtill come to this pointe, if that which is doone, hath approbation and warrant from God or no. For God hath permitted diuers times, himſelfe to bee feigned in things, which yet he gaue no warrant to: as infinite effects long ſince happened by the Oracles, which are ſo aunciently recorded of. But when ſuch things happen, ſaith Moyſes, Deut. 13. ver. 3. (ſpeaking of the prodigious effects of the falſe Prophets) the Lord your God prooueth you, to knowe whether yee loue the Lord your God, with all your heart, and with all your ſoule. For it ſuffiſeth not to ſay, ſuch things ſhall happen: but it muſt be knowen, whether God be the Authour of them, and whether they tend to the ſaluation of men, and glorie of God or no. For if it be any thing, how little ſoeuer, directlie or indirectlie, abating the glorie due onelie to God: the rule is giuen vs, that we muſt flie all things which haue appearaunce of euill. Wee muſt likewiſe beware of Sathans ſleights, who dooth like to them (as one ſaith) which teache the way

onward, by going backward. For he durſt neuer bee ſo bolde, to thruſt himſelfe into the Chriſtian Church, by the knowledge of Ieſus Chriſt crucified onely: but publiſhing the praiſes of the Croſſe, hee hath made woode, ſtones, and paintings companions with Chriſt Ieſus, defacing quite the ſpirituall ſeruice of God, introducing carnall faſhions, ſauouring rather of Paganiſme then Chriſtianitie. Seeing therefore all power, vertue and dominion, appertaines onely to him that ſits vpon the throne, we ought to ſee him not injuried in the leaſt part of his right: but likewiſe, if it may be, to engraue in mens harts, a more deepe conſideration of the death and paſſion of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
            At the beginning of the Goſpels preaching, GOD ſometimes would haue it knowne by extraordinarie meanes: wherfore, if then it pleaſed him to expreſſe his goodneſſe in ſuch ſorte to his choſen, it ought to bee acknowledged, and his gracious ſupport to bee thankefully remembred.
            But if it hath pleaſed him, that ſuch as yet ſee ſlenderlie, ſhall become more blinde, or

               indeed altogether ſtarke blinde: it ought to be reckoned as his iudgement, and ſo to bee obſerued for a trueth, for trueth is not trueth, except it bee ſo quite throughout. And to ſpeake with Nazianzen. If a precious ſtone looſe his value, by reaſon of ſome crack or vnſightlie flawe: it is not to be doubted, but that the puritie of Chriſtian doctrine, will be much impaired by the mingling or leauen of erronious teaching, attributing to the ſigne or figure, the vertue of him, who would haue his Croſſe fixed in our bearts, and not tyed to our habits, or planted either in fieldes or Citties.
            Theſe matters firſt heere noted, haue vrged vs to reſolue ſuch allegations, as are contayned in the firſt placard, the Title whereof is: Of the vertue of the Croſſe. The intent whereof is▪ to ſhew that the materiall ſigne of the Croſſe, hath many great and goodly vertues: where contrarywiſe, all true Chriſtians doo maintayne, that all vertue and power ought to bee attributed to him crucified thereon▪ This propoſition is vnderpropped with a place out of Ezechsel the 9. v. 4. and by ſome other auncient paſſages: but when the weakeneſſe

of ſuch a building ſhall be diſcouered, it wil preſently appeare howe eaſie it is to ouerthrow what ſoeuer is founded thereon.
            Now, to iudge rightly on this place, wee cannot doo beter then to ſet downe the very words of the Prophet, to the end we may thereby be ledde to the true ſence. In our language we deliuer it thus, word for word with the Hebrew text. Goe through the middeſt of the Cittie, euen through the middeſt of Ieruſalem, and ſet a marke vpon the fore-heads of them that mourne and ſigh, for all the abhominations that be done in the middeſt thereof.
            
            In this ſence, and in the ſelfe ſame words, hath the Greeke tranſlation yeelded them: as likewiſe S. Hierome noteth, that the ſeuentie Enterpreters, and Aquila, and Symmachus haue done the ſelfe ſame. For as Thau in Hebrewe ſignifieth a marke or ſigne, and is taken from the word Thauah, that is to ſay, to ſignifie or deſigne: ſo true it is, that Theodotion and the vulgar enterpretation, haue held the word Thau, taking it materially, as it is ſpoken in the Schooles; yet hereon many haue played at their pleaſure. For as the ſame Saint Hierome writeth:

               Some haue ſaide, that by the letter Thau, which is the laſt of the Hebrew Alphabet, is ſignified ſuch as haue perfect knowledge. Others ſay, that by the ſame letter, the law is vnderſtood, which in Hebrew is called Thorah, of which word the firſt letter is Thau, And finally, the ſame Saint Hiereme, leauing the Carracter vſed by the Propher, ſearched the Samaritaine Carracters, and ſaith, that Thau among the Samaritaines, hath the reſemblance of a croſſe, but yet he ſets not down at all the figure of this Thau of the Samaritaines. Wherefore, he perceiuing that this ſaying of his wold be further ſerched into, addes imediately aftewards an other expoſitiō to wit: As the letter Thau is the laſt in the Alphabet, ſuen ſo sherby is repreſented thoſe good people, beeing the remnant of the multitude of the euilliuers. But admit the letter Thau▪
                to be figured after the Hebrew Carracter, or the Samaritaine Carracter by one onely figure: yet is it eaſie to be ſeene, that it hath a verie ſlender reſemblance to an entire croſſe.
            For the Hebrew Carracter is made thus, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                and the Samaritaine after this manner, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                which is not the true figure of a croſſe,

for it wantes that part aboue, where the writing was faſtened, or title of the croſſe, as Lypſius hath well noted, in the tenth Chapter of his firſt booke of the croſſe.
            
               That if the worde Thau had beene written with his Conſonantes and one vowell, as at this day it is read in the Hebre we text, in this manner, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                then it would haue much leſſe reſemblance. But after the word, let vs now come to the ſence.
            
            Firſt of all, it appeareth by that which is recited in the eight & ninth chapters of Ezechiell, that all there ſpoken of, was repreſented in a mentall viſion, ſo that the things were not really done indeed, In the ſecond place, it is a matter moſt euidēt, that this Prophet was properly and particularly prepared or furniſhed, againſt the Cittie of Jeruſalem, and the execution therof to be diſcerned, when the Babylonians had taken and raſed the Citie of Ieruſalem, leading ſome remainder of the people into captiuitie.
            It is then beyonde reaſon, that this which was ſpoken for a certaine time and place, and for certaine perſons:

ſhould be turned and aſſigned elſe where, which neuer was the intention of the ſpirit of God, that then ſpake by the mouth of Ezechiell. Moreouer it is no where to bee found, that euer the Iewes were marked with any marke in the fore-head whatſouer, and much leſſe by the croſſe, which was a thing odious and ignominious then among all nations of the world: that death beeing curſed amongſt the Iewes, following what is written in Deuter. 21. verſe 23. That he was accurſed, who ſhould bee hanged on a treee,
            
            Now then, the true ſence of this paſſage in Ezechiell, is, that God declared, howe when this great iudgement ſhould be exerciſed on the cittie of Ieruſalem, they onely were to bee exempted, who ſhould bee marked by the ſpirit of God. After this manner is vnderſtoode what is read in the 12. of Exodus, where the deſtroying Angel paſſed through the middeſt of Egypt, and ſlewe all the firſt borne of the Egyptians: but hee commaunded the Iſraelites to put the blood of the vnblemiſhed Lambe for the Paſſeouer, on the poſts of their habitations, to the end whē the Angel ſhould paſſe

by, hee might ſee the marke of the blood, and ſo paſſe on without offending the Iſraelites. Likewiſe in the 7. of the Apocalips, is mention made of thoſe that were marked, who elſewhere are called the elect of God, or thoſe whom the Lord knowes and graunts to be his, becauſe hee hath ſigned them with his ſeale, and, as the ſcripture ſaith, Written their names in the booke of life. For as ſaith S, Paul, 2. Cor. 1. verſe 21. 22▪ 
               Jt is he that hath annoynted vs, ſealed vs, and hath giuen the earneſt of his holyſpirit in our hearts.
            
            God then declared to Ezechiell, that Jeruſalem ſhould be deſtroyed by the Babylonians: but yet notwithſtanding, that hee would ſpare ſome ſmall number of them which feared him, and mourned for the iniquities of their fellow Cittizens. In contrarie ſence is that ſpoken in the Apocalips, 16. verſe 2. The Angell powred foorth his vyall, and there f
                     •
                  liagreeuous and noyſome ſoare vppon the mer, which had the marke of the beaſt, as much to ſay, as the ſeruants of Antechriſte. Such in the liuely ſence of this place, as it is moſt manifeſt to them who read it with iudgement, and without partialitie:

yet is it badly wreſted, and ſo phiſtically applied by theſe fellowes, who would hereon build the ſigne of the croſſe, whereof the Prophet neuer thought in all the paſſage.
            The ſecond foundation is a gathering of places from ſome of olde times, confuſedly recited, and (for the moſt part) chaunged and altered, as it may appeare by that allcaged of Saint Athanaſius, for Saint Athanaſius magnifying the vertue of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, ſaid. Jt appeared heerem, That although the Pagans mocked at his death and paſſion: yet the ſigne of the croſſe; and inuocation on the name of Chriſt, ſhould chaſe away deuils, and make their diuinations to ceaſe. But that which the placarde auoucheth, neuer was ſpoken by Saint Athanaſus, to wit, that God made great account of this Signe, and he cauſed it to be forctold by the Prophet Ezechiell. Notwithſtanding we denie not, that to authorize the preaching of the Goſpell, reiected as then by the Pagans, who ſtretched then almoſt through the world: that God did many miracles by the name of Chirſt Ieſus crucified. And that is it which the ſame Athanaſius declareth in the beginning of his booke againſt

Idols. After the comming of the Croſſe, all adoration to Images was to be taken away, and by that marke, all deuilliſh deceites ſhould be shaſed away, and the only Chriſt worſhipped and his Father knowns, and thoſe which blaſphemed him, dayly eonfounded. By which woordes is witneſſed the vertue of Chriſt, acknowledged in his croſſe, and not any naked ſigne: it is then Sophiſtrie to take ſeperately, that which was ſpoken ioyntlytogither. The ſecond teſtimonie is of Epipbanius, who ſpeaking of one Joſeph of Tiberias, ſaith, he was made a Chriſtian in the time of Conſtantine, vncharmed from the furnace and chopping of chalke, to build a Chriſtian temple in the Cittie of Tiberias. Now we muſt not ſo ſlightly part from this teſtimonie, becauſe the placarde intends to proue hereby, and in this example of Joſeph: that the Chriſtians enemies haue themſelues ſubmitted to the ſigne of the croſſe. As for this Ioſeph of whome hee ſpeaketh, he was not an enemie to the chriſtians, becauſe he was a Chriſtian, and builded a temple vnto Chriſt: now then it is very likely, that whatſoeuer was done here in▪ muſt needs be for the reaſō before named, to wit, if the charme were diſcharged by the

power of Chriſt Ieſus, it was then through inuocation vpon his mightie name, and not by any ſillie naked ſigne▪ If it happened by bad meanes, one charme to be expelled by a counter charme, as one venom or poyſon is expulſed by another, then God gaue efficacie to error, to the end ſuch as would bee deceiued ſo, might be, through their owne wilfulneſſe.
            The third is of Saint Gregorie, in the third booke of his Dialogues, and ſeuenth Chapter, concerning a Iewe, who beeing one night in the temple of Apollo (where faith hee, many deuils held their counſell) hee made but the ſigne of the croſſe, and ſo was warranted from any harme. Hee that in one word would vnwinde himſelfe out of this place, will ſay that ſuch Dialogues are but filled with verie friuolous toyes. But we e muſt bring in a more ſound anſwere, which is, as hath been lately ſaid, that God did giue the ſtrength of errour to Sathan, whereby to deceiue men, and Sathan ſeeing himſelfe driuen from his Forte by Ieſus Chriſt: erected another Forte againſt the ſame Ieſus Chriſt, employing to ſuch purpoſe the ſimplicitie of Chriſtians in thoſe

times, whoſe eyes he beganne in ſuch ſort to hood-winke, that they might no more clearly ſee into the pure ſeruice of God.
            Then afterward, when Pagan-idolatrie began to decline day by day, by the bright ſplendoure of true chriſtian doctrine, then the deuill ſteps in with idolatrie, as greate or more daungerous in the midſt of Chriſtianitie: ſo that the auncient Idols names were changed, but the things themſelues ſtill continued, and in flying before from the croſſe, hee hath done like them that draw backe, to get more ground. For if euer he inuented a ſtrange kind of idolatry, it was this which he brought in about the croſſe. Sathan finding an inſtrument in Chriſts owne houſe, wherewith to chaſe the ſame Chriſt out of it, if it were poſſible for him.
            The fourth is of Nazeanzen, who reciteth that Julian the Apoſta
                     •
                  a figured himſelfe with the croſſe, when he ſaw himſelfe loſt in an obſcure place by euill ſpirits, whereto one might anſwere as before: but I heare one tel me, that the example of ſuch a miſerable wretch, ought not be alleaged for eſtabliſhing any doctrin in the church,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
for this were, as if one wold proue Chriſt to be the ſon of the liuing God, & alleage the words ſpokē by the deuil, ſaying, Thou art Chriſt the ſon of the liuing God, Math. 8. verſe 29. Mark. 5. verſe 7▪ To whō our Lord impoſed ſilence, not willing to haue him a Preacher of truth, who was the very father of lies. In like manner, they who by this deed of Julian the Apoſtata, wold authorize the ſigne of the croſſe, miſtak thēſelues too much, & ought to know, that ſuch an example is no way allowable. As likewiſe is not their imitatiō, who not beleeuing in God, nor in the bleſſed Trinitie, place before theſe names of God & the trinitie, the Angels & Prophets: the beginning of the goſpel according to S. Iohn, & make mightie ſignes of the croſſe, for furthering their enchantmēts. Herehence it appeareth, ſeeing ſuch wicked enchanters & charmes, ſerue their own turn with euil means, which ſimply are things no waies receiueable: hereby we may wel ſet down this cōcluſion. Since Julian the Apoſtaſta and ſuch like, made the ſigue of the croſſe, & therby was ſuccored, as is ſaid: it is apparant, that this proceeded not of god, but only came frō Sathan, who

would more & more fold him into ſuch deceits, as euē ſo appointed by the iuſt iudgement of god. For this caſe hapning extraordinarily, ſerued ſo much the more for confoūding the abhominable wretch, as wel in his cōſciēce, as before mē, & god himſelf.
            
               The fift is of S. Auguſtine, in his booke of 85▪ queſtions, queſtion 79. But this teſtimonie is falſly alleaged, for it is not ſo read there, as the placard ſets it downe: but rather in confirmation of that we haue deliuered in the two laſt witneſſes, yea, & that expreſly: the words are theſe. Jf he wicked at any time obtaine ſomewhat, by innocation on the higheſt God, they begit for their bad deſires: and ſo this is not grace to them, but the vengeance of God, for the Apoſtle ſaid not in vaine, That God had giuen ouer ſuch people to their owne hearts deſires. For that which our Lord ſaid, Sathan cannot caſt out Sathan, is not to bee eſteemed falſe, when any one hath caſt out Sathan, in vſing the names of ſome inferiour powers: but it ſhould bee vnderſtoode, that this was ſaid to this ende, albeit Sathan ſpare the bodie or the corporallſence, he ſpares them but with intent to rule ouer the will, and with greater

glorie to triumph! by the error of impietie.
            Theſe are the words of Saint Auguſtine, which properly appertaine to the prodigious effects, many times happening about the croſſe▪ For Sathan ſlies from the body, to the ende hee may get entrance into the ſoule, & cares not for troubling the corporal ſence, becauſe he would raigne altogither in the will, or rather in the deſire, as faith the ſame S. Anguſtine. The ſixt is out of the firſt booke of S. Auguſtines confeſsions, Chap. 11. yet impertmently alleaged. For there S. Auguſtine declares nothing elſe, but that beeing as yet in his mothers wombe, he was marked with the marke of the croſſe of Chriſt Ieſus, and ſeaſoned with his ſalt. That is to ſay, that beeing the ſonne of a good chriſtian woman, he was deſigned to be a Chriſtian, & to receiue the outward ſigne therof: agreeing with Saint Paul, 2. Cor. 7, verſe 14. That the children of the faithful are ſanctified, and the alliance with God is made to them and their poſteritie after them.
            
            The ſeuenth is out of the booke called The viſitation of the ſicke: whereto one anſweres, that that booke is falſely attributed

to S. Auguſtine, as it hath verie well beene noted of long time by the learnedſt Diuines, and not long ſince by the doctors of Louaine in the impreſsion of S. Auguſtines workes, printed by Plantin at Antwerp, the yere 1576. with priuiledge from the Emperor, the kings of France & Spaine.
            
            The eight is out of 130. Sermon de tempore. But that Sermon is likewiſe none of Saint Auguſtines: but forged by ſome moderne writer, as the ſame Doctors of Louaine haue alſo well noted in the ſelf-ſame impreſsion. Yet notwithſtanding, in that ſermon is no ſpeech vſed of the ſigne of the croſſe: but there is ſaid, that the croſſe ſheweth the combat of Chriſt and the reſurectiō declareth the triumph of him which we in like maner auouch and maintaine.
            
               The ninth is out of the 12. booke againſt Fauſtus the Manichean, Chap. 30▪ which place ſerues to confirme what wee haue alleadged, in expoſition of the words in Ezechiels 9. chapter. For Saint Auguſtine makes an Antitheſis of what was done vnder the law, and what hath happened vnder the Goſpell, ſpeaking thus. As the doores and ports of the Iſraclites dwellings,

were marked with the bloud of the Paſchal-Lambe, to the end their perdition might bee auoyded: ſo the people ſince are marked in the forehead with the ſigne of Chriſts paſsion, to the ſame intent: Which may as well be vnderſtood of the bloudſhed, and all the ſufferings endured by our Lord Jeſus: yea, better and much rather, then of the bare ſigne of the croſſe.
            The tenth is out of the booke entituled, the difference betweene the Church & the Sinagogue, which alleadgeth the ſame place of Ezechiels 9. chapter before ſpoken of. That booke is none of Saint Auguſtines, neither carrieth teſtimonie of any good authour, but rather it ſeemes the compiler thereof, was ſome Courtier or Ciuillian, ſo ſay the doctors of Louaine in the ſame impreſſion.
            The eleuenth is drawne from the nineteenth Sermon of the Saints: but that Sermon is not (as likewiſe theſe others) Saint Auguſtines, as appeares by the ſame Louaine Doctors, the 9. Tom, pag 700▪ 2. C. The twelfth is out of the 22. of the citie of God, chap. 8. where it is ſaid. A certain Ladie of Carthage, was healed of a cankre in her

breſt, hauing bin warned before in her ſleep, to be marked with the ſign of the croſse, by the firſt baptiſd woman which ſhould come before her▪
                But in the ſame place it is likewiſe ſaide: that ſhe before prepared her ſelfe for god onely, in deuoute prayer to him: to whom ſhee attributed her healing, & not vnto the ſigne the woman had made. For it appeareth by the demaund made, how ſhee was cured, and the aunſwere is returned by the heathen Phiſition in theſe tearmes. What a great matter hath Chriſt done, in healing a cankre, when he could raiſe vp Lazarus, who had lien dead foure daies before? It is then to God onely, and not to the ſigne of the croſſe, that this healing is to be reputed.
            The thirteenth is out of the expoſition of 36. Pſalme, in theſe words. In olde time offendours were crucified, now no more is crucified: the croſse was in honour, and to his ende, it was at his end, inreſpect of his puniſhment, but now it remaineth with him in glory. The aunſwere is, that hee ſpeakes not of the ſigne of the croſſe, but ſhewes how Princes and Monarches, hauing embraced Chriſt crucified, did him honor, in ſubmitting to him their ſeepters & crowns, which

they had eſpecially prepared, in honour of his croſſe and paſsion, wherof hereafter more ſhall be ſpoken.
            The foureteenth is taken from the third treatiſe on S. Iohn, in theſe words. If we be Chriſtians, wee will haue ſome feeling of Ieſus Chriſt. We will beare in our foreheads the marke of him, whereof wee will not bluſh a iote, if we beare it likewiſe in our hearts: the marke of him is the humilitie of him. With this teſtimonie wee wil ioyne, becauſe of the breuitie, al the other following, which are about ten in number, and becauſe they very necrely iumpe all with this heere ſpoken, that chriſtians ſigned themſelues on the forcheads, we will then acknowledge, that in times paſt, this cuſtome of ſigneing on the forchead hath bin brought in. By whom, or how, it matters not, for in things doubtful, as this is, it is beſt to followe the rule of Saint Athanaſius. If wee bee reſolued (ſaith hee) let vs make our recourſe to the Saints, that is, to the Apoſtles writings, who had more exact knowledge of Euangelicall matters, then we can haue. Beſide, it is certain, that neither Ieſus Chriſt, nor his Apoſtles, haue made any mention at al therof:

if it had beene a thing, either neceſſarie or expedient, there is no doubt but they would haue done it. Wherefore wee will ſay with S. Hierome: That it is nothing elſe but prating, when the woord of God marcheth not before vs. Nor need we demaund, who hath done or ſaid this, heere or there: but what hath Chriſt Ieſus inſtituted, what hath his Apoſtles ſaide and doone? nor ought we ſo much ſeeke what is done, as what is to be done. Againe, it is to be noted, that our elders ſpeaking of the death and paſſion of our redeemer, haue moſt ſpoken of his Croſſe, and of the ſigne therof together, neuer meaning what at this day is vnderſtood by the woord ſigne: but they likewiſe called it the Standard or Enſigne of the great King and Captaine, who ouercame the deuill and hell, in bringing thence the ſpoiles, drinking of the torrent by the way, and lifting vp his head, as is ſaid in the 110. Pſalme. So did Fortunatus take it in his Himne beginning thus.
            
               Pange lingua glorioſi
               Praelium certaminis,
               Et ſuper Crucis trophaeum,
               Dic triumphum nobilem.
               
                  
That is to ſay.
               Tongue declare the combate of a glorious fight,
               And tell the noble tryumphes on the Croſſe.
               And Theodulphus:
               
               Vexilla Regis prodeunt,
               Fulget Crucis miſterium.
               That is.
               The Standards of the King march foorth,
               Shining with the miſteries of the Croſſe.
            
            So that the Croſſe then vſed, was made in forme of a Standard or Banner. By the ſigne then, thoſe reuerend predeceſſours of ours, vnderſtood the Croſſe and paſſion it ſelfe: but ſince, ignoraunce hath deuiſed, that that ſhould be ſeperate, which ought to bee conioyned, ſetting the paſſion of Chriſt apart, and the ſigne of the Croſſe apart, making ſmall account of the one, ſpeaking the litle of the paſſion, but enough of the ſigne: witneſſe the paſſion, death and woundes of Chriſt, which are dayly and hourely in the mouthes of blaſphemers, who thinke neuertheleſſe to be warranted from all euill, when they doe but make the ſigne of the Croſſe.
            
               
Thus hath bin declared, what our elders vnderſtood by the ſigne of the Croſſe, to wit: the exteriour teſtimony of the chriſtian faith: which euidently appeared in them, who were conuerted from dumbe Idols, to true ſeruice of the liuing God. This may be diſcerned more clearely, by the ſaiing of S. Cirill, anſwerering the obiections of the Emperour Iulian, ſirnamed the Apoſtata, in his ſixt booke. For Iulian magnifying the antiquity of the Pagane religion, ſaid, that the Oracles were giuen by Jupiter, as the eſcutchions or bucklers fell from heauen, and Jupiters ſaddle, which was giuen or ſent to Numa: and made this compariſon, that the Pagans kept the Armour which great Iupiter the Father of Mars had giuen them as a warranted gaege, that he would alwaies haue a care of the Citty of Roome. All this notwithſtanding the Chriſtians deſiſted from honouring and worſhipping theſe thinges: whereupon Iulian ſaid, that they honoured the wood of the Croſſe, and painted the Croſſe on their foreheades, and before their houſes. Whereto Cirill anſwered thus.
            Albeit the Lord and Sauiour of all, was not

in ſhewe, yet equall in all with his father, and ſeated on the throne of his diuinitie: neuertheleſſe he was abaſed, and tooke on himſelfe the ſhape of a ſeruant, & deſpiſing allignomie, bare the croſſe, to aboliſh the power of corruption, and one onely dyed for all, to the end, that being raiſed againe from the dead, he might deliuer all mankinde from the ſnares of death, deſtroye the tyrannie of ſinne ruling in vs, appeaſe the lawe, which exerciſed his tyrannie in our members, making vs ſpirituall woorſhippers, killing in vs the feelings of the fleſhe: that they might be made the ſonnes of God, which beleeued in him, and were ſanctified by his ſpirit, ſo to deſpoile Sathan of his tyrannie, the author of euils, the mort all beast, & thoſe wicked powers, which our calumniator called the Prince of nations and Gods defenders. The wholſome wood made vs remember all theſe things, and aduiſed vs to thinke, that as S. Paule ſaith: Euen as one is dead for all, ſo ought they to knowe, that the liuing could liue no more by them ſelues, but by him who dyed and roſe againe. Which anſwer ſhewes, that the Chriſtians painted the croſſe, not as attributing any vertue to the viſible ſigne: but to let the Pagans ſee, how they (hauing
               
               forſaken theyr Idolatries, wherewith they hadbin before enchaunted) imbraced Ieſus Chriſt, of whome, the croſſe which they placed before their houſes, was the true marke and publique enſigne.
            
            And the ſame Cyrill expoundeth himſelfe, in his third booke of adoration made in ſpirit and trueth, manifeſting the vnbelecuers by this marke, that they would neuer receiue the croſſe, that is to ſaye, acknowledge Ieſus Chriſt. They (ſaith he) that haue no will to receiue the Croſſe, are vanquiſhed and ouercome by the deuill, and they are ſuch as Chriſt ſpake to ſaying: Verily, verily J ſay vnto you, if you will not beleeue that I am he, you ſhall dye in your ſinnes. So that to receiue the Croſſe, is nothing elſe, but to beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt. For ſo likewiſe Saint Cyril, ſpeaking of the comming of Chriſt, ſhewes it by theſe wordes, the comming of the Croſſe: vnderſtanding by the word Croſſe, all that which the ſonne of God did and ſuffered in the worlde for our ſaluation.
            Theſe things thus breefely touched, may ſuffice to anſwer the allegations contained in the firſt placard. Come we now

to the ſecond, which is entituled: How the Croſſe ought to be honoured: which likewiſe at this preſent wee muſt conſider on.
         
         
            
            How the Croſſe ought to be honoured.
            
            
               FIrſt of al, it is a matter moſt manifeſt, that the puniſhment of the Croſſe, was not onely one of the cruelleſt: but likewiſe the moſt ignominious of all them which was practiſed by any nation. For it was called a death moſt infamous and accurſed, and for this reaſon, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt was put to the Croſſe, that he being made accurſed, we might bee deliuered from the curſſe of the law. Yet for all this, it was not without great reaſon, that himſelfe, ſpeaking of this kinde of death, calleth it his exaltation. Iohn 8. verſe 28. and 12. ver. 32. for his Croſſe is the great victory, the trophee and glory which hee obtained againſt Sathan, & againſt death.
            
               
See now, why we can neuer ſufficiently honor the croſſe, death and paſſion of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt. For it is the meanes, whereby the Sonne of God drawes all men to him, as himſelfe ſaith in Saint Iohn 12. verſe 32. But the manner how to honor it, ought likwiſe to be learned from our Lord and maiſter himſelfe.
            He plainly expreſſed it, when he taught vs, that whoſoeuer would be his diſciple, ought to take vp his croſse & follow him: for by this means being conformed to his ſufferings, we ſhall likewiſe be ſemblable to his glorie. When he inſtituted his holye Supper, ſaying: Doe theſe things in remembrance of me, how often ſo euer you doo them, you ſhall ſhew the death of the Lorde, euen vntill his comming. This S. Paule ſawe, when hee writ to Timothe, his 2. Epiſtle. Chapter 2. ver. 8. 12. Remember that Ieſus Chriſt was raiſed from the dead: And that if wee dye with him, we ſhall liue with him, if we ſuffer with him, we ſhall reigne with him. So that the Sonne of God is highly honored, whē he is acknowledged to be the ſole Sauiour and redeemer of men loſt in Adam, and who beeing ſinners, and deſtitute of the

glory of God, are reconciled in him, and reeſtabliſhed in farre greater glory, then euer they had or could haue before. But on the contrary part, the great glory of Gods elect ſhineth, in this, that as S. Iohn ſayth, 3. ver. 16. So God loued vs, that he gaue his onely Sonne for vs, to the end, that whoſoeuer beleeued in him▪ ſhould not periſh, but haue euerlaſting life. And the ſame S. Iohn ſaith, in his firſt Epiſtle 3. ver. 1. Beholde this loue hath the Father beſtowed on vs, that we are called the Sonnes of God.
            
            So that each of vs may ſay this of himſelfe, the life which I haue at this preſent, is by the faith I haue in the Sonne of God, that he hath loued me, and gaue himſelfe for me: adding withall, that by the ſufferings which my Lord Ieſus Chriſt hath endured, all miſery and afflictions which can happen to mee, are ſanctified. For whereas in their owne nature, they were puniſhments: by the death of Ieſus Chriſt, they are become viſitations and teſtimonies of Gods fauour, that hee looueth and enſtructeth ſuch as he correcteth. We likewiſe honour the Croſſe in this, that we are crucified to the world, and the world to
               
               vs, ſo that dying with Chriſt Ieſus, we are rayſed vp againe with him, ſaith S. Paule, Rom. 6. ver. 8. For he hath giuen vs an example to follow his ſteps, that being dead to ſin▪ we might liue againe to righteouſnes, being healed by his wounds, ſaith S. Peter, 1. Pet. 2. v. 21 & 24. And again. The grace of God, that bringeth ſaluation vnto all men hath appeared. And teacheth vs, that we ſhould deny all vngodlynes and worldly luſtes: and that we ſhould liue ſoberly and righteouſly, and Godly in this preſent world. Looking for the bleſsed hope, and appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt▪ Titus 2. ver. 11. 12. 13.
            Beholde heere the true manner, how to honor the croſſe and death of Ieſus Chriſt, as the Apoſtles S. Peter, S. Iohn, and S. Paule hath raught vs in their writinges, & which themſelues practiſed, when they were in this world, & ſuch hath bin the reuerence, which the Primatiue Church made to the croſſe. For thoſe ſigns which were made at the beginning, were nothing but with the moouing of the hand, applyed to the forehead, or caſt vp into the ayre, hauing no ſubſiſtance in bodily matter of wood,

ſtone▪ ſiluer, golde or other ſuch like.
            The firſt that made any of ſome matter▪ was Conſtantine, who hauing obtained a notable victory againſt Maxentius, made his Enſigne in forme of the croſſe▪ enriched with golde and precious ſtones. Yet was it not after the faſhion of the Croſſe obſerued now-adaies, for the Hiſtorians haue thus deſcribed it.
            
            At the end of a high ſtaffe, the Greeke letter P, was repreſented▪ & vnder it the letter X, which are the two firſt letters of chriſtes name in Greeke. Soone after, a ſayle was hanged ouerth wart this ſtaffe, without

any figure in the ſaile, and was in all reſpects as is here ſet downe.
            And becauſe hee was newely exalted to the imperiall dignitie, by the conſent of his warriours, who preferred him after the declining of Diocleſian his predeceſſour: hee conſidered, that the meanes to maintaine him in this dignitie, againſt all competitours and contenders, was to make himſelfe a friend: with thoſe Chriſtians which Diocleſian had perſecuted euen to his vttermoſt.
            And for this cauſe hee made the croſſe to be erected, before himſelfe became a Chriſtian: for hee was not Baptiſed, till the ſeuenth yeere of his Empire, and the victory before named, hapned in the firſt yeere. Now becauſe the Chriſtian hiſtorians ſpeake of an apparition of the Croſſe in the ayre, with theſe words. Thou ſhalt ouer come by this: it is ſo, that Zoſimus a Pagane hiſtorian, who liued at that time there, and was a moſt exact ſearcher after the deedes of Conſtantine, hath made no mention at all thereof. Alſo it appeareth, that the Eccleſiaſtical hiſtories ſpeake diuerſly thereof. For Euſebius ſaith, that this

viſiō chanced at noone time of the day: & Sozomenus writes, that it appeared in the night to Conſtantine ſleeping. Neuertheleſſe, God might permit this miracle, as a helpe to the conuerſion of this Prince, beings as then a Pagane, and that it might ſerue afterwardes for the further auauncement of Chriſtes glory, whatſoeuer affection himſelfe ſhould beare therto: for ſome Authors haue noted great defectes and faultes in him. He then made the enſignes and Armes of his ſouldiers to bee marked with the Croſſe, he cauſed it to be ſet vp in publique places: as is to be read, that hee made to bee erected his owne ſtatue in braſſe at Roome, holding a Croſſe of the ſame mettal in his hand. Notwithſtanding, he neuer appointed it in any Temple, but in a publique place, for then the Romaine Temples had as yet the Paganes Idols in them.
            But afterward, when it was ſaid, that the true Croſſe indeed was found by Helena, mother to Conſtantine: then a great number of Croſſes were erected▪ Nor ſhall we need in this ſearch to enter ſo far, whether this were a contriued inuention, or a

truth, albeit Volaterranus, and Fryer O
                     •
                  uphrius Panuinus of the Auguſtines order, in his notes vpon Platina, in the life of Pope Euſebius, 32. giues ſufficiently to vnderſtand, that this was an vncertaine matter, conſidering the diuerſity found in Authours, as touching the time of this inuention.
            For if we ſhall credite ſome hiſtorians, Helena was yet at that time an Infidell, and Conſtantine himſelfe not become a firme Chriſtian, not hauing then done any thing in Siria. And ſome ſay, that it was not found in the time of great Conſtantine, but in his Sonne Conſtantines time: heereto may we adde Euſebius, who writ the life of Conſtantine, and ſpeakes of all which Helena did in Ieruſalem: yet ſpeakes not one word of this inuention of the Croſſe. Neyther doth Saint Ambroſe agree heerein with other writers, for hee faith, this Croſſe was knowen by the tytle thereon: and others ſay, that it was by miraculous healing of a woman, which the very touching of this Croſſe brought to perfect health againe. But howſoever it was▪ there is no man (I thinke) but will

holde for fabulous, when hee reades, that Adam being ſicke, ſent his Sonne Seth to the gate of Paradiſe, to haue ſome of the oyle of mercy, wherewith hee might be annoynted and healed: and how the Angell gaue him a bough of the tree, whereof Adam had before eaten the fruite, and ſo tranſgreſſed Gods commaundement. But being returned, he found his Father dead, and therefore planted this bough on Adams graue, which afterward grew to a goodly tree▪ ſo that when Salomon cauſed the temple to be built, he made the tree to be cut downe, but it could neuer be made to ſerue to any vſe, wherefore it was reiected, and made a Bridge of, ouer a certaine Lake. When the Queene of Saba came to ſee Salomon: ſhee would not goe ouer the Bridge, became ſhee had been before aduertiſed in a viſion, that on that wood ſhould one bee hanged, who ſhould deſtroy the Kingdome of the Iewes.
            Which when Salomon heard of, hee cauſed it to be buried very deepe in the earth, in the place where a Poole was afterwarde made, which Poole

had the vertue of healing ſickeneſſe, by reaſon of the wood, for it came foorth of the earth, and floated aboue vpon the water, at the houre when Ieſus Chriſt, was to bee crucified, and therefore the Iewes made the croſſe thereof.
            Beholde what hath beene inuented and preached to poore people: onely to make the croſſe bee honoured▪ as it is to be read in the 21. Sermon, of the booke called, The Sermons of the Diſciple.
            But let ſuch conſider, that the auncient Chriſtians vſing of the croſſe, in whatſoeuer matters by them mannaged: was but the ſimple practiſe of Saint Paules meaning, when he ſaid: J am not aſhamed of the Goſpell of Chriſt. For becauſe euery one, as well Iewes as Paganes, mocked at Chriſt, and his Croſſe was become a ſcandall to ſome, and folly to others: the more they ſtroue to defame it, the more the chriſtians endeuoured to adorne it. Heereup on, they oppoſed the Croſſe to all thinges, and in all places, as a moſte honourable marke whereby they ſufficiently declared, that they would haue part of Chriſtes opprobry, to the ende hee might impart to

them ſome of his glory. And therefore ſaid Chriſoſtome. That Enſigne ſhould bee more honoured, then all the Crownes and Diademes could be. For this cauſe, the Emperours and Kings made applycation therof to their Crownes and Scepters, ſo much the more to ſhame & confound the Iewes & Pagans, whom S. Ambroſe bringeth in, thus ſpeaking. Wehaue crucified Jeſus, to the end the Chriſtians may riſe after death, and that the dead may raigne: We haue crucified him whome Kings ſhall honour: Whence happened, that the Princes which perſecuted Chriſt, became Preachers, and their Veſtiments ſerued to repaire the croſſe, that faith might ſhine foorth the more gloriouſly. Vpon the ſame occaſion it is ſaid, that the croſſe ſhould be a tree faire and ſplendant, adorned with the purple of kings, and more brightſome then the ſtarres. And Theodoret in the third booke of his hiſtorie, chap. 27. writeth, That by all, the croſſe ſhould bee borne, to teſtifie the triumph of Chriſt.
            
            But all this while, they attributed nothing to the croſſe onely, or the bare figure therof: for Conſtantine gaue acknowledgement, that the victoric which happened

to him, was through Chriſt, and not the croſſe, and ſo he cauſed to be written on the croſſes by him erected, theſe three words: Ieſus Chriſt ouercame, & (after that manner) made his prayers of the croſſe▪ 
               Helena likewiſe worſhipped the king, and not the croſſe: For elſe it had bin a Pagan errour, & vilde vanitie, faith Saint Ambroſe.
            
            In this forte may chriſtians honour the croſſe: for who makes any queſtion▪ but in our wars againſt the Iews or Mahumetiſts, we may beare our Enſignes orarmes croſſed, for publicke teſtifying to the Infidels, that wee are Chriſtians, and our aduerſaries are miſcreants andvoyd of faith. So may the croſſe be engrauē on money to ſhew, that it is the coyne or ſtampe of a chriſtian Prince. So may the croſſe be placed on the gates of Citties, Caſtles, or houſes, to deliuer apparantly, that the Inhabitants in ſuch places, do make profeſsion of chriſtianitie. So was it long ſince ordained, that the inſtruments of contractes or bargaining, made by publike notaries, ſhould be ſealed and ſigned with the croſse, as it is read in lib. de Cod.
            
            
               
And in ſuch like polliticke conſiderations, we reiect not the vſe of the material croſſe. As Conſtantine in the very ſame reſpect, forbad to puniſh malefactours any more with the death of the croſſe: To the ende (ſaith Saint Auguſtine in his 36. Treatiſe on Saint Iohn) They ſhould not be honoured by ſuch a puniſhment. For the ſame reaſon, was it forbidden by the Emperor Theodoſuts, to engraue the croſſe in earth: and a paine decreed, againſt all ſuch as deſpiſed or caſt the croſſe at their heeles.
            Now withall is to be remembred, that then the croſſe was but two peeces of woode thwarte one another, hauing no ſhape of a crucifixe, much leſſe of the bleſſed virgine Marie, as ſince then, in diuers croſſes the image of the crucifixe is on one ſide, and that of the mother on the other, as if ſhe had borne companie with our Sauiour in his ſufferings, and ſhe in ſome ſort had wrought the redemption of mankinde.
            Then they had not read the goodly diſputation, betweene the Cordeliers and the Jacobines, in the time of Pope John the 22. of that name: the Cordeliers maintaining,

that the crucifixe ought to be naked, onely with a crowne of thornes: the Jacobines iuſtified, that hee was to weare a crowne on his head, and a royall robe with all. As for the honour done by ſome in this caſe, they of olde crowned him ſimplye with flowers, but it was for ſpeciall inſtruction to the beholders; for thus they intended, that whoſoeuer would haue the crowne, and pertake in the reward: he muſt firſt of all beare his croſſe, for ſo hath the Poet Prudentius written.

                  To beare the croſse muſt be thy paine,
                  If thou deſire the crowne to gaine.
               
            
            But in the end, theſe matters grew ſo forward, that the croſſe was broght into the temples, and ſaluted in theſe woordes, O Crux, aue, Al haile, O croſſe, which are but fond ſpeeches. Then inuocation was made to it, ſaying.

                  Auge pits iuſtitiam, reiſque dona veniam.
                  Encreaſe the iuſtice of the good, and pardon the offendors.
               
Likewiſe,

                  Crucem tuam adoramus Domine:
                  
                     
Lord, we adore and worſhip thy croſse.
               
Which are indeede blaſphemous ſpeeches.
            For to Ieſus Chriſt onely ſhuld ſuch a praier be made, It is Ieſus Chriſt who is the ſon, he ought to be kiſſed, and not the croſſe of wood. So that▪ albeit wee may honour one another ciuilly, following no more then is commaunded, the inferiour to honor their ſuperiours: yet when queſtion is made, of religious or deuoute honor, they are matters not according, to giue all honour to one onely God and his ſonne, and yet to diuide a portion thereof to any man, or a materiall croſſe, or any creature whateuer▪ Yet are not theſe queſtionaries them ſelues fully agreed hereabout: for one hath demaunded, with what kinde of honour it is to be worſhiped.
            Some ſay, that the verie croſſe, which touched the bodie of Ieſus Chriſt, oght to be honored with Latria, ſeruice: or by the means of Hyperdulia, humble dutie▪ but others beleue, that it ſhuld be ſerucd with the honour of Dulia, bond-ſeruice: as much to ſay, that the true croſſe ought to bee reuerenced with the honour due to Chriſt:

and other Croſſes ſhould bee reuerenced with ſuch honour, as ſeruants owe vnto their maiſters. And this is the reſolution of the ſecond placarde, which like wiſe it becomes vs to conſider of, and briefly ſearch into the bottome of it.
            There are diuers places of our elders alleadged, but without ſence, and quite from the Authors meaning that writ them. For when they of olde time ſpeake of the croſſe, they did not vnderſtand thereby two pecces of wood th wart one another: but the miſterie of our redemption: the true ſummarie & accompliſhment wherof, was by the croſse, death and paſsion of Ieſus Chriſt. And this equiuocall or double ſignification of the croſse, beeing not perceiued by theſe Sophiſters▪ makes thē to erre, and they cauſe other to do the like. Heerevpon it was that Chriſoſtome ſaid▪ 
               The croſse is the cauſe of al our bleſsedneſse, it is the chriſtians hope, reſurection of the dead, and a guid to the blinde, &c. And as for the materiall croſse, behold what one hath written therof: We honour not, neither deſire to haue ſuch a croſse, as the expreſſe wordes are to bee read in the 8▪ booke of Arnobius, anſwering

to the Pagans obiections, which blamed the chriſtians, as if they had honoured the croſſe of wood. For the ſame reaſon, Athanaſius ſaith in his 16. queſtion, thoſe which he writ vnto Antiochus. That the Chriſtians declared, how they honoured not the croſſe, when they laid togither two peeces in ſuch ſort: they acknowledged it to bee no more then wood, and woulde not proſtrate themſelues before it, as now they do, ſetting vp croſſes onely to be honored. And heerevppon ſaith Epiphanius, that paſsing by a village named Anablaiha, and entring into a Temple, where hung a painted cloath, hauing an image thereon of Ieſus Chriſt, or ſome other Sainte▪ hee rent the cloath in peeces, becauſe they kept it there contrary to the Scripture▪ this is at large to be read, in his Epiſtle tranſlated by Saint Hierome. Wherevpon the ſame Saint Hierome ſaith▪ 
               that no other image of God is to be honoured, but that which is God, & with God; as much to ſay, as the ſonne of GOD, Which is the engrauen forme of the eſſence of God, Hebr. 1. verſe 3. and in this ſence we holde with the teſtimonies alleaged in the placard.
            
               
But becauſe the Church of Rome containes not it ſelfe within theſe limits, but aymeth at a materiall croſſe: it is apparant, that it maintaineth vnſufferable idolatrie. And to the end it may appeare, that wee wrong them not in ſaying ſo: marke heere the verie words they vſe, when they hallow the wood of the croſſe.
            Digneris Domine, benedicere hoc lignum crucis, vt ſit remedium ſalutare generi humano, ſit ſoliditas fidei, bonorumque operum profectus, & redemptio animarum, tutela contra ſae
                  •
               a iacula inimicorum: which is thus interpreted. Lord, that it might pleaſe thee to ſanctifie this wood of the croſse, to the end it may be a healthfull remedie to mankind, aſsurance of faith, aduancement of good workes, redemption of ſoules, and a defence againſt the cruell dartes of the enemies.
            Againe.

                  Crucem tuam adoramus Domine.
                  O Lord we adore and worſhip thy Croſſe▪
                  
               
            
            Againe.

                  O crux adoranda, ô crux ſpecioſa, hominibus amabilis, ſanctior vniuerſis, quae ſola digna fuiſti, portare talentum mundi.
                  Dulce lignum, dulces clanos, dulcia ferens

pondera.
                  Serua preſentem cateruam, in tuis hodis laudibus congregaram.
               
               
                  O croſse, which oughteſt to be honoured,
O croſse, which oughteſt to bee regarded,
                  Amiable to men, more holy then all,
Which only waſt woorthie to beare the worlds talent.
                  Sweete woode, which beareſt ſweete nailes, and a ſweet burthen:
                  Saue this preſent Congregation aſsembled in thy praiſes.
               
            
            Againe,

                  Crux fidelis, inter omnes arbor vna nobilis: Nulla ſylua talem profert, fronde, flore, germine.
                  Dulce lignum, dulces clauos, dulce pondus ſuſtinet.
               
               
                  Faithfull croſse, the onely noble tree among all other:
                  No forreſt euer bare the like, for boughes, flowers and branches.
                  This ſweet wood bare ſweete nailes, and a ſweete burthen.
               
            
            Wherein is to be noted, that this Himne ſaith, it is a tree, albeit others, & namely the Canoniſts ſay, that it was made of foure

woods, to wit, of Palme, of Cedar, of Cipres, and of Oliue-tree.
            Of like ſtuffe is the French prayer, which is vſually reade at all houres, and is in the booke called Houres, that which Michaell Joue imprinted at Lyons 1568▪ according to the vſage at Rome, and is in this manner.
            
               Saincte vraye croix adoree,
               Qui du corps Dieu fut adornee.
               Et de ſa grand' ſueur arroſee,
               Et de ſon ſang enluminee.
               Par ta vertu, par ta puiſſance,
               Garde mon corps de mal meſchance,
               Et m'ottroye par ton plaiſir,
               Que vray confez puiſſe mourir.
            
            In Engliſh thus.

                  Holy croſſe, truely to be worſhipped,
                  Which with Gods bodie was adorned,
                  And with his great ſweate ſprinckled,
                  And with his bloud illumined.
                  By thy vertue, by thy puiſſance,
                  Keepe my bodie from all miſchance,
                  And graunt if ſo thy pleaſure be▪
                  
                  Truly confeſt, that J may die.
               
            
            
               
Nor is it onely called the adorned croſſe, but likewiſe the adored croſſe: as on the holy Friday it is termed worſhipped, in regard of the adoration of the croſſe as that day there. So that if the time when the croſſe is honoured, is called holy: the place likewiſe where the croſſe is to be erected, is alſo hallowed, and the handes and fingers of them that erected it. For there muſt bee ſome reaſon allowed to the circumſtances and inſtruments, as well in one as the reſt, or, to ſpeake as we ought, he muſt needs be his crafts-maiſter, that will not let the ſtench of ſuch impietie be deſcerned or felt, by them whoſe breath idolatry hath before poyſoned.
            Like follies and blaſphemies commit they about the lance or ſpeare, wherewith the ſide of our Sauiour was pearced▪ Firſt, that it was ſent by the great Turke Baiazeth, to Pope Jnnocent the eight of that name, in the yeare 1490. if the account lye not▪ of which holy ſpeare, the feaſt is celebrated on the Friday after the Octaues of Eaſter, and thereto is appoynted this prayer following.
            
               
               Aue ferrum triumphale,
               Jntrans pectus tu vitale,
               Caeli pandis oſtia,
               Foelix baſta, nos amore,
               Per te fixi ſaucia.
            
            Thus Engliſhed.

                  Triumphant Jron, be thou bleſt,
                  VVhich entring in the vitall breſt.
                  Heauen gates didſt open ſpread:
                  Holy ſpeare do vs wound,
                  VVith the loue of him profound,
                  VVhich by thee was pearced dead.
               
            
            So that whoſoeuer will beleeue theſe people, muſt likewiſe worſhip S. Lanthorne, Saint Spunge, Saint Ladder, Saint Cord, Saint Whippe, and other inſtrumēts wherewith the hang-men tormented Ieſus Chriſt.
            Let then theſe Sophiſters bite their nailes as long as they pleaſe, to ouerthrowe this ſhamefull taxation: yet ſhall they neuer make of wood, more then wood. And becauſe they bleſſe themſelues with this

wood, bowing downe their heades before it, and calling it the health & remedie for mankinde: wee ſay, that they are more blockiſh then wood, if they will not acknowledge the great fault they commit, in honouring the wood, in ſtead of applying ſuch dutie to him, who bare our ſinnes in his bodie on the croſſe of wood.
            We are not likewiſe ignorant of their goodly verſes, Effigiem Chriſt: &c.▪ but we ſay, it is alſo a drugge anſwerable to that which we call to bring one a ſleepe. For certainly, this is to make the ignorant ſleepie: wheras ſuch as receiue inſtruction out of Gods ſchoole, do hold, that ſeeing god in no caſe will be honoured by images, it is a matter altogither intollerable, that mē ſhould haue any images to worſhip. For Idolatrie is committed when we honour Idoles, or honour God otherwiſe then hee would be honoured: as appeareth by the Prophets ſpeeches of them that worſhipped in high places. They are reprooued not for that they worſhipped God: but becauſe they worſhipped him otherwiſe thē hee had allowed in his ordenance. For hee woulde haue but one place onely, to

wit, the temple of Ieruſalem, where hee would be ſerued, and they honoured him in woods and on mountaines. This is the reaſon why the Samaritaines, who called themſelues the children of Iacob, were reprooued, becauſe they worſhipped in the mount Gartzin, albeit they yet prepared themſelues to God.
            For this reaſon, in the Elibertine Councell, held in the time of the firſt Councell of Nice, the 36. Canon, were ſet downe theſe words.
            
               It is ordained, that in the Church ſhall bee no kinde of paintings, to the ende, that that which is honoured and worſhipped, ſhould not be figured in any reſemblance. Their anſwere hereto is friuolous, for they ſay. They worſhip them not▪ becauſe they put no truſt in them. To worſhip, is to encline ones ſelfe thereto, to make ſignes of humiliation, and bowing the knees: as may be ſeene by the ſcriptures manner of ſpeaking, which by bowing of the knee, noteth idolatrie, as appeares by the anſwere made to Elias, 1. Reg. 19. verſe 18. Where the true ſeruants of God oppoſed to idolatours, are marked out by this: That haue not bowed their knees
               
               before Baal, nor kiſſed him with their mouths. Theſe kinde of words vſeth the ſcripture, for deſcribing of idolatours: that they bend themſelues, burne incenſe and kiſſe the hand or the lippes, all which the church of Rome doth to images, reliques, & croſſes: the concluſion then is manifeſt, they are idolatours, becauſe they do the deeds of idolatours.
            But that which is alleadged out of the 21. of Numbers, maye not bee let paſſe lightly: for if there be an example, which formally and firmly plucketh downe the abuſe committed about the croſſe, it is that of the brazen Serpent. That was made by Gods commandement, therefore it was no Jdol.
            
            Now, albeit that by the lawe generally, God forbad to make the image of any thing in heauen, the earth, or waters vnder the earth: ſo it is, that not being bound to his law (becauſe he is aboue it) it pleaſed him to diſpence therwith, euen as himſelfe diſpenſed with the law, & gaue cōmandement to make this ſerpēt, the figure of the exaltation of Ieſus Chriſt, lifted upon the croſſe, as himſelf witneſſeth in the third of

               John, verſe 14. Not that it was eleuated on wood made croſſe-wiſe, as they vſe commonly to picture it, (for it was lifted vp on a ſtandard or poſte, as the text ſaith) but becauſe it was to bee lifted vp, and they which by Gods commaundement looked thereon, ſhould be healed: Now let vs ſee what enſues heereon. From that inſtant, till the time of the good king Ezechias, about the ſpace of ſeuen hundreth thirtie & fiue yeares, there was no ſpeech at all of this brazen Serpent. It happening then, the people making obeyſance therto, worſhipping it, becauſe it had been made by Moyſes, and was ſo kept for the ſpace of 735. yeares; Ezechias brake it, and cauſed it to be burned. From hence we gather, if images in generall, and eſpecially that of the croſſe, were neuer made by the commandement of God, but by the diffidence and preſumption of men (who thought God did neither ſee nor heare them, except they had ſuch images before their eyes) eſpeciallye ſuch as haue beene brought in wee knowe not ſince when: howe farre off ought they to bee from vs? When it ſhall come to this point, that they

were not begun to any ſuch purpoſe: it is then euident, that they ought to be taken away, as Ezechias did the Serpent, becauſe at firſt it was not framed to bee worſhipped.
            And becauſe of the abuſe which hath riſen heereabout, it were very neceſſary to be generally abandoned. For Idolatry is no part of thoſe things, whereof one will ſay: Correct the abuſe, yet holde the vſe: becauſe in whatſoeuer ſort the I doll is taken, yet it is as nothing.
            And when queſtion is made, for reformation of ſuch diſorders, wee ſhould follow the ſaying of Ieſus Chriſt, in Math. 19 verſe▪ 8. Jt was not ſo from the beginning. If then at the beginning, when the Apoſtolique Church was pure, and truth ſincere, the ſigne or forme of the Croſſe was not made, it was no where appointed, ſaluted nor worſhipped: it was very ill done, to bring in this corruption, (which can no way well be called a cuſtome,) and much worſſe is it to retaine it ſtill.
            There remaines one teſtimony, out of the firſt book of Sozomenus, Chap. 4. where it is ſaid: That the ſouldiers of Conſtiantne,

               did highly honor his Standard, made in forme of the Croſſe, and that many miracles were done among them: which being conſeſſed, concludeth not, that therefore wee ought to honour the material Croſſe. For ſay that they did honour it, or did ſuch things as ought not to be done: it is reſoluedly to be held, that in ſuch actions they are not to be imitated. Conſidering the concluſiō ſerues to the contrary, to wit: if the Croſſe ought to be honored, becauſe it did a miracle: It followes then, that the Croſſe which neuer did miracle, ought not to be honoured. Now it is moſt certaine, that of an hundred thouſand croſſes, 3. cannot be found that did any miracle: no though wee ſhould alleadge their own accounts, & the effectes ſhewed by them, with the hiſtories which theſe exorciſtes doe confirme. Witnes the example, of that ſo holy & renowned doctour Picard, & other Sorboniſts, who in the yeere 1552. could not by their exorciſmes, Croſſe & holy water, chaſe a ſpirit out of a maidens body in Paris. No more could the Munke of St. Benet, brought to Roome by the Cardinall Gondy, in the yeere 1554. driue forth the cuill ſpirits cut of the bodies

of 82. maidens, notwithſtanding all his coniurations, for the ſpace of ſixe monethes together, as Bodinus ſaith in in the 3. booke, Chap. 6, of his Demonomanie, So then▪ all thoſe Croſſes of Roome (which ſurpaſſe other in holineſſe and miraculous vertue, by reaſon of the ſanctity which is there obtained) hauing no more power then thoſe of the Munkes: haue little duety to be honoured, for the cauſe being taken away, there remaines no more of the effect.
            Laſt of all, becauſe it ſeemes, that wee would haue no Images of the crucifixe, nor the Croſſ: we declare, that we deſire all our dayes, Ieſus Chriſt ſhould be painted before oureyes, in the ſame manner as S. Paule, Gal. 3. ver. 1. painted Ieſus Chriſt before their eyes: for the penſill wherwith God ought to be paīred, is his word, which himſelf calleth the word of truth, where cō
               trariwiſe, all the doctrine of Images, is but the doctrine of lying and vanity. So then, the Croſſe of Ieſus Chriſt is as the chaire, wherout we purpoſe to preach on the one ſide, the multitude and ennormity of our ſinnes, on the other, the ſeuerity of Gods

iuſtice and depth of his mercy. The greatneſſe of our ſinnes is ſhewen vs, in that they could not be borne nor aboliſhed by any other, then he who was very God and very man. His iuſtice, in that God, who hateth iniquity, did puniſh it with all extreamity. His mercy, in that himſelfe gaue vs the price to acquit vs withall, euen vs that were his vtter enemies: for this is to vs a moſt certaine gaege, of the merciful affection of our God, diſcerned thorow the woundes of his onely Sonne. And the liuely contemplating of thoſe wounds, is the balme to heale the hurts of our ſoules. His feete and handes were pierced, his ſide opened, and thence iſſued the price of our redemption, as alſo the waſhing away of our filthyneſſe: bloud (I ſay) and water alwaies ſtreaming, to deface our ſinnes paſt, preſent, and to come, to the ende, that hauing our harts waſhed from an euil conſcience, wee ſhould goe by the freſh and liuing pathes, towardesour God with certainty of faith, and keep ing the confeſſion of our hope. Heb. 10. ver. 22. 23. that is to ſay, in following after Ieſus Chriſt. Which is nothing elſe, ſaith S. Carill, but renouncing

the world for the loue of Chriſt, & preferring the goodes which we hope for by faith, before all other in this bodily life. In like manner, ſaith S. Bernard. The ioyfull hope and aſſuraunce, is that which is affirmed by application to the death and paſſion of Chriſt. For ſince the Father hath giuen vs his Sonne: how ſhall he not with him giue vs all thinges alſo? Rom. 8. ver. 32. And bee is giu en vs of the Father, to be our iuſtice, wiſedome, redemption and ſanctification. 1▪ Cor. 1. v. 30. It is Ieſus that iuſtifies the faulty, it is Ieſus that paies for the indepted, that ſtrengthens the weake, illuminates the blinde, bindes vp the hurtes of the wounded, recalles home by-wanderers, giues life to the dead: & in a word, it is Ieſus that deſtroies the workes of the deuill, & beateth downe Sathan vnder our feete.
            Such is the memory which wee continually obſerue, of the perfect obedience, which the Sonne of GOD deliuered vpon the Croſſe, to God his Father for vs poore miſerable wretches: and not the ridiculous and I dolatrous deuotion, which the ignoraunt ſo gladly would make vs beleeue, that they honour the death and

paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt, in ſaying, during their great weekes ſpace, before the croſſe, and beholding the face of the Crucifixe, with handes eleuated, and knees bended, to wit.
            On Palme Sunday, thirty three Paters & Aues▪
                the Munday, the beades of our Lady: the Tewſday, forty Peters & Aues: the Wedneſday, thirty Paters and Aues: the Thurſday, twelue Paters and Aues: the Fryday, ſixty Paters and Aues: the Satturday forty Paters and Aues: on Eaſterday, twelue Paters and Aues. Likewiſe, during their twelue white Fridayes: the firſt, three Paters and Aues: the ſecond, ſeauen Paters and Aues: the third, ſixty times Paters & Aues, in honor of the ſixty thornes in the crowne: the fourth, forty Paters and Aues: the fift, forty Paters and Aues: the ſixt, twelue Paters and Aues: the ſeauenth, thirty Paters and Aues, in honour of Iudas his thirty pence: the eight, thirty Paters & Aues: the ninth, fiue Paters and Aues: the tenth, three Paters and Aues, in honor of the three nayles: the eleuenth, fiue Paters and Aues: the twelft, fifteene Paters Aues, in honour of the fifteene horrible

ſignes, which ſhall come before the day of iudgement. Such is the ſummary of the ſtile obſerued, in the booke by them called Houres. But true worſhippers indeed, entreate of God, that it may pleaſe him, to make them feele the efficacy of the death and paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt, and deſire to beare the Image of him: to the end, that as wee haue borne the Image of the earthlie Adam, ſo we may carry the Image of the celeſtiall Adam in our hearts, that the holy Ghoſt would be the Temple therof, and ſo by this meanes, we ſhall bee knowne by the ſame Ieſus Chriſt, at his great and laſt comming. Truely, it is thou Lord Ieſus▪ whome wee honour, whome wee bleſſe and thanke: becauſe thou dying on thy Croſſe, haſt thereby giuen vs aſſurance of life. To thee be all honour and glory, with the Father and the holy ſpirit. Amen.
            Jt is ſweete to beare the Croſſe with Chriſt, and for Chriſt.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A Sonnet annexed to the former Treatiſe in French.
            
               WE are vndone, Sathan hath vs deſtroyde,
               Sinne, death and hell is our due portion.
               Ah wretch, recant, for Chriſt his paſſion,
               Sinne, death and hell hath vtterly made voyde.
            
            
               Thereby, our firſt rights are to vs regainde,
               Thereby, health, victory, and life we holde:
               Thereby, we ſee the light ſo manifolde,
               Thereby; heauens higheſt ſecrets are attainde,
            
            
               It is the death of death, the hell of hell,
               The ſteele that hath rebated Sathans ſteele,
               Opening the gate where bleſſednes doth dwell▪
               
            
            
               Happy is he, this death by faith doth fellc.
               But he that worſhips wood or ſtone, procures
               Thoſe paines on him, which euer more endures.
            
            There is no de
                  •
               eipt nor ſubtilty, which Sathan hath not ad
                  ••
               ſedly ſtudied, thereby to make men commit Idolatry: whereby his power is no way ruynated, but eſtabliſhed.
            
         
      
   