
      
         
            
            
            ¶A new and mery Enterlude, called the Triall of Treaſure, newly ſet foorth, and neuer before this tyme imprinted.
            ¶The names of the plaiers,

                  Firſt, Sturdines, Contentation, Viſitation, Time.
                  The ſecond, Luſt Sapience, Conſolation.
                  The thirde, the Preface, Iuſt, Pleaſure, Gredy gutte.
                  The fourth, Elation, Truſt, a woman, and Treaſure, a woman.
                  The fifth, Inclination, the Vice.
               
            
            ¶Imprinted at Londō in Paules Churcheyarde, at the ſigne of the Lucrece by Thomas Purfoote. 1567.
         
         
            
            
               
                  printer's or publisher's device
                  THOMAS PVRFOOTE
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶Doe all thinges to edifie the Congregation.
            
               
                  DIogenes which vſed a barell for his houſe,
               Being fled frō his father to ye citie of Athēs,
               Cōforted him ſelf much in beholding ye mouſe
               which deſired neither caſtell nor hold for her defēce
               Cōcerning ſuſtentatiō, ſhe made no differēce,
               But eate what ſoeuer to her did befall,
               And touching her apparell, ſhe had leaſt care of all.
            
            
               This poore mouſes propertie noted Diogenes,
               Whiche oftentimes alſo, he would haue in ſight,
               And though he ware diſciple vnto Antiſthenes,
               yet he learned of the mouſe as muche as he might
               In the ſcience of Sophy he had great delight,
               But concerning his ſtate, and outward condition
               The moſt can declare, if you make inquiſition.
            
            
               On a time he chaunſed accumpanied to be
               With Alexāder, which ſtode betwene him & the ſonne
               What requireſt thou to haue Diogenes (quod he?)
               Is there any thing that by me may be done?
               I pray thee ſtande aſyde, and make a little roume
               (quod Diogenes) that the ſunne vpon me may ſhine,
               Nought els requier I of that that is thine.
            
            
               He vſed to ſaie, that as ſeruauntes be obedient
               To their bodely maiſters being in ſubiection,
               Euen ſo euill men that are not contente,
               Are ſubiectes and ſlaues to their luſtes and affection,
               This leſſon vnto vs may be a direction,
               Which way our inclination to bridle and ſubdewe,
               Namely if we labour the ſame to eſchewe.
            
            
               
               Thus ſee you howe little this Philoſopher eſtemed
               the aboundaunt poſſeſſions of this mūdaine treaſure
               Which yet notwithſtanding at theſe dayes is demed
               to be the originall and fountaine of pleaſure,
               this cauſeth luſte to raigne without meaſure,
               to the whiche men are ſubiectes, Diogenes doth ſay,
               yet both loſt and treaſure in time weareth awaye.
            
            
               A Philoſopher is he that wiſedome doth loue,
               Which before Pithagoras, wyſe men ware named
               Nowe Diogenes being wyſe, this doth approue
               that ſome mē of this age, ought as fooles to be blamed
               For where the one with treaſure lack, his life framed
               the other trauaile, care, and labour with gredines,
               the ſame by all meanes, to enioye and poſſeſſe.
            
            
               But as Luſte with the luſter, conuerteth to duſte
               And leaueth of force, his pleaſaunt proſperitie,
               So treaſure in time, is turned to ruſte:
               As S. Iames in his epiſtle ſheweth the veritie
               Hereof we purpoſe to ſpeake without temerite,
               Therefore our matter is named, ye triall of Treaſure,
               Which time doth expell, with all mundaine pleaſure.
            
            
               Both mery and ſhort we purpoſe to be,
               And therfore require your pardon and pacience,
               We truſte in our matter nothing you ſhall ſee,
               That to the godly may geue any offence,
               Though ye ſtyle be barbarous, not fined with eloquēce
               Yet our Author deſireth your gentle acceptation,
               And we the plaiers likewyſe, with all humilation.
            
            Finis.
         
         
            
            ¶Enter Luſte like a gallaunt, ſinging this ſonge.
            HEy howe care away let the world paſſe
            For I am as luſty as euer I was,
            In floures I floriſhe as bloſomes in May,
            Hey howe care away: hay howe care away.
            
               Luſte.
               What the Deuill ailed me to ſinge thus,
               I crie you mercy by my faith for entring,
               Moſte like I haue ridden on the fliyng Pegaſus,
               Or in Cock Lorrels barge I haue bene a ventringe,
               Syng▪ why I would ſinge if it were to doe againe.
               With Orpheus and Amphion I went to ſchole,
               What, laddes muſt be liuely attending on the traine
               Of lady Delectation, whiche is no ſmall foole.
               Hey rowſe▪ fill all the pottes in the houſe,
               Tuſhe man, in good felowſhip let vs be mery,
               Looke vp like a man or it is not worth a louſe.
               Hey how troly lowe, hey dery dery,
               Ha pleaſaunt youth and luſty Iuuentus,
               In faithe it is good to be mery this may,
               For of mans liuing here, there is no point endentus.
               Therfore a litle mirth is worth much ſorow ſome ſay.
               But remember ye not the wyſe mans ſentence,
Enter Iuſte
               
               It is better in the houſe of mourning to be
               Thē in the houſe of laughter where foly hath reſidēce,
               For lightnes with wiſedome can not agree
               Though many haue pleaſure in fooliſhe phantaſie.
               Enſuing their inclination and luſte,
               Yet much better is the life of one that is iuſte.
            
            
               
               Luſte.
               Sir, in this you ſeme againſt me to inuaye,
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Nothing but reaſon I thinke I doe ſaye.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Mary you ſhall haue a night cap for making ye reaſon,
               Frinde haue you not a pece of ſtockefiſhe to ſell,
               I would you had a diſhe of butterd peaſon,
               By my faith your communication likes me well,
               But I beſeche you tell me is not your name Iuſte:
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Yes forſothe.
            
            
               Luſte.
               And my name thou ſhalt vnderſtande is luſt,
               And according therto I am luſty in deede,
               But I thinke thou haſte drunke of Morpheus ſeede,
               Thou goeſt like a Dromeldory dreaming & drouſy,
               I holde twenty pounde the knaue is louſy.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Myne apparell is not like vnto thyne,
               Diſguyſed and iagged of ſundrie faſhion,
               Howe be it, it is not golde alwayes that doth ſhine,
               But corrupting Copper of ſmall valuation
               To horrible beſides is thy operation,
               Nothing more odious vnto the Iuſte,
               Then the beaſtly deſires of inordinate luſte.
            
            
               Luſte.
               It is a ſhamefull thing as Cicero doth ſaye
               That a man his owne actes ſhould praiſe & cōmende,
               Hypocrites accuſtome thee like daye by daye
               Checking other men, when they doe offende.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Yea but it is an harde thing ſaieth the Philoſopher,
               For a fooliſhe man to haue his maners reprehended,
               And euen at this daie it is come ſo farre,
               God graunt for his mercy it may be amended.
               For tell a man friendly nowe of his faulte
               Being blaſphemy, pryde, or vyle fornication,
               He wilbe as preſumptuous as Haman the haulte
               And repaye with reuenge or els defamation.
               
                  Thus fewe men a friendly monition will beare,
               But ſtoutely perſiſte and mainteine their ill,
               And in noble mens houſes truly I do feare
               There are to many haue ſuche froward will.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Woundes and hartes who can abyde this,
               Nay ye vyle vylayne I will dreſſe you therefore,
               your laſy bones I pretende ſo to bliſſe,
               That you ſhall haue ſmall luſte to prate any more.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Behold the Image of inſipient fooles,
               There are not a fewe euen nowe of thy propertie,
               Untill you be put into pouerties ſcholes:
               ye will not forſake this foliſhe inſolencie.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Nay ſoft, with thee I haue not made an ende.
            
            ¶Drawe out his ſwoorde.
            
               Iuſte.
               The Iuſt againſt luſt muſt alwayes contend,
               Therfore I purpoſe to wreſtle with thee,
Put it by
               
               Who ſhall haue the victorie, ſtreightwaye we ſhal ſee.
            
            
               Luſte.
               When thou wilt by his fleſhe: I ſhall holde the wag
            
            ¶Wreſtle, and let Luſte ſeeme to haue the better at the firſte.
            
               Iuſte.
               I know that luſt vſeth not litle to brag:
            
            
               Luſte.
               Thou ſhalt find me as mighty as Sampſon ye ſtrōg
            
            
               Iuſte.
               yea the battell of luſt endureth long.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Woundes and fleſhe, I was almoſt down on my back,
               But yet I will wreſtle till my bones cracke.
            
            ¶Staye and then ſpeake,
            
               Iuſte.
               The ende of thy preſumption nowe doth appeare,
            
            
               Luſte.
               yet dooe what thou canſt I will not lie here,
               No by his woundes you olde doting knaue,
Caſte him and let him ariſe again
               
               thinkeſt thou that luſt will be made a ſlaue,
               I ſhall mete you in Smithfield or els other wheare,
               By his fleſh and bloud, I will thee not forbeare.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Not of my power I doe thee expell
               But by the mighte of his ſpirite that dwelleth in me,
               
                  Inordinate luſte with the iuſt may not dwell,
               And therfore may not I accompanie thee.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Well goodman Iuſte, it is no matter,
               But in faithe I pretende not with thee to flatter,
               
                  Go out, he muſt driue him out.
Though from thy company departe I muſte,
               I ſhall liue in as much welthynes I truſte.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Where moſte wealth is and moſte dilectation,
               There Luſte is commonly of moſte eſtimation:
               For where as wealth wanteth idlenes doth ſla
               But where idlenes is Luſt parteth the ſlake.
               
                  Pauſe.
Thus haue you ſeene the conflicte of the Iuſte,
               Which all good men ought to vſe and frequent
               For horrible are the fruites of inordinate luſte,
               Whiche in ſome caſe reſemble Hybra the ſerpent,
               Whoſe head being cut of an other ryſeth incontinent.
               So one of Luſtes cogitations being cut away
               There ryſeth vp an other, yea many we may ſaye:
               It is requiſite therfore that euery degree
               Againſt this his luſt, both ſtriue and contende,
               And though at the firſt he ſeeme ſturdy to be,
               The Lorde will conuince him for you in the ende.
               Your cauſe vnto him therefore holy commende,
               Labouring to auoyde all inordinate luſte,
               
                  Go out, Enter Inclination the Viſe.
And to practiſe in lyfe, to liue after the Iuſte.
               I can remembre ſynce Noes ſhip
               Was made and builded on Saliſbury plaine,
               The ſame yeere ye weathercock of Paules caught ye pip
               So that Bowe bell was like much woe to ſuſtaine,
               I can remembre I am ſo olde.
               Since Paradiſe gates were watched by night,
               And when that Vvlcanus was made a cuckold
               Among the great Gods I appeared in ſight.
               
                  Nay for all your ſmiling I tell you true,
               No no▪ ye will not knowe me nowe,
               The might on the earth I doe ſubdue,
               tuſh, if you will giue me leaue yle tell ye howe,
               Howe, in good faith I carenot greatly,
               Although I declare my dayly encreaſe
               But then theſe gentle women wilbe angry,
               therfore I thinke beſt to holde my peace:
               Nay I beſeche you let the matter ſtaye,
               For I would not for twenty poūde come in their hādes
               For if there ſhould chaunce to be but one dalila,
               By the mas thei would binde me in Samſons bands
               But what meane I firſt with them to beginne,
               Seing that in all men I doe remaine,
               Becauſe that firſt I remayned euen within,
               And after her Adam and ſo foorth to Caine,
               I perceiue by your lookes my name ye would knowe,
               Why you are not ignoraunt of that I dare ſaye,
               It is I that doe guyde the bente of your bowe,
               And ruleth your actions alſo daye by daye,
               Forſothe I am called Natural inclination
               Whiche bred in old Adams foſtred bones,
               So that I am proper to his generation
               I will not awaye with caſting of ſtones,
               I make the ſtouteſt to bowe and bende:
               Againe when I luſte I make men ſtande vprighte
               From the loweſt to the higheſt I doe aſcende,
               Drawing them to thinges of naturall might.
               ¶Enter Luſte, and Sturdines, ſinging this ſonge.
               ¶Where is the knaue, that ſo did raue:
               
                  O that we could him finde,
               We would him make, for feare to quake
               That loute of lobbiſhe kinde.
               My name is luſt, & let him truſte
               That I will haue redreſſe,
               For thou and I, will make him flie,
               Mine oulde friende Sturdines.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Where is nowe that valiaunt Hercules,
               For all his bragges he is nowe ronne away:
            
            
               Sturdi.
               By the guttes of Golya, it is beſt for his eaſe,
               
                  Braggingly
For he was moſte like for the pottage to paye.
            
            
               Inclina.
               Cockes ſoule: what bragging knaues haue we here,
               Come ye to conuince the mightieſt conquerer,
               It was I that before you now doth appeare,
               Which brought to confuſion both Hector & Alexander:
               Looke on this legge ye prating ſlaues,
               I remember ſince it was no greater then a tree,
               At that time I had a cupple of knaues
               Muche like vnto you that wayghted on me.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Cockes precious ſoule, let vs conquer the knaue,
            
            
               Sturdi.
               By his fleſhe and ſydes, a good courage I haue,
               Stande you therfore a litle aſyde
               And ye ſhall ſee me quickely abate the fooles pryde.
            
            ¶Drawe out the ſwearde, make him put it vp, & then ſtrike him, looke in your ſpectacles.
            
               Inclina
               Naye I dare not I if thou lookeſt ſo bigge,
               What ſhould ſuche a Bore fight with a pigge.
               Put vp thy ſwoorde man we will agree,
               So lo: doe ſo much as beare that for mee.
            
            
               Sturdi.
               Nay by his harte, then I will you dreſſe.
            
            
               
               Inclina.
               Be Good in thine office gentle friend Sturnines,
               For though thou and I doe ſeme to contende,
               yet we are, and muſt be friendes till the ende.
            
            
               Sturdi.
               Come geue me thy hande I beſhrowe thy harte.
            
            
               Inclina.
               Nay you muſt take all thinges in good parte,
               Who ſtandeth yender captaine Luſte?
            
            
               Sturdi.
               Yea mary.
            
            
               Inclina.
               No remedy then to him go I muſt,
               you haue forgot I dare ſay your old frend Inclinatiō
               
               But let vs renew acquaintaūce again for cocks paſſiō
               
            
            
               Luſte.
               Why man our acquaintaunce hath bene of olde,
               I am yours at commaundement therfore be bolde,
               For Luſte can doe nothing without Inclination,
               Chiefly in matters concerning a pleaſaunt vocation.
            
            
               Incli.
               In dede Luſte may be taken for a thing indifferent
               Except Inclination be ioyned therevnto▪
               
               But when that I once haue reaueled my entent,
               As I will men to worke ſo commonly they doe,
            
            
               Luſte.
               Ye haue harde of the combate betwene me & Iuſt.
            
            
               Inclina.
               ye mary, I harde ſaye that you laye in the duſt.
            
            
               Luſte.
               What ſaye ye.
            
            
               Inclina.
               Neither one worde nor other ye may me truſte.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Of mine honeſtie my company he vtterly refuſed,
               And in wreſtling with me he gaue me the foyle,
               Saiyng: that I had my ſelfe and other abuſed.
               Leading men in perplexitie & marueilous toile.
            
            
               Sturdi.
               By gogs woundes if we had founde him here,
               We ſhould by his fleſhe haue abated his chere.
            
            
               Incli.
               I perceiue Sturdines thou art no foole,
               Tell me of felowſhip where wenteſt thou to ſchole,
            
            
               Sturdi.
               What to reade or wrighte.
            
            
               Incli.
               Nay to ſweare and fight.
               
                  For I thinke thou canſt neither wryte, reade, nor ſpel,
               But in ſwearing and fighting thou doeſt excell.
            
            
               Sturdines.
               Thou knoweſt that I am ioyned with Luſte,
               And Sturdy by nature I am in like caſe,
               What let the worlde wag, all can not be Iuſte,
               Some muſt Naturall inclination embrace.
            
            
               Luſte.
               All men Iuſte: no, I remember the ſentence of Tully
               That no man is Iuſte, that feareth death pouertie or paine,
               which I do feare all & that marueilouſly,
               For fortune is variable I doe perceiue playne,
               And notwithſtanding that Flix poſſeſſed great gaine,
               yet when Paule preached of the iudgement daye,
               He trembled for feare and bad him go awaye.
            
            
               Inclina.
               Doth ſuch paſſions often trouble your mynde?
            
            
               Luſte.
               Nay not often, but ſometime I doe them finde,
               But then to the entent to dryue them awaye,
               I either go to ſleape, or els to ſome playe.
            
            
               Sturdi.
               By gogs precious harte, euen ſo doe I,
               But ſometyme they comber me peſtilently.
            
            
               Inclination.
               Well maiſter Luſte, ſuch dumpes to eſchewe
               My aduiſe and requeſt you muſt nedes enſue,
               That is to become diſciple to doctor Epicurus,
               And then you ſhall haue myrth by meaſure & ouerplus
               Tuſhe, I knowe a cupple companions in ſtore
               That ware marueilous mete for you euermore.
               I wiſhe you vnto them.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Well then call them in.
            
            
               Incli.
               Here they come each of them in a knaues ſkinne.
               ¶Enter Elation and Gredy gutte.
               With luſte to liue is our delight,
               In highe eſtate and dignitie,
               
                  Seing that the Iuſt put vs to flight,
               Let them alone in miſerie.
            
            
               Sturdi▪
               
               Nay, they be luſty laddes I tell ye.
            
            
               Elation
               What Inclination, me thought I did ſmell thee,
               Gyue me thy hande or we forther go.
            
            
               Inclina.
               Nowe welcome in faith, and Gredy gutte alſo,
               But ſyrs▪ are none of you both acquainted with Luſt.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Yes that they haue bene both of them I truſte,
               welcome ſyrs in faithe welcome vnto me.
            
            
               Elation▪
               
               By my trothe I am glad your maiſterſhip to ſee
               In health and proſperitie, as preſently you bee.
            
            
               Gredy.
               Bom fay zo am I wod all my harte,
            
            
               Inclina▪
               
               This cowe bellied knaue doth come from the carte,
               Iſe teache you to ſpeake I hold you a pounde,
               Curchy Lob curchy, downe to the grounde.
            
            
               Gredy.
               Che can make curchy well enowe.
            
            
               Inclina.
               Lower old knaue or yle make ye to bowe,
               The great bellied loute me thinke can not bende,
               yes ſo lo, he beginneth now to amende.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Well ſyrs, nowe I remember Eſopes aduiſe
               whiche he gaue to the Samies againſt king Craſſus,
               Therfore it is good to be wittie and wyſe,
               And being in libertie to kepe me ſtill thus:
               I can not abide a life that is dolorous,
               And ſeing that my name is properly Luſte,
               I hate the conuerſation alſo of the Iuſte.
            
            
               Inclina
               Well maiſter Luſte, firſt ioyne you to me Inclinatiō
               
               Next here with Sturdines you muſt you acquainte
               Turne you about and embrace Elation,
               And that wealth may encreaſe without any reſtraint
               Ioine you with Gredy gutte here in our preſence,
               
                  That all theſe in you may haue proſperous influence.
            
            ¶Bowe to the grounde.
            
               Luſte.
               Out alas, what a ſodaine paſſion is this,
               I am ſo taken that I can not ſtande,
               The crampe, the crampe, hath touched me ywis,
               I ſhall die without remedie nowe out of hande.
            
            
               Gredy.
               By my matens cheſe, our maiſter is ſicke.
            
            
               Inclina.
               Stande back Nycoll nody with the pudding pricke,
               More braines in thy ſkinne then witte in thy braine,
               Such Gredy guttes in faith would be flayne,
               This crampe doth ſignifie nothing in effect
               But howe he is bowed by me Inclination,
               None of all your councels he will nowe reiecte,
               And therefore feare not to make full declaration.
            
            
               Sturdi.
               Then feare not the force of theſe that be iuſte,
               But labour your ſelfe to aduaunce and augment,
               Be iocound and liuely ſithe your name is luſt,
               And then you ſhall eaſely obteine your entente.
            
            
               Elation.
               Eſteme your ſelfe alwayes equall with the beſte,
               And ſeeke for promotion, power, and dignitie:
               It is good when men may liue as they luſte,
               And vnto the iuſte beare hate and malignitie.
            
            
               Gredy.
               O zur ye muſt be gredy to catche and to clawe.
            
            
               Incli.
               Well ſaid Gredy gutte, as wyſe as a dawe,
            
            
               Gredy.
               Eate vp at a mouthfull, houſes and landes.
            
            ¶Gape and the Viſe gape.
            
               Incli.
               Theres a vengeable mouth to,
            
            
               Gredy.
               Neuer feare God nor the gouernours lawe,
               But gripe gripe gredely all that cometh in your hāds.
               By the Maſſe but Hewe Howlet is peſtilens witty,
               What guttiſhe gredineſſe the horeſon can teache
               That thou art not erected in faith it is pitie,
               As hie as three trees, and a halter will reache.
            
            
               
               Luſte.
               Mary ſyrs, but your councels hath ſet me on fire.
               Hey luſty lad, how freſhe am I nowe,
               Leade me Inclination to haue my deſire,
               And then at thy requeſt I wyll euer bende & bowe.
            
            
               Incli.
               He that bendeth to folowe his owne inclination,
               Muſt nedes liue a wicked and vile conuerſation,
               But go maiſter Luſte, I will leade you to a place
               Where you ſhall haue pleaſure enough in ſhort ſpace.
            
            
               Luſte.
               yea, but ſhall not this company goe thether.
            
            
               Inclina.
               yes mary we foure will all go together,
               But Sturdines ſhall tary to face out the matter,
               If Iuſte peraduenture againſt you ſhould clatter.
            
            
               Sturdi.
               By the maſſe, and well ſaid, but firſt let vs ſing,
            
            
               Incli.
               I muſt tune my pipes firſt of all with drinking.
            
            
               Elation
               Tuſhe what then, I praie thee help vs beare a part.
            
            
               Incli.
               yes I will ſing the trouble with all my harte.
               Luſte ſhalbe led by inclination
               To carnall cogitation,
               Where luſte is led wholy by me,
               He muſt fall to Cupidite,
               For carnall cares ſhall him aſſaile,
               And ſpedely they ſhall preuaile.
               I Sturdines will face it out,
               In his cauſe, ſturdy ſtiffe and ſtoute,
               Then Gredy gutte ſhall make him eate,
               Both houſe & lands, like bread & meate.
               Elation ſhal puffe him hie
               For to aſpier aboue the ſkie,
               Then natural and lordly luſte,
               Shall with his poure diſpiſe the Iuſte.
            
            
               
               Elation.
               Our ſonge is ended haſte thou other in ſtore,
            
            
               Inclina.
               I ſhall not haue done this halfe houre and more,
               yet I will nowe I remember, come in Luſte
               That I go before is but nedefull and iuſt,
               
                  Go out all foure.
you ſhalbe nowe led by me Inclination
               to reaſon and talke with Carnall cogitation.
            
            
               Sturdi.
               Is there more vanitie vnder neath the ſonne,
               Then to be inclined after this ſorte,
               well Luſte doth now as other haue done,
               yea, and doe daye by daye, eſteming it a ſporte,
               this Luſte is the Image of all wicked men,
               whiche in ſeeking the worlde, haue all delectation,
               they regarde not God nor his cōmaundementes tenne
               But are wholy led by their owne Inclination,
               Firſt to inculcate with Carnall cogitation,
               And after to the deſier of all worldly treaſure,
               whiche alone they eſteme the fulnes of pleaſure
               with Elation or Pride he is alſo aſſotiate,
               which puffeth vp his ſences with preſumption peſtilēt
               then Gredy gutte maketh them continually to grate
               On ye mock of this world which he thīketh permanēt,
               I ſturdines to beare out all thinges, am bent:
               thus ſee you howe men that are led by their luſte,
               Diſſent from the vertuous godlie and Iuſte.
            
            ¶Go out.
            ¶Enter Iuſte and Sapience.
            
               Sapiēce
               The aduiſe of Ariſtippus haue in your mynde,
               which willed mē to ſeke ſuch thinges as be permanēt
               And not ſuch as are of a vaniſhing kinde
               For the one with the other is not equiualent,
               Be circumſpect therefore, forſeing and Sapient,
               For treaſures here gotten are vncertaine and vaine,
               But treaſures of the mynde do continually remaine.
            
            
               
               Iuſte.
               This is the mynde of Muſonus alſo I remembre,
               Like as preſently you haue aduertiſed me,
               For the which I can not but thankefully render,
               Such commendations as is requiſite to be,
               And as your name is Sapience, thus muche I ſee,
               That on heauenly wiſedome you doe depende,
               And not on as time doth bring to an ende.
            
            
               Sapiēce
               Truthe in deede, & therfore your name being Iuſte,
               With me and my documentes muſt be aſſotiate,
               Where contrary ſuche as are led by their luſt,
               To incline euill are alwayes appropriate,
               They haue not as you haue, battel & combate,
               Againſt the cogitations that inwardly ſpring,
               But rather are obedient vnto the ſame thing,
               And this is the occaſion that men are ſo ambitious,
               And ſo fooliſhe led by the luſte of their braine,
               Sometime to couet, ſometime to be vicious,
               Sometime the councell of the wyſe to diſdaine,
               Sometime to clime till they fall downe againe,
               Sometime to vſurpe the poſſeſſions of other,
               Sometime to diſobeye both father and mother.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Alas what auaileth it ryches to enioye,
               Though as muche in cōpariſon as Creſſus the king,
               What helpeth it to haue Helene in Troye,
               If the conſcience of man continually ſting,
               Elation and Pride, no commoditie doth bring,
               But is often knowen the forerunner of ſhame,
               And the blotte of immortall memorie and fame.
               Nowe by my hallydome it is alone a,
Enter Inclination the Viſ
                        •
                     .
               
               Better ſporte in my life I neuer ſawe,
               It is trimme I tel you to daūce with Iohn & Ione a:
               We paſſe not a point for God nor his lawe,
               
                  But Luſt is luſty and full of porridge,
               Cogitation and he, in one Bed doth lie
               When: here is maiſter Iuſte with his cancred corage,
               What an olde doting, Sapience then I am dreſſed I,
               So often already Iuſte hath me reſtrained,
               That I dare not entiſe him any more,
               For through Sapience he hath me clerely diſdained
               That my courage is ſpent, and I haue no more.
            
            ¶Make a going back,
            
               Sapiēce
               Nay ſofte ſyr we muſt talke with you or ye go.
            
            
               Inclina
               I can not tary at this time the truthe is ſo.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Nay, there is no remedy with you we muſt talke.
            
            
               Inclina.
               By the body of me, I holde beſt that I walke,
               Or els learne to ſpeake language another whyle,
               And ſo I may happen the knaues to beguyle.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Turne back or you go, we haue ſomewhat to ſay.
            
            
               Incli.
               Non point parla franſois, nonne par ma foy.
            
            
               Sapiēce
               To deceiue vs nowe him ſelfe he doth prepare.
            
            
               Incli.
               Ick en can ghene engliſhe ſpreken vorwaer,
               Body of me let me go, or els I ſhall piſſe,
               Iwis maiſter Iuſte, you haue loued me or this,
               Therfore nowe be ruled after my councell,
               And godly thinges for your commoditie I ſhall you tel
            
            
               Sapiēce
               Let him that is Iuſte not lightly enſue,
               His vyle inclination and carnall concupicence,
               But let him rather contende the ſame to ſubdue,
               And chiefly thoſe that haue knowledge of Sapience,
               Therefore to brydle this luſte do your diligence,
               His craftie prouocations vtterly to reſtrayne,
               That Iuſt may liue whyle life doth remaine.
            
            
               Inclina.
               Godd man hoball ſpeake you in earneſt:
               What doeſt thou ſaye, ſhall the Iuſt bridle me,
               
                  No, no, brother ſnappes, doe the worſte and thy beſt,
               I will not be bridled of him nor of thee.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Seing Sapience conſiſteth in heauenly document,
               And that heauenly document conſiſteth in ſapience
               To bridle this wretche I can not but conſent,
               Sithe I of his purpoſe haue had oft intelligence.
            
            
               Inclina.
               Yet againe brydle, it doth not preuayle,
               I will not be bridled of the beſt of you both,
               See you this gere heres one will make you to quaile,
               Stande backe, to kil you maiſter iuſt I would be loth
               you haue bene ſo burned and fried of late,
               That it were pitie to hurte you any more,
               Back I ſay, or my dagger ſhall about your pate,
               By the maſſe but I will ſyr, yle make your bones ſore.
            
            ¶Struggle two or thre tymes,
            
               Iuſte.
               I will bridle thee beaſt for all thy bragging.
            
            
               Incli.
               In faith good man Iuſte, yle holde ye wagging,
               Nay brother, ye ſhall finde me a curſte colte to bridle,
               Nay in faith, better yet I will make thee to ſtruggle.
            
            
               Sapiēce
               Neuer leue him but enſue the councell of ſapience.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Lo nowe I haue brought him vnder obedience.
            
            Brydle him.
            
               Incli▪
               
               Not ſo obedient as thou thinkeſt me to haue,
               Nay brother, ye ſhall finde me a coltiſhe knaue,
               We he, he, it is good for you to holde faſte,
               For I will kicke and winche whyle thy lyfe doth laſte▪
               
            
            
               Sapiēce
               Thou ſhalt kicke in deede but no victory wynne,
               Neither to conquer the Iuſt to vngodlines nor ſinne,
            
            
               Incli.
               O yes, O yes, I will make a proclamation.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               What ſhall that be?
            
            
               Incli▪
               
               If ye will geue me leaue then you ſhall ſee,
               O yes, is there any man or woman that hath loſt,
               
                  A gambolling gelding with a graye tayle,
               Let him come to the Crier and paie for his coſte,
               And he will tell him tidinges without any fayle.
            
            
               Sapiēce
               To the entent that you may him ſharpely reſtraine,
               Let him not enioye ſo muche of the raine.
            
            ¶Bridle him ſhorter.
            
               Inclina
               Cockes ſoule, nowe the ſnaff
                     •
                  e cutteth my lip,
               I would this ſuberly knaue had the pip,
               I ſhall leape no hedges while this brydle is on,
               Out alas, I thinke it will fret me to the bone.
            
            
               Sapiēce
               Thus ſhould euery man that wilbe called Iuſte,
               Brydle and ſubdue his beaſtly inclination,
               That he in the ende may obtaine perfect truſte,
               The meſſenger of God to geue ſight to ſaluation.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               That truſte to obtaine with him I haue ſtruggled,
            
            
               Sapiēce
               Then let vs departe and leaue this beaſt bridled.
            
            ¶Go out both,
            
               Inclina.
               Mary the deuill go with you and his dun dame,
               Such horſe maiſters will make a colte quickely tame,
               I would he were hanged that this ſnaffell did make,
               It maketh my chappes ſo ſhamefully to ake▪
               
               ye haue no pitie on me you I ſe by your laughing,
               I care not greatly if I fall to gambolling,
               We he, he, he, he, he, come alofte I ſaye,
               Beware the horſe heles I auiſe you, ſtande awaye,
               The raine of my bridle is tied ſo ſhorte,
               That I can not make you any more ſporte,
               But though I be bridled now of the Iuſte,
               I doubte not but I ſhalbe vnbridled by Luſte,
               And let not Iuſt thinke but I will rebell,
               Although he bridle me tenne times all well,
               Though nature ſaith one dome with a croche,
               
                  It will not lie long but incontinent aproche,
               Eeuen ſo, though that I be bridled a whyle,
               The Colte will at length the Curſer beguyle,
            
            ¶Enter Gredy gutte running and catche a fall,
            
               Gredy.
               Chill runne I as faſt as I can,
               zures did none of you zee a man,
               Cham zent in haſte from my maiſter Luſte,
               So that Inclination nedes come to him muſt.
            
            
               Incli.
               Where is he nowe I praye thee tell me.
            
            
               Gredy.
               Why what haue we here Ieſus benedicite,
               I holde twenty pounde it is Baalams Aſſe,
               Nay tis a Colte, I ſee his tayle by the maſſe.
            
            
               Incli.
               Am I a Colte, nay thou lieſt lyke a knaue,
               Somewhat for thy labour nowe ſhalt thou haue.
            
            
               Gredy.
               Ho ball ho, louſy Iade muſt ye kicke.
            
            
               Inclina▪
               
               Who euer ſawe ſuche a deſperate Dicke,
               Why Gredy gutte, doeſt thou not knowe Inclinatiō?
            
            
               Gredy▪
               
               Body O me, who hath dreſt thee of that faſhion,
               Thou arte brydled for byting nowe in deede,
               Syra, maiſter Luſte would haue thee make ſpede.
            
            
               Incli.
               I am bridled I▪ euen as thou doeſt ſee,
               Therefore deſier him to come and helpe me,
               But what is the matter that he for me ſente.
            
            
               Gredy.
               Mary to gather with Gredines, nowe he is bent,
               He hath had long talke with Carnal cogitation,
               And is ſet on fier by the meanes of Elation,
               So that he is ſo luſty he can not abyde.
               Therefore one or other for him muſt be ſpied.
            
            
               Inclina▪
               
               Well Gredy gutte, I praye thee goe and make haſte.
            
            
               Gredy.
               Tuſhe feare not, chill ſpende no time in waſte.
            
            
               Incli.
               I had rather then .xl. pence that he ware come,
               If I be bridled long I ſhalbe vndone,
               
                  So ſharpe is this ſnaffell called reſtrainte,
               That it maketh me ſweate I am ſo faint:
               Harke, I heare the voyce of my maiſter Luſte,
               Now I ſhalbe vnbridled ſhortly I truſte.
            
            Enter Luſte,
            
               Luſte.
               Cocks precious woundes, here hath bene vilanie▪
               
            
            
               Inclina.
               Ye, ye they haue vſed me with to much vilanie,
               That old knaue Sapience ſo counſeled Iuſte,
               Bu let me be vnbridled good maiſter Luſte.
            
            Vnbridle him,
            
               Luſte.
               Lo now thou art vnbridled, be of good chere▪
               
               By lady I am glad I haue gotten thus cleare,
               But harkē you maiſter Luſt, if I may do you pleaſure
               
                  Whiſper,
She is called Treaſure.
            
            
               Luſte.
               O my harte is on fyre till ſhe come in place.
            
            
               Inclina.
               O maiſter Luſte, ſhe hath an amiable face,
               A tricker▪ a trimmer, in faith that ſhe is,
               The goddes of wealth, proſperitie and bliſſe.
            
            
               Luſte.
               But thinke you that this minion long endure ſhall.
            
            
               Inclina.
               For euer and euer man, ſhe is immortall:
               There be many other, but ſhe exceadeth them all.
            
            
               Luſte.
               What be they, haue you their names in ſtore,
            
            
               Inclina.
               Yea harke in your eare.
whiſper,
& many other more
            
            
               Luſte.
               Sithe that the apple of Paris before me is caſt,
               And that I may deliuer the ſame where I will,
               I would Prometheus were here to helpe me hold faſt
               That I might haue a fore witte with me euer ſtill,
               Pallas I conſider in ſcience hath ſkill,
               But Iuno and Venus, good will doe I beare,
               Therfore to geue the Appull I know not where.
            
            
               Incli.
               Be conciled by me and geue it lady Treaſure,
               It ſhalbe for your cōmoditie in ye end without meaſur
               
                  For hauing the company of this minion laſſe,
               you ſhall neuer wante the ſocietie of Pallas,
               Iuno, nor yet the armipotent Mars,
               Can not reſiſte your ſtrengthe be they neuer ſo fearce
               And as for Venus, you ſhall haue at pleaſure,
               For ſhe is bought and ſolde alwayes with Treaſure,
               She of her power hath whole countries conquered
               The moſt noble chāpions by her hath ben murthered
               Acon for her ſake was ſtoned to death,
               Tuſhe, innumerable at this day ſpende their breath,
               Sume hange or be hanged, they loue her ſo well,
               She is the great goddeſſe, it is true that I tell.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Which way ſhould I worke of her to haue a ſight.
            
            
               Incli.
               I Inclination will leade you thyther right,
               But we muſt haue Gredy gutte and alſo Elation.
            
            
               Luſte.
               They are at the houſe of carnall Cogitation.
            
            
               Inclina
               Whether I would wyſhe that we might departe.
               I will leade you thether with all my harte.
               Go out.
               Enter Iuſt, Truſt, a woman playnly, and Contentation, knele downe & ſing, ſhe haue a crowne,
               So happy is the ſtate of thoſe▪
               
               That walke vpright and iuſte,
               That thou Lorde doeſt thy face diſcloſe
               By perfect hope and truſte.
               Their Inclination thou doeſt ſtay,
               And ſendeſt them Sapience,
               That they ſhould ſerue and eke obey,
               Thy highe magnificence.
               Thou ſendeſt contentation,
               That we in thee may reſt,
               
                  Therefore all adoration,
               To thee perteineth beſt.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               God careth for his as the Prophet doth ſaye,
               And preſerueth them vnder his mercifull wynges,
               Namely the Iuſte that his will doe obey,
               Obſeruing his holy commaundement in all thinges,
               Not for our ſake, or for our deſeruinges,
               But for his owne ſake openly to declare,
               That all men on earth ought to lyue in his feare.
            
            
               Truſte.
               Howe God hath bliſſed you all men may ſee,
               For firſt at your entraunce you conquered Luſte,
               Not by your power, but by myght of the deitie,
               As all perſons ought to doe that be Iuſte,
               Then through Sapience which God did you ſende,
               You bridled that brutiſhe beaſte Inclination,
               And alſo ordred you with Contentation.
            
            
               Conten.
               Thoſe that are contented with their vocation,
               Be thankefull to God, this is a true conſequent,
               And thoſe that be thankefull in their conuerſation,
               Can not but pleaſe the Lorde God omnipotent,
               But thoſe that be ſturdie, proude, and diſobediente,
               The Ruler of all Rulers will them confounde,
               And rote their remembraunce of from the grounde.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               When Solon was aſked of Creſſus the king,
               What man was moſte happie in this vale tereſtriall,
               To the ende he ſemeth to attriqute that thing,
               When men be aſociate with treaſures celeſtiall,
               Before the ende can no man iudge he doth ſaie,
               That any man is happie that here beareth breath,
               But then by his ende pretely iudge we may,
               Thus true happines coeſiſteth ſaith he after death.
               
                  If this be a truthe as vndoubtedly it is,
               What men are more fooliſh, wretched and miſerable,
               Thē thoſe ye in theſe treaſures accōpt their whole blys
               Being infect with amdition that ſicknes vncurable,
               A wicked Adraſtia, thou goddes deceiuable,
               Thus to plucke from men the ſence of their mynde,
               So that no contentation, therein they can finde.
            
            
               Truſte▪
               
               The treaſure of this worlde we may well compare
               To Circes the witche, with her crafty cautilitie,
               Where with many mens myndes ſo poyſoned are,
               That quite they are caried into all fidelitie,
               They are coniured in deede, and bewitched ſo ſore,
               That treaſure is their truſte, ioye and delight,
               True truſte is expelled they paſſe not therefore▪
               
               And againſt contentation, they continually fight▪
               
               But though wicked men folowe their luſt,
               Criyng, on earth is our felicitie and pleaſure,
               yet God doth ſo guide the hartes of the iuſte,
               That they reſpecte chiefly the celeſtiall treaſure.
            
            
               Conten.
               Alas ſhould we not haue that eſtimation,
               Which God hath prepared for his dere elect,
               Should not our myndes reſte in full contentation,
               Hauing truſte in this treaſure, moſt highe in reſpecte:
               S▪ Paule, when the Lorde ſo highe did erecte,
               Saith: it paſſeth the ſence of our memory and mynde,
               Much leſſe can our outward eyes the ſame finde.
               And as for treaſures which men poſſeſſe here
               Through fickelnes of fortune, ſone fadeth away▪
               
               The greateſt of renowme and moſt worthy pere,
               Sometime falleth, in the end to myſery and decaie,
               Recorde of Dioniſius, a king of much fame,
               Of the valiaunt Alexander, and Caeſar the ſtrong,
               
                  Record of Tarquiniꝰ, which Superbus had to name,
               And of Heliogabolos that miniſtred with wronge,
               If I ſhould recite all, I ſhould ſtande very long.
               But theſe be ſufficient plainely to approue,
               Howe ſone by vncertentie, this treaſure doth remoue.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               It is true, therefore a mynde well contente,
               Is great riches as the wyſe king Salomon doth ſay:
               We haue ſeene of late daies this cancar peſtilent
               Corrupting our realme, to our great decaie,
               Ambition I meane, whiche chiefly did raigne
               Among thoſe that ſhould be examples to other,
               We ſawe howe their brethren they did diſdaine,
               And burned with fire the childe with the mother,
               It is often ſeene that ſuch monſters ambitious,
               As ſpare not to ſpill the bloud of the innocente,
               Will not greatly ſticke to become ſeditious,
               The determination of God thereby to preuente:
               God graunt euery one of vs earneſtly to repent,
               And not to ſet our mindes on this fading treaſure,
               But rather wyſhe and wil, to doe the Lordes pleaſure.
            
            
               Truſte.
               O ye Emperours, Potētates, & Princes of renowne,
               Learne of Iuſt with truſte your ſelues to aſſociate,
               That like as your vocation, by right doth aſke ye crown
               And alſo due obediēce, being ye appointed magiſtrate,
               So rule that at the laſte you may be reſuſcitate,
               And raigne with ye almightie with perfect cōtinuāce,
               Receiuing double crownes for your godly gouernaūce
               ye noble men, whome God hath furniſhed with fame,
               Be myndefull to walke in the wayes of the Iuſte,
               Adde vertue euermore to your honorable name,
               And be not ouercome of concupicence or luſte,
               Fle from loue of Treaſure, catche holde of me Truſte.
               
                  And then double felicitie, at the laſt you ſhall poſſeſſe,
               And in al earthly doings, God ſhal geue good ſucces.
               ye poore men & commons, walke well in your vocation
               Baniſhe luſte and deſier, which is not conuenient,
               Let truſte worke in you a full contentation,
               Conſidering that it leadeth to treaſures more excellēt
               For theſe are vncertaine, but they are moſt permanēt:
               your neceſſitie ſupplie with vertue and truſte,
               And then ſhall you enioye your crown among ye Iuſt.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               As I being properly nominate Iuſte,
               Am here aſſociate with contentation,
               So haue I my whole felicitie in Truſte,
               Who ilumineth mine eyes to ſee my ſaluation.
            
            
               Truſte.
               Feare ye not, ſhortly you ſhall haue conſolation,
               If I were once growen in you to perfection,
               Euen thus goeth it alwaies with ye children of electiō
               
            
            
               Iuſte.
               I will departe nowe, will ye go with me truſte.
            
            
               Truſte.
               yea I muſt alwaies aſſociate the Iuſte.
            
            
               Conten.
               A pſalme of thankeſgeuing firſt let vs ſing,
               To the laude and prayſe of the immortall kinge.
               Here if you will: ſing the man is bleſt
               that feareth God. &c.
            
            ¶Go out,
            Enter Inclination laughing,
            
               Incli.
               Luſt (quod he) now in faithe he is luſty,
               Lady Treaſure and he hath made a matche,
               He thinketh that I waxe marueylous truſty,
               Becauſe I teache him to clawe and to catche,
               And now a daies amitie doth therein conſiſte,
               He that can flatter ſhalbe well beloued,
               But he that ſaieth, thus and thus ſaieth Chriſte,
               Shall as an enemy be openly reproued.
               
                  Friendſhip, yea, friendſhip cōſiſteth now in adulatiō,
               Speake faire and pleaſe the luſt of thy Lorde,
               I warrante thee be had in great eſtimation,
               When thoſe that tell truthe, ſhalbe abhorde,
               A vnhappy lingua, whether wilt thou ren,
               Take hede I aduiſe thee, leaſt thou be ſhent,
               If ye chaunce to tell any tales of theſe gentlewomen,
               With fleſhe hokes and nayles, you are like to be rent,
               Nay for the paſſion of me, be not ſo moued,
               And I will pleaſe you incontinent againe,
               Aboue all treaſures you are worthy to be loued,
               Becauſe you do no men deride nor diſdaine,
               You doe not contempte the ſimple and poore,
               you be not his minded, proude and preſumptuous,
               Neither wanton nor wyly you be neuer more,
               But gentle, louing, modeſtie, and vertuous,
               Beholde howe a lie can pleaſe ſome folkes diet,
               O pacifie their myndes marueilous well,
               All whyſte I warrant ye, ſo they in quiet,
               Howe to pleaſe you hereafter now I can tell,
               Harke, I heare Luſte and my lady Treaſure.
               They are giuen to ſolace ſinging and pleaſure.
            
            Enter Luſte and Treaſure a woman, finely appareled.
            
               Luſte.
               Ah Amorous Lady of bewtifull face,
               Thou art hartely welcome into this place,
               My harte is inclined to thee lady Treaſure,
               My loue is inſatiate, it kepeth no meaſure.
            
            
               Treaſur
               It is I maiſter Luſt that will you aduaunce,
               Treaſure, it is that thinges doth enhaunce
               Vpon me ſet your whole affection and luſte,
               And paſſe not a point for the wayes of the Iuſte,
               
                  Treaſure is a pleaſure, beare that in mynde,
               Both truſty and true ye ſhall me alwayes finde.
            
            
               Inclina.
               As truſty as is a quicke ele by the tayle,
               What Lady Treaſure welcome without fayle,
               To be better acquainted with you once I truſte,
               But I dare not in the preſence of my maiſter Luſte,
               ye are welcome ſyr hartely, what be of good courage:
               Drawer, let vs haue a pynte of white wyne & borage.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Wherefore I praye thee tell,
            
            
               Inclina▪
               
               Mary me thinke you are not well.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Not well, who can a better life craue,
               Then to poſſeſſe ſuche a lady as I haue:
               Is there any wealth not conteined in treaſure,
               Ah lady, I loue thee in faith out of meaſure,
            
            
               Incli.
               It is out of meaſure in deede as you ſaie,
               And euen ſo moſt men loue her at this daie:
               Oh ſhe is a mynion of amorous hewe,
               Her pere in my daies yet I neuer knewe,
               (Old quod you) I am an olde knaue I tell ye,
               Nay, neuer laughe at ye matter, for doubtles I ſmel ye
               She paſſeth Iuno, Ceres, and Pallas,
               More beautifull then euer dame Venus was▪
               
               Othea in ſapience ſhe doth excede,
               And Diana in dignitie, of whome we doe reade.
               What ſhould faire Helene once named be,
               She excelleth all theſe maiſter Luſte beleue me.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Howe ſaye you, is not this an eloquent lad?
            
            
               Treaſur
               That you haue ſuch a ſeruaunt, truely I am glad.
            
            
               Inclina.
               Ha, ha, nowe in deede I can you not blame,
               For women of all degrees are glad of the ſame,
               They that flatter and ſpeake them fayre,
               Shalbe their ſonnes, and peraduenture their ayre.
            
            
               
               Luſte.
               You tolde me of a brother you had lady Treaſure.
            
            
               Treaſur
               Yea ſyr that I haue, his name is called Pleaſure,
               And ſeing you enyoye me now at your will,
               Right ſone I am ſure he will come you vntill▪
               
            
            
               Luſte.
               Truly of him I would faine haue a ſight,
               For becauſe yt in pleaſure. I haue marueilous delight.
            
            
               Inclina.
               Then honeſtie and profite you may bidde good night
            
            
               Luſte.
               What ſaieſt thou?
            
            
               Incli.
               I ſaie he will ſhortly appeare in ſight,
               I knowe by his ſinging, the ſame is he,
               The miſbegotten orpheus, I thinke that he be.
               ¶Enter pleaſure ſinging this ſong.
               O happy eaies, and pleaſaunt playes,
               Wherein I doe delight a
               I doe pretende, till my liues ende
               To liue ſtill in ſuch plighte a▪
               
            
            
               Inclina.
               Maiſter pleaſure I perceiue you be of good chere.
            
            
               Pleaſur
               What Inclination old lad, art thou here.
            
            
               Inclina.
               Yea ſyr, and lady Treaſure your ſiſter alſo.
            
            
               Pleaſur
               Body of me, then vnto her I will go,
               What ſyſter, I am glad to mete with you here.
            
            
               Treaſur
               Welcome vnto me mine owne brother dere.
               Maiſter Luſte, this is my brother of whome I tolde,
               He is pleaſaunt and luſty, as you may beholde.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Gentlemā (I pray you) is your name maſter Pleaſure
            
            
               Pleaſur
               yea ſyr, and I am brother to lady Treaſure.
            
            
               Luſte.
               And are you concented to accompanie me.
            
            
               Pleaſur
               Where as ſhe is reſident I muſt nedes be,
               Treaſure doth Pleaſure commonly proceade,
               But the one is with ye other, they haue both ſo decreed
            
            
               Inclina.
               Mary now you are well in deede maiſter Luſte,
               
                  This is better I trowe then the life of the Iuſte,
               They be compelled to poſſeſſe contentation,
               Hauing no treaſure but truſt of ſaluation,
               But my lady your miſtris, my miſtris I would ſaye,
               She worketh you may ſee to kepe you from decaie.
            
            
               Luſte.
               O madame, in you is all my delight,
               And in your brother Pleaſure, both daye and night,
               The triall of treaſure this is in deede,
               I perceiue that ſhe is a true frende at neede.
               For I haue proued her according as Thales doth ſaye
               And I perceiue that her bewtie can not decaye.
            
            
               Treaſur
               Alwayes with you I wilbe reſident,
               So that your life ſhalbe moſt excellent.
            
            
               Pleaſur
               yea ſyr and me Pleaſure alſo you ſhall haue,
               So that none other thinge there nedeth to craue,
               I will repleniſhe your harte with delight,
               And I wilbe alwayes with treaſure in ſighte,
               But if you deſire to enioye me at your will,
               My ſiſter you muſt haue in reputation ſtill,
               And then as her treaſure is certaine and excellent,
               My pleaſure ſhalbe both perfect and permanent,
               Credite not thoſe ſyr that talke that and this,
               Saiyng, that in vs twoo conſiſteth no bliſſe,
               But let experience your mynde euer moue,
               And ſee if all men vs twoo doe not loue.
            
            
               Inclina.
               Loue, yes they loue you in deede without doubte,
               Which ſhutteth ſome of thē Gods kingdome without:
               They loue you ſo well that their God they do hate,
               As time hath declared to vs euen of late,
               But he that on ſuch thinges his ſtudy doth caſte,
               Shalbe ſure to be deceiued at the laſte.
            
            
               Luſte.
               What doeſt thou ſaie,
            
            
               
               In
                     •
                  lina.
               Of treaſure forſoth ye muſt euer holde faſt,
               For if you ſhould chaunce to loſe lady Treaſure,
               Then fare well in poſt this gentleman Pleaſure.
            
            
               Luſte.
               My loue to them both can not be expreſt,
               And eſpecially my Lady you I loue beſt.
            
            
               Treaſur
               If ye loue me as you doe profeſſe,
               Be ye ſure you ſhall wante no kinde of welthines.
            
            
               Pleaſur
               And if you haue welthines at your owne wyll,
               Then will I pleaſure remayne with you ſtill.
            
            
               Incli.
               You are both as conſtant as ſnowe in the ſunne.
               Which from ſnow to water through melting doth run
               But worldly wyſe men can not conceaue that▪
               
               To honte for ſuche myſe they learne of the cat.
            
            
               Luſte.
               My Lady is amorous and full of fauour.
            
            
               Inclina.
               I may ſay to you ſhe hath an ilfauoured ſauour.
            
            
               Luſte.
               What ſaieſt thou?
            
            
               Inclina.
               I ſaye ſhe is louing and of gentle behauiour.
            
            
               Treaſur
               And ſo I will continue ſtill be you ſure.
            
            
               Pleaſur
               And I in like caſe whyle your life doth endure,
            
            
               Luſte.
               Ah truſte treaſure, ah pleaſaunt pleaſure,
               All wealth I poſſeſſe nowe without meaſure,
               And ſeing that the ſame ſhall firmely remayne,
               To helpe me ſinge a ſonge, will you take the paine.
            
            
               Treaſur
               Euen with all my harte beginne whan ye will.
            
            
               Incli.
               To it, and I will either helpe or ſtand ſtill.
               ¶Singe this ſonge.
               Am not I in bliſſed caſe
               Treaſure and pleaſure to poſſeſſe,
               I would not wiſhe no better place,
               If I may ſtill haue welthines,
               
                  And to enioye in perfect peace,
               My lady lady.
               My pleaſaunt pleaſure ſhall encreaſe
               My deare lady.
               Helene may not compared be,
               Nor Creſeda that was ſo bright,
               Theſe can not ſtaine the ſhine of thee
               Nor yet Minerua of great might,
               Thou paſſeſt Venus farre away,
               Lady lady,
               Loue thee I will both night and day
               My dere lady.
               My mouſe my nobs and cony ſwete
               My hope and ioye my whole delight,
               Dame nature may fall at thy feete,
               And may yelde to thee her crowne of righte
               I will thy body nowe embrace,
               Lady, lady
               And kiſſe thy ſwete and pleaſaunt face,
               My dere lady.
            
            ¶Enter Gods viſitation.
            
               Viſita.
               I am Gods miniſter called Viſitation,
               Which diuers and many waies you may vnderſtande
               Sometime I bring ſicknes, ſometime perturbation,
               Sometime trouble and miſery throughout the lande,
               Sometime I ſignifie gods wrath to be at hande,
               
                  Sometime a foreronner of diſtruction imminent,
               But an exectuter of paine I am at this preſent,
               Thou inſipient foole that haſt folowed thy luſte,
               Diſdaining the doctrine declared by Sapience,
               In treaſure and pleaſure hath bene thy truſte,
               Which yu thoughteſt ſhould remaine euer in thy preſēce
               Thou neuer remembreſt Thales his ſentence,
               Who willeth men in all thinges to kepe a meaſure,
               Eſpecially in loue to incertaintie of treaſure,
               Euen nowe I am come from viſiting the Iuſt,
               Becauſe God beginneth firſt with his elect,
               But he is ſo aſſociate and comforted with truſte,
               That no kinde of impacience his ſoule can infecte,
               Contentation in ſuche ſorte his race doth directe,
               That he is contented with Gods operation,
               Comfortably embracing me his viſitation.
               But nowe I am come to vexe thee with paine,
               Which makeſt treaſure thy caſtell and rocke,
               Thou ſhalt knowe that both ſhe and pleaſure is vain,
               And that the almighty thou canſt not mocke,
               Anguiſhe and griefe into thee I doe caſte,
               With paine in thy members continually,
               Now thou haſt paine thy pleaſure can not laſte,
               But I will expelle him incontinently.
            
            
               Luſte.
               O cockes harte, what a peſtilence is this,
               Departe from me I ſaye, hence gods Viſitation,
               Helpe, helpe, lady treaſure thou goddes of blis,
               At thy handes let me haue ſome conſolation.
            
            
               Treaſur
               I will remaine with you be out of doubte.
            
            
               Incli.
               Will ye be packing you ilfauoured lowte.
            
            
               Viſita.
               Preſently in dede from him thou ſhalt not go,
               And why? becauſe Gods will hath not determined ſo.
               
                  But in time thou treaſure ſhalt be turned to ruſte,
               And as for pleaſure he ſhall nowe attend on the Iuſt.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Gogs woundes theſe panges encreaſe euer more.
            
            
               Inclina.
               And my littell finger is ſpitefully ſore,
               you will not beleue how my hele doth ake,
            
            
               Treaſur
               Nay let me alone your part I will take,
to Viſitatiō
                  
               
            
            
               Viſita.
               Be of good comforte whyle I here remaine.
to Luſt.
               
               For pleaſure and he ſhalbe parted in twaine,
               It is not mete that he ſhould be participate with luſt
               But rather with the vertuous godly and Iuſte.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Remaine with me ſtill maiſter pleaſure I ſay.
            
            
               Pleaſur
               Nay there is no remedy I muſt away,
               For where God doth ſende punition and paine,
               I pleaſure in no caſe can not remaine.
            
            
               Viſita.
               I could in like caſe ſeparate thy treaſure.
               But God doth admoniſhe thee by loſing thy pleaſure.
            
            ¶Go out Viſitation and Pleaſure,
            
               Inclina▪
               
               Fare well in the deuils name olde louſy loute,
               That my maiſter will die I ſtand in great doubte,
               Ho, ho, ho, howe is it with you maiſter Luſte,
            
            
               Luſte.
               By the fleſhe of Goliah, yet Treaſure is my truſte,
               Though pleaſure be gone, and I liue in paine,
               I doubt not but Treaſure will fetche him againe.
            
            
               Treaſur
               Yea, that I will feare not & with you remayne.
            
            
               Inclina.
               The propertie of riche men vndoubtedly he hath,
               Whiche thinke with monie to pacifie Gods wrath,
               And health at their pleaſure to bye and to ſell,
               Howe is it maiſter Luſte, are you any thing well.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Againſt this Viſitation my harte doth rebell,
               Gogs woundes, ſhall I ſtill in theſe panges remaine.
            
            
               Treaſur
               Feare you not maiſter Luſt, I wil helpe you againe
               Treaſure in phiſicke exceadeth Gallenus,
               
                  Tuſhe there is no phiſition but we ſhall haue with vs.
               To the eaſe of your body they will you bringe,
               And therefore I praie you diſpaire in nothing,
               Put your truſt alwayes in me lady treaſure,
               And I will reſtore you againe vnto pleaſure,
               For I am the Goddes that therein hath power,
               Which ſhall remaine perfect vnto the laſt houre.
            
            
               Inclina.
               Yea, yea, maiſter Luſte, be as mery as you may,
               Let Treaſure be your truſte who ſo euer ſay nay.
            
            ¶Enter tyme.
            
               Time.
               The auncient Grekes haue called me Chronos▪
               
               Whiche in our vulgar tongue ſignifieth time.
               I am entred in preſently for a certainly purpoſe,
               Euen to turne treaſure to ruſte and to ſlime,
               And Luſte which hath long diſdained the Iuſte,
               Enſuing his filthy and vyle inclination,
               Shall immediatly be turned to duſte,
               To the example of all the whole congregation,
               For time bringeth both theſe matters to paſſe,
               As experience hath taught in euery age,
               And you ſhall beholde the ſame in this glaſſe,
               As a document both profitable and ſage,
               Both Luſt and treaſure come foorth with ſpede
               Into the ſhop of the moſt mighty God,
               There ſhall you be beaten to pouder in dede,
               And for your abuſion, fele his ſcourge and rod.
            
            
               Incli.
               By ſaint Mary, then they haue made a wiſe matche,
               I pretende therefore to leape ouer the hatche,
               Nay let me departe, ſyrs ſtop me not I ſaye,
               For I muſt remayne though both theſe decaye.
            
            ¶Go out,
            
               Luſte.
               Luſte from the beginning frequented hath bene
               
                  And ſhall I now turne to nothing for thee.
            
            
               Treaſur
               Treaſure in all ages hath bene beloued,
               And ſhall ſhe from the earth by thee be remoued.
            
            
               Time.
               You know that all ſuche thinges are ſubiect to time
               Therefore me to withſtande is no reaſon nor ryme,
               For like as all thinges in time their beginning had,
               So muſt all thinges in time vaniſhe and fade.
            
            
               Luſte.
               Gogs woundes, let Treaſure remaine ſtil with me,
            
            
               Treaſur
               Yea let me continue ſtill in my dignitie.
            
            
               Time.
               Nay, I muſt cary you into Vulcans fire,
               Where you ſhalbe tried vnto the vttermoſte,
               Seing Luſt againſt Iuſt did daily conſpier,
               To duſt he ſhall turne for all his great boaſte,
               Both of you ſhall haue one rigorous hoaſte,
               Come therefore with ſpede time can not tary,
               To the ende of your felicitie I will you carie.
            
            
               Treaſur
               If there be no remedy then there is no ſhifte,
            
            
               Luſte.
               He muſt nedes go that is driuen by the Deuils drifte,
               A cocks precious ſydes, what fortune is this,
               Whether go I nowe, to miſery or blis.
            
            Go out.
            ¶Enter Iuſte, leading Inclination in his bridle ſhakled.
            
               Inclina
               We, he, he, he, he, ware the horſe heles I ſaye,
               I would the raine ware loſe that I might run away.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Nay fithe thou wilt not ſpare againſt me to rebell,
               I will not ſpare by Gods grace thee to brydell,
               All men may ſee howe vile Inclination,
               Spareth not to put the Iuſt to vexation,
               Euen ſo may all men learne of me againe,
               Thy beaſtly deſiers to bridle and reſtraine▪
               
            
            
               Inclin.
               Mary ſyr I am bridled in deede as you ſaye,
               
                  And ſhakled I thinke for running awaye,
               This ſnafle is ſharpe indeede for the nones,
               And theſe shakkels doe chafe my legges to the bones,
               And yet will I prouoke ſpurne and pricke,
               Rebell repugne laſhe out and kicke,
               We he, in the Iades name are ye ſo freſhe,
               This gere I ſuppoſe will plucke downe your fleſhe.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Nay ſofte, thou ſhalt haue a litle more paine,
               For ſomewhat ſhorter nowe I will tie thy rayne.
            
            ¶Enter Truſt and Conſolation.
            
               Truſte.
               Moſte bliſſed and happie I ſaye are the Iuſte,
               Euen becauſe they reſtraine their owne Inclination,
               Thou therefore that haſt made thy treaſure of truſte,
               Beholde, I haue brought thee here conſolation.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Nowe blyſſed be God of his mercy and grace,
               With all my harte and ſoule I doe you embrace.
            
            
               Conſo.
               Conſolation is my name euen as Truſt hath ſaide,
               Which is ioye or comfort in this life tranſitorie,
               He that poſſeſſeth me, is of nothing afraide,
               But hath a moſte quiet and peaciable memorie,
               For I through truſt doth ſhewe thee the glorie,
               That God hath prepared for them before hande,
               Wherein at the laſt they ſhall perfectly ſtande.
            
            
               Truſte.
               Receiue this croune of felicitie nowe at this ſpace,
               Which ſhalbe made richer in the celeſtiall place.
            
            
               Incli.
               Byr lady, I would I had ſuch a gaye croune.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               Nowe prayſed be God for this riches of renoune
               Felicitie in this worlde the Iuſt doe enioye,
               Namely when the Deuill can them not anoye,
               The Lordes worke this is, who be prayſed for euer,
               who graunte vs in his lawes ſtill to perſeuer.
            
            
               Conſo.
               Amen, amen, God gyue vs delighte,
               
                  In his holy covenaunt both daye and night.
            
            
               Truſte.
               Our matter is almoſt brought to an ende,
               Sauing that Inclination in priſon muſt be ſhut,
               Iuſte carie him forth that vſeth to contende,
               And ſee that ſurely enough he be put.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               That ſhalbe done ſhortely by gods grace.
            
            
               Inclina.
               What ſofte I ſaye, me thinke ye go a ſhamefull pace,
               Was there euer poore colte thus handled before,
               Fie vpon it, my legges be onreaſonablye ſore,
               Well yet I will rebell, yea, and rebell againe,
               And though a thouſand times, yu ſhouldeſt me reſtrain.
            
            Leade him out.
            ¶Enter time with a ſimilitude of duſt, and ruſt,
            
               Time▪
               
               Beholde here howe Luſte is conuerted to duſte,
               This is his Image, his wealth and proſperitie,
               And Treaſure in like caſe is turned to ruſte,
               Whereof this example ſheweth the veritie.
               The triall of Treaſure this is no doubte,
               Let all men take hede that truſte in the ſame,
               Conſidering what thinges I tyme bringe aboute,
               And quenche out the vngodly their memory and fame.
            
            ¶Enter Iuſte.
            
               Iuſte.
               Why, and is Luſt and treaſure conuerted to this.
            
            
               Time.
               yea forſothe.
            
            
               Iuſte.
               What fooliſhe man in them would put truſte,
               If this be the finall end of their bliſſe,
               Muche better I commende the life of the Iuſte.
            
            
               Conſo.
               So it is no doubte, for they haue conſolation,
               Poſſeſſing felicitie euen in this place,
               I meane through Cruſte and hope of ſaluation,
               Whiche ſetteth out vnto vs gods mercy and grace.
            
            
               
               Truſte.
               Let all men conſider this good erudition,
               And not to put confidence in Luſte nor Treaſure,
               By theſe two examples receiue admonition,
               And alſo of the ſodaine vaniſhement of pleaſure.
            
            
               Time,
               Remember that time turneth all thinges about▪
               
               Time is the toucheſtone the Iuſte for to trie,
               But where as luſt & treaſur in time is come to nought
               Iuſt poſſeſſing Truſt, remayneth conſtantly,
               So that as I Time hath reuealed their infamie,
               So haue I ſhewed the Conſolation and gaine,
               That the Iuſte ſhall receiue that iuſtly doe raigne.
            
            
               Conſo.
               We will nowe no lenger trouble this audience,
               Sythe ſome what tedious to you we haue bene,
               Beſeching you to beare all thinges with pacience,
               And remember the examples that you haue ſeene,
               God graunte them to floriſhe liuely and grene,
               That ſome of vs the better therefore may be.
               Amen, Amen, I beſeche the blyſſed trinitie.
            
            Finis.
            
         
      
   