
      
         
            
            
               
               To the Kings moſt excellent Maiestie.
            
            THE HVMBLE PETITION OF TWO SISTERS; THE CHVRCH AND Common-wealth: For the reſtoring of their ancient Commons and liberties, which late Incloſure with depopulation, vncharitably hath taken away: Containing ſeuen reaſons as euidences for the ſame.
            
               PROV. 14. 28.
In the multitude of the people is the honour of a King, and for the want of people, commeth the deſtruction of the Prince.
            LONDINI, Impenſis GEORGII BISHOP. 1604.
         
         
            
            
               
                  TENEZ LE VRAY
                  Exlibris Bibliothecoe Domeſticoe RICHARDI TOWNELEY de Tonmeley In Agro Lancaſtrensi Armigeri Anno Aetatis. 73 Domin
                        〈…〉
                      702
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTIE PRINCE IAMES, BY the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c.
            
               THat ſaying of Queene Heſter to the most famous King Ahaſhueroſh, (most dread Soueraigne) doth, as it were, enforce me, to make this my humble Petition to your Highneſſe: If we were ſold to bee bondſlaues, or handmaides 
               Heſt. 7. 4. (ſaith ſhee) I would haue held my tongue, although the aduerſary



could neuer recompence the King this loſſe: But let my life 
               Verſe. 3. 
               be giuen me at my requeſt, and my peoples.
            
            There is a mightie Thorne ſprung vp of late, in diuers places of this Realme, like to that cruell Haman; which doeth not onely goe about to impoueriſh your Maieſties Subiects, but quite to roote them out: I meane Incloſure of Fields and Commons; whereas the Lords of Manours, and Freeholders will haue all their landes which haue heeretofore lien open, and in Common, (ſo that the poore might enter Common with them) now laid together in ſeuerall. And hereby the poore cannot enioy their ancient Commons and liberties. And this cankred Thorne alſo deuoureth Gods people, which is his inheritance, as the Pſalme teacheth vs, Aske ofme, (ſaith God) & I will giue 
               Pſal. 2. 8. 
               thee the people for thine inheritance,



&c. and the vttermoſt parts of the earth for thy poſſeſſion. Incloſers to maintaine their owne inheritances, doe make no conſcience to impaire this inheritance. Where God 2. Cor. 1. 11 hath beene praiſed with many mouthes, there now ſhreeking Owles, and other vncleane birds make their neſtes.
            It diſhonoreth alſo your Maieſty, and weakeneth your Highneſſe power. For, in the multitude of people is the 
               Pro. 14. 28. 
               honour of a King, ſaith Salomon, and for want of people commeth the deſtruction of the Prince. But this Incloſure where it commeth, diſpeoples Townes, as common experience lamentably teacheth. And whereas your Maieſtie might haue had great choice of Souldiers, and able men for ſeruice in warre (if neede required) now there is almoſt none to be had, but a Sheepheard and his dogge. This Incloſure



alſo hurteth the commonwealth: For where no oxen are, there the cribbe is emptie, (ſaith Salomon) Prov. 14. 9. 
               but much increaſe commeth by the ſtrength of the oxe. But incloſure decareth Tellage, and turneth good arable land to Paſture. Theſe Incloſers thinke that the gaine of their Paſtures, eaten with ſheepe, commeth more eaſily to them than being tilled; and therefore they will neither plowe nor ſowe themſelues, nor let their land to ſuch as would till it: and ſo by this meanes they bring a dearth upon this Land, which is one of Gods 
               Eze. 14. 13. 
               plagues. Yea, the Cities and Townes Corporate are maintained by the Countrey: For the plowe maintaines all trades, as Mercers, Grocers, Tanners, shooemakers, Glouers, Smiths, Taylors, Ioyners, Carpenters &c. But ſince Incloſure began, all theſe Artificers prooue by experience, that they cannot



haue ſuch vtterance and returne for their wares as heretofore: becauſe that husbandmen were wont to maintaine many ſeruants, which did yeerely buy their wares of them; which multitude of ſeruants incloſure needes not. Oh Incloſure then, to be hated of all Gods children, which deuoureth their fathers inheritance! and to be detested of all your Maieſties faithfull ſubiects, which diſhonoureth your Highnes, by diminiſhing the people of your land, and procureth your Maiesties destruction (as ſaith Salomon) and to be abhorred of all true harted Engliſh men, which bringeth afamine, one of Gods plagues vpon this our Common wealth. Nay, which goeth about to impoueriſh our Grand mothers and moſt famous Cities.
            I knowe, Incloſers can vrge many plauſible reaſons for themſelues, but their reaſons are humane, and not



grounded on the word of God. Theſe dangerous and deſperate effects ſo apparantly ſpreading both into the hart of Gods Church, and of the Common-wealth, inforceth me, humbly to preſent this my Petition to your moſt ſacred Maieſtie, with theſe reaſons against Incloſure. Leaſt by holding my peace, and ſuffering the Lords inheritance to I know where ther hath beene before Incloſure 320. communicāts: but now there be ſcant 160. be impaired, I ſhould be condemned at that day as an vniust Steward: and ſeeing your Maieſties power to be diminiſhed, and not giuing warning, I ſhould be reputed a faithleſſe ſubiect to your Highneſſe: and perceiuing the Common wealth hereby to be damnified and halfe beggered, I ſhould be eſteemed an vnnaturall childe, to this my moſt louing mother.
            I am alſo incouraged with confidence of your Gracious acceptance of this my humble ſuite, with that (Maſhall) your Maieſties godly and golden



ſaying, to your Princely ſonne, that hee ſhould bee the poore mans King. The cure of this canker, and the rooting out of this thorne, will make glad your poore ſubiects hearts. For as we reade, Salomons ſubiects were as many in number as the ſand of the 
               1. Kin. 4. 20 
               Sea, eating drinking and making merrie; And at this marke ſhoulde Christian Kings aime, that their ſubiects ſhould doe the like. But incloſure diminiſheth the number of Gods people, killeth their hearts, and abridgeth both their mirth and maintenance: And your Maieſtie being a ſecond Salomon in this our Iſrael, I moſt humblie craue your gracious and tender care heereof, in your ſacred ſeſsion and high court of Parliament; for that all your afflicted ſubiects, are ready to crie with the Prophet. It is high time for 
               Pſal. 119. 126. 
               thee Lord to lay to thine hand, for they haue deſtroied thy law, which



is christian charitie. The Lord Ieſus bleſſe your Maieſtie with a long and proſperous raigne, to the glorie of his name, encreaſe of his Church, and benefit of this Common-wealth, for his glorious names ſake.
            Amen.
            
               Your Maieſties moſt humble ſubiect, FRANCIS TRIGGE.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               GOod Chriſtian Reader, if any thing in this Treatiſe, ſeeme to thee ouer bitter or ſharpe, I humbly beſeech thee to conſider with thy ſelfe, that, that purgation which Galen the prince of Phyſitions commonly vſed, was called Hiera-picra, that is, holy-bitter; And ſuch alſo are Ieſus Chriſts medicines, which he applieth to our ſicke ſoules: and that this is a canker that I goe about to cure, & therfore as Chirurgerie teacheth, lenitiues will doe no good, but rather increaſe the venome thereof. Nay I beſeech thee conſider, that I deale with the root of all euill, couetouſneſſe; and with that noiſome peſtilence that raigneth now in our age, as it did in the daies of Ieremie: and therefore I had need of a ſharpe hatchet, to cut vp that root, and of ſome forcible



Mithridate to preſerue frō that plague: of whoſe effects and infection and cure, Ieremy writes thus: I will giue their wiues 
               Ier. 8. 10. 
               to others, and their fields to heires; for euery one of them, euen from the leaſt to the greateſt, is giuen to couetouſneſſe; and from the Prophet to the Prieſt, euery one dealeth falſly. Here firſt are the effects of this noiſome plague of couetouſneſſe, that their wiues were giuen to others and their fields to heires: Here is alſo the infection or cauſe of theſe effects, becauſe they are all giuen to couetouſnes & they all deale falſely. It is reported that we haue taſted thoſe former fruits & effects, for there died of the late plague many moe men than women: and is it not likely that the ſame effects ſprong from the ſame roote? and if this be true, then let vs all beware of couetouſneſſe and falſehoode in our dealing. But the true cure of this plague which followes in the Prophet, is taught vs by the contrary. For they haue cured the hurt of the daughters of my people, (ſaith the Prophet) with 
               Verſ. 11. 
               ſweete words, ſaying peace peace when as there was no peace. Gods Miniſters muſt



cure this plague not with oyle: but with ſharpe wine, they muſt not here ſpeake faire, if they meane to doe any good, but thunder. And therefore thoſe nice eares that cannot abide their thunder, ſhall die of this plague, and periſh in their ſinnes.
            Laſtly, if through humaine frailtie, any faults haue eſcaped (as who is it that erres not?) remember that leſſon which nature teacheth; That of all liuing creatures man doth moſt often twinckle with his eyes, to teach him not to be a rigorous cenſurer of his brethren. Ponder wiſely, iudge charitable, pardon curteouſly, and if thou be ſicke of this diſeaſe, repent ſpeedily. For God ſhakes his rodde ouer thy head euen now, and the day of the Lord draweth nigh.
            
               Thine in the Lord F. T.
            
         
         
            
            A BRIEFE OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS TREATISE.
            
               1 IT decaieth Tillage.
               2 It diſpeopleth Townes.
               3 It is againſt the Common-wealth of the Iewes.
               4 It is againſt the ſtate of Chriſts Church.
               5 It is againſt Chriſtian charitie.
               6 It is againſt the Church and Common-wealth, and auncient liberties and cuſtomes of England.
               7 Incloſure with depopulation is a ſinne whereof God ſhall make eſpeciall inquiry at the day of Iudgement.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            AN HVMBLE PETITION OF THE Church and common wealth, with reaſons out of Gods word, againſt late incloſure and Depopulation of Townes.
            
            
               A preoccupation of an obiection.
               
                  WHereas this preſent treatiſe tendeth to the ſtaying and decaying of Incloſure; it is to be obſerued and noted (moſt dread Soueraigne) that héere firſt I ſpeake againſt late Incloſure, not condemning the Incloſure of Eſſex, Hartfordſhire, Deuonſhire, and ſuch like Woodland Countries; wherein the beginning, if the Woods had not béen incloſed, they could not haue béene preſerued; and ſo as it may ſéeme, the Incloſures there of neceſſitie haue euer



ſince beene continued: for there, euerie Lordſhip is charitably diuided amōgſt the Tenants, and tillage alſo in moſt of their Cloſes is maintained, & Townes nothing d
                     •
                  ſpeopled: although thoſe Woodland and incloſed countries bee not ſo populous as other countries are. But I condemne our couetous & new deuiſed 
                     ••
                  cloſurs, which cōuert champian and fruitfull ſoiles, being good arrable ground, to paſture; caſting halfe a cornefield to a ſheepes paſture. And ſo thereby diminiſh Gods people, and depopulate Exo. 14. 13. townes.
               Secondly, I ioine depopulation of towns, and this new kind of Incloſure together: becauſe the one of them doth follow the other commonly, euen as neceſſarilie as the ſhadow doth the body: for although in ſome places where this Incloſure is put in practiſe (as our Incloſers can cunningly affirme) that all the houſes remaine that haue been: yet there be not ſo many people in them as hath beene: becauſe that tillage, by meanes of their Incloſure is decaied, which required many moe ſeruants to



accompliſh it, then their paſtures will doe to looke to them.
               And thirdly, whereas Incloſers diſtinguiſh, and ſay, that it is not Incloſure, but the couetous minds of men, that pulleth downe townes. To this I anſwere, that Incloſure is the meanes to pull them downe; and depopulations follow Incloſure, as an accident inſeparable (as the Logicians call it.) For marke it who liſt, where this Incloſure hath ſet in foot, they ſhall ſée houſes fallen downe, and lie in the duſt: and ſhall I not héere rather beléeue mine eyes than their faire ſpéeches?
            
            
               The firſt reaſon againſt this Incloſure is, it decaies tillage.
               THe Heathen euer made great account of Tillage. Cicero writeth thus of Huſbandrie: That of all things 
                  Cicero lib. 1 offi
                        •
                     . 
                  whereby any gaine is gotten, there is nothing more excellent than Tillage, nothing more commodious, nothing more pleaſant, and nothing more fit for a Gentleman. O that our Gentlemen were of his mind.
               
                  
The noble men of Rome take the names of corne, as (Fabij) of Beanes, and 
                  Plin. lib. 18. cap. 3. 
                  (Cicerones) of a kinde of Peaſe, and (Piſones) of Baking. They which were married, had a garland of corne carried before them.
                   Amongſt the Romanes alſo, him whom they called (Bonum Colonum) A good plowman, they ſeemed to praiſe exceedingly. Nay, he that did not till his land well, the Cenſors puniſhed him.
                   Such Cenſors were to bée wiſhed amongſt vs, to make vs till our land. It was alſo by law enacted amongſt them, that hee that came to take an amercement, or penaltie, ſhould not take an oxe before a ſheepe. Nay, that a man ſtealing by night, corne that was ſowen, ſhould be put to death with greater ſeueritie, then an homicide. They cal Glory Adoriam of Ador, which ſignifies corne. Plinie
                   alſo writes thus of Ibidem. the fruitfulneſſe of the earth: What was the cauſe that the earth was ſo fruitfull then? becauſe (ſaith he) that then the earth was tilled with the hands of Emperors. And it is not amiſſe to thinke, that the earth did reioice then, of her coulter, and ſhare, being crowned, and of her Plowman



being a triumphant Emperor. They were then as carefull of plowing their lands, as of waging their warres, And they did as diligently order their fields, as their camps. The like cauſe may bée aſſigned of the barrenneſſe of the earth in our daies. God plagues our contempt of tillage, with penurie and ſcarcitie. Gentlemen now a daies, thinke ſcorne of the Plough.
               Tillage was the firſt worke, that was impoſed vpon man, after that he was baniſhed out of Paradiſe. And God 
                  Gen. 3. 23. 
                  ſent man out of the garden of Eden (Langabath) to ſerue, to waite vpon, to till the earth. And ſhall the beſt of vs all then thinke ſcorne of tillage? Alſo this was that gracious promiſe made vnto Noah after the flood, That heereafter, 
                  Gen. 6. 22. 
                  ſeede time and harueſt, cold and heat, ſommer and winter, day and night ſhall not ceaſe, ſo long as the earth remaineth. But if all men ſhould follow Incloſers ſteps, why then in all townes we ſhould haue no tillage (or very little) but all ſhéepe. Is not this to contradict the ordinance of God? But tillage



is troubleſome vnto them, and the other is a more gaineful and eaſie way, as they doe imagine, and therefore they paſſe not for that. Let all ſuch great ſheepe-maiſters, that are decaiers of tillage take héede, which will haue no ſeede furrowes, nor harueſts, nor greatly paſſe not for them: they contradict hoerein Gods ordinance, as this place prooues. And after we read of Noah (as of an obedient ſubiect to God héerein) thus. And Noah began to be (Iſh Haadhmah)
                   
                  Gen. 9. 20. that is, a man wholy giuing himſelfe, to labour in the earth, and he planted a vineyard. To plant a vineyard, is correſpondent in ſome countries, to our ſowing of corne, and an acre of Mines yeeldes better increaſe, then an acre of our Corne, as I haue heard. Iſaak alſo as heire of Noah, did follow his ſteps, and though a ſtraunger in Aegypt, yet we read of him thus. And Iſaak did ſowe corne in that countrie, and he found in that yeere an hundred 
                  Gen. 26. 12. 
                  meaſures, and God bleſſed him. Shall Iſaak ſowe, being a ſtranger in Aegypt, and not wée at home? Did hée



finde an hundred meaſures for one? For ſo Munſter ſaith, that the Chalde 
                  Munſter in eundem locum. 
                  Paraphraſt doth erpound this. And ſhall we ſay, that we can finde no commoditie by tillage? And it followes, God bleſſed him, a bleſſing of God followes tillage. They ſhall not thriue that decay it, as erperience teacheth. God appeated 
                  Iud. 6▪ 11. 
                  to Gedeon as he was threſhing, and appointed him Iudge ouer Iſrael: And doth not this commend threſhing? Elizeus alſo whom God did chuſe to bee a Prophet in Eliah his roome, was a great maintainer of tillage: for thus we reade. And Eliah departed thence, and found Eliſhah the ſonne of Shaphat: 
                  1. King. 19. 19. 
                  who was plowing with twelue yoke of oxen before him, and he was with the twelue. And was not Elizeus a great huſbandman who had twelue yoke of oxen, and no doubt many plowes going together in his field, and many plowmen, among whom after hée deuided thoſe two oxen, which he killed? And doe not all theſe, ſo beloued of God, and giuing themſelues ſo greatly to tillage, commend it vnto vs? ſhall we prefer



paſture, and neglect this?
               Maſter Camden writes, that in England were the ſtately Palaces of Lady Ceres, 
                  Camden Britan. p. 3. meaning great Barnes of corne. Now we may ſee in ſome places, ſome ſuch great Barnes ſtill, and Incloſers makes them ſtande emptie. I know, whereas 1500. quarters of corne hath béene yéerely growing: ſince incloſure hath beene practiſed, there groweth not now 500. And againe he writes, that England for corne was the onely ſtorehouſe of all the west Empire: And that out of England yeerely the Romanes tranſported 400. ſhippes, bigger then barkes, laden with corne to relieue their ſouldiers, that lay on the borders in Germany. In thoſe daies England was able to relieue other countries with corne: but ſometime now ſhe is glad to buie corne of other countries her ſelfe. Incloſers haue partlie brought this to paſſe, who had rather haue their wooll-houſes filled with wooll, then their Barnes with corne. O diſhonorable children to their mother!
               The Preacher alſo in his booke



writes verie excellently in the commendation of tillage. If in a countrie 
                  Eccleſ. 5. 7. (ſaith hée) thou ſeeſt the oppreſsion of the poore, and the defrawding of iudgment and iuſtice, be not afraide at the matter, for hee that is higher then the higheſt, regardeth, and there be higher then they. And the aboundance of the earth is ouer all, the King alſo conſiſts of the field that is tilled. Salomon giueth an Item to all that deale hardly with the poore: how that the God of heauen beholdeth: Nay (Shomer as it is in the Hebrew, that is) marketh and keepeth in memorie all their dealings. And that the tillage of the earth ſurpaſſeth all, and that euen the King thereby is maintained: by the foode that it miniſtreth, to ſtrengthen his people; and by the multitude of valiant ſouldiers it affordeth for his warres. For as Plinie writes, Moſt ſtrong and valiant ſouldiers 
                  Plin. lib. 18. cap. 5. 
                  are made of husbandmen, and come foorth of the countrie, and which thinke no harme. And ſhall wée deale hardly with thoſe, that muſt fight and aduenture their liues for vs? And ſhall wée not maintaine



tillage, the honorable mother of chiualrie? Lechem in Hebrew ſignifies bread, and Lacham to fight: They therfore which deſtroy bread, deſtroy chiualry. Nay, how can any chriſtian truly ſay the Lords prayer, and pray, Giue 
                  Math. 6. 11. 
                  vs this day our daily bread▪
                   that decaieth tillage? Will he pray for bread, and not vſe the ordinary meanes to haue bread, which is tillage? This is plainely to tempt God. Will he haue God feede vs miraculouſly, with Manna, as hee did Mat. 4. 7. 
                  Iſrael in the wildernes? In Canaan God Exod. 16. 15 will haue plowing and ſowing vſed: And therefore after the children of Iſrael came into the lande of Canaan, 
                  Ioſ. 5. 12. 
                  Manna ceaſed.
               
               That hiſtorie alſo of the plague in King Dauids daies, muſt teach vs ſome 2. Sam. 14. 18. thing: and therein, that is eſpecially to be marked, to build an Altar, in the threſhing floore of Araunah.
                   It ſhould ſeeme that God loues threſhing flooers, and there hée will be praiſed. But Incloſure decaieth tillage, and therefore God is not praiſed in our threſhing fl
                     •
                  oers.
               
                  
This may be a cauſe of the plague Pſal. 106. verſ. 30. Phinehas ſtoode vp and executed iudgement and the plague was ſtaied. amongſt vs euen now. Let vs erect Altars in the threshing flooers of Araunah,
                   and the plague shall ceaſe: Incloſers doe thinke that there are too manie men in this lande, and that they may decaie townes by their Incloſure, and that it is no great matter to 
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  aie a towne But God ſ
                     ••
                  th their thoughts, and now he beginneth to diminiſh the people of this land: hee may diminiſh them, as well as they; and he beginneth at the very head firſt.
               Couetousneſſe which is the roote of 
                  Luk. 12. 20. 
                  all euill, which our Sauiour deſcribes in the Goſpel, and S. Paul to Timothie; 
                  1. Tim. 1. 9. and pride, which God hates and reſiſts, which Eſay alſo paints out vnto vs in his third chapter at large; & the taking 
                  Ia. 4. 6. Eſa. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 16. 17. &c. Exod. 20. 7. Pſal. 55. 10. 2. Sam. 12. 14. 1. Tim. 6. 1. Tit. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  Gods name in vaine, for filthy lu
                     •
                  re. For which God wil not hold vs guiltles, &c. And becauſe deceite and guile goe not out of our ſtreetes; And for that by our wicked liues Gods word is euill ſpoken of: Theſe no doubt may ſéeme to bée the cauſes of the plague amongſt vs, God giue all men eies, to ſee their
               
                  
ſinnes and to amend them that the plague may ceaſe; and eſpecially Citizens and ſuch as inhabit in townes corporate, amongſt whom theſe ſinnes commonly raigne.
            
            
               A ſecond reaſon againſt this Incloſure is, that it diſpeopleth townes.
               THe people are called Gods inheritance, Aske of me & will giue thee Pſal. 2. 8. the heathen for thine inheritance & the ends of the earth for thy poſſeſsion. And again, Behold (ſaith Dauid) childrē are Pſal. 127. 3. 4. the inheritance of the Lord, & a reward the fruite of the wombe. He putteth behold before this his doctrine as though it were a ſtrange thing and yet moſt true. Secondly he addeth that children are a reward: Incloſers manie times lacke this reward, they loue the earth ſo wel that God wil not bleſſe them with many ſonnes: Nay Dauid addeth, Like as the arrowes in the hand of the Gyant, ſo are the children of young men. Such arrowes in the hands of Gyants, and many rich Farmers hauing tall and



ſtrong men to their ſonnes, wée might haue ſéene: But now, where this late incloſure hath ſet in foote, either there are no families left, or elſe they are ſo pinched by great rents, and pined with want and penurie, that they are rather like priſoners, then arrows in the hand of a Gyant.
               Thus incloſure where it commeth diſpeoples townes, and impares the Lords inheritance. Therefore all his ſtewards and miniſters ought to inueigh 1. Cor. 4. 1. againſt this ſinne, and all his children ought to condemne it. Againe Dauid ſpeaking of the reprobate and wicked giueth them this cogniſance. Haue they Pſal. 14. 4. no vnderſtanding, or will they not know, or vnderſtand (as it is in the Hebrew) all they that worke wickednes, who eate vp my people, as if they would eate bread? they haue not called vpon God. Here firſt we may note, the obſtinacie of theſe ſinners, and depopulators; They will not know, they will not be perſwaded, they will maintaine and defend their incloſures, and depopulations, ſay, what one can againſt



them, yea and that out of Gods booke, they will writhe all things to maintaine their couetouſnes. Secondly the grieuouſneſſe of this ſinne with God, and the ſmall account that men make of it. They make no account, nor no more conſcience to depopulate townes, and to conſume men, then to eate bread. They thinke that they may do it lawfully. But God tels all ſuch héere by the Prophet Dauid, that though they beare a ſhew of religion, vet they haue not called vpon God, that is, they are plainely Atheiſts. For by a figure called Synecdoche, the part is put for the whole, ano inuoration of the name of God, is put for all his religion. As Gen. 12. 8. 1. Cor. 1. 2. Acts 9. 21.
               Nay, Dauid in another pſalm toucheth narrowly theſe Incloſers and depopulators Pſal. 80. 8. of townes, ſpeaking thus to God. Thou haſt brought a vine out of Aegypt (ſaiih he) thou haſt caſt out the heathen, and planted it. No doubt Dauid heare ſpake typically of the vine Chriſts Church, which God hath in our daies brought out of the Popes



                  ſpirituall Aegypt, as Saint Iohn termes Reu. 11. 28. it: and that he hath caſt out thoſe ſpirituall heathen that trampled with their feete, the holy citie, 42. moneths. For what did they elſe in poperie, but trample in Gods Church with their féete? Their bodies were preſent in the Church, but not their vnderſtanding, and therefore their hearts were away. For where vnderſtanding is not, there the heart cannot properly be ſaid to be. And therfore their vnderſtanding was away, becauſe Gods worde was read to them in a ſtrange tongue; and alſo they praied in a ſtrange tongue. Except 
                  1. Cor. 14. 11. 
                  I know the power of the voice of him that ſpeaketh, I ſhall bee to him a Barbarian, ſaith Saint Paul. And may not theſe be properly called heathen, whom Saint Paul calleth Barbarians? and may not theſe be ſaid, to trample in the holie citie, when their bodies onely were preſent and their hearte were away? God hath brought a vine out of Aegypt, and hath expelled the heathen out of his holy citie, and planted this vine in their place. He ſwept before the 
                  Gen. 1. 2.


                  
                  face of this vine, with the winde of his ſpirit, and the béeſome oſ his worde, clenſing all the duſt and ſand of mans deuiſes, giuing to it puritie of doctrine, It filled the land. This vine ſpred her branches thorow the whole lande and that ſpeedily. The Papiſts maruell: they neuer dreamed, that this vine would haue ſpred her branches ſo far, and wide. Nay the hilles were couered with the ſhadow of it. Manie noble men, verie religiouſly and zealouſlie profeſſed this religion, and dranke the Mat. 2. 22. comfortable wine of this vine.
               But héere now followes the miſchiefe, héere followes Sathan Jeſus Chriſts enemie. But why (ſaith Dauid) 
                  Pſal. 80. 12. 
                  haſt thou pluct vp her hedge, that euery one that goeth by the way, hath a ſnatch (as we ſay) at this vine? The wild Boare of the wood hath deſtroied it, and the wilde beaſts of the field, haue eaten it vp. And the vineyard, which thy right hand hath planted, and the young vine which thou madeſt ſo ſtrong for thine owne ſelfe, It is burnt with fire and cut downe. What doth all this meane?



but that this vine, by couetous and cruell landlords is lopped and diminiſhed, and burnt with the fire of couetouſnes. Euen that vine, which God himſelfe planted ſo miraculouſly, and had made ſo ſtrong in faith, to goe out of poperie, 1. Pet. 5. 9. and not to feare the Diuell. This beloued vine, and this ſtrong vine, haue our wilde Boares deuoured, and our fierie couetouſneſſe hath burnt vp; for doe wée thinke that Dauid ſpeakes of any materiall fire or vine? Will God take this at their handes? Doe they thinke, that he makes not high account, of euery chriſtian ſoule? and doe they not know, that he will be praiſed with 
                  Act. 20. 28. 2. Cor. 9. 12 Mat. 5. 1. 
                  many mouthes? And that Chriſt, when he ſawe the multitude went vp to the hill to preach? and that hee knoweth, how manie haue béene in townes, in time of poperie? and ſhall wée now in the light of the Goſpell, impare his ſhéepe? dare wée doe it? ſurely hée will reuenge it. And let all ſuch depopulators know, that they are but trauellers by the way. They ſhall not long continue héere with their hedges.
               
                  
                  Ioab a bloudie warrier and ſouldier 2. Sam. 20. 20. could ſay, God forbid, that I ſhould deuoure or deſtroy the inheritance of the Lord: and ſhall profeſſors of the Goſpell, be guiltie of this ſinne, and depopulate townes?
               It was one of Gods bleſſings which he promiſed to Abraham, that he would Gen. 22. 17. greatly multiply his ſeede, as the ſtarres of heauen, and as the ſand which is vpon the ſea ſhore. And doe we thinke, that they ſhall be bleſſed, which goe about to depriue him of this bleſſing? And Eſay likewiſe thus propheſieth of Chriſts Church, I will power my ſpirit vpon thy ſeede, and my bleſſing vpon Eſa. 44. 3 4. thy buddes, and they ſhall grow as amongſt the graſſe, and as the willowes by the riuers of waters.. By how many types here, doth the Prophet expreſſe vnto vs Chriſts Church? of ſeede, of buddes growing amongſt graſſe, and of willowes? and doe not all theſe, inſinuate vnto vs a multitude? They are not Chriſts friends but his enemies, that doe not nouriſh and cheriſh this his ſeede, in the beſome of their hearts,



that doe not comfort theſe his buddes, with the curteſie of their ſpéeches, and which doe not water, theſe his willowes, with the continuall ſtreame of their liberalities. This was the cauſe why Salomon deſired wiſdome of God. Thou haſt made me King ouer a great 
                  2. Chr. 1. 7. 
                  people, like to the duſt of the earth. Giue me now wiſedome, and knowledge, &c. Salomon was but a type of Jeſus Chriſt: If that his ſubiectes were like to the duſt of the earth; what ſhall Jeſus Chriſts ſubiects be likened vnto?
               I reade in a booke of the Suruey of 
                  Mundus imper. Rex. gall. 
                  France, made by Bodinus, in the daies of King Henry the ſecond, beſides Burgundie there were numbred in France 27. thouſand villages with ſteeples. And in another ſuruey of France, made in the raigne of Charles the ninth, it was found that the number of the inhabitants there, were aboue 15. millions of men.
                   Did the French thus glory in their multitudes of people; and ſhall not we much more in England, ſéeke to maintaine ours?
               And here I cannot but take away



ſome ſtumbling blockes: for theſe Incloſers perchaunce will flatter themſelues and ſay, that it is but a ſmall village that they haue diſpeopled, or a ſmall farme or cottage that they haue decaied or pulled downe; and what doe you make ſo much to doe thereof? But let all ſuch know, that little Zoar ſaued 
                  Gen. 19. 20 Luk. 4. 16. Ioh. 1. 46. 
                  Lot: and Nazareth that obſcure citie whereof Nathaniell ſaid, can any good come out of Nazareth, it nurſed our Sauiour Jeſus, and gaue him a name which from his croſſe to this day is honorable. And Saint Paul teacheth vs plainely, that God hath choſen the 
                  1. Cor. 1. 27 28. 
                  weake things of this world, to confound the mightie things; and vile things, and things which are deſpiſed, hath God choſen. And dare any contemne or make light account of that, nay deſtroy that which God hath choſen and maketh great account of? Out of that little village or poore cottage which he hath decaied (whoſoeuer hée is) might haue come one as good as himſelfe. what may I ſay then of great huſband townes where many rich farmers, and



cottages are decaied? Would any of vs willingly haue the little finger of his hand cut off? no more no doubt, will Jeſus Chriſt ſuffer one poore cottage, (which is as it were his little finger) to bée cut off, vnpuniſhed without repentance. There was a ſtatute made of late, for the maintainance of tillage, and reedifying farmes decaied: It is to bée feared that God hath obſerued how diligent ſome were to ſée the poore whipped, by a ſtatute made at the ſame time: and how ſlacke in the execution of that other act of reedifying & plowing.
               Another ſtumbling blocke is, that ſome will ſay they muſt néedes maintaine their ſtates. And this cloake couers all their pride, and couetouſnes. But let all ſuch know that reaſon thus; Muſt they impare the Lords inheritance to maintaine their eſtates, euen they whom the Lord himſelfe hath aduanced? they had better to be as poore as Lazarus in ſtate and condition: nay, Luk. 16. 20. they had better neuer haue béene borne, then to exault themſelues to impare his inheritance. Oh let theſe men of all



others take héede of this ingratitude. Let the example of King Saul terrifie them, who being made of a poore acorne, a mightie oake, and of a ſeeker of his fathers aſſes, the firſt King of Iſrael, yet afterwards for his vnthankefulnes 1. Sam. 9. 26. and diſobedience, he and all his poſteritie was quite reiected of God 
                  2. Sam. 16. 18. 
                  for euer from the kingdome.
               
               Let Jeſus Chriſts example teach and moue them, who to doe vs good did not reſpect his eſtate, being equall with God (as Saint Paul teacheth vs,) but 
                  Phil. 2. 6. 7. 
                  humbled himſelfe, and became as a ſeruant. He waſhed his apoſtles feete, and became obedient to the death of the Croſſe. And what is the greateſt of our eſtates in compariſon of his? Surely euen like a little mould-hill to a mountaine. And ſhall we thinke much, to impaire our eſtates to doe our brethren good? nay ſhall we hurt them to maintaine it? nay ſhall we diſhonour God? Oh not Chriſts diſciples, but Mammons worldlings! There were as many noble men and gentlemen in England heretofore, as are now, and of as



great eſtate: and how did they maintaine themſelues? They did not in the Popes darke kingdome depopulate townes, and ſhall we in the light of the Goſpell? Can we maintaine our eſtates by no way elſe, but by imparing the Lords inheritance? let that be farre from vs. If Incloſers would be content with the auncient apparrell, and houſes and dyet of their anceſtors, as they are not aſhamed of their lands; they néede neuer raiſe rents, nor improue their lands.
               They which ſtand ſo much on this point, that they muſt maintaine their eſtates, know not what humilitie is. All Chriſts diſciples muſt be humble. 
                  Math. 11. 29. And humilitie is to deſcend a degree or two from our eſtate, and not to ſeeke to maintaine it: Surely that is a ſpice of pride. The daunger and grieuouſnes of this ſinne makes me in all humilitie to write thus. It is to be feared that God may now complaine as he did in the daies of Ieremie: Can a virgin forget Ier. 2. 32. her ornament, or a bride her attire? yet my people haue forgotten me,



daies without number, who haue adorned and maintained them. Why do you as it were now at laſt, begin to make your waies good againe, to purchaſe my loue? yea euen heerein, thou declareſt, that thy waies are euill. For in thy wings are found the blood of ſoules, of poore innocents. Thou haſt not found them with mattockes in their hands, ſuch as are mentioned in Gre
                     •
                  us, where theeues are ſaid with mat
                        •
                     od
                        ••
                     s Exod. 22. 2. to digge thorow walles, and to 
                        〈◊〉
                      into houſes by night, but about all
                     〈…〉
                   (ſaith the Prophet) no doubt wi
                     〈…〉
                   ter inſtruments, euen to pu
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  As it is in the Hebrew. houſes and townes. And yet th
                        〈…〉
                      becauſe I am guiltleſſe, ſurely 
                        〈…〉
                      ſhall turne from me. Behold I wi
                        〈…〉
                      with thee into iudgement, becauſe the
                        •
                      ſaieſt, thou haſt not ſinned. Incl
                     •
                  ſ
                     ••
                  s are as guiltie of theſe ſinnes, as were thoſe Jewes. For after their incloſure, they will goe about to make good their waies, and they will giue ſome poore widowes, cowegates in their cloſes, as it were to purchaſe Gods fauour, whereas (as thoſe Jewes had)



                  they haue the blood of poore innocent ſoules in their wings and worſhips. Nay, and they haue alſo in their hands not mattockes, but greater inſtruments then thoſe, euen to pull downe farmes and townes. And yet neuertheleſſe they ſaie (as the Jewes did) that they are not guiltie. Therefore (ſaith God) I will enter into iudgement with them. And this may ſéeme to be another cauſe, of the p
                     •
                  ague amongſt vs at this day. We ſinne in wordly cares, and in 
                  Luk. 21. 34. 
                  exceſſe in our diet, whereof our bleſſed Sauiour biddes vs take héede: we excéede in our ſtately buildings, which the Eſa. 2. 15. Ier. 22. 14. Zeph. 1. 8. Prophet Eſay and Ieremie plainely reprooue: we ſinne in vanitie of apparell, which the Prophet Zephanie condemnes; and we account theſe no ſins: wée ſay that we are guiltles and therefore doth God enter with vs into iudgement: whereas it is the firſt leſſon that the Apoſtle Saint Peter giues vs which liue in the end of the world, that we ſhould be ſober, and kéepe (no doubt) 1. Pet. 4. 7. that holie meane in all our worldly cares; in our diet, in our apparell, in



our buildings, and in the furniture of our houſes, and to conclude, in all things.
               But that which followes in the Prophet, ſhall proue them guiltie and condemue them. Why laboureſt thou ſo much (ſaith the Prophet) to change thy Verſe 36. waies, and to make them ſeeme good? thou ſhalt be confounded of Aegypt, as thou art alſo confounded of Aſhur;
                   that is, as the dead Paganes condemne thee, ſo ſhall the blind Egyptians and Papiſts condemne thee alſo. And héere firſt; did the Paganes deale ſo hardly with their tenants? Pharaoh the Egyptian, may teach all Incloſers and Landlords, chriſtian charitie, and the communicating of their lands and commodities to their tenants. Behold (ſaith Ioſeph) I haue bought you this day, and your land for Pharaoh, and foure parts Gen. 47. 23. ſhall be yours, for the ſeede of your field, and for your meate, and for them of your houſehold, & for your children to eate. Here firſt we may note, that this Egyptiā
                   king, would haue tillage maintained: Then, that although he had purchaſed



their land, yet he dealt courteouſly with his tenants, and had a care, both of the ſeede of their land, and of their families: and ſhall not Chriſtians much more haue this care of their brethren, whoſe land comes by inheritance? He gaue them ſeede, and yet he required but a fift part for his rent: Oh eaſie rent! this ſhall condemne one day our couetous rents, and cruell exactions at our brethrens hands. This mercifull Pharaoh was bleſſed of God: but Exod. 5. 17. his couetous ſucceſſor, that laid heauie burdens on Gods people, and ſaid as Incloſers ſay now, The people are too 
                  Exod. 14. 27. 
                  much idle, they muſt haue more worke impoſed vpon them, was drowned in the Sea: let them chuſe now, whether of theſe they will followe. Such a good landlord alſo was Iob, not in Iewrie, but in the land of Hus. If my land riſe againſt 
                  Iob. 31. 39. 
                  mee (ſaith hee) and the furrowes thereof weepe and waile: and if that I haue eaten of the heart thereof without money, or haue made the ſoules of the maſters thereof pant: Then let thiſtles growe in ſtead of wheate, and cockle in



ſtead of barly: Héere wée may firſt note that Iob neuer eate the ſtrength or heart of his land, but hée paied for the plowing of it, contrarie to many Landlords amongſt us, who will let their lands at great rents, and will make their tenants plow with them (gratis) and for nothing. Secondly, that he cals his tenants maſters of his land: but many amongſt us make their tenants by their exceſſiue payments, as good as bondſlaues. They did not ſo much as once pant or blow in the tilling of it, they plowed it ioyfully, and at their eaſe. But many tenants now adaies, doe not onely pant at their plowes, but ſigh, caring how they may pay their rents.
               
                  Iob alſo did neuer eate his morſell alone; 
                  Job 31. 17. if he had but one diſh, the poore had euer ſome part thereof: and ſhall Incloſers thinke much to yeeld unto them ſome part of their graſſe? ſhall they ſhut them out of their fields, whom hee admitted daily to his table? And if perchance they thinke that this was uery much, and that euery one is not bound to doe ſo: let them marke well that



Saint Iohn in his epiſtle doth charge euery Chriſtian to doe more than this: If that thou haſt the worlds good, and ſee thy brother want (ſaith hée) and 
                  1. Ioh. 3. 17. 
                  ſhutteſt vp thy verie entrals, or bowels from him, how dwelleth the loue of God in thee? If thy brother beg of thée, wilt thou denie him? Nay, by this place thou art plainely commaunded, if thou ſeeſt him want, though hée holde his peace, and craue nothing of thée, to help him; and that not in opening thy purſe to giue him money, but in opening thy verie bowels vnto him; and in doing to Mat. 7. 12. him, as thou wouldeſt haue done to thine owne ſelfe. Then if ſo be that his 
                     •
                  owe lacke graſſe, wilt thou not let her common in thy paſtures? If he lacke an houſe, wilt thou not prouide one for him? Nay Saint Iohn teacheth thée plainley héere, to doe more for him then all theſe; euen to receiue him, not into thy fields, or houſe, but (if it were poſſible) into thine owne bowels: and this was that common ſalutation among the Jewes (like unto our good morrow) your ſoule liueth in me, as appeareth



                  by the ſalutation of Anna to Elie, and the ſalutation of Gedeon to 
                  1. Sam. 1. 15. 
                  the Angell, which is as much as to ſay I wiſh to you euen as to my owne ſoule; 
                  Judg. 6. 13. For ſo it is in the Hebrew tert. Oh that this ſalutation were pronounced dayly, not in mouth onely, but in our dealings practiſed amongſt vs Chriſtians, which no doubt ought to be; as both Saint Paul and Peter, doe commaund all Chriſtians. Fulfill my ioy (ſaith Saint Paul) that ye be like minded, or of one minde together: And Phil. 2. 2. Saint Peter, finally be yee all of one minde. 
                  1. Pet. 2. 8.
               
               Such a mercifull man was Mordoche the Jew, of whom we reade thus, Heſt. 10. 3. 
                  And Mordoche the Iew was ſecond to Ahaſhuerus, and great amongſt the Iewes, and accepted (Ratſu)
                   ſuch a one as his brethren would haue wiſhed, who procured the wealth of his people, and ſpake peaceably to all his ſeede, who though háe were lately aduanced, to dignitie and worſhip, yet vſed not theſe meanes, to maintaine his eſtate. Oh that Incloſers who profeſſe the



name of the Goſpell, would imitate this Jew! As for the blinde Egyptians, that Apo. 11. 8. is the Papiſts, how they haue excelled Incloſers in the workes of charitie, euery towne almoſt tells thée: which townes they haue left to their ſucceſſors, like the winges of a doue which 
                  Pſal. 68. 13. 
                  is couered with ſiluer: and Incloſers plucke away theſe golden fethers from them, and leaue them not ſo good as they found them. Thus Incloſers may plainely ſée, how that not only dead Aſſur, but blinde Egypt alſo doth confound them.
               But theſe Incloſers alledge that ſaying of the goſpell, Is it not lawfull for me 
                  Matth. 20. 15. 
                  to doe with mine owne as I liſt? They muſt remember, that parable repreſents vnto vs that great Landlord of all Landlords, the king of heauen; he may ſay ſo only, and none elſe. They muſt alſo remember that ſaying of the Pſalme: And he gaue them the lands of the heathen, 
                  Pſal. 115. 44. 
                  and they tooke the labour of the people in poſſeſſion, that they might keepe his ſtatutes and obſerue his lawes. God hath giuen them the earth in deed:



but vpon this condition, that they ſhould kéepe his lawes, and his lawe is 
                  Joh. 13. 34. 
                  Chriſtian charitie.
               
            
            
               The third reaſon is, that this Incloſure is againſt the common wealth of the Iewes.
               GOd ſaid to Abraham, Get thee out of thy Countrey, and from thy 
                  Gen. 12. 1. 
                  kindred, & from thy Fathers houſe, vnto the land that I will ſhew thee, and I will make thee a great nation, and will bleſſe thee, and will make thy name great, and thou ſhalt be a bleſsing. All Chriſtians muſt be Abrahams ſonnes, 
                  Rom. 4. 11. and account this commaundement of God ſpoken vnto them, and goe out (by their loues, affections, ſtudies & cares) of their father Adams houſe, that is, the wor
                     ••
                  ; and liue héere in this world, as their father Abraham did, like poore pilgrims and trauailers: and then ſhall God bleſſe them, and make them a bleſſing, euen the very members of Jeſus Chriſt: who alſo when as he was in this world, followed thoſe very ſteps of



                  Abraham, and liued here as a trauailer or pilgrime, and not as a Citizen, or as an inhabiter. But how contrarie is this doctrine to the practiſe, and very ſpéeches of theſe Incloſers, who ſay, Is it not lawfull for vs to vſe the earth to the moſt aduantage? This is their maxime and principle: but Abraham and Saint Paul doe tell them, that they ſhould vſe it as though they vſed it 
                  1. Cor. 7. 31. 
                  not. That they ſhould vſe it as wiſe trauailers doe their Innes in their iourneis, who ſéeke not for gaine or ſuperfluitie there; who care for no more then will ſerue their turnes. Let the inhabitants of the earth ſéeke to make their moſt aduantage thereof: But Gen. 14. 3. all Chriſtians who dwell therein as Pilgrims, ſéeke for no more then will ſerue their turnes; let them goe out of their countries in hart and affection, with Abraham their father, and be Hebrues, that is, paſſengers with him, as the Hebrue word ſignifies; and not Canaanites, that is, marchants, whoſe trade is in this life. Thus much Abraham, the 
                  Zach. 14. 21 
                  father of the faithfull Iewes, and the bery



name of the Hebrues doth teach them a leſſon worth the learning; for this is the ſinne of our age, that we are too much in loue with this earth, more than our forefathers, nay more than Pagans haue béene.
               The Jewes whoſe fields lay together, Numb. 22. 24. Eſay. 5. 2. Pro. 24. 3. did not incloſe them: as the field of Boaz, which lay altogether and yet was not incloſed, plainely proues. Their Orchards and Vineyards were walled about; their common fields were bounded 
                  Ioſh. 15. 45. Deut. 27. 11 
                  with ſtones or mountaines: But our righteouſneſſe muſt exceede theirs, and Matth. 5. 20 therefore we ought not to incloſe.
               Among the Jewes alſo, euery yeere 
                  Exo 23. 10. 
                  the poore might gleane in their fields, and they were commaunded not to rake 
                  Leuit. 19. 9. 
                  them too cleane, but to leaue ſomthing for the poore, and not to gather in the outſides of their fields, but to leaue them alſo for the poore. Boaz did very notably fulfill this lawe. Nay, euery ſeuenth yeere what grew in their cornefields of it owne accord, they were commaunded to ſaue, and to ſuffer the poore 
                  Deut. 24. 19 Leuit. 25. 
                  to gather and reape it. And doth not this



plainly commend and commaund tillage? The poore muſt haue ſome thing left them euery yeere for to gleane, and they muſt haue euery ſeuenth yeere all the whole croppe that grew of it owne accord. And were not the Jewes then bound to ſowe their fields, ſo that the poore in Iewry had good and plentifull gleanings left them euery yeere, and the whole croppe of rich mens lands euery ſeuenth yeere? But Incloſers will cut ſhort all this, for neither will they ſowe any thing at all, and ſo bar them of their gleaning and reaping; or if they ſow any ſmall quantitie, they will rake ſo cleane, that the poore ſhall get very little that commeth to gleane after their rakers.
               The Prophet Ieremie doth propheſie of the returne of the Jewes from Babylon out of captiuitie, and vnder the type of them, of Chriſts Church thus. O virgine Iſrael, thou ſhalt be adorned 
                  Iere. 31. 5. 
                  with the Timbrell, and thou ſhalt goe forth with the dance of them that be ioyfull: Thou ſhalt yet plant vines on 
                  Epheſ. 4. 6. 
                  the mountaines of Samaria and the



planters that plant them, ſhall make them common. As Chriſts Church hath a common Father, and a common Sauiour, and common Sacraments, and a common countrey, and a common inheritance in heauen: ſo on earth ſhe ſhould alſo haue a brotherly communitie in her earthly affaires; and ſhe ſhould make her grapes cōmon. This did the Jewes in the ſhadow; and ſhall not Chriſtians doe thus much more in the cléere ſunneſhine of the Goſpell?
            
            
               The fourth reaſon; this Incloſure is againſt the eſtate of Chriſts Church and kingdome.
               
                  ESay thus propheſieth of it: Violence 
                  Eſa. 60. 18. 
                  and hard dealing ſhall no more be heard of in the land, neither deſolation nor deſtruction within thy borders, but thou ſhalt call ſaluation thy wals (of a word deriued of the name of Jeſus) and 
                  I
                        •
                     shu
                        •
                     gatha. 
                  praiſe, thy gates. Our wals ſhould taſte of the loue of Jeſus, and ſhould be like him; they ſhuld all be built of frée ſtones, and not of flint ſtones; and all our gates



ſhould be praiſe; we ſhould neuer ſet foote out of doore, but we ſhould be merry and ioyfull: And are Incloſers tenants of this kingdome? Is not their hard dealing and violence almoſt in all places complained of? Are not their deſolations and pulling downe of farmes apparant in euery mans eyes? Are the wals and dwelling houſes of their Tenants built of frée ſtone, and not rather of flint ſtone? Doe their rents taſte of Jeſus Chriſt, and not rather of worldly couetouſneſſe? Are the doores of their Tenants houſes praiſe, and not rather lamentation, ſighing and mourning?
               Add againe, he deſcribes vnto vs the eſtate of Chriſts Church, thus: The Wolfe ſhall dwell with the lambe, &c. And, the Cow and the Beare ſhall feede, their yong ones ſhall lye together, &c. This communitie of dwelling, Incloſers do ſomtimes take away in Chriſts Church: for they will haue no man almoſt dwell néere them. We may sée many of their houſes built alone, like hauens neſts, no birds building néere them: but eſpecially this community of



féeding, they like not of. They will eate their paſtures by themſelues, they will haue none to enter common with them. Geminianus a very learned man, agreeing herein with the Prophet Eſay, writes thus very excellently; Good men 
                  Gemin. lib. 4. cap. 11. 
                  euer loue a common and ſociable life, and they flie ſingularities or ſolitarineſſe by the example of Bees: For Bees, as Ambroſe writes, doe chuſe vnto them a common manſion or dwelling, and they are all ſhut vp with one doore, and they all labour together; their meate is common, as alſo their worke; as they worke together ſo alſo they eate together. Their occupation (as I may ſo tearme it) is common, and their gaine is common, and their ſwarming is common. And hath God giuen Bées theſe excellent vertues in vaine, or for themſelues only, and not rather to teach men Chriſtian charity, and humane ſociety? Such angrie creatures doe thus loue, and liue in common together, and ſhal not much more men, to whom God hath giuen no ſtings? Nay Chriſtians, to whom he hath giuen that louing and ſociable doue Mat. 3. 16. of his holy Spirit?
               
                  
The Prophet Micah alſo thus deſcribes vnto vs the eſtate of all Gods people in his Church. But they ſhall ſit Micah. 4. 4. euery man vnder his vine, and vnder his Figge tree, and none ſhall make them afraid: for the mouth of the Lord hath ſpoken it. Where the Hebrewe word (Charadh) ſignifies to mooue one with thought, and care. All ſhall liue merily in Chriſts Church; they ſhall neuer feare thought nor care, much leſſe taſte of it. And doe not Incloſers, not onely make their Tenants feare thought and care, but alſo fill their heads with it? England hath béen famous throughout all Chriſtendome by the name of merie England: but couetous Incloſers haue taken this ioy and mirth away; ſo that it may be now called ſighing or ſorrowfull England.
               
               In England we haue euer had thrée States, Lords Spirituall, Temporall, and the Commons. And theſe Commons are diuided againe into Gentlemen, Yeomen, and Husbandmen. But in other Countreyes there is no Yeomanrie, but only in England. In France


                  
all are Gentlemen, or Peſants: In Denmarke all are Noblemen, or Ruſtici, as they tearme them: And in High & Lowe Germanie there are the Nobilitie, and the Boores. So that, Gentlemen which are Incloſers, ouerthrowing the Yeomanrie, and decaying the Communalty, doe blotte out the ancient glory of England: for, no doubt, by the ſtrength and hands of theſe two, haue béen heretofore euer obtained, our admirable conqueſts, and moſt famous victories throughout all Chriſtendome. So that now theſe Incloſers doe goe about to make England as barbarous, and as weake in this reſpect, as other nations. Nay let them take héed that they prooue not themſelues Egyptians: for not the countrey, but the conditions & maners, are wont to giue names. As we may learne out of the Prophet Eſay, whereas Eſa. 1. 10. he calles the Noblemen of Iewrie Princes of Sodome; and the people, the people of Gomorah: though neither they nor their anceſtors were borne there. So I feare we haue ſome Landlords of Aegypt in England: for (Mitſraijm) the



name of Aegypt, in our language is as much to ſay, as an Afflicter, or one that makes another ſorrowfull: and are not theſe Incloſers Egyptians then, which pinch, and vexe their brethren? Let them take heede; the name agrées vnto them: let them feare the puniſhment; God is the ſame God ſtill. He that heard the grones, and ſighes of his Pſal. 102. 27. Exod. 3. 7. 8. people in Aegypt, and came downe to deliuer them, will no doubt doe the ſame in England.
               
               I haue heard of an olde propheſie, that Horne and thorne ſhall make England forlorne. Incloſers verifie this by their ſhéepe and hedges at this day. They kill poore mens hearts, by taking from them their auncient commons, to make shéepe paſture of; and by impoſing vpon them great rents, and by decaying tillage; ſo that now they are forlorne hauing no ioy to liue in the world.
               And according to theſe ſhadowes, Saint Iohn deſcribeth to vs the truth of Chriſts Church: But if that we walke 
                  1. Ioh. 1. 7. 
                  in light (ſaith he) as he is in light, we



haue fellowſhip one with another, and the blood of Ieſus Chriſt his Sonne cleanſeth vs from all our ſinnes. Here is, euen to force vs to the communicating of our vile earth one to another, the communicating of Jeſus Chriſts moſt pretious blood: as though they which would not maintaine this chriſtian communion and fellowſhip among themſelues, ſhould not be partakers of that. They are not children of God, but children of the diuell, that walke not in this light: they are not of Gods familie and Church, but of Sathans Synagogue, that haue not this fellowſhip among themſelues. And Saint Paul commaunds Timothie, and 1. Tim. 6. 17 in him all miniſters, to teach rich men the ſame leſſon; Charge them that be rich in this world that they be not high minded, &c. but to be very ready to giue and to be 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , making common their talents among their brethren: but Incloſers doe not ſo.
               To conclude this point: Eſay in his propheſie, may ſéeme to teach, and touch vs alſo very narrowly, that haue liued



vnder the gratious raigne of Quéene Elizabeth, and doe now liue vnder the happie and religious gouernment of King Iames: for he alſo propheſied in the daies of godly Ezechias, to whom Eſa. 11. both theſe may be compared. And God there complaines, that when as he had planted a moſt pleſant vine in Iewrie, and had hedged it from the hands of the enemie, and had picked out of it 
                  Eſa. 5. 2. 
                  ſtones, that is, many vnprofitable members and traytors, and when he had planted a wine-preſſe in it, that is, a famous Schoole of the Prophets which 1. Sam. 19. 20. 2. King. 2. 3. 5. ſhould yéeld vnto them the moſt pleaſant wine, and alſo had built in the middeſt of it a ſtately tower of defence, euen a moſt godly and mightie Prince and Magiſtrate: yet for all theſe benefits, when as he looked for ſwéete grapes at their hands, they brought forth ſower grapes. And hath he not beſtowed all theſe former benefits and bleſſings vpon vs in England? He is very vnthankfull, or ſtarke blind that will not acknowledge this: and yet for all theſe benefits theſe Incloſers (with thoſe



vnkinde Jewes) yéelde ſower grapes.
               And what theſe ſower grapes are, the Prophet Eſay after moſt manifeſtly ſheweth vs. Woe vnto them (ſaith he) Verſ. 8. 
                  that ioyne houſe to houſe, and lay field to field, till there be no place, that you may be placed by your ſelues in the middeſt of the earth. Is not this the marke that incloſers doe aime at, to be placed alone by themſelues on the earth? But to ſuch ſtragling ſhéepe, from the holy fellowſhip of the Lords flocke, the Prophet here, cryeth woe. And are not theſe plainely the grapes that Incloſers doe yéelde, to ioyne field to field? and theſe, they account gainefull and pleaſant grapes. Oh men deſperately ſicke, whoſe mouthes are thus out of taſte; And doe they thinke that God will take theſe grapes at their hands?
               What talke they of the goodneſſe of their land, that it is worth this, or that? let them praiſe God that they enioy it. If he had not hedged it about; not long ſince, the cruell Spaniard had deuoured vs all. Oh, remembring this, let them offer ſwéete and moſt pleaſant grapes



vnto the Lord, that is, deale as mercifully with their poore Tenants as is poſſible. All the mercy which they can ſhew, is nothing to that mercie, which God hath ſhewed to them already; nay, to that he muſt ſhew to them hereafter, or elſe they ſhalbe damned. And let them take héede; for with what meaſure they Math. 7. 2. doe now meate, ſhall be meaſured to them againe: as it was done to that rich man, who, as he would not giue a crum 
                  Luk. 16. 21. 
                  or droppe here on earth, ſo he could not haue one crumme or droppe of comfort then graunted him in hell: though he could cry father Abraham neuer ſo loud, his vncharitable and vnmercifull faith could doe him no good; no more ſhall theirs profit them: Let all men marke this well; It is written for our learning. 
                  Rom. 11. 4. And let them marke well what meaſure of mercie they now giue; and let them be ſure, that they giue meaſure enough: for, without all doubt, at that day, they ſhall receiue the ſame againe. And I pronounce vnto them, that, doe what they can, they ſhall ſtand neede of it all. Let them not flatter themſelues



in doing ſome ſmall trifles, and in giuing the paring of their nailes, and thoſe things which they may well ſpare: for as Saint Peter tels vs, at that day 
                  1. Pet. 4. 18. 
                  the iuſt man ſhall ſcarcely be ſaued: and then what caſe ſhall vnmercifull men be in?
            
            
               The fifth reaſon is, that this Incloſure is againſt Chriſtian charitie.
               SAint Paul ſaith, Charitie ſeeketh not her owne things, but euery man alſo 
                  1. Cor. 13. 5 Phil. 2. 4. 
                  the things of other men. But theſe Incloſers reſpect onely their owne commodities, and therefore it is againſt charitie. It was the voyce of Cain, and not of Sheth, nor of Gods Church, am I my brothers keeper? And euen at this Gen. 4. 9. day they are of Cains petegrée, and not of Gods familie, that haue no care of the wealth and welfare of their brethren.
               This Incloſure is alſo againſt the loue which Jeſus Chriſt commaunded and ſhewed towards vs; Yee know the grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt (ſaith 2. Cor. 8. 9.


                  
Saint Paul) that he being rich, for your ſakes became poore, that you through his pouertie might be made rich. And I giue you 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  my counſell, and 
                  2. Cor. 8. 10. 
                  mine aduiſe herein. This is alſo that law of our Sauiour Chriſt, which he ſo ſtraitely commaunds all his, To loue 
                  Ioh. 13. 34. Ioh. 15. 12. 
                  one another, as he hath loued them, and that with a repetition. This is Saint Pauls aduiſe; for our brethrens ſakes, 2. Cor. 8. 10 euen to become poore to doe them good. But Incloſers doe not thus, they ſéeke their owne wealth and riches, therefore they contradict both our Sauiours law, and Saint Pauls aduiſe.
               The moſt comfortable words of our bleſſed Sauiour, euen the firſt and moſt ioyfull meſſage that he ſent to his Apoſtles after his reſurrection were theſe, Goe to my brethren and ſay vnto them, 
                  Ioh. 20. 17. 
                  I aſcend vnto my Father and to your Father, to my God and to your God. Oh ioyfull newes! Shall we not beleeue this? And if we doe, ſhall we not account indéede all Chriſtians now our brethren? euen our moſt néere and déere brethren? which brotherhoode our Sa-Sauiour



Jeſus ſo dearely bought, euen by his moſt precious death; and ſhall we not deale with them as with our brethren? But Dauid in the perſon of our Sauiour Chriſt complaines, that he is become a ſtranger to his brethren, 
                  Pſal. 69. 8. 
                  and an aliant to his mothers children. And is not Jeſus Chriſt, in his members amongſt vs, in this ſtate euen now? and may he not ſéeme to make the ſame complaint? Whoſoeuer lets a farme, or ſels any thing to his brother, doth he not deale with him, as with a ſtranger? doth he not make him pay for it to the vttermoſt? Nay, ſometimes more then it is worth? A Turke might haue it as cheape at our hands as a Chriſtian. And may not Jeſus Chriſt then iuſtly ſay, that he is become a ſtranger to his brethren? ſurely as great a ſtranger, in his members to Chriſtians, as he was in his owne perſon to the Jewes. For as they gaue 
                  Mat. 26. 34. 
                  him vineger and gall to drinke; ſo many now giue to their brethren; and eſpecially Incloſers giue this drinke to their poore tenants.
               
                  
And here we may note that excellent propertie of true charitie that ſhe is alwaies hard to her ſelfe, that ſhe may be bountifull to others. So was the widow 
                  1. King. 17. 15. 
                  of Sareptah,
                   that ſhe might féede Elias; and ſo was that widow in the Goſpell, 
                  Luk. 21. 4. which our Sauiour ſo highly commends; That ſhe might giue ſome thing into the Treaſurie of God, ſhe gaue all her liuing, and puniſhed her ſelfe. So was that Samaritan and that ſtranger amongſt the Jewes (whoſe example all 
                  Luk. 10. 37. 
                  that will be accounted neighbours our Sauiour commaunds to follow) to that wounded man. He ſet him on his owne beaſt: he went a foote himſelfe, and tooke paines that he might ride. So were all the Church of Macedonia, as Saint Paul ſheweth, in their extreame 
                  2. Cor. 8. 2. 
                  pouertie rich in liberalitie to the poore, They pinched themſelues, that they might be liberall to them. Doe Incloſers follow theſe examples? doe they pinch themſelues that they may doe their brethren good? Shall not all theſe examples, of Jewes, widowes, ſtrangers, and Macedonians mooue them?



They doe quite contrarie; and they thinke, that they may doe it lawfully; that is, they may ſeeke their owne commoditie howſoeuer that their brethren fare: ſurely this is not charitie. All Gods creatures may ſeeme to teach vs Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis oues, &c. this leſſon, as Virgils verſes auouch. The ſheepe beareth not his fleece, nor the oxe his yoake for himſelfe, nor the Bées hord vp their honey, but all for our vſe. Nay, thoſe exceilent creatures; the Sunne, the Moone, and ſtars, how continually doe they runne their courſes, for our commoditie? And ſhall not we take paines and pinch our ſelues to doe our brethren good? And will not Incloſers learne this leſſon being taught it by ſo many ſchoole-maſters? I am verely perſwaded that God hath ſent of late vnſeaſonable weather, eſpecially in the hay-harueſt, to teach Incloſers what an acre of their incloſed paſture ground (which they doe make ſo great a reckoning of) is worth. For the hay-harueſt, which yeeldes meate for their ſheepe, hath beene lately vnſeaſonable and wet: but the corne



harueſts which yéeldes meate for his Ioh. 12. 8. 
                  ſheepe (the poore) the Lord hath bleſſed: Or elſe no doubt, if the corne harueſt had bin as wet as the hay harueſt was, there would haue béen a great dearth of corne, to the vndooing of the poore. But our moſt louing God, to declare the loue that he beares to his owne ſhéepe: & the ſmall care in compariſon, that he hath of their ſhéepe; hath as it were plagued the hay-harueſt of their ſheep, and bleſſed the corne-harueſt of his own ſheepe; for nothing chanceth in vaine. And Mat. 12. 29. therefore whereas Incloſers doe vrge, the goodneſſe of the ground, and the benefit of Incloſure, and that an acre of their incloſed medow and paſture, is worth thus much; they muſt conſider, yt vnles God ſend ſeaſonable weather, it may prooue almoſt worth nothing: they muſt learne to let God haue a chief part of their rents reſerued to him. Vnleſſe 
                  Ier. 5. 24. 
                  he keepe for vs the appointed weekes of the harueſt, as Ieremic teacheth, what is all our land and labour taken about it worth? No doubt our anceſtors had conſideration hereof, in letting their



lands; which were ſo eaſily rented, that the tenant might haue the rent what weather ſoeuer God ſent: and this was Chriſtian charitie. But this charitie is now vaniſhed out of the world: The Incloſer will haue his great rent, hée will not abate one penie what weather ſoeuer come. One writes that the poore hus
                        •
                     andman is more cruelly dealt withall than the aſ
                        •
                     e; whom his maſter, if that the weather or the way proue not conuenient and good, will eaſe of his burden. But Huſbandmen, come faire come foule weather, are nothing pitied; they muſt beare ſtill their accuſtomed burdens, be they neuer ſo great.
               This practiſe of Chriſtian charitie was vſed in the Primitiue church. And the multitude of them which beleeued 
                  Act. 4. 32. (ſaith S. Luke) were of one heart, and of one ſoule; neither any of them ſaid or accompted, that that which he poſſeſſed, was his own; but they had all things common. Common like Chriſtians, not like Anabaptiſts: common in vſe, not in propertie. For Ananias poſſeſſion Act. 5. 4. was his owne, to haue either kept or



ſold it, as Peter told him. So was alſo all other mens poſſeſſions and goods, but no man accompted it as his owne.
               
                  Lodouicus Viues, a very learned man, thus deſcribes Chriſtian charitie: To loue, ſaith hée, is the happiest and the 
                  Introduct. adſapient. 
                  best thing in the world: and therefore God and Angels are moſt happie and bleſſed, who loue most. And to hate is the worst and most miſerable thin in the world: and for this cauſe the denils are most miſerable. And after, leſt any man ſhould coine to himſelfe a counterfeite Chriſtian charitie; This true charitie makes all thinges equall; where that flouriſheth, no man deſireth to be preferred before another, no man will deſire to take away any thing from him that he loueth, when as he accompts that he himſelfe hath whatſoeuer his friend hath: no man will goe to law with him, whom he loues: none will thinke that he can receiue any iniurie at his hands, and therefore neuer thinkes on reuenge: no man will enuie him, whom he loues; nor any man is glad of the harmes of him that is his friend, nor is agrieued at his welfare. But contrariwiſe, according to the ſaying of the Apoſtle;



                  He reioyceth with them that reioyce, and weepes with them that weepe, 
                  Rom. 12. 15. & that not fa
                        •
                     nedly or counterfeitly. but from his very heart. Becauſe loue makes all things common, and atcompts that his owne which is his whom he loueth. Thus Lodouicus Viues deſcribes Chriſtian charitie. And how farre off are Incloſers 1. Cor. 13. 1 from this? Saint Paul ſaith, That if he had all knowledge, and all faith, euen to remooue mountaines, yet without this charitie he were nothing before God: And what are Incloſers then, that are deſtitute of all theſe gifts, and lacke this charitie? Let them marke this well, that this i
                     •
                  well Charitie, one day before the Maieſtie of God, ſhall be more worth than all their golde, and great rents and reuenues. This is the charitie of all the Saints in heauen. For although there be differences of ioyes, 
                  1. Cor. 15. 41. yet the Saints which haue leſſer ioyes, accoūt thoſe ioyes, through charity, alſo theirs, which their brethren doe enioy.
               Now is fulfilled that prayer of Dauid, It is time for thee Lord to put to thy hand, for (Hephiru) they haue abrogated, 
                  Pſal. 119. 126.


                  
                  they haue made no account of thy lawe. And what is Chriſts law but Ioh. 13. 34. charitie? And that not any charitie, but ſuch a charitie as he hath ſhewed towards vs; & as Lodou
                        •
                     cus Vi
                        •
                     es here hath deſcribed to vs. But it is time for God to put to his hand, for this charity is vaniſhed, is abrogated, is made no account of, many thinke that it concernes them not.
               But the very Pagans haue had this charitie, and, but that they wanted the eye of faith, they haue mounted vp herein Act. 17. 27. (like blinde Hawkes) farre higher than ſome Chriſtians, eſpecially than Incloſers.
               
                  Cymon the Athenian commaunded all hedges and pales to be taken away from his grounds, that both Citizens and ſtrangers whoſoeuer, that ſtood in neede, might haue more free acceſſe into them, to gather Ap
                           •
                        les and corne.
                   And Photion the Athenian ſaid, That a man had as good pull downe Churches and Altars, as take mercie from amongst men. And Iulius Caeſar was wont to ſay, That then he waxed rich, when as he did any man good. And



wil Incloſers come behind any of theſe? will they incloſe? Cymon the Athenian would not doe it.
                   Will they not deale charitably in letting of their farmes to their brethren? Phocion tels them, that they had as good pull downe Churches Doe they account the money in their coffers their treaſures? Caeſar, that proud Romane Emperour ſhall condemne them; he thought not ſo, but rather that which he had beſtowed liberally. Traiane
                   the Emperour was accompted the ioy of mankinde, becauſe that he neuer ſent any man ſad home. Oh that all Landlords were Traianes! They ſhould bee more; for it is more to bee a Chriſtian, than to be a Traiane; and Saint Paul wills all Chriſtians to walke worthy of their 
                  Epheſ. 4. 1. 
                  vocation. The name of a Chriſtian is 1. Pet. 4. 16. the honorableſt and bountifulleſt name in the worlde. Chriſtians take their names, of the anointing the holy Ghoſt. And what then can be more honourable 1. Ioh. 2. 27. and bountifull? Octauius Caeſar 
                        
                           •
                        ccompted that day loſt, wherein he had done good to no man.
                   Oh that all Landlords would ſpend their daies thus, in deuiſing



the good of the townes, whereof they are Landlords, and not in the impoueriſhing of them! Then we ſhould haue a flouriſhing Church, and a rich Common-wealth. P
                        •
                     olome alſo King of Aegypt was wont to ſay, That he had rather make others rich, than be rich himſelfe. Oh that Incloſers were of this minde Curius alſo the Romane hauing a great deale of golde offered him of the Samnites, 
                     
                        •
                     had rather, ſaith he, haue the poſſeſſors of the gold Mine, than their gold. O wiſe Curius he had rather haue the hearts of the Samnites, than their heapes of golde. Oh that Incloſers were in this point but as wiſe as he! The day will come when the prayers of tenants, ſhall doe their Landlords more good than their great payments now. For that ſaying of our Sauiour ſhall ſtand good, whēas they with their cheſts full of gold and ſiluer ſhall periſh; Make you friends of your vnrighteous māmō; 
                  Luk. 15. 9. 
                  that when as you ſhall depart hence and faile in your account, they may receiue you into euerlaſting Tabernacles. And our Sauiour addes an Emphaſis or a



                  Memorandum (as we ſay) to this his ſentence; (And I ſay vnto you) as though he ſhould ſay, Marke this well, all you rich men, whom God hath enriched with his talents: Herein follow that ſame vniuſt Steward, and make you friends of the poore; that when you ſhall depart hence, & God ſhall call you to an account of your ſtewardſhips (as ye great rich man did his ſteward, and ſhall faile therin, the beſt of you al, euen as he did) the poore may receiue you into euerlaſting tabernacles. Make the poore as waters to caſt your bread on, as yt Preacher counſelleth you: that you may find it again, Eccle. 12. 1. whē as you ſhal ſtand in need, after 
                  Gen. 28. 12. 18. 
                  many daies: and as ſtones to powre your oyle vpon; as did Iacob the Patriarch; that when you ſhall die, you may ſleepe quietly as hée did being aliue; and ſée that ladder Jeſus Chriſt reaching from earth to heauen. For that ſtrange fact of Iacob containes in it ſome great myſterie. And may not that ladder ſignifie faith, & this powring oile on the ſtone, mercie? So that we muſt ioyne to the ladder of faith, the oyle of mercie if we



meane to aſcend vp to heauen. Or if that Ephe. 2. 20. ſtone ſignifie Jeſus Chriſt, are not the poore his members? and doe not they which ſhew mercie vnto them, powre their oile on Jeſus Chriſts feet, as Mary 
                  Ioh. 12. 3. 
                  did in the goſpel, & as it were on ſtones? Such an heire of Iacob, was Dauid, who of himſelfe writes thus; Know 
                  Pſal. 4. 3. 
                  yee that the Lord (Hiphlah) hath as a wonderfull and pretious thing choſen to himſelfe (Chaſidh) the mercifull man. And he concludes, I will lay me downe 
                  Verſ. 8. 
                  in peace and take my reſt, as though mercifull men onely, and they that power their oyle on ſtones, as Iacob did, ſhould take their reſt, and ſléepe ſweetely. For that ſentence alſo ſhall ſtand good, wherein conſiſtes one maine point (next faith) of our ſaluation: Bleſſed are the mercifull, for they ſhall obtaine 
                  Mat. 5. 7. Iam. 2. 13. 
                  mercy; and iudgement mercileſſe ſhall be to him that hath ſhewed no mercy, as S. Iames teacheth vs. But Incloſers, I thinke, neuer remember that day: if they did, they would prefer prayers before payments, and the harts of their tenants, with that courteous



Romane Curius, before their heapes of golde and ſiluer. O blind couetouſneſſe! O blinde Incloſers! more blinde than Grecians, more blinde than Romanes, nay, more vncharitable and cruell than very Infidels. Nature teacheth, that the wilde figge tree, if it be planted neere vnto the figge tree, that it will make it more fruitfull: and ſhall not theſe Heathen or Pagans, who are wilde figge trées in compariſon of vs Chriſtians, make vs excell in good works? ſhall their figges be ſweeter than ours? O degenerate and wilde Chriſtians!
               God by his Prophet Ieremie (ſaith, Goe to the iſles of Chittim, and behold; 
                  Ier. 2. 10. 
                  and ſend vnto Kedar, and take diligent heede, and ſee whether there be ſuch things. Our moſt gratious God, compares his people of the Jewes, with the Paganes: And will he not much more compare vs chriſtians with them? And is it not a ſhame for vs to be ouercome of them in charitie towards our brethren? Surely, if we be, in the day of iudgement they ſhall condemne vs.
            
            
               
               The ſixt reaſon: this Incloſure is againſt the Church and Common-wealth, and auncient cuſtomes and liberties of England,
               GOds Miniſters may make that complaint of Incloſers, that Iacob made of Laban: Thou haſt now changed 
                  Gen. 31. 41 
                  my wages ten times: So haue they changed the auncient liuings of Gods Miniſters. But in all their exchanges it hath fallen out, as it doth commonly in caſting of mettals: that which hath comne in the ſecond place, hath not béen ſo good as was the former. Their ſummes of money which they doe now alowe, are not ſo good in value, as were heretofore tithes in kinde: and againe, the money due is not ſo eaſily obtained at their hands. And thus they doe not onely muſſell the mouthes of Gods 
                  1. Cor. 9. 9. 
                  Oxen, which doe tread out his Corne, but alſo impoueriſh them yéerely more & more by this their incloſure; and yet for all this, they will be accounted Laban,


                  
that is, they will ſéeme white and religious.
               
                  Hierome, of couetous Patrons, and laie-men which ſtudie to get into their Hier. part. 3. tract. 4. epiſt. 10. ad Damaſ. hands Eccleſiaſticall liuings, writes thus: They which ſerue at the Altar, let them be partakers of the Altar: Therefore becauſe Prieſts were wont to pray for all them, whoſe almes and oblations they doe receiue, with what face dare laie men, either themſelues eate, or grant to others, the oblations which Christians doe offer for their ſinnes, when as it becommeth not 
                  Alludit ad illud 1. Iohanis 5. 16. Orans pre fraire peccatore dat vitam. 
                  them to pray for the people? For this cauſe, (O glorious Father) we ought to excommunicate thoſe preſumptuous perſons for euer; that others might be afraid, and that theſe things might be no more done in the Church. O grieuous ſinne, which Hierome ſaith, is to be excommunicated for euer!
               And here firſt, the poore huſbandmen and cottagers, may complaine vnto your Maieſtie of the payments of the Subſidie inflicted vpon them; that whereas there hath béene rich farmers



in euery Towne to pay it, now thoſe townes incloſed being diſpeopled, and thoſe rich farmers which were wont to pay it, being fled away, the payments thereof are impoſed on poore men: who being but tenants, and hauing but a ſmall flocke of cattell (and perchance a great familie to maintaine) are enforced to be three pound men in the Subſidie booke; whereas the Lord of the mannor, or Frée-holder; being their Landlords, liuing in other places, hauing fiue hundred or a thouſand ſhéepe, in the ſaid Lordſhip (which they haue incloſed and improued) and perchance fiftie or a hundred cattell, will pay nothing towards the payment of the ſame. Pleading for themſelues, that by law, they are to be aſſeſſed and bound to pay but in one place, which for the moſt part is where they inhabit. And ſo they vſing and enioying the profits and commodities of the farmes which they haue decayed; and alſo eating with their cattel, the chiefe commoditie of the field; will beare no part of that dutie with their poore tenants, which makes them repine



and murmur. Nay (that which is the laſt refuge) if the townes incloſed be ſo poore, that they are not able to pay the Subſidie; they will vſe meanes to mitigate the ſame, and ſo make ſome townes néere adioyning, helpe to beare out the burden of thoſe townes, that they haue decayed and diſpeopled by their incloſure.
               Secondly, the poore alſo may complaine of Incloſers for taking away their Common: for herein they are, firſt impious againſt God, and iniurious to their Aunceſtors, and diſtoyall to the Kings prerogatiue royall. For firſt, God himſelfe may ſéeme to haue giuen ſome Commons, as appeares in Holland, and in the Marſh in Lincolneſhire, and Holdernes in Yorkeſhire, and in Kent, where many miles of ground haue béen added by the Sea. Secondly, ſome people of godly diſpoſition, and great poſſeſſions, dying without iſſue, haue giuen large Commons in diuers places, as in Yorkeſhire, a great Common called Walling Fenne. And laſtly, Kings haue giuen Commons alſo.
               
                  
                  William Conqueror gaue Commons and other liberties: ſo that Lords of Mannors did not appoint them, and therefore at their pleaſures may not take them away. And they were giuen as it ſhould ſeeme, vpon theſe conſiderations: Firſt, to maintaine the poore men that fought for him: for all were not Gentlemen in that great armie of the Conqueror. And as gentlemē had lordſhips beſtowed vpon them for their ſeruice, ſo no doubt, the poore had Cōmons giuen to them alſo for the ſame cauſe: that a poore man prouiding onely meate for his Cowe againſt winter, was aſſured to haue her kept and fedde on the Commons all the ſummer for nothing; and ſo might be the better imployed about his Maieſties warres, ſo often as néede did require: whereas now in many places, the poore man is forced to pay very dearely for the ſummer Common or paſture for his Cowe (ouer and beſides his houſe rent) which in times paſt he had belonging to his houſe for his ſaid rents. And ſo the care for the prouiſion for his family being great, makes



many not to be ſo forward to warres, as they both would and ought to be.
               
                  Boterus Beneſius, writing of the eſtate of the whole world, and ſtrength Mund. Imp. Rex. Angl. of England, which conſiſtes on the poore Huſbandman, Cottager, and common Souldier, reports thus; Although (ſaith he) the Engliſh men are able to bring into the field 2000. Launces, and a great number of light horſe, yet the horſemen of England haue neuer wonne to themſelues ſuch credit and praiſe in war, as the footemen haue done. King Edward the third, who made ſo many voyages into France, and obtained there ſo many victories; to declare in which of his forces he moſt truſted, forſooke his horſemen, and went on foote amongst his common Souldiers. But contrariwiſe the Frenchmen, becauſe they will not haue their common people giue themſelues ouermuch to warlike affaires (lest they ſhould forſake and contemne their handicrafts and occupations, and ſo, by being ſouldiers, waxe proude; to which thing the Frenchmen are very much inclined) put all their ſtrength of their warres in horſemen, which for the most part conſiſts of Noble men. The



common Souldier heretofore hath béen for warres, the glory of England, as this author affirmes; & by him England hath won ſo many great victories, and obtained ſuch great glory and fame; and ſhall he now be deſpiſed? Nay ſhall he in ſome places be rooted out? What is this elſe, but to put out Samſons eyes, the ſtrength Iud. 16. 21. and glory of our land, and to cut off his haire? To doe this, is not to be true Iſraelites, 
                  Ioh. 1. 47. 1. Sam. 17. 36. 
                  but vncircumciſed Philiſtimes. What will our riches do vs good, if we lacke men to kéepe them? As the body cannot conſiſt without legges & armes, ſo neither the Common-wealth without Huſbandmen, Labourers, & Souldiers. Surely, they which will not maintaine theſe armes and legs, which muſt fight and runne for them, are euill members of this Common-wealth. If the legges of our bodies be weake, how will we complaine? or if our armes be out of ioint, what ſpeed will we make to haue them put into the ioint again? and ſhall we not nouriſh bountifully theſe legges? ſhall we ſuffer theſe armes to be out of ioint? And here as Gods word



may ſéeme to be the moſt ſtrong ligament, ſo in ſome ſort theſe Commons Pſal. 2. 3. may ſeeme to bee the ſinewes of the Common-wealth: For, as our armes are ioyned to our bodies by ſinewes and ligaments, ſo no doubt theſe armes were tied in the beginning to the Common-wealth by their Commons beſtowed vpon them. For benefits are the ſtrongeſt bonds to binde men withall, as the Heathen haue taught.
               Secondly, it may ſeeme they were ordained for common workes: For ſo haue Churches béen repaired, and bridges built, and high waies made & maintained. They would lay a péece of their Common, to be ſo wen, or for meadow, and with the profit thereof being ſolde, performe any common worke; and by that meanes, ſuch like workes coſt the poore of the Towne very little. And hereof (as appeares nowe) comes the ridges and furrowes in ancient Commons, which proueth that for ſuch purpoſes they haue béene ſowne. And the like good would come to the Common-wealth, if that they were vſed ſo ſtill.



Whereas now in many places, where theſe Commons are takē away by Incloſure, euery penie comes out of the poore mans purſe; and hauing no common ſtocke, hardly any common worke can be brought to paſſe, as in times paſt hath beene.
               Laſtly, a part of theſe Commons were the Kings high waies; which name plainely argues, that Kings were the authors of thē, as of all other Commons. And thoſe which are leading from one Market towne to another, ought to be two hundred foote broade, (as appeareth by a Statute of Wincheſter 13. made in 1. Ed. 5.) which were large and ſafe, that your Maieſtie might paſſe the countrey in progreſſe with your traine; and your Subiects trauell without danger. But now Incloſers haue ſo pinched them in, by their ditches and hedges, allowing but 24. for the way, that your Maieſtie cannot paſſe in their waies and lanes, vnleſſe they throwe open their hedges againe for that time, as experience lately hath prooued. Neither can your poore Subiects



trauel with their weake beaſts without danger, the waies being thereby made ſtraite and narrow, and therefore deepe and dangerous; neither without danger of their liues, both by foreſtalling of théeues, and alſo by opening the dangerous gates. The poore Cottager had his Common allowed him alſo (as ſhould ſéeme) for his paines taken in mending of theſe high waies, which now Incloſers haue quite ſpoyled, by pinching them in: but the burthen doth remaine on poore mens backs ſtill; and they are forced to doe their common daies, as before, and yet their Common is taken from them.
               But Lords of Mannours, and Frée-holders, who haue their Commons, and ſhould alſo worke their common daies, and for euery plow-land they holde, either in Tillage, or Paſture, ſhould find one Cart or draught, to leade ſtones and rubbiſh towards the repairing of high waies; doe now of late, in many places (where Tillage is conuerted to Paſture) where heretofore, there hath beene thirtie draughts or Carts in a



towne, which did performe their common daies, ſkant finde tenne: and he that hath decayed fower or fiue draughts, ſkant ſends one to kéepe his common daies. And hereof it comes, that high waies in many places, are not ſo well maintained, as heretofore they haue béene.
               Nay, if theſe Commons had béene appointed by the Lords of Mannors, then as mens natures in all ages haue béene diuers, ſo theſe Commons would alſo, in ſome places haue béene better, and in other ſome worſe: but in all places, according to the proportion of the towne, they are very liberall and bountiful: declaring themſelues to be beames comming from the ſame Sunne; I meane from the rich liberalitie of the Kings maieſtie.
               There was a tenure in England called Baſſa tenura, now called Copie hold: and theſe had their fréedomes according to the cuſtome of the Mannor. There was another tenure called Tenure of villenage, and theſe had neither libertie of Commons, nor of



their very bodies, and ſeede. And this may bee an euident argument, that Kings gaue theſe Commons: for thoſe which had offended his Maieſtie moſt greeuouſly, he made them villens, and depriued them of the auncient liberties, which all his other people enioyed. So that as this villenage, was by the King inflicted vpon ſome: So no doubt the former liberties and priuileges alſo, were by Kings giuen and beſtowed. But Incloſers now, for no cauſe of diſobedience, but for their owne priuate lucres, take from their tenants, that which Kings did not, but vpon great offences committed againſt their perſon.
               There is an auncient law, (in regarde 20. Hen. 3. 4. 13 Edw. 4. 6. that tenants complained of the Lords of Mannors for incloſing as ſhould ſéeme of their Commons) by which it was enacted that Lords ſhould leaue ſufficient Common for their tenants, with ſufficient egreſſe and regreſſe: And, that being performed, they might (as ſhould ſéeme) make their commoditie of the reſt. But if that their



egreſſe and regreſſe were any thing hindred by the deforceors, or that they had not ſufficient paſture; that thē they ſhould recouer their ſeiſon by the view of Jewrors; ſo that by their diſcretions and othes, they ſhall haue ſufficient Common and paſture with egreſſe and regreſſe, and the diſſeſors ſhould bée amerced and render damages. This auncient ſtatute plainely proues, that Lords in euery towne, ſhould leaue to their tenants ſufficient Common. And therefore doe they not breake the meaning of this law, which incloſe, leauing no Common at all?
               Theſe Incloſers take vpon them, as though they were, not Lords of Mannours, but rather kings; and doe make, as it were, a new Commonwealth, and a new forme of gouernment in townes wherein they are Lords. They will haue no Common left at all. And wheras there hath béene common Leas and Meadow (which hath béen without memory of man yéerly letten, and the profit thereof hath béen imployed towards the repaire of the Church, and ſuch other



good and Chriſtian vſes) they will now take them away as waſte due to themſelues, except there can be good euidence in writing to ſhew for the ſame. They alter & change the ancient high waies; ſo that trauellers and ſtrangers ſometimes without danger, cannot come to their townes. They will haue no common Neat-heards, nor Hog-heards, nor Pinder in their townes, by which poore men haue liued, & had a ſtay and maintenance, both for themſelues, and families, though impotent, and not able for other works.
               
                  Philarchus teſtifieth, that the beanes of Aegypt, were firſt ſowen in Aegypt, and that if ſo be they were ſowen in any other countrey, they would grow in none but there. But after in a certaine Fenne of Epirus, nigh vnto a riuer of Theſpoſia, called Thyramnis, in the daies of King Alexander Pyrrhus, two yeeres together they grewe, and brought foorth their fruit very pleaſantly: but when as King Alexander ſet a guard to keepe and watch them, that none ſhould take of them, nor come into the Fenne, the Fenne was dried vp, neither brought



they foorth any more fruit.
               
               
                  In Edipſo alſo there appeared a certaine cold water running out of a ſpring, not farre from the ſea, by the which they that were ſicke were very much holpen. Inſomuch that many out of farre countreyes, came thither to drinke of that water. But whenas the captaines and gouernors of King Antiochus, began to pinch them of this water, and commaunded to giue them of another water to drinke, quite contrarie from the other, the ſpring by and by dryed vp.
               
               
                  In Troas it was lawfull for any man to fetch Salem Tragoſoeum (Troy ſalt) but when as King Liſimachus made them pay for it, ſtraightway the ſault vaniſhed away: but afterwards, hee wondering at that ſtrange alteration, hee made the place free agame, and the ſault alſo increaſed againe. Athenaeus lib. 3. cap.
                   1. reports all theſe hiſtories. And doe we not thinke then, that God miſlikes theſe couetous men, that for their owne priuate lucre and gaine, doe take Commons from men? Nay, if he plagued them, that thus dealt with Pagans, who were his enemies; doe we thinke that he will allowe of



them that deale ſo hardly with Chriſtians and with his owne Children? 
                     Matth. 6. 9. Offic. lib. 1.
               
               
                  T
                        •
                     llie by the light of nature could ſay, Iustice vſed things common, as common; and things priuate as her owne: and ſhall not we much more doe ſo? But the men of our age, account it wiſedome to looke narrowly into Commons; and if men cannot ſhew good euidence for them, they take them away. The earth is ſubiect 
                  Rom. 8. 20. & 23. 
                  to our vanities, againſt her will, as Saint Paul teacheth vs. And what is ſhe now then, doe we thinke, at our vncharitable ditches and hedges, made to the hurt of our brethren? And what theſe vanities are, Salomon may ſeeme to teach vs, Eccleſ. 2. 4. 5. 6. 11.
               Nay, God himſelfe may ſéeme by his ſecret prouidence (which no doubt doth gouerne all things: who, contrarie to the manner of the Jewes fields, hath entermingled our Lands together) to haue forbidden this our incloſure. No man almoſt can Incloſe in Champian countries, with out great exchange: and doe we thinke that this intermingling our Lands thus together, was done in



vaine? God alſo by that miraculous moouing of the ground at Kinnaſtone in Herefordſhiere, may ſéeme to haue condemned Incloſure: no doubt it taught ſome thing. The ground mooued 
                  Stow Anno Dom. 1571. Anno E
                        〈…〉
                     z. 13. 
                  from his own place, carying ſheepe & ſheepecoats with it, and trees and high waies: it ouerthrew Kingſton Chappell, and changed Tillage into Paſture. Howſoeuer ſome here will giue their naturall cauſes, or make no account hereof; héere was plainely the hand of God, and his extraordinary working for our learning: this thing chaunced not in vaine. And the like ſtrange alteration vpon the earth, is wrought by Incloſers. They change auncient and accuſtomed high waies, they turne Tillage into paſture, they carrie ſheepe and Shéepeheards with them. And Churches nowe in many places, thorough depopulation, may become Chappels; Incloſers haue ſo greatly diminiſhed Gods people. Nay, the Caterpillers which God ſent, not many yéeres ſince, on thornes and hedges, which did eate off all the leaues of them in ſummer, may they



not ſéeme to condemne Incloſers? GOD hath by many miracles condemned the ſinnes of our age. As our couetouſneſſe by a childe that was 
                  Ruland. de dente auree. 
                  borne with a golden tooth. And why may he not condemne this our couetous incloſing, and exchanging the auncient cuſtomes and vſes of the earth, euen by this miraculous and ſtrange mouing thereof?
               Sir Thomas Moore a great common-wealths Lib. 1. V. topia. man, and very expert in the lawes of England, writes thus of Incloſure. Your ſheepe I ſay which were wont to be milde and gentle, and to be fed with ſo ſmall coſt, now as it is reported haue begun to be ſo wild & rauenous of late, that they eate vp euen men, and that they make waſte and depopulate townes. For, in what parts of your Realme growes finer wooll, and therefore of better price, there Noblemen and Gentlemen, yea and ſome Abbots (holy men I aſſure you) not being content with the yearely rents and commodities, which were wont to be payed out of farmes vnto their anceſtors; and not content, themſelues to liue idlely and pleaſantly, and to doe no good



to the common wealth, vnleſſe alſo that they ſhould hinder and hurt it; that they may leaue nothing but reape all commodities into their owne hands: They incloſe all their paſtures, they pull downe houſes, they ouerthrow townes, leauing the Church onely for to croowe vp their ſheepe in. And as though your forreſts and parkes had not ſpoyled ground enough amongst you, theſe holy men turne into a wildernes all dwelling houſes, and whatſoeuer heretofore hath beene tilled. And therefore one inſatiable glutton and most pestilent plague to his Countrey, ioyneth fields together, that he may incloſe within one hedge ſome thouſand acres. The husbandmen are either thrust out of their inheritances, or elſe being by craft beguiled, or by force oppreſſed, or depriued of them, or elſe wearied with iniuries and compelled to ſell them. Therefore howſoeuer theſe wretches doe flit, men, women, husbands, wiues, blinde men, and widowes, fathers with their young children, with a greater, than a rich family (for husbandrie ſtands in neede of many) they flit I ſay from their knowne and accuſtomed dwellings, and they can finde no



place where to put in their heades; They ſell all their ſtuffe when as they muſt needes be thruſt out, (which is not worth much if that they could tarry and get a good chapman for it) they ſell it I ſay almoſt for nothing. And when as by wandring a while they haue ſpent that, what muſt they needs doe then, but either ſteale, and iuſtly be hanged for their labours, or elſe wander vp and downe and begge, and then alſo are caſt into priſon as vagrant perſons, ſeeing no man will ſet them a worke, when as they doe moſt willingly offer their ſeruices? For now there is nothing to be done about husbandrie, wherein they haue beene brought vp all their liues, when as there is nothing ſowen. For now one Sheepeheard, and one Neat-heard is ſufficient to looke to that ground with cattell, to the tillage whereof, that it might beare corne, many mens hands and labours were required. And by this meanes it commeth to paſſe, that in many places Corne waxeth very deare.
               
               We may note here firſt, how that Sir Thomas More, being a Papiſt, yet touched this ſinne, euen in Abbots, and that in the darkenes of Poperie: and



ſhall not we condemne it in the light of the Goſpell? Secondly, he affirmes that it makes beggers, and that it makes théeues, and cauſeth a dearth of corne in our land, nay, it pulleth downe Townes. If in his daies it wrought theſe miſchiefes, when as it began but to ſet in foote into this Common-wealth: what hath it done ſince, which hath growne to the very heart thereof? nay, what will it doe in the ende, if it procéede as it hath begun, if ſome ſtay and remedie be not had? It will no doubt begger and quite decay the Common-wealth of England. How many farmes now, ſtand emptie ſince Incloſers began; or onely with ſome ſeruants in them; which dare giue nothing not knowing their maiſters pleaſure? ſo hoſpitalitie is quite thereby decayed. How many poore men lacke worke, as threſhers; and poore women, as ſpinners; and doe complaine for lacke of their accuſtomed workes? and how many poore mens children are inforced to begge or elſe liue idely, which heretofore where tillage was maintained



were taken into ſeruice, to driue the plough, or to keepe cattell, & thereby in time grew to be good members in the Common-wealth, which Incloſers néed not.
            
            
               The ſeauenth reaſon; This Incloſure with depopulation is a ſin whereof God ſhall make ſpeciall inquirie at the day of iudgement.
               IT is written in the booke of Geneſis, Gen. 6. that the earth was full of crueltie, and that that was the principall cauſe of the drowning thereof; and it is to be feared that this ſhall be the cauſe of the burning thereof: as appeareth in the 25. of Math. verſe 42. 43.
               
               The Prophet Dauid thus manifeſtly Pſal. 102. 16. propheſieth of Chriſts comming to iudgement. The Lord ſhall ariſe, and haue mercie vpon Syon, for the áppointed time is come; for all thy ſeruants haue great pleaſure in her ſtones, and it pitieth them to ſee her in the duſt. And all nations ſhall feare thy name O Lord, and all the kingdomes of the earth



thy glorie: for the Lord doth builde Syon and he will be ſeene in his glorie. He hath had reſpect vnto the prayer of (Hangareger)
                   as it is in the Hebrew; that is, of the poore afflicted; and he hath not deſpiſed their ſupplication. This ſhall be written (Ledhor acharon) for the laſt generation of the world. And the people created ſhall praiſe the Lord. Here we may marke firſt, that this Pſalm propheſies of our daies, and that this leſſon concernes vs. The time is now come for God to ariſe to iudgement, and to haue mercie vpon Syon.
                   And then, is it not written for vs that liue in the ende of the world? Oh that we would marke it! The leſſon is this; that all Gods ſeruants rather delight in the ſtones of Syon,
                   that is, Raiſu. in the Lords ſhéepe and faithfull ſeruants, more than in their flockes of ſheepe, or in their braue walles and high Towres; and it pitieth them to ſee theſe ſtones troden vnder foote and lye in the duſt, and to be made no account off: And that in the Sun-ſhine of the Goſpell, when all nations ſhall feare



the name of the Lord, and all the Kings of the earth his glory, by the preaching of his word. But God doth build Syon, and will be ſeene in his glorie. There be ſome as ſhould ſeeme that haue pulled downe Syon, and Gods Church, and theſe his ſtones: But God himſelfe will build it vp againe (ſaith the Prophet) and will be ſeene in his glory. Let all depopulators of townes themſelues build vp the Lords Syon and farmes againe, leaſt if that they ſuffer God to build them, when as he comes in his glorie, that his building be too coſtly for them, and coſt them not ſome hundreth pounds of money, which now perchance they are loth to diſburſe, but the damnation of their ſoules. For God hath a regard vnto the prayer (Hangaregar)
                   that is, of the poore afflicted that is trampled vnder foote and made no account of, but is as a broome, (as that word ſignifieth) and hath not deſpiſed their ſupplications. The iuſt men ſhould floriſh in Gods houſe like Pſal. 92. 12. to Palme trees: and we haue made them like broome, euen béeſomes to ſwéepe



and make cleane our houſes. And doe we thinke, that God will not reuenge this? Who ſées not ſuch broomes almoſt in euery place, that is, many good farmes pulled downe, and lye in the duſt, to ſwéepe and beutifie, and build, a new braue and ſtately houſe? Let all ſuch as make the Lords Palmes, their broome béeſomes to ſwepe their houſes with all, take héede: at the day of iudgement, God ſhall ſearch out diligently for all ſuch, and without ſpéedy repentance and planting his palmes againe ſhall caſt them into hell. This is written for the last generation as Arias Montanus tranſlates it: and doth it not concerne vs?
               
               And a people (Nicrah) created, ſhall praiſe the Lord. This word Nicrah alſo, that is, a people created, doth moſt manifeſtly portray out vnto vs our daies. The Church of God was not ſeene, was as no body, was in the wildernes: 
                  Apoc. 12. 14. and now God hath as it were created it againe, and brought it into light: and this people ſhall praiſe the Lord. Nay, to confound Popery, all Gods people



are created againe to good works: there Ephe. 2. 10. is no naturall faculties remaining in them to doe good as the Papiſts teach. The people created ſhall praiſe the Lord. God ceaſed his creation of natural things the ſeauenth day as we reade in Geneſis. Gen. 2. 2. And therefore the Prophet Dauid no doubt meanes another ſpirituall creation and the regeneration of our 
                  Iohn. 3. 3. 
                  Soules: And to this place (for all Scripture hath a moſt pleaſant and ſweete harmonie Pſal. 19. 9. in it ſelfe (if any one doe marke it) doth Saint Paul allude, when as he Ephe. 2. 10. ſaith we are created in Ieſus Chriſt to good works.
               
               And Eſay alſo propheſieth in the ende Eſa. 24. 5. of the world of ſuch couetous worldlings. The earth alſo ſaith he, playeth the hypocrite, becauſe of the inhabitants thereof, for they haue tranſgreſsed the lawes, they haue changed the ordinances, and cuſtomes, and they haue broken the euerlaſting couenant: here is plainely ſet downe, why the earth doth not now of late, yéelde her accuſtomed increaſe: Becauſe the inhabitantes thereof, haue changed the ordinances



of their Anceſtors and haue broken Eccl. 13. 16. the law of nature in not louing their like: nay, the euerlaſting couenant of God, in not louing their brethren, as Ioh. 13. 34. Oſe. 2. 15. 19. Ieſus Chriſt our moſt bleſſed Sauiour hath loued vs.
               
               But if that Incloſers will here attribute the barrenueſſe of the earth to other cauſes: yet let them marke what goeth before. Behold (ſaith the Prophet) Eſa. 24. 1. 
                  the Lord will make emptie the earth (Bokek) and hee will vnhedge and vnwall it. The nature of which word, Mercerus declareth vnto vs thus. Videtur 
                  Mercer. in lex. Pagn. 
                  ex locis in quibus inuenitur, ſignificare diſſipare ſeu effringere quod clauſum & munitum erat, vt omnium iniu
                        •
                     ijs pateat: It ſeemes by the places wherein it is found, to ſignifie to diſperſe and breake vp that which was incloſed and fenced, that it may now lie open to the iniuries of all things.
                  
               
               And doth not this moſt manifeſtly touch Incloſers and their hedges? Nay Eſay addeth (Vangiua Paneha) he ſhall make crooked her face: No doubt that was ſtraight before. For (ngaua) ſignifies



                  to peruert or make a ſtraight thing ſeeme crooked. And may not this note alſo their ſtraight chaine lines drawen on the face of the earth? For otherwiſe the fare of the earth cannot bee made crooked.
               And that the 24. Chapter of Eſay concernes vs that liue in the ende of the world, and not the Jewes onely but as types of vs, theſe circumſtances may ſeeme to prooue. Firſt becauſe the Prophet ſpeaketh of the earth, and not of the land of Jewry. Then, that he ſaith, that the earth ſhall deceiue the expectation of the Tillers thereof, which I thinke was neuer more truely verified, than now in our daies. Then alſo becauſe the Prophet teacheth, That they ſhall breake in thoſe daies the euerlaſting couenant of God made to vs in Jeſus Chriſt; which couenant wee haue broken, in not obſeruing Chriſtian charitie, 
                  1. Tim. 1. 5. 
                  which is the onely lawe thereof. Nay beſides all theſe, the Prophet addeth, The Lord God of Iſraell ſhall be praiſed in the Iſles of the ſea. And againe, From the vttermoſt parts of the earth, we haue



heard praiſes, euen glory to that iuſt. And who is that iuſt, but Ieſus Chriſt? whom Steuen also honoureth with that Act. 7. 52. 
                  title, and by that name deſcribes vnto vs. The Prophet alſo ſaith, That the earth ſhall reele too and fro like a drunken man. And what is this elſe, but that which Saint Luke teacheth vs, That 
                  Luc. 21. 26 
                  in the ende of the world men ſhall be at their wits ends, not knowing what ſhall come to paſſe in the world? And laſtly, The bl
                        •
                     ſhing of the Sunne and Moone, when the Lord of hoſts ſhall raigne in Sion, and in Ieruſalem, and glory ſhall be before his Auncients: what doe all theſe meane, but the comming of the true Sunne to iudgement? And the glorie Mal. 4. 2. of the newe Moone, that is of the Church triumphant, at whoſe preſence, our Sunne and Moone ſhall bluſh? And Mat. 25. 29 what meanes the raigning of God in Sion, and in Ieruſalem, but that we all, both Jewes and Gentiles ſhall be one Ioh. 10. 16. ſheepefold vnder one ſhéepheard Ieſus Chriſt? And glory before his ancients, which they ſhall euer ſee: what is it elſe, but eternall glory?



                  Sibylla alſo ſéemes herein to agrée with the Prophet Eſay, and to point at our hedges now in the ende of the world; who ſpeaking of the day of iudgement, and of the daies before it, writes thus:

                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ,
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Sibyll. Orac. lib. 8. 
                        
                           In Engliſh thus,
                           
                              The earth ſhall be equally common to all, without any walles or hedges.
                           
                           
                              Neither being diuided 
                                    〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                 , then, (that is, in the daies before the iudgement) ſhall it yeelde more fruits.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               Doth not the plainely héere name hedges? yea, and that which Incloſers voe hope for, that the ground ſo incloſed ſhall not yéeld more fruits?
               
                  Sibylla alſo propheſies moſt truly of Jeſus Chriſt, and of his Croſſe, and of his comming to iudgement, in thoſe her moſt famous Arroſtick verſes, which ſhe made concerning him, as no man can deny: and doe we thinke that the reſt of her propheſies, eſpecially the remnant of thoſe her Acroſticks,



concerning the ſtate of the world before the day of iudgement, not to be as true? In thoſe her verſes of the condition and ſtate of the world before that day, ſhe writes thus:

                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ,
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Sibyll. Orac. lib. 8. 
                        
                           In Engliſh thus:
                           
                              When as the earth in ſweating, ſhall be a ſigne of the iudgement, &c.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               And here firſt let vs marke that ſhe ſaith, that the earth by ſweating, ſhall giue a token of the iudgement. Let couetous Landlords and Incloſers, which ouerburthen their tenants take héede, that they be not the cauſes of this her ſweating: for otherwiſe, the earth properly cannot be ſaid, to ſweate of her own nature, being of conſtitution the brieſt element; nay drier than any dogge, which as both Philoſophie and experience teacheth, doth neuer ſweate. And after ſhe propheſieth thus:

                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                           In Engliſh thus:
                           
                              All the whole world ſhall be vntilled, and ſhall be turned into a briar or thorne.


                              
And may not héere the firſt worde, 
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              , vntilled, ſéeme to touch Incloſers that will not till the earth?
                        
                     
                  
               
               And ſecondly, whereas ſhe ſaith, That the world ſhall be a Thorne or Briar, as Caſtalio tranſlates it: doth ſhe not plainely ſignifie men, who ſhall become like to thornes and briars, which ſhall pricke mens handes that deale with them, and ſhall catch vnto themſelues all that they can get, and ſhall euen pul mens coates from their backs? For as concerning materiall briars and thornes, the world was neuer ſo cleanſed of them as at this day; which euery man is carefull to roote vp for hurting their ſhéepe. But thoſe other ſpirituall briars which Sibylla meaneth, growe in many places very plentifullie. But let all ſuch briars take héede, that they be not burned in hell fire.
               Nay, to let Sibylla paſſe, doth not our Sauiour himſelfe propheſie of the daies of the ſonne of man, before the ende of the world? And doth he not plainely teach vs, That they ſhall bee



like the daies of Noah, and of Lot, before the deſtruction of the olde world, 
                  Luc. 17. 26. 
                  and the burning of Sodome? How that they ſhall eate and drinke, and marry, and build, and plant in thoſe daies? and the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which Saint Mathew vſeth, teacheth vs; that not the vſe, Mat. 24. 38. but the extraordinary abuſe of all theſe things is héere ſignified. And thoſe words, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which S. Luke vſeth, Luc. 17. 30. plainely prooue that according to theſe particulars, and not a generall ſecuritie onely (as ſome would faine haue it) is meant by all theſe. And are not our hedges now extraordinary? Now liued all our Anceſtors without them?
               And our Sauiour in this his doctrine, may ſéeme to agrée with the Prophet Ioell; who of the day of iudgement, Ioel. 2. 3. and of the eſtate of the world at that day moſt manifeſtly propheſieth thus. The earth ſhall be as the garden of Eden before him, but behinde him it ſhall be a deſolate wildernes. What doth th
                     ••
                   garden ſignifie, but that the earth then ſhall haue great coſt beſtowed vpon her; and ſhall be hedged in as we vſe



to doe our gardens If the Lord when he comes ſhall deſtroy the garden, let the gardiners take heede; for their deſtruction ſhall be without all doubt the greater. Let them willingly throwe open their gardens and cloſes againe, that God doe not throw them into hell.
               And that this propheſie of Ioel concernes vs & our daies, and not onely the comming of the Aſſirians againſt the Jewes. Firſt, that cōmandement in the Ioel. 2. 1. firſt verſe of this ſecond chapter ſeemeth very euidently to proue, where the Prophet ſaith, Blow vp the trumpet in Syon. Syon
                   is taken vſually for Chriſts church as we reade. Eſa. 2. v. 3. Pſ. 87. 2. And the trumpet ſignifies the preaching of the Goſpel, as appeareth by thoſe ſenē Angels which did blow their trumpets from Apoc. 8. 6. Jeſus Chriſts aſcenſion to his comming to iudgement. No doubt as Syon is not Apoc. 10. 7. heere to be ment literally: ſo neither the trumpets. But that which Ioel here ſaith, Blow vp the trumpet in Syon for the day of the Lord is at hand, is all one with that which our Sauiour ſaith in the Goſpell, The Goſpell ſhall be 
                  Mat. 24. 14.


                  
                  preached, and then ſhall the ende come. Nay, Saint Peter in the Acts applieth ſome part of Ioels propheſie to Chriſts Act. 2. 17. firſt comming, as the ſending downe of the holy Ghoſt vpon the Apoſtles; & ſome part thereof to the day of iudgement, when as the Sunne ſhall be darkned and the Moone turned to blood. And ſhall we ſay, that this propheſie concernes not vs? Nay we in our faſts apply the turning to the Lord with faſting Ioel. 2. 12. & wéeping vnto our daies, which is as as it were the medicine: And ſhall we not apply the ſinne and ſore which Ioel there toucheth, and that garden of Eden alſo to our daies? Nay, Saint Paul telleth vs plainely that all things 
                  1. Cor. 10. 11. 
                  chanced to the Iewes typically, and are written for our learning, on whom the ends of the world are come. And will any man ſay then, that this propheſie of Ioel concernes vs not? Shall we not learne ſomething thereby? And alſo the ſame reaſon may be alleaged concerning the 13. Chap. of Eſay, which hereafter I alſo alleage.
               And here let all the Lords watchmen



giue theſe Incloſers and gardiners Heb. 3. 13. warning before, while it is called to day, leaſt they repent to late with Diues in hell. So their blood ſhall be Luc. 16. 24. Ezec 3. 14. vpon their owne heads, for ſurely Gods word is truth. And as the land ſhall be moſt aſſuredly a garden before the face Ioh. 14. 6. of the Lord at that day, ſo there ſhall be ſome gardiners.
               The Goſpell alſo condemnes this Incloſure. Our Sauiour propheſieth, Mat. 24. 12. that in the ende of the world, the charitie of many ſhall waxe colde, which argueth a precedent heate. And may not theſe Incloſers fulfill this propheſie, who haue ſome charitie in them; but not the charitie of their anceſtors? But 
                  Gal. 5. 6. 
                  he that continues to the ende in the faith of the Goſpell working through feruent and Chriſtian charitie (ſuch charitie as Chriſt himſelfe ſhewed towards vs and 2. Ioh. 4. alſo commanded) he ſhall be ſaued, ſaith our Sauiour, and none elſe. Therefore Ioh. 13. 34. let Incloſers take héede which haue not this charitie.
               Saint Paul alſo propheſieth thus of the latter times; that in the laſt daies 2. Cor. 8. 9.


                  
ſhall be 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is, dogged times: for as Gellius notes, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , is referred to 
                  Gellius lib. 4. cap. 15. 
                  the moſt keene and fierce nature of dogges: And he willeth Timothie to know this, 
                  2. Tit. 3. 1. as a thing moſt certaine. And doth not this touch Incloſers, who catch and ſnatch all they can from their brethren for their owne lucre ſake?
               But although this had béene enough to haue declared them vnto vs, yet that which followes paints them vnto vs liuely: for many ſhall be (ſaith Saint Paul) 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is, louers of themſelues, and louers of money. By what two marks, could he haue expreſſed Incloſers more manifeſtly? theſe two loues raignes in them, but the loue of their brethren is quite baniſhed out of their harts. Nay, theſe Incloſers are (as it followes alſo in the Apoſtle) diſobedient to their parents: in not obeying after their deaths, their charitable cuſtomes which they commaunded, and in their liues obſerued. So did not the 
                  Ier. 35. 6. 
                  Rechabites.
               
               The Apoſtle Saint Peter of the day of iudgement writeth thus: The end of 
                  1. Pet. 4. 7.


                  
                  all things is at hand, be yee therefore ſober, and pray; (not on the day time only, but euen with our bleſſed Sauiour in the night) but aboue all things haue feruent 
                  Luc 6. 12. 1. Pet 4 8. 
                  loue among you; for Chriſtian charitie (as an effect of faith) ſhall couer a multitude of ſinnes. For the faithful, and mercifull mens ſinnes are couered and Mat. 25. 34, 35, 36. not mentioned, as appeareth in the Goſpel. But to goe on with our Apoſtle; Let euery man as he hath receiued the gift, ſo miniſter the ſame as good Stewards of the manyfold graces of God. Why 1. Pet. 4 10. ſhould Saint Peter here make mention of Stewards but that as ſh
                     〈…〉
                   ſéeme he did foreſée in the ſpirit, that some at the ende of the world, ſhould forget themſelues to be ſtewards; and deale here with the earth, and earthly things, as though they were chiefe Lords of them: whereas Saint Peter telleth them heere p
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  ely, that they are but péere Stewards. And Dauid himſelfe though a king acknowledged the ſame: That the earth is the Lords and all that 
                  Pſal. 24. 1. 
                  therein is. Nay, Cyrus that great Persian Monark confeſſeth, that the Lord



God of heauen hath giuen him all the 
                  Eſd. 1. 2. 
                  kingdomes of the earth, as to a frée-holder, or Steward. Let all Landlords learne this leſſon, and remember it wel, againſt the the day of Judgement; and deale like ſtewards, and not like Lords, with Gods people. God no doubt ſhall make enquirie at that day how they haue dealt with them.
               But to conclude that of this ſinne of depopulation of townes, ſhall be eſpeciall inquirie made at the day of iudgement.
               The Prophet Eſay ſpeaking of that Eſa. 13. 9. day writes thus: Behold the day of the Lord commeth, cruell with wrath and fierce anger, to lay the earth waſte. And he ſhall deſtroy her ſinners out of her. What ſhould the Prophet meane by thoſe (Chatteah) her ſinners
                   but theſe Incloſers, who are too much in loue with the earth? Nay ſaith God, I will cauſe the arrogancie of the proud to ceaſe (Gaauath Ngaritſim)
                   the pride of theſe terrible men, that no man durſt ſpeake againſt, or ſpeake vnto. And I will make a man (ſaith God) more precious



than fine gold, euen a man aboue the wedge of the gold of Ophir.
                   There ſhall be ſome at that day of iudgement, as appeareth by this place, that ſhall make no account of men, which ſhal depopulate townes. God telleth all ſuch, that he will make a man, euen one man (whereas they haue thought it a light matter, to depopulate townes and to roote out many men) more pretious, than a wedge of gold. And what is all their wooll-money to a wedge of gold? One man is more worth than a wedge of gold, much more then, than all their wooll-money; God himſelfe hath ſpoken it.
               Wherefore if Incloſers and depopulators of townes, meane to be ſaued at the day of iudgement: let them willingly caſt open their cloſes againe, and reedifie the farmes, they haue decayed. It makes no matter for the charge of hedging (which they ſhall looſe) that they haue beene at. And let them baniſh their ſhéepe out of their paſtures, and let them fill the Lords townes and ſhéepefolds, with his ſheepe againe, and that ſpéedily,



leaſt the Lord comming to Judgement doe condemne them, as cruell and 
                  Ioh. 10. 27. 
                  couetous tyrants. Fnd let them now preferre euen one man, before a wedge of gold, leaſt hereafter God doe teach them this leſſon in hell, when it ſhall be too late for them to learne.
               And here I moſt humbly deſire in the Lord, that all Gods children would beware, that they be not giltie of that woe which Eſay proclaimeth. Woe to them 
                  Eſa. 5. 20. 
                  that ſpeake good of euill, and euill of good, which put darknes for light, and light for darkneſſe, that put bitter for ſweete, and ſweete for bitter. And that all Gods faithfull ſeruants, would remoue that great ſinne farre from them, which Ieremy layed to the charge of the Iewes: 
                  Ier. 9. 3. that they would not bend their tongues like bowes, to maintaine lies: but that they would (that which Saint Iames teacheth them) lay a part all filthineſſe, 
                  Iam. 1. 21. 
                  and ſuperflu
                        •
                     tie of wickedneſſe: that is, that they would not ſinne, when they néede not ſinne. But that they would receiue with meekeneſſe the word that is grafted in them which is able to ſaue their



ſoules. The Lord Jeſus open the eyes and turne the hearts of all Incloſers, Epheſ. 1. 18 Pſal. 85. 4. that they may let the gréeuouſneſſe of this the
                     ••
                   ſinne, and repent with spéede, while it is called to day: (Leaſt with thoſe 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  and c
                        〈…〉
                     tous tyrants which Hebr. 3. 14. Eſa. 13. 11. 
                  Eſay ſpeaketh of, they he viſited of God, that is, haue 
                     〈◊〉
                   workes looked into, and be 
                     〈…〉
                  ely puniſhed at the day of Judgement) for his glorious name ſake: to whom with the Father and the holy Ghoſt be all praiſe honor and glory now and for euer
               Amen.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   