
      
         
            
            
               Epitaphes, Epigrams, Songs and Sonets, with a Diſcourſe of the Friendly affections of Tymetes to Pyndara his Ladie.
            
               Newly corrected with addi
               tions, and ſet out by George Turbervile Gentleman.
            
               Anno Domini. 1567.
            ¶IMPRINTED AT London, by Henry Denham.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the Right Noble and his ſingular good Lady, Lady Anne, Counteſſe Warwick. &c. George Turberuile wiſheth increaſe of Honor with all good Happes.
            
               
                  AS AT WHAT time (Madame) I first publiſhed this fond & ſlender treatiſe of Sonets, I made bolde with you in dedication of ſo vnworthy a booke to ſo worthie a Ladie: ſo haue I now alſo rubde my browe and wiped away all ſhame in this reſpect, aduenturing not to ceaſe, but to increaſe my former follie, in adding moe Sonets to thoſe I wrote before. So much



the more abuſing in mine owne conceite your Ladiſhippes patience, in that I had pardon before of my raſh attempt. But ſee (Madame) what preſumption raignes in retchleſſe youth. You accepted that my firſt offer of honorable and meere curteſie, and I thereby encouraged, bluſh not to procede in the like trade of follie, alwayes hoping for the lyke acceptance at your hands, which if ſhould faile me (as I hope it ſhal not faile) then ſhould I hereafter not once ſo much as dare as to ſet pen to paper for feare of controlment and check, which howe grieuous it is to a yong



man nowe (as it were) but tasting with his lippe the brim of learnings fountaine, and ſaluting the Muſes at the doore and threſholl, neyther is your Ladiſhip ignorant, and I myſelfe preſume to know. Wherfore as I haue (Madame) by a little inlarging this Booke, inlarged not a little my follie: ſo is my humble ſute to you a little to inlarge your bounteous curteſie, J meane in well accepting the increaſe of theſe my follies, proceding not ſo much vpon any light affection, as deſire to acknowledge a greater dutie. It ſhall not be long (I hope) but that my



hande ſhall ſeeke in ſome part the requitall of your bountie by ſome better deuiſe, though not more learned treatiſe. But what ſhoulde I ſtande vpon termes of ſkill? knowing that it is not the worke that your Ladiſhip doth ſo much regarde as the Writer, neyther the worthineſse of the thing, as the good will and meaning of the Deuiſer therof, offering his dutie in ſuch wiſe as best aunſweres his abilitie and power. For as if ſubiectes ſhoulde haue reſpect more to the vnworthineſſe of ſuch things as they giue their Princes, than regard the worthie mindes



and good natures of their Souereignes in well accepting ſuch ſlender trifles at their vaſsels handes, they ſhould quyte be diſcouraged from euer offering the like and ſlender giftes: ſo if I ſhould caſt an eie rather to the baſeneſse of my Booke, than account of your Noble nature and accustomed curteſie in well receyuing the ſame: neither ſhould I heretofore enboldned my ſelfe ſo farre as to haue offred you this trifling treatiſe, nor now haue the hart to aduē
               ture anew, although ſomewhat purged of his former faults and ſcapes. I cannot leaue to molest your noble



eies with ſuruey of my raſhe compiled toyes. It may pleaſe your Ladyſhip to wey my well meaning hart, at what time occaſion ministers you the pervſing of my booke, and this to deeme, that deſire alone to manifest my dutie to you, was the onely cauſe of this my enterpriſe. Which done, I haue at this time no more to trouble your Ladyſhip, but ending my Epiſtle, to craue the Gods your happie preſeruation of preſent Honor, and luckie increaſe of bleſsed happes in all your life.
            
               
                  Your Ladiſhips daily Orator George Turberuile.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               HERE HAVE I (Gentle Reader) according to promiſe in my Tranſlation, giuen thee a fewe Sonets, the vnripe ſeedes of my barraine braine, to pleaſure and recreate thy wearye mind and troubled hed withal. Truſting that thou wylte not loth the beſtowing thy time at vacant houres in pervſing the ſame. Waying that for thy ſolace alone (the bounden dutie which I owed the noble Cownteſſe reſerued) I vndertoke this



ſlender toyle, and not for anye pleaſure I did my ſelfe in penning thereof. As I deeme thou canſt not, ſo do I hope thou wilt not miſlike it at all. But if there be any thing herein that maye offend thee, refuſe it, reade and pervſe the reaſt with pacience. Let not the miſliking of one member procure thee raſhlye to condemne the whole. I ſtand to thy iudgement, I expect thy aequitie. Reade the good, and reiect the euill: yea rather condemne it to perpetuall ſilence. For ſo woulde I wyſhe thee to



deale wyth vnworthye Bookes: But aſſuredlye there is nothing in thys whole ſlender Volume that was ment amiſſe of me the Writer, howſoeuer the Letter goe in thy iudgement that arte the Reader.
            Whatſoeuer I haue penned, I write not to this purpoſe, that any youthlie head ſhoulde folow or purſue ſuch fraile affections, or taſte of amorous bait: but by meere fiction of theſe Fantaſies, I woulde warne (if I myghte) all tender age to flee that fonde and filthie affection



of poyſoned & vnlawful loue. Let this be a Glaſſe & Myrror for them to gaze vpon: the ſoner may I (I truſt) preuayle in my perſwaſiō, for that my ſelfe am of their yeares and diſpoſition. And as I am not the firſt that in this ſort hath written & imployde his time: ſo ſhall I not be the laſt, that without deſarte (perhaps) ſhalbe miſdeemed for attempting the ſame. But let thoſe curious Knightes caſt an eye to home, and looke well about whether they them ſelues are blameleſſe, or as well



worthie reproche as others. This done and my intent conſidered, hoping of thy courteſie I ende, alwayes readie to pleaſure thee by my pains, wiſhing vnto thee, that arte the patient Reader, as to my ſelf the Writer and thy very Friend.
            
               George Turberuile.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the rayling Route of Sycophants.
            
            IF he that once encountred with his Foes
            In open field at ſound of blaſted Trumpe,
            Doe dare to yéelde his hewed head to vides,
            And go again to heare ye Canons thumpe:
            With dreadleſſe hart and vnappalled breſt
            Not fearing till he be by Foes oppreſt:
            If ſuch as earſt in cutting of the Surge
            By paſſing to the ſtraunge and forraine lande
            Bode bitter blaſt and ſcornefull Neptunes ſcurge,
            Dreade not to take the lyke attempt in hande,
            But raſhly runne like ſturdie ventrous Wights
            Not fearing wind nor wane when Borias fights:
            If theſe (I ſay) doe nothing doubt at all
            But valiantly giue freſh aſſault anew,
            Not dreading daunger that is like to fall,
            As they long earſt by proufe and practiſe knew:
            Then why ſhould I of yore that haue aſſayde
            The force of Zoylls mouth be ought diſmayde?
            Then why ſhould I, like one that fearde to fight
            Or neuer cruſht his head with Helmets heft,
            Now ſhew my ſelfe a weake and coward Wight
            As long as life or lym vncut is left:
            Fo
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •••
               ſt and I attempt the like,
            And 
                  〈…〉
                ſelfe now ſhall I 
                  •••
               ck is ſtrike?
            
               
No, no, I martch gainſt Momus once againe,
            My courage is not quailde by cruell Fo,
            Though Zoyll did his beſt my Flag to gaine,
            Twas not his hap to haue the Conqueſt ſo:
            And ſince it was my luck to ſcape his might,
            I here aſſaile the Beaſt with nouell fight.
            Thou Sycophant, vnſheath thy ſhamefull blade
            Pluck out that bloudie Fawchon (Dafrard thou)
            Wherewith thou haſt full many a ſkirmiſh made
            And ſcocht the braines of many a learned brow.
            Now doe thy woorſt, I force not of thy ſtroke,
            Thou ſhalt not bring my neck to ſeruage yoke.
            Though thou affirme with raſh & railing iawes
            That I inuita haue Minerua made
            My other Booke, I gaue thée no ſuch cauſe
            By any déede of mine to drawe thy blade:
            But ſince thou haſt ſhot out that ſhameleſſe worde,
            I here gainſt thée vncote my cruell ſworde.
            I know thou wilt eche worde and ſentence wrie
            That in this ſlender Booke of me is write,
            And wilt the ſame vnto thy ſenſe applie
            Hoping for loue thereby to bréede diſpite:
            And looke what I amiſſe did neuer meane,
            Thou wilt miſtake and eke miſconſter cleane.
            Thou wilt the wylie braine that ought is bent
            To fowle ſuſpect and ſpot of fell diſtruſt,
            Perſwade that here ſomething of him was ment,
            And Iealous Coales into his boſome thruſt,
            
               
Thincking thereby thy purpoſe to aſ
                  •
               
            
            In ſetting of his boyling breaſt a fire.
            But as thou art in all thy other déedes
            Deſeruing no beliefe or truſt at all:
            Likewiſe what ſo from thy vile Iawes procéedes,
            Is lothſome lie, fowle 
                  •
               itton, bitter Gall.
            Beleue him not but reade the Treatiſe through,
            He ſowes debate with helpe of hatefull Plough.
            The modeſt mind that meanes but vertues trade
            And ſhunnes the ſhamefull ſhop of bawdie ſect,
            This ſpitefull Beaſt will (if he may) perſwade
            That theſe are Toyes: for that he ſhould reiect
            And not pervſe the meaning of the ſame,
            Thus Zoyll ſéekes but blot of black defame.
            But thou that vewſte this ſtile with ſtaid brow,
            Marke crie worde, vnioint eche Verſe of mine,
            Thy iudgement I and cenſure will allow,
            Nor once will ſéeme for rancour to repine:
            Thou art the man whoſe ſentence I expect,
            I ſcorne the ſcoffes of Zoylls ſhamefull ſect.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The Table.
            
               IN prayſe of the Renowmed Ladie Anne, Ladie Cownteſſe Warwick.
fol. 1.
               The Argument to the whole diſcourſe and Treatiſe following.
fol. 3.
               To a late acquainted Friend.
fol. 4.
               The Louer extolleth the ſingular beautie of his Ladie.
6
               The Louer declareth howe firſt he was taken and enamoured by the ſight of his Ladie.
7
               Mayſter Googe hys Sonet of the paynes of Loue.
8
               Turberuiles Aunſwere and Diſtich to the ſame.
8
               ¶An Epitaph on the death of Dame Elyzabeth Arhundle.
9
               To Piero of Pride.
9
               Piero to Turberuile.
9
               Verſe in prayſe of Lorde Henry Howarde Earle of Surrey.
9
               Of Ialouſie.
10
               To his Lady, that by hap when he kiſſed hir and made hir lip bleede, controlde him and tooke diſdaine.
10
               Mayſter Googe his Sonet.
11
               
                  
Turberuiles aunſwere.
11
               A Compariſon of the Louers eſtate wyth the Souldiars painefull lyfe.
11
               The Louer againſt one that compared hys Miſtreſſe with his Ladie.
12
               The Louer to a Gentlewoman, that after great friendſhip without deſart or cauſe of miſlyking refuſed him.
14
               The Louer obtaining his wiſh by all likelyhode, yet not able to attaine his deſire, compares himſelfe to Tantalus.
16
               The Louer to the Thems of London to fauour his Ladie paſſing thereon.
18
               To his Ring giuen to his Lady, wherin was grauen this Verſe. My hart is yours.
18
               The diſpairing Louer craues eyther mercy in time at his Ladies handes, or cruell
death.
19
               To his Friende to be conſtant after choyſe made.
20
               Counſell returned by Pyndara to Tymetes, of conſtancie.
21
               The Louers muſt not diſpaire though their Ladies ſeeme ſtraunge.
21
               A Letter ſent by Tymetes to his Lady Pyndara at the time of his departure.
23
               
                  Pyndaras Aunſwere to the Letter whiche Tymetes ſent hir at the time of his departure.


24
               To his abſent Friende the Louer writes of his vnquiet and reſtleſſe ſtate.
29
               The aunſwere of a Woman to hir Louer, ſuppoſing his complaint to be but fayned.
31
               The Louer exhorteth his Ladie to take time, while time is.
32
               The Louer wiſheth to bee conioyned and faſt linckt with his Ladie neuer to ſunder.
33
               The Louer hoping aſſuredly of attayning hys purpoſe, after long ſute, begins to ioy renouncing dolors.
35
               The Louer to hys carefull Bed declaring
his reſtleſſe ſtate.
35
               ¶ An Epitaph and wofull Verſe of the death of Sir Iohn Tregonwell Knight, and learned Doctor of both lawes.
36
               The Louer confeſſeth himſelfe to bee in loue and enamored of Miſtreſſe P.
39
               That all things haue releaſe of paine ſaue the Louer, that hoping and dreading neuer taketh eaſe.
39
               A poore Ploughman to a Gentleman, for whom he had taken a little paines.
41
               To his Friend: P: of courting, trauailing, Dyſing, and Tenys.
41
               
                  
The louer declares that vnleſſe he vtter his ſorrowes by ſute, of force he dyeth.
42
               The Louer to a Friende that wrote hym this ſentence. Yours aſsured to the death.
42
               Of certaine Flowers ſent by his Loue vpon ſuſpicion of chaunge.
42
               The Aunſwere to the ſame.
43
               Of a Foxe that would eate no Grapes.
43
               Of the ſtraunge countenaunce of an aged Gentlewoman.
43
               To the Rouing Pyrat.
44
               Of one that had little Wit.
44
               In commendation of Wit.
44
               An Aunſwere in diſpraiſe of Wit.
44
               The Louer to Cupid for mercie, declaring how firſt he became his Thrall, with the occaſion of his defying loue, and now at laſt what cauſed him to conuert.
45
               After miſaduentures come good haps.
55
               To his Loue that controlde his Dogge for fawning on hir.
55
               Vpon the death of the aforenamed Dame Elizabeth Arundle of Cornewall.
56
               Diſpraiſe of Women that allure and loue not.
59
               Of a Phiſition and a Soothſayer.
62
               A controuerſie of a conqueſt in loue twixt Fortune and Venus.
62
               
                  
The Louer voweth howſoeuer he be guendoned to loue faithfully.
63
               He ſorrowes the long abſence of hys Ladie P.
64
               To his Loue long abſent, declaring hys torments.
65
               To Browne of light beliefe.
67
               That death is not ſo much to be feared as daylie diſeaſes are.
68
               The Epicures counſell, eate, drinke, and plaie.
68
               The Aunſwere to the vile and canckred counſell of the outragious Epicure.
69
               Of Homer and his birth.
69
               That time conquereth all things, ſaue the Louers paine.
70
               To his Friend ryding to Londonward.
71
               Of the Rayne and cloudy weather at the time of hys Friendes departure from Troie.
71
               Of a couetous Niggarde, and a needie Mouſe.
71
               A pretie Epigram of a Scholler, that hauing read Vergils Aeneidos, maried a curſt Wyfe.
73
               To a yong Gentleman of taking a wife.
73
               The Aunſwere for taking a Wyfe.
73
               Of a deafe Plaintife, a deafe Defendant,



and a deafe Iudge.
74
               A promiſe of olde good will, to an olde friend at the beginning of New yere.
75
               A Vow to ſerue faithfully.
75
               Funerall Verſe vpon the death of Sir Iohn Horſey Knight.
75
               To his Friende T: hauing beene long ſtudied and well experienced, and nowe at length louing a Gentlewoman that forced him naught at all.
76
               ¶An Epitaph vpon the death of the worſhipfull Mayſter Richarde Edwards late Mayſter of the Children in the Queenes Maieſties Chappell.
77
               To his Loue that ſent him a Ring wherin was graude, Let Reaſon rule.
79
               To his Friend Francis Th: leading his lyfe in the Countrie at his deſire.
79
               To a Gentlewomā that alwaies willed him to weare Roſemarie, (a Tree that is alwayes greene,) for his ſake, and in token of his good will to hir.
80
               ¶ An Epitaph of the Ladie Br.
81
               Of the time he firſt began to loue and after how he forewent the ſame.
81
               The aſſured promiſe of a conſtaunt Louer.
82
               
                  
The Pine to the Mariner.
82
               Againe otherwiſe.
83
               To an olde Gentlewoman, that painted hir face.
83
               Of one that had a great Noſe.
83
               Of one whoſe Noſe was greater than hys hande.
84
               Of a Nightingale that flue to Colche to ſit abroode.
84
               Againe of the Nightingale.
84
               Of a contrarie mariage.
84
               Of Dronkenneſſe.
85
               Againe of Dronkenneſſe.
85
               Of the picture of a vaine Rhetorician.
85
               Of the fond diſcorde of the two Theban brothers, Oeteocles and Polynices.
85
               Of a maruellous deformed man.
85
               A Myrrour of the fall of Pride.
85
               Of the Clock and the Cock.
89
               Of a Tayler.
89
               The Louer finding hys Loue flitted from wonted troth leaues to write in praiſe of hir.
90
               He ſorrowes other to haue the fruites of his ſeruice.
91
               The Louer ſeing himſelfe abuſde, renounceth loue.
92
               Againſt the Ielous heads that alwayes haue



Louers in ſuſpect.
94
               That it is hurtfull to conceale ſecrets from our Friendes.
96
               Of the diuers and contrarie paſſions and affections of his loue.
97
               Of Dido and the truth of hir death.
99
               Of Venus in Armour.
99
               Of a Hare complayning of the hatred of Dogs.
99
               To one that painted Eccho.
99
               To a Cruell Dame for Grace and pyttie.
100
               To a Gentlewoman from whome he tooke a Ring.
100
               The Louer blames his Tongue that fayled to vtter his ſute in time of neede.
101
               That all things are as they are vſed.
102
               The Louer excuſeth himſelfe for renowncing his loue and Ladie, imputing the ſame to his fate and conſtellation.
103
               Of Lady Venus, that hauing loſt hir ſonne Cupid God of loue, and deſirous to vnderſtand of him againe, declares by the way the nature of loue and affections of the ſame, by pretie diſcription as followeth.
105
               Of the cruell hatred of Stepmothers.
106
               Againe.
106
               
                  
To Cupid for reuenge of his vnkind & cruel loue. Declaring his faithful ſeruice and true hart both to the God of Loue and his Ladie.
106
               An Aunſwere to his Ladie, that willed him that abſence ſhould not breede forgetfulneſſe.
107
               Of a Thracyan that was drownde by playing on the Iſe.
109
               The Louer hoping in May to haue had redreſſe of his woes, and yet fowly miſſing his purpoſe, bewailes his cruell hap.
109
               To a fickle & vnconſtant Dame, a friendlye warning.
111
               The Louer to his Ladie that gaſed much vp to the Skies.
111
               The Penitent Louer vtterly renowncing loue, craues pardon of forepaſſed follies.
111
               To his Friende that refuſde him without cauſe why but onely vpon delight of chaunge.
113
               To one that vpon ſurmiſe of aduerſitie, forewent hir Friend.
114
               To Maiſter Googes fanſie that begins giue Monie mee take friendſhippe who ſo liſt.
115
               The Louer abuſed renownceth loue.
115
               
                  
The forſaken Louer laments that his Ladie is matched with an other.
117
               Of one that was in reuerſion.
117
               That all hurtes and loſſes are to be recouered and recured ſaue the cruell wound of Loue.
118
               Of the choiſe of his Valentine.
119
               Of an open Foe and a fayned Friend.
119
               Againe.
119
               Of a Ritch Miſer.
119
               Of a Painter that painted Fauour.
120
               The Louer whoſe Ladie dwelt faſt by a Priſon.
120
               Complaint of the long abſence of his loue vpon the firſt acquaintance.
121
               The ventrous Louer after long abſence craues his Ladie to meete with hym in place to enterparle of hir auentures.
122
               To Maiſter Googe his Sonet out of ſight out of thought.
124
               The Louer whoſe Miſtreſſe feared a Mouſe, declareth that he would become a Cat, if he might haue his deſire.
124
               The Louer driuen to abſent him from his ladie, bewailes his eſtate.
125
               That Louers ought rather at firſt acquaintance to ſhewe their meanings by Pen then by Mouth.
127
               
                  
¶An Epitaph of Maiſter Win drowned in the Sea.
127
               Againe.
128
               Praiſe of his Loue.
129
               The complaint of a Friend of his, hauing loſt his Doue.
130
               That Louers ought to ſhunne no paines to attaine their Loue.
131
               A requeſt of Friendſhip to Vulcans Wyfe made my Mars.
132
               The Louer that had loued Long without requitall of good will.
132
               To a Friende that wild him to beware of Enuie.
133
               Of Miſreporters.
133
               That no man ſhould write but ſuch as doe excell.
133
               To his Friende, declaring what vertue it is to ſticke to former plighted friendſhip.
134
               Of two deſperate Men.
134
               Of the torments of Hell and the paines of loue.
134
               ¶An Epitaph of the death of Maiſter Tufton of Kent.
136
               Againe.
137
               In praiſe of Ladie P.
137
               The Louer in vtter diſpaire of his Ladies



returne, in eche reſpect compares his eſtate with Troylus.
139
               The Louer declareth what he would haue if he might obtaine his wiſh.
141
               Of a Gentlewoman that wild hir Louer to weare greene Bayes in token of hir ſtedfaſt loue towards him.
142
               ¶An Epitaph of Maiſter Edwards ſometime Maiſter of the childrē of the Chappell, & Gentleman of Lyncolns Iune of Court▪
142
               ¶An Epitaph on the death of Maiſter Arthur Brooke drownde in paſſing to New Hauen.
143
               Of the renowmed Lady, Lady Anne Counteſſe Warwick.
144
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               
            
            The Lyon ſtout, whome neuer earſt
            coulde any beast ſubdue:
            Here (Madame as you ſe) doth yeelde
            both to your Beare and you.
         
      
      
         
            
            In prayſe of the Renowmed Ladie Anne, Ladie Cownteſſe Warwicke.
            WHen Nature firſt in hande did take
            The Clay to frame this Cownteſſe corſe
            The Earth a while ſhée did forſake,
            And was compelde of verie force
            With mowlde in hande to flée to Skies,
            To ende the worke ſhée did deuies.
            The Gods that tho in counſell ſate,
            Were halfe amazde (againſt their kinde)
            To ſee ſo néere the ſtoole of ſtate
            Dame Nature ſtande, that was aſſignde
            Among hir worldly Impes to wonne,
            As ſhee vntill that day had donne.
            Firſt Ioue began: what (Daughter déere)
            Hath made thee ſcorne thy Fathers will?
            Why doe I ſee thée (Nature) héere,
            That oughtſt of dutie to fulfill
            Thy vnder taken charge at home:
            What makes thée thus abroade to rome?
            Diſdainefull Dame, how didſt thou dare
            So retchleſſe to depart the grownde,
            That is alotted to thy ſhare?
            (And therewithall his Godhead frownde.)
            I will (quoth Nature) out of hande
            Declare the cauſe I fled the lande.
            
               
I vndertooke of late a péece
            Of Claye a featurde face to frame,
            To match the courtly Dames of Gréece
            That for their beautie beare the name:
            But (Oh good Father) now I ſoe
            This worke of mine it will not bée.
            Vicegerent ſince you mée aſſignde
            Belowe in Earth, and gaue mée lawes
            On mortall Wightes, and willde that Kinde
            Should make and marre, as ſhee ſawe cauſe:
            Of right (I think) I may appeale
            And craue your helpe in this to deale.
            When Ioue ſawe how the caſe did ſtande
            And that the worke was well begonne,
            Hée prayde to haue the helping hande
            Of other Gods till hée had donne:
            With willing mindes they all agréede
            And ſet vpon the Clay with ſpéede.
            Firſt Ioue eche limme doth well diſpoſe
            And makes a Creature of the Clay:
            Next Ladie Venus ſhe beſtowes
            Hir gallant gifts as beſt ſhée may,
            From face to foote, from top to toe
            Shée let no wait vntoucht to goe.
            When Venus had donne what ſhe coulde
            In making of hir (carcas) braue
            Then Pallas thought ſhée might be bolde
            Among the reaſt a ſhare to haue,
            
               
A paſſing wyt ſhée did conuaye
            Into this paſſing peece of claye.
            Of Bacchus ſhee no member had
            Saue fingars fine and feate to ſee,
            Hir head with Heare Apollo clad
            That Gods had thought it golde to bée:
            So gliſtring was the treſſe in ſight
            Of this newe formde and featurde Wight.
            
               Diana helde hir peace a ſpace
            Vntill thoſe other Gods had donne:
            At laſt (quoth ſhée) in Dians chaſe
            Wyth Bowe in hande this Nymph ſhall ronne,
            And chiefe of all my Noble traine
            I will this Virgin entertaine.
            Then ioyfull Iuno came and ſayde
            Since you to hir ſo friendly are,
            I doe appoint this Noble Mayde
            To match with Mars his péere for warre:
            She ſhall the Cownteſſe Warwick bée,
            And yéelde Dianas Bowe to mée.
            When to ſo good effect it came
            And euery member had hys grace,
            There wanted nothing but a name:
            By hap was Mercurie then in place,
            That ſayde: pray you all agrée
            
               Pandora graunt hir name to bée.
            For ſince your Godheads forged haue
            With one aſſent this Noble Dame,
            
               
And eche to hir a vertue gaue,
            This terme agréeth to the ſame:
            The Gods that heard Mercurius tell
            This tale, did lyke it paſſing well.
            Report was ſommonde then in haſt
            And willde to bring his Trumpe in hande
            To blowe therewith a ſownding blaſt
            That might be heard through Brutus lande:
            
               Pandora ſtreight the Trumpet blewe
            That eche this Cownteſſe Warwicke knewe.
            O ſielie Nature borne to paine,
            O wofull wretched kinde (I ſay)
            That to forſake the ſoyle were faine
            To make this Cownteſſe out of Claye:
            But oh moſt friendly Gods that woulde
            Vouchſafe to ſet your handes to mowlde.
         
         
            
            ¶The Argument to the whole diſcourſe and Treatiſe following
            BY ſodaine ſight of vnacquainted ſhape
            
               Tymetes fell in loue with Pyndara,
            
            Whoſe beautie farre excelde Sir Paris rape,
            That Poets cleape the famous Helena.
            
            His flame at firſt be durst not to diſplaye,
            For feare be ſhould offended Pyndara:
            But couert kept his torments many a daye,
            As Paris did from worthie Helena.
            
            At length the coale ſo fierie redde became,
            Of him that ſo did fanſie Pyndara
            
            That fuming ſmoke did wrie the hidden flame
            To hir that farre exceeded Helena.
            
            Which when ſhee ſaw, ſhee ſeemde with friendly eie
            To like with him that lyked Pyndara:
            And made as though ſhee would eft ſoone applie
            To him, as to hir gueſt did Helena.
            
            
               Tymetes (loouing man) then hoped well,
            And moonde his ſute to Ladie Pyndara:
            He plide his Penne and to his writing fell
            And ſude as did the man to Helena.
            
            Within a while diſpayring wretched Wight
            He found his Loue (the Ladie Pyndara)
            So ſtraunge and coye, as though ſhe tooke delight
            To paine hir Friend, as did faire Helena.
            
            
               
Another time hir cheere was ſuch to ſee,
            That poore Tymetes hoapte that Pyndara
            
            Woulde yeelde him grace: But long it woulde not bee,
            She kept aloofe as did Dame Helena.
            
            Thus twixt diſpaire and hope the doubtfull man
            Long ſpace did liue that loued Pyndara,
            
            In wofull plight: At last the Nymph began
            To quite his loue as did faire Helena.
            
            Then ioyed be, and cherefull ditties made
            In praiſe of his atchiued Pyndara:
            
            But ſone (God wote) his pleaſure went to glade,
            Another tooke too wife this Helena.
            
            Thus euer as Tymetes had the cauſe
            Of ioy or ſmart, of comfort or refuſe:
            He glad or griefull woxe, and euer drawes
            His preſent ſtate with Pen as here enſues.
         
         
            
            To a late acquainted Friende.
            IF Vulcan durſt preſume
            that was a Gnuffe to ſée,
            And ſtrake with Hammer on the Stiche
            a cunning Smith to bée,
            Whoſe chiefe and whole delight
            was aye to frie at Forge,
            And liſten to that melodie
            Smithes ſorrowes to diſgorge:
            If Vulcan durſt (I ſaye)
            Dame Venus to aſſaile
            That was the worthyſte Wight of all,
            if witneſſe may preuaile:
            Then may you muſe the leſſe,
            though fanſie force me wright
            To you a ſecond Venus (Friende)
            and Helen in my ſight.
            For what he ſaw in hir
            a Goddeſſe by hir kinde,
            That I in you (my choſen Friende)
            and ſomewhat elſe doe finde.
            And as that ſielie Smith
            by Cupid was procurde
            To fawne on hir, to whome in fine
            hee firmely was aſſurde:
            
               

So by none other meanes
            my Senſes are in thrall,
            But by procurement of the God
            that conquers Gods and all.
            Tis hée that makes mée bolde,
            tis hée that willes me ſue
            To thée (my late acquainted Friende)
            loues torment to eſchue.
            Not too this day was ſéene
            that any durſt rebell
            Or kicke at Cupid Prince of Loue,
            as learned Poets tell:
            But rather would with frée
            and vncoacted minde
            Applie to pleaſe in any caſe
            what ſo the God aſſignde.
            What néede I here diſplaye
            the ſpoyles by Cupid wonne?
            Not I, but you (my Friende) woulde faint
            ere halfe the tale were donne.
            His Banner doth declare
            what harts haue béene ſubdude:
            Where they are all in Sabels ſet
            with blood and gore imbrude.
            Not mightie Mars alone,
            nor Hercules the ſtoute:
            But other Gods of greater ſtate,
            there ſtanding in a route.
            
               
There may you plainely ſée
            how Ioue was once a Swanne,
            To lure faire Leda to his luſt
            when raging Loue beganne.
            Some other when a Bull,
            ſome other time a ſhowre
            Of golden drops: as when he coyde
            the cloſed Nunne in towre.
            
               Appollos Loue appeares
            and euer will be knowne,
            As long as Lawrell leaues ſhall laſt,
            and Daphnes brute be blowne.
            May brainſick Bacchus brag
            or boaſt himſelfe as frée?
            Not I, but Aryadnas Crowne
            ſhewes him in loue to bée.
            Since theſe and other mo
            that Gods were made by kinde
            Might not auoyde that guilefull God
            that winged is and blinde:
            Should I haue hope to ſcape
            by force, or elſe by flight,
            That in reſpect of thoſe his thralls
            am of ſo ſlender might?
            As they did yéelde to Loue
            for feare of Cupids yre:
            Euen ſo am I become his thrall
            by force of flaming fyre.
            
               
What time I firſt diſplayde
            mine eies vpon thy face,
            (That doth allure eche lookers hart)
            I did the P. imbrace.
            And ſince that time I féele
            within my breaſt ſuch ioye,
            As Paris neuer felt the like
            when Helen was at Troye.
            
            How coulde ſo barraine ſoyle
            bring forth ſo good a Graffe,
            To whome the reaſt that ſéeme good Corne
            are in reſpect but Chaffe?
            (O God) that Cupid woulde
            vpon thy breaſt beſtowe
            His golden ſhaft, that thou the force
            of lyking loue mightſt knowe.
            Then ſhould I ſtande in hope
            and well aſſured bée,
            That thou wouldſt be as friendly (P.)
            as I am now to thée.
            Whome (till thy friendſhip fayle,
            and plighted Heſt doe ſwerue)
            I vaunt and vowe by mightie Ioue
            
            with hart and hande to ſerue.
            My Senſes all take héede,
            and yée my wits beware
            That you attentiue be on hir
            and for none other care.
            
               
You eies that woonted were
            light louing lookes to caſt,
            I giue commaundment on hir hue
            that yée be ankred faſt.
            Mine eares admit no ſounde
            ne Womans woords at all:
            Be ſhut againſt ſuch Syrens Songs
            repleate with lurking gall.
            Tongue ſée that thou be tyde,
            and vſe no wanton ſtile:
            By lawe of Loue I thee coniure
            ſuch toyes to exile.
            Legges looke that yee be lame
            when you ſhould reache a place
            To take the vewe of Venus Nymphes
            
               Pees beautie to deface.
            For ſuch a one is ſhee
            whome I would will you ſerue,
            As to be plaſte for Pallas péere
            for wiſedome may deſerue.
            So conſtant are hir lookes
            and eakē as chaſte a face:
            As if that Lucrece liuing were
            ſhée Lucrece would diſgrace.
            So modeſt is hir mirth
            in erie time and tyde,
            As they that prick moſt nearſte of all
            their ſhiuerde ſhafts are wyde.
            
               
Pauſe Pen a while therefore,
            and vſe thy woonted meane:
            For Boccas braine, and Chaucers Quill
            in this were foyled cleane.
            Of both might neither boaſt
            if they did liue againe:
            For P. would put them to their ſhifts
            to Pen hir vertues plaine.
            Yet one thing will I vaunt
            and after make an ende,
            That Momus can not for his lyfe
            deuiſe one iote to mende.
            Thus to conclude at length,
            ſée thou (my Friend) pervſe
            This ſlender Verſe, till leyſure ſerue
            abrode to bring my Muſe.
            For then you ſhall perceiue
            by that which you ſhall ſée,
            That you haue made your choiſe as well
            as I by chooſing P.
            
         
         
            The Louer extolleth the ſingular beautie of his Ladie.
            LEt Myron muſe at Natures paſſing might,
            And quite reſigne his pieuiſh Painters right:
            For ſure he can not frame hir featurde ſhape
            That for hir face excels the Gréekiſh rape.
            
               
Let Zeuxis Grapes not make him proude at all,
            Though Fowles for them did ſkyr againſt a wall:
            For if hée ſhould aſſay my Loue to paint,
            His Art would fayle, his cunning fiſt would faint.
            Let Praxitell preſume with Penſill rude
            Baſe things to blaze the people to delude:
            Hir featurde limmes to drawe let him not dare
            That with the fayre Diana may compare.
            Though Venus forme Apelles made ſo well,
            As Creece did iudge the Painter to excell:
            Yet let not that enbolde the Gréeke to graue
            Hir ſhape, that beauties praiſe deſerues to haue.
            For Nature when ſhe made hir, did entende
            To paint a péece that no man might amende:
            A paterne for the reaſt that after ſhoulde
            Be made by hande, or caſt in cunning moulde.
         
         
            The Louer declareth how firſt he was taken and enamoured by the ſight of his Ladie.
            I Hauing neuer earſt
            the craft of Cupid tride,
            Ne yet the wylie wanton wayes
            of Ladie Venus ſpide,
            But ſpent my time in ſporte
            as youth is woont by kinde,
            Not forcing fanſies pinching powre
            that other Wights did blinde:
            
               
By fortune founde a face
            that lykte my hart ſo well,
            As by the ſodaine vewe thereof
            to fanſies frame I fell.
            No ſooner had mine eies
            vpon hir beautie ſtayde,
            But Wit and Will without reſpect
            were altogither wayde.
            Vnwarely ſo was none
            in ſuch a ſnare before:
            The more I gazde vpon hir face,
            I lykte my Loue the more.
            Forthwith I thought my hart
            out of his roome was rapt:
            And wits (that woonted were to wayte
            on Reaſon) were intrapt,
            Downe by mine eies the ſtroke
            deſcended to the hart:
            Which Cupid neuer crazde before
            by force of golden dart.
            My bloud that thought it bounde
            his Maiſters part to take,
            No longer durſt abide abroade,
            but outwarde limmes forſake.
            Which hauing béene in breaſt
            and froſtie colde diſmayde:
            It haſted from the hart againe
            externall partes to ayde.
            
               
And brought with it ſuch heate
            as did enflame the face,
            Diſtayning it with Scarlet redde
            by raſhneſſe of the race.
            And ſince that time I féele
            ſuch pangues and inwarde fits,
            As now with hope, and then with feare
            encombred are my wits.
            Thus muſt I Miſer liue
            till ſhee by friendly ruth
            Doe pittie mée hir louing Thrall
            whoſe déedes ſhall trie his truth.
            Thriſe luckie was the day,
            thriſe happie cake the place,
            And yée (mine eies) thriſe bleſſed were
            that lighted on hir face.
            If I in fine may force
            hir pittie by my plaint:
            I ſhall in cunningſt verſe I may
            hir worthie prayſe depaint.
            There is one thing makes me ioy
            and bids me think the beſt:
            That cruell rigor can not lodge
            where beautie is poſſeſt.
            And ſure vnleſſe ſhe ſalue
            and beale this cankred wounde
            By yéelding grace, it muſt in time
            of force my corps confounde.
            
               
For long it may not laſt
            that in ſuch anguiſh lies:
            
               Extreames in no caſe can endure
            
            as Sages did deuiſe.
            No Tyger gaue hir Teate,
            ſhe is no Lyons whelpe:
            Ne was ſhe bred of cruell rocks,
            nor will renounce to helpe
            Such as ſhe paines with loue,
            and doth procure to wo:
            She is not of the Curriſh kinde,
            hir nature is not ſo.
         
         
            Maiſter Googe his Sonet of the paines of Loue.
            TWoo lynes ſhall tell the griefe
            that I by Loue ſuſtaine:
            I burne, I flame, I faint, I fréeze,
            of Hell I féele the paine.
         
         
            Turberuiles aunſwere and diſtick to the ſame.
            TWoo lynes ſhall teach you how
            to purchaſe eaſe anewe:
            Let Reaſon rule where Loue did raigne,
            and ydle thoughts eſchewe.
         
         
            
            ¶An Epitaphe on the death of Dame Elyzabeth Arhundle.
            HEre graued is a good and Godly Wight,
            That yéelded hath hir cynders to the ſoyle,
            Who ran hir race in vertues tylt aright
            And neuer had at Fortunes hand the foyle:
            The guide was God whome ſhée did aye enſue,
            And Vertue was the marke whereat ſhe thrue.
            Deſcending of a houſe of worthie fame
            Shée linckt at length with one of egall ſtate,
            Who though did chaunge hir firſt & former name,
            Did not enforce hir vertues to rebate:
            For Dannat ſhee Dame Arhundle was hight,
            whoſe Féere was knowne to be a worthy Knight.
            Hir beautie I not blaze ne brute at all,
            (Though with the beſt ſhe might therein compare)
            For that it was to age and fortune thrall:
            Hir thewes I touch which were ſo paſſing rare,
            As being earthde and reaft hir vitall breath,
            Hir chiefeſt part doth liue and conquer death.
            Let Spite not ſpare to ſpeake of hir the wurſt,
            Let Enuie feede vpon hir godly life,
            Let Rancour rage, let Hatreds bellie burſt,
            Let Zoill now vnſheath his cutting knife:
            For death hath cloſde hir corſe in Marble graue,
            Hir ſoule is fled in Skies his ſeate to haue.
            
               
Let Leyſter laugh that ſuch a Mirrour bred:
            Let Matrons mourne for loſſe of their renowne,
            Let Cornewall crie ſince Dannat now is ded,
            Let Vertue eke doe on hir mourning gowne:
            For ſhe is reſt that was at Vertues beck
            Whome Fortune had no powre to giue the check.
         
         
            To Piero of Pride.
            FRiend Piero, Pride infects a friendly minde,
            The haughtie are purſude with deadly hate:
            Wherfore eſchue the proude & Peacocks kinde.
            That gréede are to ſit on ſtoole of ſtate:
            The lowly hart doth winne the loue of all,
            But Pride at laſt is ſure of ſhamefull fall.
         
         
            Piero to Turberuile.
            GOod is the counſell (Turberuile) you giue,
            It is a vertue rare well to aduiſe,
            But if your ſelfe in Peacoks ſort doe liue
            Men déemen may you are not perfite wiſe:
            Whoſe chiefeſt point in act conſiſteth aye,
            Well doing farre excelleth well to ſaye.
         
         
            Verſe in prayſe of Lorde Henrye Howarde Earle of Surrey.
            WHat ſhould I ſpeake in prayſe of Surreys ſkill
            Vnleſſe I had a thouſand tongues at will?
            No one is able to depaint at full,
            The flowing fountaine of his ſacred Skull.
            
               
Whoſe Pen approoude what wit he had in mue
            Where ſuch a ſkill in making Sonets grue.
            Eche worde in place with ſuch a ſleight is coucht,
            Eche thing whereof he treates ſo firmely toucht,
            As Pallas ſéemde within his Noble breaſt
            To haue ſoiournde, and béene a daylie gueſt.
            Our mother tongue by him hath got ſuch light,
            As ruder ſpeach thereby is baniſht quight:
            Reproue him not for fanſies that he wrought,
            For Fame thereby and nothing elſe he ſought.
            What though his verſe wt pleaſāt toyes are fright?
            Yet was his honours life a Lampe of light.
            A Mirrour he the ſimple ſort to traine,
            That euer beate his brayne for Britans gaine.
            By him the Nobles had their vertues blazde,
            When ſpitefull death their honors liues had razde.
            Eche that in life had well deſerued aught,
            By Surreys meanes an endles fame hath caught.
            To quite his boone and aye well meaning minde,
            Whereby he did his Sequell ſéeme to binde:
            Though want of ſkill to ſilence me procures,
            I write of him whoſe fame for aye endures,
            A worthie Wight, a Noble for his race,
            A learned Lorde that had an Earles place.
         
         
            Of Ialouſie.
            
               A Straunge diſeaſe, a griefe excéeding great,
            A man to haue his hart in flame inrolde,
            
               
In ſort that he can neuer chooſe but ſweate,
            And féele his féete benumde with froſty colde.
            No doubt if he continue in this heate,
            He will become a Cooke hereafter olde,
            Of ſuch diſeaſes ſuch is the effect,
            And this in him we may full well ſuſpect.
         
         
            To his Ladie, that by hap when he kiſſed hir and made hir lip bleed, controld him and tooke diſdaine.
            
               DIſcharge thy dole,
            Thou ſubtile ſoule,
            It ſtandes in little ſtéede
            To curſſe the kiſſe
            That cauſer is
            Thy chirrie lip doth bléede.
            Thy bloud aſcends
            To make amends
            For domage thou haſt donne:
            For by the ſame
            I felt a flame
            More ſcorching than the Sunne.
            Thou reftſt my harte
            By ſecret Arte,
            My ſprites were quite ſubdude:
            My Senſes fled
            And I was ded,
            Thy lippes were ſcarce imbrude.
            
               
The kiſſe was thine,
            The hurt was mine,
            My hart felt all the paine:
            Twas it that bled
            And lookte ſo red,
            I tell thée once againe.
            But if you long
            To wreake your wrong
            Vpon your friendly fo:
            Come kiſſe againe
            And put to paine
            The man that hurt you ſo.
         
         
            Mayſter Googe his Sonet.
            ACcuſe not God if fanſie fonde
            doe mooue thy fooliſh braine
            To wayle for loue, for thou thy ſelfe
            art cauſe of all the paine.
         
         
            Turberuiles aunſwere.
            NOt God (friend Googe) ye Louer blames
            as worker of his woes:
            But Cupid that his fierie flames
            ſo frantickly beſtowes.
         
         
            A compariſon of the Louers eſtate with the Souldiars painefull lyfe.
            JF Souldiers may for ſeruice done,
            and labours long ſuſtainde,
            
               
For wearie watch, and perils paſt,
            and armes with armour painde:
            For puſh of Pike, for Holbers ſtroke,
            for ſtanding in the frunt,
            If they expect rewarde (I ſay)
            for byding battayles brunt:
            Then what ſhall Cupids Captaines craue,
            what recompence deſire,
            That warde the day, and wake the night
            conſumde with fretting fire?
            No roome of reſt, no time of truce,
            no pleading for a peace:
            When Cupid ſounds his warlike Trumpe,
            the fight will neuer ceaſe.
            Firſt ſhall you ſée the ſhiuering ſhafts
            and vewe the thirled darts
            Which from their eies they caſt by courſe
            to pierce their enmies harts.
            But if the Foe doe ſtande aloofe,
            (as is the Louers guiſe)
            Then Canons with their cruell cracks
            as thick as thunder flies.
            Swéete wordes in place of powder ſtande
            by force which think to win,
            That louing lookes of late had loſt
            when fight did firſt begin.
            But on the breaſt to beare the brunt
            and kéepe them from the hart,
            
               
A ſure and priuie cote is worne
            repelling pellats ſmart.
            They ſtop their eares againſt the ſound,
            which is the ſureſt ſhielde
            Againſt the dreadfull ſhot of wordes
            that thouſandes had beguilde.
            But when Cupidians flatly ſée
            nor gunne, nor Bowe preuaile,
            They then begin their friendly foes
            with other fight taſſaile.
            Then ſet the daſkardes dreade aſide,
            and to the walles they run,
            As though they woulde ſubdue the Forte
            or ere the fight begun.
            Forthwith the ſcaling Ladders come,
            and to the walles are ſet,
            Then ſighes and ſobs begin to clime,
            but they are quickly met.
            Thus Cupid and his Souldiers all
            the ſharpe repulſe ſuſtaine:
            Whome Beauty batters from the walles
            whoſe Captaine is Diſdaine.
            When all are gone and yéeld it loſt,
            comes Hope and whote Deſire,
            To ſée where they can haue the hap
            to ſet the Forte afire.
            But nought preuailes their lingring fight,
            they can not Beautie win:
            
               
Yet doe they ſkirmiſh ſtill behinde
            in hope to enter in.
            At length when Beautie doth perceyue
            thoſe Souldiers are ſo true,
            That they will neuer from the walles
            till they the holde ſubdue:
            She calles to Pittie for the keyes
            and bids hir let them in:
            In hope they will be true to hir
            as they to Loue had bin.
            The gates no ſooner are vnlockt,
            but ſouldiers all retire:
            And enter into Beauties Forte
            with Hope and hote Deſire.
            Now iudge by this that I haue ſaide
            of theſe two fightes aright,
            Which is the greateſt toyle of both
            when warlike Tents are pight.
            For Mars his men ſometime haue eaſe,
            and from their battaile blin:
            But Cupids ſouldiers euer ſerue
            till they Dame Beautie win.
         
         
            The Louer againſt one that compared his Miſtreſſe with his Ladie.
            A Madneſſe to compare
            the Pipler with the Pine,
            
               
Whereof the Mariner makes his Maſt,
            and hanges it all with line.
            A follie to preferre
            a Lampe before the Sunne,
            Or brag that Balams lumpiſh Aſſe
            with Bucephall ſhall runne.
            Then ceaſe for ſhame to vaunt,
            and crowe in craking wiſe
            Of hir that leaſt deſerues to haue
            hir beauties fame ariſe.
            Thou fooliſh Dame beware
            of haughtie Peacocks pride:
            The fruite thereof in former age
            hath ſundrie times bene tride.
            
               Arachne can expreſſe
            how angrie Pallas was,
            When ſhée in néedle worke would ſéeme
            the Heauenly Wight to paſſe.
            The Spider ſhewes the ſpite
            that ſhée (good wench) abid,
            In token of hir pride ſhee hanges
            at roufe by rotten thrid.
            No foode ſhée hath allowde
            leſſe Fortune ſende the Flie:
            The Cobwed is hir coſtly Couch
            appointed hir to lie.
            Wich venim ranck and vile
            hir wombe is like to burſt,
            
               
A token of hir inwarde hate
            and hawtie minde at furſt.
            And thou that ſurely thinkſt
            thy Ladie to excell,
            Example take of others harme
            for iudgement that befell:
            When Pan the Paſtors prince,
            and Rex of Ruſtick route,
            To paſſe Apollo in his play
            and Muſick went aboute:
            Mount Tmolus was the Iudge
            that there the roome poſſeſt,
            To giue his verdite for them both
            which vttered Muſick beſt.
            Firſt came the Ruſtick forth
            with Pipe and puffed bag,
            That made his eies to run like ſtreames,
            and both his lips to wag.
            The noyſe was ſomewhat rude
            and ragged to the eare:
            The ſimpleſt man aliue would geſſe
            that pieuiſh Pan was there.
            Then Phoebus framde his frets,
            and wreſted all his pinnes,
            And on his curious ſtrings to ſtrike
            the ſkilfull God beginnes.
            So paſſing was his play
            as made the trées to daunce,
            
               
And ſtubborne Rocks in déepeſt vales
            for gladſome ioy to praunce.
            
               Amphyon bluſht as red
            as any glowing flame:
            And Orpheus durſt not ſhew his face,
            but hide his head for ſhame.
            Ynough quoth Tmolus tho,
            my iudgement is that Pan
            
            May pipe among the ruder ſort
            that little Muſick can.
            
               Apollos playe doth paſſe
            of all that ere I hearde:
            Wherefore (as reaſon is) of mée
            the Luter is preferde.
            Meanewhile was Mydas preſt,
            not pointed Iudge in place:
            But (lyke a dolt that went about
            
               Apollo to deface)
            Tuſhe Tmolus, tuſhe quoth hee,
            
               Pan hath the better ſkill:
            For hée the emptie bagge with winde
            and ſtrouting blaſt doth fill.
            
               Apollo wagges his ioints
            and makes a iarring ſounde:
            Lyke pleaſure is not in the Lute
            as in the Bagpipe founde.
            No ſooner had hée ſpoke
            thoſe witleſſe wordes and ſed,
            
               
But Phoebus graft on Aſſes eares
            vpon his beaſtly hed.
            In proofe of iudgement wrong
            that Mydas did maintaine,
            Hée had a paire of ſowſing eares
            to ſhilde him from the raine.
            Wherefore (my Friende) take héede
            of afterclaps that fall:
            And déeme not hir a Dearling that
            deſerues no prayſe at all.
            Your iudgement is beguilde,
            your Senſes ſuffer ſhame:
            That ſo doe ſéeke to blaze hir armes,
            and to aduaunce hir fame.
            Let hir go hide hir head
            in lothſome lurking mue,
            For crabbed Crowfoote marres hir face
            and quite diſtaines hir hue.
         
         
            The Louer to a Centlewoman, that after great friendſhip without deſart or cauſe of miſlyking refuſed him.
            HAue you not heard it long ago
            of cunning Fawkners tolde,
            That Haukes which loue their kéepers call
            are woorth their weight in Golde?
            And ſuch as knowe the luring voice
            of him that féedes them ſtill:
            
               
And neuer rangle farre abroade
            againſt the kéepers will,
            Doe farre excéede the haggarde Hauke
            that ſtoopeth to no ſtale:
            Nor forceth on the Lure awhit,
            but mounts with euery gale?
            Yes, yes, I know you know it well,
            and I by proufe haue tride,
            That wylde and haggard Hawkes are worſe
            than ſuch as will abide.
            Yet is there eke another kinde,
            farre worſer than the reſt:
            And thoſe are they that flie at check,
            and ſtoupe to erie geſt.
            They leaue the lawe that nature taught
            and ſhun their woonted kinde,
            In fléeing after erie Foule
            that mounteth with the winde.
            You know what I doe meane by this,
            if not, giue eare a while:
            And I ſhall ſhewe you my conceyte
            in plaine and ſimple ſtile.
            You were ſometime a gentle Hawke,
            and woont to féede on fiſt:
            And knew my luring voice right well
            and would repaire at liſt.
            I could no ſooner make a beck
            or token with my hand,
            
               
But you would quickly iudge my will
            and how the caſe did ſtand.
            But now you are become ſo wylde
            and rammage to be ſéene,
            As though you were a haggard Hawke,
            your maners altred cléene.
            You now refuſe to come to fiſt,
            you ſhun my woonted call:
            My luring lyketh not your eare,
            you force mée not at all.
            You flée with wings of often chaunge
            at random where you pleaſe:
            But that in time will bréede in you
            ſome fowle and fell diſeaſe.
            Liue like a haggard ſtill therefore,
            and for no luring care:
            For beſt (I ſée) contents thy minde
            at wiſhe and will to fare.
            So ſome perhaps will liue in hope
            at length to light on thée,
            That earſt reclaimde ſo gentle werte
            and louing birde to mée,
            But if thou chaunce to fall to check,
            and force on erie fowle,
            Thou ſhalt be worſe deteſted then,
            than is the nightiſh Owle.
            This counſell take of him that once
            did kéepe thée at his beck:
            
               
But now giues vp in open field
            for feare of filthie check.
         
         
            The Louer obtayning his wiſhe by all likelyhode, yet not able to attaine his deſire, compares himſelf to Tantalus.
            
            OF Tantalus plight
            The Poets wright,
            Complayning
            And fayning
            In ſorowfull ſownding ſonges:
            Who féeles (they ſaye)
            For Apples gaye
            Such payning,
            Not gayning
            The fruite for which hee longes:
            For when hee thinkes to féede therone,
            The fickle flattring Trée is gone:
            And all in vaine hee hopes to haue
            his famine to expell
            The flitting fruite that lookes ſo braue
            and likes his eie ſo well:
            And thus his hunger doth increaſe,
            And hée can neuer finde releaſe.
            As want of Meate
            Doth make him freate
            
               
With raging,
            And gaging,
            To catch the fruite that flées:
            Euen ſo for drythe
            The Miſer crythe,
            Not ſwaging,
            But waging,
            For licour that hée ſées:
            For to his painefull partched mouth
            The long deſired water flouth,
            And when he gapes full greedilie
            vnthriftie thirſt to ſlake,
            The riuer waſteth ſpéedilie,
            and away warde goes the Lake:
            That all the licour from his lips
            And dryed chaps away it ſlips.
            This kinde of paine
            Doth he ſuſtaine,
            Not ceaſing,
            Increaſing,
            His pittifull pining wo:
            In plenties place,
            Deuoide of grace,
            Releaſing,
            Or ceaſſing
            The pangs that pinch him ſo:
            Of all the fretting fits of Hell
            This Tantals torment is moſt fell:
            
               
For that the reaſt can haue no hope
            their fréedome to attaine,
            And he hath graunted him ſuch ſcope
            as makes the Myſer faine:
            But all for nought in fine it ſerues,
            For he with dryth and hunger ſterues.
            Euen ſo fare I
            That am as nie
            My pleaſure,
            My treaſure,
            As I might wiſh to bée:
            And haue at will
            My Ladie ſtill
            At le
                  •••
               ure,
            In meaſure,
            As well it liketh mée.
            The amorous blincks flée to and fro,
            With ſugred words that make a ſhow
            That fanſie is well pleaſde withall
            and findes it ſelfe content:
            Eche other friendly friend doth call
            and eche of vs conſent:
            And thus we ſéeme for to poſſeſſe
            Eche others hart and haue redreſſe.
            We coll, we clip,
            We kiſſe with lip,
            Delighted,
            Requighted,
            
               
And merily ſpend the day:
            The tales I tell
            Are fanſide well,
            Recited,
            Not ſpited,
            Thus weares the time away.
            Looke what I like ſhée doth imbrace,
            Shée giues good eare vnto my caſe
            And yeeldes mee lawfull libertie
            to frame my dolorus plaint,
            To quite hir Friend from ieopardie
            whome Cupid hath attaint:
            Reſpecting nought at all his welth
            But ſéeking meane to worke his helth.
            I ſéeme to haue
            The thing I craue,
            Shée barres not,
            Shée iarres not,
            But with a verie good will
            Shee heares my ſute,
            And for the frute
            Shée warres not,
            But dares not
            To let me féede my fill.
            Shée would (I know) with hart agrée,
            The fault is neyther in hir nor mée,
            I dare auowe full willinglie
            ſhée would conſent thereto,
            
               
And gladly would mée remedie
            too baniſh away my wo:
            Lo thus my wiſh I doe poſſeſſe,
            And am a Tantal naytheleſſe.
            For though I ſtande
            And touch with hande
            Allured,
            Procured,
            The Saint I doe deſire:
            And may be bolde
            For to enfolde,
            Aſſured,
            Indured,
            The Corps that I require:
            Yet by no meanes may I attaine
            To haue the fruite I would ſo faine
            To rid mée from extremitie
            and cruell oppreſſing care,
            Euen thus with Tantals penaltie
            my deſtnie may compare:
            Who though endure exceſſiue paine,
            Yet mine is not the leaſt of twaine.
         
         
            The Louer to the Thems of London to fauor his Ladie paſſing thereon.
            THou ſtately Streame yt with the ſwelling Tide
            Gainſt London walles inceſſantly doſt beate,
            
               
Thou Thems (I ſay) where barge & bote doth ride,
            And ſnowhite Swans do fiſh for néedefull meate:
            When ſo my Loue of force, or pleaſure ſhall
            Flit on thy floud as cuſtome is to do:
            Séeke not with dread hir courage to appall,
            But calme thy tyde, and ſmoothly let it go:
            As ſhée may ioy, arriude to ſiker ſhore
            To paſſe the pleaſant ſtreame ſhe did before.
            To weltre vp and furge in wrathfull wiſe,
            (As did the floud where Helle drenched was,)
            Would but procure defame of thee to riſe:
            Wherefore let all ſuch ruthleſſe rigor paſſe,
            So wiſh I that thou mayſt with bending ſide
            Haue powre for aye in woonted goulfe to glide.
         
         
            To his Ring giuen to his Ladie, wherein was grauen this Verſe. My hart is yours.
            
            THough thou (my King) be ſmall,
            and ſlender be thy price:
            Yet haſt thou in thy compaſſe coucht
            a Louers true deuice.
            And though no Rubie red,
            ne Turkeſſe trim thy top,
            Nor other Iuell that commends
            the golden Vulcans ſhop:
            Yet mayſt thou boldlye vaunt
            and make a true report
            
               
For mée that am thy Mayſter yet
            in ſuch a ſemblant ſort,
            That aye (my hart is hirs)
            of thée I aſke no more:
            My Pen and I will ſhew the reaſt,
            which yet I kéepe in ſtore.
            Be mindefull of thy charge,
            and of thy Mayſters caſe:
            Forget not that (my hart is hirs)
            though I be not in place.
            When thou haſt tolde thy tale
            which is but ſhort and ſwéete:
            Then let my Loue coniect the reaſt
            till ſhe and I doe méete.
            For as (my hart is hirs)
            ſo ſhall it be for aye:
            My hart, my hand, my lyfe, my limmes
            are hirs till dying daye.
            Yea when the ſpirite giues vp
            and bodie breathes his laſt,
            Say naytheleſſe (my hart is hirs)
            when life and all is paſt.
            
               Sit fast to hir finger,
            
            
               But doe thou not wring her.
            
         
         
            
            The diſpairing Louer craues eyther mercie in time at his Ladies hands, or cruell death.
            LIke as the fearefull Fouls
            within the Fawcons foote
            Doth yéelde himſelfe to die,
            and ſées none other boote:
            Euen ſo dread I (my Deare)
            leaſt ruth in thée will want,
            To mée that am thy thrall,
            who fearing death doe pant.
            So faſt I am in Gyue
            within your beauties Gayle,
            As thence to make a breath
            no engin may preuaile.
            The hart within my breaſt
            with trembling feare doth quake:
            And ſaue your loue (my Deare)
            nought can my torment ſlake.
            To ſlea a yéelding pray
            I iudge it not your kinde:
            Your beautie bids mée hope
            more ruth in you to finde.
            Where Nature hath yformde
            ſuch featurde ſhape to ſhowe,
            There hath ſhe cloſde in breaſt
            a hart for grace to growe.
            
               
Wherefore my lingring paines
            redreſſe with ruthfull hart:
            And doe in time become
            Phiſition to my ſmart.
            Oh ſhowe thy ſelfe a friende
            and Natures Impe to bee,
            As thou a Woman art by kinde
            to womans kinde agrée.
            But if you can not finde
            in hart my lyfe to ſaue,
            But that you long to ſée
            your thrall lye deade in graue:
            Sende mée the fatall toole,
            and cruell cutting knife:
            And thou ſhalt ſee me rid
            my wretched limmes of life.
            No leſſe to like thy minde
            than to abridge my ſmart:
            Which were an yll rewarde
            for ſuch a good deſart.
            Of both I count it leaſt
            by curſed death to fall,
            Than ruthleſſe here to liue
            and aye to be a thrall.
         
         
            To his Friende to be conſtant after choiſe made.
            WHat made Vlyſſes Wife
            to be renowmed ſo?
            
               
What forced Fame hir endleſſe brute
            in blaſting trumpe to blow?
            What Cleopatra cauſde
            to haue immortall prayſe?
            What did procure Lucrecias lande
            to laſten to our dayes?
            Cauſe they their plighted heſtes
            vnbroken aye reſerude:
            And planted Conſtance in their harts
            from whome they neuer ſwerude.
            What makes the Marble ſtone
            and Diamond ſo deare?
            Saue that the longeſt laſt of all,
            and alwayes one appeare?
            What makes the waxen forme
            to be of ſlender price?
            But cauſe with force of fire it melts
            and waſteth with a trice.
            Then if thou long for prayſe
            or blaſted Fame to finde,
            (My Friend) thou muſt not chaunge thy choyce
            or turne lyke Cock with winde.
            Be conſtant in thy worde
            and ſtable in thy deede:
            This is the readieſt way to win
            and purchaſe prayſe with ſpeede.
         
         
            
            Counſell returned by Pyndara to Tymetes, of conſtancie.
            WHat made the Troyan Duke
            that wandring Prince to haue
            Such yll report, and foule defame
            as him Carthago gaue?
            What faythleſſe Iaſon forcde
            a Traytors name to gaine?
            When he to Colchos came, and did
            the golden Fleeſe attaine?
            What Theſeus cauſde to bée
            reported of ſo yll,
            As yet record thereof remaynes
            (I think) and euer wyll?
            Cauſe they their faithfull Friendes
            that ſaude their doubtfull lyues
            Forſooke at laſt, and did diſdaine
            to take them to their wyues,
            They brake their vowed heſtes,
            by ſhip away they went:
            And ſo betrayde thoſe ſiely ſoules
            that craft nor falſehood ment.
            Wherefore if you (my Friend)
            the like report will flée
            Stand euer to the promiſe made,
            and plighted troth to mée.
            
               
Thoſe Dames of whome you ſpake
            were conſtant (as you ſay)
            But ſure theſe Louers I alleage
            vnfaithfull parts did play.
            More cauſe haue I to doubt
            of you (Tymetes) then,
            For (as you ſée) we Women are
            more truſtie than you men.
         
         
            The Louers muſt not diſpaire though their Ladies ſeeme ſtraunge.
            THough Neptune in his rage
            the ſwelling Seas doe toſſe,
            And crack the Cables in diſpite
            to further ſhipmens loſſe:
            Though Ancker holde doe fayle,
            and Myſſon go to wrack,
            Though Sayles with bluſtring blaſt be rent,
            and Keale begin to crack:
            Yet thoſe that are a boorde
            and guide the ſhip with ſteare,
            Although they ſée ſuch daungers preſt
            and perils to appeare:
            Yet hope to light at laſt
            vpon ſome harbour holde,
            And finde a Porte where they to caſt
            their Anckers may be bolde.
            
               
Though Theeues be kept in Gayle
            faſt bound in ſureſt Gyues,
            They lay not all good hope aſide
            for ſauing of their lyues.
            They truſt at length to ſée
            ſuch mercie in the Iudge,
            As they in open preſence quit
            may from the priſon trudge,
            And thoſe for gréedie gaine
            and hope of hidden Golde
            In déepeſt Mynes and Dungeon darck
            that byde the bitter colde:
            In fine doe looke to light
            vpon ſome Golden vaine,
            Which may be thought a recompence
            for all their paſſed paine.
            The Ploughman eke that toyles
            and turnes the ground for graine,
            And ſowes his ſéede (perhaps to loſſe)
            yet ſtandes in hope of gaine.
            He will not once diſpaire,
            but hope till Harueſt fall:
            And then will looke aſſuredly
            to ſtuffe his Barnes withall.
            Since theſe in perils point
            will neuer once diſpaire,
            Then why ſhould Louers ſtand in dread
            of ſtormes in weather faire?
            
               
Why ſhould they haue miſtruſt
            ſome better hap to finde,
            Or think that Women will not chaunge
            as is their woonted kinde?
            Though ſtraunge they ſeeme a while
            and cruell for a ſpace:
            Yet ſée thou hope at length by hap
            to finde ſome better grace.
            For Tygers will be tame,
            and Lyons that were woode,
            In time their kéepers learne to knowe
            and come to them for foode.
            What though they ſcorne as now
            to liſten to thy ſute?
            Yet thou in time when fortune ſerues
            ſhalt reape ſome better frute.
            And though thy ſighes they ſcorne
            and mock thy welling teares:
            Yet hope (I ſay) for after ſtormes
            the ſhining Sunne appeares.
            And neuer ceaſe to ſue,
            nor from lamenting ſtint:
            For often drops of falling raine
            in time doe pierce the Flint.
            Was neuer ſtone ſo ſtrong
            nor womans hart ſo harde,
            But thone with toole, and thother with teares
            in proceſſe might be ſcarde.
         
         
            
            A Letter ſent by Tymetes to his Ladie Pyndara at the time of his departure.
            OF Pennes I had good ſtore,
            ne Paper did I want
            When I began to write to thée:
            but Inck was ſomewhat ſcant.
            Yet Loue deuiſde a fetch,
            a friendly ſleight at néede:
            For I with pointed Penſill made
            my middle finger bléede.
            From whence the bloud as from
            a clouen Conduite flue,
            And theſe fewe rude and ſkilleſſe lines
            with quaking quill I drue.
            Now Friend I muſt depart
            and leaue this lyked lande:
            Now canckred Hap doth force me take
            a new founde toyle in hande.
            Shée ſpites that I ſhould liue,
            or leade a quiet life:
            Aye ſéeking how to bréede my bale
            and make my ſorrowes rife.
            From whence I paſſe I knowe,
            a place of pleaſant bliſſe,
            But wither I ſhall I wote not well,
            I know not where it is.
            
               
Where ſhe by Sea or Lande
            me (cruell) will compell
            To paſſe, or by the deſart Dales,
            were verie hard to tell.
            But néedes I muſt away,
            the Weſterne winde doth blowe
            So full againſt my back that I
            of force from hence doe go.
            Yet naytheleſſe in pawne
            (O Friend) I leaue with you
            A faithfull hart, that laſting lyfe
            will ſhewe it ſelfe as true,
            As loouing earſt it hath:
            and if mée truſt you dare,
            Fill vp the emptie place with yours,
            if you the ſame may ſpare.
            Incloſe it in my breaſt,
            in ſafetie ſhall it lie:
            And thou ſhalt haue thy hart againe,
            if I doe chaunce to die.
            Thus dubble is your gaine,
            a dubble hart to haue:
            To purchaſe thée another hart,
            and eke thine owne to ſaue.
            Liue mindefull of thy Friend,
            forget not promiſe paſt:
            Be ſtoute againſt the ſtubborne ſtrokes
            of frowarde Fortunes blaſt.
            
               
               Penelope be true
            to thy Vlyſſes ſtill:
            Let no newe choſen Friend breake off
            th
                  ••…
               hréed of our good will.
            Though I on ſeas doe paſſe,
            the ſurge will haue no powre
            To quench the flame that in my breaſt
            increaſeth day and howre.
            
               
                  •
               nd thus (the heart that is
            
            
               your owne) doth wiſh thée well,
            With good increaſe of bleſſed haps
            ſiniſter chaunce to quell.
            Adue my choſen Friend,
            if Fortune ſay Amen,
            From hence I go thine owne, and will
            thine owne returne agen.
         
         
            
               Pyndaras aunſwere to the Letter which Tymetes ſent hir at the time of his departure.
            WHen firſt thy Letters came
            (O louing Friend) to mée,
            I leapt for ioy, in hope to haue
            receyude good newes of thée,
            I neuer ſtayde vpon
            thoſe lines that were without:
            But raſhl
                  •
               ript the Seale, to rid
            my minde from dreadfull dout.
            
               
Which done (Oh cruell griefe)
            I ſaw a mournefull ſight:
            This Verſe (of Pennes I had good ſtore)
            with Purple bloud ywright.
            With flouds of flowing teares
            ſtraight drowned were mine eies,
            On eyther Chéeke they trickled faſt
            and ranne in riuer wies.
            My minde did yll abode,
            it yrkt to read the reſt:
            For when I ſaw the Inck was ſuch,
            I thought I ſaw the beſt.
            Long ſtoode I in a dumpe,
            my hart began to ake:
            My Liuer leapt within my bulck,
            my trembling hands did ſhake.
            My Senſes were bereft,
            my bowing knées did bende:
            Out from my Noſe the bloud it brake,
            much like the Letter pende.
            Vp ſtart my ſtaring Locks,
            I lay for dead a ſpace:
            And what with bloud and brine I all
            bedewde the dréerie place.
            From out my féeble fiſt
            fell Néedle, cloth and all,
            I knewe no Wight, I ſaw no Sunne,
            as deafe as ſtone in wall.
            
               
At laſt when ſtanders by
            had brought my Senſe againe,
            And force of life had conquerd griefe
            and baniſht deadly paine:
            I thought the worſt was paſt,
            I déemde I could abide
            No greater torment than I had,
            vnleſſe I ſhould haue dide.
            To vewing then againe
            of bloudie lynes I go:
            And euer as I read the words,
            mee thought I ſaw the blo.
            Which pointed Penſell gaue,
            from whence that dolefull Inck
            As from a clouen Conduit flue:
            remembrance make me ſhrinck.
            Oh Friend Tymetes why
            ſo cruell were thou than?
            What didſt thou meane to hurt thy fleſh
            thou raſh and retchleſſe man?
            What? didſt thou déeme that I
            could vew that gorie ſcrole
            Withouten anguiſh of the minde?
            or think vpon the hole
            Of that thy friendly fiſt
            and finger that did bléede?
            No, no, I haue a W
                  〈…〉
                hart,
            I am no Tygers ſée
                  〈…〉
               
            
            
               
As great a griefe it was
            for me to think in hart
            Of thy miſhap, as if my ſelfe
            had felt the preſent ſmart.
            O cruell curſed want
            of fitter Inck to write:
            Good fayth that lycour was vnméete
            ſuch louing lines tindite.
            But yet in ſome reſpect
            it fitted with the caſe:
            For (out alas) I read therein
            that thou haſt fled the place,
            Where friendly we were woont
            like faithfull friends to bee:
            Where thou moughtſt that with me thy fill
            and I conferre with thée.
            Oh ſpitefull cruell Chaunce,
            oh curſed canckred Fate:
            Art thou a Goddeſſe (Monſter vile)
            deſeruing ſtoole of State?
            O blinde and muffled Dame,
            couldſt thou not ſée to ſpare
            Two faithfull harts, but reauing thone
            muſt bréede the others care?
            No woonder tis that thou
            doſt ſtande on whirling whéele:
            For by thy déedes thou doſt declare
            thou canſt doe nought but reele.
            
               
Art thou of Womans kinde
            and ruthfull Goddeſſe race,
            And haſt no more reſpect vnto
            a ſielie womans caſe?
            Auaunt thou froward Fiend,
            thou ſo my Friend doſt driue
            From ſhore well knowne to forraine coaſt
            our ſugred ioyes to riue.
            If ſo thy minde be bent
            that my Tymetes ſhall
            Depart the preſence of his Friend:
            Yet ſo doe guide the ball
            As he at lande may liue
            not trying ſurge of ſeas:
            Nor ſhip him from the Hauens mouth
            to bréede him more vncaſe.
            (Good Friend) aduenture not
            ſo raſhly on the floud,
            As earſt thou didſt in writing of
            this Letter with thy bloud.
            Séeke not tincreaſe my cares
            or dubble griefe begoon:
            Think of Leanders bolde attempt
            the lyke diſtreſſe to ſhoon.
            What ſuretie is in ſhip?
            what truſt in Oken plancks?
            What credit doe the windes deſerue
            at lande that play ſuch prancks?
            
               
If houſes ſtrongly built,
            and Towers battled hie,
            By force of blaſt be ouerthrowne
            when Aeols Impes doe flie:
            In puffing windes the Pine
            and aged Oke doe teare,
            And from the bodies rent the boughes
            and loftie lugges they beare:
            Then why ſhouldſt thou affie
            in Keale or Cable ſo,
            Or hazard thus thy ſelfe vpon
            the toſſing Seas to go?
            Haſt thou not heard of yore
            how good Vlyſſes was
            With ſtormie tempeſt chaſed ſore
            when he to Greece did paſſe?
            A wearie trauaile hée
            for ten yeares ſpace abid.
            And all the while this noble Greeke
            on waltring wallow ſlid.
            Haſt thou not read in Bookes
            of fell Charybdis Goulfe,
            And Scyllas Dogs, whome ſhips doe dread
            as Lambes doe feare the Woulfe?
            Nor of the raggie Rocks
            that vnderlurck the waue?
            And rent the Barcks that Aeols blaſts
            into their boſome draue?
            
               
Not of the Monſters huge
            that belch out frothie fleame,
            And ſinging Sirens that doe drowne
            both man and ſhip in ſtreame?
            Alas the thought of Seas,
            and of thy paſſage paines
            (If once thou gage thy ſelfe to ſurge)
            my hart and members ſtraines.
            The preſent fits of feare
            of afterclaps to cum.
            Amaze my louing tender breaſt
            and Senſes doe benum.
            But néedes thou muſt away,
            (oh Friend) what hap is this
            That ere thou flie this friendly coaſt
            thy lips I can not kiſſe?
            Nor with my folded armes
            imbrace that neck of thine:
            Nor clap vnto thy manly breaſt
            theſe louing Dugs of mine?
            Not ſhed my trilling teares
            vpon thy moiſted face?
            Nor ſay to thée (Tymet adue)
            when thou departſt the place?
            O that I had thy forme
            in waxen table now,
            To repreſent thy liuely lookes
            and friendly louing brow.
            
               
That mought perhaps abridge
            ſome part of pinching paine:
            And comfort me till better chaunce
            did ſende thée home againe.
            Both winde and waue atonce
            conſpire to worke my wo,
            Or eſſe thou ſhouldſt not ſo be forſt
            from me (thine owne) to go.
            O wayward Weſterne blaſt
            what didſt thou meane ſo full
            Againſt Tymetes back to blow,
            and him from hence to pull?
            Haſt thou bene counted earſt
            a gentle gale of winde,
            And doſt thou now at length bewray
            thy fierce and frowarde kinde?
            I thought the Northren blaſt
            from froſtie Pole that came
            Had bene the worſt of all the windes
            and moſt deſerued blame.
            But now I plainely ſée
            that Poets did but faine:
            When they of Borias ſpake ſo yll
            and of his cruell raigne.
            For thou of Aeols brats
            thy ſelfe the worſt doſt ſhowe:
            And hauing no iuſt cauſe to rage
            to ſoone beginſt to blowe.
            
               
If néedes thou wouldſt haue vſde
            thy force and fretting moode,
            Thou ſhouldſt haue broyld among the trées
            that in the Mountaines ſtoode:
            And let vs friends alone
            that liude in perfite bliſſe.
            But to requeſt the windes of ruth
            but labor loſt it is.
            Well (Friend) though cruell hap
            and windes did both agrée,
            That thou on ſodaine ſhouldſt forgo
            both countrie coaſt and mée:
            Yet haue I founde the pawne
            which thou didſt leaue behinde:
            I meane thy louing faithfull hart,
            that neuer was vnkinde.
            And for that firme beheſt
            and plighted truth of youre,
            Wherein you vow that loue begoon
            ſhall to the death endure:
            To yeelde thée thy demaunde
            my written lines proteſt,
            Incloſe my hart within thy bulck
            as I will thine in breſt.
            Shrine vp that little lumpe
            of friendly fleſh (my Friend)
            And I will lodge in louing wiſe
            the gueſt that thou didſt ſend.
            
               
I ioy at this exchaunge:
            for I aſſured ſtande,
            Thy tender hart that I doe kéepe
            ſhall ſafelie lie at lande.
            Nor doe I doubt at all
            but thou wilt haue regarde
            Of that thy charge, and womans hart
            committed to thy warde.
            Why doſt thou write of death?
            I truſt thou ſhalt not die,
            As long as in thy manly breaſt
            a womans hart doth lie.
            To cruell were the caſe,
            the Siſters eake were ſhroes:
            If they woulde ſéeke the death of vs.
            that are ſuch friendly foes.
            But if the worſt ſhoulde fall,
            and that the cruell death
            Doe ſtop the ſpindles of our life,
            and reaue vs both of breath:
            Yet this doth make me ioy,
            that thou ſhalt be the graue
            Vnto my hart, and in my breſt
            thy hart is Hierce ſhall haue.
            For ſure a ſunder ſhall
            theſe members neuer go.
            As long as life in lims doth lodge
            and breath in lungs bylow.
            
               
I mindefull liue of thée
            and of my promiſe paſt:
            I will not ſéeke to chaunge my choiſe,
            my loue is fixed faſt.
            To my Tymetes I
            as faithfull will be found:
            As to Vlyſſes was his wife
            whilſt Troie was laide on ground.
            As for new choiſe of Friends,
            preſume vpon thy P.
            
            Thou knowſt I haue thy hart in breaſt
            and it will none but thee.
            Abandon all diſtruſt
            and dread of miſtie minde:
            For to the hart (that is mine owne)
            I will not be vnkinde.
            Adue my choſen Friend,
            Adue to thée agen:
            Remaine my loue, but pray the write
            no more with bloudie Pen.
            
               
                  Thine owne in life, thine owne in death,
               
               
                  Thine owne whilſt lungs ſhall lende me breath:
               
               
                  Thine owne whilſt I on earth doe wonne
               
               
                  Thine owne whilſt eie ſhall ſee the Sonne.
               
            
         
         
            
            To his abſent Friend the Louer writes of his vnquiet and reſtleſſe ſtate.
            THough curious ſkill I want to wel endite,
            And I of ſacred Nymphes and Muſes nine
            Was neuer taught wt Poets pen to write,
            Nor barrain braine to learning did incline
            To purchaſe prayſe, or with the beſt to ſhine:
            Yet cauſe my Friend ſhall finde no want of will,
            I write, let hir accuſe the lack of ſkill.
            No leſſe deſerues the Lambe to be imbraſt
            Of lowring Ioue at ſacred Altar ſlaine,
            If with good zeale it offred be at laſt
            By Irus, that doe Craeſus Bullocks twaine:
            For no reſpect is to be had of gaine
            In ſuch affayres, but to the giuers hart
            And his good will our Senſes muſt conuart.
            Wherfore to thée (my Friend) theſe lines I ſend
            As perfite proufe of no diſſembling minde,
            But of a hart that truely doth intend
            To ſhew it ſelfe as louing and as kinde,
            As woman woulde hir Louer wiſh to finde:
            And more than this my Paper can declare,
            I loue thee (Friend) and wiſhe thée well to fare.
            I would thou wiſt the torment I ſuſtaine
            For lack of hir that ſhould my wo redreſſe,
            And that you knew ſome parcell of my paine,
            
               
Which none may well by déeming iudgemēt geſſe,
            Nor I with quill haue cunning to expreſſe:
            I know thou couldſt but rue my wofull chaunce,
            That by thy meanes was brought into this traunce
            The day doth bréede my doole, and ranckling rage
            Of ſecret ſmart in wounded breaſt doth boyle,
            No pleaſant pangue my ſorrowes may aſſwage,
            Nor giue an ende vnto my wofull toyle:
            The golden Sunne that glads the earthly ſoyle,
            And erie other thing that bréedes delight
            Of kinde, to mee are forgers of my ſpite.
            I long for Phoebus glade and going downe,
            My drearie teares more couertly to ſhed:
            But when the night with vglie face doth frowne,
            And that I am yplaſte in quiet bed,
            In hope to be with wiſhed pleaſure fed:
            A greater griefe, a worſer paine enſues.
            My vaporde eies their hoped ſléepe refues.
            Then rowle I in my déepe diſpayring breſt
            The 
                  •
               wéete diſdaines, and pleaſant anger paſt,
            The louely ſtrifes: when Stars doe counſell reſt
            Incroching cares renue my griefe as faſte,
            And thus deſired night in wo I waſte:
            And to expreſſe the harts exceſſiue paine,
            Mine eies their deawie teares diſtill amaine.
            And reaſon why they ſhould be moyſted ſo,
            Is for they bred my hart this bitter bale:
            They were the onely cauſe of cruell wo
            
               
Vnto the hart, they were the guilefull ſtale.
            Thus day and night ytoſt with churliſh Gale
            Of ſighes in Sea of ſurging brine I bide
            Not knowing how to ſcape the ſcowring Tide.
            At laſt the ſhining Rayes of Hope to finde
            Your friendſhip firme, theſe cloudy thoughts repel▪
            
            And calmed Skie returnes to miſtie minde:
            Which déepe diſpaire againe eftſoone compels
            Too fade, and eaſe by Dolours drift expels:
            That Gods themſelues (I iudge) lament my fate,
            And doe repine to ſee my wofull ſtate.
            Wherefore to purchace prayſe, and glorie gaine.
            Do eaſe your Friend that liues in wretched plight,
            Doe not to death a louing hart conſtraine,
            But ſéeke with loue his ſeruice to requight,
            Doe not exchaunge a Fawcon for a Kite:
            Refuſe him not for any friendſhip nue
            A worſe may chaunce, but none more iuſt and true
            Let Creſſed myrror hée that did forgo
            Hir former faythfull friend King Priams Sonne,
            And Diomed the Gréeke imbraced ſo,
            And left the loue ſo well that was begonne:
            But when hir Cards were tolde and twiſt yſponne
            She found hir Troian Friend the beſt of both
            For he renounſt hir not, but kept his oth.
            This don, my griping griefs will ſōwhat ſwage
            And ſorrow ceaſe to grow in penſiue breaſt,
            Which otherwiſe will neuer blin to rage
            
               
And cruſh the hart within his carefull Cheaſt
            Of both for you and mée it were the beſt,
            To ſaue my life and win immortall fame,
            And thus my Muſe ſhall blaſe your noble name
            For ruine on my wofull caſe.
         
         
            The aunſwere of a woman to hir Louer, ſuppoſing his complaint to be but fayned.
            YOu want no ſkill to paint
            or ſhew your pangues with Pen,
            It is a worlde to ſée the craft
            that is in ſubtile men.
            You ſéeme to write of woes
            and wayle for deadly ſmart,
            As though there were no griefe, but that
            which gripes your faythleſſe hart.
            Though we but Women are
            and weake by lawe of kinde,
            Yet well we can diſcerne a Friende,
            we winke, but are not blinde.
            Not euery thing that giues
            a gleame and glittering ſhowe,
            Is to be counted Gold in déede
            this prouerb well you knowe:
            Nor euery man that beares
            a faire and fawning cheere,
            
               
Is to be taken for a Friend
            or choſen for a Feere:
            Not euerie teare declares
            the troubles of the hart,
            For ſome doe wéepe that feele no wo
            ſome crie that taſte no ſmart.
            The more you ſéeme to me
            in wofull wiſe to playne,
            The ſooner I perſwade my ſelfe
            that you doe nought but fayne.
            The Crocodile by kinde
            a floud of teares doth ſhed
            Yet hath no cauſe of cruell crie
            by craft, this Fiend is led.
            For when the ſiely ſoule
            that ment no hurt at all
            Approcheth néere, the ſlipper ground
            doth giue the beaſt a fall,
            Which is no ſooner done
            but ſtraight the monſter vyle,
            For ſorrow that did wéepe ſo ſore
            for ioy beginnes to ſmyle:
            Euen ſo you men are woont
            by fraude your friends to traine
            And make in wiſe you could not ſléepe
            in carefull Couch for paine:
            When you in déede doe nought
            but take your nightly nap,
            
               
Or hauing ſlept doe ſet your ſnare
            and tylle your guilefull trap.
            Your braynes as buſie bée
            in thinking how to ſnare
            Vs women, as your pillowes ſoft
            and bowlſters pleaſant are.
            As for your dayes delights
            our ſelues can witneſſe well
            To ſundrie women ſundrie tales
            of ſundrie ieſtes you tell:
            And all to win their loues:
            which when you doe attaine
            Within a while you ſhew your kindes
            and giue them vp in plaine.
            A Fawcon is full hard
            amongſt you men to finde,
            For all your maners more agrée
            vnto the Kytiſh kinde:
            For gentle is the one
            and loues his kéepers hande,
            But thother Buſſerdlike doth ſcorne
            on Fawckners fiſt to ſtande.
            For one good turne the one
            a thouſand will requite,
            But vſe the other nere ſo well
            he ſhewth himſelfe a Kite.
            If Creſyd did amiſſe
            the Troian to forſake
            
               
Then Dyom edes did not well
            that did the Ladie take.
            Was neuer woman falſe,
            but man as falſe as ſhée
            And commonly the men doe make
            that women ſlipper bée.
            Wherefore leaue off your plaints
            and take the ſhéete of ſhame
            To ſhrowde your cloking harts from colde
            and fayning browes from blame.
            Yf ſhe that reades this rime,
            be wiſe as I coulde wiſhe,
            She will auoyde the bayted hooke
            that takes the biting fiſhe.
            And ſhoon the lymed twig
            the flying Foule that tyes
            Tis good to feare of crie buſh
            where thréed of thraldome lyes.
         
         
            The Louer exhorteth his Ladie to take time, while time is.
            THough braue your Beautie be
            and feature paſſing faire,
            Such as Apelles to depaint
            might vtterly diſpaire:
            Yet drowſie drouping Age.
            incroching on apace,
            
               
With penſiue Plough will raze your hue
            and Beauties beames deface.
            Wherefore in tender yeares
            how crooked Age doth haſte
            Reuoke to minde, ſo ſhall you not
            your minde conſume in waſte.
            Whilſt that you may, and youth
            in you is freſh and gréene,
            Delight your ſelfe: for yeares to fit
            as fickle flouds are ſéene.
            For water ſlipped by
            may not be callde againe:
            And to reuoke forepaſſed howres
            were labour loſt in vaine.
            Take time whilſt time applies
            with nimble foote it goes:
            Nor to compare with paſſed Prime
            thy after age ſuppoes.
            The holtes that now are hoare,
            both bud and bloume I ſawe:
            I ware a Garlande of the Bryer
            that puts me now in awe.
            The time will be when thou
            that doſte thy Friends defie,
            A colde and crooked Beldam ſhalt
            in lothſome Cabbin lie:
            Nor with ſuch nightlie brawles
            thy poſterne Gate ſhall ſounde,
            
               
Nor Roſes ſtrawde afront thy dore
            in dawning ſhall be founde.
            How ſoone are Corpſes (Lorde)
            with filthie furrowes fild?
            How quickly Beautie, braue of late,
            and ſéemely ſhape is ſpild?
            Euen thou that from thy youth
            to haue bene ſo, wilt ſweare:
            With turne of hand in all thy head
            ſhalt haue graye powdred heare.
            The Snakes with ſhifted ſkinnes
            their lothſome age dooway:
            The Buck doth hang is head on pale
            to liue a longer day.
            Your good without recure
            doth paſſe, receiue the flowre:
            Which if you pluck not from the ſtalke
            will fall within this howre.
         
         
            The Louer wiſheth to be conioyned and faſt linckt with his Ladie neuer to ſunder.
            
               J Reade how Salmacis ſometime with ſight
            On ſodaine looude Cyllenus Sonne, and ſought
            Forthwith with all hir powre and forced might
            Too bring to paſſe hir cloſe conceyued thought:
            Whome as by hap ſhe ſaw in open mead
            She ſude vnto, in hope to haue bene ſpead.
            
               
With ſugred words ſhe wood & ſparde no ſpeach,
            But bourded him with many a pleaſant tale,
            Requeſting him of, ruth to be hir Leach
            For whome ſhe had abid ſuch bitter bale:
            But hée repleate with pride and ſcornefull cheare
            Diſdainde hir earneſt ſute and ſongs to heare.
            Away ſhée went a wofull wretched Wight,
            And ſhrowded hir not farre from thence a ſpace:
            When that at length the ſtripling law in ſight
            No creature there, but all were out of place,
            Hée ſhifts his robes and to the riuer ran,
            And there to bath him bare the Boy began.
            The Nymph in hope as then to haue attainde
            Hir long deſired Loue, retirde to flood
            And in hir armes the naked Noorie ſtrainde:
            Whereat the Boy began to ſtriue a good,
            But ſtrugling nought auailed in that plight
            For why the Nymph ſurpaſt the Boy in might.
            O Gods (quoth tho the Girle) this gift I craue
            This Boy and I may neuer part againe,
            But ſo our corpſes may conioyned haue
            As one we may appeare, not bodies twaine:
            The Gods agreed, the water ſo it wrought,
            As both were one, thy ſelfe would ſo haue thought.
            As from a trée we ſundrie times eſpie.
            A twiſſell grow by Natures ſubtile might,
            And being two, for cauſe they grow ſo nie
            For one are tane, and ſo appeare in ſight.
            
               
So was the Nymph and Noorie ioynde yfere,
            As two no more but one ſelfe thing they were.
            O Ladie mine, howe might we ſeeme ybeſt?
            How friendly mought we Gods account to bée?
            In ſemblant ſort if they woulde bréede my reſt
            By lincking of my carkaſſe vnto thée?
            So that we might no more a ſunder go,
            But limmes to limmes, & corſe to carkaſſe grow?
            O, where is now become that bleſſed Lake
            Wherein thoſe two did bath to both their ioy?
            How might we doe, or ſuch prouiſion make
            To haue the hap as had the Maiden Boy?
            To alter forme and ſhape of either kinde,
            And yet in proufe of both a ſhare to finde?
            Then ſhould our limmes wt louely linck be tide,
            And harts of hate no taſte ſuſtaine at all,
            But both for aye in perfite league abide
            And eche to other liue as friendly thrall:
            That thone might feele the pangues the other had
            And partner be of ought that made him glad.
            O bleſſed Nymph, O. Salmacys I ſaye,
            Would thy good luck vnto hir lot would light
            Whome I imbrace, and louen ſhall for aye,
            By force of flood to chaunge hir nature quight:
            And that I might haue hap as had the Boy
            To neuer part from hir that is my Ioy.
            I would not ſtriue, I would not ſtirre a whit,
            (As did Cyllenus Sunne that ſtately Wight:)
            
               
But well content to be Hermaphrodit,
            
            Would cling as cloſe to thée as ere I might,
            And laugh to thinke my hap ſo good to bée,
            As in ſuch ſort faſt to be linckt with thée.
         
         
            The Louer hoping aſſuredly of attaining his purpoſe, after long ſute, begins to ioy renouncing dolors.
            BE farre from mée you wofull woonted cries,
            Adue Diſpaire, that madſte my hart agries:
            Ye ſobbing ſighes farewel & penſiue plaint,
            Reſigne your roomes to ioy, ye long reſtraint
            Without deſart endurde.
            Reiect thoſe ruthfull Rymes yu (quaking Quill)
            Which both declarde my wo and want of ſkill:
            (Mine eies) that long haue had my Loue in chaſe,
            With teares no more imbrue your Myſtreſſe face
            But to your Springs retyre.
            And thou (my Hart) that long for lark of Grace
            Forepinde haſt bene and in a doolefull caſe,
            Lament no more, let all ſuch gripings go
            As bred thy bale, and nurſt thy cankred wo
            With milke of mournefull Dug.
            To Venus doe your due (you Senſes all)
            And to hir Sonne to whome you are in thrall:
            To Cupid bend thy knée and thankes repay
            That after lingred ſute, and long delay
            Hath brought thy ſhip to ſhore.
            
               
Let crabbed Fortune now expreſſe hir might,
            And doe thy worſt to mée thou ſtinging ſpite:
            My hart is well defenſt againſt your force,
            For ſhe hath vowde on mée to haue remorce
            Whome I haue looude ſo long.
            Henceforth exchaunge thy chéere and wofull voice
            That haſt yfounde ſuch matter to reioice:
            With mirrie quill and pen of pleaſant plight
            Thy bliſfull haps and fortune to endight
            Enforce thy barraine Skull.
         
         
            The Louer to his carefull bed declaring his reſtleſſe ſtate.
            THou that wert earſt a reſtfull place
            doſt now renue my ſmart,
            And woonted eake to ſalue my ſore
            that now increaſeſt wo,
            Vnto my carefull Corſe an eaſe,
            a torment to my hart,
            Once quieter of minde perdie,
            now an vnquiet fo:
            The place ſometime of ſlumbring ſléepe
            wherein I may but wake,
            Drenched in Sea of ſaltiſh brine
            (O bed) I thée forſake.
            ¶No Iſe of Apenynus top
            my flaming fire may quent,
            
               
Ne heate of brighteſt Phoebus beames
            may bate my chillie colde,
            Nought is of ſtately ſtrength ynough
            my ſorrowes to relent,
            But (ſuch is hap) renewed cares
            are added to the olde:
            Such furious fits and fonde affects
            in mée my fanſies make,
            That bathed all in trickling teares
            (O bed) I thée forſake.
            ¶The dreames that daunt my dazed hed
            are pleaſant for a ſpace,
            Whilſt yet I lie in ſlumbring ſléepe
            my carkaſſe feeles no wo,
            For cauſe I ſéeme with claſped armes
            my Louer to imbrace:
            But when I wake, and finde away
            that did delight me ſo,
            Then in comes care to pleaſures place
            that makes my limmes to quake,
            That all beſprent with brackiſh bryne
            (O bed) I thee forſake.
            ¶No ſooner ſtirres Auroras Starre,
            the lighteſt Lampe of all,
            But they that rouſted were in reſt
            not fraught with fearefull dreames,
            Do pack apace to labours left
            and to their taſke doe fall:
            
               
When I awaking all inragde
            doe baine my breaſt with ſtreames,
            And make my ſmokie ſighes to Skies
            their vpwarde way to take,
            Thus with a ſurge of teares bedewde
            (O bed) I thée forſake.
            ¶Thus hurlde from hungrie Hope by Hap
            I die, yet am aliue,
            From pangues of plaint to fits of fume
            my reſtleſſe minde doth runne,
            With rage and fanſie Reaſon fights,
            they altogither ſtriue,
            Reſiſtaunce vayleth naught at all,
            for I am quickly wunne:
            Thus ſéeking reſt no ruth I finde
            that gladſome ioy may make,
            Wherefore conſumde with flowing teares
            (O bed) I thée forſake.
         
         
            ¶ An Epitaph and wofull verſe of the death of ſir Iohn Tregonwell Knight, and learned Doctor of both Lawes
            ANd can you ceaſe from plaint,
            or kéepe your Conduits drie?
            May ſaltiſh brine within your breaſts
            in ſuch a tempeſt lie?
            Where are your ſcalding ſighes
            the fitteſt foode of paine?
            
               
And where are now thy welling teares
            I aſke thée once againe?
            Haſt thou not heard of late
            The loſſe that hath befell?
            If not, my ſelfe (vnhappie Wight)
            will now begin to tell:
            (Though griefe perhaps will grutch,
            and ſtay my foltring tongue)
            From whence this ragged roote of ruth
            and mourning moode is ſprong.
            Was dwelling in this ſhéere
            a man of worthie fame:
            A Iuſticer for his deſart,
            
               Tregonwell was his name.
            A Doctor at the Lawes,
            a Knight among the mo:
            A Cato for good counſell callde
            as he in yeares did grow.
            A Patrone to the poore,
            a Rampire to the reſt:
            As léefe vnto the ſimple ſorte
            as friendly to the beſt.
            No blinde affect his eie
            in iudgement blearde at all:
            Whoſe rightous verdit and decrée
            was quite deuoyde of gall.
            If he in hatefull hartes
            (where roote of rancour grew)
            
               
Of faythfull friendſhip ſéedes might ſow,
            no paines he would eſchew.
            
               Minerua thought of like
            and Nature did conſent,
            To proue in him by ſkilfull Arte
            what eyther could inuent.
            A plot of ſuch a price
            was neuer framde before:
            To ſhow their powre the Heauens had
            
               Tregonwell kept in ſtore.
            The Prince did him imbrace,
            and ſought him to aduaunce,
            And better former ſtate of birth
            by furthering of his chaunce.
            He ſtill was readie bent
            his ſeruice to beſtowe,
            Thereby vnto his natiue ſoyle
            if gratefull gaine might growe.
            If ſage aduiſe were ſcarce
            and wholeſome counſell ſcant,
            Then ſhould you ſée Tregonwels helpe
            ne wiſedome would not want.
            When Legats came from farre
            (as is there woonted guiſe)
            To treate of truce, or talke of warre
            as matters did ariſe:
            
               Tregonwell then was callde
            his verdit to expreſſe:
            
               
Who for the moſt part in the caſe
            of fruitfull things could geſſe.
            Or if himſelfe were ſent
            (which hap Tregonwell had)
            Into a farre and forraine lande,
            then was Tregonwell glad.
            For ſo he might procure
            wealepublick by his paine:
            It was no corſie to this Knight
            long trauaile to ſuſtaine.
            But what? vndaunted death
            that ſéekes to conquer all,
            And Atropos that Goddeſſe ſterne
            at length haue ſpit their gall:
            And reft vs ſuch a one
            as was a Phoenix true,
            Saue that now of his cindrie Corfe
            there riſeth not a nue.
            Where may you ſée his match?
            where ſhall you find his leeke?
            None, though you from the fartheſt Eaſt
            vnto the Ocean ſéeke.
            O houſe without thy head,
            O ſhip without a ſteare:
            Thy Palynurus now is dead
            as ſhortly will appeare.
            In daunger of diſtreſſe
            this Knight was euer woont
            
               
To yéelde himſelfe to perils preſt,
            and bide the greateſt broont.
            No tumults tempeſt could
            ſubdue his conſtant hart:
            Ne would the man by any meanes
            once from his countrie ſtart.
            But (oh) it naught auailes,
            for death doth ſtrike the ſtroke
            In things humaine, no worldly wealth
            his friendſhip may prouoke.
            Let Troians now leaue off
            by mourning to lament
            The loſſe of Priam and his towne,
            when ten yeares warre was ſpent.
            Yée Romaines lay your Hoods
            and black attire away:
            Bewaile no more your Fabians fall
            nor that ſiniſter day
            That reſt a Noble race
            which might haue floriſht long:
            For neither loſſe is like to this
            our not deſerued wrong.
            Now Cornewall thou mayſt crake,
            and Dorſet thou mayſt erie:
            For thone hath bred, and thother loſt
            
               Tregonwell ſodainelie.
            Whoſe corps though earthed bée
            in lothſome lumps of ſoyle,
            
               
His péereleſſe prayſe by vertue woon
            ſhall neuer feare the foyle.
            Who ſo therefore ſhalt ſée
            this Marble where he lies:
            Wiſh that Tregonwels ſoule may finde
            a place aboue the Skies,
            And reach a rowme of reſt
            appointed for the nones:
            For in this Tombe interred is
            but fleſh and bared bones.
         
         
            The Louer confeſſeth himſelfe to be in Loue and enamored of Miſtreſſe. P.
            IF baniſht ſléepe, and watchfull care,
            If minde affright with dreadfull dreames:
            If torments rife, and pleaſure rare,
            If face beſmearde with often ſtreames:
            If chaunge of cheare from ioy to ſmart,
            If altred hue from pale to red:
            If foltring tongue with trembling hart,
            If ſobbing ſighes with furie fed:
            If ſodaine hope by feare oppreſt,
            If feare by hope ſuppreſt againe,
            Be prooues that loue within the breſt
            Hath bound the hart with fanſies chaine:
            Then I of force no longer may
            In couert kéepe my pierſing flame,
            
               
Which euer doth it ſelfe bewray
            But yeelde my ſelfe to fanſies frame.
            And now in fine to be a thrall
            To hir that hath my hart in Gyue,
            Shée may enforce me riſe or fall
            Till Death my limmes of life depriue.
            
               P. with hir beautie hath bereft
            My fréedome from my thralled minde,
            And with hir louing lookes ycleft
            My reaſon through both Barke and Rinde.
            Yet well therewith I am content
            In minde to take it paciently,
            Since ſure I am ſhe will relent
            And not enforce hir Friende to die.
            So I in recompence may haue
            Naught but a faithfull hart againe:
            Then other friendſhip nill I craue,
            But think my loue ylent to gaine.
         
         
            That all things haue releaſe of paine ſaue the Louer, that hoping and dreading neuer taketh eaſe.
            WHat ſo the Golden Sunne
            beholdes with blazing light,
            When paine is paſt hath time to take
            his comfort and delight.
            The Oxe with lumpiſh pace
            and leaſure that doth drawe,
            
               
Hath reſpite after toyle is paſt
            to fill his emptie mawe.
            The lolearde Aſſe that beares
            the burden on his back.
            His dutie done to ſtable plods,
            and reacheth to the rack.
            The Déere hath woonted ſoyle
            his feruent heate to ſwage:
            When woorke hath ende to reſpite runnes
            the Peaſant and the Page.
            The Owle that hates the day
            and loues to flée by night,
            Hath queachie buſhes to defende
            him from Apollos ſight.
            Eche Cunnie hath a Caue,
            eche little Foule a Neſt
            To ſhrowde them in at néedefull times
            to take their néedefull reſt.
            Thus vewing courſe of kinde
            it is not on the grounde,
            That at ſome time doth not reſort
            where is his comfort founde:
            Saue me (O curſed man)
            whome neither Sunne ne ſhade
            Doth ſerue the burthen of my breaſt
            and ſorrowes to vnlade.
            Eche ſport porcures my ſmart,
            eche ſeemely ſight annoy:
            
               
Eche pleaſant tune torments mine eaſe
            and reaues my hoped ioy.
            No Muſick ſoundes ſo ſwéete
            as doth the doolefull Drum,
            For ſomewhat neare vnto my ſmart
            that mournefull ſounde doth cum.
            A Gally ſlaue I ſéeme
            vnto my ſelfe to bée:
            The Mayſter that doth guide the ſhip
            hath neare an eie to ſée.
            You know where ſuch a one
            as Cupid is doth ſteare,
            Amid the Goulfe of déepe diſpaire
            great perill muſt appeare.
            In ſteade of ſtreaming ſayles
            hee Wiſſhes hanges aloft:
            Which if in tempeſt chaunce to teare
            the Barck will come to nought.
            For winde are ſcalding ſighes
            and ſecret ſobbings preſt:
            Mixt with a cloude of ſtormie teares
            to baine the Louers breſt.
            Though Cupid neare ſo well
            his beaten Barck doe guie,
            By fléeing flats and ſinking ſandes
            that in the wallow lie:
            Yet thoſe that are a boorde
            muſt euer ſtande in awe,
            
               
For cauſe a Buſſard is their guide
            not forcing any flawe:
            That followes none aduice,
            but bluntly runnes on hed,
            As proude as Peacock ouer thoſe
            that in his chaine or led.
            Thus may you plainely ſée
            that eche thing hath releaſe
            Of penſiue paine, ſaue Cupids thralls
            whoſe torments aye increaſe.
         
         
            A poore Ploughman to a Gentleman, for whome he had taken a little paines.
            YOur Culter cuts the ſoyle that earſt was ſowne
            Your Harueſt was forereaped long agoe,
            Your Sickle ſheares the Medowe yt was mowne,
            Ere you the toyle of Tilmans trade did knowe:
            Good fayth you are beholding to the man
            That ſo for you your huſbandrie began.
            Hee craues of you no Siluer for his Séede,
            Ne doth demaunde a penny for his Graine,
            But if you ſtande at any time in néede,
            (Good Maiſter) be as bolde with him againe.
            You can not doe a greater pleaſure than
            To chooſe you ſuch a one to be your man.
         
         
            
            To his Friende: P. of courting, trauailing, Dyſing, and Tenys.
            
               TO liue in Court among the Crue is care,
               Is nothing there but dayly diligence,
               Nor Cap nor Knée, nor money muſt thou ſpare,
               The Prince his Haule is place of great expence.
            
            
               In rotten ribbed Barck to paſſe the Seas
               The forraine landes and ſtraungie ſites to ſée,
               Doth daunger dwell: the paſſage bréedes vneaſe,
               Not ſafe the ſoyle, the men vnfriendly bée.
            
            
               Admit thou ſée the ſtraungeſt things of all?
               When eie is turnde the pleaſant ſight is gone:
               The treaſure then of trauaile is but ſmall,
               Wherefore (Friende P.) let all ſuch toyes alone.
            
            
               To ſhake the bones, and cog the craftie Dice,
               To Carde in care of ſodaine loſſe of Pence,
               Vnſéemely is, and taken for a vice:
               Vnlawfull play can haue no good pretence.
            
            
               Too band the Ball doth cauſe ye Coine to waſt,
               It melts as Butter doth againſt the Sunne,
               Naught ſaue thy paine, whē play doth ceaſe, yt haſt:
               Too ſtudie then is beſt when all is donne.
               For ſtudie ſtayes and brings a pleaſant gaine,
               When play doth paſſe as glare wt guſhing raine.
            
         
         
            
            The Louer declares that vnleſſe he vtter his ſorrowes by ſute, of force he dyeth.
            LYke as the Gunne that hath to great a charge,
            And Pellet to the Powder ramde ſo ſore,
            As neyther of both hath powre to go at large,
            Till ſhiuerd flawes in ſounding Skies doe rore:
            Euen ſo my carefull breaſt that fraughted is
            With Cupids ware, & cloide with lurcking Loue,
            Vnleſſe I ſhoulde diſcloſe my drerinis,
            And out of hande my troubled thoughts remoue:
            A ſunder woulde my cumbred Carcaſſe flee,
            The hart would breake the ouercharged Chace
            Of penſiue breaſt, and you (my Loue) ſhould ſée
            Your faythfull Friende in lamentable caſe.
            Wherefore doe what you may in gentle wyes
            The Gunner to aſſiſt in time of neede,
            And when you ſee the Pellet pierce the Skyes,
            And Powder make a proufe of hidden gleede:
            Rue on his caſe, and ſéeke to quite his wo,
            Leaſt in ſhort time his Gunne too péeces go.
         
         
            The Louer to a Friende that wrote him this ſentence. Yours aſsured to the death.
            
            
               O Faithfull Friend thriſe happy was the fiſt
            In ſo few words to ſuch effect that wrought:
            
               
O friendly hart a thouſand folde ybliſt
            That hath conceiude ſo iuſt and ioyful thought,
            As not till death from pawned loue to bende
            But Friend at firſt and Frind to be at ende.
            Wherfore to counteruaile thoſe woords of thine,
            And quit thy loue with faithfull hart againe,
            I vow that I will neuer once decline
            A foote from that I am for loſſe or gaine:
            If thou be mine till death, I the aſſure
            To be thy Friend as long as life ſhall dure.
            
         
         
            Of certaine Flowers ſent him by his Loue vpon ſuſpicion of chaunge
            YOur Flowers for their hue
            were freſh and faire to ſee:
            Yet was your meaning not ſo true
            as you it thought to bée.
            In that you ſent me Bame,
            I iudge you ment thereby,
            That cleane extinct was all my flame
            from whence no ſparckes did flie.
            Your Fenell did declare
            (as ſimple men can ſhow)
            That flattrie in my breaſt I bare
            where friendſhip ought to grow.
            A Dayſie doth expreſſe
            great follie to remaine,
            
               
I ſpeake it not by roate or geſſe,
            your meaning was ſo plaine.
            Roſemarie put in minde
            that Bayes weare out of thought:
            And Loueinydle came behinde
            for Loue that long was ſought.
            Your Cowſlips did portende
            that care was layde away:
            And Eglantyne did make an ende
            where ſwéete with ſower lay:
            As though the leaues at furſt
            were ſwéete when Loue began:
            But now in proofe the pricks were curſt,
            and hurtfull to the Man.
         
         
            The Aunſwere to the ſame.
            PErdie I néede no Bame
            ne forced heate by charme,
            To ſet my burning breaſt in flame
            whom Cupids gleames doe warme,
            On Bayes is my delight,
            Remembrance is not paſt:
            Though Dayſie hit the nayle aright,
            my Friendſhip aye ſhall laſt.
            Though Loue in ydle bée,
            yet will I not forgoe
            Ne caſt off care as you ſhall ſée,
            and time the trouth ſhall ſhowe.
            
               
So I may taſte the ſwéete,:
            I force not on the ſowre
            The more is ioy when Friends doe méete,
            that Fortune earſt did lowre.
            Your Fenell failed quight
            where ſuch good fayth is ment:
            For Bayes are onely my delight
            though I for Bayes be ſhent.
         
         
            Of a Foxe that woulde eate no Grapes.
            BY fortune came a Foxe,
            where grue a loftie Vine,
            I will no Grapes (quoth hée)
            this yarde is none of mine:
            The Foxe would none bicauſe that hée
            Perceiude the highneſſe of the Trée.
            ¶ So men that Forlie are,
            and long their luſt to haue,
            But cannot come thereby,
            make wiſe they would not craue:
            Thoſe ſubtill Marchants will no Wine
            Bicauſe they cannot reach the Vine.
         
         
            Of the ſtraunge countenaunce of an aged Gentlewoman.
            JT makes me laugh a good to ſée thée lowre,
            and long to looken ſad:
            
               
For when thy crabbed countnance is ſo ſowre,
            thou art to ſéeming glad.
            I blame not thée but nature in his caſe,
            That might beſtowde on thee a better grace.
         
         
            To the Rouing Pyrat.
            THou winſte thy wealth by warre
            vngodly way to gaine:
            And in an houre thy ſhip is ſunck
            goods drownde, the Pirat ſlaine.
            The Gunne is all thy truſt,
            it ſerues thy cruell fo
            Then brag not on thy Canon ſhot
            As thought there were no mo.
         
         
            Of one that had little Wit.
            
               J Thée aduiſe
            If thou be wiſe
            To kéepe thy wit
            Though it be ſmall:
            Tis rare to get
            And farre to fet,
            Twas euer yit
            Dearſte ware of all.
         
         
            In commendation of Wit.
            
               Wit farre excéedeth wealth,
            
               Wit Princely pompe excels,
            
               Wit better is than Beauties beames
            Where Pride and Daunger dwels.
            
               Wit matcheth Kingly Crowne,
            
               Wit maiſters Witleſſe rage:
            
               
               Wit rules the fonde affects of youth,
            
               Wit guides the ſteps of Age.
            
               Wit wants no Reaſons ſkill
            a faithfull Friend to know:
            
               Wit wotes full well the way to voide
            the ſmooth and fléering fo.
            
               Wit knowes what beſt becommes
            and what vnſéemely ſhowes:
            
               Wit hath a wile to ware the worſt,
            
               Wit all good faſhion knowes:
            Since Wit by wiſedome can
            doe this and all the reſt,
            That I imploy my painefull head
            to come by Wit is beſt.
            Whome if I might attaine,
            then Wit and I were one:
            But till time Wit and I doe cope,
            I ſhall be poſt alone.
         
         
            An aunſwere in diſpraiſe of Wi
            THe Wit you ſo commend
            with wealth cannot compare:
            For wealth is able Wit to win
            when Wit is waxen bare.
            
               Wit hath no Beauties beames,
            to Kingly crowne it yeeldes:
            
               Wit ſubiect is to wilfull rage,
            Rage Wit and Reaſon wéeldes.
            
               
               Wit rules not witleſſe youth,
            nor aged ſteps doth guide:
            
               Wit knowes not how to win a friende,
            
               Wit is ſo full of pride.
            
               Wit wots not how to flie
            the ſmooth and flattering geſt:
            
               Wit cannot well diſcerne the thing
            that doth become it beſt.
            
               Wit hath no wyle to ware
            miſhap before it fall,
            
               Wit knowes not what good faſhion meanes,
            
               Wit can doe naught at all.
            Since Wit by wiſdome can
            doe nothing as you wéene,
            If you doe toyle to come by Wit,
            
            then are you ouer ſéene.
            Whome when you doe attaine,
            though Wit and you ſéeme one:
            Yet Wit will to another when
            your back is turnde and gone.
         
         
            The Louer to Cupid for mercie, declaring how firſt he became his thrall, with the occaſion of his defiyng Loue, and now at laſt what cauſed him to conuert.
            
               O Mightie Lorde of Loue
            Dame Venus onely ioy,
            
               
Whoſe Princely powre doth farre ſurmount
            all other heauenly Roy:
            I that haue ſwarude thy lawes
            and wandred farre aſtray:
            Haue now retyrde to thée againe
            thy ſtatutes to obay.
            And ſo thou wouldſt vouchſafe
            to let me pleade for grace:
            I would before thy Barre declare
            a ſielie Louers caſe.
            I would depaint at full
            how firſt I was thy man:
            And ſhow to that what was the cauſe
            that I from Cupid ran.
            And how I haue ſince that
            yſpent my wéerie time:
            As I ſhall tell, ſo thou ſhalt here
            declarde in doolefull rime.
            In gréene and tender age
            (my Lorde) till .xvij. yeares,
            I ſpent my time as fitted youth
            in Schole among my Féeares
            As then no Bearde at all
            was growne vpon my Chin,
            Which well approoude that mans eſtate
            I was not entred in.
            I neede not tell the names
            of Authors which I read,
            
               
Of Proes and Verſe we had inough
            to fine the dulleſt head.
            But I was chiefly bent
            to Poets famous Art,
            To them with all my deuor I
            my ſtudie did conuert.
            Where when I had with ioy
            yſpent my time a while:
            The reaſt refuſde, I gaue me whole
            to Naſos Noble ſtile.
            Whoſe volumes when I ſaw
            with pleaſant ſtories fright:
            In him (I ſay) aboue the reſt
            I laide my whole delight.
            What ſhould I here reherſe
            with baſe and barraine Pen,
            The lincked tales and filed ſtuffe
            that I pervſed then?
            In fine it was my loare
            vpon that part to light
            Wherein he teacheth youth to loue,
            and women win by ſlight
            Which Treatiſe when I had
            with iudging eie ſuruayde:
            At laſt I found thy Godly kynde
            and Princely powre diſplayde.
            Of Cupid all that Booke
            and of his raigne did ring,
            
               
The Poet there of Venus did
            in ſugred Dittie ſing.
            There read I of thy ſhafts
            and of thy golden Bow,
            Thy ſhafts which by their diuers heads
            their diuers kindes did ſhow.
            I ſaw how by thy force
            thou madeſt men to ſtoope:
            And griſely Gods by ſecret ſlight
            and Deuiliſh Imps to droope.
            There were depainted plaine
            thy quick and quiuer wings,
            And what ſo elſe doth touch thy powre
            there Ouid ſwéetely ſings.
            There I thy Conqueſts ſawe
            and many a noble ſpoile:
            With names annexed to the ſame
            of ſuch as had the foile.
            There Matrones marcht along
            and Maydens in their Roe,
            Both Faunes and Satyrs there I ſaw
            with Neptuns troupe alſo.
            With other thouſands elſe
            which Naſo there doth write,
            But not my Pen or barraine Skull
            is able to recite.
            O mightie Prince (quoth I)
            of ſuch a fearefull force,
            
               
How bleſt were I, ſo thou of mée
            wouldſt daine to take remorce?
            And chooſe mée for thy thrall
            among the reſt to bee,
            That liue in hope and ſerue in truſt
            as waged men to thée?
            With that (thy Godhead knowes)
            thou gauſte a freindly looke:
            And (though vnwoorthie ſuch a place)
            mée to thy ſeruice tooke.
            In token I was thine
            I had a badge of Blue
            With Sabels ſet, and charge withall
            that I ſhould aye be true.
            Thou badſte me follow Hope
            who tho thy Enſigne bare.
            And ſo I might not doe amiſſe,
            thus didſt thy ſelfe declare.
            Then who reioyſt but I?
            who thought himſelfe ybliſt?
            That was in Cupids ſeruice plaſte
            as brauely as the beſt?
            And thus in luſtie youth
            I grue to be your thrall,
            And was (I witneſſe of thy Dame)
            right well content withall.
            But now I minde to ſhewe
            (as promiſſe was to doe)
            
               
How firſt I fled thy Tents, and why
            thy campe I did forgoe.
            When I had bene retainde
            well nigh a yeare or more,
            And ſerude in place of wage and méede
            as is the Souldiars lere:
            I chaunſt by hap to caſt
            my floting eies awrie,
            And ſo a Dame of paſſing ſhape
            my fortune was to ſpie.
            On whome Dame Nature thought
            ſuch beautie to beſtowe,
            As ſhe had neuer framde before
            as proufe did plainely ſhowe.
            On hir I gazde a while
            till vſe of ſenſe was fled:
            And colour Paper white before
            was woxen Scarlet red.
            I felt the kindled ſparkes
            to flaſhing flames to growe:
            And ſo on ſodaine I did loue
            the Wight I did not knowe.
            Then to thy Pallace I
            with frowarde foote did run,
            And what I ſaide, I mynde it yet,
            for thus my tale begun.
            O Noble Sir (quoth I)
            is this your free aſſent
            
               
I ſhould purſue a Game vnknowne
            within your ſtately Tent?
            If ſo (quoth I) thou wilt,
            and giuſte the ſame in charge:
            I mynde of all my brydled luſt
            to let the Raynes at large.
            Then (Hope) did prick mée forth
            and bad mee be of chéere:
            Who ſaid I ſhould within a while
            ſubdue my Noble Feere.
            He counſelde mee to ſhun
            no dreadfull daungers place,
            But follow him who Banner bore
            vnto your Noble grace.
            He would maintaine my right
            and further aye my cauſe,
            And banniſh all diſpaire that grewe
            by frowarde fortunes flawes.
            Tis Cupids will (quoth hée)
            our Maiſter and our Lorde
            That thou with manly hart and hand
            ſhouldſt lay the Barck aborde.
            She ſhall not chooſe but yéelde
            the fruite for paſſed paines:
            For ſhée is one of Cupids thralls,
            and bound in Venus Chaines.
            Thinkſt thou our maiſter will
            his ſeruant liue in woe?
            
               
No not for all his golden Darts
            ne yet his crooked Bowe.
            Wherefore with luckie Mart
            giue charge vnto the Wight:
            Take Speare in hande, and Targe on arme,
            and doe with courage fight.
            With that, I armde me well
            as fits a warring man,
            And to the place of friendly fight
            with luſtie foote I ran.
            My Foe was there before
            I came vnto the fielde,
            I thought Bellona had bene there
            or Pallas with hir ſhielde.
            So well ſhée was beſet
            with Plate and priuie Maile,
            As for my life my limber Launce
            might not a whit preuaile.
            Yet naytheleſſe with Speare
            and Shielde, we fought a ſpace:
            But laſt of all we tooke our Bowes
            and Arrowes from the caſe.
            Then Dartes we gan to ſling
            in wide and weightleſſe Skies:
            And then the fierceſt fight of all
            and combat did ariſe.
            In ſtead of ſhiuering ſhafts,
            light louing lookes we caſt,
            
               
And there I founde my ſelfe too weake
            hir Arrowes went ſo faſt.
            But one aboue the reaſt
            did cleaue my breaſt ſo farre,
            As downe it went, where lay my hart,
            and there it gaue a iarre.
            So cruell was the ſtroke,
            ſo ſodaine eke the wounde,
            As by the fearefull force I fell
            into a ſenſeleſſe ſounde.
            Thus hauing no refuge
            to quite my ſelfe from death:
            I made a vowe to loue hir well
            whilſt Lungs ſhould lende me breath.
            And ſince that time I haue
            endeuorde with my might
            To win hir loue, but nought preuailes
            ſhée wayes it not a Mite.
            Shée ſkornes my yéelding hart,
            not forcing on my Heſt:
            But by diſdaine of cloudy browe
            doth further my vnreſt.
            Yet ruthleſſe though ſhée were,
            and farſed full of yre:
            I looude hir well as hart coulde think,
            or woman might deſire.
            I ſought to frame my ſpeach
            and countnance in ſuch ſort,
            
               
As ſhée my couert hart myght ſée
            by ſhewe of outwarde port.
            To Troilus halfe ſo true
            vnto his Creſide was
            As I to hir, who for hir face
            did Troiane Creſide paſſe.
            At length, when Reaſon ſaw
            mée ſotted ſo in loue
            As I ne would, ne might at all
            my fanſie thence remoue:
            Shée cauſde hir Trumpe be blowne
            to cyte hir ſeruants all
            Into the place, by whoſe aduiſe
            I might be rid from thrall.
            Then Plato firſt appearde
            with ſage and ſolemne ſawes:
            And in his hand a golden booke
            of good and gréekiſh lawes
            Whoſe honnie mouth ſuch wiſe
            and weightie wordes did tell:
            Gainſt thee and all thy troupe at once
            as Reaſon likte it well.
            When Platoes tale was done,
            then Tullie preſt in place:
            Whoſe filed tongue with ſugred talke
            would good a ſimple caſe.
            With open mouth I heard
            and Iawes yſtrecht a wyde,
            
               
How he gainſt Venus dearlings all
            and Cupids captiues cryde.
            Then Plutarch gan to preach
            and by examples proue,
            That thouſand miſchiefes were procurde
            by meane of guilefull loue.
            Whole Cities brought to ſpoyle,
            and Realmes to ſhamefull ſack:
            Where Kings and Rulers good aduice
            by meane of Loue did lack?
            Next Plutarch, Senec came
            ſeuere in all his ſawes:
            Who cleane defide your wanton tricks,
            and ſcornde your childiſh lawes.
            I néede not name the reaſt
            that ſtoode as then in place:
            But thouſandes more there were that ſought
            your Godhead to deface.
            When all the Hall was huſht,
            and Sages all had donne:
            Then Reaſon that in iudgement ſate
            hir ſkilfull talke begonne.
            Gramercie Friends (quoth ſhee)
            your counſell lykes me well:
            But now lend eare to Reaſons wordes
            and liſten what I tell.
            What madneſſe may be more
            than ſuch a Lorde to haue,
            
               
Who makes the chieftaine of his bande
            a ruke and raſkall ſlaue?
            Who woonted is to yeelde
            in recompence of paine,
            A ragged recompence God w
                  •
               te
            that turnes to méere diſdaine?
            Who gladly would enſue
            a Conduct that is blinde?
            Or thrall himſelfe to ſuch a one
            as ſhewes himſelfe vnkinde?
            What Ploughman would be glad
            to ſowe his ſéede for gaine,
            And reape when Harueſt time comes on
            but trauaile for his paine?
            What madman might endure
            to watch and warde for nought?
            To ride, to runne, and laſt to looſe
            the recompence he ſought?
            To waſte the day in wo,
            and reſtleſſe night in care,
            And haue in ſtead of better foode
            but ſobbing for his fare?
            To bleare his eies with brine
            and ſalted teares yſhead:
            To force his fainting fleſh to fade,
            his colour pale and dead?
            And to foredoe with carke
            his wretched witherde hart?
            
               
And ſo to bréede his bitter bale
            and hatch his deadly ſmart?
            I ſpeake it to this fine,
            that plainely might appere
            
               Cupidos craft and guilefull guiſe
            to him that ſtandeth here.
            Whoſe eies with fanſies miſt
            and errors cloudes are dim,
            By meane that hée in Venus Lake
            and Cupids goulfe doth ſwim.
            And hath by ſodaine ſight
            of vnacquainted ſhape
            So fixt his hart, as hope is paſt
            for euer to eſcape.
            Vnleſſe to theſe my wordes
            a liſtning eare hée lende:
            Which oft art woont the Louers minde
            and fanſie to offende.
            But he that would his health
            ſowre Sirops muſt aſſay:
            For erie griefe hath cure againe
            by cleane repugnaunt way.
            And who ſo mindes to quite
            and rid himſelfe from wo,
            Muſt ſéeke in time for to remoue
            the thing that hurtes him ſo.
            For longer that it laſtes
            it frets the farder in
            
               
Vntill it growe to cureleſſe maine
            by paſſing fell and ſkin.
            The Pyne that beares his head
            vp to the haughtie Skie,
            Would well haue béene remooude at firſt
            as daylie proofe doth trie:
            Which now no force of man
            nor engine may ſubuart:
            So wyde the créeping rootes are run
            by Natures ſubtile Art:
            So Loue by ſlender ſleight
            and little paine at furſt
            Would haue béene ſtopt, but hardly now
            though thou wouldſt doe thy wurſt,
            The woonted ſaw is true,
            ſhun Loue, and Loue will flée,
            But follow Loue and ſpite thy noſe
            then Loue will follow thée.
            And though ſuch graffed thoughts
            on ſodaine may not die,
            Ne be forgone: yet proceſſe ſhall
            their farther grouth deſtrie.
            No Giaunt for his lyfe
            can cleaue a knarrie Oke,
            Though he would ſéeke to doe his wurſt
            and vtmoſt at a ſtroke:
            But let the meaneſt man
            haue ſpace to ſell him downe,
            
               
And he will make him bende his head
            and bring his boughes to grownde.
            No force of falling ſhowre
            can pierce the Marble ſtone,
            As will the often drops of raine
            that from the gutters gone.
            Wherefore thou retchleſſe man
            my counſell with the mo
            Is, that thou péecemeale doe expell
            the loue that paines thée ſo.
            Renounce the place where ſhée
            doth make ſoiourne and ſtay:
            Force not hir trayning truthleſſe eies,
            but turne thy face away.
            Thinke that the hurtfull hooke
            is couerde with ſuch baite:
            And that in ſuch a pleaſant plot
            the Serpent lurcks in waite.
            Waie well hir ſcornefull chéere,
            and think ſhée ſeekes thy ſpoile:
            And though thy conqueſt were atchiude
            may not acquite thy toile:
            Not ydle ſée thou bee,
            take aye ſome charge in hande:
            And quickly ſhalt thou quench the flame
            of careleſſe Cupids brande.
            For what (I pray you) bred
            
               Aegiſthus fowle defame?
            
               
And made him ſpoken of ſo yll?
            what put him to the ſhame?
            What forcde the Foole to loue.
            his beaſtly ydle lyfe
            Was cauſe that he beſotted was
            of Agamemnons Wyfe.
            If he had fought in field
            encountring with his Foe,
            On ſtately ſtéede, or elſe on foote
            with glaue had giuen the bloe:
            If he that Lecher lewde
            had warlick walles aſſailde
            With Cannon ſhot, or bownſing Ram
            his fenced enmies quailde:
            He had not felt ſuch force
            of vile and beaſtly ſin,
            
               Cupidos ſhafts had fallen ſhort
            if he had buſie bin.
            What Myrrha made to loue,
            or Byblos to deſire
            To quench the heate of hungrie luſt
            and flames of filthy fire?
            What Canace enforcde
            to frie with frantick brands,
            In ſort as vp to yéeld hir ſelfe
            vnto hir brothers hands?
            And others thouſand mo
            of whome the Poets wright?
            
               
Nought elſe (good fayth) but for they had
            in ydle thoughts delight.
            They ſpent their youthfull yeares
            in foule and filthie trade,
            They buſied not their ydle braines
            but God of Pleaſure made.
            Wherefore if thou (I ſay)
            doſt couet to auoyde
            That bedlam Boyes deceitfull Bowe
            that others hath anoyde:
            Eſchewe the ydle lyfe,
            flée, flée from doing nought:
            For neuer was there ydle braine
            but bred an ydle thought.
            And when thoſe ſtormes are paſt
            and cloudes remooude away:
            I know thou wilt on (Reaſon) think
            and minde the words I ſay.
            Which are:Diſcomodities of Loue. that Loue is roote
            and onely crop of care,
            The bodies foe, the harts annoy,
            and cauſe of pleaſures rare.
            The ſickneſſe of the minde,
            the Fountaine of vnreſt:
            The goulfe of guile, the pit of paine,
            of griefe the hollow Cheſt.
            A fierie froſt, a flame
            that frozen is with Iſe,
            
               
A heauie burden light to beare,
            a Vertue fraught with Vice.
            It is a Warlike peace,
            a ſafetie ſet in dred,
            A deepe diſpaire annext to hope,
            a famine that is fed.
            Sweete poyſon for his taſte,
            a Porte Charybdis léeke,
            A Scylla for his ſafetie thought,
            a Lyon that is méeke.
            And (by my Crowne I ſweare)
            the longer thou doſt loue,
            The longer ſhalt thou liue a Thrall
            as tract of time will proue.
            Wherefore retire in haſte
            and ſpéede thée home againe,
            And pardned ſhall thy treſpaſſe bée,
            and thou exempt from paine.
            Take Reaſon for thy guide
            as thou haſt done of yore:
            And ſpite of Loue thou ſhalt not loue
            ne be a thrall no more.
            Repaire to Platos ſchoole,
            and Tullies true aduice:
            Let Plutarch be and Seneca
            
            thy teachers to be wiſe.
            This long and learned tale
            had brooſed ſo my braine:
            
               
As I forthwith to reaſon ran,
            and gaue thee vp in plaine.
            Fie, fie on Loue quoth I,
            I now perceiue his craft:
            For Reaſon hath declarde at large
            how hee my fréedome raft,
            I ſée his promiſe is
            farre fayrer than his paie:
            I finde how Cupid blearde mine eies,
            and made me run aſtraie.
            I wote how hungrie Hope
            hath led mée by the lip,
            And made mée mooue an endleſſe ſute
            well worth an Oken chip.
            Hée trainde mée all by truſt,
            I farde as Hounde at hatch:
            The leſſer fruite I founde, the more
            I was procurde to watch.
            Thus (mightie Lorde) I left
            thy lawes and ſtatutes ſtrong
            For rayling Reaſons trifling talke,
            and offerd thée a wrong.
            But now Dame Venus knowes,
            and thou hir ſonne canſt tell
            That I within my couert hart
            doe loue thée paſſing well.
            Now fully bent to be
            (ſo thou wilt cleane put out
            
               
Of mind my paſſed iniuries)
            thy man and Souldier ſtout:
            Preſt to obey thy will
            and neuer ſwarue againe,
            As long as Venus is of force
            and thou ſhalt kéepe thy Raigne.
            I weigh not Tullies tale,
            ne prating Platos talke:
            Let Plutarch vouch what Plutarch can,
            let ſkuruey Senec walke.
            Olde Ouid will I reade,
            whoſe pleaſant wit doth paſſe
            The reaſt, as farre as ſtubborne Stéele
            excells the brittle Glaſſe.
            In him thy déedes of Armes
            and manly Marts appéere,
            In him thy ſtately ſpoyles are ſéene
            as in a Mirrour cléere.
            Thy mothers prayſe and thine
            in him are to be founde,
            For conqueſtes which you had in Heauen
            and here bylow on grounde.
            Forgiue my former guilt,
            forget my paſſed toyes:
            And graunt I may aſpire againe
            vnto my woonted ioyes.
            If euer man did loue
            or ſerue in better ſtoode,
            
               
Then ſhape my wageſſe to the ſame
            and doe reſtraine my meede.
            But ſo I fight in fielde
            as fiercely as the beſt:
            I hope that then your Godhead will
            reward me with the reſt.
         
         
            After miſaduentures come good haps.
            
               J Neuer thought but this that luck in fine
            Would to my will and fanſie well incline.
            For dayly proofe doth make an open ſhow
            That commen courſe of things would haue it ſo.
            When ſtormie clouds from darkned ſkyes are fled,
            Then Phoebus ſhewes his gay and golden hed.
            His princely pride appeares whē ſhowres are paſt,
            And after day the night enſues as faſt.
            When winter hath his trembling carkas ſhowne,
            And wt his froſtie foote the ſpring downe throwne,
            Then in leapes Aeſtas gay with gladſome gleames
            That Harueſt brings & dries vp winter ſtreames.
            The Barck that broylde in rough & churliſh Seas
            At length doth reach a Port and place of eaſe.
            The wailefull warre in time doth yéelde to peace,
            The Larums lowde & Trūpets ſound doth ceaſe:
            Thus may we ſée that chaunce is full of chaunge.
            And Fortune feedes on foode that is full ſtraunge,
            
               
Wherefore doe not diſpaire thou louing Wight,
            For Seas doe ebbe and flow by Natures might:
            From worſe to good our haps are chaunged oft,
            And baſeſt things ſometimes are rayſde aloft.
            So Gods would haue, and Fortune doth agree,
            Which proufe appéeres and is expreſt by mée.
         
         
            To his Loue that controlde his Dogge for fawning on hir.
            JN deede (my Deare) you wrong my Dog in this
            And ſhew your ſelfe to be of crabbed kinde,
            That will not let my fawning Whelp to kiſſe
            Your fiſt, ye faine would ſhew his Maiſters minde:
            A Maſtife were more fit for ſuch a one,
            That can not let hir Louers Dog alone.
            He in his kinde for mée did ſéeme to ſue,
            That earſt did ſtande ſo highly in your grace,
            His Maiſters minde the wittie Spanell knewe,
            And thought his woonted Miſtreſſe was in place:
            But now at laſt (good faith) I plainly ſée
            That Dogs more wiſe than Women friendly bée.
            Wherefore ſince you ſo cruelly entreate
            My Whelp, not forcing of his fawning chéere,
            You ſhew your ſelfe with pride to be repleate,
            And to your Friend your Nature doth appéere:
            The Prouerbe olde is verifide in you,
            Loue mée and loue my Dog, and ſo adue,
            
               
Both I and he that ſiely Beaſt ſuſtaine
            For louing well and bearing faithfull harts,
            Deſpitous checks, and rigorous diſdaine,
            Where both haue well deſerued for our parts,
            For Friendſhip I, for offred ſeruice hée,
            And yet thou neyther loouſte the Dog nor mée.
         
         
            Vpon the death of the aforenamed Dame Elizabeth Arhundle of Cornewall.
            WHat Tongue can tell the wo?
            what Pen expreſſe the plaint?
            Vnleſſe the Muſes helpe at néede
            I féele my wits to faint.
            Yée that frequent the hilles
            and higheſt Holtes of all,
            Aſſiſt mée with your ſkilfull Quilles
            and liſten when I call.
            And Phoebus, thou that ſitſt
            amidſt the learned route,
            Doo way thy Bowe, and reach thy Lute
            and ſay to ſounde it oute.
            Helpe (learned Pallas) helpe
            to write the fatall fall
            Of hir, whoſe lyfe deſerues to be
            a Mirrour to vs all.
            Whoſe Parents were of fame
            as Leyſter well can ſhowe:
            
               
Where they in worſhip long had liude,
            with yeares did worſhip growe.
            Of worſhip was the houſe
            from whence ſhée tooke hir line:
            And ſhe a Dannat by diſcent
            to worſhip did incline.
            What néede I pen the prayſe
            of hir that liude ſo well.
            That of it ſelfe doth yéelde a ſounde,
            we néede not ring the Bell.
            Whilſt Dannat did enſue
            
               Diana in the race,
            A truer Nymph than Dannat was
            was neuer earſt in place.
            With Beautie ſo adreſt
            with Vertue ſo adornde:
            Was none that more imbraſte the good.
            nor at the wicked ſcornde.
            When fléeing Fame with Trumpe
            and blaſted brute had brought
            This Dannats thewes to courtlike eares
            (which Dannat neuer ſought)
            To Court ſhe was procurde
            on Princeſſe to attende
            A ſeruice fit for ſuch a one
            hir flowring yeares to ſpende.
            Where when ſhe had remainde
            and ſerude the Princeſſe well,
            
               
Not raſhly but with good aduice
            to Iunos yoke ſhe fell.
            A Woulfe by hap eſpide
            this ſielie Lambe in place,
            And thought hir fitteſt for his pray:
            not gaſtly was his face,
            Not Woulflike were his eies,
            ne harriſh was his voice:
            Nor ſuch as Lambes might feare to heare
            but rather might reioice.
            A hart not bent to hate
            or yeelding pray to ſpill:
            Vnto Licaon farre vnlike
            whoſe pleaſure was to kill.
            
               Arhundle was his name,
            his ſtock of great diſcent:
            Whoſe predeceſſors all their liues
            in Vertues path had ſpent.
            Hée not vnlike the reſt
            behaude himſelfe ſo well,
            As he in fine became a Knight,
            ſo to his ſhare it fell.
            Thus was this Ladie faſt
            conioynde in ſacred knot:
            Whoſe prime and tender yeares were ſpent
            deuoyde of ſlaunders blot.
            The match no ſooner made,
            when mariage rites were donne;
            
               
But Dannat ranne hir race as right
            as ſhée hir courſe begonne.
            And ſooth it is, ſhee liude
            in wiuely bond ſo well,
            As ſhe from Collatinus wife
            of Chaſtice bore the bell.
            
               Vlyſſes wyfe did bluſh
            to heare of Dannats prayſe:
            
               Admetus Make (the good Alceſt)
            did yéelde vp all hir Kayes.
            The Gréekes might take in griefe
            of ſuch a one to héere,
            Who for hir well deſerued fame
            could haue no Greekiſh Péere.
            Thus many yeares were ſpent
            with good and ſoothfaſt life,
            Twixt Arhundle that worthie Knight
            and his approoued wife.
            Of whome ſuch Impes did ſpring,
            ſuch fruite began to growe.
            Such iſſue did proceede as we
            them by their braunches knowe.
            The Oke will yéelde no Grapes,
            the Vine will beare no Hawes:
            Ech thing muſt follow kindly courſe
            by Natures fixed lawes.
            Euen ſo that worthie Tree
            ſuch fruite is ſéene to beare,
            
               
As yet commends the withred ſtocks
            and them to Welkin reare.
            Thus did they liue in ioy,
            till chaunce and ſpitefull death
            Theſe louing Turtles did deuide
            and reſt the Cock his breath.
            Then firſt the bale began,
            then black attyre came on:
            And Dannats dréerie doole was ſeene
            with neuer ſtinting mone.
            Nought might hir ſorrow ſwage,
            but ſtill ſhe did bewaile
            The Cinders of hir ſeuerd Make
            with teares of none auaile.
            Seauen yeares ſhe ſpent in wo
            refuſing other Make:
            For ſuch is Turtles kinde you know
            they will none other take.
            I doubt where Dido felt
            the like tormenting rage,
            When that the guilefull Gueſt was gone
            that laid his fayth to gage,
            This Dannats vertues were
            ſo rife and eke ſo rare,
            As few with hir for honeſt life.
            and wiſdome might compare.
            
               Minerua did ſoiourne
            within that wiuely breſt:
            
               
Hir déedes declarde that in hir head
            Dame Pallas was a gueſt.
            But what we couet moſt
            or chiefeſt holde in price,
            With gréedie gripe of darting death
            is reaued with a trice.
            The cruell Siſters thrée
            were all in one agréede,
            To let the ſpindle run no more
            but ſhrid the fatall thréede.
            And fortune, (to expreſſe
            what ſwing and ſway ſhe bare)
            Allowde them leaue to vſe their force
            vpon this Iewell rare.
            Thus hath the Welkin woon,
            and we a loſſe ſuſtainde:
            Thus hath hir Corſe a Vante founde out,
            hir Sprite the Heauens gainde.
            Since ſobbing will not ſerue,
            ne ſhedding teares auaile
            To bring the ſoule to Corps againe
            his olde and woonted Gaile:
            Leaue off to bath hir ſtone
            with Niobs teares to long,
            For thou ſhalt aide hir naught at all
            but put thy ſelfe to wrong.
            Wiſh that hir ſoule may reach
            the place from whence it came:
            
               
And ſhe be guerdond for hir life
            with neuer dying fame.
            For ſure ſhe well deſerude
            to haue immortall prayſe,
            And lawde more light than cleareſt Sunne
            or Phoebus golden rayes.
            If ought my ſlender ſkill
            or writing were of powre,
            No proceſſe of ingratefull time.
            hir vertues ſhould deuoure.
         
         
            Diſprayſe of Women that allure and loue not.
            
               WHen ſo you vew in Verſe
               and Poets rimes report,
               Of Lucrece, and Vlyſſes wife
               that lyues in honeſt ſort.
               When Hippo commes by hap
               or good Alceſt yfeare,
               And other ſome that by deſert
               with fame renowmed were,
               Then you with haſtie doome
               and raſhfull ſentence ſtraight,
               Will vaunt that women more and leſſe
               were all with vertue fraight.
               And, for thoſe fewe that liude
               in wiuely bonde ſo well,
               
                  
You will eſtéeme the reaſt by thoſe
               that onely bare the bell,
               But follow ſound aduice,
               let eche receyue hir doome,
               As ech in vertue did ſurmount,
               or ſit in higheſt roome.
               So cleane was neuer ſéede
               yſifted, but among
               For all their paynes were weedes that grew
               to put the graine to wrong.
               That troupe of honeſt Dames
               thoſe Griſels all are gone:
               No Lucrece now is left aliue,
               ne Cleopatra none.
               Thoſe dayes are all ypaſt,
               that date is fléeted by:
               They myrrors were Dame Nature made
               hir ſkilfull hande to try.
               Now courſe of kinde exchaungde
               doth yeelde a woorſer graine,
               And women in theſe latter yeares
               thoſe modeſt Matrones ſtaine.
               Deceit in their delight,
               great fraude in friendly lookes:
               They ſpoyle the Fiſh for friendſhips ſake
               that houer on their Hookes.
               They buye the baite to deare
               that ſo their fréedome loze:
               
                  
And they the more deceitfull are
               that ſo can craft and gloze.
               With beautie to allure,
               and murder with diſdaine:
               What more may be gainſt womens kind
               where ruth of right ſhould raigne
               So Memphite Crocodile
               (as we in Poets fine)
               Where Nylus with his ſeuenfold ſtreame
               to Seaward doth incline
               With ruthleſſe trickling teares
               and lamentable ſounde,
               The ſiely Beaſt with pittie mooude
               doth cruelly confounde.
               So Marmaydes in the flood
               and Syrens ſwéetly ſing,
               Till they the muſing Mariner
               to ſpéedie death doe bring.
               Now Helen for hir traine
               with Dian may compare:
               Such ſundrie Helens now are found,
               and Dians Nymphes ſo rare.
               Who if by craft eſpie
               thy Senſes once to bende,
               And bow by Cupids ſubtile breach
               that burning gleames doth ſende:
               Then will they ſéeke in haſte
               by force of friendly blinck,
               
                  
And wreſted looke into thy breaſt
               their beauties ſhape to ſinck.
               Which if be brought to paſſe,
               then haue they their deſire:
               And ſtanding farre doe ſmile to ſée
               the flaming of the fire.
               Then looke they on a loofe,
               and neuer once repaire
               To ende the ſtrife that they haue ſtirrde
               twixt Louer and Diſpaire.
               As Shepheards when they ſée
               the Ganders foe in ſnare
               Reioyce, that from their foldes of late
               their ſiely cattle bare:
               Or Boy that knowes the Foule
               to be in pithole caught,
               That woonted was to ſteale the ſtale
               and ſet the ſnare at naught:
               So wily Women woont
               to laugh, when ſo they ſpie
               The louing Wight ytraynde by truſt
               in poynt and pinch to die.
               But if ſuch chaunce doe chaunce
               (as often chaunce we ſee)
               The fiſh that earſt was hangde on Hooke
               by better chaunce be frée,
               If he by happie hap
               doe caſt off Cupids yoke,
               
                  
Not ſetting of their Loue a Leeke
               that gaue the cruell ſtroke:
               Then are remooude the cloudes
               of hir diſdainfull brow:
               And friendſhips flood that earſt was drie
               afreſh begins to flow.
               Then wreſteth ſhée hir grace,
               and makes a ſéeming ſhow
               As though ſhe ment no chaunge at all,
               ne would hir Heſtes forgo.
               Thus are they fright wich wiles
               whome Nature made ſo plaine,
               Thus Sinons ſhifts they put in vre
               their purpoſe to attaine.
               Wherefore let be our care
               
                  Vlyſſes trade to trie:
               And ſtop our eares againſt the ſounde
               of Syrens when they crie.
               Think when thou ſéeſt the baite
               whereon is thy delite,
               That hidden Hookes are hard at hande
               to bane thee when thou bite.
               Think well that poyſon lurckes
               in ſhape of Sugar ſwéete:
               And where the freſheſt flowres are ſéene
               there moſt beware thy féete.
               But chiefly Women ſhoonne
               and follow mine aduice,
               
                  
If not, thou mayſt perhaps in proufe
               of folly beare the price.
               To truſt to rotten boughes
               the daunger well is ſeene:
               To treade the tylled trap vnwares
               hath alwayes perill béene.
               Haue Medea ſtill in minde,
               let Circe be in thought:
               And Helen that to vtter ſack,
               both Greece and Troie brought
               Let Creſide be in coumpt
               and number of the mo,
               Who for hir lightneſſe may preſume
               with falſeſt on the row:
               Elſe would ſhe not haue left
               a Troian for a Gréeke.
               But what? by kinde the Cat will hunt,
               hir Father did the like.
               As wylie are their wits,
               ſo are their tongues vntrue:
               Vnconſtant and aye fleeting mindes
               that moſt imbrace the nue.
               When fixed is their fayth
               it reſtes on brittle ſande:
               And when thou déemſte them ſurſte of all
               they beare thée but in hande.
               Though Argus were aliue
               whoſe eies in number were
               
                  
As many as the Peacock proude
               in painted plume doth beare:
               Yet Women by their wyles
               and well acquainted drifts,
               Would ſoone deceiue his waking head,
               and put his eies to ſhifts.
               Nought haue they néede at all
               
                  Cyllenus Pipe to blow
               To forge their fraude, their tongues will ſerue
               as learned writers ſhow.
            
            
               
                  Firſt trie and then tell
               
               
                  Where I haue ſayd well
               
               
                  For without a triall
               
               
                  There vailes no deniall.
               
            
         
         
            Of a Phiſition and a Soothſayer.
            
               MARCKE felt himſelfe diſeaſde,
            the Soothſayer ſayd: There bée
            Sixe yet remainder daies of life,
            no mo (Friend Marcke) to thée
            Then ſkilfull Alcon came,
            he felt the pulſes beate:
            And out of hande this Marcus dide,
            there Phiſick wrought his feate.
            This ſhowes Phiſition doth
            the Soothſayer farre excéede:
            For thone can make a ſhort diſpatch,
            when thother makes no ſpéede.
         
         
            
            A controuerſie of a conqueſt in Loue twixt Fortune and Venus.
            WHilſt Fiſſher keſt his line
            the houering fiſh to hooke:
            By hap a rich mans daughter on
            the Fiſſher keſt hir looke.
            Shée fryde with frantick Loue,
            they maride eke at laſt:
            Thus Fiſſher was from lowe eſtate
            in top of Treaſure plaſt.
            Stoode Fortune by and ſmylde:
            how ſay you (Dame) quoth ſhée
            To Venus? was this conqueſt yours,
            or is it due to mée?
            Twas I (quoth Vulcans Wife)
            with helpe of Cupids Bowe,
            That made this wanton wench to rage,
            and match hir ſelfe ſo lowe.
            Not ſo: twas Fortune I
            that brought the Trull in place:
            And Fortune was it that the man
            ſtoode ſo in Maydens grace.
            By Fortune fell their loue,
            twas Fortune ſtrake the ſtroke:
            Then detter is this man to mee
            that did the match prouoke.
         
         
            
            The Louer voweth how ſo euer he be guerdoned to loue faithfully.
            VVthankfull though ſhe were
            and had diſdainefull browe,
            Regarding nought my conſtant hart,
            ne forcing of hir vowe:
            Since ſowen is the ſéede
            of faithfull friendſhips lore,
            Vnconſtant will I neuer be
            ne breake my Heſt therefore.
            Let Fortune vſe hir force
            ſo Cupide ſtande mine ayde,
            And Cyprid laugh with loouely looke,
            I will not be afrayde.
            By mée the Noble kinde
            of man ſhall not be ſhamde,
            Recorde through mée ſhall neuer force
            our ſequell be defamde.
            Albe that I conſume
            my gréene and growing youth,
            Yea age and all without rewarde
            yet nill I ſwarue my truth.
            Eche that ſhall after come,
            and liue when I am duſt,
            This louing hart ſhall well deſcrie
            the Key of perfite truſt.
            
               
Hir, while my vitall breath
            theſe fainting limmes ſhall mooue:
            Yea, after death in hollow Vawte
            ytombed, will I looue.
            Force ſhée my ſeruice true
            I force it not at all,
            Rue ſhe by ruth my dréerie life
            or it to mercy call:
            In ſtay my Loue ſhall ſtand,
            I will not falſe my fayth,
            Ne breake my former plighted heſt
            or promiſe to the death.
            Diſdaine ſhall neuer force
            my friendſhip once awrie:
            Ere that I craue immortall Gods
            that ye will let me die.
            Let Dido ſtill complaine
            
               Aeneas broken Heſt,
            Of all that came to Carthage Coaſt
            the moſt vnfaythfull gueſt.
            Vntruſtie Theſeus eke
            let Ariadne cléepe,
            Eſcaping from his friendly Féere
            yled in ſlumbring ſléepe:
            So let Medea blame
            the Knight that woon the Fliſe,
            That forced naught at all in fine
            hir cleapings and hir cries:
            
               
Haue thou the faythfull hart
            of thine aſſured Friend,
            Ere he be of that retchleſſe race
            the Sunne awrie ſhall wende.
            Where ſo thou yéelde him grace
            or as an outcaſt ſhoon:
            Expect his former plighted Heſt
            as thou tofore haſt doon.
            Loue will hée neuer blame
            ne Venus lawes forgo,
            Life ſooner ſhall than loue decreaſe
            his faith is fixed ſo.
         
         
            He ſorrowes the long abſence of his Ladie. P.
            NOw once againe (my Muſe) renue the woes
            Which earſt thou haſt in doolefull dittie ſoong,
            For greater cauſe of ſorrow not aroſe
            To mée at all, than now of late is ſproong:
            As you ſhall heare in ſad and ſolemne Verſe,
            A wofull Wight his hapleſſe hap rehearſe,
            Come (Clio) come with penſiue Pen in hande
            And cauſe thy ſiſters chaunge their chéereful voice,
            Ye furies fell that lurcke in Plutos lande,
            Come ſkip to Skies, and raiſe a doolefull noice:
            Helpe to lament the Louers wofull chaunce,
            And let Alecto leade the lothſome daunce.
            
               
All ye that Ladies are of Lymbo Lake
            With hiſſing haire, and Snakie buſh bedect,
            Your beddes of ſtéele and dankiſh Dennes forſal
            And Stix with ſtinking Sulpher all infect:
            Doe what you may to ayde my carefull Quill,
            And helpe to ring a Louers latter knill.
            And time (I trow) ſith ſhe from hence is fled
            Who was the guide and giuer of my breath,
            By whome I was with wiſhed pleaſure fed
            And haue eſcapte the ruthleſſe hande of death:
            Who was the Key and Cable of my life,
            That made me ſcape Charybdis carefull clife.
            A Starre whereby to ſteare my bodies Bark,
            And ſhip of ſoule to ſhoare in ſafetie bring,
            To quite my Corſe from painefull pining cark,
            And fierie force of craftie Cupids ſting:
            Euen ſhe that me from Syllas ſhelfe did ſhroude,
            That light is loſt, that Lodeſtarre vnder cloude.
            Whoſe abſence bréedes the tempeſt I ſuſtaine,
            And makes my thoughts ſo cloudie black to bae,
            And brackiſh teares from ſwolen eies to raine,
            And churliſh gale of ſurging ſighes to flée:
            That Ancor ſcarce ne harbour I may haue
            From deepe diſpaire my broken Ship to ſaue.
            The Rubie from the Ring is reſt I finde,
            The foile appéeres that vnderneath was ſet:
            The Saint is gone, the Shrine is left behinde,
            The Fiſh is ſcapte, and here remaines the Net:
            
               
That other choiſe for me is none but this,
            To waile the want of hir that is my bliſſe.
            I curſſe the Wight that cauſde hir hence to go,
            I hate the Horſe that hence hir Corſe conuaide,
            The Bit, the Saddle all I curſſe aroe,
            And ought that elſe might this hir iourney ſtaide:
            I curſſe the place where ſhe doth now ſolourne,
            And that whereto ſhe mindes to ſhape retourne.
            My mouth, that kiſt hir not before ſhe went,
            Mine cies, that did not ſéeke to ſée hir face,
            My head, that it no matter did inuent,
            My hande, that it in Paper did not place:
            My feete, that they refuſde to trauell tho,
            My legges I curſſe that were ſo loth to go.
            My tongue, that it to parle did then procure
            To vtter all my cloſe and couert minde,
            To hir who long hath had my woundes in cure,
            In whome ſuch ruth and mercie I did finde:
            My hart I curſſe, that ſought not to bewray
            It ſelfe to hir or ere ſhe went hir way.
            And laſt my ſelfe and erie thing beſide,
            My life, my limmes, my carrion Corſe I curſſe:
            Saue hir for whome theſe torments I abide,
            That of my lyfe is onely well and ſourſe:
            
               Ioue ſhroude hir ſalfe, and kéepe hir from annoy,
            And ſende hir ſoone to make returne with ioy.
         
         
            
            To his Loue long abſent, declaring his torments.
            O Lingring Loue, O Friende
            that abſent art ſo long,
            Where ſo thou be, the Gods thée guide
            and quit thy Corſe from wrong:
            And ſende thée harmeleſſe health,
            and ſafely to reuart,
            How ſoone your ſelfe may déeme full well
            to ſaue a dying hart.
            For ſince your parture I
            haue lead a lothſome ſtate:
            And ſaue the hope of your returne
            nought might my woes abate.
            And will you know the time
            how I haue ſpent away?
            And doe you long in ruthfull rime
            my torments to ſuruay?
            Though but with weeping eies
            I may the ſame recite:
            Yet naytheleſſe the truth herein
            to thée (my Friend) I write.
            When flickring Fame at firſt
            vnto mine eares had brought
            That you to trauell were addreſt,
            and fixed was your thought
            
               
In London long to lodge,
            and flee our friendly ſoile:
            Then Dolour firſt in daunted Corps
            and wounded breaſt did boile.
            I felt how griefe did gi
                  ••
               
            
            the onſet on my hart,
            And ſorrow ſware that penſiue pangues
            ſhould neuer thence depart.
            With clinching clawes there came,
            and talents ſharply ſet,
            A flock of gréedie griping woes
            my grunting hart to fret.
            The more I ſought the meane
            by pleaſaunt thought to eaſe
            My growing griefe, the more I felt
            increaſe my new diſeaſe.
            When other laught for ioy,
            it brought to minde my woe:
            When Muſick ſlakte their ſorrowes, then
            my ſecret ſore did growe.
            When they at meate were ſet
            their daintie foode to taſte,
            In ſtead of Viands, hartie ſighes
            I had for my repaſte.
            When Bacchus came to Boorde,
            and eche to other drincks:
            My ſwolen floud of ſalted teares
            did ouerflow his brincks,
            
               
And out did guſhe amaine
            of drinke to ſtande in ſtéede
            To me, that of ſuch monſtrous meate
            as ſorrow was did féede.
            From boorde to bed I go▪
            
            in hope to finde reliefe,
            And by ſome pleaſaunt nap to rid
            my troubled Ghoſt from griefe:
            But ſlumbring ſleepe is fled.
            and Morpheus ſhewes his ſpight:
            That will not yéelde on minuts reaſt
            in all a Winters night.
            O Lorde, what ſundrie kindes
            of care doe then begin
            Taſſault my wearie waking head,
            and trembling hart within?
            A thouſande thoughts ariſe,
            eche thought his torment brings:
            And thus the lothed night I ſpend
            and féele how ſorrow ſprings.
            And if in dawning chaunce
            ſome drouping ſléepe to light
            Vpon the carefull Corſe that thus
            hath ſpent the waking night:
            It ſtandes in little ſteade,
            ſo dreadfull are my dreames
            As they by force of wo procure
            mine eies to runne with ſtreames.
            
               
Then bathe I bed with brine,
            and cloy my Couch with teares:
            And mid my ſleepe thy griefly Ghoſt
            in ſtraungie ſort appeares.
            Not with ſuch friendly face
            and brow of gladſome cheare
            As earſt thou hadſt: thoſe louely lookes
            and blincks are all areare.
            More grimmer is your grace,
            more coye your countnance eake:
            More lowring lookes than were of yore
            and Brow more bent to wreake.
            In hande mée thinkes I ſee
            thée holde the hatefull knife
            To flea thy Friend, and for good will
            to reaue deſerued lyfe.
            Wherewith I wake afright
            and ſtraine my pillow faſt,
            To garde me from the cruell toole
            vntill your wrath be paſt.
            At length I ſee it plaine
            that fanſie did enforce
            Vnto his vgly monſtrous dreame
            my weake and ſlumbring Corſe.
            I vewe thy ſecret hart,
            and how it longs to bée
            With him that for vnfayned loue
            impawnde his faith to thée.
            
               
For mercie then I call
            of you that iudge ſo yll,
            Whoſe pleaſure is to garde your Friend,
            and not your Foe to kyll.
            Of dreames a thouſand ſuch
            eche night I haue a ſhare,
            To banniſh ſléepe from pining Corſe
            and nurſe my canckred care.
            Thus day and night I liue,
            thus night and day I die:
            In death I féele no ſmart at all,
            in life great wo I trie.
            Wherefore to rid my griefes
            and banniſh all annoie:
            Retire from Creece, and doe ſoiourne
            here with thy Friend in Troie.
            
            Who longs to ſee thy face
            and witneſſe of thy ſtate:
            nd partner be of thy delights
            Ahis furious fits to bate.
         
         
            To Browne of light beliefe.
            BEware my Browne of light beliefe,
            truſt not before you trie:
            For vnder cloke of great good will
            doth fained friendſhip lie.
            As wylie Adder lurcks in leaues
            and greeneſt graſſe of all,
            
               
And ſtings the ſtalking Wight that thought
            no daunger would befall.
            So is the plaine vnplayted man
            by ſubtile dealing guilde
            And ſooneſt ſnarde by ſubtile ſhifts
            of him that ſmoothly ſmilde.
            Wée neuer ſée the frowning Friend
            that frets to outwarde ſhowe,
            Beguile or ſéeke to falſe his Friend,
            as doth the fléering Foe:
            The Maſtife Dog is voyded well
            that barcks or ere he bite:
            But (oh) the Cur is cruell that
            doth neuer barck a whit.
            Deale thou as Courtyers daylie doe,
            in wordes be franck and frée,
            Speake fayre and make the weather cléere
            to him that gybes with thée.
            For ſo thou ſhalt aſſured ſtande
            from hurt to be as farre,
            As from the grounde of true good will
            thoſe gloſing marchaunts are.
            A wiſedome to beware of Woulfes,
            and Foxes guilefull guiſe:
            For tone is craftie by his kinde,
            the other paſſing wiſe.
            So that it is a matter harde
            their double drifts to flée:
            
               
But yet thou ſhalt auoyde the wurſt
            if thou be rulde by mée.
            
               (ꝙ) G. T.
               
            
         
         
            That Death is not ſo much to be feared as daylie diſeaſes are.
            WHat? yſt not follie for to dread
            and ſtande of Death in feare,
            That mother is of quiet reaſt,
            and griefes away doth weare?
            That brings releaſe to want of welth,
            and poore oppreſſed Wightes?
            He comes but once to mortall men,
            but once for all he ſmites.
            Was neuer none that twiſe hath felt
            of cruell Death the knife:
            But other griefes and pining paines
            doe linger on the life,
            And oftentimes on ſelfe ſame Corſe
            with furious fits moleſt,
            When Death by one diſpatcht of life
            doth bring the ſoule to reſt.
         
         
            The Epicures counſell, eate, drinke, and plaie.
            MY Friend, where as thou ſéeſt thy ſelfe
            to be a man in déede,
            
               
Eate, quaffe, and play, with preſent ioyes
            thy greedie fanſie féede.
            For I (thou ſéeſt) am duſt become
            that earſt ſo welthie was:
            I haue that I aliue did eate,
            the reaſt away did paſſe.
            What ſo I poorde in pampred paunch
            and to my guts conuaide,
            To gaping grounde with me I bore,
            the reaſt behinde is ſtaide.
            My haughtie buildings huge to ſée,
            my Turrets and my traine,
            My Horſe, my Houndes, my cofred Coine
            for others doe remaine.
            Wherefore a Myrrour make of mée
            and drowne thee in delight:
            For Death will ſwéepe away thy welth
            and reaue thy pleaſures quight.
         
         
            The Aunſwere to the vile and canckred counſell of the outragious Epicure.
            MY Friend, for that I ſée my ſelfe
            to be a man in déede,
            Thy quaffing counſell I refuſe,
            vnleſſe to ſerue my néede.
            I muſe no whit that thou art duſt,
            thy beaſtly lyuing héere
            
               
Was meane to bring thée to thy bane,
            the ſooner for thy chéere.
            Thou thoughts to pamper vp thy paunch,
            but thou didſt feede ywis
            The gréedie Wormes that gnaw thy guts,
            for them a daintie diſh.
            Good reaſon that thou ſhouldſt forgo
            and leaue thy goods behinde,
            For that a beaſt ſo lyke a beaſt
            didſt liue againſt thy kinde.
            A man in name, no man in déede
            thou art that counſelſt mée
            To liue as thou haſt liude, and die
            a Monſter like to thée.
            For ſince thy lyfe ſo lothſome was,
            and ſhamefull cake thy death:
            I will beware, and make a Glaſſe
            of thée whilſt I haue breath,
            To ſhunne thy ſluttiſh ſinfull Sect,
            thy tipling and thy toyes:
            For after death thoſe pleaſures paſſe
            as did thy fickle ioyes.
         
         
            Of Homer and his birth.
            THe Poet Homer Chius claimes,
            
               Colophon doth the léeke:
            And Smyrne ſweares that he is hirs
            that was the learned Greeke.
            
            
               
Of Salamine ſome ſay he was,
            of Iö other ſome:
            And diuers make report that he
            of Theſſale line did come.
            Thus ſundred and deuided are
            the peoples mindes of thée,
            (Thou Princely Poet) but my thought
            with neyther doth agree.
            For I aſſuredly ſuppoſe
            and déeme the Heauenly Speare
            Thy ſoyle, and Pallas lap the wombe
            that did thy body beare.
            Hir breaſt (the Dug) that thou didſt ſuck
            in Cradle when thou layſt:
            With haughtie ſtile ſo much (thou Gréeke)
            thy mazed head diſmayſt.
         
         
            That Time conquereth all things, ſaue the Louers paine.
            WAs neuer Bull ſo fell
            with wrinckle fronted face,
            But Time would make him yéeld to yoke
            and toyle the ground apace.
            The Horſe ybred in Holte
            and fed in luſtie Leaſe
            In Time will champe the fomie Bit
            his Riders will to pleaſe.
            
               
The Lions that are woode
            and raging in their kinde,
            By trackt of Time their kéepers know
            in whome they friendſhip finde.
            Thoſe Beaſtes that come from Inde
            
            and fartheſt partes of all,
            In Time doe ſwerue their ſauage ſect
            and to their dutie fall.
            
               Time makes the Grape to growe
            and Vine to ſpreade at large,
            So that the ſkin ſcarſe able is
            to holde his inwarde charge:
            So Ceres fruite doth ſproute
            by force of growing Time,
            
            Which makes the ſtrength of hidden ſéede
            into the ſtalke to clime.
            
               Time makes the tender twig
            to bouſteous Trée to grow:
            It makes the Oke to ouerlooke
            the ſlender ſhrubs bylow.
            It frets the Culter kéene
            that cuts the froting ſoyle,
            It forceth hardeſt Flint of all
            and Marble to recoyle.
            
               Time wreakefull wrath ſubdues
            it breaketh angers gall,
            And eche diſeaſe in Time hath helpe:
            thus Time doth conquer all.
            
               
Though theſe and other like
            by proceſſe are procurde,
            Yet naytheleſſe my feſtred wounde
            can not in Time be curde.
            For that which ſendeth ſalue
            and comfort to the reaſt,
            Doth cauſe my ranckling ſore to rage
            and dubble in my breaſt.
            As Springs that from a Mount
            doe take their downe warde ſourſe,
            To whome there may no barre be founde
            to ſtop their headlong courſe:
            So Lordlike Loue yſtaulde
            and ceazde in yeelding minde
            May not be diſpoſſeſt againe,
            ſuch is his ſtately kinde.
         
         
            To his Friend riding to Londonwarde.
            AS Troylus did reioyce
            when Creſid yéelded grace,
            And dained him from ſeruice true
            ſo néere hir hart to place:
            So haue I ioyde (my Deare)
            for friendſhip which I founde,
            And loue requited with the like
            which curde my carefull wounde.
            And he full ſhrilly ſhright
            and doolde his wofull chaunce,
            
               
On Gréekiſh Stéede from Troian towne
            when Creſid gan to praunce
            And leaue the lyked ſoyle
            where did ſoiourne hir ioie,
            I meane the worthy Troylus
            
            and louingſt youth in Troie:
            Euen ſo I waile at thy
            departure, would thou wiſt,
            And out I crie a wretched Wight
            that thought himſelfe ybliſt.
            O London lothſome lodge
            why doſt thou now procure
            My Loue to leaue this pleaſant ſoyle
            that hath my hart in cure?
            Since needes it muſt be ſo
            gainſend hir home in haſt:
            Let hir retire with harmeleſſe health
            that ſickleſſe hence is paſt.
            Yeelde mée a good account
            of hir that is my ioie,
            And ſend hir to hir Troylus
            
            that longs for hir in Troie.
            
         
         
            Of the Raine and cloudy weather at the time of his Friends departure from Troie.
            NO meruaile though the Sunne do hide his hed
            And vnder cloude do keepe his lowring lookes,
            
               
No woonder that the Skie his teares doth ſhed
            And with his ſtreames increaſe the water brookes:
            The cauſe is knowne, the proofe is paſſing plaine,
            My Loue and I be ſundred to our paine.
            Now ſhe is gone that did ſuſtaine my breath
            And ſaude my ſhip of bodie from the wrack,
            By whome I ſcapte the cruell hande of Death
            Which thought to bring my Corſe to vtter ſack:
            The Welkin wéepes and helpes me to bewaile
            With guſhing ſhowres the loſſe of mine auaile.
            Wherefore, O Heauenly ſtates that Rulers bée
            Of ſtarrie Skies from whence theſe teares diſcende
            And fluſh ſo faſt as mortall Wights doe ſée:
            Of ruth in néedefull time my woes to ende,
            Procure my Loue to make returne in poſt,
            To gard from griefe hir Friends afflicted ghoſt.
            If not, with flaſſhing flame and Thunder dint
            By Vulcan forgde and hammerd for the nones,
            Conſume to duſt my fleſh my wo to ſtint,
            And with thy Mace (O Ioue) vnioint my bones:
            That by ſuch ſcath and loſſe of vitall breath
            I may auoide a worſe and ſtraunger death.
            For like the teene that now my hart ſuſtaines
            Was neuer felt nor ſuch oppreſſing care:
            Of force my life muſt yéelde to pinching paines
            Of haſting Death, the fits ſo furious are:
            Which though be ſo, when I am wrapt in Clay,
            (My ſoule) to hir thou ſhalt repaire and ſay.
            
               
That whilſt the lyfe would ſuffer mee to woonne
            With mortall Wights, my hart was hirs at will,
            And now my Spindle hath his courſe yroonne
            And twiſt is none yleft, thou wilt fulfill
            The dutie which thy Maiſter ought of right,
            And which he would accompliſh if he might.
         
         
            Of a couetous Niggard, and a needie Mouſe.
            
               ASclepiad that gréedie Carle,
            by fortune found a Mouſe
            (As he about his lodgings lookte)
            within his niggiſh houſe.
            The chiding Chuffe began to chaufe,
            and (ſparefull of his chéere)
            Demaunded of the ſiely Beaſt
            and ſayde what makſte thou héere?
            ¶ You néede not ſtand in feare (good Friend)
            the ſmiling Mouſe replide:
            I come not to deuoure your Cates
            but in your houſe to hide.
            ¶ No man this Miſer I account
            that chid this hurtleſſe Elfe:
            No Mouſe the Mouſe, but wiſer than
            the Patch that owde the Pelfe.
         
         
            
            A pretie Epigram of a Scholler, that hauing read Vergils Aeneidos, maried a curſt Wyfe.
            A Schollar ſkillde in Vergils Verſe
            and reading of his booke
            (Arma virum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
               ) that begins,
            was caught in Cupids booke.
            At length to mariage flat he fell,
            when wedding day was doon,
            To play hir prancks, and bob the Foole
            the ſhrowiſh Wife begoon.
            The Huſband daylie felt the fiſtes
            and buffers of his Wife:
            Vntill at laſt he thus began
            to plaine of painefull life.
            (Oh Caitiffe mée) the Schollar cryde
            well worthy of this wo,
            For Arma I Virum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                read
            in Vergill long ago:
            Yet could not ſée to ſcape the plague
            whereof the Poet ſpake.
            No doubt that Noble Poet for
            a Prophet I will take.
            For Arma now Virum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                I
            both day and night ſuſtaine
            At home, I néede not runne to Schoole,
            to reade the Verſe againe.
            
               
Would (Virum) were away, and then
            let (Arma) doe their wurſt:
            But when I matcht with ſuch a ſhrew
            I think I was accurſt.
         
         
            To a yong Gentleman of taking a Wyfe.
            LOng you with greedie minde to leade a lyfe,
            That pleaſaunt is in déede, and voyde of care▪
            
            I neuer wiſhe you then to take a Wyfe
            Nor ſet your foote in craftie Cupids ſnare.
            A filthie Trull is yrkeſome too the eie,
            A gallant girle allures the lookers minde:
            A wanton wench will haue the head too die,
            An aged Trot to lyke is hard to finde.
            A bearing Wyfe with brats will cloy thée ſore,
            A greater carcke than childrens care is none,
            A barraine beaſt will greeue thée ten times more,
            No ioy remaines when hope of fruite is gone.
            Wherefore let wyuing go, lyue ſingle aye,
            Apply the Booke and bande the Ball among:
            A ſhrew (we ſée) is wedded in a day
            But ere a man can ſhift his handes tys long.
         
         
            The Aunſwere for taking a Wyfe.
            LOng you with gréedie minde to bleare mine eie
            And make mée thinke of marige thus amiſſe?
            
               
I cannot déeme ſo yll of wyuing I,
            To loue and wed for loue is perfite bliſſe.
            A filthy Trull (you ſay) is lothſome ſight,
            Put caſe ſhe be not paſſing faire to vewe?
            If ſhe with vertue doe the want requight
            Of comely ſhape thou haſt no cauſe to rue.
            A gallant girle allures the lookers minde,
            What ſhall we ſay the womans is the ſhame?
            Bicauſe the cléereſt eies by courſe of kinde
            Can not abide the Sunne, is hee to blame?
            A wanton wench to die will haue the hed,
            Canſt thou not ſée before thou wade ſo farre?
            His be the hurt that lookes not ere he wed,
            The Huſband may the woman make or ma
                  ••
               e.
            Put caſe an aged Trot be ſomewhat tough?
            If coyne ſhée bring the care will be the leſſe,
            If ſhée haue ſtore of muck and goods ynough
            Thou néedſte not force ſo much of handſomneſſe.
            A bearing Wyfe doth make the huſband glad,
            A greater ioye than Childrens may not bée:
            A barraine wench ſometime muſt néedes be had
            There doth not fruite ſpring out of euery trée.
            So that I finde no reaſon, none at all
            In that thou wilſt a man to ſingle lyfe,
            And quite to ſhun the comfort that may fall
            And daylie doth to him that hath a Wyfe.
            For ſure though ſome be ſhrewes as ſome there be,
            (As of the ſhéepe are ſome that beare no wull)
            
               
Yet muſt we praiſe the match whereby we ſée
            The earth maintainde with men, and ſtored full.
            But if you thinke ſo yll to take a Wyfe,
            Let others wed, leade you the ſingle lyfe.
            
               (ꝙ) G. T.
               
            
         
         
            Of a deafe Plaintife, a deafe Defendant, and a deafe Iudge.
            BY hap a man that could not heare
            but borne deafe by kinde,
            Another cited to the Court,
            much like himſelfe to finde,
            Whoſe bearing Senſe was quight bereft:
            the Iudge that of the Caſe
            Should giue his verdit, was as deafe
            as deafeſt in the place.
            To Court they came: the Plaintife praide
            to haue the vnpaid rent.
            Defendant ſaide, in grinding I
            this wearie night haue ſpent.
            The Iudge behelde them both a while,
            is this at laſt (quoth hée)
            Of all your ſtirred ſtrife the cauſe?
            You both hir children bée:
            Then Reaſon willes, and Law allowes
            your Mother ſhould haue aide
            At both your handes that are hir Sonnes.
            When thus the Iudge had ſaide,
            
               
The People laught a good to heare
            this well diſcuſſed caſe
            Twixt two deafe men, and thought him fit
            to ſit in Iudges place
            Vpon ſo blinde a matter that
            was deafe as any rock:
            And thus the ſimple men were ſhamde,
            the Iuſtice had a mock.
         
         
            A promiſe of olde good will, to an olde friend at the beginning of New yere.
            THe Chuffes for gréedie gaine
            and lucers looue expende
            Their New yeares gifts vpon their Lords
            as crie yeare hath ende:
            But I in token that
            the yeare his courſe hath roon,
            And proufe that ioyfull Ianus hath
            a nouell yeare begoon:
            (As Loue and Dutie willes)
            the Herauld of my hart
            Here ſend to you to make a ſhew
            that Friendſhip ſhall not ſtart.
            Though yeares doe chaunge by courſe
            and alter by their kinde:
            My olde good will and faith to ſlip
            I truſt you ſhall not finde.
            
               
               Timetes will be true,
            his loue ſhall neuer blin:
            But gather ſtrength and grow to more
            than when it did begin.
         
         
            A Vow to ſerue faithfully.
            JN gréene and growing age, in luftie yéeres,
            In latter dayes when ſiluer buſh appeeres:
            In good and gladſome hap when Fortune ſerues,
            In lowring luck when good auenture ſwerues
            By day when Phoebus ſhewes his princely pride,
            By night when golden Starres in Skies do glide,
            In Winter when the groues haue loſt their gréene
            In Sommer when the longeſt dayes are ſéene,
            In happie helth when ſickleſſe limmes haue lyfe,
            In griefull ſtate, amids my dolors ryfe,
            In pleaſant peace when Trumpets are away,
            In wreakfull warre when Mars doth beare ye ſway,
            In perillous goulfe amid the ſinking ſande,
            In ſafer ſoyle and in the ſtable lande.
            When ſo you laugh, or elſe with grimmer grace
            You beare your faithfull Friend vnfriendly face,
            In good report and time of woorſer fame,
            I will be yours, yea though I looſe the game.
         
         
            Funerall Verſe vpon the death of Sir Iohn Horſey Knight.
            THat welth aſſigned is to waſte away,
            And ſtately pompe to vaniſh and decreaſe.
            
               
That worſhip weares and worldly wights decay,
            And Fortunes gifts though nere ſo braue do ceaſe
            May well appéere by Horſeys hatefull Hierce,
            Whoſe Corſe (alas) vntimely Death did pierce.
            Who thought thereby as Nature to ſubdue
            By reauing breath and rowne in worldly ſtage:
            So blaſted brute to blot, and Fame that flue
            Of him that well deſerude in all his age
            For worſhip and renowne to haue his ſhare
            Among the reaſt that prayſe for Vertue bare.
            But ſéeking waies to wrong this worthy wight,
            Shée fowly myſt hir purpoſe in the fine:
            For Horſey gaines by deaths outragious ſpight,
            And endleſſe fame, whereat his Foes repine:
            But eche man elſe laments and cries alowde
            That Horſey was to ſoone ywrapt in ſhrowde.
            The rich report that ruth in him did raigne,
            And pittie lodgde within his loouing breaſt,
            The ſimple ſay that for no maner gaine
            He hath at any time the poore oppreaſt:
            Thus both eſtates his worthy life commende,
            And both lament his ouerhaſting ende.
            Then ceaſe (I ſay) ſuch fluſhing teares to ſhed,
            Doo way thy doole, repreſſe thy ruthfull mone,
            For Horſey liues, his ſoule to Skies is fled,
            The onely Corſe is cloſde in Marble ſtone.
            So that thou haſt no cauſe to waile his chaunce,
            Whome ſpitefull death by hatred did aduaunce.
         
         
            
            To his Friend T: hauing bene long ſtudied and well experienced, and now at length louing a Gentlewoman that forced him naught at all.
            
               J Thought good fayth, & durſt haue gagde my hand
            For you (Friend T.) ye beautie ſhould now hight
            Haue raſde your hart, nor Cupid with his brand
            Haue brought thy learned breaſt to ſuch a plight.
            I thought Mineruas gift had beene of powre
            By holeſome reade to roote this fanſie out:
            But now I ſée that Venus in an howre
            Can bend the beſt, and dawnt the wiſe and ſtoute.
            Why ſhouldſt thou ſéeke to make ye Tiger tame?
            To win a Woulfe ſo cruell by his kinde?
            To ſuffer Aeſops Snake thou art to blame
            That ſtoong the man where he reliefe did finde.
            Is naught in hir but Womans name alone,
            No Woman ſure ſhe is, but Monſter fell,
            That ſcornes hir friend, & makes him die wt mone.
            Who makes an Idoll of a Diuell of Hell.
            Shée was cut out of ſome Sea beaten rock,
            Or taken from the cruell Lyons Tet,
            That féedes hir Friend for friendſhip with a mock
            And ſmiles to ſee him macht in Follies Net.
            If thou were wiſe (as thou art full of loue)
            Thou wouldſt account hir beautie but a Glaſſe,
            And from thy hart ſuch fanſies fond remoue
            I loth to ſee the Lyon wex an Aſſe.
            
               
If ſo ſhe were thy faithfull Friend in déede,
            And ſought a ſalue to cure thy cruell ſore,
            (As now ſhée ſéekes to make thy hart to bleede)
            Good fayth thou couldſt account of hir no more.
            But waying now hir great abuſe to thée
            A Friend to hir, but to thy ſelfe a Foe:
            Why ſhouldſt thou loue, or ſo enamoured bée?
            Leaue off be time, let all ſuch dotage goe.
            Should I imbrace the man that hates my life?
            Should I account of him that ſettes me light?
            Should I yeeld vp my throate to murthring Knife?
            Or ſéeke for to reclaime a Haggard Kite?
            Haſt thou not read how wiſe Vlyſſes did
            Enſtuffe his eares with Waxe, and cloſe them vp,
            Of Cyrces filthie loue himſelfe to rid,
            That turnd his Mates to Swine by Witches cup?
            And how he did the lyke vpon the Seas
            The pleaſant noyſome Syrens ſongs tendure,
            That otherwiſe had wrought him great vneaſe
            If once they mought his mates and him allure?
            Put thou the Greekes deuiſe againe in vre,
            Stop vp thine cares this Syren to beguile,
            Seale vp thoſe wanton eies of thine, be ſure
            To lend no eare vnto hir flattring ſtile.
            For all hir talke but to deceit doth tende,
            A canckred hart is wrapt in friendly lookes:
            Shée all hir wittes to thy decay doth bende,
            Thou art the Fiſh, ſhe beares the byting hookes.
            
               
No ſauage beaſt doth force a man a whit
            That loues him not: we ſee the dogged Curre
            Fawnes not one him that with ye whip doth ſmite
            The Horſe hates him yt pricks him with the ſpurre.
            And wilt thou loue, or place within thy breſt
            The cruell Dame that weaues thy web of woe?
            Wilt thou ſtill fawne vpon ſo falſe a gueſt:
            In ſtead of Doue wilt thou retaine a Crowe?
            Beware in time, ere Beautie pierce to farre,
            Let fanſies go, loue where is loue againe:
            For doubtleſſe now to much to blame you arre.
            To ſowe good will and reape but fowle diſdaine.
            I counſaile thus that may thée beſt aduiſe,
            For that my ſelfe did ſerue a cruell Dame:
            The blinde recurde can iudge of bleared eies,
            The Criple healde knowes how to heale the lame.
            Shake thou betimes the yoke from off thy neck,
            For feare the print thereof remaine behind:
            A happie man is he that feares no check,
            But liues at fréedome with contented minde.
         
         
            ¶ An Epitaph vpon the death of the worſhipfull Maiſter Richarde Edwardes late Maiſter of the Children in the Queenes Maieſties Chappell.
            IF teares could tell my thought,
            or plaints could paint my paine,
            If dubled ſighes could ſhew my ſmart,
            if wayling were not vaine:
            
               
If gripes that gnawe my breſt
            coulde well my griefe expreſſe,
            My teares, my plaints, my ſighes, my wayling
            neuer ſhould ſurceſſe.
            By meane whereof I might,
            vnto the world diſcloſe
            The death of ſuch a man (alas)
            as chaunced vs to loſe.
            But what auayles to mone?
            If life for life might bée
            Reſtorde againe, I woulde exchaunge
            my lyfe for death with thée.
            Or if I might ſome way,
            to pay thy rawnſome know,
            (O Edwards) then beleue me ſure
            thou ſhouldſt not lie ſo low:
            That O thou cruell Death,
            ſo fierce with dint of dart
            Due curſes on my knees I yéelde
            to thée with all my hart.
            For that it liſt thée trie
            thy foule and cankred ſpite
            On that ſo rare a péece, on that
            ſo wiſe and worthy Wight.
            Suffiſde thée (ſince thou muſt
            be mad) the ſimple ſort
            to flea, or on the brutiſh blood
            of beaſtes to take thy ſport,
            
               
And not in furious wiſe,
            with haſte and headlong rage
            To kill the flowre of all our Realme
            and Phaenix of our age.
            The fact doth crie reuenge,
            the Gods repay thine hire,
            Déepe darckned Lake of Lymbo lowe,
            and ſtill conſuming fire.
            His death not I but all
            good gentle harts doe mone:
            O London, though thy griefe be great,
            thou doſt not mourne alone.
            The ſeate of Muſes nine
            where fiftene Welles doe flowe,
            Whoſe ſprinckling ſprings and golden ſtreames
            ere this thou well didſt knowe.
            Lament to looſe this Plant
            for they ſhall ſee no more
            The braunch that they ſo long had bred,
            whereby they ſet ſuch ſtore.
            O happie Houſe, O Place
            of Corpus Chriſti, thou
            That plantedſt firſt, and gauſte the roote
            to that ſo braue a bow:
            And Chriſt Church which enioydſte
            the fruite more rype at fill,
            Plunge vp a thouſande ſighes, for griefe
            your trickling teares diſtill.
            
               
Whilſt Childe and Chappell dure,
            whilſt Court a Court ſhall bée,
            (Good Edwards) eche eſtate ſhall much
            both want and wiſhe for thée.
            Thy tender Tunes and Rimes
            wherein thou woontſt to play
            Eche princely Dame of Court and Towne
            ſhall beare in minde alway.
            Thy Damon and his Friend,
            
               Arcyte and Palemon
            
            With moe full fit for Princes eares,
            though thou from earth art gone,
            Shall ſtill remaine in fame,
            and lyke ſo long to hide
            As earthly things ſhall liue, and God
            this mortall Globe ſhall guide.
            For loe, thus Vertue liſt,
            hir Pupils to aduaunce:
            Yet for my part I would that God
            had giuen thée better chaunce.
            A longer time on earth,
            thy haſtned death before,
            But Edwardes now farewell for teares
            will let me write no more.
            Well may thy bones be lodgde
            thy fame abroade may flie,
            Thy ſacred ſoule poſſeſſe a place
            aboue the ſtarrie Skie.
            
               (ꝙ) Tho. Twine.
               
            
         
         
            
            To his Loue that ſent him a Ring wherein was graude, Let Reaſon rule.
            
            SHall Reaſon rule where Reaſon hath no right?
            Nor neuer had? ſhall Cupid looſe his landes?
            His claim? his crown? his kingdōe? name of might
            And yéeld himſelfe to be in Reaſons bandes?
            No, (Friend) thy Ring doth wil me thus in baine,
            
               Reaſon and Loue haue euer yet béene twaine.
            They are by kinde of ſuch contrarie mould
            As one miſlikes the others lewde deuiſe,
            What Reaſon willes Cupido neuer would,
            
               Loue neuer yet thought Reaſon to be wiſe.
            To Cupid I my homage earſt haue donne.
            Let Reaſon rule the harts that ſhe hath wonne.
         
         
            To his Friend Francis Th: leading his lyfe in the Countrie at his deſire.
            MY Francis, whilſt you breath your foming ſteede
            Athwart the fields in peace to practiſe warre,
            In Countrie whilſt your keneld Hounds doe feede,
            Or in the wood for taken pray doe iarre:
            Whilſt you with Haukes the ſielie Foule doe ſlape,
            And take delight a quick retriue to haue,
            To flee to marke, and heare the Spanels baye
            Waſting your age in pleaſure paſſing braue:
            In Citie I my youthfull yeares doe ſpende,
            At Booke perhaps ſometime to weare the day:
            Where man to man not friend to friend doth lende,
            With vs is naught but pitch (my Friend) and pay.
            
               
Great ſtore of Coyne, but fewe enioy the ſame,
            The owners holde it faſt with lymed handes,
            We liue by loſſe, we play and practiſe game
            Wee by and fell, the ſtreate is all our landes.
            Well ſtorde we are of crie needefull thing.
            Wood, Water, Coale, Fleſh, Fiſhe we haue ynow:
            (What lack you) Wyues and Maides doe daylie ſing
            The Horne is rife, it ſticks on many a brow.
            But yet (I ſay) the Countrie hath no peere,
            The Towne is but a toyle, and wearie lyfe:
            We like your Countrie ſportes (Friend Francis) heere,
            The Citie is a place of bate and ſtrife.
            Wherefore I thinke thee wiſe and full of thrift
            That fledſt the Towne, and haſt that bleſſed gift.
         
         
            To a Gentlewoman that alwayes willed him to weare Roſemarie, (a Tree that is alwayes greene,) for hir ſake, and in token of his good will to hir.
            
               THe gréene that you did wiſh mée weare
               aye for your looue,
               And on my helme a braunch to beare
               not to remooue:
               Was euer you to haue in minde
               Whome Cupid hath my Féere aſſignde.
            
            
               As I in this haue done your will,
               and minde to doo:
               So I requeſt you to fulfill
               my fanſie too:
               A gréene and louing hart to haue,
               And this is all that I doe craue.
            
            
               
               For if your flowring hart ſhould chaunge
               his colour greene,
               Or you at length a Ladie ſtraunge
               of mée be ſéene:
               Then will my braunch againſt his vſe
               His colour chaunge for your refuſe.
            
            
               As Winters force can not deface
               this braunch his hue:
               So let no chaunge of loue diſgrace
               your friendſhip true:
               You were mine owne and ſo be ſtill,
               So ſhall we liue and loue our fill.
            
            
               Then may I thinke my ſelfe to bée
               well recompenſt,
               For wearing of the Trée that is
               ſo well defenſt
               Againſt all weather that doth fall,
               When waywarde Winter ſpits his gall.
            
            
               And when wée méete, to trie me true,
               looke on my Hed,
               And I will craue an othe of you
               where Faith be fled:
               So ſhall we both aſſured bée
               Both I of you, and you of mée.
            
         
         
            
            ¶An Epitaph of the Ladie Br.
            STaie (gentle Friend) that paſſeſt by
            and learne this lore of mée,
            That mortall things doe liue to die,
            and die againe to bée.
            For daylie proufe hath daylie taught
            and yet doth teache it plaine,
            That all our ſubſtance comes to naught,
            and worldly welth is vaine.
            No rawnſome may redéeme thy fleſhe
            from lothſome lumpes of ſoyle,
            The Wormes will ſoone thy Beautie freſhe
            with greedie gripe diſpoyle.
            I that was earſt of gentle bloud
            that neuer ſufferd ſtaine,
            Haue nothing but a winding ſhrowds
            in ſtead of all my gaine.
            I twiſe was bound by ſolemne oth
            vnto a louing Make:
            Yet twas my luck to burie both,
            and eke a thirde to take.
            The ioy that fourtie yeares had growne
            by thoſe two huſbands dayes,
            In two yeares ſpace was ouerthrowne
            and altred ſundrie wayes.
            As luck would not allow my choice,
            ſo Death miſlikte the ſame:
            
               
Thoſe two agréed with common voyce
            my bondage too vnframe.
            The Lady (Br) quoth Fortune tho
            hir worſhip ſhall not looſe:
            Then ſhée (quoth Death) ſhall haue no mo,
            nor other huſbande chooſe.
            Thus did they both contend at once
            who mought the friendliſt bée:
            Thus Death and Fortune for the nones
            did make my body frée.
            ¶Pray gentle Friend therefore for me,
            to Mightie Ioue on hie:
            For as I am ſo thou ſhalt bée
            ſince thou doſt liue to die.
            Truſt neuer Fortunes fickle fate,
            but Vertue ſtill retaine:
            Thou mayſt in time exchaunge eſtate,
            yet Vertue will remaine.
         
         
            Of the time he firſt began to loue and after how he forewent the ſame.
            
               HOwe may it be that Snow and Iſe
               ingender heate?
               Or how may Glare and Froſt intiſe
               a feruent ſweate?
               Or how may Sommer ſeaſon make
               of heate a colde?
               
                  
How may the Spring the leaues downe ſhake
               and trées vnfolde?
               Though theſe too others ſéeme full rare,
               To mée no newes at all they are.
            
            
               For I my ſelfe in Winter tide
               when colde was rife,
               Whote gleames of Cupid did abide
               and ſtormes of ſtrife.
               In froſtie weather I was warme
               and burning whot,
               But when the Bées and Birds did ſwarme,
               full colde God wot:
               In Winter time began my looue,
               Which I in Sommer did remooue.
            
         
         
            The aſſured promiſe of a conſtant Louer.
            WHen Phenix ſhall haue many Makes,
            And Fiſhes ſhun the Siluer Lakes:
            When Woulfes and Lambes yfeare ſhall play,
            And Phoebus ceaſe to ſhine by day:
            When Graſſe on Marble ſtone ſhall groe,
            And euerie man imbrace his foe:
            When Moles ſhall leaue to dig the grounde,
            And Hares accorde with hatefull Hounde:
            When Lawrell leaues ſhall looſe their hur,
            And men of Crete be counted true:
            
               
When Vulcan ſhall be colde as Iſe,
            
               Coraebus eake approoued wiſe:
            When Pan ſhall paſſe Appollos ſkill,
            And Fooles of fanſies haue their fill:
            When Hawkes ſhall dread the ſielie Fowle,
            And men eſtéeme the nightiſh Owle:
            When Pearle ſhall be of little price,
            And golden Vertue friend to Vice:
            When Fortune hath no chaunge in ſtore,
            Then will I falſe and not before.
            Till all theſe Monſters come to paſſe
            I am Timetes as I was.
            My Loue as long as lyfe ſhall laſt,
            Not forcing any Fortunes blaſt.
            No threat, nor thraldome ſhall preuaile
            To cauſe my fayth one iote to faile,
            But as I was, ſo will I bée,
            A Louer and a Friend to thée.
         
         
            The Pine to the Mariner.
            O Man of little Wit,
            What meanes this frantick fit,
            To make thy Ship of mée
            That am a ſlender Trée,
            Whome erie blaſt that blowes
            Full lightly ouerthrowes?
            Doth this not mooue thy minde
            That rage of roring winde
            
               Did beate my boughes agood
            When earſt I grue in Wood?
            How can I here auoyde
            The foe that there anoyde?
            Thinkſt thou now I am made
            A Veſſell for thy trade,
            I ſhall be more at eaſe
            Amid the flaſſhing Seas?
            I feare if Aeole frowne,
            Both thou and I ſhall drowne.
         
         
            Againe otherwiſe.
            A Vaſſell to the winde
            when earſt I grew in wood,
            How ſhall I fauour finde
            now fléeting in the flood?
            For there whilſt reaching rootes did holde
            I thought I mought be ſomewhat bolde.
            But now that I am cut
            and framde another way,
            And to this practiſe put
            in daunger crie day.
            I feare the force of cruell foe,
            my ribbes are thin, my ſides be lowe
            But if thou venter life,
            then I will hazard lim,
            For thée is all my griefe,
            for lightly I ſhall ſwim:
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
               Though top and tackle all be torne,
            yet I aloft the ſurge am borne.
         
         
            To an olde Gentlewoman, that painted hir face.
            LEaue off good Beroe now
            to ſléeke thy ſhriuled ſkin,
            For Hecubes face will neuer be,
            as Helens hue hath bin.
            Let Beautie go with youth,
            renownce the gloſing Glaſſe,
            
               
                  ••
               ake Booke in hand: that ſeemely Roſe
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                woxen withred Graſſe.
            
               
                  •••…
               ooue thy Pecocks plumes
            thou cranck and curious Dame:
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                other Trulls of tender yeares
            reſigne the flagge of Fame.
         
         
            Of one that had a great Noſe.
            STande with thy Noſe againſt
            the Sunne with open chaps,
            And by thy teeth we ſhall diſcerne
            what tis a clock perhaps.
         
         
            
            Of one whoſe Noſe was greater than his hand.
            O Proclus, tis in vaine
            that thou about doſt ſtande,
            For well I ſée thou mindſte to wipe
            thy Nares with thy hande.
            Truth is that though thou be
            fowle fiſted out of frame:
            Yet doth this toſſing Noſe of thine
            in bigneſſe paſſe the ſame.
            When néezing thou on Ioue
            
            for ſuccour ſéemſte to crie
            Thou canſt not heare, thy Noſe debarres
            the noyſe to Eare to flie.
            It beateth back the ſounde,
            it ſtandes in middle place
            Twixt Eare and Mouth, but ſure it caſtes
            a ſhade to all the face.
         
         
            Of a Nightingale that flue to Colche to ſit abroode.
            THou ſielie foule what meanes this fooliſh paine,
            to flie to Colche too hatch thy chickins there?
            A Mother thou mayſt hap returne againe,
            
               Medaea will deſtroie thy broode I feare.
            
               
For ſhée that ſpared not to ſpoile hir owne,
            Wil ſhe ſtand friend to Fowles yt are vnknowne?
         
         
            Againe of the Nightingale.
            WHat (Philomela) meanes this fond intent
            To hatch thy broode in fell Medaeas lap?
            What? doſte thou hope hir rigor will relent
            Towarde thy Babes, that gaue hir owne no pap?
            But ſlue them all at once, and at a clap?
            I wote not what thou meanſte: vnleſſe that ſhée
            Should kill thy Brats, too make the Mother frée.
         
         
            Of a contrarie mariage.
            AN aged Trot and tough
            did marrie with a Lad:
            Againe, a Gallant Girle to.
            hir Spouſe, a Graybeard had,
            A monſtrous match (God wote)
            for others ſhe doth wed:
            And he beſtowes his ſeede on ground
            that lets it take no hed.
            In fayth, a fooliſh choyce,
            for neither hath his wiſhe:
            For tone doth lack his wife, and to.
            ther féedes on filthie fiſhe.
         
         
            
            Of Dronkenneſſe.
            AT night when Ale is in,
            like friends we part to bed:
            In mororw graye when Ale is out,
            then hatred is in hed.
         
         
            Againe of Dronkenneſſe.
            MEn hauing quaft
            are friendly ouernight:
            In dawning drie
            a man too man a ſpright.
         
         
            Of the picture of a vaine Rhetorician.
            THis Rufe his Table is,
            can nothing be more true:
            If Rufus holde his peace, this péece
            and he are one to vewe.
         
         
            Of the fond diſcord of the two Theban brothers, Octocles and Polynices.
            
            IN death you part the fire,
            you cut the cruell flame:
            If ſo you had deuided Thebes
            
            you might enioyde the ſame.
         
         
            
            Of a maruellous deformed man.
            TO drawe the minde in Table to the ſight
            Is hard: to paint the lims is counted light:
            But now in thée theſe two are nothing ſo,
            For Nature ſplayes thy minde to open ſhow.
            We ſée by proofe of thy vnthriftie déedes,
            The couert kinde from whence this filth procéedes.
            But who can paint thoſe ſhapeleſſe lims of thine,
            When eche to vewe thy Carcaſſe doth repine?
         
         
            A Myrrour of the fall of Pride.
            SOmetime the Giants did rebell
            againſt the mightie Ioue,
            
            They thought in Olymp Mount to dwell
            and long for that they ſtroue.
            A hundred handes eche Monſter had
            by courſe of curſſed kinde:
            A ſtock ſo ſtubborne and ſo mad
            I no where elſe can finde.
            Dame Tellus was their Mother thought
            of pleaſant Poets all,
            By whome they would haue brought to nought
            the ſeate Olympicall.
            
            Firſt Briareus began the broyle
            who tooke a hill in hand,
            And layde it on another ſoyle
            that thereabout did ſtand:
            
               
Stll calling on his monſtrous Mates
            exhorting them the ſame,
            And with the reaſt the Gnuffe debates
            how ſtately Gods to tame.
            
               Oſſa was layde on Pyndus back.
            and Pelion on hie:
            And thus they thought to bring to ſack
            in time the ſtarrie Skie.
            They did enuie the Gods the place
            by nature them aſſignde:
            And thought it meeter for a race
            which Tellus bred by kinde.
            They would haue had the higheſt throne
            that Ioue had long poſſeſt:
            And downe they would the Gods haue throwne
            and Princely powre repreſt.
            At length the route began to rore
            in making dreadfull ſound,
            The like was neuer heard before
            to Heauen from the ground.
            Then Iupiter began to gaze
            and looke about the Skie,
            And all the Gods were in a maze
            the Monſters were ſo nie.
            They callde a counſaile then in haſte
            the Gods aſſembled tho:
            And common ſentence was at laſt
            that mightie Ioue ſhould throw
            
               
His thunderbolt that Vulcan lame
            prepared for the nonce,
            Whereby he might eftſoone make tame
            the haughtie Giants bones.
            Then might you ſee the Mountaines fall
            and hill from hill depart,
            And monſters in the valley crawle
            whome Thunder did ſubuart.
            The Mountaines were not rayſde ſo quick
            but downe they fell as faſt:
            And Giants in a cluſter thick
            to Tellus fell at laſt.
            Such plagues had pride in former time,
            the Gods abhorred ſo
            That mortall men ſhould dare to clime
            the Heauens hie to know.
            And not alone the heauenly route
            the loftie lookes correct
            Of ſuch as prowdly go about
            their Empire to reiect:
            But other Gods of meaner ſtate
            (of whome the Poets write)
            Such pieuiſh Pecocks pride doe hate
            and ſéeke reuenge by might.
            The griſly God whome flouds obay
            and drenching Seas imbrace,
            Who in the waters beares the ſway
            where Nereus ſhewes his face:
            
               
Whome forceth he by ſurge of Seas
            into Charybdis cliues?
            Or whome doth Neptune moſt diſeaſe?
            or whome to Scylla driues?
            Not him that beares his Sailes alowe,
            nor him that kéepes the ſhoare:
            Ne yet the Bargeman that doth rowe
            with long and limber Oare.
            Not thoſe that haunt the Hauen ſure
            and port of perill voide,
            They cannot Neptunes wrath procure
            the Chanell that auoide:
            But thoſe that voide of carck and care
            and feare of Neptunes yre,
            Doe hoiſe their Sailes and neuer ſpare
            to further their deſyre,
            And doe receiue whole Gales of winde
            from mightie Aeole ſent:
            Thoſe, thoſe are they by courſe of kinde
            that Neptune makes repent.
            He ſpoiles the Sailes, and tackle teares,
            the Maſt it goes to wrack:
            The Ribbes they rent, the Shipmen feares
            when Gables gin to crack.
            Then whereto ſerues the Pilats pride
            that hoyſt his Sailes ſo hie?
            And where is he that fearde no tide
            nor threatning from the Skie?
            
               
His pride procurde his fearefull fate
            and fortune that befell.
            Which Neptune moſt of all doth hate
            as Shipmen know right well.
            Let Giants fall and Shipmens caſe
            a myrrour be therefore
            To ſuch as ſéeke to hie a place,
            for like ſhall be their lore.
            
               Narciſſus may example bée
            and myrrour to the prowde,
            By whome they may moſt plainly ſée
            how pride hath béene allowde.
            His beautie braue ſuch loftie chéere
            in him did bréede in time:
            That Gods themſelues agréeued were
            with ſuch a haynous crime.
            No loouing Laſſe might him allure,
            nor Dians Nymphes at all
            By ought his friendſhip might procure:
            but note ye well his fall.
            In Sommer time as Fortune would
            his Fortune was to bee
            In open fielde, where no man could
            his blazing beautie ſee.
            At length in raunging to and fro
            his fortune was to finde
            A Fountaine freſhe that there did flow
            as Gods (I think) aſſignde.
            
               
He thought forthwith his thirſt to quent
            by pleaſant trauaile gote,
            But there he found or ere he went
            a greater drougth God wote.
            In ſtooping downe to take the taſte
            of Chriſtall waters theare,
            (Vnhappie Boy) had ſpide at laſt
            a little Boy appeare.
            Whoſe beautie braue, and liking looke
            his fanſie pleaſde ſo well,
            That there himſelfe the Boy forſooke
            and to a frenſie fell.
            He had that he ſo fondly looude:
            and yet it was not ſo:
            And from himſelfe he was remooude
            that thence did neuer go.
            He was the Boy that tooke the vewe,
            he was the Boy eſpide,
            And being both he neither knewe,
            ſuch was the ende of pride.
            Then gan he ſhed his teares a downe,
            then gan he make his plaint:
            And then at length he fell to grounde
            ſore féebled all with faint.
            His ſpirite that earſt ſo prowde was ſéene
            conuerted into winde:
            But of his Corps a flower gréene
            ſtill there abode behinde.
            
               
               Narciſſus callde (as Poets tell)
            as Narciſſe was before,
            In token that to Narciſſe fell
            this moſt vnhappie lore.
            I could recite the hiſtories
            of many other moe,
            Whome pieuiſh pride the miſeries
            of Fortune forſt to knowe.
            But I of purpoſe will let paſſe
            
               Apollos Baſtard Sonne,
            Who Phaeton ycleped was
            when firſt his fame begonne.
            I minde not to rehearſe at all
            the charge he tooke in hande,
            I wittingly omit his fall
            into Eridan ſande.
            But this I ſay aſſuredly
            had it not béene for pride,
            The Charret had not gone awrie
            though Phaeton were guide.
            But glorie vaine and want of ſkill
            enforſte his haughtie hart,
            Of Phoebe to craue to worke his will
            in ruling Phaebus Cart.
            The like attempt tooke Icarus
            
            from Creta that did flie
            By wings of War with Dedalus,
            
            when Icar ſlue to hie.
            
               
His Fathers words preuailed not
            nor leſſon taught before,
            Till fained fethers were ſo whot
            as he could flie no more.
            For want of wings then gan he clap
            his breaſt with open armes
            Till downe he fell: ſuch was his hap,
            whoſe pride procurde his harmes.
            When wraſtling windes from Aeole ſent
            befight themſelues ſo long
            That Eaſt againſt the Weſt is bent,
            and North puts South to wrong:
            Then may you heare the Pine to crack
            that beares his hed ſo hie,
            And loftie lugs go then to wrack
            which ſeeme to touch the Skie.
            When Ioue flings downe his thundring bolts
            our vices to redreſſe,
            They batter downe the higheſt holts
            and touch not once the leſſe.
            The Cotte is ſurer then the Hall
            in proofe we daylie ſee:
            For higheſt things doe ſooneſt fall
            from their felicitee.
            What makes the Phaenix flame with fire
            a Birde ſo rare in ſight?
            What cauſeth him not to retire
            from Phaebus burning light?
            
               
In faith if he woulde liue belowe
            as Birds Dame Nature tought,
            The Eſterlings ſhould neuer knowe
            their Phoenix burnt ſo oft.
            All ye therefore that ſuretie looue
            and would not haue a fall,
            From you the Peacocks pride remooue
            and truſt not Fortunes Ball.
            Let Phaetons fate be fearde of you
            and Icars lot alſo:
            Remember that the Pine doth rue
            that he ſo high doth grow.
         
         
            Of the Clock and the Cock.
            GOod reaſon thou allow
            one letter more to mée
            Than to the Cock: For Cocks doe ſléept
            when Clocks doe wake for thée.
         
         
            Of a Tayler.
            THough Tayler cut thy garment out of frame,
            And ſtrie thy ſtuffe by ſowing it arms:
            Yet muſt we ſay the Tayler makes the Iame,
            To make and marre is one with themywis.
         
         
            
            The Louer finding his Loue flitted from wonted troth leaues to write in prayſe of hir.
            THough cleane contrarie be my Verſe
            to thoſe I wrote before,
            Yet let not retchleſſe doome accuſe
            my wandring wits the more.
            As time doth ſhape and ſhew (they ſay)
            ſo ought our ſtile to frame,
            In Sommer, Sunne, we néede no fire,
            yet winter aſketh flame:
            So I that earſt found cauſe of ſport
            and matter to reioyce,
            Of force by fanſie was procurde
            to vſe a gladſome voyce.
            And now ſince déepe diſpaire hath drencht
            my hope, I will aſſay
            To turne my tune and chaunge my chéere
            and leaue my woonted lay.
            Not farre vnlike the chirping Foule
            in Sommer that doth ſing,
            And during Winter hides his head
            till next returne of Spring.
            They ſay when altred is the cauſe
            of force effect doth ſue:
            As new repaire of better bloud
            doth cauſe a Hawke to mue.
            
               
Though Aetna burne by kindly courſe
            and belke out fire with fume:
            When Sulpher vaine is cleane extinct
            the fire will conſume.
            Whereby I may conclude aright
            that eche Effect muſt bée
            As is his Cauſe: ſo fruite enſues
            the nature of the Trée.
            Then I of force muſt ſhape my ſtile
            as matter is I write:
            Vnleſſe I would be thought to match
            a Fawcon with a Kite.
            When winde and waue at Sea doe rore
            that Barck is in diſtreſſe,
            Then time requires that ſhipmen ſhould
            their Tackles all addreſſe.
            Then crooked Ancors muſt be caſt
            the ſhaken Ship to ſtay
            From ſincking Sands, and ruthleſſe Rocks
            that Shipmen oft affray.
            No ſooner Triton blowes his Trumpe
            and ſwolen waters quailes,
            And Aeole makes his windes retire:
            but hoyſe they vp the ſailes.
            Then fléete they forward in the floud,
            then cut they waues in twaine:
            Then launch they on (as earſt they did)
            with all their might and maine;
            
               
So I hereafter muſt aſſay
            my woonted tune to chaunge
            As time requires, and I in loue
            ſhall finde my Ladie ſtraunge.
            If ſhe be one of Creſids crue
            and ſwarue hir former Heſt,
            No Lucrece muſt I terme hir then,
            for that were but a ieſt.
            Or if ſhe falſe hir fixed fayth,
            
               Vlyſſes wiues renowne
            Vnſitting is for hir whoſe loue
            endureth but a ſtowne.
            Wherefore, I will as time ſhall ſhape
            and ſhe hir loue prolong,
            Applie my Pen, and tell the troth
            as beſt I may in Song.
         
         
            He ſorrowes other to haue the fruites of his ſeruice.
            SOme men would looke to haue
            a recompence of paine,
            And Reaſon wills it ſo to be
            vnleſſe we liſt to faine:
            Some would expect for loue
            to haue vnfained hart,
            And think it but a fit reward
            for ſuch a good defart.
            
               
But I (vnhappie Wight)
            that ſpend my loue in vaine,
            Doe ſéeke for ſuccour at hir hands
            while other get the gaine.
            As thirſtie ground doth gape
            to ſwallow in the ſhoure:
            Euen ſo fare I poore Harpalus
            
            whome Cupids paines deuoure.
            I holde the Hiue in hande
            and paine my ſelfe thereby,
            While other eate the hidden foods
            that are not halfe ſo dry.
            I plough the ſoyle with paine
            and caſt my ſeede thereon:
            And other come that ſheare the ſheaues
            and laugh when I am gon.
            Mine is the Winters toile,
            and theirs the Sommers gaine:
            The Harueſt falles out too their ſhare
            that felt no part of paine.
            I beare the pinching yoke
            and burden on my back,
            And other driue when I muſt draw,
            and thus I go to wrack.
            I faſt when other féede,
            I thirſt when other drinck:
            I mourne when they triumph for ioy,
            they ſwim when I muſt ſinck.
            
               
They haue the hoped gaine
            whiles I the loſſe indure:
            They whole at hart, whilſt I my griefe
            by no meanes can recure.
            They ſhrowd themſelues in ſhade,
            I ſit in open Sunne:
            They leape as Lambes in luſtie Leaze,
            I lie as one vndunne.
            They taſte their nightly reſt,
            my troubled head doth wake:
            I toſſe and turne from ſide to ſide
            while they their pleaſure take.
            I would, but they enioy,
            I craue that is debard,
            They haue: what will you more I ſay?
            their ſeruice is prefard.
            Thus I procure my woe
            by framing them their ioy:
            In ſéeking how to ſalue my ſore
            I bréede my chiefe annoy.
            So ſhéepe with wooll are clad
            their Maiſters haue the gaine,
            So Birds doe builde their Neſts on Brakes
            and put themſelues to paine,
            But other taſte the fruite
            when ſo their broode is hatcht:
            The Neſt remaines, the Birds are gone,
            the Chickens are diſpatcht.
            
               
So Bées for Honnie toile
            in fléeing too and fro,
            And ſillie wretches take great paines
            for whome they little know.
            I think it is procurde
            by grieſly Gods aboue
            That ſome ſhould gape, and other gaine
            the fruit of others loue.
            But ſure if Womans will
            be forger of my wo,
            And not the mightie Gods ordaine
            my deſtnie to be ſo:
            Then muſt I néedes complaine
            and curſſe their cruell kinde,
            That in requitall of good will
            doe ſhew themſelues vnkinde.
            But whether be the cauſe,
            hereafter I intende
            To fawne on them that force on mée,
            and bowe when other bende.
            This one abuſe ſhall make
            me take the better héede
            On whome I fixe my fanſie faſt,
            or make a friend in déede.
         
         
            The Louer ſeeing himſelfe abuſde, renounceth Loue.
            THough men account it ſhame
            and folly to repent,
            
               
Or grutcht good will that was beſtowde
            when nought ſaue faith was ment:
            Yet can they not denie
            but if the knot be burſt,
            Then may we ſhew our ſelues vnkinde
            that friendly were at furſt.
            He runnes an endleſſe race
            that neuer turnes againe,
            And he a fonded Louer is
            that waſtes his loue in vaine.
            Nought can he iudge of hues,
            that can not ſée when Guile
            In place of friendſhip cloakes hir ſelfe
            in forme of forged wile.
            And he that plainely ſées
            the Trap before his eie
            And will not ſhun from perill, tis
            no matter though he die.
            I tell my tale by proufe
            I ſpeake it not by rot,
            To loue a ſubtile Laſſe of late
            was fallen to my lot.
            On whome I ſet ſuch ſtore
            ſuch comfort and delight,
            As life it was to ſée hir face,
            a death to want hir ſight.
            So I might doe the thing
            that might abridge hir ſmart,
            
               
And banniſh all annoy that grue
            by froward fortunes Art:
            What daunger would I dread?
            or perill ſéeme to ſhun?
            None that is here bylow on earth
            or ſubiect to the Sun.
            To ſhew my ſelfe a Friend
            to hir, I was my Foe:
            She was the onely Idoll whome
            I honorde here belowe.
            This is (thought I) the ſame
            that was Vlyſſes wife:
            Who in the abſence of hir Make
            did leade a dolefull life.
            Or elſe tis ſhe at leaſt
            whome Tarquyn did enforce
            By beaſtly rape with piercing ſworde
            ſo to for doe hir Corſe.
            But ſuch is hir abuſe
            ſo frowarde eke hir grace,
            As loue it may no longer laſt
            ſince friendſhip hides his face.
            I did not well aduiſe
            I built on ſincking Sande.
            And when I thought ſhe looude me beſt
            ſhee bore me but in hande.
            Where I had thought a Porte
            and Hauen ſure to bée:
            
               
There founde I hap and dreadfull death,
            as gazers on may ſée.
            As Mouſe that treades the trap
            in hope to finde repaſt,
            And bites the bread that bréedes his bane
            and is intrapped faſt:
            Like was my dolefull caſe
            that fed vpon my wo,
            Till now Repentance willes mée all
            ſuch fanſies to forgo.
            And (thanked be good hap)
            now once againe I fleete
            And ſwim aloft, that ſanck of late
            faſt hampred by the féete.
            Now is my fortune good
            ſo Fortune graunt it laſt:
            And I as happie as the beſt
            now ſtormie cloudes are paſt,
            I finde the bottom firme
            and ſtable where I paſſe,
            There are no haughtie Rocks at hande
            ne yet no ground of Glaſſe.
            Good Ancor holde I haue
            ſo I may vſe it ſtill,
            I am no more a bounden Thrall
            but frée I liue at will.
            But that which moſt torments
            my minde, and reaues my ioy.
            
               
Is, for I ſerude a fickle Wench
            that bred mée this annoy,
            But Gods forgiue my guilt
            and time miſpent before
            And I will be a ſillie Sot
            of Cupids crue no more.
         
         
            Againſt the Ielous heads that alwayes haue Louers in ſuſpect.
            WHen Ielous Iuno ſaw hir mightie Make
            Had Iö turnde into a brutiſh kinde
            More couertly of hir his luſt to take:
            To work hir will & all his frawd to finde
            She craude the Cowe in gift at Ioue his hande,
            Who could not well his Siſters ſute withſtande.
            When yéelded was hir boone and Heſt fulfillde
            To Argus charge committed was the Cowe,
            For he could wake ſo well, him Iuno willde
            To watch the Beaſt with neuer ſléeping browe:
            With hundreth eies that hatefull Hierds hed
            Was deckt, ſom watcht whē ſom to ſléepe were led.
            So warded he by day, ſo wakte by night
            And did Dame Iunos will accompliſh ſo,
            As neither Ioue might once delude his ſight,
            Nor Iö part hir pointed paſture fro:
            His ſtaring eies on Iö ſtill were bent,
            He markt hir march, and ſude hir as ſhe went.
            
               
Till Ioue at length to ruth and pittie mooude
            To ſée the ſpitefull hate that Argus bare
            To hir, whome he ſo feruently had looude
            And who for him abode ſuch endleſſe care:
            His fethred Sonne Cylenus ſent from Skies
            To reaue the carefull Clowne his watchfull eies.
            Who to fulfill his Lorde and Fathers Heſt
            Tooke charmed Rod in hande and Pipe to playe,
            And gyrt him with a ſworde as lykte him beſt
            And to the fielde he flue where Argus laye
            Diſguiſed like a ſhepherd in his wéede
            That he his purpoſe might the better ſpéede.
            When eche had other ſalued in his ſort,
            To brag vpon his Pipe the Clowne begoon,
            And ſayde, that for that noyſe and gallant ſport
            All other mirthes and maygames he would ſhoon,
            His only ioy was on his Pipe to playe:
            And then to blow the Ruſtick did aſſaye.
            In fine when Argus had his cunning ſhowde,
            And eche to other chatted had a ſpace
            Of this and that as was befalne abrode,
            
               Mercurius tooke his Pipe from out his cafe
            And thereon playde hée ſo paſſing well,
            As moſt of Argus eies to ſlumber fell.
            And as they ſlept with charmed Rod he ſtroke
            The drowſie Dolt to kéepe him in that plight,
            And playde ſo long till time he did prouoke
            All Argus eies to byd the beaſt God night:
            
               
Whome when he ſawe in ſuch a ſlumber led,
            He ſtole the Cowe, and ſwapt of Argus hed.
            Such was the fine of his diſpitous hate,
            Such was the boone and guerdon of his hire,
            And all the good the carefull Coward gate
            For ſeeking to debarre the Gods deſire:
            A fit reward for ſuch a good deſart,
            The Cowarde might haue playde a wiſer part.
            God ſende the lyke and worſe to ſuch as vſe
            (As Argus did) with euer waking eie
            The blameleſſe ſort of Louers to abuſe,
            That alwayes readie are and preſt to prie
            The purpoſe to bewray and couert toyes
            Of faithfull friends, and barre their bliſſefull ioyes.
            I truſt there will be found in time of néede
            A Mercurie with charmed Twig in hand
            And pleaſaunt Pipe, their waking eies to féede
            With drowſte dumps, their purpoſe to withſtand:
            That iealous heads may learne to be wies
            For feare they loſe (as Argus did) their eies
            For Cupid takes diſdaine and ſcorne to ſée
            His Thralls abuſde in ſuch vnſéemely ſort,
            Who ſéeke no gréedie gaine nor filthie fée,
            But pleaſant play, and Venus ſugred ſport:
            A ſlender hire (God wote) to quite the paine
            That Louers bide, or they their loue attaine.
         
         
            
            That it is hurtfull to conceale ſecrets from our Friendes.
            A Smart in ſilence kept
            (as Ouid doth expreſſe)
            Doth more torment the payned man
            than him that ſéekes redreſſe.
            For then it reſpite takes,
            and leyſure to procure
            Such miſchiefe as for want of helpe
            the longer doth endure.
            As if thou ſet no ſalue
            where ranckleth ſwelling ſore,
            It will in further proceſſe paine,
            and thée torment the more.
            I ſundrie times haue ſéene
            a wound that earſt was ſmall,
            In time for want of Surgions ſight
            to greater miſchiefe fall:
            And eke the balefull blowe
            ſo grieuous that was thought,
            Full quickly curde by Surgions ſleight
            if he were quickly ſought.
            So fareth it by man,
            that kéepes in couert breaſt
            The pinching paine that bréedes within,
            increaſing great vnreaſt;
            
               
That neuer will diſcloſe
            the ſecret of his hart,
            But rather ſuffer feruent fits
            and déeper piercing ſmart.
            For why was friendſhip founde
            and quickly put in vre,
            But that th'one of thothers helpe
            ſhould thinke himſelfe full ſure?
            Why are they like in minde
            and one in erie part?
            Why are they twoo in bodies twaine
            poſſeſſing but one hart?
            And why doth one miſlike,
            that ſo offendes his Féere,
            But that they two are one in déede
            it plainely might appeere?
            Did Tullie euer dreade
            his ſecrets to diſcloſe
            To Atticus his louing Friende,
            in whome he did repoſe
            Such credit and ſuch truſt
            and in himſelfe he might,
            To whome full oft with painfull Pen
            this Tullie did indight?
            What euer Theſeus thought
            
               Perythous coulde tell,
            With wearie trauell that purſude
            his louing friende to Hell.
            
               
Was Damon daintie founde
            to Pythias at all,
            For whome he woulde with Tyran ſtaide
            as pledge to liue in thrall?
            In Pylades was nought
            but that Oreſtes knewe,
            Who priuie was from time to time
            how care or comfort grewe.
            
               Gyſippus felt no griefe
            but Titus boade the ſame:
            And where that Titus founde reliefe
            their Gyſippe had his game.
            When Laelius did laugh
            then Scipio did ioy:
            And what Menetus Sonne miſlikte
            
               Achylles did annoy.
            
               Aeurialus his thoughts
            and ſecrets of his hart
            To Nyſus would declare at large,
            were they of ioy or ſmart.
            All theſe conioyned were
            in ſureſt league of looue,
            Whome neyther Fortune good or bad,
            nor Death might once remooue.
            They would not think in minde
            nor practiſe that at all:
            But to that ſame their truſtie Friends
            they would in counſell call.
            
               
All thoſe therefore that wiſhe
            their inward paines redreſſe,
            Muſt to their moſt aſſured Friend
            it outwardly expreſſe.
            So may they chaunce to finde
            a ſalue for ſecret ſore,
            Which otherwiſe in couert kept
            will ſoone increaſe to more.
         
         
            Of the diuers and contrarie paſſions and affections of his Loue.
            TO Phiſick thoſe that long haue gone
            and ſpent their time in griefe,
            Affirme that Pacients in their paines
            will ſhun their beſt reliefe.
            They will refuſe the Tyſants taſte
            and wholeſome drinkes deſpiſe,
            Which to recure diſeaſes fell
            Phiſttions did deuiſe:
            But when they be debard the ſame
            which ſo they ſhunde before,
            They crie and call for Tyſants then
            as ſoueraigne for their ſore.
            Such is the wayward guiſe of thoſe
            with pangues that are oppreſt,
            They wiſh for that they neuer had,
            and ſhun that they poſſeſt.
            
               
I may to them right well compare
            the Louers diuers thought,
            That likes, and then miſlikes againe
            that they long earſt had ſought.
            They will not, when they may, enioy
            their harts deſired choiſe:
            They then defie, they then deteſt
            with lowde and lothſome voice.
            They will refuſe when time doth ſerue,
            but when ſuch time is gone,
            They ſigh and ſchreach with mournefull crie
            and make a ruthfull mone.
            They little think that Time hath wings
            or knoweth how to flie:
            They hope to haue it ſtill at hande
            that ſwiftly paſſeth bie.
            They thinke that Time will tarie them
            and for their fanſie ſtay,
            But Time in little time is gone
            it fléeteth faſt away.
            So ſtandes the foole by fléeting floud
            and looketh for a turne:
            But Riuer runnes and ſtill will run
            and neuer ſhape returne.
            What? doe they hope that beauties glaſſe
            will ſtill continue bright?
            Nay, when the day is gone and paſt
            by courſe appéeres the night.
            
               
For crooked age his woonted trade
            is for to plough the face
            With wrinckled furrowes, that before
            was chiefe of Beauties grace.
            Perhaps they thinke that men are mad,
            and once intrapt in loue
            Will neuer ſtriue to breake the ſnare
            nor neuer to remoue.
            No Fowler that had wylie Wit
            but will foreſée ſuch hap,
            That Birds will alway buſke and bate
            and ſcape the Fowlers Trap.
            And if their fortune fauor ſo,
            then who doth mount ſo hie
            As thoſe that guilefull Pitfall tooke
            prepared for to die?
            What Fi
                  ••
                doth fléete ſo faſt as that
            which lately hangde on hooke?
            By happie hap if he eſcape,
            he will not backwarde looke.
            Take time therefore thou fooliſh Feeme,
            whilſt Time doth ſerue ſo well:
            For Time away as faſt doth flée
            as any ſound of Bell.
            And thou perhaps in after Time
            when Time is paſt and gone,
            Shall lie lamenting loſſe of Time
            as colde as any ſtone.
            
               
Yet were thou better take thy time
            whilſt yet thy Beautie ſerues,
            For Beautie as the Flower fades
            whome lack of Phoebus ſterues.
         
         
            Of Dido and the truth of hir death.
            
               J Dido
                and the Quéene of Carthage ground,
            Whoſe lims thou ſéeſt ſo liuely ſet to ſight:
            Such one I was, but neuer to be found
            So farre in loue as Vergill ſéemes to wright,
            I liude not ſo in luſt and fowle delight.
            For neither he that wandring Duke of Troie
            
            Knewe mée, nor yet at Lybie lande ariude:
            But to eſcape Iarbos that did noie
            Mée ſore, of lyfe my Carcaſſe I depriude,
            To keepe my Heſt that he would tho haue riude.
            No ſtorme of loue, or dolour made me die,
            I ſlue my ſelfe to ſaue my Sheete of ſhame
            Wherein good Sycheus wrapped me perdie:
            Then Vergill then the greater be thy blame,
            That ſo by loue doſt bréede my fowle defame.
         
         
            Of Venus in Armour.
            IN complete Pallas ſaw
            the Ladie Venus ſtande:
            Who ſaid, let Paris now be iudge
            encounter we with hande.
            
               
Replide the Goddeſſe: what?
            ſcornſte thou in Armour mée,
            That naked earſt in Ida Mount
            ſo foylde and conquerde thée?
         
         
            Of a Hare complaining of the hatred of Dogs.
            THe ſcenting Hounds purſude
            the haſtie Hare of foote:
            The ſillie Beaſt to ſcape the Dogs
            did iumpe vpon a roote.
            The rotten ſcrag it burſt,
            from Cliffe to Seas he fell:
            Then cride the Hare: vnhappie mée,
            for now perceiue I well
            Both lande and Sea purſue
            and hate the hurtleſſe Hare:
            And cake the dogged Skies aloft,
            if ſo the Dog be thare.
         
         
            To one that painted Eccho.
            THou witles wight, what meanes this mad intēt
            To draw my face & forme, vnknowne to thée?
            What meanſte thou ſo for to moleſten mée?
            Whom neuer Cie behelde, nor man coulde ſee?
            Daughter to talking tongue, and Ayre am I,
            My Mother is nothing when things are waide:
            I am a voyce without the bodies aide.
            When all the tale is tolde and ſentence ſaide,
            
               
Then I recite the latter worde afreſhe
            In mocking ſort and counterfayting wies:
            Within your eares my chiefeſt harbour lies,
            There doe I woonne, not ſeene with mortall eies.
            And more to tell and farther to procéede,
            I Eccho height of men below in grounde:
            If thou wilt draw my Counterfait in déede,
            Then muſt thou paint (O Painter) but a ſound.
         
         
            To a cruell Dame for grace and pittie.
            AS I doe lack the ſkill
            to ſhow my faithfull hart:
            So doe you want good will
            too rue your Louers ſmart.
            The greater is my fire
            the leſſer is your heate:
            The more that I deſire
            the leſſe you ſéeme to ſweate.
            O quench not ſo the Coale
            of this my faithfull flame,
            With nayes thou frowarde ſoule,
            let yeas increaſe the ſame.
            Let vs at length agrée
            whome Cupid made by law
            Eche others friend to bée
            in fanſies yoke to draw.
            
               
If I doe plaie my part
            at any time amis,
            Then doe beſtowe thy hart
            where greater Friendſhip is.
            But if in true good will
            I beare my ſelfe vpright,
            Let mée enioy thee ſtill
            my ſeruice too requight.
            Go thou my fierie Dart
            of ſcalding whote deſire
            To pierre hir yſie hart
            and ſet hir breſt on fire.
            That I may both prolong
            my painefull pyning dayes,
            And eke auendge hir wrong
            that paine for pleaſure payes.
            I neuer ſawe the ſtone
            but often drops would waſt:
            Nor Dame but daylie mone
            would make hir yeelde at laſt.
         
         
            To a Gentlewoman from whome he tooke a Ring.
            WHat néedes this frowning face?
            what meanes your looke ſo coye?
            Is all this for a Ring,
            a trifle and a toye?
            
               
What though I reſt your Ring?
            I tooke it not to kéepe:
            Therefore you néede the leſſe
            in ſuch diſpite to wéepe.
            For Cupid ſhall be iudge
            and Vmpire in this caſe,
            Or who by hap ſhall next
            approche into this place.
            You tooke from mée my hart,
            I caught from you a Ring:
            Whoſe is the greateſt loſſe?
            where ought the griefe to ſpring?
            Kéepe you as well my hart,
            as I will kéepe your Ring,
            And you ſhall iudge at laſt
            that you haue loſt nothing.
            For if a Friendly hart
            ſo ſtuft with ſtaide looue,
            In value doe not paſſe
            the Ring you may reprooue
            The reauing of the ſame,
            and I of force muſt ſay
            That I deſerude the blame
            who tooke your Ring away.
            But what if you doe wreake
            your malice on my hart?
            Then giue mée leaue to thinke
            you guiltie for your part.
            
               
And when ſo ere I yeelde
            to you your Ring againe,
            Reſtore me vp my hart
            that now you put to paine.
            For ſo we both be pleaſde,
            to ſay we may be bolde
            That neyther to the loſſe
            of vs hath bought or ſolde.
         
         
            The Louer blames his Tongue that failed to vtter his ſute in time of neede.
            FOrcauſe I ſtill preferde the truth before
            Shameleſſe vntruth, and lothſome léeſings lore,
            I finde my ſelfe yll recompenſt therefore
            Off thée my Tongue.
            For good deſert and guiding thée aright,
            That thou for aye mightſt liue deuoide of ſpight,
            I reape but ſhame, and lack my chiefe delight
            For ſilence kept.
            When happie hap by hap aduaunſt my caſe,
            And brought mée to my Ladie face to face,
            Where I hir Corps in ſafetie might imbrace,
            Thou heldſt thy peace.
            Thou madſte my voyce to cleaue amids my throte,
            And ſute to ceaſe vnluckylie (God wote)
            Thou wouldſt not ſpeake, tho yu hadſt quite forgote
            My harts beheſt.
            
               
My hart by thée ſuſpected was of guile,
            For cauſe thou ceaſt to vſe a louing ſtile,
            And wordes to forge and frame with fineſt file
            As Louers woont.
            Thou madſte my bloud fro paled face to ſtart,
            And flie to ſéeke ſome ſuccor of the hart,
            That wounded was long earſt with dreadfull dart
            Off Cupids Bowe.
            And thou as colde as any Marble ſtone
            When from my face the chillie bloud was gone,
            Couldſt not deuiſe the way to make my mone
            By wordes appéere.
            And (yée my teares) that woonted were to flowe
            And ſtreame adowne as faſt as thawed Snowe,
            Were ſtopt, as then yée had no powre to ſhowe
            A Louers ſute.
            My ſighes that earſt were woont to dim the Skie,
            And cauſe a fume by force of flame to flie,
            Were tho as ſlack, as Welles of wéeping drie
            Too ſhowe my Loue.
            The hart that lay incombred all within
            Had fainted quite had not by lookes ybin:
            For they declarde the caſe my hart was in
            By tongues vntroth.
         
         
            That all things are as they are vſed.
            WAs neuer ought by Natures Art
            Or cunning ſkill ſo wiſely wrought,
            
               
But Man by practiſe might conuart
            Too worſer vſe then Nature thought.
            Ne yet was euer thing ſo ill
            Or may be of ſo ſmall a priſe,
            But man may better it by ſkill
            And chaunge his ſort by ſounde aduiſe.
            So that by proofe it may be ſéene
            That all things are as is their vſe,
            And man may alter Nature cleene,
            And things corrupt by his abuſe.
            What better may be founde than flame,
            Too Nature that doth ſuccor paie?
            Yet we doe oft abuſe the ſame
            In bringing buildings to decaie.
            For thoſe that minde to put in vre
            Their malice, mooude to wrath and ire:
            To wreake their miſchiefe, will be ſure
            Too ſpill and ſpoyle thy houſe with fire.
            So Phiſick that doth ſerue for eaſe
            And to recure the grieued ſoule,
            The painefull Patient may diſeaſe,
            And make him ſick that earſt was whole.
            The true Man and the Théefe are léeke
            For ſworde doth ſerue them both at néede,
            Saue one by it doth ſafetie ſeeke
            And th'other of the ſpoile to ſpéede.
            As Law and learning doth redreſſe
            That otherwiſe would go to wrack:
            
               
Euen ſo doth it oft times oppreſſe
            And bring the true man to the rack.
            Though Poyſon paine the drinker ſore
            By boyling in his fainting breaſt,
            Yet is it not refuſde therefore,
            For cauſe ſometime it breedeth reaſt:
            And mixt with Medicines of proofe
            According to Machaons Arte,
            Doth ſerue right well for our behoofe
            And ſuccor ſends to dying harte.
            Yet theſe and other things were made
            By Nature for the better vſe,
            But we of cuſtome take a trade
            By wilfull will them to abuſe.
            So nothing is by kinde ſo voide
            Of vice, and with ſuch vertue fraught,
            But it by vs may be anoide,
            And brought in trackt of time too naught
            Againe there is not that ſo ill
            Bylowe the Lampe of Phoebus light,
            But man may better if he will
            Applie his wit to make it right.
         
         
            The Louer excuſeth himſelfe for renowncing his Loue and Ladie, imputing the ſame to his fate and conſtellation.
            THough Dydo blamde Aeneas truth
            for leauing Carthage ſhore,
            
               
Where he well entertainde had béene,
            and like a Prince before:
            Though Theſeus were vnthriftie thought
            and of a cruell race,
            That in rewarde of death eſcapte
            by Aryadnas Lace,
            Amid the deſart woods ſo wilde
            his loouing Laſſe forſooke,
            Whome by good hap and luckie lore
            the drowſie Bacchus tooke.
            Yet if the Iudges in this caſe
            their verdit yéelde aright,
            Nor Theſeus nor Aeneas fact
            deſerue ſuch endleſſe ſpight,
            As waywarde Women ſtirde to wrath
            beare fixed faſt in minde,
            Still ſeeking wayes to wreake their yre
            vpon Aeneas kinde.
            For neither lack of liking loue,
            nor hope of greater gaine,
            Nor fickle fanſies force vs men
            to breake off friendſhips chaine.
            They loth not that they looude before,
            they hate not things poſſeſt:
            Some other weightie cauſe they haue
            of chaunge, as may be geſt.
            And waying with my ſelfe eche one,
            I can none fitter finde,
            
               
Than that to men ſuch bleſſed hap
            is by the Gods aſſignde.
            The golden Starres that guide their age,
            and Planets will them ſo:
            And Gods (the Rulers of their race)
            procure them to forgo
            Their forged faith and plighted truth,
            with promiſe made ſo ſure,
            That is too ſéeming ſtrong as Stéele,
            and likely to endure.
            For did not mightie Ioue himſelfe
            the ſwift Cyllenus ſende
            To will the Troyan Prince in haſte
            into Italia bende
            And leaue the lyked lande ſo well,
            and Carthage Quéene forſake,
            That made him owner of hir hart,
            and all that ſhée could make?
            And ſuch was Theſeus lot perdie,
            ſo hard the Maydens hap,
            That ſhée in deſart ſhould be left
            and caught in Bacchus trap.
            Should Iaſon be proclaimde and cride
            a Traitor to the Skies
            For that he Medea left at laſt
            by whome he wan the Fliſe?
            No, ſuch was Oetes Daughters chaunce
            in Cradle hir aſſignde,
            
               
And Iaſans Birthſtarre forſt the Gréeke
            to ſhowe himſelfe vnkinde:
            For if rewardes might binde ſo faſt,
            and knit the knot ſo ſure,
            Their faith (no doubt) and lincked loue
            ſhould then of force endure.
            For Dido gaue him Carthage Kayes,
            the wealth, and ſoile withall:
            Thoſe other two preſerude their liues
            that elſe had liude in thrall.
            Then ſithens ſtreaming Starres procure,
            and fatall powers agree,
            And ſtawled Gods doe condiſcend
            that I my friendſhip flee:
            And reaue your Bells and caſt you off
            to liue in haggards wies,
            That for no priuate ſtale doe care,
            but loue to range the Skies:
            I muſt not ſéeme then to rebell
            nor ſecret Treaſon forge,
            But chaunge my choyce, and leaue my looue
            and fanſies fonde diſgorge.
            I craue of Cupid Lorde of loue
            a pardon for the ſame,
            For that I now reiect his lawes
            and quite renownce his game.
         
         
            
            Of Ladie Venus, that hauing loſt hir Sonne Cupid God of Loue, and deſirous to vnderſtand of him againe, declares by the way the nature of Loue and affections of the ſame, by pretie diſcription as followeth.
            
               WHat time the Ladie Venus ſought hir little Sonne
               That Cupid hight, & found him not, ſhe thus begonne
               My friends (quoth ſhe) if any chaunce in open ſtreete
               Or croſſing pathes, yt wandring amorous Elfe to meete,
               That Runnagate (I ſay) is mine: who ſo by hap
               Shall firſt bring tidings of the Boy, in Venus lap
               Is ſure to ſit, and haue in price of taken paine.
               A ſugred kiſſe. But he that brings him home againe,
               A buſſe? yea not a buſſe alone doubtleſſe ſhall haue
               But like a Friend I will entreate him paſſing braue.
               I tell you tis a proper youth. Marke euery Lun
               And member of my ſtraid Sonne that is ſo trim.
               Not ſallow white his bodie is, but like to flame,
               A fierce and fierie roling eie ſets out the ſame.
               A miſchieuous wylie hart in Breaſt the Boy doth beare,
               But yet his wordes are Honnie like and ſweete to eare.
               His talking tongue and meaning minde aſunder goe.
               Smooth filed ſtile for little coſt he will beſtowe.
               But being once inflamde with ire and raging wrath,
               A cruell canckred dogged hart the Vrchin hath.
               Falſe Foxely ſubtile Boy, and gloſing lying Lad,
               He ſports to outward ſight, but inward chafes like mad.
               A curled Sconce he hath, with angrie frowning browe.
               A little hand, yet Dart a cruell way can throwe.
               To ſhadie A cheron ſometime he flings the ſame,
               And deepeſt damp of hollow Hell thoſe Impes to tame.
               Vpon his Carkaſſe not a cloth, but naked hee
               Of garments goes, his minde is wrapt, and not to ſee.
               
                  
Much like a fethred Foule he flies, & wags his wings
               Now here now there: ye man ſomtime this Miſer wrings
               Sometimes againe the Laſſe to loue he doth enforce,
               Of neither kind, nor man nor maid, he hath remorce:
               A little Bow the Boy doth beare in tender hande,
               And in the ſame an Arrow nockt to ſtring doth ſtand.
               A ſlender Shaft, yet ſuch a one as farre will flie,
               And being ſhot from Cupids Bow will reach the Skie.
               A pretie golden Quiuer hangs there albehinde
               Vpon his back, wherein who ſo doth looke, ſhall finde
               A ſort of ſharpe and lurching ſhafts, vnhappie Boy
               Wherewith his Ladie Mother eke he doth annoy
               Sometimes: but moſt of all the fooliſh fretting Elfe
               In cruell wife doth cruelly torment and vex himſelfe.
               Doe beate the Boy and ſpare him not at all, if thou
               On him doe chaunce to light: although frō childiſh brow
               And moyſted eies the trickling teares like flouds diſtill,
               Beleeue him not, for chiefly then beguile he will.
               Not if he ſmile vnloſe his pyniond armes take heede,
               With pleaſāt home words though he thine eares dos feede
               And craue a kiſſe, beware thou kiſſe him not at all:
               For in his lips vile venom lurcks, and bitter Gall.
               Or if with friendly face he ſeeme to yeelde his Bow
               And ſhafts to thee, his proferde gifts (my Friend) forgo
               Touch not with tender hand the ſubtile flattring Dart
               Of Loue, for feare the fire thereof doe make thee ſmart.
            
            
               
                  Where this that I haue ſayde be true,
               
               
                  Yee Louers I appeale to you.
               
               
                  For ye doe knowe Cupidos toyes,
               
               
                  Yee feele his ſmarts, yee taſte his ioyes.
               
               
                  A fickle fooliſh God to ſerue,
               
               
                  I tearme him as he doth deſerue.
               
            
         
         
            
            Of the cruell hatred of Stepmothers.
            THe Sonne in lawe his Stepdame being dead,
            Began hir Hierce with Garlands to cōmende:
            Meane while there fell a ſtone vpon his head
            From out the Tombe that brought the Boy abed,
            A proofe that Stepdames hate hath neuer ende.
         
         
            Againe.
            GLad was ye ſonne of frowning Beldams death,
            To witneſſe ioy to deck hir Tomb gan trudge:
            A peece of Marbell fell and reft his breath
            As he (good Lad) ſtoode ſtrewing flowres beneath,
            A ſigne ye Death dawnts not the mothers grudge.
         
         
            To Cupid for reuenge of his vnkind and cruell Loue. Declaring his faithfull ſeruice and true hart both to the God of Loue and his Ladie.
            IF I had béene in Troyan ground
            When Ladie Venus tooke hir wound:
            IF I in Gréekiſh campe had béene,
            Or clad in armour had béene ſéene:
            If Hector had by mée béene ſlaine,
            Or Prince Aeneas put to paine:
            If I the Machin huge had brought,
            By Grecian guile ſo falſely wrought,
            Or rayſed it aboue the wall,
            Of Troie that procurde the fall:
            
               
Then could I not thée (Cupid) blame,
            If thou didſt put mée to this ſhame.
            But I haue alwaies béene as true
            To thée and thine in order due,
            As euer was there any Wight,
            That fayth and truth to Cupid plight.
            I neuer yet deſpiſe thy lawe,
            But aye of thée did ſtand in awe:
            I neuer callde thée Buſſard blinde,
            I no ſuch fault in thée did finde,
            But thought my time well ſpent to bée
            That I imploide in ſeruing thée.
            I wiſte thou wert of force and powre
            To conquere Princes in an howre
            When thou retaindſt mée as thy man
            I thought my ſelfe moſt happie than.
            Since this is true that I haue ſaide,
            Good Cupid let mée haue thy aide,
            Helpe mée to wreake my wrath aright
            And ſuccor mée to worke my ſpight.
            To thée it appertaines of due
            Him to aſſiſt that is ſo true:
            And thou of reaſon ſhouldſt torment
            Such as by wilfull will are bent
            To triumph ouer thoſe that ſerue
            Thée in the field, and neuer ſwerue,
            Go bend thy Bowe with haſtie ſpéede,
            And make hir Tigers hart to bléede.
            
               
Cauſe hir that little ſets by mee,
            Yet ſtill to ſtand in awe of thée.
            Let hir perceiue thy feruent fire,
            And what thou art in raging ire,
            Now ſhowe thy ſelfe no man to bée,
            Let hir a God both féele and ſée.
            She forceth not my cutting paine,
            Hir vowed othes ſhee wayes as vaine.
            Shée ſits in peace at quiet reſt,
            And ſcornes at mée ſo diſpoſſeſt.
            Shée laughes at thée, and mocks thy might,
            Thou art not Cupid in hir ſight.
            Shée ſpites at mée without cauſe whie,
            Shée forceth not although I die.
            I am hir captiue bounde in Giue
            And dare not once for lyfe to ſtriue.
            The more to thee I call and crie,
            To rid mee from this crueltie,
            The more ſhée ſéekes to worke hir ire,
            The more ſhée burnes with ſcalding fire.
            And all for Cupids ſake I bide,
            From whoſe decrées I doe not glide.
            Wherefore (I ſay) go bende thy Bow,
            And to hir hart an Arrow throw:
            That Dart which breaketh harts of flint
            And giues the cruell craſing dint,
            Vpon hir crabbed breaſt beſtow,
            That ſhée thy force and powre may know:
            
               
That ſhée a Myrrour may be knowne
            To ſuch as be thy deadly fone,
            So ſhall they good example take,
            How to abuſe men for thy ſake.
            Let hir (good Cupid) vnderſtande,
            That I am thine both hart and hande.
            And to play quittance force a fire,
            That ſhée may frie with whote deſire
            Of me, whome earſt ſhe put to paine,
            And this is all that I would gaine.
         
         
            An Aunſwere to his Ladie, that willed him that abſence ſhould not breede forgetfulneſſe.
            THough Noble Surrey ſayde
            that abſence woonders frame,
            And makes things out of ſight forgot,
            and thereof takes his name:
            Though ſome there are that force
            but on their pleaſures preſt,
            Vnmindefull of their plighted truth
            and falſely forged heſt:
            Yet will I not approoue
            mée guiltie of this crime,
            Ne breake the friendſhip late begoon
            as you ſhall trie in time.
            No diſtance of the place
            ſhall reaue thée from my breſt:
            
               
Not fawning chaunce, nor frowning hap
            ſhall make mée ſwarue my Heſt.
            As ſoone may Phoebus frame
            his fierie Steades to roon
            Their race from path they woonted were,
            and ende where they begoon:
            As ſoone ſhall Saturne ceaſe
            his bended broowes to ſhow,
            And frowning face to friendly Starres
            that in their Circles go:
            As ſoone the Tiger tame
            and Lion ſhall you finde:
            And brutiſh beaſtes that ſauage were
            ſhall ſwarue their bedlam kinde:
            As ſoone the froſt ſhall flame,
            and Aetna ceaſe to burne,
            And reſtleſſe Riuers to their ſprings
            and Fountaines ſhall returne;
            As abſence bréede debate,
            or want of ſight procure
            Our faithfull friendſhips writh awrie
            whilſt liuely breath indure.
            As ſoone I will commit
            my ſelfe to Lethes lake
            As the (ſwéete friend) whome I a Friend
            haue choſe for vertues ſake.
            How may a man forget
            the coale that burnes within?
            
               
Augmenting ſtill his ſecret ſore
            by piercing fell and ſkin?
            May Martirs ceaſe to mourne
            or thinke of torments preſt,
            Whilſt paine to paine is added aie
            to further their vnreſt?
            May Shipmen in diſtreſſe
            at pleaſure of the winde
            Toſt too and fro by ſurge of Seas
            that they in tempeſt finde,
            Forget Neptunus rage
            or bluſtring Borias blaſt,
            When Cables are in ſunder crackt,
            and tackle rent from Maſt?
            Ne may I (Friend) forget
            (vnleſſe I would but faine)
            The ſalue that doth recure my ſore
            and heales the ſcarre againe.
            I ſend thée by the winde
            ten thouſand ſighes a day,
            Which dim the Skies with clowdie ſmoke
            as they doe paſſe away.
            Oft gazing on the Sunne
            I count Apollo bleſt,
            For that he vewes thée once aday
            in paſſing to the Weſt.
            Oh that I had his powre
            and blaſing Lampe of light
            
               
Then thou my Friend ſhould ſtand aſurde
            to neuer ſée the night.
            But ſince it is not ſo,
            content thy ſelfe a while:
            And with remembrance of thy Friend
            the lothſome time begile.
            Till Fortune doe agrée
            that we ſhall méete againe:
            For then ſhall preſence bréede our ioyes
            whome abſence put to paine.
            And of my olde good will
            (good Friend) thy ſelfe aſſure
            Haue no diſtruſt, my loue ſhall laſt
            as long as life ſhall dure.
         
         
            Of a Thracyan that was drownde by playing on the Iſe.
            A Thracyan Boy well tipled all the day
            Vpon a frozen Spring did ſport and play,
            The ſlipper Iſe with hieft of bodies ſway
            On ſodaine brake, & ſwapt his head away:
            It ſwam aloft, bylowe the Carcas lay.
            The Mother came and bore the head away:
            When ſhée did burie it thus gan ſhée ſay.
            This brought I foorth in flame his Hierce to haue,
            The reſt amids the flood to finde a graue.
         
         
            
            The Louer hoping in May to haue had redreſſe of his woes, and yet fowly miſſing his purpoſe, bewailes his cruell hap.
            MOu that in May haue bathde in blis
            And found a ſalue to eaſe your ſore:
            Doe May obſeruaunce, Reaſon is
            That May ſhould honord be therfore.
            Awake out of your drowſie ſléepe
            And leaue your tender Beds of Downe,
            Of Cupids Lawes that taken kéepe
            With Sommer flowers deck your Crowne.
            As ſoone as Venus Starre doth ſhowe
            That brings the dawning on his back
            And chéerefull light begins to growe
            By putting of his Foe to wrack:
            Repair to heare the wedded Makes
            And late ycoupled in a knote,
            The Nightingale that ſits in Brakes
            And telles of Tereus truth by note:
            The Thruſſell, with the Turtle Doue,
            The little Robin eke yfeare
            That make rehearſall of their loue,
            Make haſte (I ſay) that yee were theare.
            Into the fieldes where Dian dwels
            With Nimphes enuirond round about,
            Haſte yée to daunce about the Wels,
            A fit paſtime for ſuch a rout.
            
               
Let them doe this that haue receiude
            In May the hire of hoped grace:
            But I as one that am bereaude
            Of bliſſefull ſtate, will hide my face,
            And doole my daies with ruthfull voice
            As fits a retchleſſe Wight to doe:
            Since now it lies not in my choiſe
            To quite mée from this curſed woe.
            I harbour in my breaſt a thought
            Which now is turnde another way,
            That pleaſaunt May would mée ybrought
            From Scylla to a better bay.
            Since all (quoth I) that Nature made,
            And placed here in earth bylowe,
            When Spring returnes, of woonted trade
            Doe baniſh griefe that earſt did growe,
            And chaungeth eke the churliſh chéere
            And frowning face of Tellus hewe,
            With vernant flowers that appéere
            To clad the ſoile with mantell newe:
            Since Snakes doe caſt their ſhriueled ſkinnes,
            And Bucks hang vp their heads on pale,
            Since friſking Fiſhes loſe their finnes,
            And glide with new repaired ſcale:
            Then I of force with gréedie eie
            Muſt hope to finde to eaſe my ſmart,
            Since eche anoy in Spring doth die,
            And cares to comfort doe conuart.
            
               
Then I (quoth I) ſhall reach the port
            And faſt mine Aucker on the ground,
            Where lyes my pleaſure and diſport
            Where is my ſuretie to be found:
            There ſhall my beaten Barke haue rode,
            And I for ſeruice done be paid,
            My ſorrowes quite ſhall be vnlode,
            Euen thus vnto my ſelfe I ſaid.
            But (out alas) it falles not ſo,
            May is to mée a Month of mone,
            In May though others comfort gro,
            My ſéedes of griefe are ſurely ſowne.
            My bitter Teares for water ſerue
            Wherewith the Garden of my breſt
            I moiſt, for feare the ſeedes ſhould ſterue,
            And thus I frame mine owne vnreſt.
            Let others then that féelen ioy
            Extole the merrie Month of May,
            And I that taſted haue annoy,
            In praiſe thereof will nothing ſay.
            But wiſh returne of winters warre
            And bluſtring force of Borias force againe.
            Theſe ſower ſéedes of wo to marre
            By force of winde and wiſking raine.
            And ſo perhaps by better fate
            At next returne of Spring, I may
            By chaunging of my former ſtate
            Caſt off my care, and chaunge my lay.
         
         
            
            To a fickle and vnconſtant Dame, a friendly warning.
            WHat may I thinke of you (my Fawlcon frée)
            That hauing hood, lines, buets, bels of mée,
            And woonted earſt when I my game did ſpring
            To flie ſo well and make ſuch nimble wing,
            As might no Fowle for weightneſſe well compare
            With thée, thou wert a Bird ſo paſſing rare:
            What may I déeme of thée (fayre Fawlcon) now,
            That neyther to my lure nor traine wilt bow.
            But this that when my back is turnde and gon,
            Another giues thée rumpes to tyre vpon.
            Well wanton well, if you were wiſe in déede
            You would regard the fiſt whereon you féede.
            You would the Horſe deuouring Crow refuſe,
            And gorge your ſelfe with fleſhe more fine to chuſe.
            I wiſhe thée this for woonted olde good will
            To flie more high, for feare the ſtowping will
            Bréede him, that now doth kéepe thée, out of loue
            And thinke his Fawlcon will a Buſſard proue.
            Which if he deeme, or doe ſuſpect at all,
            He will abate thy fleſh, and make thée fall.
            So that of force thou ſhalt enforced bée
            Too doe by him as nowe thou doſt by mée:
            That is to leaue the Kéeper, and away,
            Fawlcon take héede, for this is true I ſay.
         
         
            
            The Louer to his Ladie that gafed much vp to the Skies.
            MY Girle, thou gazeſt much
            vpon the golden Skies:
            Would I were Heauen, I would behold
            thée then with all mine eies.
         
         
            The Penitent Louer vtterly renouncing loue, craues pardon of forefaſſed follies.
            IF ſuch as did amiſſe
            and ran their race awrie,
            May boldely craue at Iudges hand
            ſome mercie ere they die,
            And pardon for their gilt
            that wilfully tranſgreſt,
            And ſawe the bownds before their eies
            that vertue had addreſt:
            Then I that brake the bancks
            which Reaſon had aſſignde
            To ſuch as would purſue hir traine,
            may ſtande in hope to finde
            Some fauour at hir hand:
            ſince blinde forecaſt was cauſe,
            And not my wilfull will in fault
            that I haue ſwerude hir lawes.
            Miſguided haue I béene
            and trayned all by truſt,
            
               
And Loue was forger of the fraude,
            and furtherer of my luſt.
            Whoſe vele did daze mine eies,
            and darckned ſo my ſight
            With errors foggie miſt at firſt,
            that Reaſon gaue no light.
            And as thoſe wofull Wightes
            that ſaile on ſwelling Seas,
            When windes and wrathfull waues conſpire
            to baniſh all their eaſe,
            When heauenly Lamps are hid
            from Shipmens hungrie eies,
            And Lodeſtarres are in couert kept
            within the cloudie Skies:
            As they without reſpect
            doe follow Fortunes lore,
            And run at randome in the flood
            where Aeols Impes doe rore,
            Till golden creſted Phebe,
            
            or elſe his Siſters light,
            Haue chaſde away thoſe noyſome clouds,
            and put the ſame to flight:
            So I (vnhappie man)
            haue followde Loue a ſpace,
            And felt the whotteſt of his flame,
            and flaſhing fierie blaſe.
            In darkneſſe haue I dwelt,
            and Errours vglie ſhade,
            
               
Vnwitting how to raiſe a Starre
            from perill to cuade.
            Few daies came on my head
            wherein was cauſe of ioy,
            But day and night were readie both
            to haſten mine anoy.
            Short were my ſléepes (God wot)
            moſt dreadfull were my dreames,
            Mine eies (as Conduits of the hart)
            did guſh out ſaltiſh ſtreames.
            Tormented was my Corſe,
            my minde was neuer frée,
            But both repleate with anguiſh aye
            diſſeuerde ſought to bée.
            No place might like mée long,
            no pleaſure could endure,
            In ſtead of ſport was ſmart at hande,
            for paſtime paine in vre.
            A Bondman to my ſelfe,
            yet frée in others ſight,
            Not able to reſiſt the rage
            of winged Archers might.
            Thus haue I ſpent my time
            in ſeruage as a Thrall,
            Till Reaſon of hir bountie liſt
            mée to hir mercie call.
            Now haue I made returne,
            and by good hap retirde
            
               
From Cupids Camp and déepe Diſpaire:
            and once againe aſpirde
            To Ladie Reaſons ſtawle
            where wiſedome throned is,
            On promiſe of amends releaſt
            is all that was amis.
            To Plato now I flie,
            and Senecs ſound aduice:
            A Fatch for Loue, I force not now
            what Chaunce fall on the Dice.
         
         
            To his Friend that refuſde him without cauſe why but onely vpon delight of chaunge.
            YOu ſhowe your ſelfe to bée
            a Woman right by kinde:
            You lyke and then miſlyke againe
            where you no cauſe doe finde.
            I can not thinke that loue
            was planted in your breſt,
            As did your flattring lookes declare,
            and periurde tongue proteſt.
            Thou ſwarſte alone that I
            thy fanſie did ſubdue,
            Then why ſhould frenſie force thée now
            to ſhow thy ſelfe vntrue?
            
               
Fie faithleſſe woman fie,
            wilt thou condemne the kinde
            Bicauſe of iuſt report of yll
            and blot of wauering minde?
            Too playne it now appeares
            that luſt procurde thy loue,
            Or elſe it would not ſo decay
            and cauſeleſſe thus remoue.
            I thought that I at firſt
            a Lucrece had ſubdude,
            But nowe I finde that fanſie fonde
            my ſenſes did delude
            I déemde that I had got
            a Fawlcon to the fiſt,
            Whome I might quickly haue reclaimde,
            but I my purpoſe miſt.
            For (oh) the worſer hap
            my Fawlcon is ſo frée,
            As downe ſhée ſtoupes to ſtraungers lure
            and forceth leaſt of mée.
            Good ſhape was yll beſtowde
            vpon ſo vile a Kite,
            That Haggard wiſe doth loue to liue
            and doth in chaunge delight.
            Yéeld me thy flanting Hood,
            ſhake off thoſe Belles of thine,
            Such checking Buſſards yll deſerue
            or Bell or Hood ſo fine.
            
               
With Fowles of baſer ſort
            how can you brooke too flie,
            That earſt your Nature did to Hawkes
            of ſtately kinde applie?
            If want of pray enforſte
            this chaunge thou art too blame:
            For I had euer traines in ſtore
            to make my Fawlcon game.
            I had a Taſſell eke
            full gentle by his kinde,
            Too flie with thée in vſe of wing
            the greater ioy to finde.
            No, doubtleſſe wanton luſt
            and fleſhly fowle deſire
            Did make thée loath my friendly lure,
            and ſet thy hart on fire
            Too trie what mettall was
            in Buſſards to be founde
            This, this was it that made thée ſtowpe
            from loftie gate to grounde.
            Wherefore if euer luck
            doe let me light on thée,
            And Fortune graunt me once againe
            thy keeper for to bée:
            Thy diet ſhall be ſuch,
            thy tyring rumpes ſo bare,
            As thou ſhalt know thy kéeper well,
            and for none other care.
            
               
Meanewhile on carren féede,
            thy hungrie gorge to glut:
            That all thy luſt in daylie chaunge
            and diet new doſt put.
            Diſeaſes muſt of force
            ſuch féeding fowle enſue:
            No force to me, thou wert my Bird,
            But (Fawlcon) now adue.
         
         
            To one that vpon ſurmiſe of aduerſitie, forewent hir Friend.
            AS too the whyte, and lately lymed houſe
            The Doues doe flock in hope of better fare,
            And leaue their home of Culuers cleane and bare:
            As to the Kitchin poſtes the péeping Mouſe
            Where Vittailes fine and curious Cates are dreſt,
            And ſhoons the ſhop where liuelyhood waxeth thin,
            Where he before had fillde his emptie ſkin,
            And where he choſe him firſt to be a gueſt:
            As Lyſe vnto the lyuing Carcaſſe cleane,
            But balke the ſame made readie to the Beare,
            So you that earſt my Friend to ſéeming weare,
            In happie ſtate: your néedie Friend doe leaue.
            Vnfriendly are thoſe other, Doue and Mouſe
            That doe refuſe olde harbour for a newe
            And make exchaunge for lodge they neuer knewe,
            Vnfriendly eke the ſlowe and lumpiſh Lowſe.
            
               
But more vnciuill you that wittie arre
            To iudge a Friend, your Friendſhip to forgo,
            Without a cauſe and make exchaunges ſo:
            For friendes are néeded moſt in time of warre.
            Put caſe that Chaunce withdrew hir olde good will
            And frownde on mée to whome ſhee was a friend?
            Is that a reaſon why your loue ſhould end?
            No, no, you ſhould a friend continue ſtill.
            For true good will in miſerie is tride,
            For then will none but faithfull friends abide.
         
         
            To Maiſter Googes fanſie that begins Giue Monie mee take friendſhip who ſo liſt.
            FRiend Googe, giue me ye faithfull friend to truſt,
            And take the fickle Coine for mée that luſt.
            For Friends in time of trouble and diſtreſſe
            With help and ſound aduiſe will ſoone redreſſe
            Eche growing griefe that gripes the penſiue breſt,
            When Monie lies lockt vp in couert Cheſt.
            Thy Coine will cauſe a thouſand cares to grow,
            Which if thou hadſt no Coine yu couldſt not know,
            Thy Friend no care but comfort will procure,
            Of him thou mayſt at néede thy ſelfe aſſure.
            Thy Monie makes the Théefe in waite to lie,
            Whoſe fraude thy Friend & falſehood will deſcrie.
            Thou canſt not kéepe vnlockt thy carefull Coine,
            But ſome from thée thy Monie will purloine:
            
               
Thy faithfull Friend will neuer ſtart aſide,
            But take his ſhare of all that ſhall beride.
            When thou art dead thy Monie is bereft
            But after life thy truſtie Friend is left:
            Thy Monie ſerues another Maiſter than,
            Thy faythfull Friend lincks with none other man.
            So that (Friend Googe) I deeme it better I,
            To chooſe the Friend and let the Monie lie.
         
         
            The Louer abuſed renownceth Loue.
            FOr to reuoke to penſiue thought
            And troubled head my former plight,
            How I by earneſt ſute haue ſought
            And griefull paines a louing Wight
            For to accoy, accoy,
            And bréede my ioy
            Without anoy, makes ſaltiſh bryne
            To fluſh out of my vapord eyne.
            ¶ To thinke vpon the ſundrie ſnares
            And priuie Panthers that were led
            To forge my daylie dolefull cares,
            Whereby my hoped pleaſures fled,
            Doth plague my hart, my hart,
            With deadly ſmart,
            Without deſart, that haue indurde
            Such woes, and am not yet recurde,
            
               
¶Was neuer day came on my hed
            Wherein I did not ſue for grace,
            Was neuer night but I in bed
            Vnto my Pillow tolde my caſe,
            Bayning my breſt, my breſt,
            For want of reſt,
            With teares oppreſt, yet remedie none
            Was to be found for all my mone.
            ¶If ſhe had dained my good will
            And recompenſt me with hir Loue,
            I would haue béene hir Vaſſell ſtill,
            And neuer once my hart remoue:
            I did pretend, pretend,
            To be hir Friend
            Vnto the end, but ſhe refuſde
            My louing hart, and me abuſde.
            ¶I did not force vpon the ſpite
            And venemous ſtings of hiſſing Snakes,
            I wayed not their words a Mite,
            That ſuch a doe at Louers makes:
            I did reioyce, reioyce,
            To haue the voyce
            Of ſuch a choyce, and ſmild to ſée
            That they reported ſo of mée.
            ¶Oh mée moſt luckie Wight (quoth I)
            At whome the people ſo repine,
            I truſt the rumor that doth flie
            Will force hir to my will incline,
            
               
And like well mée, well mée
            Whome ſhee doth ſée,
            Hir loue to bée, vnfainedly,
            In whome ſhée may full well affie.
            ¶But now at length I plainely vew
            That woman neuer gaue hir breſt,
            For they by kindly courſe will rue
            On ſuch as ſeeme to loue them beſt:
            And will relent, relent
            And be content,
            When nought is ment, ſaue friendly hart
            And loue for neuer to depart.
            ¶Some cruell Tiger lent hir Te
                  •
               
            
            And foſtred hir with ſauage Pap,
            That can not finde in hart to let
            A man to loue hir, ſince his hap
            Hath ſo aſſignde, aſſignde
            To haue his minde
            To loue inclinde, in honeſt wiſe
            Whome ſhée ſhould not of right deſpiſe.
            ¶But ſince I ſée hir ſtonie hart
            Cannot be pierſt with pitties Launce,
            Since nought is gainde but wofull ſmart,
            I doe intende to breake the daunce,
            And quite forgo, forgo
            My pleaſaunt Fo,
            That paines mée ſo, and thinkes in fine
            To make me like to Circes Swine:
            
               
¶I cleane defie hir flattering face,
            I quite abhorre hir luring lookes:
            As long as Ioue ſhall giue mée grace
            Shée neuer comes within my bookes,
            I doe deteſt, deteſt
            So falſe a Gueſt
            That breedes vnreſt, where ſhe ſhould plant
            Hir loue, if pittie did not want.
            ¶Let hir go ſéeke ſome other Foole,
            Let hir inrage ſome other Dolt:
            I haue béene taught in Platos Schoole
            From Cupids Banner to reuolt:
            And to forſake, forſake
            As fearefull Snake,
            Such as doe make, a man but ſmart
            For bearing them a faithfull hart.
         
         
            The forſaken Louer laments that his Ladie is matched with an other.
            AS Menelaus did lament
            When Helena to Troie went,
            And to the Teucrian Gueſt applide
            And all hir Countrie Friends defide:
            Euen ſo I féele tormenting paine
            To lurck in erie little vaine,
            And ranſack all my Corſe, to ſée
            That ſhée hath now forſaken mee,
            The faithfull Friend that ſhe could finde:
            But fickle Dames will to their kinde.
            
               
A ſimple chaunge in fayth it was
            To leaue the Lyon for the Aſſe,
            Such chopping will but make you bare
            And ſpend your lyfe in carek and care,
            You might haue taken better héede
            Then left the Graine, and choſe the wéede:
            Your Harueſt would the better beene
            If you had to your Bargin ſéene,
            But to recant it is to late,
            Go too, a Gods name to your Mate,
            Tis Muck that makes the Pot to play
            As men of olde were woont to ſay,
            And women marrie for the gaine
            Though oft it fall out to their paine:
            And as I geſſe thou haſt ydoon
            When all thy twiſt is throughly ſpoon,
            It will appéere vnto thy foes,
            Thou pluckſt a Nettle for a Roſe:
            In faith thy Friend would loth to ſée
            Thy curſſed luck ſo yll to bée.
         
         
            Of one that was in reuerſion.
            ANother hath that I did bie,
            and I enioy that hée imbraſte:
            I reape the Graine, and pluck the Peare,
            but he had Peare and Corne at laſte.
            Which fithens Fortune hath allowde,
            let eyther well contented bee:
            
               
I hate him not for his delights,
            then let him doe the lyke too mée.
            For ſowe both be pleaſde, I ſay,
            this bargaine was deuiſed well:
            Let him with preſent good delight
            as I what time to mée it fell.
            If euer he by hap forgo,
            I truſt my hope is not in vaine,
            I hope the thing I once enioyde
            will to his owner come againe.
            Which if be ſo, then happie I
            that had the firſt, and haue the laſte:
            What better fortune may there bée
            than in Reuerſion to be plaſte.
         
         
            That all hurts and loſſes are to be recouered and recured ſaue the cruell wound of Loue.
            THe Surgion may deuiſe
            a Salue for erie ſore,
            And to recure all inwarde griefes
            Phiſitions haue in ſtore
            Their Simples to compownde
            and match in mixture ſo,
            As ech diſeaſe from ſicklie Corſe
            they can enforce to go.
            The waſtfull wrack of welth
            that Merchants doe ſuſtaine,
            
               
By happie vent of gotten wares
            may be ſupplide againe.
            A Towne by treaſon loſt,
            a Forte by falſehood woon,
            By manly fight is got againe
            and helpe of hurtfull Goon.
            Thus eche thing hath redreſſe
            and ſwéete recure againe:
            Saue onely Loue, that farther frets,
            and feedes on inward paine.
            No Galen may this griefe
            by Phiſicks force expell:
            No Reaſons rule may ought preuaile
            where lurcking Loue doth dwell.
            The Patient hath no powre
            of holeſome things to taſte:
            No Drench, no Drug, nor Sirop ſwéete
            his hidden harme may waſte.
            No comfort comes by day,
            no pleaſant ſléepe by night:
            No néedefull nap at Noone may eaſe
            the Louers painefull plight.
            In deepe diſpaire he dwels
            till in comes hope of eaſe,
            Which ſomewhat leſſens paines of Loue,
            and calmes the ſurge of Seas.
            His head is fraught with thoughts,
            his hart with throwes repleate:
            
               
His eies amazde, his quaking hand,
            his ſtomack lothing meate.
            This bale the Louer bides
            and hatefull Hagge of Hell,
            And yet himſelfe doth déeme that hée
            in Paradyce doth dwell.
         
         
            Of the choiſe of his Valentine.
            WIth others I to chooſe a Valentine
            Addreſt my ſelfe: Ech had his deareſt friend
            In Scrole ywrit, among the reaſt was mine.
            Sée now the luck by lot that Chaunce doth ſend
            To Cupids crewe, marke Fortune how it falls,
            And mark how Venꝰ Imps are Fortūs thralls.
            The Papers were in couert kept from ſight,
            In hope I went to note what hap would fall:
            I choze, but on my Friend I could not light,
            (Such was the Goddeſſe wil that wildes the Ball)
            But ſée good luck, although I miſt the ſame,
            I hapt on one that bare my Ladies name.
            Vnegall though their beauties were to looke,
            Remembrance yet of hir well feauturde fare
            So often ſéene, thereby my Senſes tooke,
            Vnhappie though ſhee were not then in place:
            Long you to learne what name my Ladie hight?
            Account from V. to. A. and ſpell aright.
         
         
            
            Of an open Foe and a fayned Friend.
            NOt he ſo much anoies
            that ſayes: I am thy Fo,
            As he that beares a hatefull hart,
            and is a Friend to ſho.
            Of tone we may beware,
            and flie his open hate,
            But tother bites before he barck,
            a hard auoyded Mate.
         
         
            Againe.
            OF both giue mée the man
            that ſayes, I hate in déede:
            Than him that hath a Knife to kill,
            yet weares a friendly wéede.
         
         
            Of a Ritch Miſer.
            A Miſers minde thou haſt,
            thou haſt a Princes pelfe:
            Which makes thée welthy to thine Heire,
            a Beggar to thy ſelfe.
         
         
            
            Of a Painter that painted Fauour.
            THou (Painter fond) what meanes this mad deuiſe
            Fauour to drawe? ſith vncouth is the hed
            From whence it comes, and firſt of all was bred?
            Some deeme that it of Beautie doth ariſe,
            Dame Fortunes Babie and vndoubted Sonne,
            Some other doe furmiſe this Fauour was:
            Againe, ſome thinke by Chaunce it came to paſſe,
            Another ſaies of Vertue it begonne.
            What Mate is he that daylie is at hand?Queſt
            
            Faire ſpeaking he and gloſing Flattrie hight.Aunſ.
            
            What he that ſlowly comes behind? Aunſ. Deſpight.Queſt
            
            What they (I pray) that him inuiron ſtand?Queſ
                     •
                  
               
            
            Wealth, Honor, Pride, and Noble needefull Lawes.Aunſ.
            
            And leading Luſt that driues to thouſand ills.
            What meane thoſe wings, & painted quiuering Quills?Queſ
                     •
                  
               
            
            Cauſe vpward aie Dame Fortune Fauour drawes.Aunſ.
            
            Why blinde is Fauour made?Queſ
                     •
                  
                (Aunſ.) for cauſe that he
            That is vnthriftie once yplaſt amownt
            From baſer ſtep not had in any cownt
            Can not diſcerue his Friends, or who they be.
            Why treades he on the tickle turning wheele?Queſ
                     •
                  
               
            
            He followes Fortunes ſteps and giddie GateAunſ.
            
            Vnſtaied Chaunces aie vnſtedfaſt Mate:
            And when that things are well, can neuer feele.
            Then tell me one thing elſe to peaſe my minde
            My laſt demaund. what meanes his ſwelling ſo?Queſt
            
            How chaunſt that Fauour doth ſo prowdly go?Aunſ.
            
            Good haps by courſe vs Men doe maken blinde.
         
         
            The Louer whoſe Lady dwelt faſt by a Priſon.
            ONe day I hide mee faſt vnto the place
            where lodgde my Loue, a paſſing propre dame
            
               
For head, hand, leg, lim, wealth, wit, comly grace:
            And being there my ſute I gan to frame,
            The ſmokie ſighes bewrayde my fierie flame.
            But cruell ſhee, diſdainefull, coy and curſt,
            Forſt not my words, but quaild hir Friend at furſt.
            Whereat I lookte me vp a wofull Wight,
            And threw mine eies vp to the painted Skie,
            In minde to waile my hap: And ſaw in ſight
            Not farre from thence a place where Priſners lie,
            For crimes forepaſt the after paines to trie:
            A Laberinth, a lothſome Lodge to dwell,
            A Dungeon déepe, a Dampe as darke as Hell.
            Oh happie you (quoth I) that féele the force
            Of girding Gyue, thirſt, colde and ſtonie bed,
            Reſpect of mée, whoſe loue hath no remorce:
            In death you liue, but I in life and ded,
            Your ioy is yet to come, my pleaſure fled.
            In priſon you haue mindes at fréedome aye,
            I frée am thrall, whoſe loue ſéekes his decaye.
            Vnworthy you to liue in ſuch diſtreſſe
            Whoſe former faults repentance did bewaile:
            More fitter were this Ladie mercileſſe
            At grate to ſtand, with whome no teares preuaile:
            More worthy ſhe to liue in lothſome Gaile
            That murders ſuch as ſue to hir for lyfe,
            And ſpoyles hir faithfull Friends wt ſpiteful knyfe.
         
         
            
            Complaint of the long abſence of his Loue vpon the firſt acquaintance.
            O Curſed, cruell, canckred Chaunce,
            O Fortune full of ſpight,
            Why haſt thou ſo on ſodaine reſt
            from mée my chiefe delight?
            What glorie ſhalt thou gaine perdie
            or purchace by the rage?
            This is no Conqueſt to be callde,
            wherefore thy wrath aſſwage.
            To ſoone eclipſed was my ioy,
            my dolors grow to faſt:
            For want of hir that is my life,
            my life it can not laſt.
            Is this thy fickle kind ſo ſoone
            to hoiſe a man to ioy,
            And ere he touch the top of bliſſe
            to bréede him ſuch anoy?
            Nowe doe I plaine perceiue and ſée
            that Poets faine not all,
            For churliſh Chaunce is counted blinde
            and full of filthy Gall.
            I thought there had béene no ſuch Dame
            ne Goddeſſe on a whéele:
            But now too well I know hir kinde,
            too ſoone hir force I féele.
            
               
And that which doth augment my ſmart
            and maketh more my wo,
            Is, for I felt a ſodaine ioy
            where now this griefe doth grow.
            If thou hadſt ment (vnhappie Hap)
            thus to haue nipt my ioy,
            Why didſt thou ſhow a ſmyling chéere
            that ſhouldſt haue lookte acoy?
            For griefes doe nothing grudge at all
            but where was bliſſe before:
            None wailes the want of wealth ſo much
            as he that had the ſtore.
            Not he that neuer ſaw the Sunne
            complaines for lack of light,
            But ſuch as ſaw his golden gleames
            and knew his chéerefull might.
            Too late I learne through ſpitefull chaunce
            that ioy is mixt with wo,
            And eche good hap hath hate in hoorde,
            the courſe of things is ſo.
            So Poyſon lurcks in Suger ſwéete,
            the Hooke ſo hides the bayte:
            Euen ſo in gréene and pleaſant graſſe
            the Serpent lies in wayte.
            
               Vlyſſes wife I learne at laſt
            thy ſorrow and diſtreſſe,
            In abſence of thy lingring Loue,
            that ſhould thy woes redreſſe.
            
               
Great was your griefe (ye Gréekiſh Girlles)
            whilſte ſtately Troie ſtood,
            And kept your huſbands from your laps
            in perill of their blood.
            All ye therefore that haue aſſayde
            what torments lack procures
            Of that you loue, lament my lack
            which ouerlong endures.
            Ye Winds tranſport my ſoking ſighes
            to my new choſen Friende,
            So may my ſorrow ſwage perhaps
            and dréerie ſtate haue ende.
            Ye Sighes make true report of teares,
            that ſo beraine my breſt,
            As Helens huſbands neuer were
            for treaſon of his Gueſt.
            If thou (my Letter) maiſt attaine
            the place of hir abode,
            Doe thou, as Herauld of the hart,
            my ſorrowes quite vnlode.
            In thée as in a Myrronr cléere
            or Chriſtall may ſhe vewe
            My pangues, my paynes, my ſighes and teares
            which Tigers could but rewe.
            There ſhall ſhée ſee my ſecret parts
            encombred all with mone,
            My fainting lims, my vapord eien
            with hart as colde as ſtone.
            
               
I know ſhée can but rue my caſe
            when thou preſents my ſute,
            Wherefore play thou thy part ſo well
            that I may reape the frute.
            And if (when ſhée hath read thée through)
            ſhée place thée in hir lap,
            Then chaunge thy chéere thy Maiſter hath
            his long deſired hap.
         
         
            The ventrous Louer after long abſence craues his Ladie to meete with him in place to enterparle of hir auentures.
            IF ſo Leander durſt
            from Abydon to Seſt
            
            To ſwim to Herô whome he choſe
            his Friend aboue the reſt,
            And gage his comely corſe
            vnto the ſowſing Tyde
            To lay his water beaten lims
            faſt by hir tender ſide:
            Then I (my Deare) whoſe gleames
            and ardor doth ſurpaſſe
            The ſcorching flame and blaſing heate
            that in Leander was,
            May well preſume to take
            the greateſt toyle in hande,
            
               
To reach the place where thou doſt lodge
            the chiefe of Venus bande.
            For not Leanders loue
            my friendſhip doth excell,
            Nor Herô may compare with hir
            that beares Dame Beauties Bell.
            There reſteth nought for thée
            but to aſſigne the place,
            The mirrie day, the ioyfull houre
            when I may ſée thy face:
            Appoint the certaine Tide
            and fixed ſtem of ſtay,
            And thou ſhalt ſée thy faithfull Friend
            will quickly come his way
            Not dréeding any doubt:
            but ventrouſly will go
            Through thick and thin to gaine a glimſe
            of thée his ſugred fo.
            Where when by hap we méete,
            our long endured woes
            Shall ſtint by force of friendly thoughts
            which we ſhall then diſcloes.
            Then eyther may vnfolde
            the ſecrets of the hart,
            And ſhow how long diſlodge hath bred
            our cruell cutting ſmart.
            Then may we fréely chat
            of all forepaſſed toyes,
            
               
And put thoſe penſiue pangues to flight
            with new recourſe of ioyes.
            Then pleaſure ſhall poſſeſſe
            the lodge were Dolour lay,
            And mirrie blincks put cloudes of care
            and lowring lookes away.
            Then kiſſing may be plide
            and clipping put in vre,
            And lingred ſores by Cupids ſalues
            aſpire to quick recure.
            Oh dréede thou not at all,
            ſet womans feare a part
            And take the courage of a man,
            that haſt a manly hart
            In hoſtage aie with thée
            to vſe at thy deuiſe.
            In all affaires and needefull houres
            as matter ſhall ariſe.
            Reuoke to louing minde
            how ventrous Thisbe met
            In fearefull night with Pyramus
            
            where Nynus Tombe was ſet.
            So hazard thou to come
            vnto the pointed place,
            To thwart thy Friend, and méete with him
            that longs to ſée thy face.
            Who better will attend
            thy friendly comming there,
            
               
Than Pyramus of Thysbe did
            his diſappointed Féere.
            For (oh) their méeting was
            the reauer of their breath,
            The crop of endleſſe care, and cauſe
            of either Louers death.
            But we ſo warely will
            our fixed time attende,
            As no miſhap ſhall grow thereby.
            And thus I make an ende
            With wiſhing well to thee,
            and hope to méete in place
            To enterparle with thée (my Friend)
            and tell my dolefull caſe.
         
         
            To Maiſter Googe his Sonet out of ſight out of thought.
            THe leſſe I ſee, the more my téene,
            The more my teene the greater griefe
            The greater griefe, the leſſer ſéene,
            The leſſer ſéene, the leſſe reliefe:
            The leſſe reliefe the heuier ſpright,
            When P. is fartheſt out of ſight.
            The rarer ſéene, the rifer ſobs,
            The rifer ſobbes, the ſadder hart,
            The ſadder hart, the greater throbs,
            The greater throbs, the worſer ſmart,
            
               
The worſer ſmart procéedes of this
            That I my P. ſo often miſſe.
            The néerer too, the more I ſmile,
            The more I ſmile, the merier minde:
            The mirrie minde doth thought exile,
            And thought exilde recourſe I finde
            Of heauenly ioyes: all this delight
            Haue I when P. is once in fight.
         
         
            The Louer whoſe Miſtreſſe feared a Mouſe, declareth that he would become a Cat, if he might haue his deſire.
            IF I might alter kinde,
            what thinke you I would bée,
            Nor Fiſh, nor Foule, nor Fle, nor Frog,
            nor Squirrell on the Tree.
            The Fiſh the hooke, the Foule
            the lymed twig doth catch,
            The Fle the Finger, and the Frog
            the Buffard doth dipatch.
            The Squirrell thincking nought
            that feately cracks the Nut,
            The gréedie Gaſhauke wanting pray
            in dread of death doth put.
            ¶But ſcorning all theſe kindes
            I would become a Cat,
            
               
To combat with the créeping Mouſe
            and ſcratch the ſcréeking Rat.
            I would be preſent aye
            and at my Ladies call,
            To gard hir from the fearefull Mouſe
            in Parlour and in Hall.
            In Kitching for his life
            he ſhould not ſhew his hed,
            The Peare in Poke ſhould lie vntoucht
            when ſhée were gone to bed.
            The Mouſe ſhould ſtand in feare,
            ſo ſhould the ſqueaking Rat:
            All this would I doe if I were
            conuerted to a Cat.
         
         
            The Louer driuen to abſent him from his Ladie, bawayles his eſtate.
            WHen angrie Gréekes wt Troians fought
            In minde to ſack their welthie Towne,
            King Agamemnon needefull thought
            To beate the neighbour Cities downe,
            And by his Princely power to quell
            Such as by Priams Realme did dwell.
            Thus forth he trauailde with his traine
            Till he vnto Lyrneſus came,
            Where cruell fight he did maintaine,
            And fiue ſuch Wights as were of fame:
            
               
Downe went the walles and all to wrack
            And ſo was Lyrnes brought to ſack.
            Two Noble Dames of paſſing ſhape
            Vnto the Prince were brought in fine
            That might compare with Paris rape,
            Their glimring beauties ſo did ſhine:
            The Prince choſe faireſt of the twaine,
            And Achyll tother for his paine.
            And thus the warlike Chiefetaines liude
            Eche with his Ladie in delight:
            Till Agamemnon was depriude
            Of hir that golden Chryſes hight.
            For Gods did will as (Poets faine)
            That he ſhould yéelde hir vp againe.
            Which done, he reft Achylles Mate
            To ſerue in Chryſis place at néede,
            Not forcing on the fowle debate
            That followde of that cruell déede:
            For why Achylles grutged fore
            To loſe the Laſſe he wan before.
            And what for griefe and great diſdaine
            The Gréeke his Helmet hoong aſide,
            And Sworde that many a Knight had ſlaine,
            And Shield that Troian Darts had tride:
            Refuſing to approch the place
            Where he was woont his foes to chaſe.
            His manly courage was appallde
            His valiant hart began to yeelde,
            
               
His brawned armes that earſt were gallde
            With clattering Armour in the field
            Had loſt their force, his fiſt did faint,
            His gladſome ſongs were growne to plaint.
            His mouth refuſde his woonted foode,
            His tongue could féele no taſte of meat,
            His hanging chéekes declarde his moode,
            His feltred beard with haire vnſet,
            Bewraid his ſodaine chaunge of cheere
            For looſing of his louing Feere.
            His eares but ſorrowes ſounde could heare,
            The Trumpets tune was quite forgot,
            His eies were fraught with many a teare,
            Whome carcking care permitted not
            The pleaſant ſlumber to retaine
            To quite the ſielie Miſers paine.
            The thouſande part of penſiue care
            The Noble Gréeke endured than
            In Bryſeis abſence, to declare
            It farre ſurmounts the Wit of man:
            But ſure a Martyr right he liude
            Of Bryſeis beautie once beriude.
            If thus Achylles valiant hart
            Were wrapt in web of wailefull wo,
            That was invrde too dint of Dart
            His louing Bryſeis to forgo.
            If thus the ſturdie Gréeke (I ſay)
            Bewaild the night and wept the day:
            
               
Then blame not mée a louing Wight
            Whome Nature made to Cupids Bow
            To liue in ſuch a piteous plight,
            Bewaſht with waues of woorſer wo
            Than euer was the Gréekiſh Péere
            Diſpoiled of his Darling déere.
            For I of force am faine to flée
            The preſſe, the preſence and the place
            Of you my Loue a brauer B
            
            Than Bryſeis was for foote and face,
            For Head, for Hande, for Carkaſſe éeke
            Not to be matcht of any Gréeke.
            Whoſe troth you haue full often tride,
            Whoſe hart hath béene vnfolded quight
            Whoſe faith by friendſhip was deſcride
            Whoſe ioy conſiſted in your ſight,
            Whoſe paine was pleaſure if in place
            He might but gaze vpon thy face.
            O dolefull Gréeke I would I might
            Exchaunge my trouble for thy paine,
            For then I hope I ſhould acquite
            My griefe with gladſome ioyes againe:
            For Bryſeis made returne to thée,
            Would B. might doe the like to mée.
            But to exchaunge my Loue for thine,
            Or B. for Bryſeis I ne would:
            To labour in the Leaden Mine.
            And leaue the ground where growes the Golde
            
               
I minde it not, it follie were
            To chooſe the pare, and leaue the Peare.
         
         
            That Louers ought rather at firſt acquaintance to ſhew their meanings by Pen then by Mouth.
            IF all that feele the fits of loue
            And flanckring ſparkes of Cupids fire,
            By tatling tongues ſhould ſay to moue
            Their Ladies to their fonde deſire:
            No doubt a number would but gaine
            A badge of Follie for their paine.
            For Ladyes eyther would ſuſpect
            Thoſe ſugred wordes ſo ſwéete to eare
            With ſecrete poyſons baite infect:
            Or elſe would wiſely ſtand in feare,
            That all ſuch flame as ſo did burne
            To duſtie Cinders ſoone would turne.
            For he that bluntly doth preſume
            On ſmall acquaintance to diſplay
            His hidden fire by caſting fume
            Of wanton words, doth miſſe the way
            To win the Wight he honours ſo,
            For of a Friend he makes a Fo.
            For who is ſhée that may endure
            The dapper tearmes that Louers vſe?
            And painted Proems to procure
            The Modeſt Matrons minde to muſe?
            
               
No, firſt let writings go to tell
            Your Ladies that you loue them well.
            And when that time hath triall made
            Of perfite loue and faithfull breſt,
            Then boldly may you further wade
            This counſell I account the beſt:
            And this (my Deare) procurde my Quill
            To write, and tongue to be ſo ſtill.
            Which now at firſt ſhall flatly ſhowe
            (As faithfull Herauld of the hart
            The perfite loue to thee I owe
            That bréedſt my ioy, and wilt my ſmart,
            Vnleſſe at laſt (Remembrance) rue
            Vpon hir (Thought) that will be true.
            Wherefore I ſay, go ſlender ſcrole
            To hir the ſielie Mouſe that ſhonnes,
            Salute in friendly ſort the ſoule
            Among thoſe pretie beaſtes that wonnes,
            That bit the Pocat for the Peare,
            And bred the ſoule to ſuch a feare.
         
         
            ¶ An Epitaph of Maiſter Win drowned in the Sea.
            WHo ſo thou art that paſſeſt by this place
            And runſt at random on the ſlipper way,
            Recline thy liſtning eare to mée a ſpace
            Doe ſtay thy ſhip & hearken what I ſaye:
            
               
Caſt Ankor here vntill my tale be donne,
            So maiſt thou chaunce the lyke miſhaps to ſhonne.
            Learne this of mée, that men doe liue to die
            And Death decayes the worthieſt Wightes of all,
            No worldly welth or kingdomes can ſupplie
            Or garde their Princes from the fatall fall:
            One way to come vnto this lyfe we ſée,
            But to be rid thereof a thouſand bée.
            My gallant youth and frolick yeares behight
            Mee longer age, and ſiluer haires to haue,
            I thought my day would neuer come to night,
            My prime prouokte me to forget my graue:
            I thought by water to haue ſcapte the death
            That now amid the Seas doe loſe my breath.
            Now, now the churliſh chanell me doth check
            Now ſurging Seas conſpire to bréede my carke
            Now fighting flouds enforce me to the rock,
            
               Charybdis Whelps and Scyllas Dogs doe barke
            Now hope of life is paſt, now, now I ſee
            That W. can no more a liues man bée.
            Yet I doe well affie for my deſart
            (When cruell death hath done the worſt it may)
            Of well renowmed Fame to haue a part
            To ſaue my name from ruine and decay:
            And that is all that thou or I may gaine,
            And ſo adue, I thanke thée for thy paine.
         
         
            
            Againe.
            
               O Neptune churliſh Chuff, O wayward Woolfe
            O God of Seas by name, no God in déede,
            O Tyran, Ruler of the grauell Goolfe
            Where greater Fiſh on leſſer Spawne doth féede
            Why didſt yu drench with deadly Mace a Wight
            That well deſerude to run his courſe aright?
            O cruell curſed Tide, O weltring Waue
            That W. wrought this deteſtable care,
            O wrathfull ſurge, why wouldſt y• not vouchſafe
            A mid thy rage ſo good a youth to ſpare,
            And ſuffer him in luckie Bark to reach
            The pleaſant port of eaſe and bliſfull beach?
            But what though ſurging Seas & toſſing Tide
            Haue done their worſt and vttered all their force
            In working W. wrack, that ſo hath tride
            The cruelſt rage that might befall his Corſe:
            Yet naytheleſſe his euer during name
            Is faſt ingraude within the houſe of Fame.
            Let Fiſhes féede vpon his fleſh apace,
            Let crawling Cungers créepe about his bones,
            Let Wormes awake and W: Carkaſſe race
            For why it was appointed for the nones:
            But when they haue done all the ſpite they can
            His good report ſhall liue in mouth of man.
            Inſtead of ſtonie Tombe and Marble Graue
            In lieu of a lamentable Verſe,
            
               
Let W. on the ſandie Cheaſell haue
            This dolefull rime in ſtead of better Hierſe:
            
               Lo, here among the Wormes doth W. woon
            
            
               That well deſerude a farther race to roon.
            
            But ſince his fate allotted him to fall
            Amid the ſowſing Seas and troublous Tide,
            Let not his death his faithfull Friends appall
            For he is not the firſt that ſo hath dide,
            Nor ſhall be ſéene the laſt: As nie away
            To Heauen by waters as by Land they ſay.
         
         
            Praiſe of his Loue.
            
               APpelles lay the Penſill downe
            and ſhun thy woonted ſkill,
            Let brute no more with flattring Trumpe
            the Gréekiſh eares fulfill:
            Clayme not to thee ſuch Painters praiſe
            as thou haſt done of yore,
            Leaſt thou in fine be foiled flat
            and gained glorie lore.
            So ſeeke not to diſgrace the Gréekes
            thy louing Natiue land,
            But rather from depainting formes
            withdraw thy ſkilleſt hand.
            For ſo thou ſtiffely ſtand and vaunt
            that thou wilt frame hir like
            Whome I extoll aboue the Starres,
            thou art a ſtately Gréeke.
            
               
As ſoone with might thou mayſte remoue
            the Rock from whence it growes,
            As frame hir featurde forme in whome
            ſuch flouds of graces flowes.
            If I might ſpeake vnhurt of hate,
            I would auaunt that kinde
            In ſpite of Roſe and Lillie both
            had hir in earth aſſignde
            To dwell among the daintie Dames
            that ſhée hath placed héere:
            Cauſe, by hir paſſing feature might
            Dame Natures ſkill appéere.
            Hir Haire ſurmounts Apollos pride
            in it ſuch beautie raines
            Hir gliſtring eies the Criſtall farre
            and fineſt Saphire ſtaines
            A little Mouth with decent Chin,
            a Corall Lip of hue,
            With Téeth as white as Whale his bone
            eche one in order due.
            A body blameleſſe to be found,
            Armes rated to the ſame:
            Such Hands with Azure deckt, as all
            that warre with hir doe ſhame.
            As for the partes in couert kept
            and what is not in ſight,
            I doe eſtéeme them by the reaſt
            not forcing on diſpight.
            
               
If I were foreman of the Queſt
            my verdit to expreſſe,
            Forgiue mée (Phoebus,) of thy place
            ſhée ſhould thée diſpoſſeſſe.
            
               P: ſhould be raiſed to the cloudes
            and Phoebus brought alow,
            For that there ſhould liue none in earth
            but might hir vertue know.
            Thus to conclude and make an ende,
            to vouch I dare beholde:
            As ſoone as Nature hir had made
            all Natures ware was ſolde.
         
         
            The complaint of a Friend of his hauing loſt his Doue.
            WHat ſhold I ſhed my teares to ſhow mine inward pain
            Since yt the Iewell I haue loſt may not be had again.
            Yet booteleſſe though it bee to vtter couert ſmart
            It is a meane to cure the griefe, and make a ioyfull hart.
            Wherefore I ſay to you that haue enioyde your Loue,
            Lament with me in wofull wiſe for looſing of my Doue.
            You Turtle Cocks that are your louing Honnes bereft,
            And do bewaile your cruell chaunce that you aliue are left:
            Come hither, come I ſay, come hie in haſte to mee,
            Let eyther make his dolefull plaint amid this drearie tree.
            A fitter place than this may no where elſe be found
            For friendly Eccho here wil cauſe ech cry to yeeld a ſound.
            In youth it was my luck on ſuch a Doue to light,
            As by good nature wan my loue, ſhe was my whole delite
            A freſher fowle than mine for ſhape and beauties hue,
            Was neuer any man on earth that had the hap to vewe.
            
               
Dame Nature hir had framde ſo perfite in hir kinde
            As not the ſpiteful man himſelf one fault in hir could finde.
            Hir eie ſo paſſing pure, hir beake ſo braue and fit,
            The ſtature of hir lims ſo ſmall, hir head ſo full of wit,
            Hir neck of ſo good fyſe, hir plume of colour white,
            Hir legs & feete ſo finely made, though ſeldom ſene in ſight:
            Eche part ſo fitly pight as none mought chaūge his place.
            Nor any Bird could lightly haue ſo good & braue a grace.
            But moſt of all that I did fanſie, was hir voyce,
            For ſwete it was vnto mine care, & made the hart reioyce.
            No ſooner could I come in place where ſhe was ſet,
            But vp ſhe roſe, and ioyfull would hir Make & louer met.
            About my tender neck ſhe would haue claſped tho,
            And laid hir beake betwixt my lips, ſweete kiſſes to beſto.
            And ought beſides that mought haue pleaſurde me at all,
            was neuer man that had a birde ſo fit to play withall.
            when I for ioy did ſing, ſhe would haue ſong with mee,
            whē I was wo, my grief was hirs, ſhe wold not pleſāt be
            But (oh) amid my ioyes came cruell canckred Death.
            And ſpiting at my pleaſures reſt my louing bird hir breath
            who finding me alack, and abſent on a day,
            Caught bow in hand, & ſtrak hir down, a breding as ſhe lay
            Since I haue cauſe to waile the death of ſuch a Doue.
            (Good Turtles) help me to lament ye loſſe of my true loue.
            The Tree whereon ſhe ſat ſhall be the place where I
            will ſing my laſt, & end my life: for (Turtles) I muſt die.
            you know it is our kinde, we can not liue alone,
            More pleaſant is ye death to vs then life when loue is gone
            To tell a farther tale my famting breath denies,
            And ſelfe ſame death ye ſlue my Doue, begins to cloſe mine eies.
         
         
            
            That Louers ought to ſhunne no paines to attaine their Loue.
            IF Marchaunts in their warped Keales
            commit themſelues to Waue,
            And dreadfull daunger of the Goulfe
            in tempeſt that doth raue,
            To ſet from farre and Forraine lands
            ſuch ware as is to ſell,
            And is not in their Natiue ſoile
            where they themſelues doe dwell:
            If Souldiars ſerue in perills place
            and dread of Cannon ſhot,
            Ech day in daunger of their liues
            and Countrie loſſe God wot,
            Whoſe Muſick is the dreadfull Drum
            and dolefull Trumpets ſounde,
            Who haue in ſtead of better bed
            the colde and ſtonie grounde,
            And all tattaine the ſpoile with ſpéede
            of ſuch as doe withſtande,
            Which ſlender is ſometime we ſee
            when ſo it comes to hande:
            If they for Lucre light ſuſtaine
            ſuch perill as enſues,
            Then thoſe that ſerue the Lorde of Loue
            no trauaile ought refuſe:
            
               
But lauiſh of their liuely breath
            all tempeſt to abide,
            To maintaine Loue and all his lawes
            what Fortune ſo betide.
            And not to ſhrink at erie ſhoure
            or ſtormie flaw that lights,
            Ne yet to yéelde themſelues as thrall
            to ſuch as with them fights.
            Such are not fit for Cupids Campe,
            they ought no wages win
            Which faint before the clang of Trump
            or Battels broile begin.
            They muſt not make account of hurt,
            for Cupid hath in ſtore
            Continually within his Campe
            a ſalue for erie ſore.
            Their Enſigne bearer is ſo ſtoute
            ecleaped Hope by name,
            As if they follow his aduiſe
            ech thing ſhall be in frame.
            But if for want of courage ſtoute
            the Banner be bereft,
            If Hope by hap be ſtricken downe,
            and no good hope yleft:
            Tis time with Trump to blow retreate,
            the Field muſt needes be woon:
            So Cupid once be Captiue tane
            his Souldiars are vndoon.
            
               
Wherefore, what ſo they are that Loue
            as waged men doe ſerue:
            Muſt ſhun no daunger drift at all
            ne from no perill ſwerue.
            Kéepe watch and warde the wakefull night
            and neuer yéelde to reſt.
            For feare leaſt thou a waiting nought
            on ſodaine be oppreſt.
            Though hunger gripe thy emptie Maw
            endure it for a while,
            Till time doe ſerue with good repaſt
            ſuch famine to beguile.
            Be not with chilly colde diſmaide,
            let Snow nor Iſe procure
            Thy luſtfull lims from painefull plight
            thy Ladie to allure.
            That is the ſpoile that Cupid giues
            that is the onely wight
            Where at his Thralls are woont to roue
            with Arrowes from their ſight.
            My ſelfe as one among the moe,
            ſhall neuer ſpare to ſpend
            My life, my lims, yea hart and all
            Loues quarrell to defend.
            And ſo in recompence of paines
            and toile of perills paſt,
            He yéelde mée but my Ladies loue:
            I will not be agaſt,
            
               
Of Fortune, nor hir frowning face,
            I nought ſhall force hir chéere,
            But tend on erie turne on hir
            that is my louing Féere.
         
         
            A requeſt of Friendſhip to Vulcans Wyfe made my Mars.
            
            THough froward Fortune would yt you who are
            So braue a Dame, wc 
               Vulcan ſhoulden linck:
            Yet may you loue the luſtie God of warre,
            And bleare his eies that no ſuch fraud will thinck.
            Tis Cupids charge, and all the Gods agree,
            That you be Féere to him, and Friend to mée.
         
         
            The Louer that had loued Long without requitald of good will.
            LOng did I loue, and likte hir paſſing well
            Whoſe beautie bred ye thraldom of my thought,
            Long did I ſue to hir for to expell
            The foule diſdain yt beauties beames had wrought:
            Long did I ſerue, and Long I would haue doon,
            My minde was bent a thorow race to roon.
            Long when I had looude, ſude, and ſerued ſo.
            As mought haue likte as braue a Dame as ſhée,
            Hir Friend ſhe forced not but let him go,
            Shee looude at leaſt beſides him two or thrée:
            
               
Hir common cheare to erie one that ſude,
            Bred me to déeme ſhée did hir Friend delude.
            Great was my griefe at firſt to be refuſde
            That Long had looude with true vnfained hart,
            But when I ſawe I had béene long abuſde
            I forcde the leſſe from ſuch a Friend to part:
            Yet ere I gaue hir vp I gainde a thing
            That griefe to hir, and eaſe to me did bring.
         
         
            To a Friend that wild him to beware of Enuie.
            THis ſound aduiſe and counſell ſent from you
            With friendly hart yt you (my friend) doe giue,
            With willing minde I purpoſe to enſue,
            And to beware of Enuie whilſt I liue.
            For ſpitefull it doth nought but malice brue
            Aie ſéeking Loue from faithfull harts to riue,
            And plant in place where perfit Friendſhip grue
            A mortall hate, good Nature to depriue:
            And thoſe that nip mée by the back behinde,
            I truſt you ſhall vntrue reporters finde.
         
         
            Of Miſreporters.
            
               J Hope (mine Owne) this fixed Loue of thine
            Is ſo well ſtaid and rooted déepe in breſt
            That not, vnleſſe thou ſee it with thine eine
            That I from thée my loue and Friendſhip wreſt,
            Thou wilt vntie the knot of thy beheſt.
            
               
I truſt your ſelfe of Enuie will beware
            That wild your friend take héede of Enuies ſnare.
         
         
            That no man ſhould write but ſuch as doe excell.
            SHould no man write (ſay you,)
            but ſuch as doe excell?
            This fonde deuiſe of yours deſerues
            a Bable and a Bell.
            Then one alone ſhould doe
            or verie few in déede:
            For that in erie Art there can
            but one alone exceede.
            Should others ydle bée
            and waſte their age in vaine,
            That mought perhaps in after time
            the prick and price attaine?
            By practiſe ſkill is got
            by practiſe Wit is woon.
            At games you ſée how many doe
            to win the wager roon,
            Yet one among the moe
            doth beare away the Bell:
            Is that a cauſe to ſay the reſt
            in running did not well?
            If none in Phiſick ſhould
            but onely Galene deale,
            
               
No doubt a thouſand periſhe would
            whome Phiſick now doth heale.
            Eche one his Talent hath,
            to vſe at his deuiſe:
            Which makes that many men as well
            as one are counted wiſe.
            For if that Wit alone
            in one ſhould reſt and raine
            Then God the ſkulles of other men
            did make but all in vaine.
            Let eche one trie his force,
            and doe the beſt he can
            For therevnto appointed were
            the hand and hed of man.
            The Poet Horace ſpeakes
            againſt thy Reaſon plaine,
            Who ſayes tis, ſomewhat to attempt
            although thou not attaine
            The ſcope in erie thyng:
            to touch the highſt degrée
            Is paſſing hard, too doe the beſt
            ſufficing is for thée.
         
         
            To his Friend, declaring what vertue it is to ſtick to former plighted friendſhip.
            THe ſage and Siluer haired Wights doe thinke
            A vertue rare not to be proude of mind
            
               
When Fortune ſmiles: nor cowardly to ſhrink
            Though chaūged Chaūce do ſhew hir ſelf vnkind.
            But chiefeſt praiſe is to imbrace the man
            In welth and wo with whome your loue began.
         
         
            Of two deſperate Men.
            
               A Man in déepe diſpaire with Hemp in hand
            Went out in haſte to ende his wretched daies:
            And where he thought the Gallo trée ſhould ſtand
            He found a Pot of Gold: he goes his waies
            Therewith eftſoone, and in exchaunge he left
            The Rope wherewith he would his breath bereft.
            ¶The gréedie Carle came within a ſpace
            That owde the good, and ſaw the Pot behind
            Where Ruddocks lay, and in the Ruddocks place
            A knottie Cord, but Ruddocks could not find:
            He caught the Hemp and hoong himſelfe on trée,
            For griefe that he is Treaſure could not ſee.
         
         
            Of the torments of Hell and the paines of Loue.
            THough they that wanted graee
            and whilome liued héere,
            Suſtaine ſuch pangues and paines in Hell
            as doth by Bookes appéere,
            Though reſtleſſe be the rage
            of that infernall route,
            That voide of feare and Pitties plaint
            doe fling the fire aboute,
            
               
And toſſe the blaſing Brands
            that neuer ſhall conſume,
            And breath on ſielie Soules that fit
            and ſuffer furious fume:
            Though Tantall, Pelops Sonne,
            abide the Dropſie dry,
            And ſterue with hunger where he hath
            both Foode and Water by:
            Though Tytius doe indure
            his Liuer to be rent
            Of Vultures tyring on the ſame
            vnto his ſpoile ybent:
            And Syſiphe though with paine
            and neuer ſtinting drift
            Doe role the ſtone from Mountaines top
            and it to Mountaine lift:
            Though Belydes doe broile
            and ſuffer endleſſe paine,
            In drawing water from the déepe
            that falleth downe againe:
            Though Agamemnons Sonne
            ſuch retchleſſe rage indure,
            By meane of furies that with flame
            his griefull ſmart procure:
            Though Mynos hath aſſignde
            
               Prometheus to the rack,
            With hand and foote yſtretch awide
            till all his lims doe crack;
            
               
To leade a lothſome life
            and die a liuing death,
            Amid his paines to waſte his winde
            and yet to want no breath:
            Though other ſtand in Stix
            with Sulpher that doth flame,
            And other plunge in Phlegiton
            
            ſo gaſtly for the name:
            Though Cerberus, the Kaie
            of Plutos Denne that beares,
            With hungrie throte and gréedie gripe
            the newcome Straunger teares:
            Though theſe condemned Ghoſtes
            ſuch dreadfull paine indures,
            Yet may they not compare at all
            with pangues that Loue procures.
            His tiring farre excéedes
            the gnawing of the Gripes,
            And with his Whip ſuch laſhes giues
            that paſſe Megeras ſtripes.
            He lets the Liuer lie,
            tormenting aie the Hart:
            He ſtrikes and wounds his bounden thrall
            with dubble hedded Dart.
            His fire excéedes the flame
            of déepe Auernus Lakes:
            And where he once pretendes a plague
            a ſpitefull ſpoile he makes.
            
               
His foes doe wake by day
            they dread to ſléepe the night:
            They ban the Sunne, they curſe the Moone,
            and all that elſe giues light.
            They paſſe their lothſome liues
            with not contented minde:
            Their dolefull daies drawe ſlow to date
            as Cupid hath aſſignde.
            To Tantall like, but yet
            their caſe is worſe than his:
            They haue that they imbrace, but ſtraight
            are quite bereft of blis.
            They waſte their winde in ſighes
            they bleare their eies with brine:
            They breake their bulcks with bowncing griefe,
            their harts with lingring pine.
            Though Orpheus were aliue
            with Muſick that appeaſde
            The vglie God of Lymbo Lake,
            and ſoules ſo ſore diſeaſde,
            By Arte he mought not eaſe
            the Louers feruent fits,
            Ne purchace him his harts deſire
            ſo troubled are his wits.
            No place of quiet reſt,
            no roome deuoide of ruth:
            No ſwaging of his endleſſe paine
            whoſe death doth trie his truth.
            
               
His Chamber ſerues for nought
            but witneſſe of his plaint,
            His Bed and Bolſter to bewaile
            their Lorde with Loue attaint.
            The man for murther caught
            and clodgde with yron colde
            To ſweare that he more happie is
            than Louers may be bolde.
            For he in little ſpace
            his dreadfull day ſhall ſée,
            But Cupids thralls in daylie griefes
            tormented daylie bée.
            A thouſand deaths they bide
            whilſt they in life remaine,
            And onely plaints and ſtormie thoughts
            they are the Louers gaine.
         
         
            ¶An Epitaph of the death of Maiſter Tufton of Kent.
            HEre may wée ſee the force of ſpitefull death
            And what a ſwaye it beares in worldly things,
            It neyther ſpares the one nor others breath,
            He ſlayes the Keaſers and the crowned Kings.
            Nothing preuailes againſt his hatefull hande
            He heares no ſuters when they pleade for lyfe,
            The richmans purſe cānot Deaths powre wtſtand,
            Nor Souldiars ſworde compare with fatall Knyfe.
            
               
He recketh not of well renowmed fame
            He forceth not awhit of golden Fée,
            His greateſt ioy is to obſcure the name
            Of ſuch as ſéeke immortall aie to bee.
            For if that wealth, bloud, lynage, or deſart
            Loue, pittie, zeale, or friendſhip mought preuaild,
            If life well led, if true vnfayned hart
            Mought purchaſe lyfe: then Death had not aſſaild.
            This Tuftons lyfe with curſt and cruell blade
            Breaking the courſe of him that ran ſo right
            A race as he no ſtop at all had made
            Had Death not tript this Tufton for deſpight.
            The poore haue loſt the ritch haue nothing gaind,
            The good haue cauſe to mourne, the yll to plaine:
            For Tufton was to all a Friend vnfaind.
            Let Kent cry out that Death hath Tufton ſlaine,
            Yet this there is whereof they may reioyce
            That his good lyfe hath woon the peoples voyce.
         
         
            Againe.
            LEt neuer man preſume on worldly wealth,
            Let riches neuer bréede a loftie minde,
            Let no man boaſt to much of perfite health
            Let Natures gifts make no man ouer blinde
            For theſe are all but Bladders full of winde.
            Let friendſhip not enforce a retchleſſe thought,
            Let no deſart or life well led before,
            Let no renowne or glorie greatly ſought
            
               
Make man forget his preſent ſtate the more:
            For death is he that kéepes and rids the ſtore.
            If eyther health, or goods had béene of powre,
            If Natures giftes, or friendſhip and good will,
            If lyfe forepaſt, if glories Golden Bowre
            Mought haue preuaild, or ſtopt the dolefull Knill
            Of Tufton, then had Tufton liued ſtill.
            But now you ſée that Death hath quight vndoon
            His laſt of lyfe, and put him to the foile,
            Yet liues the vertue that aliue he woon,
            The times alone are ſhrowded in the ſoile:
            Thus Death is ende of all this worldleſſe toile.
         
         
            In praiſe of Ladie P.
            
               P. Séemes of Venus ſtock to bée
            for beauties comely grace,
            A Gryſell for hir grauitie,
            a Helen for hir face:
            A ſecond Pallas for hir Wit,
            a Goddeſſe rare in ſight:
            A Dian for hir daintineſſe,
            ſhée is ſo chaſte a Wight.
            Doe vew hir Corſe with curious eie,
            eche lim from top to toe,
            And you ſhall ſay I tell but truth
            that doe extoll hir ſo.
            The Head as chiefe that ſtands aloft
            and ouer looketh all,
            
               
With wiſedome is ſo fully fraught
            as Pallas there did 
                  •
               all.
            Two Eares th
                  ••…
                
               
                  •
               uſt no trifling tales
            nor credit b
                  〈…〉
               rute:
            Yet ſuch againe as readie are
            to heare the humbles ſute.
            Hir Eies are ſuch as will not gaze
            on things not worthy ſight,
            And where ſhe ought to caſt a looke
            ſhe will not winke in ſpight.
            The golden graines that gréedie gueſtes
            from forraine Countries bring,
            Ne ſhining Phoebus glittring beames
            that on his Godhead ſpring:
            No auncient Amber had in price
            of Roman Matrons olde,
            May be comparde with ſplendant hatres
            that paſſe the Venys Golde.
            Hir Noſe adorns hir countnance ſo
            in middle iuſtly plaſte,
            As it at no time will permit
            hir beautie be defaſte.
            Hir Mouth ſo ſmall hir Téeth ſo white
            as any Whale his bone,
            Hir lips without ſo liuely red
            that paſſe the Corall ſtone.
            What neede I to deſcribe hir Chéekes?
            hir Chin? or elſe hir Pap?
            
               
For they are all as though the 
                  •
               oſe
            lodge in the Lillies lap
            What ſhould I ſtand vpon the reſt
            or other parts depaint:
            As little Hand with Fingers long?
            my wits are all to faint.
            Yet this I ſay in hir behalfe
            if Helen were hir léeke,
            Sir Paris néede not to diſdaine
            hir through the Seas to ſéeke:
            Nor Menelaus was vnwiſe
            or Troupe of Troians mad,
            When he with them, and they with him,
            for hir ſuch combat had.
            
               Leanders labour was not loſt
            that ſwam the ſurging Seas,
            If Hero were of ſuch a hue
            whome ſo he ſought to pleaſe.
            And if Admetus Darling déere
            were of ſo freſh a face,
            Though Phoebus kept Admetus flock
            it may not him diſgrace.
            Nor mightie Mauors waye the floutes
            and laughing of the reſt,
            If ſuch a one were ſhée with whome
            he lay in Vulcans Neſt.
            If Bryſeis beautie were ſo braue,
            
               Achylles néedes no blame
            
               
Who left the Campe and fled the field
            for looſing ſuch a Dame.
            If ſhée in Ida had bene ſéene
            with Pallas and the reſt,
            I doubt where Paris would haue choſe
            Dame Venus for the beſt,
            Or if Pygmalion had but tane
            a glimſe of ſuch a face,
            He would not then his Idoll dumme
            ſo feruently imbrace.
            But what ſhall néede ſo many wordes
            in things that are ſo plaine?
            I ſay but that I doubt where Kinde
            can make the like againe.
         
         
            The Louer in vtter diſpaire of his Ladies returne, in eche reſpect compares his eſtate with Troylus.
            
            MY caſe with Troylus may compare,
            For as he felt both ſorrow and care:
            Euen ſo doe I moſt Miſer Wight,
            That am a Troylus outright.
            As ere he could atchieue his wiſh,
            He fed of many a dolefull diſh,
            And day and night vnto the Skies
            The ſielie Troian keſt his eies,
            Requeſting ruth at Creſids hande
            In whome his life and death did ſtande:
            
               
So night and day I ſpent in wo,
            Ere ſhe hir pittie would beſtow
            To quight me from the painefull plight
            That made me be a Martir right.
            As when at laſt he fauour ſounde,
            And was recured of his wounde,
            His grutching griefes to comfort grue,
            And torments from the Troian flue:
            So when my Ladie did remooue
            Hir rigour, and began to looue
            Hir Vaſſell in ſuch friendly ſort,
            As might appeere by outward port:
            Then who began to ioy but I
            That ſtoode my Miſtreſſe hart ſo nie?
            Then (as the Troian did) I ſoong,
            And out my Ladies vertues roong
            So lowde, as all the world could tell
            What was the meaning of the Bell.
            And as that pleaſaunt taſte of ioy
            That he endured had in Troy,
            From ſwéete to ſower did conuart,
            When Creſida did thence depart:
            So my forepaſſed pleaſures arre
            By ſpitefull Fortune put a farre
            By hir departure from this place,
            Where I was woont to view hir face.
            So Angelike that ſhone in ſight
            Surpaſſing Phoebes golden light.
            
               
As when that Diomed the Gréeke
            Had giuen the Troian Foe the gléeke.
            And reſt him Creſids comely hue
            Which often made his hart to rue,
            The wofull Troylus did lament,
            And dolefull dayes in mourning ſpent:
            So I bereft my loouing Make,
            To ſighes and ſobbings mée betake,
            Repining that my fortune is
            Of my deſired Friend to miſſe,
            And that a guilefull Greeke ſhould bée
            Eſtéemde of hir in ſuch degrée.
            But though my fortune frame awrie,
            And I diſpoylde hir companie
            Muſt waſte the day and night in wo,
            For that the Gods appointed ſo:
            I naytheleſſe will wiſh hir well
            And better than to Creſid fell.
            I pray ſhe may haue better hap
            Than beg hir bread with Diſh and Clap,
            As ſhée the ſielie Miſer did
            When Troylus by the Spittle rid.
            God ſhield hir from the Lazars lore
            And lothſome Leapers ſtincking ſore,
            And for the loue I earſt hir bare
            I wiſh hir as my ſelfe to fare:
            My ſelfe that am a Troian true
            As ſhée full well by triall knue.
            
               
And as King Priams worthie Sonne
            All other Ladies ſéemde to ſhonne
            For loue of Creſid: ſo doe I
            All Venus Dearlings quight defie,
            In minde to loue them all alee
                  •
               e,
            That leaue a Troian for a Greeke.
            
         
         
            The Louer declareth what he would haue if he might obtaine his wiſh.
            IF Gods would daine to lende
            a liſtning eare to mee
            And yéelde me my demaunde at full,
            what think you it to bee?
            Not to excell in ſeate
            or wield the Regall Mace,
            Or Scepter in ſuch ſtately ſort
            as might commende the place.
            For as their Hawle is hie,
            ſo is their ruine rough,
            As thoſe that earſt hath felt the fall
            declare it well ynough.
            Ne would I wiſh by warre
            and bloudie blade in fiſt,
            To gore the grounde with giltleſſe bloud
            of ſuch as would reſiſt.
            For Tirants though a while
            doe leade their liues in ioy,
            Yet Tirants trie in trackt of time
            how bloudſhed doth annoy.
            
               
I would none office craue,
            ne Conſulſhip requeſt:
            For that ſuch rule is full of rage,
            and fraught with all vnreſt.
            Ne would I wiſh for welth
            in great exceſſe to flow,
            Which keepes the Keyes of diſcords Denne
            as all the world doth know.
            But my deſire ſhould farre
            ſuch baſe requeſts excell,
            That I might hir enioy at will
            whome I doe loue ſo well.
            O mightie God of Gods
            I were aſſured than
            In happie hap him to ſurpaſſe
            that were the happieſt man.
            Then might I martch in mirth
            with well contented minde,
            And ioy to thinke that I in loue
            ſuch bliſſefull hap did finde.
            What friendly wordes would we
            togither then recite?
            More than my tongue is able tell
            or this poore Pen to write.
            Then ſhould my hart reioyce
            and thereby comfort take,
            As they haue felt that earſt haue had
            the vſe of ſuch a Make.
            
               
If Fortune then would frowne,
            or ſought me to diſgrace:
            The touching of hir cherrie lip
            ſuch ſorrowes would diſplace.
            Or if ſuch griefe did growe
            as might procure my ſmart,
            Hir long and limber armes to mée
            might ſoone reduce my hart.
            For as by foming flouds
            the fleating Fiſhes liues:
            To Salamanders as the 
                  ••
               me
            their onely comfort giues:
            So doth thy beautie (P)
            my ſorrowes quite expell:
            And makes me fare where I ſhould faint
            vnleſſe thou loo
                  ••
               ſte mée well.
            And as by Waters want,
            Fiſh falleth to decay,
            And Salamander can not liue
            when flame is tane away:
            So abſence from hir ſight
            whole Seas of ſorrowes makes,
            Which preſence of that Paragon
            
            by ſecret vertue ſlakes.
            Would Death would ſpare to ſpoyle
            and crooked age to raſe
            (As they are woont by courſe of kinde)
            
               Pees beautie in this caſe.
            
               
Yet though their rigor rage,
            and powre by proofe be plaine:
            If P. ſhould die to morrow next,
            yet P. ſhould liue againe.
            For Phaenix by his kinde
            to Phaenix will returne,
            When he by force of Phaebus flame
            in ſcalding Skies doe burne.
            Then P. muſt néedes reuiue
            that is a Phaenix plaine:
            And P. by lack of liuely breath
            ſhall be a P. againe.
         
         
            Of a Gentlewoman that wilde hir Louer to weare greene Bayes in token of hir ſtedfaſt loue towards him.
            
               B: Tolde me that the Bay would aye be gréene,
            And neuer chaunge his hue for winters thret:
            Wherefore (quoth ſhee) that plainely may be ſéene
            What loue thy Ladie beares, the Lawrell get.
            A braunch aloft vpon the Helmet weare,
            Preſuming that vntill the Lawrell die
            And loze his natiue colour, I will beare
            A faithfull hart, and neuer ſwerue awrie.
            I (ſiely ſoule) did ſmile with ioyfull brow
            Hoping that Daphnis would retainde hir hue
            And not haue chaungde: & lykewiſe that the vow
            My Ladie made would make my Ladie true.
            
               
O Gods, beholde the chaunce, I wore the Trée,
            And honord it as ſtay of ſtedfaſt Loue:
            But ſodainely the Lawrell might I ſée
            To looke as browne as doth the browneſt Doue.
            I marueld much at this vnwoonted ſight:
            Within a day or two came newes to mée
            That ſhée had chaungde, & ſwarude hir friendſhip quight
            Wherefore affie in neither trull nor tree.
            For I perceiue that colours lightly chaunge,
            And Ladies loue on ſodaine waxeth ſtraunge.
         
         
            ¶An Epitaph of Maiſter Edwards ſometime Maiſter of the Children of the Chappell, and Gentleman of Lyncolns Inne of Court.
            YE Learned Muſes nine
            and ſacred Siſters all,
            Now lay your chéerefull Cithrons downe
            and to lamenting fall.
            Rent off thoſe Garlands gréene,
            doe Lawrell Leaues away,
            Remooue the Myrtell from your browes
            and ſtint on ſtrings to play.
            For he that led the daunce
            the chiefeſt of your traine,
            (I meane the man that Edwards height)
            by cruell death is ſlaine.
            
               
Yée Courtyers chaunge your chéere,
            lament in wailefull wiſe,
            For now your Orpheus hath reſignde,
            in clay his Carcas lyes.
            O ruth, he is bereft
            that whilſt he liued héere
            For Poets Pen and paſſing Wit
            could haue no Engliſh Péere.
            His vaine in Verſe was ſuch,
            ſo ſtately eke his ſtile
            His feate in forging ſugred Songs
            with cleane and curious file,
            As all the learned Greekes
            
            and Romaines would repine
            If they did liue againe, to vewe
            his Verſe with ſcornefull eine.
            From Plautus he the Palme
            and learned Terence wan,
            His writings well declarde the Wit
            that lurcked in the man.
            O Death thou ſtoodſte in dread
            that Edwards by his Art
            And Wiſedome would haue ſcapte thy ſhaft
            and fled thy furious Dart.
            This feare enforſte thy fiſt
            thy curſed Bow to bende,
            And let the fatall Arrow flie
            that Edwards life did ende.
            
               
But ſpite of all thy ſpite
            when all thy hate is tride,
            (Thou curſed Death) his earned praiſe
            in Mouth of Man ſhall bide.
            Wherefore (O Fame) I ſay
            to trumpe thy lips applie,
            And blow a blaſt that Edwards brute
            may pierce the golden Skie.
            For here bylow in earth
            his name is ſo well knowne:
            As eche that knew his life, laments
            that hée ſo ſoone is gone.
         
         
            ¶An Epitaph on the death of Maiſter Arthur Brooke drownde in paſſing to New Hauen.
            AT point to ende and finiſhe this my Booke,
            Came good report to mée, and wild me write
            A dolefull Verſe, in praiſe of Authur Brooke
            
            That age to come lament his fortune might.
            Agréede (quoth I) for ſure his Vertues were
            As many as his yeares in number few:
            The Muſes him in learned laps did beare,
            And Pallas Dug this daintie Bab did chew.
            
               Apollo lent him Lute for ſolace ſake
            To ſound his Verſe by touch of ſtately ſtring,
            And of the neuer fading Baye did make
            A Lawrell Crowne, about his browes to cling,
            
               
In proufe that he for Myter did excell
            As may be iudge by Iulyet and hir Mate:
            For there he ſhewde his cunning paſſing well
            When he the Tale to Engliſh did tranſlate.
            But what? as he to forraine Realme was bownd
            With others moe his ſoueraigne Quéene to ſerue,
            Amid the Seas vnluckie youth was drownd,
            More ſpéedie death than ſuch one did deſerue.
            Aye mée, that time (thou crooked Delphin) where
            Waſt thou, Aryons help and onely ſtay,
            That ſafely him from Sea to ſhore didſt beare?
            when Brooke was drownd why waſt yu thē away?
            If ſound of Harp thine eare delighted ſo
            And cauſer was that he beſt
                  •
               id thy back,
            Then doubtleſſe yu moughſt wel on Brooke beſtow
            As good a turne to ſaue him from the wrack.
            For ſure his hande Aryons Harp exceld,
            His pleaſant Pen did paſſe the others ſkill,
            Who ſo his Booke with iudging eie beheld
            Gaue thanks to him, and praiſde his learned quill.
            Thou cruel Goulf what meanſt thou to deuowre
            With ſupping Seas a Iewell of ſuch fame?
            Why didſt thou ſo with water marre the Flowre
            That Pallas thought ſo curiouſly to frame?
            Vnhappie was the Hauen which he ſought,
            Cruell the Seas whereon his Ship did glide,
            The winds to rough that Brooke to ruin brought,
            Vnſkilfull he that vndertooke to glide.
            
               
But ſithens teares can not reuoke the ded,
            Nor cries recall a drowned man to lande:
            Let this ſuffice textall the life he led
            And print his prayſe in houſe of Fame to ſtande
            That they that after vs ſhall bée and liue
            Deſerued praiſe to Arthur Brooke may giue.
            
               (ꝙ) G. T.
               
            
         
         
            Of the renowmed Lady, Lady Anne Counteſſe Warwick.
            AN Earle was your Sire a worthie Wight,
            A Cownteſſe gaue you Tet, a Noble Dame,
            An Earle is your Féere, a Mars outright,
            A Cownteſſe eke your ſelfe of bruted fame▪
            
            A Brother Lorde, your Father Earles Sonne,
            Thus doth your line in Lordes and Earles ronne.
            You were well knowne of Ruſſels race a childe,
            Of Bedfords blood that now doth liue an Earle,
            Now Warwicks wife, a warlike man in fielde,
            A Venus Péere, a ritch and Orient Pearle,
            Wherefore to you that Siſter, Childe, and Wife
            To Lorde and Earles are, I wiſh long life.
            You Alpha were when I this Booke begoonne
            And formoſt, as became your ſtate, did ſtande,
            To be Omega now you will not ſhoonne,
            (O Noble Dame) I truſt: but take with hande
            This ragged rime, and with a courteous looke
            And Cownteſſe eie pervſe this tryfling Booke.
         
      
      
         
            
            The Authours Epiloge to his Booke
            
            THe countnance of this Noble Cownteſſe marck
            When ſhe thy Verſe with eie that Saphire like
            Doth ſhine ſuruayes, let be thy onely carck
            To note hir Lookes: and if ſhe ought miſlike
            Say that thou ſhouldſt haue hid it from hir ſight,
            Thy Authour made the beſt for hir delight,
            The woorſt he willde in couert ſcrole to lurke
            Vntill the Beare were ouerlickt afreſh,
            For why in déepe this haſtie hatched wurke
            Reſembleth much the ſhapeleſſe lumpe of fleſh
            That Beares bring forth: So when I lick thée ouer
            Thou ſhalt (I truſt) thy perfite ſhape recouer.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater
               noſter Rovve, at the ſigne of the Starre.
            
               OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT.
            
            
               Anno Domini 1567.
            
               Cum Priuilegio.
            
            
         
      
   