
      
         
            
            
            A
THEOLOGICAL
DISCOVRSE OF THE
gracious and bleſſed Coniunction
of Chriſt and a ſincere
Chriſtian.
            
            By THO: TVKE Preacher
of Gods word.
            
               1. COR. 6.
               He that is ioyned vnto Chriſt, is one ſpirit.
            
            The bleſſed Virgin Mary brought foorth Chriſt,
the Catholique Church brings foorth all true
Chriſtians.
            
            
               LONDON
Printed by Edw: Griffin dwelling in the
little Old-baily neere the ſigne of
the Kings head, 1617.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONOVRABLE SIR
FRANCIS BACON Knight,
Lord Keeper of the great
Seale of England.
            
               Right Honourable,
            
            
               THere is no ſound
reaſon, why any
man ſhould glorie
in himſelfe
being Alone,
and I thinke,
no man, that is
compos animi, doth deſire it, ſeeing
no man can be compleat and happie,
no not in this world, without a
Fellow. It is no mans vnitie in

himſelfe, but his Vnion and Communion
witb others, that makes him
bleſſed. Woe therefore vnto him,
that is alone.
            
            But amongst all our Vnions one
with another there is none to be compared
with our Coniunction with
our bleſſed Lord and Sauiour, Ieſus
Chriſt. For Princes, Parents, Patrones,
Husbands, Wiues, Children,
Kinsfolkes, Friends, Neighbours, and
all others alſo, with whom wee are
conioyned, are but the ſpoyle of Time,
and a prey for Death. Adam and all
his Children are but Eatrh. Some of
them indeede ſtand aboue their Brethren
like Mountaines: yet theſe
Mountaines (as well as Mole-hills)
are but earth: and earth will to earth,
though all the world ſay nay. But our
Lord Ieſus Chriſt hath maſtered the
graue in the graue, and ouercome
death in death: hee is aliue and liues

for euer. And whereas no other Vnion,
no not all the Vnions in the
world together, can aſſure the ſoule
of Gods fatherly grace, and giue it a
true Title to euerlaſting life; this
can, and doth, in ſo much that hee,
which is ioyned to Chriſt, may ſay,
and ſay truely with Saint PAVL,
I am dead to the Law,
               Gal. 2. 19. 
               I am crucified
with Chriſt: but I liue: yet
not I any more, but Chriſt liueth in
mee. And in that I now liue in the
fleſh, I liue by the faith of the
Sonne of God, who hath loued
me, and giuen himſelfe for mee.
A happie man indeede; clothed with
Chriſt, partaker of his merits, indued
with his Spirit, and transformed
into him by his grace. This man
cannot periſh out of doubt, but Chriſt,
who died for him, and liueth in him,
muſt alſo periſh with him. which cannot
be. There is good reaſon therefore

to iudge an vnfeigned Chriſtian
the Only bleſſed man indeede, and to
make more account of this Coniunction
then of all earthly things, how
glorious, how great, or how good
ſoeuer.
            A Diſcourſe hereof I doe here
offer vnto your Honourable Lordſhippe:
and it comes cheerefully to
you, as being bold vpon your generous
ſpirit and loue to learning; though in
it ſelfe it be vnworthy of ſo learned
and iudicious a Perſon, and comes, it
may be, alſo out of ſeaſon; your Lordſhippe
being full of great and weighty
buſineſſes. But yet I beſeech you grace
it with your kinde acceptance, and
vouchſafe to pardon my boldneſſe
with your Lordſhippe. Go on, right
noble Lord, go on. As you doe inioy
your Fathers Honours, ſo continue,
as you haue begunne, to expreſſe his
noble Vertues, that while you liue,

not onely your owne Friends and Followers,
but that many a poore Prieſt,
that hath waited long at Altar, and
done faithfull ſeruice in the Church,
a prentiſhippe, or perhaps two or three,
and could neuer come by Benefice, either
for want of friends, or through
the cruell and curſed corruption of
ſacrilegious Patrones: and not ſuch
onely, but that all, which loue
learning, godlineſſe, truth and equitie,
may loue you, and honour
you, and bleſſe God for you: and
that when you ſhall depart from
hence, you may inioy his Happineſſe
in heauen, and leaue as honourable
a Name behinde you here on
earth.
            The great God of Heauen and
Earth double his graces in you, and
grant you health and long life for
the good of this Church and State,
and the comfort of all thoſe, that

loue your Perſon, and honour your
Vertues.
            
               
                  May 24, 1617.
               
               Your Lordſhips
euer humbly
THO: TVKE.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Of the Coniunction
of CHRIST and a
Chriſtian.
            
               OVr Lord Ieſus Chriſt is
Rom. 9. 5. God, and2 Tim. 2. 5. Man,
Symbol. Nicen. & Athan. God of God, light
of light, very God of
very God, Man of
theMath. 21. 9. & 22. 42. Luke 3. 23. 31. ſeede of Dauid,
borne of a womanGal. 4. 4. at the fulneſſe of
time, a virgin-man of aMath. 1. 25. virgin-mother,
theMath. 1. 21. great Sauiour of the world,
theIſ. 9. 6 King,Heb. 4: 14. Prieſt, andMath. 23. 8. 10. Doctor of
the Church, which is hisEph. 1. 23. myſticall
body, and deereſtCant. 4. 9. 
               Spouſe.
            
            A true Chriſtian is he, that belieues
truly in Chriſt, and expreſſeth his confidence
in him by conſtant obedience
to his law, which is his light, and by
ſincere loue vnto him; and vnto his
members.
            Hee is vnworthy the name of a

Chriſtian, that is not indued with the
faith of a Chriſtian.
            He doth really deny Chriſt and his
Lordſhip,Luke 19. 27. that will not that Chriſt
raigne ouer him. Hee doth deny him,
that denies to ſerue him. And he doth
not loue him, that doth not loue his
ſeruants. He is indeed a Chriſtian (faith
Saint Auguſtine) who ſheweth mercy vnto
all, who feeles another mans ſorrow, as
his owne, who denies no poore man his
meat, who is contented to be inglorious before
men, that hee may glory before God
and his Angells, who deſpiſeth earthly
things, that he may haue heauenly, who
ſuccours the miſerable, and is mooued to
weepe by the teares of others.
            
            A true Chriſtian is the true ſheepe of
Chriſt: now the Sheepheard beſt
knowes his owne ſheepe, and is beſt able
to deſcribe them, and ſhew with
what markes they are branded, and are
to be diſcerned.
            Ye belieue not (ſaith Chriſt) for yee
are not of my ſheep.John 10. 24. 26. 27. My ſheepe heare my
voice, and I know them, and am knowne of
mine, and they follow me.
            A true Chriſtian is Chriſts true

               Diſciple; one, that heares his word
gladly, and conformes himſelfe vnto
it carefully, delighting to heare the
things that are worthy to be done, and
to doe the things, that are worthy to
be heard, accounting it to learne well
to liue well, and to know well to belieue
well. Now true Chriſtian charitie
diſcouers the true diſciple of Chriſt.
By this (ſaith Chriſt) ſhall all men know
that ye are my Diſciples,
               John 13. 35. 
               if yee haue loue
one to another. For ſure hee loues not
the Maſter, that hates the Scholler:
neither deſerues he the name of a
ſcholler in the ſchoole of Chriſt, that
loues not the learning of Chriſt, wherwith
all his ſchollers are both knowne,
and graced; and this is Charitie, the
poore mans riches, the rich mans honour,
and the great mans crowne,
without which rich men are worſe
then beggars, learned men viler then
idiots, and they, that thinke themſelues
higheſt, are lower then the loweſt, euen
nothing, iuſt nothing,1 Cor. 13. 2. worſe then
nothing, for nothing can neither doe
hurt, nor take hurt.
            So then, true Faith in Chriſt, true

knowledge and acknowledgement of
Chriſt, true and right hearing and diſcerning
of the voice of Chriſt, which
is his word, and true following of him,
which conſiſts in obedience, ſubiection
and conformity to him, and finally
true Chriſtian charitie, are true
markes and characters, and infallible
arguments, by which a man indued
with them may demonſtrate & proue
himſelfe to be a ſincere Chriſtian, or
true diſciple and ſheepe of Chriſt leſus,
who is that good
               
                  Ioh. 10. 11. 
               Shepheard, euen
the1 Pet. 2. 25. Shepheard and Byſhop of our
ſouls, the
                  Heb. 13. 20. 
               great and
               1 Pet. 5. 4. 
               chiefe Shepheard,
who gaue
                  Ioh. 10. 11. his life for his ſheepe, that
they might not die, but haue euerlaſting
life throughhim.
            This true Chriſtian, and Chriſt Ieſus,
God and Man, are vnited, and coupled
together by God ſo, as that they are
now no more two, but one: yet not
one fleſh,1 Cor. 6. 17. 
               but one Spirit, or
ſpirituall bodie.
            Before a man bee ioyned to Chriſt,
that is, before a mans effectuall vocation,
a man and Chriſt are at oddes, are
two, are diuided, are enemies. Te were

at that time, ſaith Saint Paul,
               Eph. 2. 12. that is, in
your daies of ignorance and paganiſme,
without Chriſt, and were aliens
from the Common-wealth of Iſrael, and
were ſtrangers from the couenants of promiſe,
and had no hope, and were without
God in the world.
            
            But after they bee conioyned and
knit together, after they haue giuen
themſelues each to other, and haue taken
and entertained each other, they
are now like man and wife no more to
be reputed two, but one.
            Neither is a man to thinke that he is
a true Chriſtian, and adorned with true
Chriſtian faith and charity before hee
be vnited vnto Chriſt. But then, when
he is firſt truely coupled vnto Chriſt,
euen then, and not before, he is indued
with thoſe Chriſtian vertues, and is become
indeede a Chriſtian. For there
muſt be an vnion with Chriſt, before
there bee communion, or fellowſhip.
Wee are knit to Chriſt, before wee
draw any vertue from him. Before I
ſay, not in time, but in nature. So that
faith, hope, charitie, obedience, are
not vertues had before this vnion is

made, but then, when it is made, and
after wards. They go not before the
vnion, but they are giuen at the making
of the vnion, and ſhew him, that
is vnited. Then, when Chriſt is pleaſed
to come vnto a man, and to vnite
himſelfe actually to him, euen then,
and not before, hee breathes into him
the breath of life, to wit, his holy Spirit,
who creates in him faith and loue,
and moues him to giue himſelfe vnto
Chriſt, and workes in him a certaine
ſpirituall hunger and thirſt after him,
and learnes him to feede vpon him, as
a childe on's Nurſe, or as a hungrie
man on the meat, that's ſet before him.
But more of this hereafter.
            
               This Coniunction is not imaginary,Ioh. 17. 22. 23. 26.
               and deceitfull, but reall, and true. The
glory, which thou gaueſt me, ſaith Chriſt,
I haue giuen them, that they may be one,
euen as we are one: I in them, and thou in
mee, that they may be made perfect in one.
And I haue declared vnto them thy
name, and will declare it, that the loue,
wherewith thou haſt loued mee, may be in
them,Ioh. 14. 20. and I in them. And againe, At
that day ſhall ye know, that I am in my Father,

and you in me,Verſ. 23. and I in you. And
yet more, If any man loue me, my Father
will loue him, and we will come vnto him,
and will dwell with him.
            There are ſome, that dreame they
eat and drinke, yet indeede they neither
eate nor drinke: but awaking
they riſe vp hungrie, and a thirſt. Some
haue imagined in their dreames, they
haue beene married, and yet in truth,
were not. Theſe marriages are but
dreames and phanſies: but the vnion
of Chriſt and his members is true, certaine,
and demonſtrable. Indeede as
ſome phrantique men haue thought
many things theirs, which were not:
ſo Hypocrites who are like the flower
Granadelle, which is very faire to the
eye, but hath no ſmell (as Ioſeph Acoſta
writeth) and other wicked and falſe
hearted Chriſtians (who are like the
wilde Tunalls in the weſterne Indies,
               Ioſ. Acoſt. hiſt. Ind. lib. 4. c. 23. the
which doe cary no fruite, or elſe that,
which is very pricking and vnprofitable)
may through a certaine phrenſie
of ſpirit imagine and perſwade themſelues,
that they are true Chriſtians,
wedded and vnited vnto Chriſt, and

poſſeſſed of his grace, being in trueth
cleane voide of Chriſt, and wedded to
their owne Idolls, which they dote on,
and embrace for Chriſt, as Ixion did
the cloud for Iuno.
            
            There is a true Vnion, or Coniunction
of loue, among true friends, as
betweene Dauid, and Ionathan. For
(Amicus eſt alter ego) a man and his
friend are both as one; either one, or
none. If diuided, then no friends. But
this is the vnion of amity, the coniunction
of conſent. Such a like coniunction
is vnderſtood, where it is ſaid,
the multitude of them, that belieued,
               Act. 4. 32. 
               were
of one heart, and of one ſoule. And behold
the communion iſſuing of this vnion,
behold the goodly fruit of this
their godly coniunction by their Chriſtian
charitie, an effect indeed of their
vnion with Chriſt himſelfe; Neither
ſaid any of them, that ought of the things,
which he poſſeſſed, was his owne: but they
had all things common.
            
            For true loue rauiſhes the louer, and
tranſports him out of himſelfe into his
loue, and makes him to communicate
and diſtribute himſelfe and his vnto his

beloued for his good: whence it is
truely ſaid, that among true friends
and louers all things are in common.
            Now ſure it is that there is a league
of loue and friendſhip between Chriſt
and all true Chriſtian people.Ioh. 15. 14. 15. 
               I haue
called you friends, ſaith Chriſt, and ye are
my friends, if yee doe whatſoeuer I commaund
you. And by reaſon of Chriſts
loue to them, and of their loue to
Chriſt (ſpringing from him, as water
from a fountaine) Chriſt and they are
vnited and ioyned together in one,
like louing friends, one of them inamored
with the other, he delighting in
them, and they in him, he ſeeking their
glorie, and they his. For as hatred
parts thoſe, that are vnited, ſo true loue
vnites them, that were diuided, it
conioyneth ſoules, and cauſeth true
contentment and delight among
thoſe,1 Cor. 13. 5. that it hath vnited, and makes
them to ſeeke one another, and not
themſelues, or their owne thinges
onely.
            But yet this is not all the Coniunction,
that is betwixt Chriſt and his
Church, and the true members of it.

A friend cannot do that for his friend,
that Chriſt doth for vs, who giues vs
his very Spirit,Ioh. 14. 17. the Spirit of truth, who
dwelleth with vs, and abideth in vs:
who himſelfe alſo is in vs, as an helper
and vpholder: and from whoſe aide
and preſence no diſtance of place, or
fury of the enemie can diſioyne vs:
and from whoſe very ſacred body alſo
we ſucke that nurriture, which doth
not onely refreſh and comfort vs (as
meat doth a mans body) but as a true
caeleſtiall and liſe-giuing cordiall repaires
and preſerues the ſupernaturall
ſappe of the ſoule, the radicall humour of
grace infuſed into our hearts in our
conuerſion, that tho there may bee a
ſeparation made of ſoule and body, yet
there ſhall bee no totall ſeparation of
the ſoule from God.
            Friends may dye, muſt die. They
are but men, and men muſt die. Duſt
we are, and to duſt we muſt returne.
Wee and our friendſhips too muſt periſh.
We are ſeene a while, and after a
while wee are ſeene no more, but fall
like drops of raine into the ſea, and are
knowne no more. And oftentimes

friends fall flat out, and end their
friendſhippes before they end themſelues.
But Chriſt and his faithfull
friends doe neuer part, the graue cannot
part them, neither can any ſuch
vnkindneſſe happen betweene them,
but that they may and ſhall bee reconciled.
            And whereas many men will ſhake
of their friends and acquaintance, if
they grow poore and needy, the Lord
Ieſus, tho now at the right hand of the
Father, farre aboue all Powers and
Maieſties, doth take great delight in
all thoſe, whom he hath vnited to him,
how poore or meane ſoeuer, and is a
Cheriſher of them in all their wants,
yes is troubled with them in all their
troubles, afflicted in all their afflictions,
and accounts himſelfe the receiuer,
when any of his poore friends are
relieued, entertained, honored. But I
paſſe on further.
            The Soule and body of a man are
ioyned together to make a true and
perfit man. For neither the ſoule alone,
nor the body alone, but the ſoule and
body together doe make a perfit man:

as neither the King alone by himſelfe,
nor the people alone by themſelues,
doe make the Kingdome, but the King
and the people ioyntly together. But
the coniunction of Chriſt and of Chriſtians
is not of the ſame kinde.
            For the vnion of ſoule and body is
naturall: but our vnion with Chriſt is
ſupernaturall.
            The ſoule is not giuen a man in the
very act or inſtant of generation: but
afterwards, when there is ſome organ
or organs fitted for it: but Chriſt is giuen
a man in the very act and article of
regeneration.
            The ſoule is created by God in the
body, and to euery particular body
there is a particular ſoule. For though
all mens ſoules are one in kinde, yet
they are not one in number, but haue
their numericall and particular differences.
But there are not ſo many
Chriſts, as men. There is but one
Chriſt in all belieuers. And although
Chriſt may truely in the Apoſtles ſenſe
be ſaid to be formed in vs,Gal. 4. 19. which is
when we are reformed, and made conformable
to him, yet we muſt beware

we do not thinke him to be formed in
vs as the ſoule is, which is formed
wholy at once, and not by degrees,
and is ſo formed in vs, as that it is not
out of vs, nor in any other body, and
did not ſubſiſt out of vs before it was
created in vs.
            The ſoule now framed, and being
by nature immortal is vnited to a fraile
and corruptible body, and enters vppon
it with condition to depart againe
and leaue it, when God ſhall pleaſe:
but Chriſt comes not into vs vpon the
ſame tearmes, but taries with vs, and
abides in vs for euer. Hee takes the
ſoule into an heauenly manſion, where
it forſakes her earthly Tabernacle, and
forgets not our duſt, our leſſe then
duſt, which we leaue behinde vs, but
ſees it alwaies, is mindfull of it, and can
diſtinguiſh it from the duſt of beaſts,
of Reprobates, and will againe one day
blow vpon it, and make it liue againe.
            And whereas the ſoule and body being
knit together make one and the
ſelfe ſame perſon, ſo that the ſoule is
not one perſon, and the body another
perſon. For in a man there is (aliud &

aliud, but not alius & alius) diuerſitie of
natures, but no diſtinction or diuiſion
of perſon. Our Lord Chriſt Ieſus is a
diſtinct, compleat, and abſolute perſon,
ſubſiſting by himſelfe: and there
are as many diſtinct and particular
perſons of Chriſtians, as there are
Chriſtians, euery man being a diſtinct
and perfit perſon by himſelfe, as Chriſt
is by himſelfe. Indeed he and they altogether
make but one entire myſticall
bodie, and wheras euery man ſuſteines
himſelfe, I confeſſe that Chriſt doth
vp-beare vs all with his grace & power,
as a goodly Oake or Cedar doth her
branches, or as a foundation and pillars
do the building of ſtones, & timber,
and other materialls, that are laide
vpon them.
            Chriſt (as the Apoſtles,Rom. 9. 5. 1 Iohn 5. 20. S. Paul,
and S. Iohn doe teach vs) is very God,
God ouer all, bleſſed for ever. Now to
Chriſt, as God, the great Creator and
Vpholder of all things,Joh. 1. 3. Heb. 1. 3. by whom all
things were made, who vpholdeth all
things with the word of his power, All
things created are vnited (vnione depē
                  dantia)
with the vnion of dependance,

without the which nothing that is created,
can laſt a moment. But as the
light depends vpon the Sunne, and is
after a ſort ioyned to it, ſo that if any
thing ſhould come betweene the light
and the Sunne, which is the fountaine
of light, the light would inſtantly vaniſh,
and there would bee nothing but
very darkeneſſe: and as in this Microcoſme
of man the liuer is the ſource of
bloud, and the ſpring, by which it is
diſfuſed by veines throughout the body:
and the heart is the fountaine of
the vitall ſpirits, which are thence by
arteries carried into the body, as neede
requireth: or as the head is the originall
of the nerues or ſinewes, by the
which motion is cauſed, ſo that if any
thing ſhould come betweene the liuer
and the veines, the heart and the arteries,
the head and the ſinewes, that
they ſhould bee parted, of neceſſitie
bloud, ſpirits, motion, and life it ſelfe
muſt preſently decay and faile: euen
ſo all creatures in the world depend on
Chriſt, as God, and are ſo vnited to
him, that they cannot be without him:
ſo that if any thing could come betwixt

him and them, which might hinder
their dependance on him, and coherence
with him, they could not but
vaniſh as light, and bee brought to nothing.
The very duſt of dead men
would not be duſt, but would preſently
periſh, were it not vpheld by the power
of his word. But the godly are vnited
to Chriſt more bleſſedly then thus only.
For euen beaſts, yea and the Diuels
themſelues, and all damned ſoules are
thus coupled with him and depend
vpon him. Without this kinde of vnion
they were not able to ſubſiſt the
twinckling of an eye, but muſt needes
periſh, vaniſh, and come to nothing.
            This therefore is not the vnion wee
treat of, which makes a man, that is, to
be well: it preſuppoſes being, but cauſes
bleſſedneſſe: it findes nature, but
giues grace: it meets with a man, but
it makes a Saint: it finds him on earth,
but brings him to heauen: it findes
him poore, naked, wounded, ſicke and
ſuccourleſſe, but it giues him riches,
garments, ſoundneſſe, health and comfort,
which ſhall not bee taken away
from him, whether hee will, or no, as

his body, goods, good name, life, liberty
and ſuch tranſitory and glaſſie
things, ouer which fire, water, earth,
ayre, beaſts, men, and Diuells haue a
tyrannizing power, when God permits.
            But beſides this vnion of vniuerſall
Dependance there is alſo another kind
of Coniunction, whereby not onely
all Chriſtians, but all other men alſo,
yea and all the creatures in the world
are vnited or ioyned vnto Chriſt, as
God.
            For the Deity by reaſon of the immenſitie
and ſubtilty thereof is moſt
fully, and moſt inwardly, totally preſent
in, and to, and throughout all
creatures corporall and ſpirituall, comprehending
all things, but comprehended
of nothing, piercing all things, but
pierced of nothing; and is farre more
thoroughly preſent, and more fully,
then either light, or heate, is in the aire,
or then the ſoule is in the body. So
that if that ſhould bee, which yet cannot
be, that is to ſay, if the creature
did not depend on Chriſt, yet by reaſon
of the all-piercing ſubtilneſſe, and

vnmeaſureableneſſe of his Godhead,
he ſhould penetrate and fill all things
(it ſelfe being fill'd of nothing) and be
moſt inwardly and thoroughly preſent
vnto them, and ſo be in ſome ſort
conioyned with them. But this Coniunction
is common: that of true dealing
Chriſtians and Chriſt Ieſus is ſpeciall,
and proper to them.
            This Coniunction is of the Creature
to Chriſt, as God: but the other is
of man to Chriſt, God-Man, or Man-God,
& Mediator betwixt God & man.
            Here Chriſt is preſent by a moſt inward,
and thorough penetration, his
very Deity incloſing, touching and
piercing all things. But there hee is
preſent by the preſence of ſupernaturall
grace, yea and his very fleſh is not
away, or wanting, but preſent, as I
will declare hereafter.
            The Coniunction, which is by penetration
and omni-preſence, makes
no man happy, as the other doth:
with the which whoſoeuer is vnited
vnto Chriſt, he is certainely in the ſtate
of grace, and liues in ſure hope of the
ſtate of glory.
            
               
And whereas the vnion of Chriſt
and a Chriſtian is indeed a true and
certaine vnion, and may properly bee
ſo called; this Coniunction by penetration
and preſence doth not properly
conteine any vnion, but onely vbiquity,
indiſtancy, and an inſenſible,
but thorough, repletion of all things.
            There are not two Chriſts, but one:
and this one Chriſt hath two diſtinct
natures in him; one Diuine, the other
Humane: and both theſe names are vnited
together in one and the ſame
perſon by a perſonall vnion.
            But we are not ſo vnited to Chriſt,
as our nature is to the nature of God
in Chriſt. (I call Chriſts humane nature
ours, becauſe it is indeed ours, not
in number the ſame with any mans, but
in kinde the ſame with all mens, indued
with a true humane ſoule and body,
not being created a new of nothing,Gal. 4. Heb. 2. 16. Luke 3. or from another peece of clay, but
made of a woman, who came from the
loynes of Adam.)
            For by the vertue of this vnion,
which is Hypoſtaticall, God is man, &
man is God. But if Chriſtians were vnited

perſonally to Chriſt, then the
very name of Chriſt and God ſhould
be giuen to them, which were abſurd
to think. And which were very groſſe
and horrible, then alſo God might bee
as truely and as orthodoxally ſaid to
ſinne, when a Chriſtian man ſinned,
as it is ſaid that God died, was crucified,
and roſe againe, becauſe the man,
who is true God, in one perſon, our
Lord Ieſus Chriſt was crucified, died,
roſe againe.
            Though it be true that Ieſus, the
Sonne of the bleſſed Virgin Mary, be
the true and eternall Son of the eternall
and true God, yet it were falſe and
impious to ſay that the Church is the
eternall and true naturall Daughter of
God, or that euery true belieuer were
Gods naturall Son, or God, which yet
were ſo, if wee were perſonally vnited
to the Godhead.
            There are many Maries mothers:
but only the Virgin Mary was the mother
of God. I doubt not but that
Chriſt is formed, and is in forming in
many a Ladies heart: but yet hee was
onely formed in that Ladies wombe,

as a childe. Her childe onely is the
naturall Sonne of God, he onely is the
Word, the ſubſtantiall, the conſubſtantiall
and coeternall Word. But if we were
perſonally vnited to the Word, or to
the God head, or to both Godhead &
Manhead in the Word, then might we
be called the Word of God, and God,
yea and the Virgin Mary might bee
ſaid to be our mother as well, as the
mother of God, yes and wee could not
but be full of merits, power, and vertue,
euen as Chriſt. But what pious
eare can indure to heare ſuch blaſphemies?
Moreouer, though it be moſt
true,Iohn 14. 20. which our Sauiour ſaith, I am in
my Father, and you in mee, and I in you:
yet wee muſt not thinke that wee are
hypoſtatically vnited vnto Chriſt, nor
that we are ſo in Chriſt, as Chriſt is in
his Father. This ſpeech therefore of
Chriſt muſt bee taken with a graine of
falt. For Chriſt is in his father, as being
of one and the ſelfe-ſame ſubſtance and nature
with his Father,
               Heb. 1. 3. 
               being indeede the
brightneſſe of his glory, and the very character
of his Perſon, and his true naturall
Sonne and ſubſtantiall image: but he is in

vs, as an helper, ayder, and ſuſteiner,
by whom we haue our ſpirituall being,
life, breath, ſenſe, and motion, and
who beares vs vp and feeds vs, as the
roote doth the body and branches of
a tree.
            Furthermore, there is a certaine
vnion of the workeman and his toole,
of the hand and the inſtrument in it.
And thus by way of ſimilitude Chriſt
and all faithfull Chriſtians, who
are inſtruments of his praiſes, and
whom he holdeth in the right hand of
his power and protection, bearing
them as an Eagle doth her yong ones,
may be ſaid to be conioyned. And as
in an inſtrument of muſique tho one
winde giue a generall ſound, yet by
the diuerſity and diſequality of the
pipes and organes, all which the wind
filleth, the tones are varied: ſo though
one Chriſt be in all true Chriſtians, &
one ſpirit be inſpired as a celeſtiall and
liuing winde into them all, yet they
differ in their tunes, actions, motions,
and iubilations, according to their
owne perſonall and particular capacities,
and as the Spirit, who workes, not

as a naturall, but as a voluntary agent▪
doth impart and diffuſe his grace.
            But whereas a ſword, lute, trumpet,
and other inſtruments of Art, are
voide of life, Chriſtians are liuing and
breathing Organs, intellectuall, ſpirituall
and voluntary inſtruments for
Chriſt to worke with, and are liker a
mans hand, or other liue-member of
his body, then a ſword of ſteele, or other
ſenſeleſſe and dead inſtrument,
voide of reaſon, ſenſe, life and will,
able to do no more, then it is made to
do by plaine force.
            And whereas the workeman doth
not, nor cannot alwaies make or mend
his toole, Chriſt doth alwaies both
make and mend his tooles. For wee
are his workemanſhip, Hee hath made
vs, and not we our ſelues. He that makes
himſelfe, is alwaies marr'd in the making.
And he, that teaches himſelfe,
hath a foole for his maſter.
            And whereas a workeman and his
tooles may part: how good or deare
ſo euer vnto him, hee may yet bee depriued
of them, and ſeparated from
them flat and full againſt his will, or

may looſe ſome one of them, or ſpoile
it through negligence or forgetfulnes,
or may throw them by, as being wearied
with the vſe or bearing of them;
no ſuch miſchance and accident can
come to Chriſt againſt his will: hee
cannot looſe vs againſt his will, neither
is hee weary of vs, or careleſſe of our
good. Thoſe, which are his, he loues,
cheriſhes, delights in, preſerues, and
keepes faſt and ſafe for euer. But this
is not all.
            There is alſo a certaine Coniunction
betweene brothers and ſiſters, and
ſuch, as are Coheires, or Partners in
ſome office: but this is either naturall,
or elſe legall, and politicall or ciuill.
But our Coniunction with Chriſt is
not naturall or ciuill, nor of humane
inſtitution, but ghoſtly, heauenly, inuiſible,
and aboue nature, either as it
was created, or as it is corrupted. And
            Though wee be the Heires of God,Gal. 4. 7.
and heires annexed with Chriſt,
               Rom. 8. 17. and be
called his Brethren, and therefore muſt
needes be coupled together,Heb. 2. 11. 12. and haue
fellowſhip with him, yet we muſt not
imagine our vnion or communion to

be the ſame, that naturall brothers in
bloud haue, or which are partners of
the ſame office,Gal. 4. 7. or inheritance. For he
is a naturall Heire, we are adopted by
grace. Indeed as he is man, he is heire
by the grace of hypoſtaticall vnion.
And that we are heires we are beholding
vnto him. For wee are Heires in
him, and by him, and not without
him, nor by our owne perſonall merits.
            Yea whatſoeuer we either are, or
haue, which is ſpirituall, celeſtiall, ſupernaturall,
and Chriſtian, or hereafter
ſhall haue, we are, and haue it all,
and wholly, by Ieſus Chriſt our Lord.
            
               
                  Epheſ. 1. 5. Adoption,1 Pet. 1. 10.vocation,
                  Rom. 4. 26. iuſtification,

                  Epheſ. 2. 10.ſanctification,
                  Rom. 5. 1. peace,1 Pet. 1. 13. hope,
1 Cor. 15. 87.victorie ouer death, and the purchaſe

                  Rom. 6. 23. & 1 Theſſ. 5. 9. of eternall life, are all of them by the
merits and grace of Chriſt, as the holy
Scriptures ſhew vs.
            And albeit wee haue an office and
high calling (for Chriſt hath made vs
Kings and Prieſts vnto God his Father)
yet are we no ſuch Kings and Prieſts,
as he is: but as wee haue receiued our
honour from him, ſo we ſhould returne

it to him, and glorifie him with it,
and not bee like thoſe captious ſpirits,
who, becauſe they heare they
bee Kings and Prieſts, heires of
GOD, and heires annexed with
Chriſt, their Brother, thinke it a
diſparagement forſooth of their honour
(as ſome of them ſcribble, and other
of them babble) and weakning in
ſhew of their fellowſhip with him, if
they ſhall receiue the bleſſed Sacrament
vpon their knees bended to him;
either (as it ſeemes) forgetting, or not
knowing that they are the Heires of
God through Chriſt,
               
                  Gal: 4: 7. by whoſe onely
merits they doe receiue all their honours
and happineſſe, their life and luſtre,
their grace and goodneſſe.
            Brothers and ſiſters may die, ſhall
die: heires may fall out and vndoe one
another, or others may ſpoile their inheritance:
and where many are heires,
their portions are the leſſe: ſome of
them may lacke and complaine of
neede. But Chriſt and his brethren,
cannot be parted, their portions cannot
be deſtroied, nor taken from them
their inheritance cannot faile, nor diſcontent

them: but euery one of them
ſhall haue enough, and ſhall enioy it
for euer.
            But there is yet a neerer coniunction,
then this of Brothers or Partners,
which is the holy, honourable, and inuiolable
coniunction of man and wife.
            By this matrimoniall coniunction,
they that were two before, are now become
One.
               
                  Matth: 19: 6. They are no longer twaine,
but one fleſh, ſaith our Maſter:
            And they are tuely one, and not
two, becauſe GOD the Author of
man and marriage hath ſayde it.
            
               For this cauſe ſhall a man leaue his father
and his mother,
               
                  Geneſ: 2: 24. Matth: 19: 5. 
               and ſhall cleaue vnto
his wife: and they two ſhall bee one fleſh.
So that though all men ſhould ſay that
they are not one, but two, yea though
they themſelues ſhould ſay ſo too, yet
they are not therefore two, becauſe
man ſayes ſo: but one, becauſe God
hath ſayd it.
            For, Non noſtrum dicere dat veritatem
rebus, ſed conforinit as eius cum mente diuinâ,
things are not ſo and ſo, becauſe
men ſay they are ſo: but becauſe they
are ſo with God, in Gods ordinance

and appoyntment.
            Though all men ſhould ſay golde
were not golde, yet it is golde. And
though all the Gold-ſmiths in the
world ſhould ſay copper is gold, yet it
is not golde for all their ſaying, but
copper ſtill, becauſe it agrees not with
the diuine minde, God hath not ſayd it
is gold, it is not gold in his decree and
iudgement, and therfore it is not gold.
            Well then, man and wife are but one,
and not two. Yes, they are two diſtinct
perſons, and not one. They haue two
ſoules, and not one: two bodies, and
not one: two diſtinct wils and not only
one. They are of two different ſexes,
and haue their owne perſonall vertues
and infirmities, He his, and She hers.
            
            Yet neuertheleſſe theſe two are
made one matrimoniall creature, the
man being as head, and the woman as
the body; or if you will, he being as the
Soule,1 Cor: 11: 3. and ſhe the Body. For as Chriſt
is the head of the man, ſo man is the
head of the woman. And this is in reſpect
of authority and dominion, in
which regard Chriſt is not the wiues
head, but the husbands, neither is ſhee

the image of Chriſt, but he onely.
            As Chriſt is the head of the Church,
                  Eph: 5: 23.
ſo the husband is the head of his wife.
            And as the ſoule and body, though
things greatly differing in themſelues,
are yet coupled together by God, and
doe liue and worke together: and as
two diſtinctNo ſimilitude runnes on all foure. riuers meeting together,
doe now mingle and blend themſelues,
and become as one common water or
riuer: ſo man and wife are (indeede not
confounded, but) vnited together, liue
together vnder one roofe, draw together
in one yoke, take care mutually of
one another, and become by Gods ordinance
one foundation and fountaine
of generation.
            So that here is more then a coniunction
of affections, as vſes to bee among
friends, as was betwixt Damon
and Pythias: there is alſo a coniunction
of bodies, for the propagation and
perpetuation of mankinde, and that
there might alſo be a way made for the
fulfilling of the number of Chriſts myſticall
members, Gods adopted ſonnes
and daughters.
            For generation muſt goe before regeneration,

and nature before grace.
Yes ſanctification muſt follow ſinne.
For Chriſt came not to call the righteous,
but ſinners to repentance: neither
did hee die for the iuſt, but for the vniuſt.
There muſt firſt bee a man, and
then a Chriſtian: firſt a ſinner, and
then a Saint: filius ſoli, before there be
filius poli: one of Adams planting, before
there be one of Chriſts tranſplanting:
one of Eues breeding, before
there be one of the Churches bearing.
            Now without doubt our Lord God
and Sauiour, the Lord Ieſus Chriſt,
hath contracted and vnited himſelfe
vnto his people,
                  Eoſ: 2: 19: 20. and is their head and
louing husband. And therefore the
Apoſtle tels the Corinths that hee prepared
them for one husband,
               2 Cor: 11: 2. 
               to preſent
them as a pure virgine vnto Chriſt. Wherfore
alſo Saint Auſten is bold to ſay
that (Omnis anima aut Chriſts ſponſa,
aut diaboli adultera eſt, Euery ſoule of
man is either the ſpouſe of Chriſt, or
Diuels adultreſſe.
            And as in ſimple contract or marriage,
there is a mutuall & reciprocall
giuing & taking made between man &

wife of each other: ſo in this holy, happy,
and ſpirituall contract and coniunction
betwixt Chriſt and all true beleeuers,
there is a mutuall giuing and taking
of each other.
            God giues his ſonne to vs, the ſonne
alſo giues himſelfe freely to vs: and
God giues vs alſo vnto his ſonne, as hee
did Eue to Adam, and wee alſo by his
grace preuenting, aſſiſting and co-working
with vs, doe giue our ſelues willingly
vnto his ſonne;
                  Phil: 2: 13. Ioh: 3: 16. 
               Willingly (I ſay)
God hauing giuen vs the will, who willingly,
and of his owne accord ſent vs his Son.
            
            And if the promiſe made by a woman
to her husband in the day of her
Marriage or Eſpouſals be worthily called,
The Couenant of her God,
               
                  Prou: 2: 17. as it is indeed
ſo called by the Holy Ghoſt, well
then and worthily may our vow and
promiſe made vnto Chriſt in our Baptiſme,
by which wee are engrafted into
him and coupled with him, bee called
the Couenant of our God, beeing made
not onely according to Gods appointment,
and in his name and preſence,
but vnto him alſo, who himſelfe is
God, euen our God, who hath vpon his

thigh and vpon his garment a name
written,Reu: 19: 16. 
               The King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords.
            
            And therefore alſo as the wife is called
by the name of her husband, and
no longer of her father: for to this new
eſtate belongs a new name: ſo when a
man hath ſeparated his ſoule from the
world, and hath put himſelfe into the
power of Chriſt, and hath ioyned himſelfe
vnto him, as a woman vnto her
husband, a new title belongs vnto him,
the name of Chriſt is now called vpon
him, and he is now no more to follow
the world, nor the carnall affections
and commands of olde Adam: but as
a wife muſt forſake father and mother,
and all, and cleaue vnto her husband
(For thy deſire (ſaith God) ſhall bee ſubiect
to thy husband,
               Pſal: 45: 10. Gen: 3: 16. 
               and he ſhall rule ouer
thee) ſo a man, that is wedded and vnited
vnto Chriſt, muſt deny himſelfe,
his owne reaſon,Pſal: 45: 10: 11 Matth: 16: 24. and will, and worth,
and forſake the world, euen whatſoeuer
is oppoſite to the will of Chriſt. Hee
ſhould faſhion himſelfe vnto his pleaſure,
and cleaue vnto him, continuing
conſtant, as Penelope, and ſhould ſo

chaſtely beare himſelfe, & ſo diſcreetly,
that no other name might be iuſtly
caſt vpon him, but that hee might bee
called onely by the name of Chriſt,
whoſe hee is, and to whom alone hee
eſpouſed himſelfe.
            For no greater ſhame can befall a
wife, then to be called in contempt and
diſgrace by another mans name, and
not her husbands, which comes to
paſſe, when ſhe forſaketh the Guide of
her youth, and forgetteth and violateth the
couenant of her God.
            
            Such goodly huſwiues were Meſſelina,
the wife of Emperor Claudius, and
Marie of Arragon, wife to Otho the
third: but wee neede not goe ſo farre
to ſeeke ſuch weedes; they thriue too
well in euery Climate. But let vs returne.
            Albeit a woman bee allowed to
change her fathers name, when ſhee is
married, and to cleaue vnto her huſbands,
yet ſhee may in no caſe change
her Chriſtian name: that ſhee muſt
hold faſt vnto death. Neither indeede
ſee wee any woman change or forſake
her name in Baptiſme (vnleſſe ſuch, as

turne Turkes and Apoſtataes) thereby
being inſtructed to bee faithfull vnto
Chriſt her heauenly husband, and to
weare his name as a garland of honour
vnto death. For ſhe is not married vnto
Chriſt, as ſhee is to her Chriſtian
Husband, till death her doe part. For
death hath no power ouer Chriſt our
Lord, as it hath ouer vs his ſeruants,
who are but bubbles and breathes of
aire.
            And therefore though hee ſhould
change as many husbands, as SheThis woman liued at Rome in the time of Damaſus and Ierom, and was at laſt married to a man, that had had twenty wiues before: and liuing to bury her, the people honoured him with a crowne of Laurell.did,
who had (as Saint Hierome writeth)
three and twenty, and ſo likewiſe be called
by as many names, yet ſhee muſt euer
remember to keepe faſt the Name
and Faith of Chriſt, and beware ſhee
make no change of him for Idols, like
Glaucus, that changed golden armour
with Diomedes for brazen, that ſo
Chriſt may delight in her, and in her
vertue, which (as Saint Chryſoſtome
faith) is the true beauty of the Soule.
For he is her Lord God, and moſt louing
husband, in oppoſition to whom
ſhe muſt call no man husband, nor acknowledge
any man, nor any thing els

in the whole world.
            By reaſon of this ſweet contract and
vnion of Chriſt and his Church, there
paſſe from them many louing kindneſſes
and embraces, expreſſed by either
to other really, as is euident by
thoſe patheticall paſſages of loue, that
are ſet downe in the Booke of the Canticles
(the Churches Loue ſong) wherin
their loue to each other is moſt liuely
deſcribed.
            But yet the Coniunction of man
and wife in holy matrimonie, comes
far ſhort of the coniunction of Chriſt
and his Church, and doth not ſufficiently
expreſſe & vnfold it to vs. For by
wedlock the man & his wife are made
one fleſh: two (faith the Scripture) ſhall
be one fleſh.
               Matth. 19. 5. But he that is ioyned to the
Lord,1 Cor. 6. 17. is one ſpirit, as the Apoſtle teacheth.
Now all fleſh is graſſe (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               )
and all the glory of man
and woman,1 Pet. 1. 24 as fleſh and blood, is as
the flower of the graſſe, which fades
and fals away, before the graſſe itſelfe
doth die. The ſtrongeſt men are
but ſturdie graſſe, the goodlieſt women
are but goodly graſſe, duſt and

aſhes, wormes and wormes meat.
            
               Death ſeparateth the moſt louing
and faithfull couples, that either are,
or euer were vnited and wed together,
as Abraham and Sarah, Iacob and Racheb,
Vlyſſes and Penelope, Seneca and
Paulina, Mauſolus and Artimiſia, Pompey
and lulia. But death cannot ſeparate
Chriſt Ieſus and his Church.
               Rom. 8. 35. 39. Who
ſhall ſeuer vs from the loue of Chriſt? ſhall
tribulation, or anguiſh, or perſecution, or
famine, or nakedneſſe, or perill, or ſword?
As it is written, for thy ſake are we killed
all day long. We are counted as ſheepe for
the ſlaughter. Neuertheleſſe in all theſe
things wee are more then Conquerours
through him, that loued vs. For I am
perſwaded, that neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, nor Principallities, nor Powers,
nor things preſent, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
ſhall bee able to ſeuer vs from the loue of
God, which is in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord.
            Wee ſay of many men, that they
marry they Executours: but ſo doe
not Chriſt who hath vanquiſht death
in his owne denne, and liues for euer.
            Yes, many men haue married their

owue Executioners, as did Domitian the
Emperour, Albonius King of Lumbardie,
Sergus a King of Scotland, Arden
of Feuerſham, and many others. But
the Church of Chriſt, and Chriſt her
head, are free from either doing or ſuffering
ſuch barbarous cruelty betwixt
themſelues.
            The Diuell and the World may
preuaile againſt ſome married couples,
and ſometimes doe, to the deſtruction
of their ſoules no doubt:Matth. 16. 18. but hell-gates
ſhall not ouercome the Church:1 Ioh. 5. 4.& Joh. 16. 33. the
World cannot preuaile againſt faithfull
Chriſtians. My ſheepe, heare my voyce
(ſaith Chriſt) and I know them,
               Ioh. 10. 27. 28. 
               and I
giue vnto them euerlaſting life: and they
ſhall neuer periſh, neither ſhall any plucke
them out of my hands. If Chriſt himſelfe
cannot be damned,Rom. 4. 2 5. then not they, that
are ioyned to him, who died for them,
and roſe againe for their iuſtification.
And therefore wee may boldly ſay,
There is no condemnation to them, that
are in Chriſt Ieſus,
               Rom. 8. 1. 
               who walke not according
to the fleſh, but according to the
Spirit.
            
            Euery godly Chriſtian is endued, is

inueſted, is clad with Chriſt, and weares
him as a wedding garment.Gal. 4. 271 
               For ſo many
of you (ſaith St. Paul) as are baptized
into Chriſt (that is, as are regenerated
and borne a new of water and the Holy
Ghoſt, by whom wee are *1 Cor. 12. 13. baptized
and incorporated into the body of
Chriſt) haue put on Chriſt, as a rich,
precious and glorious garment, whereby
their naked filthineſſe, and filthy
nakedneſſe is couered, and are themſelues
accepted of God as beautifull
and gracious, in the beauty and grace
of Ieſus Chriſt, in which they ſtand and
appeare moſt ſweet and amiable. Now
if ſuch a man can bee damned, being
lapped and wrapped vp in Chriſt, who
couers him from top to toe, them muſt
Chriſt needes bee damned with him
(which cannot bee) as a man that is
flung in the fire with his clothes on, is
burnt together with them.
            Many men in marrying make very
dangerous aduentures. They venture
their name, their peace, their goods,
their ſoundneſſe, yea and ſometimes
their ſoules too; for which reſpect God
forbad his people to marry with the

Heathen, for feare they ſhould turne
them from God to Idols. And this is
the caſe of many women alſo, who by
their marriages doe buy themſelues repentance
and ſorrow, that whereas it is
ſayd of Iepthaes daughter,Iudg. 11. 38. that ſhe went
out to bewaile the daies of her virginity,
they may goe out and bewaile the
daies of their mariage, and that not for
two moneths only, but perchance as long
as they liue. It is good for them therfore
to look before they leap, and to ſound
before they ſaile. But men by ioyning
themſelues to Chriſt venture nothing,
loſe nothing: or if they doe loſe, they
gaine by their loſſes, and are enriched
by their calamity.Matth. 19. 29. 
               Whoſoeuer ſhall forſake
houſes, or brethren, or ſiſters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
lands, for my name ſake (ſaith Chriſt)
hee ſhall receiue an hundred fold more,
and ſhall inherit euerlaſting life.
            
            Many ſore vnkindneſſes, heart-burnings
and quarrels doe now and then
fall out betwixt many men and their
wiues, that ſometimes they euen loth
one another, and forſake one another.
But Chriſt neuer forſakes his Spouſe,

nor ſhee him.Heb. 13. 6. Hee is with her,
to ſaue, protect,Matth. 28. 20. aſſiſt and guide her to day, and
for euer. He loueth all thoſe which are
his,Ioh. 13. 1. vnto the end he loueth them. His
couenant with them is euerlaſting.Ier. 32 39. 41. He
will neuer turne away from them to do
them good: but he will delight in them
to do them good, and will put his feare
into their hearts, that they ſhall not
depart from him. Hee will giue them
one heart and one way, that they may
feare him for euer. And if at any time
they ſhall fall, hee will lift them vp againe,
as he did Dauid and Peter: and
though hee doe ſometimes chaſtize
them, yet hee will not remooue his louing
kindueſſe from them.
            Men and their wiues are ſometimes
clouen-hearted hypocrites vnto God,
and hollow-hearted one towards another,
inconſtant, vneuen, and like the
beaſt called Onocentaurus, whoſe vpper
part reſembleth a man, and the nether
an aſſe.1 Pet. 2. 22. Cant. 6. 8. 9. & 7. 10. But Chriſt and his Spouſe are
true-hearted, and holy. All the eſſentiall
and true members of the true
Church,Epheſ 5. 26. 27. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Reuel. 1. 5. are true Saints, iuſtified and
ſanctified.
            
               
Euery perſon married is not a member
of the Church, hath not the
Church for a mother: but euery one,
whether wedded or ſingle, that is truely
ioyned vnto Chriſt, may iuſtly call
the true Church, Mother, and the
true God, Father.
            Euery man and his wife are indeed
partakers of the nature of man: but
euery true Chriſtian, who is borne of
God, and is the Sonne of God, and is
eſpouſed and vnited vnto Chriſt, is
partaker of the Diuine nature,
               2 Pet. 1. 4. which
many a man, and his wife too, are void
of, being not the children of God, but
the ſonnes of Belial: not the members
of Chriſt, but the very limmes of the
Diuell.
            But yet the Churches true children,
true Chriſtian belieuers, are not ſo, in
that manner and meaſure, partakers of
the diuine nature with Chriſt, as women
are partakers of the humane nature
with men, as I haue ſufficiently
before declared. And beſides, the differences
of a man and a woman (if we
regard nature) are not ſpecificall, and
ſubſtantiall, but numericall and accidentall.

               Homo, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Man, is a
name as common to women, as to
men; But Deus, God, is a name proper
to Chriſt, who is eſſentially God,
and in whom the Diuinitie dwelleth
perſonally; and doth not commonly
belong to all Chriſtians, who are partakers
of the diuine nature, as concerning
conſolation, aſſiſtance, and holy,
happy, and ſauing operations: and are
indeed indued with a new nature,
which may be call'd diuine, becauſe it
is from Gods ſpeciall grace, and is for
his honour and glory, is according to
his will, and is oppoſite to that vicious
and ſinfull worke of the Deuill, which
hath corrupted the nature of man, deforming
the image of God, according
to which he was created. For ſure it is,
if any man be in Chriſt, hee is a new
creature, a diuine creature, the worke
of Heauen. The diuell (who raignes
in moe, then in vnmarried people) is
expulſed out of him, the ſpirit of God
is inſpired into him, and a new ſpirit,
another heart, a better heart is giuen
him: which ſpirit a woman hath not,
becauſe this or that man hath married

her, but becauſe ſhee is ioyned vnto
Chriſt, who hath giuen himſelfe vnto
her.
            There are ſome men, that neuer
truely loued their wiues, but their
wiues wealth, not Them, but Theirs.
For their riches they tooke them, and
when once they became Maſters of
them, they cared no longer for them.
And ſuch vſually proue thoſe young
ſprigges, that are grafted into olde
ſtockes. Vnhappy women, who loue,
but are not loued againe! But they
more vnhappy, who in their elder
daies, when their wombes are dead
doe giue the reines to luſt, dreaming
and doting after youthes, when they
ſhould rather bee preparing and trimming
themſelues for Chriſt, their
thoughts being aſcended higher then
the Temples of Venus, Flora, Cupid,
mounting vp into the higheſt heauens,
where are perfect pleaſures, pure delights,
immortall ioyes, and euerlaſting
contentment. But Chriſt loueth
his Church truely, expreſſing his loue
to her,Epheſ. 5. 25. by laying downe his life for
her. He was ſo deſirous to clenſe her,

that he ſpared not his owne bloud, his
beſt bloud,Reuel. 1. 5. his heart bloud, but waſht
her in it. Here was loue indeed. Hee
did not loue her, becauſe ſhe was faire,
or rich: for ſhe was of her ſelfe (till he
came & preuented her with his grace,
and made loue to her) poore, naked,
polluted,Izek. 16. wretched, and inglorious:
but by his loue he hath made her louely
and louing: by his ornaments hee
hath made her ſhining: by his purity
he hath made her cleane: by his beautie
he hath made her gracious: and
with his bleſſedneſſe ſhee is made an
happy woman.
            She was once as blacke as pitch:
but ſhee is now as white as the driuen
ſnow.Pſal. 45. 13. 
               The Kings daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of broydred gold.
She is ſo faire and louely in his eye, as
that his loue will ſuffer him to ſpie no
blemiſh in her,Numb. 23. 21. as it is written, He ſeeth
no iniquitie in Iacob, nor tranſgreſſion in
Iſraell. For indeed he hath couered all
her ſinnes, and waſht her from all her
foulenes,Epheſ. 5. 27. ridding her of all her wrinckles,
freckles and deformities, by the
merit and vertue of his owne blood.

Behold his owne ſpeeches of her praiſes,
which he ſpeakes vnto her, and
mockes her not.Cant. 4. 6. 
               Thou art all faire my
Loue, and there is no ſpot in thee.
               Cant. 6. 9. 
               Who is
ſhe, that looketh foorth in the morning,
faire as the Moone,
               Cant. 7. 1. 6. 
               and pure as the Sun?
How beautifull are thy goings with ſhooes
thou Princes daughter! How faire are
thou, and how pleaſant art thou, O my
loue, in pleaſures!
            
            
               Yea to expreſſe his full contentment
in her, hee ſpeakes ſomewhere to her,
like a man rapt out of himſelfe, and ouercome
of loue. My Siſter, my Spouſe,Cant. 4. 9.
thou haſt wounded mine heart: thou haſt
wounded mine heart with one of thine eies,
and with a chaine of thy necke. My Siſter,
my Spouſe, how faire is thy loue! How
much better is thy loue, then wine, and the
ſauour of thine ointments, then all ſpices?
Thy lips, my Spouſe, drop as hony-combes:
hony and milke are vnder thy tongue, and
the ſauour of thy garments is as the ſauour
of Lebanon.
            It is certaine that the power of ruling
appertaines vnto the Husband:
but yet ſometimes hee wants wit to
rule himſelfe: and ſome wiues are now

and then ſicke of the vnruly euill, being
very thwart, and fooliſh.
            But Chriſt being the Wiſedome of
God, and the very fountaine of goodneſſe
and commiſerations, performes
the office of a wiſe and tender-hearted
Husband alwaies to his Church, his
Spouſe, which is not moroſe, ſcornefull
and vnruly, but humble, gentle,
and obedient. And therefore the Apoſtle
exhorting women to be ſubmiſſiue
to their Husbands, propoundes
vnto them the example of the Spouſe
of Chriſt.Epheſ. 5. 24. 
               Therefore (ſaith hee) as the
Church is ſubiect vnto Chriſt, ſo let the
wiues bee to their owne husbands euery
thing. And when he would perſwade
the men to loue their wiues,Eph. 5. 25. 29. and to vſe
them tenderly, hee prouokes them to
it by the practiſe of Chriſt, who loues
the Church, and nouriſhes and cheriſhes
it, as a man his owne fleſh.
            It is allowed to one man to haue
one wife at once, and no more then
one. For God gaue Adam but one.
Though he had abundance of ſpirit,Mal. 2. 15.
yet he made but one, but one woman
of one ribbe, for the helpe, comfort,

and contentment of one man. Therefore
he ſaith by his Prophet, keepe your
ſelues in your ſpirit,
               Mal. 2. 15. that is, bridle your
affections, and keepe your ſelues within
your compaſſe, and let none treſpaſſe
againſt the wife of his youth. Our Lord
likewiſe hath but one wife or Spouſe,
our Head hath but one Body. For
though euery godly man bee vnited
vnto Chriſt, and bee a member of his
body, yet all the godly in the world,
that either haue beene, are, or ſhalbe,
being all ioyntly conſidered together,
doe make that one and onely Spouſe
or wife of Chriſt, who ſhall raigne at
his right hand with him in all honour
and glory for euer and euer. This is
ſhe, that is his, and his onely, and no
others with him. This is his Doue,
his Loue, his louing Hinde, and pleaſant
Roe. Her eies doe hold him, her
breaſts doe ſatisfie him, her loue contents
him, in her, and in her loue hee
delights continually.
            Yet truely may euery true Belieuer
ſay, Chriſt is my Head, Chriſt is my
Husband: for he is vnited to him. But
yet is Chriſt husband and head to one

ſo, as he is Head and Husband to the
reſt: as Iacob was a father equally to all
his ſonnes: as a mans head is the head
of all his members, the feet as well, as
the hands: or as a King is head and
husband ciuill vnto all his Subiects indifferently,
without reſpect of perſons.
            But Chriſt doth much more to the
Church, then the Husband can vnto
his Wife. A man may, as our Seruicebooke
ſpeakes, worſhip his wife with his
body, that is, hee may honour her with
his body, which hee doth in that hee
doth appropriate it to her, making her
the Miſtris of it: for as the Apoſtle
ſheweth,1 Cor. 7. 4. 
               the Husband hath not the
power of his owne bodie, but the wife. But
no man is able to giue his wife his ſpirit
or ſoule. Though a man and his
wife may liue ſo louingly and peaceably
together, ſpecially a time, as that
a body would almoſt thinke and ſay
there were but one ſoule in both their
bodies: yet in truth each of them haue
their owne priuate ſpirits; the mans
ſoule is not in the woman, nor the womans
in the man. His animates and

poſſeſſes him, and hers animates and
poſſeſſes her, one of them truely differing
from the other, not in kinde,
but in number, not in ſubſtance, but in
accidents.
            But our Lord Ieſus Chriſt hath beſtowed
his Spirit on his Church. She
liues not by her owne life, but by his
life. She is not ruled by her owne ſpirit,
but by his Spirit. Yes, euery man
vnited to Chriſt hath the Spirit of
Chriſt. The very ſoule of man is not
more common to all his members,
then the holy Ghoſt is to all the godly.
            And whereas ſome mens wiues
haue beene (and I would none were
now) poſſeſſed with an euill Spirit, being
very torments and trouble houſes:
the Spouſe of Chriſt is poſſeſſed with
the good Spirit of God,1 Cor. 6. which is the
Spirit of peace, gentleneſſe and loue, who ſuſteines, comforts, inſtructs,Gal. 5. 1 &
leades her, and dwelleth with all thoſe,Ioh. 2. 27.
that can truly call her Mother.
               Joh. 14. 23.
            
            There is a certaine tranſcendent and
ſtrong coherence betwixt Chriſt and
his Church. He cleaueth to her, as an
husband to his wife; and ſhee to him,

as a wife to her husband: but yet ſo,
as that one of them cannot be broken
from the other, one of them cannot be
abſent from the other, no diſtance of
place, nor croſſeneſſe of winde and
weather, nor any perturbations of
minde, being able to diuide or diuell
them, as they may doe a man and his
wife.
            An husband may bee in Italy, and
his wife in England: and when hee is
there, hee is not with her here. And
while ſhee is here, ſhe is not with him
there: but one of them (both being
definite and circumſcriptible) is abſent
from the other. But (Chriſtus eſt totus
in toto corpore Eccleſiae, & totus in qualibet
eius parte) Chriſt is whole with the
whole Church, and whole with euery
part of the Church, as touching his
perſon, which can no way diuide it
ſelfe, or be poſſeſt by degrees or portions.
            Chriſt is no where, neuer, abſent
from any godly Chriſtian: but is preſent
with him in all places, with his
light he ſees, with his grace he is adorned,
with his Spirit hee is reuiued and

comforted, which Spirit reſideth in
him alwaies, and worketh in him really,
though not alwaies ſenſibly. Hee
worketh in him, I ſay, yet not as an inſtrument,
but as an artizan: not as a
ſeruant, but as a maſter: nor as the
Sunne or Moone, which are naturall
Agents, but as a voluntary Motor or
workeman, according to his will, in
which he is one with Chriſt, who ſends
him.
            There is many a true ſoule, which
puts her truſt in her husband, and relies
vpon his honeſty and faith, but being
abſent from him is deceiued, iniured,
miſ-vſed, by reaſon of his vnfaithfull
and inſatiate ſpirit, and ſometimes
is left in ſcorne, and turned of at ſixe
and ſeauens. But Chriſt is faſt and
faithfull, conſtant and true, plaies not
faſt and looſe, as incontinent and goatiſh
Carnaliſts: and being ſtill preſent
with his Church is a wall of fire round
about her, a ſhaddow againſt the heat,
a fountaine againſt her thirſt, an antidote
againſt poyſon, friend in trouble,
a treaſure of all good thinges againſt
want, an impenetrable Buckler

to all thoſe, that put their confidence
in him. He,1 Pet. 2. 6. that belieueth in him, ſhall
not bee aſhamed. Whereas many a
poore woman is aſhamed of her huſband,
and confounded in her ſelfe,
being euen at her wits end, not knowing
which way to turne her ſelfe.
            We haue a By-word, Out of ſight
and out of minde. And indeede it falls
out often twixt man and wife, that abſence
and diſtance make them forget
each other, or not ſo mindfull, as they
ſhould bee. But the Church is neuer
out of Chriſts ſight, neuer out of his
hand, neuer out of his heart. Can a
woman (trow ye) forget her childe?
can ſhe forget or not haue compaſſion
on the ſonne of her wombe? but ſay
ſhe ſhould,Iſ. 49. 15. 16. 
               yet will not Chriſt for get his
Church. Why? ſhe is ſet as a ſeale on
his heart, as a ſignet vpon his arme.
Behold, ſaith he, I haue grauenthee vpon
the palme of mine hands: thy walls are
euer in my ſight.
            
            Men muſt needes reſt themſelues
and ſleep (Quod caret alternâ requie,
durabile non eſt) and ſo ſhut their wiues
out of their eyes, tho not out of their

breaſts: and in ſleepe much crueltie
(as Stories declare) haue been ſhewed
ſometimes againſt both them & their
wiues. But the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the
great Keeper of Iſraell, and husband of
his people needs no ſuch refreſhment.
Hee that keepeth thee,
               Pſal. 121. 3. that is, the
Church, will not ſlumber. Behold, hee,
that keepeth Iſraell, ſhall neither ſlumber,
nor ſleepe.
            
            Yea ſuch is his power and prouidence
ouer her, that hee will preſerue
her night and day continually from
all euill, and ſo order all thinges, that
nothing ſhall hurt her, but work-together
for her good,Rom. 8. 28. and the good of all
her children, which ſhe beares him.
            But this is quite out of mans power.
He is vnable to turne all things to his
wiues good, or to the good of his children
by her.
            Hee can ſay vnto her, with all my
worldly goods I thee endow. Though
they be his onely in diſcretion to diſpoſe,
yet they are all hers in participation
to vſe: all which ſometimes are ſo
few, as that they are ſcarce able to diſcharge
the Churches rites, and buy a

wedding Dinner, and a bed to lye in.
But how many ſoeuer,2 Tim: 6. 17. and how glorious,
yet are they very vncertaine, and
loue to change their Maſters often: yes
and ſhe too, (vnhappy man) doth ſomtimes
proue as vncertaine her ſelfe, as
any thing hee hath, ſhewing her ſelfe a
mooueable, euer a gadding, euen the
ſame that Salomon ſpeakes of,Prou: 7. 11. 12. whoſe
feet cannot abide in her houſe: but now
ſhe is without, now in the ſtreet, and
lies in wait at euery corner.
            But be his goods what they may be,
and be his Wife another Sara, Rabel,
Anna, Penelope, or Lucretia, yet hee is
not able to ſay to her, becauſe ſhe is his
Wife, that therefore all things in the world
are hers. The greateſt Prince on earth
cannot ſay ſo, and ſpeake the truth, vnto
his Wife. But the ſpouſe of Chriſt
isI deſire this may not bee ſtrained, but interpreted by Rom: 8. 28. 32. & 1. Cor: 3. 22. & 2. Cor. 6. 10. 
               Lady of the whole world: Chriſt hath
giuen her of his owne riches, his owne
ornaments and honour, and bought
her ſuch a Crowne, ſuch a maſſie
Crowne, ſet with ſuch rich Pearles and
Iewels, as doth as farre ſurpaſſe the
Crownes, all the Crownes of all the
Kings and Emperours in the World,

as Heauen doth Earth, as the fayreſt
Diamond doth the pooreſt ſtone.
            One looking on a Crowne when it
was offered him,Valer: Mau. ſayd vnto it, before
he would accept and take it, Oh Oh if men
knew the miſerie that comes with thee,
there is no man would ſtoope to the ground
to take thee vp: For as Seneca well ſayd,Senec. ad Polyb. conſol: cap. 6.
               Great ſeruice followes vpon a great eſtate.
The waking of the Prince defendeth the
ſleepes of all men, his labour maintaines
their leyſure, his induſtry their delights,
his occupation their vocation. Crownes
are full of care and feare: and bee they
what they may be, they are ſubiect to
alteration and deſtruction: But the
Churches Crowne is incorruptible, &
eternall, neuer to bee won from her by
deceits, nor taken away from her by
force and fury. And when once ſhe is
actually inueſted with it, ſhee ſhall enioy
it alwaies without feare or doubt.
            Yea euen in this life we haue ſuch riches
as the world cannot affoord vnto
her followers. For wee haue the grace
of God, pardon of our ſinnes, the freedome
and peace of a good conſcience,
hope, and comfort. Yea, the kingdome

of God is in vs, all things are cleane
vnto vs,Tit: 1. 15. al things in the world are ours,
if we be Chriſts, if Chriſt be in vs, and
we vnited to him.
            
               All things are yours (ſaith the Holy
Ghoſt) Whether Paul,
               1 Cor. 3. 22. 
               or Apollos, or Cephas,
or the world, or life, or death, or
things preſent, or things to come, All are
yours. And if all things be ours, then
nothing ſhall hurt vs, but all things
ſhall further vs. For ſeeing all things
are ours, it is meet that all things ſhold
co operate for our good. Yea the Diuels
themſelues are ours, if wee be not
theirs, but Chriſts. Chriſt will ſo order
the matter that they ſhall but wreath
garlands of immortality for vs (though
ſore againſt their wils) and increaſe our
glory.
            And whereas many men forget the
honour of their wiues, and are regardleſſe
of their decency,Lanquet. Chron as Sergus that
Scottiſh King, who ſo baſely neglected
his Wife, and held her ſo penurious,
that ſhee was driuen to ſerue other Noble
women for her liuing; Chriſt Ieſus
is ſo carefull ouer his Spouſe, who
ſtands at his right hand in gould of Ophir,
               Pſal: 45. 9.
               
that rather then ſhee ſhall want attendance
and honour, he will moue euen
Kings to be her nouriſhers, & Queens
her nurſes,Iſ. 49. 23. who ſhall bow downe vnto
her with their faces towards the earth,
and licke vp the duſt of her feete.
            The coniunction of Man and Wife
doth not neceſſarily cauſe eyther, or
both of them to bee piouſly diſpoſed:
For, as hee that toucheth pitch is vſually
defiled with it, and as ſweet riuers
running through fenniſh grounds are
thereby corrupted, ſo the company of
a wicked man doth oftentimes corrupt
the manners of a good natured woman.
And although a man may take a
woman to his wife, yet it is not in his
hands to make her eyther a good Woman,
or a good Wife, if he finde her
naught. But our coniunction with
Chriſt doth chaunge vs all ouer, and
turnes vs vpſide downe: hee contaminates
and infects no man, hee cannot
but he purifies and makes good al that
come vnto him, and beſtow themſelues
vpon him.
            And albeit the Wife doth in ſome
ſort depend vpon her Husband, ſeeing

ſhe is vnited to him, and is his: yet if
that knot were diſſolued, either by iuſt
diuorce, or death, it might fall out that
ſhee might liue ſtill as well, and bee as
godly as ſhe was before. For neither her
Vertues, nor her life, depends on him,
nor vpon his life, neither yet her happineſſe
alway, nor her good ſucceſſe
it'h world. She may find better friends
then her Husband was: or ſhee may be
married to a ſecond Huſband, in whom
ſhee may be happier by far, then in her
firſt. But the Church and all her children
doe ſo depend on Chriſt, that
without him they cannot continue a
moment: for by him we liue, & moue,
and haue our being, and all our wellbeing,
both as wee be men, and as wee
are Chriſtian men.1 Cor. 1. 30. From him we haue
our ſelues, our iuſtice, holineſſe, and all
our happineſſe. In him wee areEpheſ: 1. 4. elected,
in himEpheſ: 2. 10. created, by himCol. 1. 14. redeemed
andIude 1. Iohn 15. 12. preſerued. Without me (ſaith
Chriſt) ye can doe nothing; and ſo alſo
without Chriſt wee can be nothing. If
ſomething, yet that ſomething, that's
worſe then nothing; for nothing cannot
ſinne, and nothing cannot ſuffer

for ſinne. Nothing can doe no wrong,
and nothing can feele no paine. It were
more profitable for a man not to bee,
then to be a man out of Chriſt. Though
hee were married to the beſt woman in
the world, though hee were coupled
with the beſt friends i'th world, though
he were ioyned in bloud or alliance to
the cheefeſt Monarchs in the world,
though hee were poſſeſſed with the
greateſt and richeſt kinngdomes of the
world, yet if hee were not vnited to
Chriſt Ieſus, if hee were not poſſeſt of
him, he were nothing, he had nothing,
hee were more miſerable then the duſt
he treads on For Chriſt is all things,
he that hath Chriſt, lacks nothing: he
that wants Chriſt, hath nothing. A man
were better be nothing, then ſomething
hauing nothing. Who is able to expreſſe
the worthineſſe of Chriſt Ieſus?
He is our life and our light, our comfort
and our crowne, our grace & our
glory,Col. 3. 11. he is our all things: he that hath
him,1 Iohn 5. 12. hath life (ſaies Saint Iohn) but hee
that hath not him, hath not life. But had
I the tongues of Men and Angels, I
could not declare the praiſes due to

Chriſt Ieſus my Lord and Sauiour. If
all the water in the Maine were incke,
yet all that incke were not enough to
write downe his worthy praiſes.
            Common experience teacheth that
women feed their children, yea out of
their owne bodies,Gen: 21. 7. as Sarah did Iſaak
with her owne milke. And I haue read
of a woman, who gaue her owne mother
ſucke of her owne body, when ſhe
being in priſon was kept from meat:
and after ſuch a ſort a woman may
preſerue the life of her husband, a
while at leaſt: but did I neuer eyther
ſee, heare, or read of a man that fedde
and nouriſhed his wife of himſelfe. He
may bring her meat, but he is no meat,
hee makes not himſelfe a diſh to feede
on: he giues his wife his heart but not
as Hawkes-meat to prey on, not roſted
to liue on. But Chriſt Ieſus the
Husband of the Church, is alſo the very
food of our ſoules.Iohn 6. 48. 
               I am that bread
of life,
               Iohn 6. 50. 51. 56. (ſaith Chriſt) I am the liuing
bread. The bread which I will giue, is my
fleſh. He which eateth my fleſh, and drinketh
my bloud, abideth in mee, and I in
him. Here is a louer indeed; the globe

we tread on, beares not a husband halfe
ſo kinde, nor all the Markets in the
world can afford ſuch meat, as here.
If there were but a Baker, which could
make ſuch bread for the body, to keep
it from death, men would to him, if he
were in the fartheſt angle of the earth,
Countries would goe together by the
eares to get and enioy him. I ſuppoſe
that if he had his choyce, hee would
rather chuſe to dye, then to liue. For
ſure, men would weare his fleſh to the
bones with labour, and would ſcarce
ſuffer him eyther to eate or ſleepe. But
what gaines a man by long life without
this Bread of Life, Chriſt Ieſus? The
Iudgement will come at length, and
ſhall not bee put off: and the longer a
ſinner hath liued, the more ſinnes hee
hath committed, the greater accounts
he muſt make, & the greater torments
hee muſt indure. And what pleaſure;
thinke wee, will the ſoule then take to
be kept in the body (like a Priſoner in
a ſtrong Goale, vnder much pain, want,
and ſorrow) againſt her will, and not
to be able to get out, through ſhe would
begge it with flouds of teares continually

ſtreaming from the eyes, and
would giue euen all the world, if ſhee
had it, if ſhee could but die, and come
to nothing?
            Our Lord, our Husband is better
bread then ſo. He is the bread of eternall
life to all that are vnited to him,
and which feede vpon him. They,
whom he feeds vpon himſelfe, are ſafe
from ſtaruing, ſure enough from deſtruction.
And. whereas other Bread
is turned and concocted in vs, the
truth is, This bread of life is not turned
in vs, not turned into the ſubſtance of our
ſoule or body: but it turnes and transforms
vs rather into it. For Chriſt doth ſo metamorphiſe
and alter a man, whom he
couples to himſelfe, that he doth put a
new life into him, hee giues him another
kinde of ſpirit, and doth ſo furniſh
him with his owne things, that it
may be truly ſaid, Hee is a man tranſlated
and transformed into Chriſt: he is not
in the fleſh, but in the ſpirit: not Satan, but
Chriſt Ieſus doth dwell and raigne within
him. O happy men, that are in Chriſt
Ieſus, that haue Chriſt Ieſus for their
Husband, who is the ſtaffe of their

liues, the breath of their noſtrills, and
their Hope! Many a man is ſaued, and
his wife damned. Two ſhall be in a bed,
one of them ſhall bee taken, the other
forſaken. But whoſeeuer ſhall be found
coupled to Chriſt ſhall bee ſaued. For
he is the bread of life, and life eternall
to all, that haue and hold him.
            There are ſome men (or I wot not
well what in the ſhapes of men) that waxe
weary of their wiues with a little acquaintance,
contemne them in their
decaying dayes, and whether young
or olde, will not bee pleaſed in them
without a deale of artificiall brauery,
and borrowed fauour.
            But the Lord Ieſus eſteemes the hart
of a man, and not his Art: he delights
in ſubſtance, not in naked ſhewes: counterfeit
vertue, which is true hypocriſie,
is accounted with him for double iniquity.
It is not outward beauty that
he ſtands vpon, but inward Vertue, inward
Trueth, and not outward trappings.
Painting of the face with him
is as the guilding of a nutmegge, or the
colouring of a ſtatue, and as pleaſing to
wiſe men when they ſpie it, as a painted

Sepulchre when they ſmell it, or as
counterfeit coyne, when they diſcerne
it. But grace, true grace, which is accidentall
to a man or woman, is eſſentiall
to a true Chriſtian.
            This is that which pleaſeth Chriſt,
which hee with his owne finger hath
painted and engrauen in the ſoule.
            This, this is the tincture, and
the luſtre, that hee delights in. And
as for old age, hee will caſt no man off
for that: but the longer he hath beene
acquainted with any, the longer any
man hath liued in his ſeruice: the longer
that any haue beene coupled with
him, the more account he vſes to make
of them. Old friends, old ſeruants, old
followers, old conſorts, if ſincere and
truſty, are of all others moſt gracious,
and ſhall haue their rewards with the
chiefeſt.
            I ſaid before that the Husband and
his Wife are appointed by God to bee
one common fountaine and foundation
or Originall of Poſterity by generation
of children.
            For neither is the Man without the
Woman and efficient, nor the Woman

without the Man. And neyther Man
nor Woman without the benignity of
the Sunne. For it is true that (Sol &
homo generant hominem) the Sunne and
Man beget a Man.
            Our Lord, the Lord Ieſus Chriſt,
hath children, and no children, but
thoſe, which he gets himſelfe. But the
Sunne, which is a naturall agent, hath
no hand, helpeth nothing in Regeneration,
which is ſupernaturall; as it doth
to Generation, which is naturall.
            And though a Man cannot beget
without a Woman, yet is Chriſt, God
and Man, able to regenerate a Man
without the cooperation of any Creature
by himſelfe alone. But yet ordinarily,
if not euer, he doth beget men
to himſelfe by the Church. For my
part, I am perſwaded that hee that cannot
call her Mother, hath no right to
call him Father. For Ieruſalem, the
City of God, whoſe Originall is from
Heauen aboue, and not from the earth
below,Gal. 4. 26. 
               is the Mother of vs all.
            
            But whereas the Mother nouriſhes
her childe with food from her owne

bodie, the Church feedes her children
with the milk and meat of Gods word.
For the two Teſtaments are the Churches
two Breaſts.
            And as Parents beget children according
to their owne image, that is,
men, and ſinfull, and doe ſometimes
alſo lend them their owne diſeaſes, as
Leproſie, Palſey, Gowt: ſo the Lord
Ieſus begets his children according to
his image (ſubſtantiall I meane not, but
accidentall) conſiſting in light, iuſtice,
holineſſe, and true Chriſtian Vertues.
Indeede our Parents beget vs, when
before we werenot: but Chriſt begets
vs, being men before, though in truth
but dead men, dead in ſinnes and treſpaſſes,
and the children of wrath.Epheſ. 2. 1. 3. And
as they giue vs their ſinne, which hath
beene deriued to them from Adam, ſo
Chriſt giues vs his Iuſtice and Merits
to couer our ſinnes, as I ſhall afterwards
ſhew more fully.
            A Woman may be a Wife, and yet
no Mother: and ſome are Mothers and
yet no Wiues. Or ſhe may be a Mother,
and yet an adultreſſe. But this

is a mans affliction, when either his
wife is barren or vnchaſte. And it is a
womans ſhame, when either ſhee is a
mother before ſhee bee a wife, or is vnfaithfull
when ſhee is a wife. But the
Church can haue no children but by
Chriſt her husband, without whoſe
gracious influence and intention, no
man can make a Chriſtian. The Catholique
Church (as Fulgentius well
obſerueth) is a Spouſe,
               Fulg. ad Probam. do virgin. ep. 3. 
               becauſe ſhe is vnited,
and adhereth vnto Chriſt: a mother,
becauſe ſhe is made fruitfull by Chriſt: and
a virgine, becauſe ſhee doth purely perſeuere
in Chriſt.
            
            Shee is indeed a ſingular wife, of rare
endowments,Pſal 45. and full of honour.Cant. 7. 1. For
ſhee is the great kings Daughter,
               Epheſ. 5. and
coupled with him, that is God and
Man.
            
            Shee is not ſubiect to violence, as
the daughters and wiues of men are, as
Lucretia the wife of Collatinus; Dinah
the daughteer of Iacob; and they that
were rauiſht by Brias, Rodericus, Nouellus
Cararius, Osbright, and ſuch like
monſters in the ſhapes of men. Neither
brings ſhee any children to God

by any adulterous mixture (as ſome
wanton wiues) but onely by the grace
of her husband Ieſus Chriſt. As for
Heretiques and Infidels, they bee not
the fruits of her wombe, but Baſtards
of the Diuels getting, and the worlds
conceiuing and bringing foorth.
            Shee is an high and honourable mother.
For ſhee is Mother and Nurſe
(no cruell ſtep-mother) but a louing
mother and tender-hearted nurſe to all
Gods adopted children. They that
haue not her for mother, haue not him
for Father. Shee is mother to all the
true members of Chriſt, to all his brethren.
They that haue not her for mother,
haue not him for their head and
elder brother.
            She is our ſpirituall mother Eue, the
mother of all the liuing,
               Gal. 4. 26. that either liue a
ſpirituiall life in this world, or ſhall liue
a celeſtall life in the world to come.
            Shee is the mother to all true Iſraelites
according to the faith, as Sarah
was to all Iſraelites according to the
fleſh. And as God made Sarah a mother,
and gaue her a ſonne out of his
owne good will: ſo God makes his

Church a mother, and giues her children
as he pleaſeth.
            I read of a certaine Romane Lady,
by name Paulina, a very chaſte and honeſt
matron, who by no meanes would
yeelde to the Iuſt of Mundus a Gentleman
of Rome, who attempted to haue
corrupt her, who yet being couzened
by certaine Prieſts lay with him (like a
ſuperſticious foole) in the Temple of
Iſis, vnder the name of Anubis the God
of Aegypt, who deſired her company,
as thoſe varlets tolde her. And in thoſe
heatheniſh dayes it was accounted a
great fauour to haue to doe with a
God.
            But Gods Church is no Paulina,
yeeldes not to Mundus, the World, but
is able to diſtinguiſh betwixt God and
the world, vnder what habit or colour
ſoeuer the world appeareth. Shee is
neither ſo dimme-ſighted, nor ſo ſuperſticious
and fooliſh, as to miſtake or
leaue her husband, or to giue her ſelfe
to the Iuſt of any, out of the loue either
of their fauour or dalliance with them.
Shee loues to beare, but yet onely by
her owne husband. Him ſhee knowes

well, his voice ſhe heares, him ſhee followes.
But the voyce of ſtrangers ſhe
knowes not,Ioh. 10. them ſhe followes not, but
flyeth from them.
            
            A man may take a wife, but he cannot
alwayes make her a mother. God
maketh the barren woman to be a ioyfull
mother of children.Gon. 30. 1. 2. A man is not
able to remooue ſterility,Pſal. 113. 9. nor (though
his wife were fruitfull) to beget a childe
when hee will himſelfe. Loe, children
are an heritage of the Lord,
               Pſal. 127. 3. 
               and the fruit
of the wombe, is his reward. But Chriſt
Ieſus the Churches husband, a man indeede,
but more then a man, euen God
eternall, is able to make his Spcuſe
fruitfull, and to giue her children, when
he will, and children of a better condition
and complexion, then husbands
giue their wiues,Iob 25. 4. which are wormes,
and worſe too, vncleane and wretched,
ſubiect to the wrath of God, and vnder
death.
            For all the children of the Church,
which ſhee beareth vnto Chriſt, are
cleane and happy, faire and louely, endued
with the holy Ghoſt, and clad
with Chriſt himſelfe, who is their father,

and enrobed with his iuſtice, as
with a garment rich enough to redeem
the world,Gal. 3. 27. in which appearing before
the great and righteous God, the Iudge
of all the world, they reioyce his heart,
and obtaine his bleſſing, as Iacob obtained
his father Iſaachs,
               Gen. 27. 15. comming to
him with his brothers faire apparrell on
him, which his mother had with her
in her houſe. Of ſuch bleſſed Parents
how can there be but bleſſed children?
O bleſſed, thrice bleſſed are all the
children of the Church: The children
of the greateſt Kings and Queenes in
the world are not to bee compared to
them; They are not worthy to bee named
together in one day. The truth is
they are but very wretches (how glorious
ſoeuer they bee in the world) till
they come and call her mother, and
become obedient to her.
            But be it that a woman be a wife vnto
her husband, and a mother too;
yet ſhee is not both houſwife and houſe
too. Men dwell with their wiues, but
not in their wiues, except by loue. But
the Catholique Church is Chriſts huſwife
and his houſe too, his Spouſe and

his Temple alſo.2 Cor: 6: 16. 
               Ye are the Temple of the
lining God, ſaith Saint Paul.
               Reuel: 2: 15 In this temple
Chriſt is alway preſent, alway reſident,Cant: 8: 13.
alway preſident. To him this
Temple is erected, by him it is ſet vp
and kept (ſartumtectum) ſafe & ſound.
This he fils, in it hee walkes and rules,
and takes great delight.Pſal: 149: 4. The Lord hath
choſen her for his owne habitation,
and loueth to dwell in her,Pſ: 132: 13: 14. ſaying; This
is my reſt for euer: heere will I dwell: for
I haue a delight therein.
               Coloſſ: 3: 4. Shee is a liuing
Temple, and Chriſt is the life thereof.
Shee is a light houſe (but no light huſwife)
and Chriſt is the Light thereof.Ioh: 12: & 1 Cor: 1: 30. 1 Pet: 2: 5.
A part of which princely Palace is euery
godly Chriſtian, who as a liuing
ſtone is hewen out of that rocke of life,
Chriſt Ieſus, and by him made vp, and
put into that goodly building.
            So then, wheras many a poore child
which hath both father and mother, is
yet deſtitute oftentimes of a houſe to
put his head in, and is compelled to lie
vnder hedges and wals, or in the open
fields; there is not a true childe of
God, there is not a man aliue, if he bee
(filius Eccleſiae) the ſon of the Church,

but hee hath an houſe to reſt his ſoule
in; and ſo long as he is vnder the roofe
hee is ſafe from euill, being vnder the
Lords protection,Pſal: 18: 30. Prou: 2. 7. who is a ſure ſhield
and caſtle of defence, inuincible, vnbatterable,
vnto all, that put their truſt in
him, and walke vprightly with him in
his houſe.
            But I will haſte a little faſter on. No
man makes his owne wife. For ſhee is
firſt, without him, a woman, before hee
take her to be with him, as his wife. It
is too much for a man to make a woman
(for ſome finde it too much to
mend a woman) ſo that he muſt let that
alone for euer, as a worke peculiar vnto
God. And though it be an eaſie matter
for a man to get himſelfe a wife, ſuch as
ſhee is: yet a good wife, a vertuous wife,
a prudent wife,Prou: 31: 12. one,Prou: 18: 22. that will doe her
husband good and not euill, all the
dayes of her life,Prou: 19: 14. is a bleſſing, that
comes from God. Parents can giue
nature, but God giues grace. They can
giue fleſh and blood, but vertue and
well doing are the gifts of God,Iam: 1: 17. who is
the fountaine and father of lights. And
it fals out ſometimes by the iniquity of

rigid and couetous parents, that a man
hath a wife thruſt vpon him, beeing
conſtrained to take her for auoyding
greater dangers and more greeuous euils.
And when they haue them, they
loue them as men doe ſtraight ſhooes,
and clothes they care not for.
            But the Lord leſus hath no wife obtruded
on him againſt his will: neither
can any with ſubtill ſleights ſteale into
him, and goe beyond him, as ſome women
vſe to winne their husbands. But
hee takes, whom hee takes, willingly,
and makes the firſt motion of loue alwayes
himſelfe: neither doth he cozen
or beguile any, but leads them on with
truths and ſollid demonſtrations, and
promiſes no more then he can and will
performe. Yea, he takes but what hee
made before. For all creatures haue
paſt through his hands, hee had the
forming of them all. And whom hee
makes his wife, hee does not marre in
the making (as ſometimes men doe) but
reformes and beautifies them: wheras
men ſometimes take vpon them (moued
by worldly reſpects) to marry
ſome peruerſe, wicked, or ſuperſticious

women, hoping, and now and then
bragging they will reforme them,
whereas commonly they buy repentance
too late, and in ſtead of mending
them are ſomtimes marr'd themſelues,
infected with their vices, as wine or
water with muſty veſſells.
            And whereas men doe not beget
their wiues, they meane to marry. For
men marry not with their daughters.
And ſure if Lot and Cyanippus had not
both beene drunke,Plutarch. their daughters
had not beene vitiated by them. Neither
had Valeria Thuſculana got the inceſtuous
companie of her father, but
vnder the colour of another woman.
Which ſo ſoone, as hee did perceiue,
he kild himſelfe in deteſtation of the
fact.
            Euery Chriſtian ſoule (eſt filia &
ſponſa Chriſti) is both the daughter &
the Spouſe of Chriſt Ieſus, deſcended
from him, and vnited to him. Hee
weddeth none, but his owne, whom
hee doth himſelfe beget by the power
of his Spirit. There is none ioyned
to God, but he, that is borne of God.
The Spirit, which regenerates vs, and

giues vs a new life, is the ſame, by
which we are coupled vnto Chriſt, and
by whoſe holy inſpirations faith and
loue are created in vs, whereby we belieue
in Chriſt, embrace him, and are
transformed into him. The ſoule is
the life of the body, and Chriſt is the
true life of the ſoule, euen the ſoules
Soule: take away the ſoule from the body,
and the bodie dies, euen ſo take away
the ſoule from Chriſt, or Chriſt
from the ſoule, and the ſoule will die.
In this caſe the body is but a liuing
and breathing Sepulchre of a dead
ſoule, a breathleſſe ſoule, the breath
whereof is the very breath of Chriſt.
            
            
               Eue may be ſome light herein vnto
vs. For Eue was made of Adam, who
ſeeing her ſaid,Gen 2. 22. 23. 
               This is now bone of my
bone, and fleſh of my fleſh: and ſo alſo we
are of Chriſt,Eph. 5. 30 
               of his fleſh, and of his bones,
as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh. God hath
framed his Church out of the very
fleſh, the very wounded and bleeding
ſide of the ſon of man. To all thinges
liuing Chriſt is life, and to men light,
as hee is the ſonne of God: to the
Church both light and life eternall, by

being made the ſon of man for vs, &
by being our Surety and Sauiour,
whether we reſpect him as God, or as
Man.
            His body crucified, and his bloudſhed
for the life of the world are the
true elements of our Chriſtian and heauenly
being, which maketh vs truely
aliue and holy, as he is, of whom wee
come.
            And as by nature we are in our firſt
parents, Adam and Eue: ſo by grace
we are euery one of vs, that are truely
ſpirituall, in Chriſt and in his Church.
            As men, we are all originally in Adam:
as Chriſtians, or new men, we are
all originally in Chriſt.
            As men, wee haue the nature and
bloud of Eue: as new men, or Saints,
wee are partakers of the Spirit of the
Church in her miniſtery by the gift
of Chriſt.
            As we are men, Adam and Eue were
our Parents: but as we are regenerate,
ſo Chriſt is our father, and the Church
which ſprang out of his holy ſide opened
vpon the croſſe, is our holy and
honorable mother.
            
               
And as Eue made not her ſelfe, neither
was made or begotten by a man,
but by the hand of God, euen by the
hand of Chriſt,Iohn 1. by whom all things
were created: ſo the Church is not the
workemanſhippe of any creature, nor
of her owne making and moulding,
but is made and faſhioned by God,
whoſe workemanſhip wee are created in
Chriſt Ieſus vnto good workes,
               Eph. 2. 10. 
               which God
hath before ordained, that we ſhould walke
in them.
            
            Indeed Adam had no ſtroke in Eues
making: ſhe was made out of him, but
yet without his helpe; of him, not by
him; of his ribbe, not by his hand.
But Chriſt hath a great ſtroke in the
framing of the Church. Shee is both
taken out of him, and made vp by
him: and without him ſhee could not
be formed.
            For by his will ſhe is, by his holy
breath ſhee's quickned, his finger
fram'd her, and his merits are her making.
Nay, not her ſelfe alone, but all
ſhe hath, that is good, ſhe hath receiued
from him, of his fulneſſe. There is
not an ornament about her, but is a fauour,

ſhee hath had of him. There is
not a pinne of her ſleeue, but hee hath
giuen it her.
            And tho God made Eue neither
witting, nor willing, yet he quickens
vs, reſtores and reformes vs, both witting
and willing. He made vs without
vs, but hee doth not ſanctifie and ſaue
vs without vs.
            But it is hee, that makes vs willing
and obedient,Phil. 2. 13. being without his grace
vnwilling inough of our ſelues, dead in
our ſinnes and treſpaſſes, voide of a
true ſpirituall life and being. He both
giues vs feete and makes vs runne. He
giues vs hearing eares, and ſeeing eyes,
and makes vs heare and ſee. He opens
our mouthes, and makes vs ſpeake.
Hee vnties our bands, and makes vs
moue. We worke and worke willingly:
but he giues vs hands to worke and
makes vs worke. Hee workes all our
workes for vs. Hee giues vs both the
will and the worke, and that of his
owne good will, without our deſerts.
            But whereas not the ſoule of Adam,
but her owne did quicken, ſuſteine and
gouerne Eue: and whereas neither of

their ſoules in number doe inhabit or
animate any of their children: but that
very perſonall ſoule, that euery one of
them hath receiued of God, who is the
Father of ſpirits,
               Heb. 12. 9. Eceleſ. 12. 7. and who giues vnto
euery man his owne proper ſpirit; the
truth is, that Chriſt beſtowes his Spirit
vpon his Church, which holy Spirit is
deriued from Chriſt into euery true
Chriſtian man and woman, who are
his ſeede and children, the iſſues of his
Ioynes. Who are not borne,Iſ. 53. 10. Heb. 2. 13. as meere
naturall and ſinfull men, of bloud, nor
of the will of the fleſh, nor of the will of
man,
               Ioh. 1. 12. 
               but of God, who of his owne will begets
them,Jam. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 1. 23. 
               not of corruptible ſeede, but of
incorruptible, with the word of truth, as
the holy Scriptures ſhew vs. And therfore
alſo the holy A poſtle ſaith expreſly,
that,Rom. 8. 9. 
               if any man haue not the ſpirit of
Chriſt, the ſame is none of his. And againe,
becauſe yee are ſonnes,
               Gal. 4. 6. 
               God ſent
foorth the Spirit of his Sonne into your
hearts. Which Spirit no ſooner comes
into the heart and inhabits it, but hee
giueth life ſpirituall, euen as the ſoule
no ſooner is in the body, and is vnited
to it, and dwelleth in it, but it affordeth

the life, that is naturall or corporall.
And as the ſoule worketh in the
body, and mainteines the naturall life
thereof, and makes a man ſhew himſelfe
to be a man, and indeede to bee a
man, and not a beaſt, or ſome ſenſeles
or liueleſſe lumpe of fleſh: ſo the ſpirit
of Chriſt worketh in the ſoule of a
Chriſtian, and preſerues the ſpirituall
life thereof, and makes him to be, and
to ſhew himſelfe to be a Chriſtian, and
not a meere carnall or naturall man,
and childe of the Diuell.
            And whereas many Parents are
grieued to ſee their children increaſe ſo
thicke vpon them, and ſome more vnnaturall
through diffidence in the prouidence
of God, are euen glad, when
they are rid of them by death, or almoſt
any way elſe; the Lord Ieſus
Chriſt and the Catholique Church, his
Spouſe, our Mother, take great delight
and pleaſure in their children, are neuer
grieued for the numbers of them,
or troubled with their fellowſhippe:
But ſhe rather takes it kindly, and with
all thankefulneſſe of heart, when her
Lord doth viſit her and giue her children,

both ſonnes and daughters of all
ſorts and nations, and is very carefull
in their breeding, when ſhe hath them,
that they may be fit Inſtruments of his
glory, & may doeſeruice to his name
in all ages and places of the world,
wherein and whilſt they liue.
            But that wee may yet further our
knowledge of the Coniunction, that
is betwixt Chriſt and vs, it will not be
amiſſe to conſider of three other ſimilitudes
vſed in the holy Scriptures to
ſet it foorth vnto vs. The firſt is of a
Vine, the ſecond of a Body, the third
of a Building. And this I will do with
the help of Chriſt.
            
               I am (faith Chriſt) the Vine,
               Ioh. 15. 5. 
               yee are
the Branches. Now wee know that the
Vine and her Branches are ioyned faſt
together by nature: and not as boards
are in a ſhippe with pinnes and nayles
by Arte, but a great deale cloſer.
            For the branches ſhoot forth of the
Vine, are animated with the ſpirit of
the vine, liue the life of the vine, are
fed, nouriſhed, and ſuſteined of the
vine, and abiding in the vine bring
foorth fruits according to the nature

of the vine, out of which they grow
and in which they liue. Euen ſo are
we coupled and ioyned vnto Chriſt,
and ſo faſt, that wee cannot be rent or
broken in peeces from him by violence,
as branches may be from a vine.
            We grow out of Chriſt, as an heauenly
root, from whom by the fauour
of God and influence of his grace, we
doe all as new creatures or heauenly
branches ariſe and ſpring foorth.
            
               Adam is the root of all men, as
men: and when God created Adam,
he created vs. And as many, as are
ſprung from Adam, haue in themſelues
the root, out of which they ſpring.
Euen ſo the children of God haue
Chriſt, as a ſecond Adam from heauen
for a certaine celeſtiall and bleſſed
root, whoſe progenie and branches
they are by regeneration, or heauenly
birth.
            And the good Spirit of Chriſt is
from Chriſt deriued to them all,Rom. 8. 9. 10. who
doth animate, conſolate, and ſuſteine
them. And from Chriſt they receiue
food and nouriſhment, by the which
they are refreſht and cheered, and preſerued

from death, by the worke of
the Spirit.
            True it is that life and all good gifts
and graces are from the father,Iam. 1. 17. as from
the originall or beginning of them all:
but they come not to vs but by the
Sonne,1 Ioh. 5. 11. in whom,Col. 2. 3. 
               Life is, and, in whom
are hid all the treaſures of wiſedome
and knowledge,Mal. 4. 2. who is the Sunne of
righteouſneſſe with healing in his wings,
               Reu. 3. 18.
and hath gold, rayment and eye-ſalue,
and all other medicines to enrich vs,
cloth vs, and cure vs of all our ſoule-diſeaſes.
But yet none of all theſe
things come vnto any of vs in particular,
but by the holy Ghoſt: and therefore
the Apoſtle ſaith,2 Cor. 13. 14. 
               The grace of our
Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and the loue of God,
and the fellowſhippe of the holy Ghoſt.
            
            And being now indued with the
holy Spirit of Chriſt,Gal. 2. 20. they liue a ſpirituall
and Chriſtian life. They liue indeed,2 Cor. 3. 17.
and yet not they, but Chriſt and
his Spirit liue within them. Chriſt is
in his Spirit, and his Spirit is in him.
And where the Spirit of Chriſt is, there
is liberty. They liue then, and liue
free, deliuered, and out of feare.
            
               
And for becauſe Chriſt is in them,
and they in him, and for that the ſpirit
of Chriſt is not idle in them (euen as
the ſoule is not idle in the body, or as a
vigilant Prince is not idle in his kingdome)
but is buſie, as a Bee, working,
like a carefull and prudent husbandman,
his holy workes within them,
therefore alſo they are not barren, and
take vp roome in vaine, but beare, and
bring forth fruite, as God by the influence
of his grace doth giue increaſe.
For neither is he, that planteth,
               1 Cor. 3. 7. 
               any thing:
neither, that watereth: but God, that
giueth the increaſe.
            
            
               Whence it is that our Sauiour ſpaith,
Abide in me, and I in you.Ioh. 15. 4. 5. As the branch
cannot beare fruit of it ſelfe, except it abide
in the vine: no more can ye, except ye
abide in me. He, that abideth in me, and
I in him, the ſame bringeth foorth much
fruite.
            And the fruits, they yeeld, are ſuch,
as become the vine Chriſt Ieſus, whoſe
branches they are, and whoſe ſpirit
makes them beare. For vine-branches
bring foorth vine-fruites,Math. 7. 18. vine-berries,Luk. 6. 44.
grapes,Iam. 3. 12. and not ſoure ſlowes, crabbes,

or hawes. Euery tree brings foorth
fruit according to his owne kind, euen
as euery man, beaſt, bird, and fiſh, begetteth
and produceth according to
his owne ſpecies, kinde, and image.
            But although the faithfull bee in
Chriſt, and Chriſt in them, yet they do
not all equally draw vertue from
Chriſt: but as one branch receiueth
more from the vine, then another, and
as ſome are ſtronger, fairer, and fuller
of fruits, then ſome others are: euen ſo
one Belieuer receiues more grace and
vertue from Chriſt, then another: and
as Chriſt doth more or leſſe impart
himſelfe vnto vs, ſo we ſucke more or
leſſe vertue from him, and ſo alſo are
more or leſſe fruitfull in good workes.
            Sure it is that God doth giue all his
children his ſpirit,Gal. 4. 6. and that this ſpirit
reſideth in them:1 Cor. 6. 19. but this ſpirit worketh
not equally in them all, nor alike
at all ſeaſons: but in ſome more, and
in ſome leſſe: and at one time more
ſenſibly, then at an other, as the Sun
doth in the heauens, or a workeman in
his ſhoppe.
            God dwelleth in all his children, &

they in him: and they are all truely,1 Ioh. 3. 24. & 4. 15.
one as well as another,2 Pet. 1. 4. 
               partakers of the
diuine nature: but yet God doth not
manifeſt and expreſſe himſelfe in the
ſame degree vnto all (as neither Parents
to their children) not that hee
could not, but becauſe he will not for
cauſes iuſt, but beſt knowne vnto himſelfe:
and hereupon it comes to paſſe
that one is more vertuous, and better
then another, fuller of good workes,
and more like vnto himſelfe, as that
childe is vnto his father, into whom
his father hath more fully and more
happily powred foorth of himſelfe into
him in generation, tending him like
wife afterwards with a more carefull &
ingenuous education.Aug. Epiſt. 57. 
               Whence is it
(ſaith S. Auſtin) that ſome bee holier,
then others are: but becauſe that God doth
dwell in ſome more plenteouſly, then in others?
            
            Chriſt is the Sunne, the light,Mal. 4. 2. that
giueth light of nature,Ioh. 8. 12. graceIoh. 1. 4. 9., and glory
vnto the world. Euery Chriſtian
man is a ſtarre receiuing light from
Chriſt, who ſhineth into his ſoule: now
as one ſtarre is brighter, then another,

according as it receiueth more light
from the Sunne, then another: euen
ſo one Chriſtian excells another in the
light of grace and good workes, according
as hee receiues more plentifully
from Chriſt, and is more neerely ioyned
with him, and partaker of his light,
and ſpirit. And thus of the firſt ſimilitude.
I come to the ſecond.
            Chriſt and the Catholique Church
are a certaine Myſticall,
               1 Cor. 12. 27. or ſpirituall bodie.
               Eph. 1. 22. & 5. 30 32.
Chriſt himſelfe is the Head of that
bodie. And euery true Belieuer is a
member of it. Wee are members of his
body, of his fleſh, and of his bones, ſaith S.
Paul. And this is a great myſterie.
            
            The Head is not a perfit body of it
ſelfe alone. For no mans body is all
head.
            Neither is the Body a compleate
bodie without the head. But being
both vnited, and no part wanting, they
become one entire and perfit body.
            Euen ſo Chriſt, and his Church inſtructed
with all her true parts and
members, make together one compleate
body, or (as it were) one perfit
ſpirituall man.
            
               
It pleaſeth him in his mercy to
count himſelfe incompleat, and maimed,
without his Church, which is his
Body,
               Eph: 1. 23. 
               the Fulneſſe of him, that filleth all
in all.
            
            And we, for our parts, are moſt certaine,
that without him we are iuſt nothing,
but that we all receiue of his fulneſſe,
becauſe hee is Iuſtification to vs,
and is alſo in vs, as a moſt free mouing,
and working cauſe, whence many bleſſed
effects doe come, all of them tending
to eternall life and glory, as all
waters vnto the Maine.
            I ſay Chriſt is the head, the ſole head
of the catholique church, which is his
onely body. For the Father hath put
all things vnder his feete, and hath giuen
him to be the Head ouer all things
to the Church.
               Eph: 1. 22. So by way of ſupereminencie
and praedominancie, he is our
Head alone.
            There is no other man but this
man, Chriſt Ieſus, who is head and
Husband to the Church, which is his,
               2. Cor: 11. 2. 
               and
his alone.
            
            Truely (ſaith Saint Gregorie) PeterGreg: Mag: lib: 4. Epiſt: 38.
the Apoſtle is the chiefeſt member of the

the Holy Catholique Church, Paul, Andrew
and Iohn, what are they elſe but
heads of ſeuerall or particular people. But
yet they are all members of the Church
vnder one Head.
            Hee (ſaith S. Ambroſe) is the Bridegroome,
that hath the Bride:Ambr: lib: de benedict: Patriarch: c. 4. that is, Hee
alone is the Churches Husband.
            The Apoſtles, and other Paſtors of
the Church, Biſhops and Presbyters,
are the ſeruants or friends of the Bridegroome:
but none of them haue her
for their Spouſe, none of them is her
Husband. Saint Bernard thus ſpeakes
to Pope Eugenius,
               Bern: ep. 237. 
               If thou beeſt(ſaith he)
the friend of the Bridegroome, doe not
call his Beloued, thy Princeſſe, but Princeſſe,
challenging nothing for thine in her,
ſaue onely that thou oughteſt to giue thy
life for her, if it were behoouefull.
            
            Wee doe therefore all of vs ſay with
Saint Paul, Wee preach not our ſelues,
               2 Cor: 4. 5. 
               but
Chriſt Ieſus the Lord, and our ſelues your
ſeruants for Ieſus ſake. Weacknowledge
Chriſt for our Lord, and our ſelues his
ſeruants, called and ſent by him to
wait vpon his Church and children,2 Cor: 11. 2. to
prepare them for Chriſt, as a Virgin

for her Husband, to giue them all their
portion of meat in due ſeaſon, and to
preſent euery man in Chriſt Ieſus.
               Col: 1. 28. 29. This
is our proper office, this is our ſtrife
and ſtudy, and this is the voice of vs
all, all, all.
            
            I ſay further,Greg: vbi ſupra: that the Catholique
Church alone is the myſticall Body of
Chriſt. The Saints before the Law (ſaith
Saint Gregorie) the Saints vnder the
Law, and the Saints vnder Grace, All
theſe perfecting the Lords Body are members
of the Church. Not ſome of the
members, but all, that are conſtituent
and eſſentiall.
            venerable Beda ſpeakes the like,Bed. Hiſt: Eccleſ Lib: 5: cap: 22.
when he ſaith, All Churches throughout
the world make one Catholique.
            
            This Catholique and myſticall Body
of Chriſt, conſiſts of true beleeuers,
and ſuch, as are truely ſanctified. For
the Church of Chriſt and all her proper
members, are made clean and holy,
not hauing ſpot, or wrinkle.
               Eph: 5: 26. 27. The Church
of Chriſt is Chriſts Doue and Faire one:
               Cant: 2: 13: 14.
but Doues are not Kytes, Crowes, Vultures,
Snakes, Adders, Dragons, Lions,
Beares, & Leopards.Cant: 4. 1. His Church

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
is faire and beautifull, waſhed with
Water, and annointed with Oyle, and
is very beautifull and perfect through the
beauty which God hath put vpon her.
               Ezek: 16. 9: 13. 14. Yes,
She is the faireſt among Women. And
therefore neyther ſhee,Pſalm: 45. 7. nor any of her
naturall and louing children ought to
be reputed foule,Cant: 5. 19. 17. vile, and vgly.
            The members of the Church are
Chriſts ſheepe,Iohn 10. and he is their carefull
and good Sheepheard, who maketh
them to reſt in greene Paſtures,Pſalme 23. 2. and
leadeth them by the ſtill Waters. But
Sheepe are not Wolues, and Foxes,
Goates and Tygers, Dogges, Swine,
nor fatte Buls of Baſan. To make any
ſuch to be members of the Catholicke
Church were to make Chriſt a Neateheard,
which were a tranſcendent indignity:
but let vs heare the Fathers and
Doctors of the Church, which ſhined
like Lampes in the houſe of God in ages
long agoe. They (ſaith Saint Origen)
which haue not ſpot or wrinckle,
               Orig: in Geneſ: Homil: 1. 
               or any
ſuch thing about them, are the true
Church.
               In Luc: Hom: 2. And in another place hee
ſhewes the reaſon why the Church is
ſaid to be holy, & without ſpot, namely

becauſe ſhe is reputed pure and ſincere.
            
            In the Church (ſaith S. Chryſoſtome)
there is no earthen or wodden veſſell:Chryſ: in 2. Tim. Homil: 5. but
all are of ſiluer and gold. For there is the
body of Chriſt, a chaſt Virgin, not hauing
ſpot or wrinckle.
            When we ſay the Church (faith S. Cyrill
of Alexandria) we meane the moſt holy
multitude of the godly.Cyril. Alexan. in Iſ: lib: 4. Or at: 4.
            
            
               The Church (ſaith Saint Ambroſe) is
the mother of thoſe that are aliue.
               Ambr: in Luc: lib: 2. cap. 3. Surely
the good Father neuer thought then
that men dead in ſinnes, and inwardly
vicious and irreformed, though they
ſhould make a faire outward profeſſion,
were to be reputed true members
of the Catholique Church.
            The Church of Chriſt (ſaith S. Hierome)
is glorious,Hier: in Ephe 5. not hauing ſpot, or
wrinckle, nor any ſuch, therefore he which
is a ſinner, or defiled with any filthineſſe,
cannot bee ſayd to bee of the Church of
Chriſt, nor ſubiect vnto Chriſt.
            Proſper accordingly ſaith,
               Proſp: in Pſal: 106. 
               that the
Catholique Church conſiſts in the Elect
foreknowne of God, the children of the promiſe,
the members of Chriſts body.
            Rupertus in like manner affirmeth
               Rup: 1. Pet. c. 2.
               
               that the vniuerſall Church is cleanſed in
the bloud of Chriſt from all fault.
            
               And Bernard,Bern in Cant: Ser: 68. What is the Spouſe? but
the congregation of iuſt ones. And what is
this congregation, but the generation of
them, that ſeeke the Lord, of them that
ſeeke the face of the bridegroome.
            As for haeretiques, hypocrites, and
other wicked and vngodly men, they
pertaine not to the holy Church of
God,Aug: de Bapt: Contr: Donat. as Saint Auguſtine ſpeaketh,L. 1. c. 10. &. l. 4. c. 3. & 1. 6. c. 3. 
               although
they may ſeeme to be within it.
            
            But as Chriſt is the Head of the
Church, which is his Body, and ſhall
raigne with him in euerlaſting glory:
euen ſo the Deuill is the Head (and
Heardſ-man) of the wicked,Aug. de Doctr.who are after
a ſort his Bodie (as the ſaid holy Father
ſheweth) who ſhall be puniſhed with
him in aternall fire.
               Chr: lib. 3. c: 37.
            
            
               As concerning theſe three points of
Popery, to wit, That the Biſhop of Rome
is the Head of the Vniuerſall Church on
earth, to whom euery ſoule of man muſt be
ſubiect, or elſe he cannot but be damned.
            
               Secondiy, that the Church of Rome is
the vniuerſall Church of Chriſt, the onely
Catholique Church of Christ.
            
               
               Thirdly,
               Bellar: de Eccleſ. that no inward vertue is required
to make a part of the Catholique
Church,Lib: 3. cap: 2. but onely an exteriour profeſſion
of the faith, and followſhip in Sacraments.
            Theſe three points of Doctrin haue
in theſe latter times crept out of the
Alpes, like Miſe, or Rats. Rome hath
ſet her marke vpon them, and allowed
them: but the Catholique Church of
Chriſt neyther did, nor doth, nor will
euer owne them for her owne, beeing
indeed meere Counterfets, and Baſtard
Plants. And ſo I leaue them to
them that coyned them, and ſo proceede.
            This Body, this Catholique congregation
of Saints, and all the true, naturall,
and eſſentiall parts and members
thereof,1 Cor: 12. 12. are all of them vnited and
coupled to their Head,Eph: 4. 15. and one vnto
another:Col: 2. 7: 19 euen as we ſee a naturall body,
and all the parts thereof, to be ioyned
and knit vnto their naturall head.
            But whereas the head and body of a
man may be pul'd, torne, or cut aſunder,
as it fared with S. Iohn Baptiſt, who
was beheaded: the truth is, that Chriſt
and his members cannot be parted or

torneaſunder. The Church, which is
the body of our Lord, perſeuering
firmely in the faith (Nulla res ſeparare
poteſt a Chriſto) Nothing is able to ſeparate
from Chriſt leſus, as Saint Cyprian
ſpeaketh truly.Cypr: Epiſt: 63. For why? Chriſt
ſhed his bloud for the Church and all
her children. Therefore ſure, Hee will
not that thoſe ſhould periſh, for whom hee
payed ſo dearely, as Saint Auſtin ſomewhere
ſpeaketh. Charity faileth not from
the Church (ſaith Saint Bernard.) The
Church is founded vpon a Rocke: and the
Rocke is Chriſt.
               Bern: in Cant. Ser: 79. 
               And therefore wee neyther
could, nor can at any time heereafter
be ſouered
from the loue of Chriſt, neither
by the verboſity and babling of Philoſophers,
nor by the cauils and Sophiſtry of
Heretiques, nor by the ſwords of Perſecutors.
            
            
               For indeed, they that truſt in the Lord
ſhall be as mount Sion,Pſal: 125. which cannot be remooued,
but remaineth for euer.
            As the mountaines are about Ieruſalem:
ſo is the Lord about his people,Verſ: 2. from
henceforth, and for euer.
            And that Annoynting,
               1 Ioh 2. 27. which the
members of the true Church haue receiued

of Chriſt, dwelleth in them: and
the ſeede of God remaineth in them,1 Iohn 3. 9.
whereby he hath begot them: & they
ſhall remaine in that annoynting, that
is, in the Holy Ghoſt.
            Seeing therefore the Lord is alwaies
about his people,1 Pet: 1. 5. 
               Guarding them by his
power through faith vnto ſaluation; ſeeing
alſo the Spirit of Chriſt Ieſus dwelleth
and remaineth in them, and they in
him, it is impoſſible that they ſhould
be ſeparated or cut off from Chriſt, or
that they ſhould drop off from him as
drie and withered leaues, or rotten
ſprings and branches from a tree, or fall
like olde rotten teeth out of a mans
head.
            But when I ſay that all holy and
righteous men, being the naturall and
onely liue-members of the Church, are
vnited vnto Chriſt, my meaning is not
(as I haue touched before) that they
are holy, righteous, and ſpirituall before
the vnion, but then, when they are
vnited. They are not holy without the
vnion, but by the vnion. The coniunction
doth not finde them iuſt, but
makes them iuſt. They are not holy

till they be conioyned. For all our holineſſe,
iuſtice, wiſedome, and goodneſſe
is from the Lord Ieſus, partly by
imputation,1 Cor: 1. 30. and partly by inſpiration:1 Iohn 1. 7.
which we would not haue,Epheſ: 2. 5. vnleſſe firſt
we haue Chriſt himſelfe,Rom: 8. 9. 10. 12. and be vnited
to him: euen as a man cannot haue
comfort from his clothes vnleſſe hee
put them on, and buckle them about
him: or as the hungry, and ſicke, or
wounded perſon cannot haue the vertue
of meates, and medicines & ſalues,
vnleſſe he haue the very things themſelues
firſt, and that they he applied to
him. And therefore Saint Iohn hauing
ſayde that Life is in the Sonne,
               1 Iohn 5. 11. inferreth
thence that he that hath the Sonne, hath
life, and he that hath not the Son, hath not
life. Now who hath the Son, but he
that is vnited to him? who hath the
Husbands fellowſhip, but the Wife?
Who inioyes the loue of a friend and
his loue tokens, but his friend? What
hath ſenſe or motion from the head,
but that which is vnited to the Head,
as are the members of the body?
Who hath the payment of a ſurety,
euen he, that hath the ſurety himſelfe?

And who hath the ſurety, but he, whoſe
perſon the ſurety is pleaſed to vndertake,
and put on vpon himſelfe, and
with and for whom hee ſtands in bands
or couenants to ſee the debt diſcharged?
Now the Lord Ieſus Chriſt is our
friend, our ſurety, our head and huſband;
when once we are vnited to him,
(but not before, except in predeſtination)
then we come to enioy him, his benefits;
and graces, which are more
worth then the grace of all Princes, the
gifts of all rich men, and the prizes of
all things that can bee prized in the
world.
            They ſay of Venice, ſhee muſt bee
ſeene before ſhee can bee prized. But
though a man cannot tell what ſhee is
worth, yet he may tell what ſhee is not
worth. Shee is not worth all the Cities
of Italy: She is not worth all the towns
in Europe: Shee is not worth all the
earth beſides, is ſhee?
            But the Citie of God,Gal. 4: 26. the Citie of
the great King, Hieruſalem, which is
aboue, the ſpirituall body of Chriſt,
the Mother of vs all, is worth all the
Cities in the world, is woorth all the

world beſides. Her foundations are in
heauen, her wals are Iaſper, her building
gold, pure golde, her ſtreete ſuch
alſo, her gates pearle, and her ſhining
like abſtone moſt precious. Shee is
wonderfully rich & glorious. Chriſt is
her King, and her Temple, and her
Sunne, ſhee ſees by. She may well ſay,
Come ſee mee, and then eſteeme mee. But
who can ſee her yet? who can prize her?
I ſee her not, I cannot ſee her: but I
doe beleeue her being and her beauty,
and I count it aboue all earthly happineſſe
to be her ſonne. If I forget thee; ô
Ieruſalem, let my right hand forget her
dexterity. If I doe not remember thee, let
my tongue cleaue to the roofe of my mouth:
if I preferre not Hieruſalem to my cheefeſt
ioy. But I haue beene ouer carried.
            
               Adam is the Head of men, of all men,
both good and euill, ſaints and ſinners,
ſo farre as either nature or vice of nature
reacheth: euen as Gehezi was head
of all his iſſue, as touching their humane,
their ſinnefull and their leprous
nature and diſpoſition: but with ſome
difference. For hee was but a ſubordinate
and ſecondary Head to them, as

they were men and ſinners, guilty of originall
corruption: for heere Adam,
hath the primacie. But he was indeede
the firſt head and originall of their leproſie.
For he was by the ſingular and
ſudden iudgment of God firſt himſelfe
a leper, & then they afterwards by him.
            So Chriſt Ieſus is the head of godly
Chriſtians, of all godly Chriſtians, and
of none but ſuch: of all bleſſed men in
the world, and but of ſuch.
            
               Adam is to he found, yea and felt in
euery man: euen ſo Chriſt is to bee
found in euery Saint.
            There are prints of Adams ſetting in
euery mortall man: and there are likewiſe
certaine markes of Chriſts imptinting
in the ſoule of euery godly man,
who is immortall in hope, which ſhall
not faile him.
            Nature ſprings from Adam, as Gods
liuing inſtrument. And ſin alſo comes
from Adam, and from ſinne death. Euen
ſo alſo grace is from Chriſt: iuſtice
and holineſſe, imputatiue and inheſiue;
true life and liberty, victory ouer death
at laſt, victory ouer the world in this
life, and all future felicity proceede

from Chriſt, as from their Authour,
or Spring-head, from whence they
flow.
            There is much liberty in the world,
there is a peace of worldlings, many
honours and outward fauours, giuen
them by GOD, but not through
Chriſt.
            Many men haue had victories from
God, as Nebuchadnezzar, Caeſar, Pompey,
Tamerlane, the great Turkes, and
many moe vnbeleeuers,Rom: 5: 1. but not
through Ieſus Chriſt.1 Cor: 15: 57. But ſpirituall
peace,Rom: 6: 23. liberty, life, health, ioy, victory,
and ſaluation,Epheſ: 5: 1. no man hath but by
Ieſus Chriſt or Lord.
            So then, if we were not of Adam, and
had not Adams nature in vs, and ſinne,
which doth defile it, we ſhould neither
be men, nor ſinnefull men, and ſo not
men ſubiect vnto death. Euen ſo, if we
were not members of Chriſt, ſprung
from him as our head, and had him
not in vs and with vs, we could not bee
Chriſtian men, we could not bee ſpirituall
and holy, we could not bee vnder
grace, but vnder the Law, we could not
bee free, but bond-men, wee could not

be iuſtified, we could not be ſaued.
            A man therefore that would haue
life, light, grace and glory, and ſo become
a true bleſſed man, muſt needes
haue Chriſt his head, hee muſt needes
be his member, he muſt needs be coupled
with him, and iſſue from him, as
well as ſinners (to make them men and
ſinners) haue their father Adams nature
in them, and that, which doth infect
and poyſon it.
            Now Chriſt is the head of the
Church, as hee is both God and Man.
Euen ſo wee who are his members, are
vnited to him, as hee is both God and
Man.
            Chriſt, God and Man dwelleth in vs,
and we dwell in Chriſt, who is God and
man. We are partakers of both his natures,
diuine and humane: Chriſt is in
vs, as touching both, and wee are in
him, as touching both: hee in vs, and
wee in him: and both faſt knit together.
            But this muſt be wiſely vnderſtood;
and for the cleering heereof, I will
ſpeake a little yet more fully and punctually,
by the helpe of Chriſt, who is

abundantly able beyond all to vnfolde
and define what this vnion is, and to
anſwer all the queſtions, that may bee
put about it.
            Firſt it is readily granted, that the
diuine nature of Chriſt filleth heauen
& earth, and is eſſentially all the world
ouer preſent whole in all places, and at
all times.
            Secondly, that very Man Ieſus
Chriſt, the Virgins Sonne, hath the
diuine nature by hypoſtaticall vnion:
ſo that in the perſon of the eternall
Sonne of God, which is not double,
but ſingle, the two natures, diuine and
humane, are vnited faſt together, and
for euer, the humane beeing receiued
into God, hauing neuer had any
perſonall ſubſiſtence out of the perſon
of the Sonne of God. A certaine ſimilitude
thereof is in the Miſſelto, which
(as Pliny writeth) growes not but in a
Plant of another kinde.Plin. hiſt. nat. lib. 16. cap. 44. Indeed wheras
the Miſſelto may be pluckt by force
or ſtubbed vp out of the plant it grows
in, the humane nature of Chriſt cannot
be ſeuered from the Word.
            
            Thirdly, the Coniunction of the

fleſh with the Deity is extended as far,
as the Deity it ſelfe. For the Deity is
no where ſeuered from the Man-head:
but yet the actuall Poſition of the fleſh is
reſtrained and tied to a certaine place.
            Doubt not (ſith Saint Auſtin) but
that the man Chriſt Ieſus is now in that
very place,Aug. ep. 57. from whence hee ſhall come in
the ſame for me and ſubſtance of fleſh, which
he carried thither, and from which he hath
not taken nature, but giuen thereunto immortality.
According to this forme hee
ſpreddeth not out himſelfe into all places.
For it behooueth vs to take great heede,
leſt while wee goe about to maintaine the
glorious Deity of him, which is man, wee
leaue not the true bodily ſubſtance of man.
So then, tho the fleſh bee actually ſeated
there, or there, & not euery where:
yet it is euery where ioyned to the Godhead,
which filleth the whole world:
and no place, no not hell it ſelfe doth
hinder that Coniunction.
            But though wee cannot ſay that the
Man-head of Chriſt is euery where
preſent, yet we may truely ſay that the
man Chriſt is euery where preſent: becauſe
that perſon is euery where preſent,

from whoſe God-head the Man-head
is no where ſeparated: or, becauſe
this man is very God, and ſo by his Deity
he is omni-preſent, tho in his humanity
hee bee but in one particular ſpace
or place at once. So by reaſon of the
hypoſtaticall vnion wee may ſay the
man Ieſus is eternall, is omnipotent, is
God, is Mediatour betweene God and
Man. But wee cannot ſo ſpeake of his
mans nature.
            Fourthly, the fleſh or humane nature
of Chriſt, or Chriſt as he is a true
man conſiſting of ſoule and body, now
knit together, may bee rightly ſayd to
hee euery where preſent, as touching
co-operation with the God-head, and that
in all things.
            For the diuine nature of Chriſt,
which before his incarnation wrought
all things without the man-head, doth
now worke nothing, wherein the man-head,
which he hath aſſumed, is either
abſent from it, or idle.
            He which came downe from heauen,
and deſcended into hell, is aſcended into
heauen, that ſitting at the right hand
of God, inueſted with all maieſty,

might, power, honour and glory, hee
might from thence gouerne and diſpoſe
all things, and fill his Church with
the gracious and bleſſed fruites of his
ſauing preſence.
            His humane nature before his glorious
Aſcenſion, and Seſſion, was not
without the poſſeſſion of this power:
but the full vſe and exerciſe thereof was
ſuſpended, till his humiliation, which
had before vailed Maieſty, was ended,
and laide aſide.
            For the Seſſion at the right hand of
his Father is the actuall exerciſe of that
power and regency, wherein his Man-head
was ioyned and matched with
his Godhead.
            This regencie and dominion hee
now exerciſeth, both as God and man;
as God, by eſſentiall preſence with all
things; as Man, by cooperation with
his Godhead, which is eſſentially all
the world ouer.
            I ſay then that the Manhead of
Chriſt cooperates with his Godhead,
to which it is perſonally ioyned. For
the humane will of Chriſt aſſenteth to althings,
which his diuine will affecteth,

and willeth, what the diuine diſlikes.
And from his humane vnderſtanding
nothing, which his Deity worketh, is
concealed: ſo that by knowledge and
aſſent the ſoule of Chriſt is preſent with all
things, which his Deiry worketh.
            And as concerning his very bodie of
fleſh: ſeeing it is the Body of God, and
perſonally vnited to the Godhead of
the Sonne of God, by whom it was alſo
made a propitiatorie Sacrifice for
the ſinnes of the whole world, it therefore
receiueth a Preſence of force and
efficacie, by reaſon of the ſaid Coniunction,
throughout all ages and generations
of men. In ſo much that no
ſtint, or limit, can be ſet to the value,
vertue, and merite of his ſacrificed
body it knoweth no bounds of efficacie
vnto life: but is alſo it ſelfe infinitely
able to purge and ſaue all in any
place, or age, on whom Chriſt is pleaſed
to conferre it.
            Wee are then vnited by the vnion of
grace to our bleſſed Lord and Sauiour
Ieſus Chriſt, being locked and ioyned
to him by the vnion of a ſingular and
moſt bleſſed Dependance, as hee is both

God and Man.
            For our very being, as we are Chriſtians,
& true members of the Church,
his body, doth wholly depend vpon
him.
            Our new life and pardon, our iuſtice
and holineſſe, and all our ſpirituall
and celeſtiall gifts and comforts,
flow from him, as water from a fountaine,
or as light from the Sunne, and
altogether depend vpon him ſo, as
that if any thing could come betwixt
vs and him, that could ſeuer vs from
him, or from the gracious operations
of his Godhead, or from the Cooperation
and merits of his Manhead, we
could not, wee ſhould not continue
new creatures, Saints, or liuing members
of his myſticall body, one moment
of time: but muſt needes preſently
become nothing, dead, curſed,
ſlaues, fire-brands of hell, and periſhable.
            I ſay againe, the Godhead of Chriſt
is in vs, dwells in vs, and we in it; not
onely becauſe it fills vs, as it fills all
things elſe, and is preſent with vs, as it
is throughout all the world: but becauſe

cauſe it worketh mightily in vs, and very
graciouſly, powring foorth and giuing
vs all our new being, life, ioyes and
vertues, which we haue: and for that
it doth alſo ſuſteine and keepe vs in
this good eſtate, it ſets vs in. In which
reſpect we may truely ſay that God is
abſent from the reprobate, and that
they are ſeparated from him. And
therefore alſo Saint Gregorie ſaith that
All we, which belieue in Chriſt,
               Greg. in Iob. l. 2. c. 16. 
               are out of
doubt his body. And becauſe he is become
the head of his members by a maruellous
diſpenſation of pietie, therefore he is alſo
onely with vs, the rout of Reprobates being
repulſed.
            
            The Church of Chriſt is the choſen
inheritance of Chriſt,
               
                  Rab. in Eccleſ. l. 5. c. 13. as Rabanus truely
ſpeaketh: and therefore the Godhead
of Chriſt viſits and tends her onely
with the viſitation and preſence of
grace and mercy to ſaluation, paſſing
ouer the vaſt and drie Deſarts, and
craggy rockes, and ſterilous mountaines
of wicked Caſt-awayes, which
are the heritage of Satan, and confuſion.
            I ſay further, the very fleſh of Chriſt

is in vs, and we in it. And that, not
onely Propter identitatem naturee, becauſe
he hath a true humane ſoule and
body, as we haue, but without ſin: like
as the head and the body,2 Cor. 5. 21. and the vine
and her branches haue one kinde of
ſubſtance or nature:
                  Heb. 2. 16. 17. & 4. 15. nor yet onely
Propter conformitatem affectuum,
               
                  Cyril. in Job. l. 10. c. 13. for
conformity of affections, or ſimilitude
of vertues, or for becauſe hee is in our
hearts by loue, and we in his, which
may be among faithfull louers, and
louing couples: but alſo, becauſe wee
are his worke and creation, his fruite
and edifice. His very fleſh doth ſanctifie
vs, his bloud doth clenſe vs: by the
meanes and vertue whereof, being the
fleſh and bloud of God, our ſoules are
quickned,
                  Act. 20. 28. our hearts are purified, our
ſinnes are waſhed away, and wee nouriſhed,
refreſhed, ſtrengthened, and
preſerued to life and glory.
            From this ſacred fleſh of his our very
bodies doe receiue that life, which
ſhall make them glorious at the latter
day, and for the which they are now
reputed parcels of his bleſſed body.
            Theſe corruptible bodies of ours

could neuer liue the life, they ſhall
liue, but that they are here ioyned with
his body, which is incorruptible, and
that his is in ours, as a cauſe of immortality;
a cauſe by remouing, through
the inualuable death and merite of his
owne fleſh, that, which hindered the
life of ours.
            And if a man may ſay the fire is in a
man, when the heat and vertue of the
fire is in him, as when he is hot, burnt,
ſcorcht, or ſcalded, well then may a
man truely ſay that Chriſt is in a man,
who partakes of his merit, vertue, and
operations, and who hath his very ſpirit
dwelling and abiding in him, who
moulds him, turnes him, faſhions
him, mortifies him, quickens him, and
repaires him, ſcorching, drying, conſuming,
and burning vp the petulant
and luxurious luſts and humors of ſin
within him.
            Chriſt then, both as God and Man,
is in vs, within vs, and is our Head,
                  Col. 2. 10. 
               in
whom we are compleat.
            
            And as from the head is conueied
ſenſe and motion into all the parts of
the body. And as the ſame ſoule, which

is in the head, is in all the members of
the body, quickning, mouing and directing
them. Euen ſo the holy Spirit
of Chriſt is from Chriſt deriued into
all the members of his ſpirituall body:
and from him, as God and Man,
wee receiue our godly life and being,
and all thoſe perfections, wherein our
godlineſſe and happineſſe ſtandeth.
            The Godhead indeed is the fountain
of all grace and comforts: but the manhead
is the conduit-pipe, by which they
are from that fountain, or ſpring-head,
conueyed and brought vnto vs, euen
as bloud is diffuſed by veines throughout
the body from the liuer, or as the
ſinewes do miniſter ſenſe and motion
from the braine.
            But whereas, ſinewes, veines, and
pipes of wood, lead or other matter,
lacke reaſon, iudgement and will, the
fleſh of Chriſt is furniſhed with them
in all perfections: ſo that indeed neither
the Deity without the Humanity,
nor the Humanity without the Deity,
but both do work together for our good,
and worke-out our life and glorie.
            So then, we participate whole Chriſt,

and the whole of Chriſt. We participate
Chriſt, God and Man, agent and patient,
liuing and dying, deſcending &
aſcending, abaſed and exalted.
            Hee, that hath the tree, hath the
fruits: he, that hath the field, hath the
corne: he, to whom the ſheep belongs,
is owner alſo of the fleece and fruite.
            We participate Chriſt partly by imputation,
his obedience, holineſſe, and
ſufferings, being imputed to vs, and
iudged to be ours, For the Suretie being
ours, his mony is alſo ours, to pay
our debts, hauing freely vndertaken
vpon him ſo to doe. This mony is the
iuſtice of Chriſt imputed to vs, wherewith
we buy out our iuſtification and
liberty, which we haue in Chriſt Ieſus.
This (as Salomon ſpeakes of mony)
doth anſwere all things.
               
                  Eccleſ. 10. 19. By it we obteine
acceſſe to God, pardon of our ſinnes,
redemption from our enemies, and
euerlaſting ſaluation.
            And partly alſo we participate him
by habituall and reall infuſion, as when
grace is really wrought within vs, and
inhereth inwardly in vs, true holineſſe
being ingrauen vpon our hearts by the

finger of God, whiles we liue on earth,
and hereafter more fully, when both
our bodies, and our ſoules, ſhall bee
made like vnto his in perfit glory.
            And becauſe Chriſt worketh by his
Spirit, therefore hee beſtowes his Spirit,
euen the holy Ghoſt, who is breathed
from him, vpon his whole body,
and euery particular member thereof.
This Spirit is that odoriferous Northwinde,
and Southwinde, which blowes
vpon the Garden of Chriſt Ieſus,
which is the Church,
                  Cant. 4. 16. 
               that the ſpices
thereof may flow out. Theſe wholeſome
and ſweete windes do nip, and kill the
naughty ſwelling humours of our ſpirits,
and doe alſo mollifie, ſupple, refreſh
and comfort vs. So that if any
man would haue theſe windes to blow
vpon him, let him abide in this Garden.
If any man would inioy this
Spirit, let him abide in Chriſts body.
For as Irenaeus ſaies well,
                  Iren. lib. 4. cap. 18. 
               Where the
Church is, there is the Spirit: and where
the Spirit of God is, there is the Church,
and euery grace.
               
                  Ioh. 14. 17. 
               And the ſpirit is
truth.
            
            So then, a godly Chriſtian is more

than a man, and farre better then a
ſinner.
            He is become a new Creature, a new
man,2 Cor: 5: 17. a Saint on earth,
               Coloſſ: 3: 10. a tree tranſplanted
out of an ill ground,Rom. 1. 17. out of the
world,1 Cor: 1: 2. the Diuels territorie,Gal. 1. 4. and tranſlated
into the kingdome of Chriſt,Col: 1. 14. a
brand taken out of the fire, a Lamb plucked
out of the Lions mouth, a man taken
out of Adam, and incorporated into
Chriſt,1 Cor: 12. 13. a man baptized, that is, regenerated
and ingrafted into that One Body,
whereof Chriſt is Head, euen the head
of the whole Church, Militant & Triumphant,
throughout the World.
From whom the whole Body fitly ioyned together,
               
                  Epheſ: 4. 16.
               and compacted by that,
               
                  Col. 2. 19. 
               which euery
ioynt ſupplieth, according to the effectuall
working in the meaſure, of euery part,
maketh increaſe of the Body, vnto the edifying
of it ſelfe in loue.
            
            Euery true Chriſtian therefore is a
liue-man, a liuing limme of Chriſts body,
a man reuiued,Epheſ: 2: 5. reformed,Col: 2. 11. 13. and as
it were transformed into Chriſt,Epheſ: 4. 15. and
may ſay with Saint Paul, I am crucified
with Chriſt: Neuertheleſſe I liue, yet not
I,
               
                  Gal. 2. 20. 
               but Chriſt liueth in mee: and the life

which I now liue in the fleſh, I liue by the
Faith of the Sonne of God, who loued mee,
and gave himſelfe for me.
            
            Who now would not be a member
of this Body, who hath ſo glorious an
head, and is indued with ſuch an excellent
Spirit?
            Behold all the heads of the world,
naturall heads, politicall heads, oeconomicall
heads, Eccleſiaſticall heads;
what are they all? euen duſt, earth, and
aſhes. A learned head, is but learned
earth: a wiſe head is but wiſe earth: a
great head is but a great clot of earth:
a noble head is but noble earth. Emperors
and Kings, the great commanders
and ſwayers of the world, they
are but earth, imperiall earth, royall
earth. Earth and aſhes will one day lay
them euen with their Subiects. The
fineſt heads it'h world, what are they
elſe, but handfuls of duſt: make the beſt
of them, They are but fine duſt and aſhes.
For all fleſh is graſſe: all fleſh is
not one manner of fleſh. But there is
one manner of fleſh of men, another of
beaſts, another of birds, another of fiſhes.
But the fleſh of all men, as well

as of all beaſts, birds, and fiſhes, is but
graſſe, very graſſe, leſſe then graſſe:
Yet behold how we admire the perſons
of men, of great men, rich men, Princes,
Heads, who are but clay, but duſt,
but dreames, aliue in the morning and
dead at night.
            But Chriſt, our head, our royall
head, is aliue and giues life, liues, and
will liue for euer: Duſt, Death, Diuels,
Men and Angels, Earth and Heauen,
and all things are at his becke. If hee
ſay to the dead, Liue: they ſhall liue. If
he ſay to Death it ſelfe, die, be not: death
muſt die, it cannot longer be. What he
will haue done, ſhall be done, there is
no reſiſtance.
            Vouchſafe O Lord, to looke vpon
me, as thou vſeſt to looke on thoſe that
are enamoured with thee, and doe deſire
thee. My ſoule thirſteth after thee:
Come vnto me, bring me to thee, and
let me finde thee, and enioy thee Lord
Ieſus come quickly, and let mee feele
thy grace, and the ioyes of thy Spirit
in me.
            But the contemplation of our thrice
excellent and moſt bleſſed head hath

made mee tarry a little longer then I
thought.
            I am come at laſt, though long firſt,
to the laſt ſimilitude, which I propounded
for the illuſtration of our Vnion
with Chriſt, which is of an Houſe of
Temple, wherein I promiſe to be plaine
and breefe.
            The Catholick Church is the Temple,1 Tim: 3. 15.
or Houſe of the liuing God.
               1 Cor: 3. 11. Chriſt is
the Foundation thereof.Eph: 2: 20. He is the Principall
and energeticall foundation, and
chiefe-corner-ſtone thereof.
            The holy Prophets and Apoſtles are
miniſteriall foundations and Pillars
thereof.Reuel. 21. For by their miniſtery and
doctrine this houſe is builded,Eph: 2. 20. and
confirmed.
            Chriſt alſo is the chiefeſt Architect
of this building. The Apoſtles and other
Paſtors of the Church, are his Miniſters,1 Cor. 3. 9.
with and by whom hee worketh,Math: 28. 20.
and with whom hee is preſent to
ayde and proſper them to the ende of
the world.
            They are in this Houſe as Seruants,
and vnder-officers,1 Cor: 4. 1. and ſtewards: but
he is in it,
                  Heb: 3. 6. and ouer it as a Maiſter, being

the onely begotten Sonne of God,Hebr. 1. 2.
and Heyre of all things. He alſo is the
light and beauty of it.Reu: 21: 23.
            
            This houſe of Chriſt groweth out of
Chriſt,Iohn 8. 12. and is ruled by the Faith of
Chriſt. The rule of the Faith is the holy
Scripture: The Church is the
ground and Pillar of the Truth,1 Cor: 3. 15. Chryſoſt. and
the trueth is the ground and Pillar of
the Church: yea therefore ſhee is the
ground of the trueth, becauſe the truth
is the ground of her, and for becauſe
the ſpirit of Truth inhabits and directs
her:Iohn 14. 17. which ſpirit, becauſe hee ſpake in
the holy men of God,2 Pet. 1. 22. is therefore beſt
able to giue the ſence of the Scripture,
& accordingly doth teach the Church
all truths therein contained, needfull
to ſaluation.
            This houſe is a ſpirituall houſe, a liuing
Temple,1 Pet: 2. 5. and Chriſt is the Life
thereof,1 Cor: 6. and his Spirit poſſeſſes and
keepes it.
            All the ſtones of this Temple are
liuing ſtones,
               I Pet: 2. 5. growing out of the liuing
and life-giuing Rocke, on which the
Temple ſtandeth. They are all made
aliue, and kept aliue by the Spirit of

Chriſt, who is reſident alwaies,1 Cor. 6. 9. & preſident
in them.
            There are in theſe diuerſities of gifts
and operations, but the ſame Spirit
which worketh all in all.1 Cor: 12. 4. 6. Who is ſeauen,Reuel. 1. 4.
yea ſeauenty times ſeauen fould,
not in perſon (for ſo hee is but one) but
in variety of gifts and gracious operations.Eph: 4. 4.
            
            Now as the foundation beares vp
all the houſe that is layd vpon it: ſo
Chriſt holds vp and confirmes the
Church, beeing rooted and built in
him,Col. 2. 7. and ſtabliſhed in the Faith. And
this he doth, partly by his prouidence
and circumſpection, and partly by his
merits and efficacy, through his
Spirit.
            And as all the parts of an houſe are
compact together, and ioyned to the
foundation: ſo are all true beleeuers,
all deuout and ſincere Chriſtians knit
together in one,Coloſ: 2. 2. 7. & ioyned vnto Chriſt
by Faith and Charity (as it were by
lime, pins, nayles, and ſawder) through
the holy Ghoſt, who heweth, frameth,
and ſetteth euery ſtone in order in
Chriſt, In whom all the Building fitly framed

together,Eph: 2: 20. groweth vnto an holy Temple
to the Lord.
            
            This is a rare and ſingular houſe:
for they that are heereof, are Stones,
and Kings,1 Pet: 1: 5. 9. and Prieſts.Reuel: 1: 6. So then the
Church is a liuing Temple, a ſpirituall
Houſe, and a Royall Prieſthood: a
kingdome of Prieſts, and a Prieſtlie
kingdome.
            And no maruell it is if Chriſtians
be ſtones, ſeeing Chriſt Ieſus, out of
whom they are cut, and grow, bee a
Rocke: or though they haue a certaine
Kingdome and Prieſthood, ſeeing
they be members of him who is a
King and Prieſt.Pſal: 45. They are Chriſtians:1 Iohn: 2:
it is enough; they are annoiuted with
the oyle of gladneſſe, that they may
be able to ouercome the Deuiil, the
World▪ and the Fleſh, as Kings that
raigne by Chriſt; and may alſo haue
grace like Prieſts to offer vp ſpirituall
ſacrifices acceptable to God by Chriſt,
with whoſe holy oyle they are annointed.
            For as the precious oyntment, that
was powred vpon Aarons head,Pſal: 133: 2. ranne
downe vpon his beard, and went down

on the border of his garments: So the
holy oyle, the moſt ſweete and ſauing
oyle, which was powred vpon our head
Chriſt Ieſus, hath runne downe ouer
all his body into all his members, and
be-deawes them all, as the deaw of
Hermon, which falleth vpon the
mountaines of Zion. And (which is
no ſmall fauour) this precious and holy
oyntment tarrieth on vs,1 Ioh: 2: 27. and dwelleth
in vs, as St. Iohn doth aſſure vs.
            In a word, this Temple, this Houſe
hath a priuiledge aboue all the temples
and houſes in the world.
            For no winde can driue it downe, no
water can waſh it downe, no fire can
burne it downe, no canon can beat it
downe, no weight can weigh it downe,
no might can caſt it downe, no witchcraft
can worke it downe, no vnderminer
can vndermine it downe, no thunder
or lightning can teare or fire it
downe: neither men nor Diuels haue
power ouer it. For Chriſt vpholds it
againſt all aſſaults of enemies whatſoeuer.
It is built by Chriſt vpon himſelfe
who hath alſo ſayd that the gates of hell,
               Matth: 16: 18.
               ſhall not ouercome it. Chriſt hath ſpoken

this concerning no houſe, that is materiall
and earthly, but onely of this his
owne ſpirituall Temple: and beeing
Truth it ſelfe,Ioh: 14: 6. we may well beleeue him.1 Ioh: 5: 19.
               Whoſe houſe we are,
               Heb: 3: 6. 
               if we hold faſt the confidence,
and reioycing of hope to the end,
as the Apoſtle ſpeakes vnto the Hebrewes.
            Thus haue we ſeene our Coniunction
with Chriſt,
               Ioh: 14: 20. who is in vs, and wee in
him.
            
            He is in vs, as a cauſe in the effect:
wee are in him, as the effect is in the
cauſe.
            He is in vs, as a worke-man is in his
worke: we are in him, as a worke is in
the worke-man.
            We are in him, as Eue was in Adam:
he is in vs as Adams rib and nature was
in Eue.
            
            Hee is in vs, as the Sunne is in the
aire or houſe, to illuminate and warme
it: we are in him, as the aire or an houſe
is in the Sunne, which is lightned and
warmed of it.
            He is in vs as a kernell or ſeede, and
the earth it growes in is in the plant:Similitudo non c
                     •
                  rrit quat uor pedibus. we
are in him, as the plant is in the kernel

or ſeede of which it comes, and in the
ground, in which it is ſet, and by which
it is fed.
            He is in vs, and we in him, as Adam
is in his children, and his children in
him: or as the fountaine is in the riuer,
and the riuer in it: or as a roote is
in the boughes, and they in the root.
            But who is able ſufficiently to expreſſe
theſe things? who can declare
how hee is faſhioned in his mothers
wombe? or tell how his ſoule and body
are knit together:Epheſ: 5: 32. 
               This is a great myſtery,
ſaith Saint Paul; but I ſpeake concerning
Chriſt and the Church.
            
            I doubt not but that many a poore
ſoule is the Spouſe of Chriſt, and one
of his true members, tho hee be not able
to ſay much about his vnion and
incorporation,1 Cor: 12: 13. which is by the Spirit
of Chriſt.
            And though a man ſayd neuer ſo
much hereof, and could ſpeake of heauen,
as if hee had beene there, yet all
were but dreames, vnleſſe hee bee ioyned
to Chriſt, and haue his ſpirit really
to poſſeſſe and leade him.
            That which quickneth vs, is the ſpirit

of Chriſt:1 Cor: 15: 22: 45 and his fleſh that wherewith
he quickneth vs.
            That which ſanctified our nature in
Chriſt, that which made it a ſacrifice
of reconciliation,Heb: 9: 14. is the ſame, which
quickneth it, raiſed it from the graue,
and exalted it to glory.
            And therefore if a man haue not the
Spirit, or God-head of Chriſt, and be
partaker of his fleſh, hee is but a dead
man, a miſerable man, a man vnmortified,
vnſanctified, and without hope
of glory. I am the liuing bread (ſaith
Chriſt) which came downe from heauen.
               Ioh: 5: 21: 53.
               If any man eat of this bread, hee ſhall liue
for euer: and the bread, that I will giue, is
my fleſh, which I will giue, for the life of the
world. Except yee eat the fleſh of the Son
of man, and drinke his blood, yee haue no
life in you.
            
            But how can a man eat bread, if hee
haue it not? How can wee eat his fleſh
and drinke his blood, vnleſſe wee haue
it? The truth is, hee that giues vs this
meat to eat, muſt alſo giue vs hands to
take it, and mouthes to taſte and eat it,
and a ſtomacke to craue and holde it.
We muſt needes therefore be vnited to

Chriſt, and be truely poſſeſſed of him
and of his grace, or elſe we cannot liue
by him.
            And becauſe no man eats him, but
by grace, and for that no grace is but by
the holy Ghoſt, who diuideth to euery
man ſeuerally,1 Cor: 12: 11. as he will, and ſeeing by
this eating of Chriſt hee is not turned
into vs as bodily food, but wee receiue
nurriture and confirmation from him,
and are tranſmuted into him, and
grow vp in him, and he in vs, which neither
can bee wrought, but by the Holy
Ghoſt, it is of abſolute neceſſity that we
bee partakers of the holy Ghoſt, and
haue him dwelling in vs.
            So then whatſoeuer men talke of the
Spirit, all is nothing, they doe but beat
the aire, and make a dinne, they are
moſt miſerable wretches, viler then the
duſt on their ſhooe-ſoles, vnleſſe they
be endued with him.
            Hee it is which annoynted the bleſſed
ſoule of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt,
and which doth faſhion, vnite, animate,
and actuate all that ſpring from
him, in all the ages and places of the
world, as if both he and they together

were ſo many members or parts compacted
into one body, being all poſſeſſed
and indued with one and the ſelfe
ſameſoule.
            This Coniunction is moſt ſweet and
comfortable, and indeed that, wherein
our bleſſedneſſe conſiſteth, whiles we
liue on earth, and giues vs right vnto
the perfect bleſſedneſſe of the life to
come.
            We count it a great courteſie to bee
taken into ſome Corporation or Society
amongſt men in ſome Towne, City,
or Colledge; and eſteeme it a great
aduancement, when a poore Mayden
is married to a Prince, or to ſome
mighty rich man: what fauour then
hath God ſhewen vs, how highly hath
hee graced vs, how great is our happineſſe,
ſeeing hee hath giuen vs vnto his
one eternall and only Sonne, to whom
wee are faſt vnited, with whom wee are
clothed, whoſe ſpirit, grace and merits
we do participate, and from whom nothing
ſhall be able to diſioyne and part
vs, no not the gates of hell?
            
            What ſhall wee render vnto the
Lord for his loue vnto vs? what praiſes

ſhall wee ſing vnto him? O Lord,
what is man, that thou ſhouldſt ſo regard
him, or the ſon of man, that thou
ſhouldſt ſo aduance him? Man is a
worme, & the ſon of man is a worme,
duſt and aſhes, ſin, ſhame, and confuſion.
What are we all, euen the beſt of
vs all, but vapors, ſhadowes, dreames,
glaſſes, and very vanity? yet as baſe, as
wee be, the great God of heauen hath
lookt downe vpon vs, and not ſcorn'd
vs. O Lord, how ſhall we praiſe thee?
where ſhall wee beginne, or how ſhall
we make an end?
            The Angels, which tranſgreſſed,
thou haſt paſſed by, and wouldſt not
giue thy Son vnto them. Thou doſt
puniſh their pride againſt thee, and
their enuie at our felicity. They
fell without a Tempter, and they periſh
without a Sauiour. But man,
poore man, diſtreſſed wretch, who
being fallen by Sathans ſubtiltie, had
no ſtrength left him to riſe againe, and
with himſelfe ouerthrew all his iſſue,
thou haſt out of pure pity relieued and
raiſed vp againe, and a many alſo of
his children, euen as many, as thy

grace made choyce of.
            On him thou didſt beſtow thy Son,
thy deare and onely childe. Thou
haſt eſpouſed and knit vs to him. His
we are (who once were Satans) hee is
our life,Col. 3. 4. 11. our crowne, our hope, our
happineſſe.
            In him we haue all things, and he is
all things in and to vs.
            Wee poore wretches are ſicke and
wounded: but he is our phiſique and
Phiſician; in him we find perfit health
and ſoundneſſe.
            We are weake and feeble, but he is
our fortitude and ſtrength.
            We are naked, hauing nothing on
vs, but rotten ragges, and ſtinking
patches: but he is rayment for vs, and
doth aray vs, and preſerue vs from
cold and nakedneſſe.
            We are hungry and thirſty, empty
and hollow, yea euen famiſhed for
lacke of meate: but hee is meate and
drinke, Pabulum & Paſtor, our food,
and feeder, our nurriture, and our
nurſe,1 Cor. 6. 
               Eſca mentis, non ventris, meate
indeed for the ſoule, not for the belly.
Meates are for the belly, and the belly

for meates, and God will deſtroy both
it and them: but this foode is for the
ſoule, and the ſoule for it, and the ſoule
ſhall beſaued by it, if it doe receiue it,
and ſhall not be deſtroyed. All refections
are in him: if we haue him, we can
lacke no meat to ſtrengthen vs, no
drinke to coole vs, no wine to cheere
vs, no dainties to content vs, no waters
to reuiue and comfort vs.
            All the aqua vitae, aqua caeleſtis, aurum
potabile, all the waters, wines, & drinks
in the world, cannot quicken a dead
man, or preſerue a liuing man, that he
ſee not death; much leſſe then are they
able to reuiue a dead ſoule, and to
ſaue ſoule and body from hell fire, and
raiſe a dead body from his duſt.
            But our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, in whom
we are, and he in vs,Joh. 14. & 17. whoſe fleſh wee
eate,Ioh. 6. 50. 54. whoſe bloud we drinke, he, he is
able, fully able to do all this for vs.
            He is the Fountaine of the gardens,
               Cant. 4. 15. 
               the
well of liuing waters,
               Eph. 4. the Leader of captiuity
captiue,1 Cor. 15. the death of death,Col. 3. the
deſtruction of the graue,Eph. 5. and the Author
of life, grace and immortalitie to
all his body.
            
               
When we were caſt forth in our nakednes
and bloud,Ezek 16. and lay as forlorne
and dead, he, I ſay, he came to vs, took
pity vpon vs, and clothed vs, and ſaid
vnto vs liue,
               Col. 2. 13. and we are become aliue.
            He hath crucified our ſinnes, waſhed
our ſoules,Reu: 1. reconciled vs to God,1 Cor: 5.
quieted our mindes,Rom. 5. ſaued vs from hel,
giuen vs his Spirit, the Spirit of life
and comfort, of grace and holineſſe:
and when the fulneſſe of time is come,Ioh. 5.
he will raiſe vp our dead bodies,1 Cor. 15. and
make vs triumph ouer death, and hell,
and ſin, and all our infernall enemies,
in eternall and euer-bleſſed glory with
him; his holy Name be praiſed for euer,
and for euer, Amen.
            
            The Time, wherein we are firſt ioyned
vnto Chriſt actually, the time, I
ſay, in which he is firſt actually in vs ſo,
as hath been ſaid, and wee actually in
him, is at our effectuall calling and turning
vnto God, then when wee are firſt
actually incorporated by the Spirit into
his body.
            As concerning Gods eternall counſell,
and fore-knowledge, and purpoſe
of adoption, and incorporation, wee

were in Chriſt, and Chriſt in vs, before
the foundations of the world were
laide: but we are not actually knit vnto
him, he is not actually giuen to vs, and
we to him, vntill we be actually regenerated,
or called: Euen as Eue was
not actually vnited to Adam, till God
made her, and gaue her to him, and
hee receiued her. And our being in
Chriſt by eternall foreknowledge
ſaues vs not without our actuall calling,
and adoption, and our reall incorporation
in time into his body,
which is perfit in him, the head,
whence all the body by ioints and bands
hauing nouriſhment miniſtred, and knit together,
               Col. 2. 10. 19.
               increaſeth with the increaſe of
God. The time when our Vnion and
Contract with Chriſt ſhall be ſolemnly
celebrated, is at the latter day, then
when our dead bodies are reſtored aliue
and glorious vnto vs, and when all
our enemies ſhall bee actually troden
vnder our feete, and for euer. Againſt
which day hee prepare and fit vs for
himſelfe, who hath prepared it for
himſelfe, and vs. Come ô Lord, Lord
Ieſus come quickly, & take vs to thee.
            
               
The man, that is vnited vnto Chriſt
and is partaker of him and of his benefits,
that man (I ſay) may diſcerne this
his bleſſed vnion with Chriſt, and
Chriſts abode within him by theſe
notes enſuing.
            Our bleſſed Lord and Sauiour ſaith,
if a man loue me,
               Ioh. 14. 23. 
               he will keepe my wordes,
and my father will loue him: and wee will
come vnto him, and make our abode with
him. He therefore, that loueth Chriſt,
and keepeth his word, hath Chriſt in
him, and is in Chriſt.
            Againe, behold, I ſtand at the doore,
and knocke:
               Reu: 3. 20. 
               if any man heare my voice and
open the doore, I will come into him, and
ſup with him, and he with me. He therefore
that heares Chriſt ſpeaking to
him in the miniſtery of the word and
good motions of the Spirit, and opens
the doore of his heart,Pſal. 24. that this glorious
King may come into him (for hee
will not breake in like a Theife or
Murderer by violence, againſt a mans
will) he hath Chriſt in him, and hee is
himſelfe in Chriſt. For Chriſt is in no
man, as a Sauiour, but in him, who as
a man ſaued is in Chriſt, And hee is a

Sauiour to none, but ſuch, as entertain
him for their Lord, and will be ruled
by him, as obedient and louing Subiects.
            Further,Ioh. 6. 47. 
               He, that belieueth in me, hath
euerlaſting life. Therefore by true faith
in Chriſt a man belieuing may ſee his
vnion and fellowſhip with Chriſt. For
no man hath eternall life, but he, that
is in Chriſt, and hath Chriſt. For Chriſt
is the life, euen eternall life: life, euen
euerlaſting is in him, and floweth from
him.Rom. 8. 1.Yea Chriſt expreſſely ſaith, Hee
that eateth my fleſh,
               1 Ioh. 5. 12. 
               and drinketh my
bloud,
               Ioh. 14. 6. 
               dwelleth in me and I in him. But,
qui credit,
               1 Ioh. 5. 11. 20 
               edit, he eateth, that belieueth.
Why prepareſt thou thy teeth,
               Ioh. 6. 56. 
               and thy belly,
ſaith Saint Auſtin, Belieue, and thou
haſt eaten, Crede, & manducaſti, He eateth
him, which belieueth in him. Noli parare
fauces, ſed cor: make not ready thy
chaps for the matter, but thine heart.
            
            For a good ſoule is a good ſtomach:
a good minde is mouth inough: it is
no matter tho the teeth be rotten, and
the gummes be naught, if the faith bee
ſound: or tho the mouth be ſhut, if the
heart be open.
            
               
Moreouer, he that dwelleth in God,
& God in him, dwelleth in Chriſt, and
Chriſt in him.Ioh. 14. 10. 11. For Chriſt is in God,
and God in him.Ioh. 17. 23. 
               I in them, and thou in
me, that they may be made perfit in one.
Now we may know that God dwells in
vs, and we in God, by obedience to his
precepts, by mutuall loue one towards
another, and by his holy ſpirit.
            
            1 By obedience: For, who ſo keepeth his
word,1 Ioh: 2. 5. in him verily is the loue of God perfited:
hereby know we that we are in him.
Hee that keepeth his commandements,1 Ioh. 3. 24.
dwelleth in him, and he in him.
            2 By mutuall loue: if we loue one another,
God dwelleth in vs, and his loue is
perfit in vs. God is loue, and he, that
dwelleth in loue, dwelleth in God, and God
in him.
            3 By his holy Spirit: Hereby we know
that he abideth in vs,1 Joh. 3. 24. by the Spirit, which
he hath giuen vs.1 Ioh. 4. 13. 
               And againe, Hereby
know we that we dwell in him, and hee in
vs, becauſe hee hath giuen vs his ſpirit.
            True it is that there is no condemnation
to them, that are in Chriſt Ieſus.
But who are they? Euen they,
that walke not after the fleſh,Rom. 8. 1. but after
the ſpirit.
            
            
               
Certain it is, if any man haue Chriſt,
the ſame hath the ſpirit of Chriſt. For
if any man haue not the ſpirit of Chriſt,
               Rom. 8. 9.
               the ſame is none of his. And the ſpirit is
knowne by his works, as a ſtrong wind
by his effects, as a tree by her fruits, or
the ſoule by her actions in the bodie.Luke 6. 44.
But the fruit of the ſpirit is loue,
               Gal 5. 22. 
               ioy, peace,
longanimity, gentleneſſe, goodnes, fidelity,
meekenes, temperance. And as the body
is dead without the ſpirit,Iam 1. 26. ſo is the ſoule
without the ſpirit of Chriſt, & a mans
faith & godlines without good works,
which doth manifeſt it, as the light
doth the ſunne, or as the heat doth the
truth of fire.
            Many men abuſe themſelues with
their owne fanſies, thinking they haue
the ſpirit of Chriſt in them, whereas in
truth they liue in the fleſh, follow the
fleſh, daunce after the Deuils pipe, run
when the world whoops, liuing in ignorance,
and pride, in preſumption &
ſecurity of the fleſh, delighting in one
knowne euill or other, and will not be
ſeparated from it: but cleaue vnto it
(let Iohn Baptiſt ſay what he will) as Herod
to Herodias his brothers wife. But

the truth is, the ſpirit of God dwells in
none, but thoſe that are not in the fleſh
but in the Spirit: in none,Rom. 8. 9. but thoſe
that are led by the ſpirit, and not by
the fleſh. And they that are Chriſts,
haue crucified the fleſh with the luſts
thereof.
               Gal: 5. 24.
            
            It is no ſuch difficulty for a man to
diſtinguiſh his friend from his foe, for
a Woman to know her owne husband
from a ſtranger, or for a man to know
his owne head from another mans.
Neyther is it indeed ſo hard a matter
for a true Chriſtian to know Chriſt to
be his and himſelfe to be Chriſts.
            Indeede Epicures, Atheiſts, Mammoniſts,
malicious Idiots, Hypocrites,
and Chriſtians onely in name, finde it
not onely difficult, but impoſſible: or
elſe, like melancholy fooles and franticke
men, they feed & fill themſelues
with fooliſh fantaſies.
            For he that would know himſelfe to
be in Chriſt, muſt needs firſt bee in
Chriſt: as ſhee that would know her
ſelfe to be ſuch a mans wife, muſt firſt
bee his wife: or as a man muſt haue
wealth or health before hee know hee

hath it, and muſt bee aliue before hee
knowes hee is aliue, and can tell another
that he is aliue.
            In vaine doe they ſay, that they are
in Chriſt, which doe not the works of
Chriſt, and haue not his holy Spirit,
but a ſpirit of vncleanneſſe in them.
And in vaine doe they imagine or tell
folkes, that they haue the ſpirit of
Chriſt, when they adhere vnto Antichriſt,
or while they follow and fulfill
the luſts of the fleſh, as adultery, fornication,
vncleanneſſe, laſciuiouſneſſe, idolatry,
               Gal: 5. 19. 21.
               witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations,
wrath, ſtrife, ſeditions, hereſies, enuyings,
murders, drunkenneſſe, reuellings, and
ſuch like, which whoſoeuer doth,
               1 Cor: 6. 10. 
               ſhall not
inherit the kingdome of God, and therefore
plainely declare that they are not
in Chriſt, and Chriſt in them.
            The courſe that men ſhould take to
become partakers of Chriſt and his benefits,
is this. Firſt duely to conſider,
and bitterly to lament their wretchedneſſe
out of Chriſt, and to hunger and
thirſt eagerly after him.
            For vnleſſe we ſee and feele our miſerable
and fearefull eſtate without

him, wee ſhall make no reckoning of
him.
            Vnleſſe we know and acknowledge
our indigence of him, and that hee is
aboundantly able to ſupply our wants,
wee ſhall not eſteeme and deſire him.
            What ſhould hee doe with a friend
or ſurety, that ſees no need of him? Or
what ſhould ſhee doe with a husband,
that knowes not what a husband
meanes? Or what ſhould they do with
money, that knowes not what to doe
with it? or with cloathes that know
not how to put them on, or what they
ſhould doe with them: like the wilde
Virginians that count them cumberſome
vnto them, chooſing to goe naked?
            A full ſtomacke loathes an honnycombe,
contemnes all ſorts of delicates:
but true hunger makes a man
deſire and ſeeke for meate. The ſence
of ſickeneſſe and nakedneſſe makes a
man deſire health and cloathing. The
feeling of pouerty and lacke, mooues
a man to ſeeke riches and ſupply. The
pinching of could weather makes a
man runne to the fire, and leaue the open

ayre. The ſmart of paines cauſeth
a man to ſeeke eaſe. The miſeries of
warres make men ſeeke peace and purſue
it.
            Oh that we could ſee our vnrighteouſnes,
that wee might affect the righteouſneſſe
of Chriſt. Oh that we could
feele our heauy ſinnes, our ſinnes that
oppreſſe our ſoules, and haue ſwallowed
vs vp, that Chriſt might deliuer vs
from them, and giue vs eaſe. Oh that
we could feare, that we might come to
hope, and ſorrow, that wee might reioyce
in Chriſt. They that would haue
much ioy, muſt firſt haue much ſorrow:
there is no way to ſound ioyes,
but by bitter ſorrow: and a little ſorrow
will ſuſtaine but a little ioy: Of ſhort
ſorrow ariſes but ſhort ioy: of counterfet
ſorrowes, but counterfet ioyes.
            He that would hope, muſt feare: the
true way to hope, is by true feare, and
they that would hope much, muſt fear
much: they that would build high,
muſt digge low; the talleſt trees haue
the deepeſt roots: a little feare will ſupport
but a little hope: a little diſtruſt
but a little confidence.
            
               
Oh that we could, and at laſt would
diſtruſt our ſelues, that wee might repoſe
all truſt in Chriſt.1 Pet. 2. 
               He that beleeueth
in him ſhall not be aſhamed.
            
            Oh that wee could ſorrow, lament
and howle for our vileneſſe, and weepe
bitterly for our ſinnes with Peter, and
euen waſh our Sauiours feete with our
teares, as that poore penitent woman
did. Oh that the fountaines of ſorrow
were broken vp within vs, that whole
flouds of teares might guſh out from
vs: then all our ſorrowes ſhould be turned
into ioyes, our mourning into
merriment, and our teares into ſongs.
            O that we could goe downe into the
deepes, the deepeſt deepes, and cry out
(as Ionah did) out of the belly of hell.
               Ionas 2. 2.
Then our feares would be chang'd inhope,
and our ſighes would end in ſolace.
Oh that our ſoules did faint within
vs, and that wee were euen brought
vnto true deſpaire of our own ſtrength
and valour, that wee might onely truſt
in Chriſt, and ſeeke to him for ſuccour.
For all other helpes are but as a ſliding
foote, a rotten tooth, and a ſilly
reede. And they that waite vpon lying

vanities, forſake their owne mercie.
            
            Behold we the ſpirit of S. Paul,
               Ion: 2: 8. who
was able to ſay for himſelfe as much as
another; yet ſeeing his owne neceſſities
and the perfections of Chriſt, hee was
content to caſt off himſelfe, to put on
Chriſt: to caſt downe himſelfe, to
build vp himſelfe in Chriſt: to vilifie
himſelfe to be made glorious in Chriſt:
to become nothing in himſelfe, to bee
ſomething (euen that whole thing which
he is) in Chriſt: and euen to loſe himſelfe
in himſelfe, that hee might finde
himſelfe ſafe in Chriſt.
            What things (ſaith hee) were gaine to
me,Phil: 3: 7. thoſe I counted loſſe for Chriſt. Yea
doubtleſſe and I count all things but loſſe
for the excellency of the knowledge of
Chriſt my Lord. For whom I haue ſuffered
the loſſe of all things, and doe count them
but dung, that I may winne Chriſt, and be
found in him, not hauing mine owne righteouſneſſe
which is of the Law: but that,
which is through the faith of Christ, the
righteouſneſſe which is of God by faith:
that I may know him, and the power of his
Reſurrection, and the fellow-ſhip of his ſufferings,
being made conformable vnto his

death: if by any meanes I might attaine
vnto the reſurrection of the dead.
            Secondly, to gaine Chriſt Ieſus and
his graces, and gracious bleſſings, wee
ought to apply our ſelues to the Miniſtery
of the Word and Sacraments.
For theſe are the golden pipes, through
which the oyle of the ſpirit is conuayed
and brought vnto vs, and by which we
become enriched with the merits and
vertues of our Sauiour.
            For as concerning the Word:Iam: 1: 8. it is
the word of truth, by which we are begotten
in Chriſt to God by the Spirit,
who worketh by it.Heb: 6: 5. It is the good word
of God: a word, that conuerteth the
ſoule and giueth wiſdome to the ſimple.
               Pſal: 19: 7.
            
            It is the word of grace, the word of
life,Phil: 2: 15. 1 Tim: 4: 6. Tit: 2: 8. Epheſ: 6: 15: & 1: 13. Iam: 1: 21: the word of faith, an wholeſome
word, the word of peace, the word of
ſaluation, able to ſaue the ſoule, in which
it is engrafted.
            It is a word that ſhewes vs our poorneſſe,
nakedneſſe, blindneſſe, and
wretchedneſſe, and is withall that happy
organ of grace and glory, in the
which God ſhewes vs his Sonne, in
whom we may haue remedy, and holds

him out vnto vs, willing vs to take him
of him: and by receiuing of which
word we may come to enioy that ſubſtantiall
and thrice-bleſſed Word, who
is our life and glory.
            And as touching the Sacraments:
they are not onely memorials, ſignes
and teſtimonies, but effectuall meanes
and inſtruments (not naturall, but morall:
not humane, but diuine) by the
which God, when wee take the Sacraments,
deliuereth vnto vs Chriſt Ieſus
and his merits, and that grace that is
needefull to ſaluation.
            By theſe wee are put into poſſeſſion
of Chriſt, of his ſpirit and grace, both
imputatiue and inheſiue.
            In theſe our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, God
and Man, comes vnto our ſoules, and
applyes himſelfe vnto vs, and worketh
in vs, as he pleaſeth.
            Yet to ſpeake properly, by Baptiſme
wee receiue but the beginning of thoſe
graces, the increaſe and confirmation
whereof wee receiue afterwards by
the often receiuing of the Lords Supper.
            Wee receiue Chriſt Ieſus in Baptiſme

once, as the Author and firſt Beginner:
in the Communion often, as
being by continuall degrees the Finiſher
and Perfecter of our life.
            When wee receiue this Sacrament,
the ſpirit is ſent a new into vs: not as if
he mooued place (for he is euery where
whole all the world ouer) but becauſe
he is now to beginne ſome new grace,
or to confirme and augment ſome formerly
begun, or to raiſe vp ſome languiſhing,
or to giue ſome ioy, ſome
comfort, where either none was, or was
ſcarcely felt, or is decayed.
            So then that healing and ſauing
grace, which Chriſt originally is, or
hath, as the fountaine of life and grace,
for the good of the whole Church, hee
doth ſeuerally by Sacraments diuide
and deriue into euery particular member
thereof Neither doth hee ordinarily
beſtow the grace of Sacraments on
any, but by Sacraments.
            But yet this grace, which wee receiue
by the Sacraments organically, wee receiue
not from them energetically, but
from him: as they that looked vpon
the brazen ſerpent,Wiſd: 16: 7. were not healed by

that they ſaw, but by the Lord, their
Sauiour.
            But yet it is very iuſt, and more then
probable, that they which contemne
or neglect the Sacraments, ſhould bee
without the grace of the Sacraments.
            Chriſt is the kernell of the word and
Sacraments: they, that would eat the
kernell, muſt cracke the ſhell. Theſe
are the veſtiments in which hee comes
vnto vs.
            They are worthy to goe without
him, that will not vſe the meanes to get
and keepe him.
            Without doubt it is either ignorance,
or worldlineſſe, or wantonnes,
and preſumption, or ſomething that is
naught, that makes men contemne and
paſſe by theſe holy ordinances of
Chriſt.
            I aſſure my ſelfe their ſtomackes are
full, their hearts a ſleepe, and their
mouths out of taſte (ſomething doubtleſſe
is amiſſe) that they haue ſo ſmall
deſire to them, and feele ſo little ſweetneſſe
in them.
            Something doth bewitch them, that
they can neither ſee nor feele their own

wants, nor that ſuperabundance of ſupply,
that is offered to them in Chriſt,
who ſtretcheth foorth himſelfe, and
exhibits his ſpirit, and all his merits in
theſe holy myſteries.
            Queſtionleſſe theſe men lacke faith,
in ſteade whereof their heads are filled
full of fanſies. For had they faith,
they would flie to the Communion,
and preſſe on themſelues, as ſhe in the
Goſpell,Matth: 9. in her iſſue, whoſe faith made
her come to Chriſt, and goe behinde
him, tho but to touch the outer garment
of Chriſt. And what followed?
vertue went foorth of Chriſt, ſhee was
inſtantly cured. Chriſt Ieſus is offered
vnto vs in the Sacrament. Now if wee
would come to it, as ſhee did to his garment,
we ſhould finde grace. But how
came ſhe? her body was conſumed, her
bloud was ſpent, her purſe was emptied:
and all this ſhee felt, and was well
affected with. Further, ſhe ſaw all her
helps failed her. Shee doth deſpaire of
the skill of all Phyſicians. And for
herſelfe, ſhee ſaw there was no hope of
helpe in nature, which dayly decayed
in her: ſhe ſaw ſhe could not long hold

out in this eſtate. What does ſhe then?
kill her ſelfe, or run out to wizards? Oh
no: but ſhee bethinkes her ſelfe of
Chriſt, whoſe miracles ſhee either had
ſeene or heard of. To him ſhe trudges,
and touched the hemme of his garment.
For ſhee ſayd in her ſelfe, If I may touch
but his garment onely, I ſhall bee whole.
And ſhee was made whole at that ſame inſtant.
               Matth: 9: 22.
In like manner the Scripture reports
of the men of Gennazaret,Mattth: 14: 35. 36. that
when once they knew Chriſt, they ſent
all the ſick people about them to him,
and beſought him that they might
touch the hemme of his garment only.
And as many as toucht it, were made
whole.
            
            See, theſe people knew by ſenſe the
miſery of ſickneſſe and diſeaſes, as wee
ſay the oxe knowes not the loſſe of his
horne, till hee hath loſt it: they alſo
knew Chriſt and beleeued his power,
and they were well perſwaded of his
gentle nature: neither were they ſo ſimple
as to thinke his garment able of it
ſelfe to heale them: but they knew that
the vertue came from him: but yet
they deſired onely to touch his garment,

becauſe they knew it was a teſtimony
or ſigne ſufficient of their confidence
in him.
            Queſtionleſſe Chriſt is the onely
Phyſician of the ſoule, the onely fountaine
of life and grace. And in the Sacrament
hee tenders himſelfe vnto vs,
as he is both God and Man. He is the
ſame that euer he was, as potent, as gracious,
as eaſie to be entreated. And we
for our parts are full of defects. F
                  •
               ther
therefore that men neglect the Sacrament,
or make light regard thereof, it
it becauſe they are ignorant of Chriſt,
and beleeue not in him, but either deny
his might or elſe his mercy, or
both: or elſe it is becauſe they are inſenſate
and ignorant beaſts, without
knowledge and feeling of their owne
miſerable wants and beggerly baſenes:
or they do not vnderſtand & beleeue
what the Sacrament is, and what may
bee obtained by touching, taſting and
receiuing it, in a faithfull, penitent, and
humble manner.
            But if wee came preparedly to the
Sacrament, with good beleefe, and vnfeigned
deſire of grace, touched with a

thorough feeling of our wants, wee
ſhould certainely obtaine his Spirit,
and receiue grace by the taking and taſting
of the Sacrament, which grace
proceedeth originally from his Godhead,
which dwelleth perſonally in his
fleſh, which is there with his whole perſon
and all his merits exhibited to the
faithfull and humbled ſoule.
            Faith then wee ſee is a gift of great
importance: for by faith wee come to
Chriſt:Iohn 1. 12. by faith wee loue Chriſt: by
faith we receiue Chirſt: by faith we reſt
in Chriſt:Rom: 3. by faith wee are iuſtified by
the bloud of Chriſt:Gal: 2. by faith our harts
are purified:Gal: 3. by faith we liue: by faith
we walke:Eph: 6. by faith Chriſt dwelleth in
our hearts:1 Pet: 5. by faith wee become the
Sonnes of God:1 Iohn 5. by faith wee reſiſt the
Deuill: by faith wee ouercome the
world: by faith wee are ſaued. What
ſhall I ſay more?Heb: 11. Without faith it is impoſſible
to pleaſe God:Heb: 4. without faith
the word will be vnprofitable in vs, &
the Sacraments likewiſe: without faith
a man cannot enioy Chriſt: for none
ſhall haue him, but ſuch as doe receiue
him, and none receiue him, but ſuch as

put their confidence in him, and reſt
contented in his loue And in a word
In Chriſt Ieſus neyther circumciſion auaileth
any thing,
               Galat. 5. 6. 
               nor vncircumciſion: but
faith, which worketh by loue.
            
            A man lackes nothing, that hath
himſelfe: but he hath himſelf that hath
Chriſt, and hee hath Chriſt that beleeueth
in Chriſt, in the power of Chriſt,
in the grace of Chriſt, in the worde of
Chriſt, & reſts himſelfe in his doctrine,
regency and ſaluation. Hee that hath
faith hath all things; but hee that is
without faith, hath nothing, but in the
middſt of all things round about him,
is nothing. All the riches, treaſures, honours,
and learning in the world come
ſhort of the worke, the worth and efficacy
of true Chriſtian Faith.
            This is enough to make it eſteemed,
becauſe by it he dwelleth in our hearts,
who hath riches for vs if we be poore;Eph: 3. 17.
ſight for vs, if we be blind; hearing for
vs, if we be deafe; apparell for vs, if we
be naked; bread for vs; if wee be hungry;
drinke for vs, if wee bee thirſty;
ſtrength for vs, if we be weake; health
for vs if we be ſicke; freedome for vs, if

we be in bonds; and ſufficient meanes
of ſatisfaction if we be in debt, and will
come by faith, and ſeeke vnto him for
his grace.
            O Lord increaſe in mee faith, and
helpe mine vnbeleefe. O Lord open
my blind eyes, that I may ſee my wretchedneſſe,
and beholde thy glory.
Touch me with a liuely ſence thereof,
that I may flye to thee for ſuccour.
            Come downe to me, and make mee
to goe vp to thee.
            Seeke me vp, that I may ſeeke thee,
and ſeeking thee may finde thee.
            Let me finde no reſt in my ſelfe, till
I doe finde reſt in thee.
            Vnite me faſt vnto thee, that I may
enioy thee, and in enioying thee, enioy
my ſelfe.
            Hold mee, that nothing may withhold
thee from me.
            With-hold mee, that nothing may
intiſe or draw me from thee.
            Giue me thy ſelfe, O Lord, yea giue
me thy ſelfe, that I may giue my ſelfe
vnto thee.
            Pardon my ſinnes, O Lord, O Lord

pardon all my ſins, and purge me with
thy holy ſpirit.
            Guide me, that I may follow thee,
and follow mee that I may not goe away
from thee.
            Thou art the way, giue me grace to
walke in thee.
            Thou art the Trueth; learne me to
know thee, and perſwade mee to loue
thee.
            Thou, thou art the Life, make mee
to come to thee, and to continue ſtedfaſt
in thee.
            Thou art the onely Sauiour, ſaue
mee, O Lord, I beſeech thee for thy
mercy ſake, and vouchſafe to deliuer
mee from the hands of all mine enemyes:
ſo ſhall I praiſe thy name, for
euer and for euer, Amen.
            Trin-Vni Deo Gloria in ſecula
ſeculorum, Amen,
Amen, Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   