
      
         
            
            
               
               
                  Aſylum Veneris,
               
            
            OR A SANCTVARY for LADIES.
            Iuſtly PROTECTING THEM, their virtues, and ſufficiencies from the foule aſperſions and forged imputations of traducing Spirits.
            
               Ipſa ſibi Ʋirtus pretium nihil indiga laudis. 
               
                  Claud:
               
            
            LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for Laurence L'iſle, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Pauls Church-yard at the ſigne of the Tygers head. 1616.
            
               〈1 page missing〉
            
         
         
            
            
               with all variety of Graces and Abilities. Euery thing growes there in ſo good order, that the ſearching eye of Malice can finde nothing to be lopt, little to bee pruned. The hand of Heauen hath made it as it were a Nurſery, frō whence many Virtues & Perfections are oft times tranſplanted into others.
            
            
               This inward Beauty, graced with an outward comelineſſe, makes me thinke you, that compleat Heroine, which Venus ſpake of, when ſhe ſaid;
            
            
               
               Haec eſt caeruleis me cum conſurgere digna
               Fluctibus, & noſtrâ potuit conſidere Conchâ. 
                     Well was ſhe worthy on the ſeas to ride,
                     And in our Shell ſit with vs ſide by ſide.
                  
               
            
            
               Hence, Madame, I preſume to place you, like an armed Cherubin, at the very entrance of this Sanctuary, to put backe ſuch, as haue not on the Liuery, which your ſelfe doe weare.
            
            
               That ſeruiceable Loue, wherewith I haue alwaies honoured your noble Familie the Spencers, & their Allies, directing it ſelfe vpon ſome reſpects in a more particular

manner to you, was the chiefe occaſion that I first erected it. Protect it, and hauing kiſſed your worthy hands, I will euer reſt,
            
            
               Your affectionate Seruant,
D. T.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               I Know this age to be very Stoicall and Criticall, and that many will cenſure the Author to haue ſeriouſly buſied himſelf in an idle ſubiect; as making no account of vertue in women, though they come farre ſhort of it themſelues. But I haue Plutarke, and many other worthy perſons for my Precedents, Beſides I conſidered with my ſelfe that if the Trophies of Miltiades were of power to recall Themiſtocles from his effeminat and wanton courſes, much more ſhould their Perfections & Sufficiencies, whom we account the weaker Veſſels, bee of force to ſtir vs vp to all heroicall attempts

and atchieuements. And bleſſed S. Auguſtine doth moſt ingenuouſly confeſſe, That from their conſtancy hee receiued much encouragement in his firſt conuerſion. But the ſlight approbation I make of it my ſelfe, may bee witneſſed by my long ſuppreſſing it. And but to preuent others, who had gotten from mee ſome imperfect copies, I would neuer haue publiſhed it now. Careleſſe therfore of all ſnarling Cynicks & their taxations, with Horace I onely court the learned and the good.
            
               —quibus haec ſint qualia cunqne
               Arridere velim; doliturus, ſi placeant ſpe
               Deterius noſtra.—
            
         
         
            
            To the looſer ſort of Women.
            
               STand of you foule adulterate brats of Hell,
               Whoſe lunges exhale a worſe then ſulph'rous ſmell,
               Do not attempt with your prophaner hands
               To touch the Shrine, in which chaſt Ʋirtue ſtands.
               Hence Meſſallina, hence, backe to the ſtew,
               And in that cage thy blouded Pinions mew.
               Hence you that weigh not, ſo your thoghts be ſtill'd,
               Though Naboth's bloud be innocently ſpill'd;
               And being bankrupt of each natiue grace,
               Thinke to catch Iehu with a bird-limed Face.
               Hence frisking Faëries, that like Herods Noice,
               Esteeme of dancing, as your cheifeſt peice,
               And with Sempronia care not, ſo your Lute
               Delight the Hearers, though your Soules be mute.
               Hence you, that ſeek by Philtres, drugs, & charms,
               To bring the curl'd-head Youth into your armes;
               And doe not feare by poyſon to remoue
               A worthy Husband, for a worthleſſe Loue.
               Hence you, that practiſe Aretines vile ſhapes,
               Yet can ſo fairely ſoder vp your ſcapes.
               
                  
That in your Nuptialls firſt aſſaults, the Bed
               Shall boaſt the conqueſt of a Maiden-head.
               Hence you that ſtriue to haue your outſides brave,
               Yet are within far fouler then your Slaue;
               And will not let, being ſtirr'd by ranker veines,
               The Groome away, to try your Stallions reines.
               For Women only is this Place ordain'd,
               But you are Monſters, and their Sex haue ſtain'd.
               Hence therefore, hence, you baſe, vnhallowed crew,
               Hope for no ſhelter heere, All ſuch as you,
               That hitherwards for helpe, and ſuccour flie,
               Pluckt from the Altar, muſt abiure, or die.
            
         
         
            
            In delicatum Lectorem, è MART.
            
               COnſumpta eſt vno ſi lēmate pagina tranſis,
               Et breuiora tibi, non meliora, placent.
               Diues, & ex omni poſita eſt inſtructa macello
               Coena tibi; ſed te mattya ſola juuant:
               Non opus eſt nobis nimium lectore guloſo;
               Hunc volo, qui fiat, non ſine pane, ſatur.
            
         
         
            
            To the nice and daintie READER.
            
            
               Hath one conceit by chance fild vp a ſide,
               Thou skip'ſt it ore, & doeſt the work deride.
               Amongſt them all, thoſe which the briefeſt be,
               And not the beſt, are pleaſing'ſt vnto thee.
               I haue not ſpar'd to furniſh out my bord,
               With all choiſe Meats, the Shambles could afford
               Veale, Mutton, Lamb, Pig, Capon, but in ſooth
               Saue iūkets, nothing likes thy lickeriſh tooth.
               We ſuch a Reader, truſt me, doe not neede,
               As too much like an Epicure doth feede:
               Giue me that Man, who when he ſits to eate,
               Will fill himſelfe with bread, as well as meate.
            
         
         
            
            The Contents.
            
               The Proeme.
               
                  CHAP. 1. Of Womens worth in generall.
               
                  CHAP. 2. Of their Beauty.
               
                  CHAP. 3. Of their Chaſtity.
               
                  CHAP. 4. Of their outward modeſtie.
               
                  CHAP. 5. Of their Humility, and ſuppoſed Pride.
               
                  CHAP. 6. Of their Silence and falſly obiected Talkatiueneſſe.
               
                  CHAP. 7. Of the Conſtancie of their Affections.
               
                  
                  CHAP. 8. Of their Learning and Knowledge.
               
                  CHAP. 9. Of their Wiſedome and Diſcretion.
               
                  CHAP. 10. Of their Valour and Courage.
            
         
         
            The Epilogue. 11.
            
               In which their abilities and graces are prooued to be as weighty as Mens; their weakneſſes and imperfections onely ſhadowe of theirs: and Men generally taxed for their erroneous and ſide-reſpect in the choice of wiues, as the maine cauſe of their after-complaints.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Aſylum Ʋeneris, OR A SANCTVARIE for VVOMEN.
            
               Proaemium.
               
                  VIrtue is made a whited wall, which euery ideot doth delight to ſoile. He that knoweth no part of hir but the name, wil notwithſtanding haue hir baniſhed for hir worth. If ſhe flouriſh neuer ſo little, ſome tricke or other muſt be put in practiſe to giue hir a remoue: but ſhe, who as the Poet ſaith.
               
                  
                  Nec ſumit, aut ponit ſecures
                  Arbitrio popularis aurae. 
                        Nor takes, nor leaues hir dignity, and crowne
                        For any vulgar fawne, or baſer frowne,
                     
                  
               
               Can at hir pleaſure free hir ſelfe from checke; and with the ſplendor of hir maieſtie diſperſe thoſe earthly exhalations which being belched out of the boſome of wretched malice, would obſcure his glory. She ſtands continually firme and vpon hir ſquare: hir conſtancie is like the ſunnes, which neither for our praiſes, nor our curſes will bee moued to haſten or ſlacken his carere. She imitates the Moone, and howſoeuer ſauage wolues doe houle and barke at hir, ſhee is not moued to forgoe hir Spheare. Antoeus like, the oftner ſhe is caſt to ground, the greater ſtrength ſhe ſtill recouereth. Hi
                     •
                   foiles doe ſerue hir as a file, to giue him courage point. She is Colloſſus etiam in puteo; put hir into a dungeon ſhe retaines hir ſtate. He that laboreth by the interpoſition of ſome ſcandalous delation to ecclipſe hir brightneſſe, may peraduenture

with the ſillie Flie, make the obiect of his enuie an occaſion of his tragedie.
               What ſweete perfections are in women, which ill diſpoſed men haue not endeuoured to depraue, through falſe and forged imputations? what faire abilities and graces, which they haue not ſought to blacke with their calumnious aſperſions? She hath beene a long time the white, at which their hate hath leuelled; but as they that ſhoote againſt the ſtarres, may peraduenture hurt themſelues, but neuer endanger them; their arrowes many times haue rebounded backe, and deliuered a fatall anſwere to thoſe that ſent them: The diſſection of their weakeneſſe hath happened to bee a ſtrict anatomizing of their owne.
               The ſnuffers in the Temple were of pure gold, to ſignifie vnto vs, that ſuch as take vpon them to remoue from others the ſuperfluitie of the weeke, that their light may burne out the clearer; ought

to be free from all taxation themſelues. It were ridiculous for any man to talke of a mote in his neighbours eye, when there is a beame in his owne. Hee may well beare with a wart, who is himſelfe disfigured with a wenne. But alas! it is the nature of ſicke and crazie appetites, to thinke the meate which is ſet before them, is vnſauourie, when indeede the fault proceedeth not, but from a meere diſtemperature in their owne palates. The diſeaſed perſon complaineth of the hardneſſe of his bed, when the cauſe of his diſquiet is a weakeneſſe in his bones. Looke vpon ſuch as are ouercome with wine, and yee ſhall ſee them ready to accuſe euen temperance it ſelfe of their owne folly: the earth, which ſtandeth ſtill immoueable, cannot eſcape their cenſure. They will by no meanes be perſwaded, but it is that which reeleth, when alas! it is onely their own braines, which are ſet on wheeling. But I will not here profeſſe my ſelfe a champion to that ſex, leaſt by ſo doing I might be thought to

queſtion their ſufficiencie: the ſtrength of their owne merit, without the helpe of any forraigne ſupply, is that which muſt free them from the ſiege of barbarous oppoſition, and ſet their honour out of the reach of daring contradiction, which out of doubt will eaſily be effected, as by the ſequell briefely ſhall appeare.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Of womens worth in generall.
               
               THere is no greater argument of a generous minde, then to ioy in whatſoeuer it ſeeth generous in others. The Owle and the Bat, though they haue eyes to diſcerne there is a ſunne, yet haue ſo euill eyes, that they cannot delight in the ſunne: it is for Eagles onely, and ſuch kingly birds, as haue had no other Aerie for their

breeding, than the lappe of loue, to gaſe with pleaſure & admiration on his glory. The meaner ſort of people, whoſe ſpirits are oppreſſed & aggraued with ſuch groſſer humours, as the channels of their bloud are vſually dammed vp with; dare not but with cowardly feare approach the pallaces of Princes: it is honour enough for them, they thinke, if they may be ſuffered to obſerue the frontiſpice, or at the moſt to take a view of ſuch inferiour offices, as are in them. Their ambition is of a ſhorter wing, then to aſpire ſo high as to looke into a roome of ſtate; yet euen theſe, if in theſe meaner parts their duller obſeruation find any thing, which holdes not correſpondency with their conceit, will not ſticke at their departure for a little errour to diſcommend the workmanſhip of the whole frame. They which out of a cynicall diſpoſition doe wound the reputation of Women with inuectiues, are men of no better garbe. The graces haue found no ſweeter habitation vpon earth to reſt in, then their

boſomes. Our Sauiour did not ſcorne when hee came downe from heauen to make the wombe of a Virgin, the receptacle of his glory. Whereupon Saint Bernard tranſported with a diuiner ecſtacie, crieth out, O venter capacior coelis, diffuſior terris; latior elementis; qui illum continere valuit, quem totus mundus capere non potuit. O bleſſed wombe, wider then the heauens, broader then the earth, larger then then the elements; which was able to containe him, whom the whole world was too little to receiue. And to ſay truely, where could vertue in the pourpris of this vniuerſe, haue picked out a fairer manſion? It ſeemes to me that Women were erected of purpoſe for her to ſoiourne in; and that, by the hand of God himſelfe, who built her, built her I ſay, (for this is the proper word, by which the mouth of wiſedome in the originall expreſſeth hir creation) to ſhew the abſoluteneſſe of his skill, in the cloſing vp of his worke. But Calumnie ſuggeſteth here, that ſhe was built indeede, but the

foundation was a crooked rib.

                     Inde genus curuum, placidae virtutis inane.
                  
               
               And from hence a crookedneſſe both in manners and behauiour hath euer ſince deſcended by way of propagation, from hir to hir poſteritie; which I will no otherwiſe confute, than by condemning ſuch of ignorance, as haue beene authors of this improper ſpeech: Art would haue termed it an Arch, which of all kindes of Architecture is both the firmeſt, and the faireſt. But this is not the period of their traducements: they will ſeeme to tax the Artiſan himſelfe of errour and miſtaking. He made hir for a helpe, ſay they, to Man, when ſhe fell out to be nothing leſſe; as if that patron of all exemplary goodneſſe had beene ill aduiſed in his ends. They conſider not the fault is in themſelues, if they proue contrary to his intention. Their owne peruerſenes is that, which maketh them ſuch as they report them. Let Phaebus haue the guiding of the day and ye ſhall ſee it cleare and lightſome, but if Phaethon
                  
haue the mannaging of thoſe ſteedes, his preſumptuous ouer weening wil go neere to ſet all things in combuſtion. I but, ſay they, ſhe was according to that Spaniſh adage; Armas del Diablo: cabeza del Peccado: deſtruycion del Parayſo; The ſword wherewith the diuell cut the throate of mans felicitie; ſhe was the head of ſinne, the ouerthrow of Paradiſe. But let them conſider the good they gained by this hir errour, and tranſgreſſion; and vnleſſe their foreheads bee of Adamant, they will recant thoſe blaſphemies and cry out with a better reformed zeale, O foelix culpa, quae talem, ac tantum meruit Redemptorem! O neceſſarium Adae peccatum, quod Chriſti morte deletum eſt! O happie fault of Eue, which ſtood in neede of ſuch a worthy, and ſo mightie a redeemer! O needefull offence of Adam, which was not to be cancelled, but by the death of Chriſt. Then was it, and not till then, that the dores of thoſe euerlaſting taberacles, in which the king of glory hath is reſidence, were opened vnto wretched

Man. He was driuen out of an earthly Paradiſe by one Angel, that he might be welcommed by Legions of them into a heauenly one, whereof that other was but a figure and a type. And this it may be, was the cauſe why God after the time of her fall, and not before, entitled hir Heuah, the mother of the liuing. I will omit many things, and not inſiſt vpon any long.
               Hir breſt is as a precious cabinet in which the choiſeſt of all Virtues are preſerued. Our Sauiour himſelfe could not but wonder at the faith which hee found in the woman of Canaan, and forgot not in the height of his admiration to crown it with applauſe. Malice notwithſtanding would perſwade the world, that their outſide is a ſhop for vanitie; their inſide a ware-houſe for impietie; that conſcience in them is but peeuiſhneſſe; chaſtitie, waywardneſſe, and gratefulneſſe a miracle. In a word, that their boſomes are fuller of miſchiefes and diſaſters, than euer was Pandoras boxe: and that like the

Apothecaries painted pots, they may be faire without, yet full of poyſon within. And ſurely I muſt needes confeſſe, that there are ſome, on whom ſhe may iuſtly faſten theſe reproaches. For howſoeuer the matter be the ſame, there is a difference notwithſtanding in the forme. The fineſt cloth hath a liſt, and the pureſt gold, is not without ſome droſſe. But let not preiudice, like one of Circes charmes worke ſuch a fearefull metamorphoſis vpon the mindes of men, as to make reaſon brutiſh; iudgement and vnderſtanding, things of little ſenſe. Let them not ſhew themſelues, like bores, as ready to roote vp a bed of roſes, as a dunghill: but conſider that the earth hurteth not the ſunne, with thoſe miſtie vapours, and exhalations, which ſhee breatheth forth againſt it; but depriueth her ſelfe by them of that comfort, which the chearfulneſſe of his beames would otherwiſe afford hir. And ſo from theſe generall notions and conceits of Womens worthineſſe, I will now ſlide to ſome particulars, amongſt

which their Beautie is the firſt that offereth it ſelfe to be conſidered.
            
            
               CHAP. 2.
               
                  Of their Beautie.
               
               THis is that blazing light which virtue like another Hero, ſetteth vp in the face of Women, as in the turret of hir habitation, to guide thereby the courſe of thoſe generous and heroicall Leanders, who being enamoured of hir faire deſarts, cannot brooke that the threates and menaces of a rebellious fortune ſhould hinder them from repayring to hir lodge, or that any other diſaſtrous accidents whatſoeuer, ſhould preuent their affection from making a perſonall preſentment of their ſeruice, to ſo ſweete and heauenly a miſtriſſe: It is the onely harbinger, which prouideth a reſting place both for hir and hirs, whitherſoeuer they doe goe: it is the loade-ſtone of

all hearts; and in a word, a loade-ſtarre to all eyes. Beaſts onely cannot diſcerne it, and let them bee in the role of beaſts that doe not honour it.
               The force thereof is ſuch, as hath enforced the greateſt conquerours to ſubmit their glory, and to caſt the trophies of their victories, as enſignes of their ſubiection at hir feete. Sampſon, who like another Atlas could carrie cities on his ſhoulders, and by the vigour of his arme which ſerued him as an armie, both confront and confound the batalions of his vncircumciſed enemies; did notwithſtanding this his more then naturall ſtrength, become an homager to hir. Salomon for all his wiſedome was made hir liegeman; and Dauid who in his youth had ouercome the Lion and the Beare, and did afterwards vanquiſh that prodigious Philiſtim, the thunder of whoſe Threats proclaimed nothing but terrour and amaſement to the Iſraelites: vpon the ſight of Berſhabe, & that at a ſufficient diſtance, was captiuated by hir comelineſſe.

                  Darius may be ſo great in power, that all regions may feare to touch him. Yet Apame his concubine will dare to take the crowne from his head, and ſet it vpon hir own. If ſhe ſtrike him, he muſt be patient, & when ſhe any way diſtaſteth him, ſeek by flatteries and ſmooth inſinuations to worke his reconcilement. 1. Eſdr. 4. v. 30.
               What ſhould I tell you how Achilles doted on his Briſis? or how Alcides was enthralled to his Omphale? The very Gods themſelues, if any credit may bee giuen to the fictions of Antiquitie, haue acknowledged by their ſubmiſſion, a greater deity in womens faces, then their owne. Beautie euen in the capitoll of heauen hath hung vp many monuments of hir conqueſts. And hence it may bee, grew that ſpeech of Leonidas, who, when he beheld an image of Venus armed, ſaid, it was more then needed, conſidering how, when ſhee was naked, and altogether vnprouided of ſuch ſteely complement, ſhe had ſubdued Mars himſelfe. It is not then for any mortall eye to withſtand

the fierceneſſe of hir aſſault. Virtue it ſelfe can bee no armour of proofe againſt hir ſhot.
               
                  Hir darts pierce deeper, and woūd ſwifter far,
                  Than the ſharpe arrowes of the God of war:
                  Who would be ſure his enemies ſhould die,
                  Muſt touch his weapon with a womans eye.
                  Ioue, though he held the thunder in his hand,
                  Was faine to ſtoope, when Leda did command:
                  Bright Phoebus found in Daphnes lookes a flame,
                  Which ſcorcht him more, than he this earthly frame.
               
               
                  Arceſilaus an auncient ſtatuarie, to repreſent the fulnes of hir power vnto vs, made a Lioneſſe of marble, and about it many little beauteous Cupids, ſporting themſelues therewith in ſundrie manners. Some made it drink out of a horne, ſome put ſhooes vpon the feete of it: ſome tied it with ropes vnto a ſtake: all of them according to their ſeuerall humours made it the ſubiect of their delightfull paſtime. The beaſt tranſported as it were with the faireneſſe of thoſe obiects,

ſeemed to forget hir ſauage nature, and to ioy in the courſe of their proceedins. And ſurely it hath often hapned that beautie hath abated the edge of furic; & ſet a milde aſpect vpon the face of crueltie. She hath forced tyranny many times to alter his rougher dialect, and to vtter ſilken words at hir entreatie.
               
                  Nought vnder heauen ſo ſtrongly doth allure
                  The ſenſe of man, and all his minde poſſeſſe,
                  As beauties louely baite, that doth procure
                  Great warriors oft their rigor to repreſſe,
                  And mighty hands forget their manlineſſe,
                  Drawn with the power of an hart-robbing eie
                  And wrapt in fetters of a golden treſſe,
                  That can with melting pleaſance mollifie
                  Their hardned harts, enur'd to blood & cruelty
               
               Yet euen this in women (and in them alone of all the creatures in this world in hath hir chiefeſt perfection) ſtandeth liable to ſcandall, Enuie maketh it a prouerbe, that If ſhe be faire, ſhe muſt be fooliſh but the ſpirit of truth confuteth it as a

popular vntruth, with the example of Sarah, who notwithſtanding hir excellencie in this kinde was ſuch, as had ſo ſet on fire the heart of Abimeleck, that if God himſelf had not interpoſed his authoritie, ſhee muſt haue beene of neceſſitie the ſpoile and prey of his intemperancy; was endued beſides with ſuch an extraordinarie meaſure of knowledge and diſcretion, that the Lord commanded that worthy Patriarch hir husband to ſhew himſelfe in all things obedient to hir directions. Eſter by meanes of both preuailed ſo far with King Aſſuerus, that ſhe deliuered hir people from the merciles proiects of their oppreſſors, and made them fall into the ſnares, which they had laid for others.
               What ſhould I ſpeake of Iudith, or of Deborah? the one ſo famous for the deliuerance which ſhee procured hir countrie: the other for the prudent gouernement, whereby ſhe did long protect it? both of them notwithſtanding moſt remarkeable for their eminencie in both.

I could leuie infinite examples out of the writings of prophaner authors to conuince this errour; but I ſee, that euen common ſenſe doth giue it the fatall blow. For indeede, where ſhould we looke for knowledge, but in hir whoſe firſt ambition was the height of knowledge.
               It is not vſuall for any to couet, what they doe not conceit. The ſilly Paiſant regardeth a pearle no more than Eſops Cocke, becauſe hee knoweth not the vſe thereof. The Queene of Shebas repairing to king Salomon, gaue Iſrael an ample teſtimony of hir vnderſtanding.
               But if according to that Tuſcanphraſe, tutto vain ſcorza, all be in the barke, and nothing in the bodie; If there bee onely a ſuperficiall tincture, an outward dye, not woaded with any graces or abilities, which might colour it in graine, this Sanctuarie will afford them no protection. I muſt liken them my ſelfe vnto a ragged wall, whoſe deformities are hidden with ſome curious peice of hanging: or to

thoſe carriages of ſtate, which are couered ouer with embroidered ſumpterclothes, when the loading conſiſteth of nothing peraduenture but lome and rubbiſh; or laſt of all to a ſtately building, which putteth the weary trauailer a farre off, in minde of ſome great inhabitant, but when he draweth neere vnto it, hee findes there is onely ſome poore decrepit beldame, and hir curre, reſiding in it. As a iewell of gold in a ſwines ſnout, ſaith the mouth of Wiſdome, ſo is a faire Woman, which is without diſcretion. Prou. 11. 13,
               
                  Olympias derided a luſtie Gallant of hir Court, who had matched himſelfe, as ſhe well vnderſtood, with one of the loulier hew, but looſer crew, and ſaid, that if he had beene a creature endued with reaſon he would neuer haue made his eyes the inſtruments of his contraction.
               
                  Venus was ſeldome pictured without the graces by hir. Antiquitie held them for hir true and faithfull aſſiſtants, without whom ſhe would not willingly doe any thing. Hereupon it is reported, that

when Paris was to reward hir with the due price of hir perfections, ſhee did not onely ſummon them, but Hymenaeus, Cupid, and all hir little louekins, to come and deliuer their opinion & their counſaile in that buſineſſe. And out of queſtion where theſe are wanting Beautie is but impoſture. It is the diuels maskingſuite, wherewith impietie and impuritie doe many times diſguiſe themſelues. Yea whenſoeuer the ſpirit of darkneſſe would ſeeme an angell of light, he findeth not in all his ward robe a fitter habit. There are many though, which make this the onely ground of their affections; and which, like little babies, ſo the couer of booke be gay, reſpect not the contents. But alas! they ſuffer themſelues to bee guided by an Ignis fatuus, which without much warineſſe will leade them to their owne diſtruction. The loue of beautie argueth a lacke of reaſon, and commeth as Saint Hierom ſaith within an inch of madneſſe. Wiſdome will neuer be deluded

with theſe appearances; ſo the lining be good, let the outſide be what it will. She knoweth that the foule to ade may haue a faire ſtone in his head, that the fine gold is found many times in the filthie earth; and that the ſweete kernell lieth often in a hard ſhel. Yet I muſt needs ſay with the Poet.
               
                  Gratior eſt pulchro veniens è corpore virtus.
               
               That virtue liketh hir much better, when ſhe findes it in a comely lodging, then when ſhe is bound to ſeeke it in an ill fauoured creature, like a pearle in a dunghill. Such as would bee protected here therefore, muſt produce their warrant. If they be black without, they muſt make it appeare by their manners and behauiour that they be beautifull within; and ſo on the contrary, if they bee ſpotleſſe in body, that they be ſpiteleſſe in minde; if they be faire as the moone, that they be likewiſe pure as the ſunne, or it will aduantage them but little, to make this the refuge of their ſafetie. She that hath a faire body, but a foule minde, is like vnto him that hath a good Ship, but

an ill Pilot. The period of that Panegyricke, which was penned by the Pſalmiſt in praiſe of the kings daughter, was this, That ſhe was all glorious within. And ſurely in ſuch as are not ſo, neither beauty, nor embroiderie can iuſtly challenge the name of ornaments.
               It is not purple, needle-worke, or precious ſtones that muſt adorne and beautifie a woman.
               Theſe be arguments of hir wealth, not of hir worth, and get hir nothing but a popular applauſe.

                     Pulchrū ornatū turpes mores peius coeno collinunt,
                     Lepidi mores turpem ornatū facile factis cōprobāt.
                  
               
               Ill geſtures defile good garments, but virtuous conditions are a rich lyning to a meane outſide. If ſhe would therefore be the ſubiect of diſcreeter admiration, ſhee muſt eſteeme theſe acceſſory adiuncts, no better, then did Lyſander thoſe iewels and coſtlier tyres, with which the tyrant of Sicilie did court the loue and affection of his daughters. She muſt eye them with no greater reſpect, then ſhee

would the trappings of a horſe, which adde not to the goodneſſe of the beaſt, that beareth them; and weare them not ſo much for fame as for faſhion. Virtue muſt be hir chiefeſt garniſh. Beautie may procure delight, but it will hardly purchaſe loue, vnleſſe temperancie and modeſtie, like two iudiciall Schoole-miſtreſſes, haue the faſhioning of hir carriage and conuerſation.
               
                  Donec er as ſimplex animum cum corpore amaui;
                  
                     At mentis vitio laeſa figura tua eſt. 
                     
                        I lik'd thy body as I did thy minde
                        Whilſt in thy boſome I no craft did finde;
                        But thoſe vile cankers, which haue gnawn thy ſoule
                        Haue marr'd thy fauor) made thy beauty foule.
                     
                  
               
               And ſo from hence will I now turne the courſe of my diſcourſe, and come to ſpeake a little of their Chaſtitie, a thing excellent in many, yet traduced by the moſt. For behold, Hylax in limine latrat, I heare it cloſely purſued with hue and crie, euen in the very entrance.
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  
                  I ſeeke if any wench deny,
                  
                     Sophronius, vp and downe:
                  But not a wench which doth deny,
                  finde I through out the towne;
                  As though it were a wicked thing,
                  and whence diſgrace might riſe;
                  Yea no way lawfull to deny;
                  no wench at all denies.
                  Be none then chaſte? yes out of doubt,
                  we thouſands chaſte may call:
                  What then doe they? they do not grant,
                  yet nere denie at all.
               
               Which harſher cenſures, whether they proceeded from the diſcontented humours of theſe particular perſons onely whoſe feete well felt where the ſhoe did wring them; or from a generall deprauation rather of thoſetimes, I know not.
               
                  But there are many hold it as their creede,
                  That all of them are falſe, if they be tried:
                  If ſome ſeeme chaſt, it doth of this prrceede
                  They haue the wit to doe, but not be ſpide;
                  And know by deep diſſembling & good heed,
                  
                     
With ſober lookes their wanton luſt to hide.
               
               With theſe the Satyriſt giueth vp his verdict, & finding chaſtity for the rarenes of it in thoſe ruder times, as prodigious as either a milke-white Rauen, or a coleblacke ſwanne, examineth ſuch as goe about to wiue, what helliſh furies they be which driue them to it; and wondereth that any, conſidering the world affordeth ſuch infinite ſtore of neck-ties, ſo many loftie turrets, and deeper wels, ſhould endure to yoke themſelues to the vicious imperfections of a creature ſo laſciuious and imperious.
               
                  
                     —Tarpeium limen adora
                  
                  
                     Pronus, & auratam Iunoni caede iu vencam,
                  
                  
                     Si tibi contigerit capitis matrona pudici:
                  
                  
                     Paucae adeo vittas Cereris contingere dignae. 
                     
                        Within the temple proſtrate on thy face,
                        Offer the gods thy prayers in any caſe;
                        To Iuno then, vvith loud, but hallowed cries,
                        A horne-guilt Heifer ſee thou ſacrifice,
                        If thou a wife haſt got, that's free from blame,
                        
                           
Chaſt in hir life, and ſpotleſſe in hir name;
                        So few there be, whoſe purer worth appeares
                        Such as may claime the garlands Ceres weares.
                     
                  
               
               But out of doubt, theſe are not the legitimate children of a ſtaied conceit. Ielouſie that adulterate & ſpurious brat of loue and feare, was their onely ſire: and indeede this is a monſter, which neuer looketh vpon virtue, but with a froward and ſuſpicious eye. It reſembleth in effect the Iuie, which doth alwaies hurt that moſt, which it moſt embraceth. Such as haue it in their braine, wil not be perſwaded, but that which affordeth pleaſure to themſelues, doth giue the like contentment to others. Baſſa Ionuſes, who with hisſword, as with a pen of ſteele drew the conueighances, which did enſtate his Soueraigne Selymus the firſt in the territories and dominions of the Mamalukes, became ſo deſperately enamoured of the beauteous Lady Manto, by birth a Graecian, but by the chance of warre his priſoner, that he did not onely admit hir to his board, but of his captiue made hir in a

while the lawfull partner of his bed. And for a time they ſo delighted in each others loue, that as the Poet ſaid of Cephalus and Procris.
               
               
                  
                     Non Iouis illa viri thalamos praeferret amori:
                  
                  
                     Non hunc quae caperet, non ſi Venus ipſa veniret,
                  
                  
                     
                        Ʋlla erat; aequales vrebant pectora flammae. 
                     
                        T' was not the ſtate, nor ſoueraigntie of Ioue
                        Could court hir chaſt affectiōs from hir loue;
                        Nor was there any Venus in the skies,
                        Could frō hir looks withdraw his greedy eies:
                        Both like true Turtles whereſoere they came,
                        Conſum'd, and waſted in one equall flame.
                     
                  
               
               But deſart we know is the fewell of deſire; and good, whether it bee ſenſible, or ſuch as reaſon leadeth vs to ſeeke; is loues ſollicitor. It is the generall obiect of each mans appetite, of each mans will, and therefore they which poſſeſſe it; are no leſſe totmented with feare, then they which yet purſue it. It is a treaſure, which the more they ioy in, the leſſe ſecure they grow of their enioying. They are prone to beleeue, that what their owne

palate doth like, cannot but like anothers Witneſſe this worthy Souldier, who by doting on his Mantos face, began to doubt of hir faith.
               
                  —facies, aetaſque iubebant
                  
                  
                     Credere adulterium; prohibebant credere mores. 
                     
                        Hir age, and beautie wild him to beleeue,
                        That hir falſedealing gaue him cauſe to grieue
                        But when hir virtuous carriage he did eye,
                        His hart relēting gaue thoſe thoughts the lie.
                     
                  
               
               Yet in the end he ſuffered himſelf to be ſo farre tranſported with this frenſie, that like a glutton, who fearing that any ſhold wrong his mawe by intercepting the diſh it moſt delighted in, catcheth at it ſo raſhly, and ſo roughly, that through his inciuility he beguileth himſelfe, and pleaſureth onely the earth with the purchaſe of his greedineſſe; hee altered quite the ſcene of his proceedings. His words were now not accented with love, as beforetime they had beene. He vnaceuſtomed himſelfe to Cupids dialect, and neuer vttered

his minde vnto hir but in a tragicall and churliſh key. To bee briefe, his rage could finde no reſt, till ſuch time as hauing choſen his weapon for the Phyſitian of his Furie, hir purer bloud was made a purging Potion for his Iealouſie. Many to the great impeachment of Womens worth haue bin ſicke of the like diſtemperature. Their Vnderſtanding hath had no Tutor, but their owne idle Fancie, which hath ſetled in them ſuch erroneous opinions, that what through preiudice and paſſionate Affections, they will by no meanes bee perſwaded that Honeſtie and Beautie can euer harbour vnder one roofe; but that there is ſo great an Antipathie betwixt them, that like Caſtor and Pollux, they ſhew not their motions together in one Spheare. And here they inſtance their aſſertions vpon that firebrand of Greece, which being brought to Troy, did ſet it on a flame; and for better confirmation of their hereſie produce that ſaying of the Poet,
               
                  
                  
                     Formoſis leuitas ſemper amica fuit. 
                     
                        Looſenes was ſtil companion to the faire.
                     
                  
               
               But thoſe alas muſt be very narrow eyde, who if a Gnat but ſpread his wing betwixt them and the Sunne, doe thinke it is eclipſed.
               One drop of poyſon cannot infect the Ocean, though a little leauen may peraduenture ſower a great lumpe. It were ridiculous for any man to contemne the Roſe becauſe there is a prickle in the buſh or neglect the Corne, becauſe there is ſome cockle in the Barne.
               
                  We ſhould not let th'enſample of the bad
                  Offend the good; for good by paragones
                  Of euill, may more notably be rade:
                  As white ſeems fairer, matcht with black attone;
                  Ne, all are ſhamed by the fault of one. Sp. T Q Cant. 9.
                  
                  For lo, in heauē, wher as al goodnes is,
                  Emongſt the Angels, a whole legione
                  Of wicked ſprights, did fal from happy bliſſe?
                  What wōder thē, if ſome of womē al do miſſe?
               
               As there is often a Mars his heart in a

Cupids body; ſo may we many times diſcouer a Diana apparelled in the garments of Venus. Witneſſe Sarah, Rebekah, Rachell & Suſanna, with diuers others which ſtand vpon record in the Court-roles of Heauen for their vnmatchable perfection in either kinde. I could bring both Lucrece and Penelope vpon this Stage, and make their well knowne worthineſſe the pampering foode of my diſcourſe, but I will omit to ſpeake of them: as likewiſe of hir, whoſe husband, it may be, comming ſomewhat neere the lips of his miſtriſſe, and finding himſelfe denide the complement of his deſire, becauſe his breath was noiſome and vnſauourie, came home and blamed his wife, for hauing neuer informed him of that defect: when ſhee, good ſoule, out of hir chaſt ſimplicity replide, She knew not but that al mens mouths had ſmelt like his. The daughter of Ericus, Gouernour of Calcis, the chiefe towne in the Iſland of Eubaea, being taken by the Turkes, was for hir extraordinary beauty, as the choiſeſt part of all the ſpoile, preſented

vnto Mahomet the ſecond, whom when hee could neither by threats, nor flatteries conforme to his deſires, he moſt inhumanely commanded to be ſlaine.
               But non eſt admirationi vna arbor, ſaith the Philoſopher, vbi in eandem altitudinem tota ſylua ſuccreſcit. What ſhould wee make particulars the ſubiect of our admiration, when Hiſtories giue vs notice of whole countries peopled with Women of no leſſe deſart.
               The Lacedaemonians were generally ſo Chaſt, that when Geradas was asked why Lycurgus had made no lawes for the puniſhing of Adultery: his anſwer was that amongſt them there was not one addicted to ſuch incontinencie; But if there were, ſaid the ſtranger: why then ſaid he, he ſhould pay for the forfeiture of his miſdeede, a Bull of that growth and bignes, that ſtanding vpon the top of the Mountaine Taygetus, he might drinke out of the riuer Eurotas. It is impoſſible, ſaid his Gueſt a creature of that greatnes ſhould be found. Geradas aſſured him with a ſmiling

countenance, it was no leſſe impoſſible, that Sparta ſhould afford within hir confines any ſuch offender.
               One of the meaneſt amongſt them both for birth and breeding, when a Chapman as ſhe ſtood in the Market to be ſold, demanded of hir, whether ſhee would proue honeſt if he ſhould buy hir; replide vpon the inſtant. I wil proue honeſt though you ſhould not buy me.
               
               The Cianians were ſo free from any taxation this way, that for the ſpace of ſeauen hundreth yeares it was neuer known that any Matrone amongſt them had vnlooſed to a ſtranger the girdle of hir honeſtie; or any Virgin beſtowed vpon a luſtfull friend the floure of hir Virginity.
               The Eaſterne Indians did neuer proſtitute their Bodies, but to him, who did preſent them with an Elephant; and that the law permitted them to doe, with no little approbation of their worth, that could be valued at ſo high a rate.
               Thoſe religious and holy Veſtals, who had the charge of that immortall and ſacred

fire, which was by Numa conſecrated to the gods, were ſo reſpected for their ſpotleſſe puritie, that if by chance they met at anytime ſome wretched malefactor, who by the appointment of iuſtice was conducted to his Death, they had a priuiledge to reprieue him: ſo that the Votreſſe vpon hir depoſition would affirme that the encounter was onely caſuall.
               Poets enforme vs that Venus had hir chariot drawne by ſwannes, to ſignifie vnto vs, that Women as they labour to bee neate and cleanely in their Clothes, ſhould ſtriue to be ſweete and comely in their Conuerſation. Many may peraduenture make it their delight, to ſtand & gaſe vpon the Eſtrich for the rareneſſe of hir Plumes; but not any will make it the diſh which their Appetite ſhall feede vpon, becauſe of the rankneſſe of hir fleſh. They muſt harbour therefore alwaies a ſpeciall care within themſelues, that as they haue Vultum Veneris, the badge of Beautie in their Face; they haue likewiſe ceſtum Veneris,
                  
the markes of Virtue in their Forehead; leaſt want of grace in their outward geſture, might make their inward goodneſſe liable to miſconſtruction.
               Chaſtitie muſt haue ſetled Grauitie for hir Vſher; and for hir waiting-woman, baſhfull Modeſtie; or ſhe ſhall neuer procure reſpectiue reuerence and obſeruance from thoſe that doe behold hir. If Ladies of noble rancke & quality, ſhould now and then, though but to ſport their Fancie, lay aſide the ornaments of their ſtate, and without their vſual attendance ſhew themſelues abroade, diſguiſed in ſome wanton manner, I doubt not, but they would quickly finde, that many not acquainted with their intent, would not ſticke to ranke them in the role of Courtiſans, nor yet to rayle vpon them in a phraſe, which onely fitteth creatures of that condition. Immodeſty is like a Vintners buſh, which giueth euery man direction, where he may call for wine. Women alone are ſaid by ſcandalous and traducing

Spirits to giue it countenance, a little therefore now of this; as likewiſe of the contrary.
            
            
               CHAP. 4.
               
                  Of their outward modeſtie.
               
               IT is an iniurie to Virtue, to be committed alwaies cloſe-priſoner to the Heart. ſhe deſireth to looke out at the eyes, and to goe forth now and then in the words. If ſhee ſee hir ſelfe reſtrained of this libertie, ſhe will goe neere with griefe to fall into a hectike Feuer, and ſo to die of a languiſhing Conſumption.
               
                  Euill words are, as the Apoſtle ſaith, the very gangrenes of good manners; if they eate them not out, they will at leaſt deface them. If Women haue immodeſt lookes, it will auaile them little for auoiding the worlds cenſure, to haue honeſt hearts. A booke is cenſured many times, by what the title promiſeth; and Siluer,

into what faſhion ſoeuer wee melt it, though it ceaſe not to be ſiluer, yet the outward ſtampe is that which maketh it currant.
               
                  Craſſus had a liking to a goodly Mannor belonging to a certaine Veſtal, which that he might the better purchaſe, hee tooke occaſion to meete with hir in ſundrie places, & at ſundrie times, omitting nothing in his carriage & conuerſation, which might any way endere him to hir; but by this courteous entercourſe hir Innocency grew to be ſuſpected, and in the end, (as Malice is euer ready to picke a hole in Virtues coat) ſhee was publikely accuſed, to haue inceſtuouſly conuerſed with him. Poſtumia was a little too much in clinde to laughter, and now and than delighted freely to diſcourſe with Men, but this hir freedome brought hir to bee arraignd as an Adultereſſe, wherof when ſhee had throughly acquited hir ſelfe. Spur. Minutius, the high Prieſt abſolued hir, but withall aduiſed hir, ne verbis vitae caſtimoniam non aquantibus vteretur, ſo to

order hir life thence forward, that the outward faſhion might not preiudice the inward forme.
               Forbearance of the Action is no ſuffient demonſtration of a chaſt Deuotion. T'is from the ſetled diſpoſition of the Will, that this purer Virtue doth receiue hir forme. A certaine Spaniſh Laſſe hauing paſſed through the hands of Souldiers; God be thanked, ſaid ſhee, that once in my daies I haue had my fill without ſinning. But herein ſilly wretch, ſhe deceiued hir ſelfe: for howſoeuer Violence were Prologue to the fact, the delight ſhee tooke in the performance conuinced hir of a fault.
               Some could be content to haue it, but they would not bee thought to deſire it. They wiſh another would foile them, when of themſelues they haue a will to fall. Such as are truely modeſt, and ſuch aſſuredly are the moſt, will not ſticke to make their liues the ranſome of their Fame: for feare, though they conſented not to the doing, they might be thought

to bee well enough contented with the deede.
               
                  Theoxena to free hir Siſters children and hir owne from the laſciuious embraces of King Phillip, put weapons into their weaker hands, and perſwaded them Vt imminens ludibrium morte effugerent; to reſcue themſelues by Death from imminent diſgrace, where in ſhe had no ſooner preuailed, but with a heroine reſolution ſhe ſhewed them by hir owne example, that what ſhee had taught them, was eaſie to be done.
               
                  Hippo a Grecian, when the Shippe in which ſhee trauailed was taken by the Enemy, caſt hirſelfe immediately into the ſoft embraces of the ſea, to free hir Honour from the luxurious courtſhip of hir Foe. A Gentlewoman of Capua did the like. But theſe examples are a little too vehement, that which followeth is ſomewhat more conſiderate.
               
                  Cn. Manlius hauing giuen the Galathians a mighty ouerthrow at the mount of Olympus, there was amongſt the captiues

that were taken. Chiomara, the wife of Orgiagontes, a Ruler in that Prouince of ſome note, who being compelled by the Centurion that had hir in cuſtody, to ſatisfie the beaſtly appetite of his debauched affections, imparted afterwards the wrong ſhe had receiued, to ſome of hir friends, who were come thither to redeeme hir, and willed them to kill him as hee ſhould kiſſe hir at the farewell. This done, ſhe cauſed his head to be cut off, and bringing it home in hir own lap, caſt it for a preſent at hir husbands feete who vented the paſſions, which the ſight thereof had ſtirred vp in his boſome, with words which ſauoured ſomewhat of reproofe: O Woman, faith is an excellent thing: But ſhe confronted his pitie with hir own puritie, and told him, It was more excellent by farre, there was but one man liuing, that euer knew hir.
               
               A Veſtall Virgin to preuent the violence of an vnlawfull purſuite in a Prince, who much affected hir for the beauty of hir eyes, plucked them out hir ſelfe, and

hauing caſt them on the ground before him, bad him glut himſelfe with thoſe traiterous obiects, which had conſpired with his luſtfull Thoughts, to make hir a prey to Infamie. A Gentlewoman of Portugall, to cut off the importunacie of diuers, who in the time of hir widowhood, did continually ſollicite hir for ſome nightly kindneſſe, fearing leaſt the fleſh might in the end betray hir, ſeared vp thoſe naturall parts with a burning firebrand, ſaying: God forbid that for thee I ſhould euer fall into ſo foule a ſinne.
               
               
                  Fatua, the wife of Faunus from the day of hir marriage was neuer knowne to be the obiect of any maſculine eye, but hir Husbands. She did not faſhion hirſelfe according to the Moone, who then looketh merrieſt, when the Sunne is furtheſt off: but to the Marrigolde, which neuer openeth it ſelfe but whilſt he doth eye it. Zenobia ſo much renowmed in the Eaſt, for many ſingular virtues and abilities that were in hir, neuer imparted hirſelfe, no not to the partner of hir Bed, any longer,

then ſhe knew hirſelfe not to be with Childe.
               
                  Pulcheria, ſiſter to the Emperour Theodoſius the ſecond, and rightly ſo named for hir more then ordinary beauty, both in body and minde, matched hirſelfe to Marcianus with no other intent, then to adde thereby ſome ſtrength to his authoritie, as well appeareth by the conditions, to which ſhee firſt of all had tyed him. viz. That either of them ſhould for euer preſerue their Chaſtitie vntouched; a thing which was willingly accepted of by him, and thoroughly performed by both.
               The Mileſian Virgins, whether through the diſtemperature of the aire, or vpon any occaſion of diſcontent, I know not, were on the ſudden poſſeſſed with ſuch a furie, that neither the prayers of their friends, nor the teares of their Parents, could diuert them from an obſtinate and ſelfe-wild reſolution, which they had to hang themſelues, and many notwithſtanding the warineſſe of their Keepers, to

the terrour and amaſement of the whole Citie, did continually by ſubtile ſlights and deuiſes, giue theſe their tragicall purpoſes their determinate effect; till at the lēgth one of the wiſeſt Senators cauſed a Law to bee proclaimed, That whoſoeuer in that manner did abridge hir daies, ſhould after hir death be carried naked through the market-place: the conſideration of which diſhonor, ſuch was their ſetled Modeſty, did not onely reſtraine them, but free them from this frenzie. Shamefac'tneſſe, is nothing elſe, ſaith the Philoſopher, but a feare of Ignominie and iuſt Reproach. Theſe Virgins were ſo ſenſible thereof, that to remoue it euen from their Aſhes, they were content to forbeare that which they moſt deſired.
               I could muſter vp an armie royall of thoſe heroicall examples, to deſtroy thoſe Monſters, which make the Virgin fame of Women their tributarie foode. But who ſeeth not, that euen the moſt of thoſe few, which are Actors of vnciuill parts, can produce Men for their Authors. Such

a one who preferred hir Honor before hir Life, hath notwithſtanding for hir ſafetie of hir Husband ſuffered it like litter to be trampled on by the Luſt of a deadly Enemie, and done that for him, which ſhe would by no meanes haue committed for hir ſelfe. There are of thoſe, who for their Husbands profit and aduantage doe lend their bodies out, and that by their expreſſe appointment and entremiſe. Phaulius the Argien offered his wife vnto King Philippe through ambition; as Galba did out of curteſie and ciuilitie; when hauing feaſted Mecaenas at a Supper, and finding that his wife and he beganne with ſignes and glances to plot a further matter, that he might the better ſhoulder vp their loue, hee feigned a heauie ſleepe, which he auouched with no little grace. For vpon the inſtant a fellow being emboldned thereby to caſt a theeuiſh hand vpon his Cup-borde of Plate, he cried out vnto him freely. Stay, ſtay, thou knaue, ſeeſt thou not, that I ſleepe for none, but for Maecoenas?
               
               
                  
                  Phaedo a Philoſopher, after the deſolation of his Countrie, made the proſtitution of his wife, the ſubſtance of his Reuenue. And how many be there amongſt vs, who cull out the choiſeſt Beauties of of the Land, and hauing married them, ſtall them afterwards, as they doe their Wares, with no better intent then to procure themſelues that good which Pharaoh did to Abraham for Sarahs ſake? In a word, if wee examine euery thing but with indifferencie, we ſhall find, let Women be what they will, they cannot poſſibly be ſo bad as Men.
               
                  For when a man is bent to ſpeake his worſt,
                  That in deſpight of Women he can ſay,
                  He cals them but incontinent and curſt,
                  No greater fault he to their charge can lay:
                  To rob, to ſpoile, houſes to breake, and burſt;
                  Whole Cities, Towns, & Countries to betray;
                  Vſurie, Murder, all ſuch ſinnes appeare
                  Proper to Men, Women of them are cleare.
               
               Againe, that euen in thoſe things,

wherein we report them faulty, they can vnburthen themſelues on Men, as on the ſole Sollicitors, and Counſellers of their irregular proceedings. Ahaſhueroſh will not ſuffer a Virgin to come neere him, till after ſixe monthes purification with oyle of Mirrh, and other ſixe monthes with pleaſant odours, and ſweete perfumes.
               Some Husbands haue ſuch curious eyes, that if their wiues want colour of their owne: they muſt ſeeke for a ſupply. They had rather behold them artificially painted, then naturally pale. This is that which tieth their Affections to the perch, which otherwiſe peraduēture being prōe to bate at any thing, would get on wing & follow game. But alas! they conſider not that as Pythias, Ariſtotles Daughter was wont to ſay, The faireſt colour in the face of a Woman is that, which ariſeth from hir baſhfull Modeſty; and that onely Bluſhes are the Scarlet Robes in which the Graces delight to ſhew themſelues abroade. She that is cloathed with theſe virmilion Habits,

and hath this glorious tincture in hir Countenance, neede not feare the rude aſſaults of an Elephant, nor ſtart at the fierce incurſions of a Bull. It is a Shield of ſurer temper, then that of Pallas to defend hir Honour from inuaſion. Pudor arx pulchritudinis, ſaith Demades: It is Beauties fortreſſe: and according to Saint Bernard, Venuſtatem ingerit gratiam auget; it addes comelineſſe, and giues an encreaſe of grace. The brightnes of it daſeleth the eyes of Sinne, putteth Luſt out of his part; and maketh Temptation to forget his Qu. Thoſe other borrowed decencies, are nothing but meere ſophiſtication and impoſture. An able iudgement will neuer ſuffer it ſelfe to be deluded by them. The King of Ethiopia viewed the ſumptuous Garments that were ſent him for a preſent by Cambyſes Emperor of Perſia, with no little admiration, but when hee vnderſtood by thoſe that brought them, that the purple die they were of, was an inuention of Men: Surely ſaid he, both the garments and the men are

full of deceipt. The application would be fit, if charitie did not ſuppreſſe it.
            
            
               CHAP. 5.
               
                  Of their ſuppoſed Pride.
               
               PRide had hir originall in Heauen, but hauing forgotten, as it were, the way, by which ſhe fell from thence, could neuer ſince returne. Like an exile did ſhe pace the Earth, and found no habitation, till ſome ſay Women tooke hir in, and made their hearts the ſetled place of hir abode. Conformable to this is that vnhallowed fiction of another, who reporteth to the world, how Sathan, that ſworne enemie to Man, hauing matched himſelfe in mariage with Iniquitie, had by hir nine children, which he placed with ſeuerall perſons, fitting in diſpoſition to their ſeuerall humours and inclinations in manner following. viz. Simonie with Prieſts, Hypocriſie with profeſſors,

                  Oppreſsion with Nobles, Vſurie with Citizens, Deceit with Merchants, Falſehood with Seruants, Sacriledge with Souldiers, Pride with Women, Luxurie with all.
               
                  Plutarke condemneth thoſe of his time as ouermuch addicted to the ſeruice of this hell-borne Fiend. The Egyptian wiues, ſaith he, by the decrees, and ordinances of their Anceſtors, were forbidden the vſe of Shooes, to put them in minde, that it was their dutie to keepe ſtill at home, a point which many now obſerue, but alas! out of another reſpect. They will not ſtirre abroade, ſaith he, becauſe they haue not their embrodered Pantophles, their chaines of Pearle, their coſtly Carquanets, their Eare-rings, and their Vnions. And behold, me thinkes, I heare ſome whiſper, that by the beating of the Pulſe, thoſe of our Age ſhould labour of the like diſtemperature. For let them be well rigged, and ſet out, they will be gadding preſently with Dinah, though the loſſe both of life, and honour

were the propounded guerdon of their folly. They conſider not, ſay they, that the ſnaile is ſafe while it harboureth in the Shell; but ſo ſoone as ſhee commeth forth to make ſhew of hir Hornes, ſhee meeteth with many lets, which occaſion their drawing in againe to hir griefe and ſhame.
               A Woman, ſaith Simonides, ſhould be like the Bee, chaſt and frugall, buſied ſtill about hir huſwiuerie; no wanderer at any time abroad, but alwaies carefull of hir progenie at home.
               
                  The vertues that in Women merit praiſe,
                  Are ſober ſhows without chaſt thoughts with in
                  True faith, and due obedience to their make,
                  And of their children honeſt care to take.
               
               How to gouerne well hir Familie ſhould be hir chiefeſt ſtudie. She ſhould not hunt ambitiouſly after popular applauſe, but reſt contented with the Conſcience of hir owne deſeruings, and think it praiſe enough to bee thought praiſeworthy

by ſuch as liue within the boūds of hir owne threſhold. She ſhould remember with Thucydides,
                  
                     That thoſe of Women ſtill are counted beſt,
                     Of whom in praiſe or diſpraiſe mē ſpeak leaſt.
                  
               
               The Lacedemonians could not endure to heare their wiues commended by a Stranger. They thought it not fit their Virtues ſhould be knowne to any but to their Husband; and hence it was, their Virgins went alwaies open-faced, till ſuch time as Hymen had linked them to ſome louing Mate, and then their beauty was canopied from the generall view of all, and made the ſolitarie obiect of their particular choiſe alone. The Turkiſh Women are forbidden by the Alcoran to ſhew themſelues vnuailed to any but their Fathers and their Husbands. And the Venetians obſerue in a manner the like cuſtome, euen at this day ſay our aduerſaries, but by their fauour it is notout of any good reſpect: for in them it is onely a depraued and corrupt opinion, which the knowledge of their owne wickednes

maketh them carrie off anothers worthineſſe. Nor doe I ſpeake this vnaduiſedly; for it is a Maxime of infallible truth, That open ſuſpecting others commeth of ſecret condemning our ſelues. Theſe Women-quellers would ſeeme to countenance their proceedings, thinking to breake the backe of Innocencie, by ouercharging it with ſcandalous imputations, which they can no way proue by any ſurer demonſtration then their owne adulterate opinions. To what end, ſay they, is that prodigious varietie of apparell which they vſe, but to enſnare the hearts of ignorant and vndiſcreeter perſons?
               
                  
                     Vni, ſi qua placet, culta puella ſat eſt. 
                     
                        If any wench delightfull be to one,
                        She's trim enough, and decking needeth none.
                     
                  
               
               Brauerie in ancient Engliſh was called Baudrie; and curious Cals in thoſe humbler times, were accounted but the ſtales of a careleſſe Callot. They be the Weres and Nets of Luſt. Virtue delights not in them at all: they be things which

cannot any way aduantage hir. For as all men know,
               
                  Hir gloriousſtate no borrowed grace doth need
                  Hir Beautie findes of skilfull Art no lack,
                  She ſeems as louely in a Shepheads weed,
                  As they that weare the Indies on their back.
               
               In a word, they be the noted enſignes of diſorderly Pride, in which the very folds and motions of the Heart are charactred vnto the life. Let vs but caſt a ſerious eye ſay they, vpon the vanitie of Women in this kinde, & we ſhal quickly finde them to be the leaſt part of what they ſeeme; Inter tot 
                        •
                      honeſtamenta vix inuenies mulierem. They be fenſed in on euery with ſuch innumerable borrels, and fantaſticall attoures, as Chaucer calleth them, that without ſome difficultie you cannot diſcouer what creature it is that beareth them. And from this conſideration peraduenture grew that ſaying of the Comicke; Negotij ſibi qui volet vim comparare, nauim, & mulierem, haec duo comparato.

Nam nullae res magis duaeplus negotij habent; Hethat would buſie himſelfe indeede, muſt get him a Woman and a Ship. For there are not any two things in the world that require more trimming. Dum comuntur dum pectuntur, annus eſt; ſaith another. They be a yeere in keaming and in curling of themſelues.
               I might well feare to be ſwallowed vp of theſe waues, did not my Genius prompt me, that the Starre, by which I ſteare my courſe, bids me not feare the rage of Scylla, nor the threatnings of Carybdis, but on with courage, till I haue worthily atchieued, what I willingly attempted: and I know, let Womens aduerſaries make what head they can to ouerthrow the ſtrength and glory of their reputation, there are exemplarie Virtues enough in hir alone, to protect it from the furie of malignant Tongues; and therefore I will boldly dare to defend them euen from this.
               Ignorance it ſelfe muſt needes confeſſe that Pride conſiſteth more in the Heart,

then in the outward Habit, and that it peereth as often through a ragged coate, as through a veluet cloake. For if apparell, iewels, odours, and ſuch like acceſſerie complements did giue it forme, it were no way poſſible, that Women ſhould be freed from this crime. But alas! theſe are no other then outward ornaments, which howſoeuer peraduenture they may giue it luſtre, can adde no life.
               Beautie, Birth, and Breeding, if any thing (for theſe be their chiefeſt peices) would cauſe both tumour and inflammation in them, were their mindes ſo light and wauering, as ſome would haue them; but we ſee notwithſtanding all theſe, how humble and how debonnaire Rebekah was, who did not onely out of meckeneſſe ſatisfie the requeſt of Abrahams ſeruant, then a ſtranger to hir, in giuing him water to drinke, as he deſired, but went hir ſelfe with all alacritie to the Well, and drew ſome likewiſe for thoſe of his retinue, and their Camels.

Nor did the maſſie Rings, and Bracelets, where with he afterwards rewarded this hir kindeneſſe, alter any way the compoſition of this ſetled forme.
               It is true that Vaſhti was degraded from hir dignitie, for the rebellious pride and diſobedience which ſhe ſhewed toward hir Lord and Soueraigne; but Eſther was elected in hir place, who with hir Buxome and lowly carriage found fauour in the eyes of hir Aſsuerus, and forgot not in this tranſcendent of hir honour the miſeries and afflictions of hir diſtreſſed Countrimen, nor was ſhe euer wanting in the performance of that due reſpect, which ſhe did owe vnto hir poore friend Mardoche. It is true likewiſe, it may be, that the daughter of Nicephorus the Emperour, was ſo neate and ſo nice, that ſhee neuer waſhed hir but in dew, nor ſpent hir time in any thing, but in painting, poudring, and perfuming of hir ſelfe, which brought vpon hir in the end ſo odious and ſo loathſome a diſeaſe, that for the ſtench of hir Body, there

was not any could endure to come nigh hir: all are not yet to be condemned of the like. This age as corrupted as Men would make it, affordeth many of extraordinary birth and qualitie, who hauing ſhooke hands with Vanitie, and tooke an euerlaſting Farewell of all worldly Pleaſures, doe altogether ſpend their houres in the ſolitarie contemplation of celeſtiall things, making with all humilitie and ſingleneſſe of Heart, the goodneſſe of their God, the continuall ſubiect of their Meditation. I could here ſet diuers Precedents on foote, to backe and ſecond my diſcourſe, but as our owne Engliſh Poet, ſaith:
               
                  This al men know ful wel, though I would lie,
                  In Women is all troth, and ſtedfaſtneſſe,
                  For in good faith, Ineuer of them ſee,
                  But much worſhip, bounty, and gentleneſse,
                  Right comming, faire, and full of meekeneſſe,
                  Good, and glad, and lowly, I you enſure,
                  Is this goodly angelike Creature.
               
               
                  
Hauing freed them therefore from this, I will now turne my plee to the defence of their Tongue, which ſtandeth at the barre of weaker Iudgment, accuſed of prodigious Intemperancie, and hath many forged Writs and Proceſſes ſerued vpon it for the ſame.
            
            
               CHAP. 4.
               
                  Of their Talke atiueneſse.
               
               
                  PHidias, ſay their aduerſaries, that worthy Workman, ſo renowmed through the confines of Peloponneſus for the rareneſſe of his skill, made an image of Venus, treading vpon a Torteiſe, to ſhew thereby vnto vs, that Women ſhould be wedded to their Houſes, as are the Statues of Saints and Martyrs to the Temples, neuer deſiring to goſſippe it abroad; but making Silence alwaies the God of their Deuotion.
               They ſhould neuer ſpeake, but either

to their Husbands, or by their Huſbands; nor take it ill, if like a Trumpeter, or one that playeth vpon the Cornet or the Flute, by ſuffering them to be the Organes of their ſpeech, they ſend forth ſounds more graue, and more delightful then their owne. But alas ſay they, theſe principles are but lightly practiſed: for looke whereſoeuer they come,
               
                  —verborum tanta cadit vis,
                  Tot pariter pelues, tot tintinnabula dic as
                  Pulſari. Iam nemo tubas, atque aera fatiget:
                  Vna labor anti poterit ſuccurrere Lunae. 
                        Such a tempeſtuous ſtorme of words doe fall,
                        Youl'd thinke ſo many Baſons iangling were,
                        Or Orkeney's Bels were ſounding in your Eare;
                        Now none need ſpēd their breath on Haubois more,
                        Nor with loud Clarions make their inwards ſore.
                        One Womans tongue, without the helpe of theſe,
                        Makes noyſe enough the fainting Moone to eaſe.
                     
                  
               
               And ſome what ſutable to this, is that Epitaph of theirs, by which the exceſſiue talk atiueneſſe of a Spaniſh Lady is

commended to the knowledge of Poſteritie. The ſubſtance thereof is this.
               
                  Aquiyaze ſepultada
                  Lamas que noble Sennora,
                  Quên ſu vida, punto ni hora
                  Tuvò la boca cerrada
                  Yes tanto lo, que hablò,
                  Qne aunque mas no hade hablar,
                  Nunca llegarà el callar.
                  A donde el hablar llegò. 
                        Here lies entombed vnderneath this Stone
                        A Dame, whoſe Tongue had cauſe enough to mone.
                        It mou'd as faſt, as doth the ſwifteſt Spheare,
                        And found nominutes reſt throughout the yeare,
                        Forth ruſht hir words in ſuch abundant ſtore
                        That now (how ener) ſhe ſhall nere ſpeake more.
                        Hir ſilence yet will neuer equall be
                        To what ſhe ſpake by many a large degree.
                     
                  
               
               And for a more pregnant proofe of theſe malignant Paſquils, Xantippe muſt be placed vpon the Market-croſſe, whoſe Paſſions like a deafe body, becauſe they could not heare the voice of reaſon

themſelues, that reaſon might not be altogether vncapable of theirs, would be ſure to expreſſe their meaning in the loudeſt ſtraine. So that Socrates when he was demanded, how he could endure hir clamours, had no other anſwer wherewith to ſhadow this hir imperfection, then, That for the children which ſhe bare him he could as well abide hir prating, as he did the cackling of his Hennes for the Egges they laid him. A certaine Portugall, how truely, though I know not, is made an Abbettor to them in the like. His fellow Senators hauing conuinced a Criminell, of ſome more then ordinarie fault, and conſulting among themſelues, what death was beſt to equall his offence; ſome would haue him hanged in chaines aliue; ſome torne in peeces with wildehorſes; others pined to death; and ſome againe caſt quicke into his graue; Tuſh ſaid he at length, theſe iudgements are but ieſtings, if you minde to torture him indeede, vſe no delayes, but marrie him. And ſurely, ſay our oppoſites, this man

according to that Caſtilian Adage, Hablò de la feria, ſegun lefue en ella: ſpake of the Mart according as he found it. They alleadge another, who at a monthly Seſſions in the Towne, whereof himſelfe was a Burgeſſe, vpon good deliberation and aduiſe preferred a petition to the Iudges of the Bench, deſiring them they would be pleaſed to grant him libertie to die. For he was not able any longer to endure the diſdainefull braues, and haughtie menaces, which his Wife like a triple-mouthed Cerberus did continually thunder out againſt him; which fauour if they would vouchſafe him, he made no doubt, but to finde a ſpeedie paſſage vnto Heauen, hauing ſuffered ſo long a Purgatorie here on earth. Another inſcription of a Tombe is produced by them, compoſed in manner of a Dialogue, the Argument wherof doth ſhew, ſay they, that howſoeuer Death be nothing but a ſuffocation, and extinction of all heate in euery naturall Bodie, he cannot yet with that icie coldnes

qualifie the cholerike and fiery temper of their Tongues.
               
                  Heus viator! Miraculum. Vir & vxor non litigant. Qui ſimus, non dico. At ipſa dicam. Hic Bebrius ebrius me Bebriam ebriam nominat. Heus vxor! etiam mortua litigas?
               
               
                  Huſ.
                  Liſt Paſſenger, thou ſhalt a wonder ſee
                  Here louingly the Man and Wife agree.
                  Our names, and what we are, I will conceale.
               
               
                  Wif.
                  But goodmā gooſe, I wil our Names reueale:
                  This Beber, bibber, free of Drunkards Hall,
                  Me Bebreſſe, bibbreſſe doth at al times call.
               
               
                  Huſ.
                  Now out alds! good Wife, I prethee hold;
                  For ſhame for beare, now thou art dead, to ſcold.
               
               Iudge here, ſay they, whether this wretched Man, that cauſed this to bee writ vpon his graue, liued not continually vpon the racke, or no. In a word they ſet it downe for a ſure Poſition, that

                     —Dos eſt vxoria, lites.
                  
               
               The onely Dowrie that a Woman brings,

Are ſtrifes, contentions, end leſſe quarrel
               And are not aſhamed to affirme with the Satyriſt, that
               
                  Semper habet lites, alterna
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iurgia lectus,
                  In quo nuptaiacet: minimum dormitur? in illo 
                        Brawles chidings, iarres, attend the marriage bed:
                        And where a Wife lies, ſeldome ſleepes the Head.
                     
                  
               
               But I ſee it is high time to caſt a bit into the mouthes of theſe vnbridled Steeds, leaſt with their hedſtrong courſe they tread this nobler Sex vnder their hoofes, and make their innocencie dung and litter for themſelues to wallow on. And ſince they do oppugne vs with the Achieuements of the dead, that I may foile them at their owne weapon, I will produce the Monument of Rubius Celer, which doth witneſſe, that he liued with Caia Ennia, his wife, fortie three yeares, eight months, hauing neuer receiued from hir all this while, any iuſt occaſion of offence. That of Albutieus Tertius like wiſe doth auouch, that he liued 52.

yeares with his wife ſine querelâ, without any manner of vexation, quarrell or diſturbance. The like equalitie of affections was without any let, or mixture of moleſtation in Acme and Septimius, as appeareth by that which is vttered by Catullus to the perpetuall honor of them both.
               
                  Vnam Septimius miſellus Acmen.
                  Mauult, qùem Syrias, Britanniaſque;
                  Vno in ſeptimio fidelis Acme
                  Facit delitias, libidineſque:
                  Mutuis animis amant, amantur.
                  Quis vllos homines beatiores
                  Vidit? quis venerem auſpicatiorem? 
                        Poore Septime rather had his Acme haue,
                        Then Syrias wealth, or Britains Iſles ſo braue;
                        Chaſt Acme no ſtrange dalliances doth try,
                        Hir thoughts nere ſtir, but when hir Septime's by
                        With pure obſeruace each to other moue,
                        With naturall minds they be belou'd & loue:
                        Who euer did a happier couple ſee,
                        Or who two Turtles louinglier agree?
                     
                  
               
               But this is not all, ſay they, Plenae ſunt

rimarum, huc atque illuc effluunt. Looke what ſecrets be committed to their cuſtodie, ſhall be kept as ſafe, as water in a Siue. And hereupon one of the three things, that Cato ſtill repented him of, was, if he had imparted any thing to a Woman, which he would not all the world ſhould know. They alleadge the weakeneſſe of Sempronia, Fuluia, and diuers others in this kinde to inſtance theſe erronious propoſitions. But the ſight of that worthy Romane Epicharis ſhall make them vaniſh like Meteores before the Sunne, who being priuie to a great conſpiracie intended againſt Nero, was ſo conſtant in concealing it, that notwithſtanding ſhe were torturned day by day in the moſt grieuous manner that could poſſibly bee imagined, could no way be forced or enduced to be wray hir complices, and that to the perpetuall ſhame of ſundrie noble Senators, who in the ſame triall fainting like Crauens vnder the ſcourge of Tyrannie, obiected in hope of ſome releaſe their very Brothers

vnto death, and caſt their deareſt friends into the iawes of danger. The Athenians cauſed a Lioneſſe of Marble to bee made without a Tongue, and erected it in the market place to the neuer dying honour of Leona, who vpon the like occaſion, and in the like extremitie ſhewed no leſſe taciturnitie than the other. I will not, becauſe I thinke this point already cleare enough, alleadge any more examples. It is an imperfection no way proper to the Vniuerſall, but ſuch a one as by meere accident faſteneth it ſelfe vpon ſome indiuiduall, whoſe carriage by reaſon of the meaneneſſe of hir breeding and education, was neuer fortified with the retentiue rules and principles of Moralitie, without which the minde is alwaies very dangerouſly ſicke of a continuall Dyſenterie. And thus I thinke that want of Secrecie is as incident to Men and found as often in their boſomes, as in any of this Sex. Wherefore I come now to the next thing, which is queſtioned, and that is the ſincereneſſe

and conſtancie of their affections.
            
            
               CHAP. 7.
               
                  Of their affections.
               
               THey be like looking-glaſſes, ſay their aduerſaries, which repreſent no obiect longer then it ſtands before them, and not then, but with ſome flatterie or deceit. Their words are like the Syrens, neuer vttered but to worke ſome wracke, their teares like the Crocodiles, neuer ſhed, but to purchaſe ſome occaſion to be cruell They haue as the French-man ſaith, Viſage d'Ange, the ſhape and ſemblance of an Angell; but alas teſte de Diable, & oeil de Baſilie. The braines of a Diuell, and the eye of a Baſiliske. The Tuſcan giueth vs in a little Volume their liuely Caracter, Di di si, èfà di nò. Their thoughts are neuer ſeconded by their Words, nor followed by their Deedes. They come many times foorth hand in

hand, as if they did intend to tread one meaſure, but as in Galliard, they fall off on a ſuddaine and forſake each other. They neuer eie one another but a ſquint, and are then moſt diſtant from each others view, when they ſeeme to face each other moſt. In all their actions like the Crab, they looke one way, but goe another. And therefore ſay they, Ci dice donna, dice danno. He that nameth a Laſſe, in effect nameth a Loſſe; and in our natiue language Woman carrieth no other ſound with it, then Mans Woe. The Latines to ſhew the ſoftneſſe, but withall the ſwiftneſſe of their affections, ſay ſhe was called mulier quaſi mollis aer; and for confirmation of this fantaſticall Etymologie, that of Petrarch is alleaged.
               
                  Femina è coſa mobil per natura,
                  Ond'io ſoben, amoroſo ſtato
                  In cuor di donna picciol tempo dura. 
                        Light wauering things by nature Women are:
                        Hence in their Hearts, my knowledge is full ſure,
                        
                           
An amorous ſtate can but a while endure.
                     
                  
               
               But let them ſhew me an affection more ſyncere then that of Iulia, the daughter of C. Caeſar towards hir huſband Pompey the great, who when his garment was brought hir from the field all ſtained with blood, out of the feare ſhe had of his well doing, fell ſtraight into abortion, and by and by expired, the fruit of hir wombe ſeruing but as a Prologue to hir owne enſuing Tragedy. Let them ſhew me I ſay, one more graue and ſetled, then that of Portia towards Brutus, who ſcorning to ſuruiue his honour, and ſeeing Iron was denied hir, made burning coales the conuoye of hir Spirit to hir deceaſed loue. In a word, let them ſhew me one, more firme and conſtant, then that of Hipſicratea towards Mithridates, who deſiring no better fortune, then ſhould follow him, was content to vaile hir beautie vnder a manly habit, and withall to exerciſe hir daintier limbes on horſebacke, and in deedes of armes, that ſhe might the better participate

with him in the dangers and croſſe occurrences of his warres. The conſideration of which hir loyaltie, was ſuch a comfortable cordiall to him in that wretched and miſerable eſtate, wherein he was, when he fled from the victorious ſword of Cn. Pompeius, that cum domo, & penatibus vagari ſe eredidit, vxore ſimul exulante. He thought himſelfe, notwithſtanding he were no better then a fugitiue, ſole Lord of heauen and earth by the fruition of hir company. Agathocles, King of Sictlie finding himſelfe well nigh diſſeazed both of life and State by his rebellious Nephue, prouided all things that were neceſſary, for the tranſportation of his Wife Theoxena into Egypt, from whence he had hir. But ſhe moſt affectionately beſought him not to furniſh Slander, with ſo faire a parallell for his kinſmans parricide, as hir departure. Nubendo ſe non proſperae tantum, ſed omnis fortunae iniſſe ſocietatem. That by Marriage ſhee had not made hir ſelfe a companion for him onely in proſperity,

but in all aduerſe chances whatſoeuer. Neither was ſhe vnwilling to buye the embracing of his lateſt breath, with the hazard of hir owne. This puiſne age of ours affordeth the like example in Iſabella, ſiſter to Charles the Emperour, and wife to Chriſtierne King of Denmarke, whoſe diſcontented ſubiects, when they had degraded him from that royall dignitie; would willingly haue conferred the types thereof vpon hir: but ſhe moſt valiantly refuſed them; thinking it a greater honour, and more beſeeming the dutie of a Wife, to leade a languiſhing life in exile with hir husband, then to liue a Princeſſe in the higheſt tranſcendent of all Soueraignetie without him. What ſhould I ſpeake of Artemiſia, or Alceſte, when Prouinces peopled with Women of no leſſe integritie towards their Huſbands, expoſe themſelues vnto our view? Thoſe of Mynia in Theſſalie, when their husbands according to the laws of Sparta, were by night to ſuffer death for their ambitions, and vngratefull vſurpation

ouer that Citie, vnder pretence of ſpeaking with thoſe cōdemned wretches before their execution, entred the priſon, and hauing changed garments with them, vailing their faces vnder a ſhew of griefe, made meanes for their eſcape, themſelues remaining in their place to abide with conſtancie, whatſoeuer the deluded Magiſtrate ſhould inflict vpon them, for this their bold attempt. Conrade. III. After he had compelled Guelphus, D. of Bauaria to open to him, and to his forces the gates of Winſbergh, and to yeelde vp the towne to his mercie, granted vpon ſome eaſie entreatie, that the Ducheſſe, and ſuch other Matrons as were there, ſhould depart vntoucht, and carrie with them whatſoeuer they could conueniently vpon their ſhoulders: whereupon forgetting their precious ornaments, and ſuch things as Women vſually moſt delight in, and charging themſelues immediately with no other burthen, then with their Husbands, they forſooke the place; which pious act of

theirs ſo mollified the heart of the Emperour, that hee cauſed them to bee brought backe, & cancelling the wrongs & iniuries which had incited him to that ſieg, receiued the Duke into his fauor, reſtored him to his dignity, and ſeated him againe without any charge or innouation at all in his auncient gouernment. But I will now retire a little from theſe ſofter Virtues, which can no more be ſeparated from this Sex, then whiteneſſe from the Swanne; and curtaine vp a while the Table, in which I haue hitherto laboured, as with the pencile of Apelles to giue each foule-mouthd Mantuaniſt the liuely repreſentation of Womens perfections in a louely Venus, whilſt I endeuor hereafter withall the art I can, to limme them foorth in an armed Pallas, ſprung out of the very head of Ioue, and endued with ſuch learning, wiſdome, courage, and other the like abilities, which Men, ouerwhelmed with ſelf-conceit preſumptuouſly entitle Maſculine, as being eſſentiall to themſelues alone, that they

may iuſtly challenge the garland euen from the greateſt worthies, as in briefe ſhall plainly appeare.
            
            
               CHAP. 8.
               
                  Of their Learning.
               
               LEarning in the breſt of a Woman, is likened by their Stoicall aduerſaries to a ſword in the hands of a Mad-man, which hee knoweth not how to rule as reaſon ſhall informe him, but as the motions and violent fits of his diſtemperature ſhall enforce him. It doth not ballaſt their Iudgements, but onely addeth more ſaile to their ambition; and like the weapon of Goliah, ſerueth but as an inſtrument to giue the fatall period to their Honours ouerthrow. And ſurely this fond imagination hath purchaſed a free inheritance to it ſelfe in the Boſomes of ſome vndiſcreeter Parents, who hereupon will by no meanes endure

that their daughters ſhould be acquainted with any kinde of literature at all. The Pen muſt be forbidden them as the Tree of good and euill, and vpon their bleſſing they muſt not handle it. It is a Pandar to a Virgine Chaſtitie, and betray eth it, by venting foorth thoſe amarous Paſſions, that are incident to hotter bloods, which otherwiſe, like fire raked vp in embers, would peraduenture in a little ſpace be vtterly conſumed. But if this be their feare, let them likewiſe barre them the vſe of their needle: with this did Philomela fairely character thoſe foule indignities, which had bin offered hir by Tereus the inceſtuous husband of hir ſiſter Progne; and why then may not others expreſſe their loues, and their affections in the like forme? Cupid hath wings, and like another Daedalus, if his paſſage be ſtopped by land and water, he will cut through the aire, but he will be Maiſter of his deſires. You cannot hinder his Pinnions from Soaring hie, by depriuing him of a quill or twaine. Affection

is ingenious, and can impe them, as it pleaſeth hir. Leander will not for a Helleſpont be kept from Heros kiſſes, nor Daenae by a braſen Tower from Iupiters embraces. Be Iuno neuer ſo iealous, Loue hath a Mercurie, that can at all times delude hir Spies.

                     Et quid non fiet, quod voluere duo?
                  
               
               To conuerſe with the dead, and this is to conuerſe with Bookes, hath bin ſtill accounted the readieſt way to moraliſe our harſher natures, and to weane them from all inbred Barbariſme to more humane and ciuill conuerſation. And hence it was, that Iulius Agricola, when he had obtained the gouernment of this our Iſle that he might abaſethe fierce and fiery temper of the inhabitants, whoſe knowledge could demonſtrate nothing but by armes, tooke from the nobler Britons their ſonnes, and trayned them vp in all the liberall Sciences, whereby hee made them willingly ſubmit themſelues to the Romane Empire, and not prone

to riſe ſo often vp in armes as formerly by reaſon of their rough-hewen diſpoſitions they had accuſtomed to doe. Now I ſee no hinderance why they ſhould not produce the ſame effect in them, which they doe in vs, their bodies conſiſting of the ſame matter, and their mindes comming out of the ſame molde.
               But if thoſe prohibitions proceed from a prouidence in them to preuent a curious deſire of ſearching further into the Cabinets of Minerua, then is fitting, an errour incident to capriocious, and working Wits, ſuch as they would haue Womens for the moſt part to be, let them ſhew me what Men are free from the like weakeneſſe.
               Knowledge is infinite, and admitteth no bounds. It is Iacobs ladder, and reacheth from the loweſt part of the Earth, to the higheſt place in Heauen. Mans Thoughts are like thoſe Angels, which were ſeene by the Patriarch in his Viſion, neuer at a ſtand, but ſtill going either vp or downe. And therefore Salomon anouncheth,

that Qui addit ſcientiam, addit & dolorem; an acquiſt of learning bringeth with it an encreaſe of labour. For the more a man attaineth vnto, the more hee ſeeth to bee attained, and ſo not content with any former purchaſe, wearieth out himſelfe in purſuite of that, which is behinde. Nil actum credens, cum quid ſibi cernit agendum. Thoſe that are altogether vnfurniſhed of this diuiner complement, are as the Italian termeth them humanate beftie, things that reſemble reaſonable creatures only in the bark and rinde, and could not poſſibly be diſtinguiſhed from Statues made of clay and marble, but by their outward ſenſe and motion. Theſe are they, which like Aeſop's Cock, ſpurne at the Iewell, which they cannot prize, and ſuch were Nero, Domitian, Cliſtheſnes, who as Tacitus reporteth, Virtutem ipſam excindere concupientes; ſtudying as much as in them lay, how to bring Vertue herſelfe vnto the Blocke, made Philoſophie a capitall offence, and put to death, thoſe Profeſſours

of Wiſdome and good Arts, which betimes did not retire themſelues from the reach of their infernall rage. And ſuch as theſe, no doubt are thoſe, or at leſt not many degrees ſhort of them, who out of an idle ſuppoſition of their owne addle braines thinke learning a thing ſuperfluous in any. For as it is a plaine teſtimony of Ignorance it ſelfe to know nothing: ſo is it an ample ſigne of Dulneſſe to reſt ſatisfied with the knowledge of any ſomething. Adams fingers, notwithſtanding Gods menaces, will bee ſtill itching at the forbidden Tree: The Children of Iſrael for all the threatning Proclamations which Moſes doth divulge amongſt them from the Lord, will hardly be reſtrained from aduancing forward at the mount of Sinai. The Bethſhemites will be peering into the Ark, though the liues of more than 50000. of them bee made the forfeiture of their preſumption. Diuine S. Augt ſtine will bee diuing into the myſtery of the Trinity, till he ſee a childe become the cenſurer of his folly: & holy,

                  Daniel will trouble himſelfe in ſearching after the condition of future times, till an Angell from Heauen will him to ſtand vpright in his place. In a word, it ſo bewitcheth vs, that wee grow deſperate in the chaſe. Plinie will haue no other Vrne, then the mountaine Veſuuius for his aſhes, when hee cannot finde out the reaſon of his flames: nor Ariſtotle any other Sepulcher than Euripus, when angling for the hidden cauſes of his ebbes & flowes, he ſeeth nothing will hang vpon his hooke. And vpon this intemperancy of Men, was grounded peraduenture that Morall precept of Antiquities, Noli altum ſapere, Aime not at things beyond your reach, as likewiſe that admonition of S. Pauls. Be wiſe vnto ſobrietic. From al which premiſes I gather this concluſion, That meats might as well bee forbidden women for feare of ſurfetting, as the vſe of learning for feare of ouerweening, unleſſe we our ſelues will bee content to bee regiſtred with them, as liable to the like miſcarrying, in the ſame role. But I

heare our Aduerſaries crie out, what a prodigious thing it was counted among the Romanes for a woman to ſpeake in publike, and when it happened, what ſpeepy recourſe they had vnto their Augures to know what diſaſtrous fortune ſo ſtrange an accident might portend to their Common-weale. Againſt which particular Cuſtom of a people, which for Wit and Valour might boaſt themſelues the legitimate children as well of Mercurie, as of Mars, I will ſay nothing, though I could eaſily ſhew with what good ſucceſſe the Daughter of Hortenſius pleaded the Matrons cauſe, to the freeing of them from the greateſt part of that greeuous taxation, which the Trium-viri had moſt iniuriouſly impoſed vpon them. As likewiſe how Amaeſia Sentia, being arraigned before L. Titius then Praetor, pleaded ſo ſtoutly and exactly to euery point of her Inditements, that ſhe acquitted herſelfe, maugre the power of her enemies, with the generall applauſe of all.
               To that, wherewith they vrge vs out

of holy Writ, touching the reſtraint of their teaching, and ſpeaking publikely in the Temples, I anſwer that the bleſſed Apoſtle in that to the Corinthians. 1. Ep. 14. verſ. 34. alludeth onely to ſome ignorant and prating Goſſips, who when attention ſhould bee given to the diſpenſers of Gods myſteries, are continually asking to their own hurt, and others hinderance, ſuch friuolous queſtions, as on the inſtant are begotten in their idle Braines. And in that to Timothie, 1. Ep. 2. verſ. 12. where hee permitteth them not to teach, becauſe, as they would haue it, Semel docuit, & omnia ſubuertit; Shee taught but once, and that once brought all things out of order, he doth but vtter his owne opinion, and howſoeuer hee allow not of it, yet he doth not condemne it: So that his meaning, as I take it, there, is onely this; They ſhould not when men of ſufficiencie are in place, and ſuch as can diſcharge the duties that appertaine to ſo high a calling, vſurpe ouer their authority. For otherwiſe the Scripture

informeth vs, that Deborah was a Propheteſſe, and that Anna the Daughter of Phanuel. Luke 2. verſ. 37. neuer ſtirred out of the Temple, but ſpent therein both day and night, in prayer & faſting, and ſpeaking feruently of Ieſus Chriſt the Sauiour of the world, to all that waited for their deliuerance in Ieruſalem. And indeede the light of the Moone is needeleſle; when the Sunne is in his Tranſcendent, but if hee bee gone, her Beames, though not ſo pregnant, will affoord much comfort. Apollos may be eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures, Priſcilla yet may take him vnto her, and expound vnto him the waies of God more plainly.
               But Scientia inſlat; Knowledge puffeth vp, and there is nothing, ſay our oppoſites, more ſwelling and imperious, than a Woman, that ſeeth ſhee hath the ſuperiority and ſtart of her Husband in any thing:

                     —Faciunt grauior a coactae Iuu. Sat. 6.
                     Imperio Sexus; minimum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         libidine peccant.
                  
                  
As if they ſhould conforme themſelues to mens weakeneſſes, and patterne out their owne Abilities by their Defects. He that is depriued of his bodily ſight, is content to bee led, though by a childe: and ſhall hee, that is blinde in his vnderſtanding diſdaine to be directed by her, who by the ordinance of God, and the rules of ſacred Wedlocke, is alotted him a fellow-helper in all his buſineſſes? The Husband and the Wife are the eyes of a Familie; if the right one bee ſo bleared, that it cannot well diſcerne; the guiding of the Houſhold muſt of neceſſity be left vnto the left, or on the ſudden all will go to wracke. And ſurely I ſee no reaſon but the Henne may bee permitted to crowe, where the Cocke can doe nothing but cackle. So that learning, we ſee, is an ornament, and a decencie, moſt expedient for Women, were it for no other reſpect, then to ſupply, as occaſion may require, the defects that are in Men. And truely ſome of them, by ſeconding a naturall propenſion in themſelues to letters, with

an induſtrious purſuit, haue attained to ſo high a perfection in them, that men conſidering how imperiouſly they challenge a preheminence ouer them herein, haue had iuſt cauſe to bluſh at their own ignorance. There are ſome, which Antiquity obiecteth to our view, whoſe many rare and profitable inuentions made them deſerue the names of Goddeſſes heere on earth, as Pallas, Ceres, and the Sybills, whoſe mouth it pleaſed God many times to vſe as a ſacred Oracle, whereby to publiſh vnto the world, what hee purpoſed in his will. Others again, which haue had the tutoring of diuerſe very famous and worthy perſons, as Aſpaſia, Macrina and Diotime, who by her prayers and deuouter ſacrifices, prorogued a certaine peſtilence, which was then to light vpon the Athenians, till ten yeeres after. I could heere alleadge Nicoſtrata, the mother of Euander, who was the firſt that taught the Latines what letters were, as likewiſe Corinna, Sappho, Sulpitia, and the Schoole-miſtreſſe of Pindare the Lyrike,

all of them worthy admiration for their excellencie in Poeſie; but I deſire not to trauell farre, for what I may procure neere home. A country-woman of our owne, hauing diſguiſed herſelfe into the habit of a Student tooke her iourney to Rome, where in a while ſhe grew ſo famous for wit and knowledge, that from one degree of Dignity to another, ſhee ſtepped at length into Saint Peters Chaire and had the cuſtodie of the Keyes. And this if their aduerſaries like deafe Adders ſtoppe not their eares when Reaſon charmeth, may very well ſuffice to maintaine them learned. Their Wiſedome is the next, which men with their traducements would enuiouſly impeach, but you ſhall quickly ſee it vncanopied of thoſe miſtie clouds, which would obſcure it, and ſhining out as cleere as brighteſt day.
            
            
               
               CHAP. 9.
               
                  Of their Wiſdome.
               
               WOmen are wiſe enough ſay their aduerſaries, if they can but keepe themſelues out of the raine. Indeede it would much aduantage men, if their vnderſtandings were limited with ſuch narrow bounds. Their imperfections would not furniſh them with matter of laughter ſo readily as now they doe, nor their ableſt virtues be ſo often ouermatched by them, as now they are.
               It hath bin our pollicie from the beginning to buſie them in domeſtical affaires, thereby to diuert them from more ſerious imployments, in which if they had not ſurmounted vs, they would at leaſt haue ſhowne themſelues our equals, and our parallels. Spinning, knitting, ſowing, preſeruing, & the like, as we would make them beleeue, are their chiefeſt peices:

But all ages haue affoorded ſome, whoſe Spirits being of a ſtronger temper, and harder edge, then to turne at ſuch perſwaſions, haue trauailed beyond thoſe Herculean Pillers, and made manifeſt to the world, that the Braines of a Serpent haue beene lodged in the Head of a Doue. For proofe hereof let vs ſearch no farther into the boſome of Antiquitie, then thoſe times, in which the pride and glory of Italie, ſat chained, as a Trophie, on the victorious armes of the barbarous Gothes, and we ſhall finde, that there liued then amongſt them Queene Amalaſunta, who with ſuch wonderfull diſcretion and moderation ſo managed their harſher mindes, that ſhe found not in them, all the while ſhe raigned, the leaſt rub or ſtoppe, which might interrupt the ſmoother courſe of hir proceedings. After hir, we ſhall heare of Theodelinda, Queene of Lumbardie, a Woman famous and much renowmed for hir ſingular virtue in the gouernment of State affaires; and after hir of Theodora,
                  
the Grecian Empereſſe, one not inferiour in Wiſdome, or ſufficiencie to the former. But that we may draw ſomewhat neerer home; what King or Prince almoſt of the latter daies, and make inquirie through the largeſt part of Chriſtendome, did euer deſerue to be compared to Iſabella, Queene of Spaine. At hir firſt comming to the crowne, ſhe found the greateſt part of hir Eſtate in the hands of the greateſt, which notwithſtanding ſhee recouered in ſo iuſt and peaceable manner, that they, whom ſhe diſpoſſeſſed, continued moſt affectionate vnto hir, and were willing to forgoe, what formerly they had willingly vſurped. After this ſhe did not onely defend hir owne Kingdomes from the powerfull inuaſions of forraine enemies, but withall enlarged them to hir perpetuall honour, by the glorious acquiſt of the kingdome of Granado: beſides all which there was in hir, as is credibly recorded by ſuch as knew hir, ſuch a diuiner kinde of Maieſty, as drew from hir Subiects all

dutifull reſpect, and put the moſt rebellious, without any ſtirre, or tumult, in minde of their obedience: withall ſuch a diſcerning iudgement in the choiſe and election of Miniſters fit for thoſe places, in which ſhe meant to employ them, which as the Poet ſaith, is the chiefeſt Art that belongeth vnto Soueraignetie.
               
                  Principis eſt virtus maxima noſſe ſuos.
               
               And afterwards ſo liberall a minde to reward the worthineſſe of their deſarts, that ſince, there haue bin few in Spaine of any note or credit, which were not of hir creation. Gonſaluo, the great Captaine, did more highly value himſelfe for the happineſſe he had to be preferred by hir, then for all the famous victories, and worthie Acts, which made him honoured of all Men both in Peace and Warre. So that in a word, the glory and the reputation, which Ferdinand hir husband got by hir, was no leſſe a Dower, then the Kingdome of Caſtile. What ſhould I ſpeake of Queene Anne of France, a Lady

of no leſſe worth, then wealth, wife to two Kings, Charles and Lewis, but to neither of them any way inferiour, either in iuſtice, clemency, liberality, or holineſſe of life? What of Lady Margaret, Daughter to Miximilian the Emperour, who with no leſſe wiſedome, moderation and equity gouerned hir State a long time? Hungarie, Naples, Arragon, and Sicilie afford vs diuers examples of the like kinde; but ſince the winde is faire, I will diſanchor from theſe forraine Coaſtes, and hauing hoiſeſt vp my Sailes, make haſt vnto our owne. And behold I am met vpon the ſhore by that wonder of hir Sex, Queene Elizabeth of happy memory, of whom Taſſo maks this honourable mention; That howſoeuer their owne ill fortune had decreed, ſhe ſhould be ſeparated from the Church, neuertheleſſe ſaith hee, l'Heroiche virtu dell animo ſuo, & l'altezza dell ingegno mirabile le rendeua affectionatiſsimo ogni animo gentile, & valoroſo. The Heroicall virtues of hir Minde and the wonderfull profoundneſſe

of hir Wit, endeared euery noble and valorous diſpoſition moſt affectionately vnto hir. And indeede the world cānot produce a fairer example out of all Antiquities Court-roles, in which goodnes was euermore equally matched with greatneſſe; honeſtie with Policie; mildeneſſe with ſeueritie: liberality with frugalitie, or affability with maieſty: and in which we may ſee ſuch prudence in gouerning; ſuch moderation in commanding; ſuch readineſſe in rewarding, ſuch diſcretion in promiſing, ſuch religion in performing. So that all hir abilities rightly conſidered we may ſay of hir, as was ſaid of Greece, Sola factorum gloriā ad verborū copiā tetendit. She alone hath equalled with hir deeds all that euer could be ſaid of hir in words, and deſerued that which Alexander wiſhed, that Homers quil to be the Trumpet of hir Praiſes. But not to keepe hir Princely Aſhes too long out of their Sacred Urne; I will onely vtter to the aſtoniſhment of Fame, that which the Muſe of diuine du Bartas ſung of hir

with admiration, ſtiling hir, & that without flatterie.
               
                  
                     La docte Elizabeth, la prudente Pallas,
                  
                  
                     Qui fait que le Bretō, deſdaigneux ne deſire,
                  
                  
                     Changer anmaſleiougd'une femme l'Empire
                  
                  
                     Qui tandis qu Erynnis laſſe d'eſtre en enfer,
                  
                  
                     Rauage ſes voyſins, & par flamme & par fer,
                  
                  
                     Et que le noir effroy d'vn murmurāt orage,
                  
                  
                     Menace horriblement l'vniuers de naufrage:
                  
                  
                     Tient heurenſe paix ſa Prouince, ou la Loy
                  
                  
                     Venerable fleurit auec la blanche Foy,
                  
                  
                     Qui nâ pas ſeulement l'opulence faconde
                  
                  
                     Dn matern
                           •
                        lāguage; ains d'une bouche rōde
                  
                  
                     Peut ſibien ſur le champ harenguer en Latine
                  
                  
                     Grec, Frācois, Eſpagnol, Tudeſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         & Florētin
                  
                  
                     Que Rome l'Emperiere, & laGrece, & la Frāce
                  
                  
                     Le Rhin et l'Arne encor plaident pour ſa naiſſance. 
                     
                        Elizabeth the learned, Pallas the wiſe,
                        Who makes the Britaines ſcornfully diſdaine,
                        For the male yoake to change a females raign,
                        Who whilſt Erynnis, weary now of hell,
                        With fire & ſword doth all hir neigbors quell,
                        And that the black fright of a murmuring ſtorme.
                        
                           
The world with ſhipwracke threatneth to deforme,
                        In happie peace hir prouinces doth ſway,
                        Where Law & Faith doe neuer fall away.
                        Who is not onely very richly ſtor'd
                        With the ſweet wealth hir lāguage doth afford
                        But can ſo well and volubly addreſſe
                        Hir tongue vpon the ſudden, to expreſſe
                        Hir hie conceits in Latine, and can ſpeake
                        Such Spaniſh, Dutch, ſuch Tuſcan and ſuch Greeke,
                        That Rome, Greece, France, and Spaine and Arne, and Rhine
                        Each of them pleade, and ſay, By birth ſhe is mine.
                     
                  
               
               And ſo I leaue this glorious Sun lodged in hir Weſt, till ſhe riſe againe at the approach of the Sunne of glorie, to behold Queene Anne our gracious Soueraigne, whoſe virtue like that Starre in the Eaſt, drawes Princes, from a farre to doe homage and ſeruice to hir worthineſſe. Let vs but conſider with what wiſdome and diſcretion ſhe hath hitherto gouerned hir owne domeſticall affaires, and from thence we ſhall preſently conclude in hir

behalfe, as Artaxerxes, ſurnamed Mnemon, did in the behalfe of that poore man, who preſented him with an apple of extraordinary bigneſſe, which when he had receiued with a chearefull countenance: and withall informed himſelfe, that it was of his own planting. Perſolem inquit, videtur hic mihi commiſſam ſibi vrbem de parua magnam redacturus. Now by the Sunne, ſaid he, were a Citie committed to this mans cuſtodie, of a littel one he would ſurely make it great, of a meane one, mighty. I could here to ſtoppe the mouthes of our aduerſaries produce the names of diuers honourable perſonages, which like blazing lights doe continually waite vpon this glorious Cynthia, and are eminent in the eyes of the world for ſundrie notable graces and perfections; but I will now againe looke backe a little vpon thoſe elder Times, and come to Helena the wife of Iohn, king of Cyprus, who perceiuing that hir husbands weakeneſſe was a blot whereon the greateſt part of his nobility continually plaied, and that

the Kingdome was the ſtake at which they aimed, & which vnles hir better skil preuented, they by their falſe play were like to winne; ſhee tooke the gouernement into hir owne hands, to the releaſe of the Land, and the reliefe of all hir ſubiects. And ſurely where the ſword doth ruſt for want of vſe, or is ſo full of gaps and flawes, that it cannot well be vſed, I ſee no reaſon but the Diſtaffe ſhould be ſuffered to ſupply the place. God, when the children of Iſrael, after the death of Ehud the Beniamite did euill in his ſight, ſold them into the hands of Iabin King of Canaan, who for twentie yeares moſt grieuouſly oppreſſed them, and when there wanted a Iudge for their deliuerance, he ſent them vpon the crie of their lamentation, Deborah a Propheteſſe, the wife of Lapidoth. Iud. 4. 4. by whoſe counſailes and directions Barak, the ſonne of Abinoam freed them from the cruell hand of Iabin, and the bloody ſword of Siſera. And all the people, ſaith the Text, came vp as occaſion compelled them to hir

dwelling vnder the Palme-tree, betweene Ramah and Bethel in mount Ephraim, and receiued iudgement from hir. I cannot therefore but condemne the Salique law, and taxe it of iniuſtice, by which the worthineſſe of Women is excluded, as a thing altogether eccentricall from the crown of France. But leauing this, do we not ſee that the greateſt Captaines, and the graueſt commanders haue thought it no diſparagement to their worth, to take a peece of the Fox from them, wherewith to peece out the Lion in themſelues, for the ſafer effecting of their high deſſignes? Coriolanus whom neither the maieſtie of the Common-weale in the perſons of Embaſſadors, nor the reuerence of Religion in the countenance of the Prieſts could moue, was by their teares, like a hard Diamond with the blood of Goates, ſo mollified, that on the inſtant he did abate the edge of his furie, and turned the point of his weapon from the boſome of his vngratefull Countrey.
               The Captaine of that Garriſon, which

                  Hannibal had planted in Tarentum, was deſperately en amoured of a certaine gentlewoman, who had a Brother that ſerued at the ſame time in the Romane armie, vnder Fabius the Conſul, which when he vnderſtood, he commanded him as a fugitiue to haſten thither; where making vſe of his ſiſters cunning flatteries he droue the Gouernour in a ſhort time to betray the towne, which was committed to his cuſtodie. To bee briefe, what had become of the two ſonnes of Alexander, King of the Iewes, when immediately vpon their Fathers death, the incenſed multitude, in reuenge of that hard and cruell ſlauery, wherein he had alwaies held them during his life, haſtened to the Pallace with their weapons in a readineſſe to deſtroy them; and had giuen thoſe their tragicall deſſignes a bloody Cataſtrophe, but that a Womans wiſedome on the ſudden altered the Scene of their proceedings, and hatching a Doue out of a Serpents egge, according to Sampſons riddle;

out of the fierce brought ſweetneſſe, and out of the deuourer meate, by caſting the corps of hir deceaſed Lord into the middeſt of the market place, and telling them, that as in his life time ſhe would willingly haue diuerted him from thoſe tyrannicall and cruell courſes, which had moſt iuſtly ſtirred them vp to anger againſt him: ſo now, being dead, ſhe was ready there with them to torture his wretched carkaſle, and to fling it to the dogs; onely ſhe intreated them to commiſerate thoſe little infants, which were ſo farre from being guiltie of any fault, that they could not poſſibly haue beene priuie to any fact. Which words of hirs wrought ſuch an impreſſion in their mindes, that they did not onely chooſe thoſe children with one conſent for their Soueraigne Lords, but afforded likewiſe honourable burial to the expoſed corps. Nay what had become of the whole nation of the Iewes, if the wiſedome of Iudith had not cunningly practiſed the harſh affections of Holofernes, and with

her ſpeeches, actions and behauiour ſo enchanted his warlike Spirits, that hee minded no armes at all, but hers, which if at any time they happened to compaſſe him, hee thought himſelfe no leſſe than a glorious Planet in a golden Spheare?
               Queene Cleofis, after ſhe had yeelded her ſelfe to Alexander, redeemed by lying with him her loſt kingdome; Illecebris ſaith Q. Curtius, conſecuta quod virtute non poterat, hauing obtained that of him by flatterie, which ſhe could not keepe from him by force; And vndoubtedly there is nothing, if once they be pleaſed to employ their wits, in which they cannot very eaſily ouer-reach and gull the wiſeſt and the ableſt men. Dauid cannot ſo ſtifly reſolue to reuenge him ſelfe on Nabal and his houſhold, but Abigail will make him through her wiſe behauiour quickely relent. Out of which conſideration it may peraduenture be, and no worſe, S. Aug. calleth them Muſcipulas animae; latrones vitae: Mouſe traps for our ſoules; Pickepurſes

of our affections. But I will here hang vp Fabius his Sheilde, to handle a while Marcellus his ſword; and hauing ſpoken of their Wiſedome, come now to treate of their Valour.
            
            
               CHAP. 10.
               
                  Of their Courage and Valour.
               
               REuenge and cruelty are the Symptomes of a ſickly reſolution, and cannot faſten vpon the Temperature of a minde, that is truly valorous. But theſe in Women, ſay their Aduerſaries, haue, like vlcerous Cankers eaten into their very marrow, and wrought ſuch a generall corruption in all the powers and faculties of their Soules, that there can not any Criſis poſſibly bee made of their recouerie. The world doth not harbour in it a Creature more vindicatiue, ſaith the Poet.
               
               
                  
                  Scylla, & Charybdis Sicula cōtorquens freta,
                  Minus eſt timenda: nulla non melior fera eſt:
                  Adeo cruentus ſtimulat faeminam dolor. 
                        Scylla, Charybdis, and thoſe rockes that teare
                        The Seas proud billawes, need not halfe that feare,
                        There's not a Beaſt throughout the world ſo wide,
                        Which, than a Woman, is not farre more milde.
                        Such bloudie Paſſions, in her boſome raigne,
                        When outward croſſes cauſe her inward paine.
                     
                  
               
               For inſtance whereof they alledge Pariſatis, who hauing apprehended the Carien, that had cut the hamſtring of Cyrus her younger Sonne, cauſed him for the ſpace of tenne daies to bee continually tortured; after that, his eyes to be bored out: and finally molten mettle to bee poured into his eares, till he breathed his laſt in this miſerable torment. Shee condemned Mithridates, who had wounded him in the temples, to that helliſh torture of the Troughes, in which after hee had pittifully languiſhed 17. daies together, with much a doe hee died. As for Mefabates, who depriued him of head & hands, hauing wonne him at dice of her

ſonne Artexerxes, ſhe deliuered him to the Executioners, & commanded them to flay him aliue, and afterwards to teare his body in peeces, and to hang both his skinne and it on ſeuerall gibbets. The mother of Mahomet II. was ſo incenſed againſt Moſes Baſſa, who by the command of his Soueraigne had maſſacred her younger ſonne, a childe but 18. yeares old, that nothing could appeaſe her furie, till ſhe had him, with hands and feete faſt bound, deliuered vp vnto her; which being obtained, ſhee ſtrooke him firſt into the breſt with a knife, then made a hole in his right ſide, and by peece-meale cut out his Liuer, and caſt it before his eyes to the Dogges to eate. Theſe things conſidered, the Satyriſt had reaſon, ſay our Oppoſites, to crie out:
               
                  
                     —minor admiratio ſummis
                  
                  
                     Debetur monſtris, quoties facit ira nocentem
                  
                  
                     Hunc ſexū, & rabieiecur incendente feruntur
                  
                  
                     Praecipites, vt ſaxa iugis abrupta.—
                     
                        
                           
We need the greateſt Monſters leſſe admire,
                        Then this ſame Sex of theirs, when rage doth fire
                        Their liuers; & to miſcheif bears them all,
                        Headlong, like rockes, which from their cliffes doe fall.
                     
                  
               
               Nor is it a thing to be much wondered at, ſay they, to ſee thoſe ſo voide of mercie, that are ſo full of feare. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; is a poſition out of check. The heart, that fainteth at the alarmes of an enemy, cannot poſſibly be recouered, vnleſſe it drinke the Spirit of his blood. To miniſter any other aurum potabile, than this vnto it, is meere vanitie, and will produce but a weak effect. This alone is that extracted Quinteſſence, which beyond all Chymicall inuentions, muſt free it from thoſe Paralyticall reſolutions, and Epileptike convulſions, whereinto, vpon the very noiſe of his approach, it is alwaies apt to fall. The Emperour Maurice in a dreame ſaw a Souldier, called Phocas, killing his Wife, his children, and afterwards himſelfe, with which Viſion being ſorely daunted, he enquired of his ſonne

in law Philippicus if there were not ſuch a fellow in the Armie, who tould him, yes; and withal that he was a roaring youth, but yet a very Crauen; Whereupon the Emperour concluded with a troubled countenance, that if he were a Coward, he would ſure bee cruell. And indeede this argument may hold in men, in whom want of courage is occaſioned either by ſome diminution, ablation, or deprauation of the animall, and vitall ſpirits; by reaſon whereof they neuer think themſelues ſecure, till their enemies death ſigne the Quietus eſt, which muſt ſet them free from the dangerous purſuit of hazard and moleſtation: but in Women it muſt faile, from the quickneſſe of whoſe apprehenſion, ariſeth many times a ſuddaine fright, which vpon a more ſerious conſideration of the obiect doth as ſuddainly vaniſh. And thus let mee ſee if the Soule of the wiſeſt & the worthieſt man be able to reſiſt the firſt conceits and fantaſies that aſſaile him, and ſtarteth not as out of a natural ſubiection, with much

paleneſſe and contraction at the noiſe of thunder, the vnexpected diſcharge of a Cannon, or the ſuddaine cracke of ſome great ruine. Sure it ſufficeth here, as in other Paſſions, that his opinion remaine ſafe & ſound, that the ſetlednes of his diſcourſe vndergo no alteration or attaint, and that he giue not his conſent to his affright and ſufferance. I muſt confeſſe yet, there be many Vultures, Harpies, and helliſh Furies amongſt them, in whom as in Media, and the like, Paſſions are ſo predominant, that they make not a ſuperficiall impreſſion, but penetrate ſo farre into the ſeate of Reaſon as to infect it, and corrupt it. But if things may be cenſured with indifferencie, our Aduerſaries will finde, that Crueltie euen in theſe, is not an imperfection of Nature, but a defect of breeding. Cyrus his Nurſe, while he was young would now & then ſuckle him with the blood of Beaſts and foules, that were newly kild, which bred ſuch a habit in him, that being manlier growne, hee neuer returned from the

ſlaughter of his enemies, but hee licked his ſword: Which barbarous and beaſtly thirſt of his, was an occaſion that Tamiris hauing cut off his head, cauſed it to be caſt into a tub of mans blood, with this exprobration of his crueltie. Satia te ſanguine quem ſitiſti, cuiuſque infatiabilis ſemper fuiſti: Now glut thy ſelfe, inhumane Tyrant, with that, whereof heretofore, thou couldeſt neuer haue thy fill. The Plants of Eden, in the ſtate of innocencie, were apt, it ſeem'd, to riot in their growth; the walkes and allies thereof were likewiſe ſubiect to be quickly defaced, and ouerſhadowed with weedes, and therefore the Lord himſelfe tooke care that Man ſhould be put therein to keepe it, and to dreſſe it. And indeed it is the propertie of ſome vigorous and actiue Spirits, when they finde a vacation of good imployments, to make themſelues a Termtime of bad. The brighteſt ſword will quickly ruſt, if it be not vſed; The fatter the ſoile, the ſooner will the fielde be ouergrowne with nettles and briers, if it

lye long fallow. Neglect is vrenda filix innaſcitur agris. Nature, if ſhe be not continually lopt and prun'd, will ſuddainly grow debauched. It is ſaid of Scylla, that he was cupidus voluptatum, Much addicted to voluptuouſneſſe; ſed gloriae cupidior; yet neuer, but when buſineſſe of more importance failed him. The like is likewiſe recorded of Demetrius, the ſonne of Antigonus and diuers others. But I am led a little from my leuell. It appeareth out of all theſe premiſes, that to ſay Women becauſe they be fearefull muſt of neceſſitie be cruell, is a deceitfull concluſion; and that Crueltie, becauſe it is found in the vntutoured boſomes of ſome fewe amongſt them, muſt needs, like a beloued Gueſt, be inwardly harboured of them all, is a conſequence, as voide of Charity as the other was full of Sophiſtrie. For as for the firſt.
               
                  
                     Mens immota manet, lachrymae volvuntur inanes. 
                     
                        Some ſofter dewes frō their faire eies may fall.
                        But nothing can their nobler mindes appall.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
And for the other, there can be no certaine demonſtration grounded vpon particular obſeruation. But not to follow Womens valour any longer afarre of, as Hippolytus did the Goddeſſe Venus, I will begin to court it at a neerer diſtance, and make knowne in breife vnto the world, that amongſt them are very many, which deſerue a wreath of Bayes, as well as a garland of Roſes; and to haue their Temples ſhrouded vnder the Oliue, as well as ſhadowed with the Lillie. Plinie the younger had a neighbour, neere vnto a certaine houſe of his in Italy, wonderfully tormented with certaine Vlcers, which had befallen him in thoſe parts that were the occaſion of our firſt Parents ſhame. His Wife in the end, conſidering how long hee languiſhed, beſought him earneſtly that ſhee might view his greife, and that ſhe would more freely than any bodie elſe tell him in briefe, what he had to truſt vnto; which when ſhe had obteyned, ſhe found it was impoſſible, he ſhould euer be recouered,

and therefore counſailed him, as the ſafeſt and ſureſt remedie, to kill himſelfe. And finding him too ſoft for ſo rough an enterpriſe: Nay doe not thinke, ſaid ſhe, ſweete friend, that the paines I ſee you ſuffer, concerne not me, as well as you, and that to free my ſelfe from them, I will not take the ſame medicine, I preſcribe to thee. I will accompanie you in the Cure, as I haue done hitherto in the Care. Cast of this feare, and beleeue aſſuredly, that we ſhall meete but with pleaſure in this paſſage, which must reſcue vs from ſuch torments. Come, my Loue, we will goe ioyfully together. This ſaid, finding that ſhee had already warmed hir Huſbands courage, ſhee roſolueth from a window in their lodging to fling themſelues headlong out into the Sea; and to maintaine euen to the end, this loyal and vehement affection, where with ſhee had euer formerly imbraced him, ſhe would haue him dye within hir armes; and that hir ſtrict enlacements, might not ſlacken either through the fall, or feare, ſhee cauſed him to be faſt bound vnto hir middle,

and in this manner for the eaſing of his life, abandoned hir owne. But this was a Woman of meane ranke, and amongſt ſuch, it is not ſo ſtrange a thing to ſee now and than ſome traces of extraordinarie goodneſſe.
               
                  extrema per illos
                  Iuſtitia excedens terris veſtigia fecit. 
                        When iuſt Aſtraea ſtept from earth to ſkies,
                        From poore folks harts ſhe took hir lateſt riſe.
                     
                  
               
               I will bring you others from the Pallaces of Princes, where (ſome ſay) Virtue ſeldome quartereth. Arria, wife to Cecinna Poetus, when ſhe ſaw, that hir Huſband afterthe ouerthrow of Scribonianus whoſe faction hee had followed againſt the Emperour Claudius, was led away by the ſouldiers as a priſoner, and that ſhee might not be ſuffered to accompany him in the ſame ſhip; hired vpon the inſtant a fiſher-boate, and followed him in that manner from Sclauonia to Rome, where one day, Iunia the wife of Scribonianus accoſting her in preſence of the Emperour ſomewhat familiarly by reaſon of

the Society of their fortunes, ſhee thruſt her backe veryeagerly with theſe words. Heauens forbid that I ſhould either ſpeak or liſten vnto thee, in whoſe lap Scribonianus was ſlaine, and thou yet aliue. Theſe and other the like words gaue her friends occaſion to ſuſpect, that ſhee was not minded to continue long, the ſlauiſh captiue of an inſulting fortune. And heereupon did Thraſea her ſonne in Law beſeech her, not to lay violent hands vpon herſelfe, asking her whether ſhee would be content that his wife her Daughter, if hee at any time ſhould chance to runne the like hazard, which Cecinna did, ſhould doe the like? whereunto ſhee anſwered, Would I? yes, yes, aſſure thy ſelfe I would had ſhee liued ſo long, and ſo peaceably with thee, as I haue done with him. Theſe deſperate replies made them more narrowly obſerue her geſture and demeanour: which when once ſhee had diſcouered. You doe wiſely, ſaid ſhe, well may you make mee die more vneaſily; but keepe mee from dying at all, you cannot; and therewith riſing

furiouſly out of her chaire, ſhe ranne her head againſt a poſt, and a while after being ſomewhat recouered of the blow; Did I not tell you, ſaid ſhe, that if you denied me an eaſie death, I would make choice of ſome other, how painefull ſoeuer it did prooue. The end of ſuch an admirable vertue was this. Her husband Paetus was ſomewhat too faint-hearted, to preuent what the Tyrant had cruelly deſign'd againſt him, by doing it himſelfe. One day therefore amongſt other, hauing employed all the inducements, perſwaſions end exhort ations that were fit for ſuch a buſineſſe, ſhee tooke the poynard which he wore, and holding it naked in her hand, for the concluſion of her diſcourſe. Paetus, ſaid ſhee, doe thus; and hauing vpon the very inſtant giuen herſelfe a mortall ſtroake about the ſtomacke, and then ſnarching it out of the wound, preſented it vnto him, as the Legacie of her affectionate loue, with this noble, generous, and immortall encouragement, Paete non dolet. Hold, take it Paetus, it hath not hurt me

at all. The Summe of which worthy ſtory is punctually comprized in this enſuing Epigram. Mart. lib. 2. Ep. 14.
               
                  Caſta ſuo gladium cum traderet Arria Paeto,
                  Quam de viſceribus traxerat ipſa ſuis;
                  Si qua fides, vulnus, qd
                      feci, non dolet inquit;
                  Sed quod tu facies, hoc mihi, Paete, dolet. 
                        
                           When to her Paetus Arria did preſent
                        
                        
                           The ſword, wherwith her bowels ſhe had rent;
                        
                        
                           This woūd, qd ſhe, tormēts me not, belieue me
                        
                        
                           But what thou mak'ſt, ſweete Paetus, that will greeue me.
                        
                     
                  
               
               And vpon the inſtant he ſtrucke himſelfe with the ſame weapon; aſhamed, in my opinion, that euer hee had needed ſo deere and precious an inſtruction. But ſhall I ſhew you a Roſie Bud, that will bloome no longer, than it may lie in the bed of winter: a Fire that burneth not but when cold water is caſt vpon it: a Marigold, that openeth not, but at a ſetting Sunne? looke then vpon that young and honourable Romane Lady, Pompeia Paulina, who hauing in the ſpring of her youth, matched herſelfe with Seneca in

the full fall of his age, would not, after Nero had decreed his death, vpon any rearmes bee diſſwaded by him from dying with him. It was, ſhe ſaid, a neceſſarie Iourney, and could neuer bee better vndertaken, then in his company. Seneca was much delighted with this glorious determination of hers, and told her, that he would not enuie her that honour: and withall, that howſoeuer there might be an equality of conſtancie and reſolution in both of them towards their common end: the beauty yet, and glorie of the action would bee greater on her ſide then on his by farre. And ſo hand in hand after many ſweete farewels taken, and ſoft embraces, they ſet themſelues in a readineſſe to welcome death, and had their veines wide opened preſently to let out life, to let in him.
               
                  Harmonia the Daughter of Hieron the Syracuſan, would needes bee buried in thoſe flames in which her Country burned. Mithridates knew not how to die, till his ſiſters had markt him out the way.

                  Aſdrubal, though very valiant, was fain to take a precedent from his wife to free himſelfe from his foe.
               But I heare theſe magnanimous and high deſignes of theirs, traduced by our aduerſaries, as if a dull and ſtupid ignorance of the danger which they vndergo, or ſome obſtinate and ſelfe-willd humor to effect, what they vndertake, were the principall cauſes of their being. When indeede their true originall is an abſolute and determinate will, to preſerre honour and duety before all the dangers of the world, as the ſequell in a more warrelike and martiall manner ſhall diſcouer vnto them.
               
                  Marulla a Maide of Coccinum in Lemnos, when Solyman Baſſa thought vnexpectedly to haue ſurprized the Towne, took vp the weapons of her Father, whom ſhe ſaw ſlaine before her in the gate, and did not onely reuenge his death vpon thoſe that approached her, but kept out the Turke and all his forces, till the Citizens mooued with the alarme, made haſte to

ſuccour her. At the ſiege of Alba Regalis, amongſt other women was a tall Hungarian, who thruſting in amongſt the ſouldiers, with a ſithe in her hand, at one blow ſtrucke off the heads of two Turkes, as they were climbing vppe the Rampier. At the battell of Coy, which was fought betweene Selymus the firſt, and Iſmael, and for the terribleneſſe therof entitled by the Saracens themſelues, The onely Day of Doome, were found in the fields of Calderan, amongſt the heaps of men that were at that time ſlaine, the bodies of diuers Perſian Women, who had armed themſelues out of no other intent, than to ſhare with their Husbands in thoſe bloody purchaſes. At the ſiege of Agria, the women ſhewed themſelues no leſſe valiant, then the men, in beating Mahomet from the wals, and maſſacring his Souldiers on euery ſide. One amongſt the reſt, taking from her dead Husband his Sword and Target, did ſacrifice therwith immediately the liues of three of her enemies to his Ghoſt, and her owne

reuenge. But I will now muſter vp whole armies from ſundry Nations, of generous and warlike Laſſes, ſuch as ſhall confound our Aduerſaries with their preſence, and ſerue as a Teſt to diſcouer much weakeneſſe in the ſtoureſt Men. The Perſians flying from the Medes, are met without their City gates by their Mothers and their Wiues, who taking vp their garments, demanded thoſe fearfull hares, Num in vteros matrum vel vxorum vellent refugere, whether they thoght to ſhroud themſelues from the purſuite of their enemies, within the compaſſe of thoſe formes againe, or no? with which ſpectacle and ſpeech of theirs, they grew ſo much aſhamed of their owne ſaintheartedneſſe, that preſently they turned head, and recouered the victorie which before they had moſt baſely loſt, out of the hands of their enemies. Philip the ſonne of Demetrius, hauing beſieged the Towne of Chio, cauſed Proclamation to be made, That as many ſlaues, as would flie from thence to him, ſhould enioy

liberty, and with all their Maſters wiues, which ignominious affront ſo incenſed the women, that without delay they ran armed to the wals, and aſſaulted him ſo fiercely, that in ſhort ſpace they enforced him, which the men could neuer doe, to raiſe his Armie, and remooue his Forces, with no little loſſe of Honour, Labour and Expence. The very ſame perſons, when their Huſbands were aſſaulted by the Erithraeans and their confederates, & finding themſelues vnable to contend with them, were content vpon compoſition to depart out of Leuconia only with one ſhirt and one vpper garment: reproued them very ſharpely, that they could endure, hauing forgone their weapons, to march naked through the ſquadrons of their enemies, and wiſhed them for the keeping of their Oath, in ſtead of their clothes to take their ſword & their ſhield, and to tell them that thoſe were the proper garments which belonged to men of valour. They obeyed them herein, and

with this their boldneſſe ſo terrified the Erithraeans, that they were glad of their departure. The Inhabitants of Curzola perceiuing the Turkiſh forces to approach, out of cowardly feare for ſooke their towne, leauing behind them, not aboue twentie men, and fourſcore Women, who with great courage defended the place, and in the end, ſeconded, as it were, by heauen with a tempeſt from the North, reſcued it wholly from the violent aſſaults of thoſe barbarous Mahometanes.
               
                  Nicholas Serpietre, cheife Leader of the Ratians againſt Frier George Bb. of Varadine, in aide of Iſabella, Qu: of Hungarie, hauing moſt diſhonourably loſt, by reaſon of his feare and careleſſe neglect, the greateſt part of his Regiment, was for his baſeneſſe ſo much diſtaſted by his heroicke Wife, that ſhee did not onely reproue him, and that ſharpely, for the ſame, but withall abſented herſelfe from him a long time, as loathing the ſociety of one ſo degenerating from the ſtraines

of true Nobilitie, as to preferre the ſafety of his life, before the ſafegard of his Honour. What ſhall I neede to ſhew, how the Saguntines in defence of their Countrie, armed their dantier limbes againſt the troupes of Hanibal? or how when the Dutchmen were ouerthrowne by Marius, their Women being denied the fauour of liuing free in the ſeruice of the Veſtall Virgins, ſlewe both themſelues and their children; to ſhew how much they hated and deteſted a ſeruile ſubiection? The Celtes a people in France betweene the riuers Garunna, and Sequana, before ſuch time as hauing paſſed the Alpes they obtained that part of Italie, which afterwardes they inhabited, fell at ods amongſt themſelues, with ſuch implacable hatred, that it ſeemed nothing but the vtter ruine and extirpation of each other could alaie the tumult. But the women thruſting themſelues into the middeſt of thoſe factious leuies, tooke notice of their differences, and reconciled them with ſuch equitie and dexteritie, that

they departed together from the fielde without the leaſt ſigne of any former partialities amongſt them; in honour of which their proweſſe and wiſedom, they admitted them euer after to al their conſultations both of peace and warre. And in the league which they made with Hannibal, it was articulated and agreed vpon, That if the Celtes ſhould haue occaſion at any time to accuſe the Carthaginians of wrong offered, the Carthaginian Captaines and Commanders in Spaine ſhould haue the hearing of the buſines; But if the Carthaginians ſhould complain of the Celtes, the knowledge of the cauſe ſhould bee by reference committed to their Women. What ſhould I ſpeake of Tamyris amongſt the Scythians: of Theoxena amongſt the Greekes; of Octauia, Portia, Caia, Cecilia, Cornelia or of Cloelia amongſt the Romanes: all of an extraordinary temper, and ſprightly carriage, but the laſt, euen by Poſena, the profeſſed enemie of her Countrey, for her ſtoute and valiant attempts againſt himſelfe,

ſo much admired, that hee preſented her with a Horſe, the onely honouable reward of a true martiall Virtue? The French talke of Iane la pucelle? who when the Kingdome of France in the time of Charles the VII. lay panting for want of breath vnder the burthen of our Engliſh armes, couragiouſly releiued it, and hauing chaſed the forces of the Duke of Bedford from Orleans cauſed the King her Soueraigne to be crowned at Rhemis, and ſet him afterwards in peaceable poſſeſſion of all his Territories. Haue wee not in our owne Confines, that princely Voadicia, for in this point I will not mention any later times, who with her warlike Amazonians maintaind the reputation of her State, and kept it long on foot againſt the feirce inuaſion of the Romanes? And therefore as our Engliſh Poet ſaith. Spencer F. Q. lib. 3. Can. 2.
               
                  Here haue I cauſe, in men iuſt blame to finde,
                  That in their proper praiſe too partiall be,
                  And not indifferent to Woman-kinde,
                  To whom no ſhare in Armes, or Chinalrie
                  
                     
They doe impart, ne maken memorie
                  Of their braue geſts, and proweſſe martiall,
                  Scarce doe they ſpare to one, or two, or three
                  Roome in their writs, yet the ſame writing ſmall,
                  Doth all their deeds deface, & dims their glorious all.
               
               But I haue drawne this wire out too farre, I wil now therfore breake it off, and in a little modell expreſſe the large remainder of this worke.
            
            
               The Epilogue.
               
                  THucydides was of opinion that an honeſt and vertuous Woman ſhould as charily cloiſter vp hir Fame from the Eares of Men, as ſhe would hir Face from their Eyes. But Gorgias was of another minde. For though he would not haue their Beauties ſeene; hee was content their virtues might be knowne. And Plutarke much approueth thoſe Romane Lawes, which permitted Women as well, as Men, according to their deſart, and dignitie, to be publikely praiſed, at the

ſolemnizing of their Funerals. For howſoeuer Ariſtotle affirme, that nature intendeth alwaies to produce that, which is moſt perfect, and therefore willingly would ſtill bring foorth the Male, counting Females, it ſhould ſeeme, like thoſe, that are borne blinde and lame, or any other way defectiue, the prodigious errours and miſtakings of hir operations: Howſoeuer likewiſe their aduerſaries would depriue them of that glorious caracter of Gods diuinitie imprinted in the heart of Man at his creation; becauſe it is ſaid in the 1. Cor. 11. v. 7. That man is the Image, and glory of God; but Woman is the glory of the Man; And hereupon would conclude, that their whole Sex is but an ample demonſtration of natures Crazineſſe, and their owne vnworthineſſe: Plato yet maintaines, that if there be any diſtinction betwixt their ſufficiencie: and ours, it is not eſſentiall, but accidentall, & ſuch a one as is grounded meerely vpon vſe. And therefore, ſaith hee, as both the Hands are by nature alike fit

for all manner of actions, till application and imployment bring in a difference of Right and Left. So Women and Men haue in them the ſame aptitude and abilitie for the well managing of ciuill and militarie places, and it is exerciſe alone, which begets dexteritie in the one and the other. Which example he drew peraduenture from the doctrine of the Pythagorians, who diuided all things into good and euill; and in the ranke of thoſe that were good, placed the Righthand, the Male, and that which was limited and finite: in the ranke of thoſe that were euill; the Left-hand, the Female, and that which was infinite. But omitting this, his concluſion is, That as thoſe bodies are moſt perfect, and fitting for euery action, which can, if occaſion require, as well apply their left-hand to the buſineſſe, as their right: ſo is that Common-wealth the moſt abſolute which for good gouernment can make vſe of Women, as well as of Men.
               It is an Axiome in Schooles, whereof

no quaere can be made, That Subſtantiae non recipiunt aut maius, aut minus. Subſtances admit not either more or leſſe: wherefore as one ſtone cannot be ſaid to be more a ſtone, then another, ſo farre as concerneth that eſſentiall forme, which giueth a being to them both: no more can one man be ſaid to be more perfectly Man then another. And ſo by conſequence the Male ſhall not be thought more worthy then the Female, in regard of his eſſence, becauſe they be comprehended both vnder one kinde: but if in any thing he haue the ſtart, and aduantage, it is merely by accident, and no way elſe. As concerning that forealleaged poſition of Ariſtotles, I confeſſe it is true, that nature in the production of things doth continually minde the perfecteſt; & therefore intendeth the bringing foorth of Man in his kinde, but not Male more then Female. For if ſhe ſhould alwaies produce the Male, ſhee ſhould commit an extraordinary incongruitie; becauſe as from the bodie, and the ſoule, ariſeth a compound more noble, then his

parts, which is Man: ſo from the company of Male & Female doth redound likewiſe a compound, which is the onely preſeruer of humane generation, without which the parts would ſoone decay. Male and Female therefore, are by nature alwaies together, neither can the one exiſt without the other. One Sex alone is an argument of imperfection; and therefore the Heathens did attribute both of them to God. Orpheus ſaid of Iupiter, that he was Male and Female. So that the graces and abilities which are in them, howſoeuer they may varie in ſome outward traces and lineaments, are in forme and ſubſtance the ſame with ours. Let vs conſider if the magnificencie of of Semiramis and that of Seſoſtris; the ſubtiltie of Tanaquil, and that of Seruius; the courage of Porcia, and that of Brutus; of Timoclea, and that of Pelopidas; doe not reſemble one the other very neerely. Virtue may alter now and then hir habit, but ſhe will neuer change hir hew; the nature and condition, the temperature and

conſtitution, the diet and courſe of life of thoſe in whom ſhe abideth, doe but furniſh hir a wardrobe of ſo many ſeuerall ſuites and ſhapes wherewith at hir pleaſure ſhe diſguiſeth hirſelfe in outward appearance. Achilles was valiant in one kinde, Aiax in another: Neſtors wiſedome, and that of Vlyſſes were not alike. Ageſilaus and Cato were both iuſt, but not in the ſame manner. Eirene loued hir Husband otherwiſe then Alceſtis. Cornelias magnanimitie was of a differing ſtraine from that of Olympias: yet notwithſtanding al this there is but one Fortitude, one Prudence, one Iuſtice. The diuerſitie of the operation ariſeth onely from the varietie of the Organe. But ſelf-conceitedneſſe hath like a canker eaten into the hearts of Men, and poſſeſſed them with ſuch an admiration of their owne ſufficiencie, that they looke but with a ſcornefull eye vpon the ſufficiencie of others. In choiſe of Wiues they reſpect not any virtuous qualities. They account them but impertinences, and

things of little vſe. Hath ſhe wealth, ſhe cannot poſſibly be without worth.
               
                  Optima, ſed qnare, Ceſennia, teſte marito;
                  Bis quingenta dedit; tanti vocat ille pudicam:
                  Nec Veneris pharetris macer eſt, nec lampade feruet;
                  Inde faces ardent; veniunt à dote Sagittae. 
                        Beſt was Ceſennia by hir husband thought;
                        But why? ſhe to him many hundreths brought:
                        Hir grace, and vertue he doth wholly rate,
                        After the faire proportion of hir State.
                        He grows not leane through Paphiādarts or torch:
                        Hir dowrie's that, which doth his boſome ſcorch.
                     
                  
               
               They take vpon them to bee their Heads, and therefore if they proue not as they ought, the blame muſt light vpon themſelues. If Vaſhti bee diſobedient, let Aſſuerus be blamed, for commanding hir that, which being contrary to the Lawes of Perſia, did not beſeeme hir modeſtie to doe. The eye is in fault if the foote doe ſtumble. The Chariot of the Sunne, as I ſaid before was glorious, and did afford much comfort, but when Phaeton
                  
had the guiding of it, his vnaduiſed raſhneſſe ſet all things in combuſtion. It is here as it is at Iriſh, if we haue a bad caſt, we muſt ſeeke to better it by good play. If a woman be ſharpe and ſower in hir conuerſation, it becommeth Man with the mildeneſſe of his behauiour, mingling as it were Oyle with Vineger, to qualifie the tartneſſe, and like a skilfull Chirurgion, neuer to apply a Cataplaſme where hee ſees an oyntment will ſerue the turne. If ſhe be obſtinate and ſelfe-wild, he muſt remember the Apologue, that the bluſtring Winde the ſtiffer hee ſought to blow the Trauailers Cloake from him, the ſtraighter he made him binde it to him: whereas the Sunne by ſhining gently vpon him ſo preuailed, vt praeaeſtu ſimul cum pallio tunicam exueret, that through ouermuch heate, with his Cloake he did likewiſe put of his Coate.
               
                  —Bacchae bacchanti ſivelis aduerſarier.
                  Exinſana infaniorem facies; feriet ſaepius.
                  Si obſequare vnâ reſolues plaga,
               
               Saith the Comicke.
               
                  
Paſſions in women are like wilde beaſts ſooner tamed by following, then ouerthrowne by withſtanding. Tumours and inflamations are but exaſperated by Corroſiues, the readieſt way to recouer them is by lenitiues.
               
                  Lenefluit Nilus, ſed cunct is amnibus extat
                  Vtilior, nullas confeſſus murmure vires. 
                        Nile ſoftly flowes, but yet more profit yeelds
                        Then all ſtreames elſe, in making rich the Fields,
                        Whilſt gently gliding on his moiſter way,
                        He with no murmure doth his force bewray.
                     
                  
               
               He muſt not thinke to vſe them, as Eſops Labourer did his God, from whom he then wrung moſt, when he did moſt wrong him. It is otherwiſe here.
               
                  —peragit trauquilla poteſtas,
                  Quod violenta nequit; mandata
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      fortius vrget
                  Imperioſa quies—
                        Calme powre with much facilitie doth doe,
                        What ſtormie force can nere attaine vnto.
                        Still peace doth beare a more imperious ſway
                        
                           
And farre more ſtrongly vrge them to obey.
                     
                  
               
               
                  This is that field of Bio's, which if you praiſe it, will yeelde more fruite, then when you plough it.
               
               If ſhe be light and wanton, and that the freeneſſe of hir carriage make him ſuſpect the faireneſſe of hir conſcience, let him conceale it cloſely, and remember how Ioſeph, whan hee doubted the B. Virgins faith, would not make hir a publike example, but determined with himſelfe to put hir away priuily: and this was noted in him as an effect of iuſtice, and vprightneſſe by the H. G. it ſelfe. Priuate admotions, like precious balmes, are ſeldome applied but with good ſucceſſe: churliſh reſtraints are of another nature.
               
                  Sinunquam Danaen habuiſſet ahenea turris,
                  Non eſſet Danae de Ioue fact a parens. 
                        If beauteous Danae had not bin detain'd
                        In wals of braſſe, great Ioue had neuer rayn'd
                        Into hir chaſter lap that golden ſhower,
                        Which broke the ſtalke of hir faire virgin floure.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
Like whetſtones they ſet an edge vpon the dulleſt appetite, and are oftentimes the occaſioners of miſdeedes in ſuch as neuer thought to ſtep awry.
               
                  Nullus in vrbe fuit tota, qui tangere vellet
                  Vxorem gratis Caeciliane tuam,
                  Dum licuit, ſed nunc poſitis cuſtodibus ingens
                  Turba fututorum eſt.—
                        
                           Whilſt to his wife, Caecilian, gaue acceſſe,
                        
                        
                           None did themſelues vnto his houſe addreſſe:
                        
                        
                           He had no ſooner though appointed Spies,
                        
                        
                           But ſtraight a ſwarme of Lechers thither hies.
                        
                     
                  
               
               Prohibitions in this kinde are but prouokings. Beſides they are to little purpoſe. For as our Engliſh Poet ſaith.
               
                  It is not iron bands, nor hundreth eyes,
                  Nor brazen wals, nor many wakefull Spies,
                  That can withhold her wilfull wandring feet:
                  But faſt good will with gentle courteſies,
                  And timely ſeruice to her pleaſures meet,
                  May her perhaps containe, that elſe would algates fleet.
               
               Let him conſider likewiſe if his owne Lordlyneſſe bee not a maine efficient of her lewdneſſe. For indeede,
               
                  
                  Non benè conueniunt, nec in vna ſede morantur,
                  Maieſtas & Amor.—
                        Loue hath a ſmiling face, and cannot brooke
                        To ſee it ſelfe checkt with a ſurly looke.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Mildneſſe and Affabilitie are the true Parents of legitimate Affections; all other Complements and ſeruiceable Demonſtrations are but impoſtures; and to ſpeake truely, the baſtard iſſue of Siniſter and Side Reſpects. Witneſſe our witty Epigrammatiſt. Mart. lib. 2. Epig. 55.
               
                  Vis te, Sexte, coli; volebam amare;
                  Parendum eſt tibi: quod iubes, colêris
                  Sed ſite colo, Sexte: non amabo. 
                        I would, good Sextus, faine haue loued thee;
                        But thou deſireſt worſhipped to bee:
                        Thy heſt ſhal bee obeyed but thou wilt proue
                        That they, which worſhip. Sextus, wil not loue.
                     
                  
               
               All Cynicall rigour therefore and auſterity muſt bee quite diuorced from the nuptiall yoke. A Stoicall brow, a churliſh accent, or a countenance any way Tyrannicall, and which ſhall ſeeme to exact obſeruance, is the bane and poiſon of amorous embracements. The ancient

Pagans did alwaies place the Statues of Perſwaſion, and the Graces neere to that of Venus, to ſhew, That married people ſhould by faire demeanour and ſoft entreaty, without brawling or contention obtaine their deſires at each others hand. Iſaac that bleſſed Patriarch, was ſeene by Abimelech as hee looked out at a window, to ſport himſelfe with his Rebaccah; An example confounding the arrogant behauiour of ſuch, as will not remember, that the woman was taken out of the ſide of man, to bee rankt in equall eſtimation with him; and not out of his foot, to become litier for his proud and inſolent ambition to wallow on. They are not al of them Saints, I muſt confeſſe, but ſuch as haue their imperfections & defects, as well as we; 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſaith Plato, There is no ſweete, but hath ſome ſower: The wine is not without his Lees; and the Bee, as it hath Hony, ſo it hath a Sting.
               
                  —Medio de fonte leporum
                  Surgit amari aliquid, quod in ipſis faucibus angat. 
                        
                           
There's nothing ſo delightfull to our Taſte,
                        But leaues ſome bitter ſauour at the laſt;
                        And ereit come to ſettle in our mawes,
                        Offenſiue prooues euen to our very iawes.
                     
                  
               
               But whoſoeuer ſhall neglect them for theſe, reſembleth thoſe, who for one illrelliſhing grape forbeare the whole cluſter; or becauſe they haue been ſcratched with the Buſh will forgoe the Berry. But were they neuer ſo crooked in their carriage, neuer ſo deformed in their conuerſation, that well-tempred Wiſdome, by reaſon wherof men challenge ſuch a preheminence ouer them, ſhould eaſily, me thinkes, worke ſome amendment. For though not euery Beaſt in the Forreſt, nor euery Tree in the wood, can be thoroughly ſtripped of their wilder nature; the Huntſ-man notwithſtanding out of thoſe, and the Gardiner out of theſe, will finde a meanes to reape ſome profit. The water of the ſea is vicious, and vnfit for drinke; Fiſhes yet make it their nouriſhment, and Mariners, as well, as Merchants vſe it as chariot to carry them into

farre countries. In a word, no ſublunary thing is more needefull vnto man, than fire: It affoordeth him both Light and Heat, yet if the Satyre bee too buſie with it, he may peraduenture burn his beard. The Phyſician can extract a cordiall out of the deadlieſt poyſon; and out of the baſeſt minerall a noble Quinteſſence. But men are ſo farre from this, that women to countenance their baſeſt actions can bring Precedents from home. Ahabs weakneſſe was a cauſe of Iezabels vnworthineſſe. Such a one is proud and haughty, but if you marke her well, you ſhall finde, her husband is the Glaſſe by which ſhe trimmeth herſelfe.

                     —in vulgus manant exempla regentum;
                     Vtque ducū lituos, ſic mores caſtra ſequuntur.
                  
               
               The deedes of men in authority, are alwaies Patrons for thoſe of lower ranke. A ſubiect vſually eies nothing but the example of his Superiour. Doth Ariſtotle ſtammer? thoſe that are vnder him will affect it as a ſoueraigne grace: Is Plato any thing crooke ſhouldred? hee ſhall haue

many that will imitate him. Hath Alexander the great a peculiar writhing of his necke? no doubt but Hepheſtion out of his loue would willingly ſeeme to haue the like. It is the nature of true affection not onely to palliate and diſguiſe the blemiſhes of a friend, but with all to ioy in them ſomerimes.

                     —Balbini polypus Agnam
                  
               
               
                  Delectat—and to make them often the ſubiects of ſetled imitation. Is there any tumour therefore or inflammation in the Leg, or other inferiour parts of the bodie? let vs ſee if the defluction which cauſeth it, proceede not from the Head, Where there is a neere coniunction, no maruaile if there happen a ſudden infection.
               
                  —grex totus in agris
                  Vnius ſcabie cadit, & porrigine porci,
                  Vuaque conſpect â liuorem ducit ab vuâ.
               
               One ſcabbed ſheepe may marr a faire flocke, one meaſled hogge endanger a whole heard. The cleareſt eye many times by viewing onely that which is

bleared, becomes abnoxious to the like perill. Let vs not complaine then like that fooliſh fellow, of a paine in the Hand, whē there is an impoſtume in the Head. If we would haue women without ſpots, let vs keep our ſelues without ſtaines. But here our aduerſaries crie out,
               
                  Quid iuuat ad ſurdas ſi cālet Phemius aures?
                  Quid miſerā Thamyram picta tabella iuuat? 
                        Deafe Eares in Muſicke take but ſmall delight,
                        Faire Pictures pleaſe not, where there wāteth ſight.
                     
                  
               
               Little auaileth the wiſedome of the Inchanter, if the Adder be not diſpoſed to liſten. What effect can either Precept, or Precedent produce in thoſe, who haue armed themſelues with a willful Reſolution, to put by all good counſell and perſwaſion? Oleum perdit & impenſas, qui bouem mittit ad ceroma; ſaith the Prouerb, An Oxe will neuer prooue a Wreſtler, vſe what care and coſt you can. Let your plees bee neuer ſo well tempered with wiſedome and diſcretion, your ſpeeches ſa-

                     〈1 line〉
                  
                  
Let him ſpie one wrinckle on her brow, And he ſhall ſtreight his Miſtris diſauow: Let her skin writhell; let her eye-ſight faile, Her teeth wex yellow; or her cheeks look pale; Packe huſwife, hence, this honeſt man ſhal ſay; Out of my doores; diſpatch, vſe no delay; Your dropping noſe occaſions my diſdaine, I muſt haue one, that hath a dryer braine.
               For there are, which make Virtue the marke whereat they leuell; Let vs but liſten a while, and wee ſhall heare many tragically ſighing out, what Demenetus vttered in the Comedie, Argentum accepi, dote imperium vendidi; I haue gotten monie but I haue purchaſed miſerie, and for a large Portion forgone my libertie. M. Aurelius will not dare though, to caſt himſelfe into the looſe embraces of a Strumpet, ſo ſhe bring an Empire to him for her dowrie. Many of lower ranke, out of a couerous deſire to ſoder vp a crackt eſtate, let not to doe the like; but in the ende they may crie out with Eſau, The pottage hath refreſht me, but my birthright's gone. Plaut. in Aulul.
               
                  
                  —ſunt multae in magnis dotibus
                  Incommoditates, ſumptu ſque intolerabiles;
                  Nam quae indotata eſt, ea in poteſtate eſt viri;
                  Dotatae mactant & malo, & damno viros.
               
               Let all things be rightly conſidered, and we ſhall finde that rich wiues are but bils of charge. She that hath no ſuch addition to make her weigh will be continually readie to conforme herſelfe in all things to her Husbands will; but ſhee that hath the ſtart in that, will haue it in all things elſe, or the whole houſe ſhall periſh in her Furie.

                     Intoler abilius nihil eſt quàm foemina diues.
                  
               
               There can be no greater torture to a man, then to bee matched to a woman whoſe fortunes are of a higher built roofe than his owne. Iuv: lib. 2. Sat. 6.
               
                  Nil non permitt it mulier ſibi, turpe putat nil,
                  Cum virides gemmas collo circundedit, & cum
                  Auribus extenſis magnos commiſit Elenchos. 
                        No Act ſo lawleſſe; no attempt ſo vile,
                        But ſhe beleeues becomes her well, the while
                        About her neck faire ſparkling gems ſhe weres,
                        And with large Pendants loades her ſtretched eares.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
Beautie therefore is vaine, and riches are deceitfull, ſaith (Pro. 31.) the H. G. but a woman that feareth the Lord, ſhee ſhall be praiſed. She openeth her mouth with wiſedome, and in her tongue is the Law of kindneſſe. Hir Husband ſhall be knowne in the Gates, when he ſitteth among the elders of the Land. The frailty of the firſt is fully characterd in this enſuing Poem, occaſioned, it ſhould ſeem, by ſome great and ſuddaine alteration diſcouered in the Subiect, which for the coreſpondencie it holds with this diſcourſe I will heere wholly inſert.
               
                  A glorious place I did of late behold,
                  Whoſe outſide richly deckt with burniſht gold;
                  Did ſeeme to mee a Manſion fit for Ioue,
                  
                  For virtuous Pallas, or the Queene of Loue.
                  I thought ſo ſweete a ſeat could not but be
                  The ſacred harbour of ſome Deitie.
                  The roofe thereof was arched like the skies
                  And grac'd with ſtars, wch
                      though but mortal eies,
                  Yet ſuch they were as like Promethean fire,
                  In frozen earth could kindle hot deſire;
                  Such as could warme the Liuer; quick the braine,
                  And moue affection in the dulleſt Swaine;
                  
                     
It ioy'd me much to ſee my weaker ſight
                  Curiouſly ſearch this Labyrinth of Delight.
                  One Beauty ſeene, I ſtraightway more diſcouer,
                  And rauiſht, crie; Who would not be a Louer?
                  Through chriſtall Caſements I might eaſily ſee
                  The louely Graces in their ſport full glee;
                  And by and by the Archer and his Mother
                  With wanton dalliance courting one another.
                  An entrance was into this princely place,
                  Whoſe currall Gates tooke vp a ſeemely ſpace;
                  From foorth betwixt the Leaues iſſued a breath,
                  Could ſet a gloſſe vpon the face of death,
                  And now and then came foorth a gentle ſound,
                  Whoſe ſweet concent did Orpheus quite confound.
                  It much affected many mortall eares,
                  And might haue drawn bright Angells from their Spheares
                  But beauty fades, and louely parts decay,
                  Greene Herbes do quickly turne to withered hay;
                  The bluſhing Roſe, the glory of the morne,
                  Doth often-times become the mid-daies ſcorne.
                  This ſeeming Eden I did lately view,
                  But all things varied from their former hewe;
                  Nothing I ſaw, which I might terme the ſame,
                  So ſhort a Date hath euery earthly frame.
                  Yet in this change Time could not vant his force;
                  
                     So I had not finiſht halfe his annuall courſe,
                  Since firſt that glorious parcell of the skies,
                  Was made the happie Obiect of mine eyes;
                  
                     
Whereat th'affections, formed in my breſt,
                  As vnderpropped with to weake areſt.
                  In their owne ruins did themſelues entombe,
                  And like Abortiues periſh't in the Wombe.
                  My thoughts ſhall therefore neuer more embrace
                  The waſhie tincture of a female face;
                  Beauties imperious lookes may force mine eye,
                  But virtues Liege-man my poore heart ſhall die.
                  Yet ſome may taxe me for a wauering minde;
                  Whoſe loue goes out at euery blaſt of winde:
                  But let theſe know; buildings though nere ſo tal,
                  
                  
                     If once their Baſe, & ground-worke faile, muſt fall.
                  
               
               As for the vanitie of the laſt, I will take Martiall for my Patron, who being condemned by a friend, for hauing refuſed to marrie with a wealthie Widow, returned him his reaſons in this pithie Epigramme.
               
                  
                     Vxorem quare locupletem ducere nolim,
                  
                  
                     Quaeritis? vxori nubere nolo meae.
                  
                  
                     Inferior Matrona ſuo ſit, Priſce, Marito,
                  
                  
                     Non aliter fuerint Faemina, Vir
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         pares.
                  
                  
                     Mart. lib. 8. Epigram. 12. 
                        Demand you why, with one that's rich
                        
                           
to marrie I denide?
                        The reaſon was, vnto my wife
                        I would not be the bride.
                        The Matrons muſt inferiour be,
                        good Priſcus, to the Man;
                        Or neuer will they equall be,
                        doe Priſcus what you can.
                     
                  
               
               But the Couvre-feu Bell hath alreadie rung, and it is now time the Draw-bridge of this our Sanctuarie were puld vp, and the gates thereof ſhut in. Such as had Oyle in their Lamps are already entred; If any ſeeke admiſſion hereafter, whatſoere their allegations be, they muſt attend a Iubile for a ſecond opening; till when to ſtoppe the mouthes of their aduerſaries, moſt whereof, like Euripides, though they raile vpon them at the bord, are well contented with them in the Bed, I publiſh here in a little volume, this poeticall Character of their worthineſſe.
               
                  —They are the comfort of our liues,
                  That draw an equall yoake without debate;
                  
                     
A Play-fellow, that for of all griefe driues;
                  A Steward, early that prouides and late;
                  Both faithfull, chaſt, and ſober, milde, and truſtie,
                  Nurſe to weake Age, and pleaſure to the Luſtie.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   