
      
         
            
            
            Miſtris Turners Farewell to all women.
            
               Angell (turn'd Diuell) Pride:
               by thee I fell
               When heere on earth I dwelt
               too'th pit of Hell:
               Yet ſpite of all thy Poyſons,
               I am faire
               Now in Gods eyes,
               Women by me Beware.
            
            
               
            
            
               
            
            
               Mistris Turner.
               1 THou, of all ſinnes the firſt, of all, the higheſt,
               Becauſe thou fell'ſt from Heauen before Mans fall,
               Who, (when to Happines thou wert the nigheſt,)
               In enuy of the beſt of all, loſt all.
            
            
               2 Wo worth that whoriſh face of thine, which tempted
               Me to more Hells then thou haſt vaine attires,
               For which my ſpotted Soule, is not exempted
               (With out Gods mercy) from eternall fires.
            
            
               3 Shee-Diuell, (deſtroyer both of man and Woman,
               That with thy forcerous Drugges didſt catch my Soule:
               To the laſt Barre Tribunall, thee I ſummon,
               Where I ſhall ſtand all white, thou black and foule.
            
            
               4 Waſhd are my ſpots away by Chriſts red paſſion,
               For I am there whence headlong thou wert throwne:
               And now I glory in triumphant faſhion,
               That thou art there whether I ſhould haue gone:
               From Heauen thou fellſt to Hell, and I being drownd
               In Sinnes, got vp and now in Heauen ſit Crownd.
            
            
               Lady Pride.
               1 THou, of all Woemen worſt of all, the baſeſt,
               Who (when I am of Sinnes the worſt and proudeſt,
               And throwne from Heauen me in thy boſome placeſt;
               And what thy heart lou'd beſt, now rail'ſt ar loudeſt.
            
            
               2 'Tis not thy hate of Pride, makes thee to cry
               Wo worth my Whoriſh Face, but tis becauſe
               Thy Pride hath caught her fall, and thou muſt dye,
               And frighted art with Hels deuouring Iawes.
            
            
               3 Enough it is for me that I haue made thee
               Drunke with my cup: nor care I though thou boaſt
               That from eternall fires Gods mercy ſtaid thee;
               For ſay thy ſoule be ſau'd, thy bodyes loſt.
            
            
               4 As for thy yellowed Ruffes, phantaſtick Tires,
               Paintings, and Poyſonings (now by thee abhorred)
               I laugh to ſee thee wrap them vp in fires,
               For Pride hath more to bewitch many a Forehead.
               And though thy ſoule ſhould climbe the higheſt Sphere,
               Ile pluck downe thouſands that ſhall nere come there.
            
         
      
      
         
            Printed for Iohn Trundle.
         
      
   