
      
         
            
            THE TRVE TRIAL and Turning of a Sinner.
            OR, THREE PLAINE AND profitable Sermons, teaching the Search and Triall of our waies, Repentance of Sinne, and true turning vnto God.
            The ſumme whereof was preached at Feuerſham in Kent Aug. 3. 1606.
            
            By Thomas Tuke.
            
            
               
                  ZACH. 1. 3.
               
               Turne yee vnto mee, ſaith the Lord of hoſtes, and I will turne vnto you.
            
            
               
                  EZEK. 18. 21.
               
               If the wicked will returne from all his ſinnes, that he hath committed, &c. he ſhall ſurely liue, and ſhall not die.
            
            LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creede. 1607.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT Worſhipfull and vertuous Ladie, Chriſtiana, wife to the Right Worſhipfull Sir Iohn Leueſon Knight: grace from God, both temporall, and et
                  ••
               nall.
            MAdame, rare and admirable are the fauors which we haue receiued of the Lord, & by his grace enioyed now almoſt fiftie yeares together. He hath giuen vs his Word and Goſpel, his lawes and ſtatutes: hee hath planted a

Vineyard amongſt vs, and ſent his Prophets vnto vs. Hee hath brought vs out of captiuitie from vnder Weaſterne Babylon, and diſpelled the Egyptian-like darkneſſe of Romiſh ſuperſtitions. Hee hath not dealt ſo with euery Nation. Moreouer, hee hath imparked vs with the pales of Peace, and hedged vs about with the Lawrells of Proſperitie. He doo
                  •
               h fill our barnes with plentie, & cauſeth our cups to runne ouer. He hath put the Palmes of victorie into our hands, the Garlands of triumphs about our heads,

and hath made our verie enemies ſeeke to be at peace with vs. Hee hath turned our ſpeares into ſpades, our ſwords into ſythes, and our pikes into pennes; yea to make a perfect and plenary demonſtration of his loue vnto vs, and hatred of our Aduerſaries, he hath of late vouchſafed to vs both Prince and People,
                  Neuem. 5. 1605. a verie wonderfull and great Deliuerance, from a moſt barbarous and vniuerſall confuſion, plotted, and almoſt performed by the children of Babel, the Minians of that purple Harlot. But

how doe we remonſtrate our thankfulneſſe and loue to him? Alas, our ingratitude is too-too manifeſt. Our ſinnes doe teſtifie the ſame to our faces. Ignorance, Oathes, Prophanations of the Lords day, Neglect, yea and palpable Contempt of the Goſpell, and of Gods faithfull and honourable Embaſſadours, with many other grieuous and tranſcendent enormities, do ſo ſwell & abound in the multitude, as that if they were not by force held in with the piles of wholeſome lawes, and the banks

of gouernmēt, they would quickly ouerflow, & beare and beate down all before them. So that the Lorde may ſay of vs, as Moſes ſomtimes ſaid of Iſrael:
                  Deut. 32. 15. 
               But hee that ſhould haue bene vpright, when he waxed fatte, ſpurned with his heele, and forſooke God that made him, and regarded not the ſtrong God of his ſaluation: not much vnlike wee are (for the moſt) to the yong Hindes mentioned in the booke of Iob, who when they are waxed fatte, and growne vp with corne, Goe from their dammes,
               
                  Iob. 39. 7. 
               and returne no more vnto them. Ioſephus
               
writeth, that the Riuer Iordan doth carrie the Fiſhes ſo long ſporting themſelues, and floting aloft, till at length it caſts thē headlong into the Dead Sea,
               Mare mortuum. where they periſh: ſo it ſeemes our proſperity, through the corruption of our heartes, hath trained vs on ſo long, that wee haue fallen into a Sea of ſinnes, and a gulfe of wickedneſſe. What can we now expect of God, beſides the complement of that dreadfull minace vpon vs, with which, the declining church of Epheſus was ſomtimes threatned:
                  Reue. 2. 5. to wit, the

remouing of her Candleſtick out of his place vnleſſe ſhe did repent? If we therefore deſire the continuance of the Goſpell among vs, and of all outwarde bleſſings, which attend vpō the true profeſſors and embracers of it, we muſt in the feare of God, Search & trie our waies, and turne againe vnto him. Amend your waies and your works (ſaith the Lord) and I will let you dwell in this place.
               
                  Ier. 7. 3. 
               2. Chron. 30. 9. 
               The Lord our God is gracious and mercifull, and will not turne away his face from vs, if we conuert vnto him. Pliny ſaith,Plin. lib. 
                     •
                  . cap. 26.
                that the Riuer-horſe feeling himſelf too

fatte,Plin. lib. 8. c. 26.
                & ouermuch grown, pricketh a veine in his legge with ſome ſharpe reede newly cut, and by letting himſelfe blood, doeth ſo helpe himſelfe, and preuent the daunger, which he was ſubiect before to fall into: ſo when wee ſwell with pride and ſelfe-loue, and when we waxe groſſe ſpirited, and fatte at heart, and when the corrupt humors of our ſoules abound, our beſt phiſicke is, to prick our hearts with true compunction of ſpirit, and remorſe of conſcience, and to let our ſelues blood of thoſe

corrupt humours by true repentance, and godlye ſorrow. If wee neglect the performance of theſe duties, wee may iuſtly feare, that the Lord will remoue his fauours from vs, & giue them to a people that will bring forth better fruites. To helpe forwarde this godly practiſe, I haue compiled, penned, and now publiſhed, theſe ſequent exhortations: which I dedicate and offer vnto your Ladiſhippe, eſpecially becauſe I knowe you loue this Doctrine, & the faithfull practiſers of the ſame.

Thus taking my humble leaue, I recommend you to the grace of God.
            
               
                  Cuxton. 
                  
                     March. 25. 1607.
               
               
                  Your Ladiſhips in all dutie, Thomas Tuke.
            
         
         
            
            The principall Contents.
            
               1 An eleuen doctrines are orderly collected, and their applications ſeuerally annexed.
               2 Sundry reaſons to mooue vs to ſearch our ſelues.
               3 Many mo
                     •
                  iues to perſwade vs to ſearch narrowly and ſoundly.
               4 Diuers reaſons, to moue M
                     •
                  niſters to ioyne themſelues in their exhortations.
               5 Many reaſons why euery man ought to buſie himſelfe in ſearching of himſelfe principally.
               6 Sundry cauſes why wee ſhould try our waies, after that by ſearching we haue found them out.
               7 The true Touchſtone of triall:

here ſundry Iudges are reiected for ſundry reaſons.
               8 Theſe points with their reaſons are diſcuſſed and propounded. 1. Who muſt turne. 2. From what. 3. To whom. 4. Where. 5. When. 6. How.
               9 All theſe things are illuſtrated by many fit ſimilitudes, and other compariſons: or at leaſt the chiefest.
               Many other particulars are taught, which the godly Reader may finde, if it pleaſe him to peruſe the Sermons through.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            SERMONS PREAched at Feuerſham in Kent.
            
               
                  
                     Lament. 3. 40.
                  
                  Let vs ſearch and try our waies, and turne againe vnto the Lord.
               
            
            
               THis mournefull prophet, Ieremy, hauing in part deſcribed & declared the perplexed and lamentable cōdition of his countrymen, and both teſtified and iuſtified, as wel the righteouſnes of God in afflicting them for the multitude of their tranſgreſſions, as his mercie in moderating their miſery, and

preſeruing them from a full and finall deſtruction; hee doth in theſe words propound vnto them a very ſerious and ſober exhorta
                  •
               ion, conſiſting of three branches. The firſt is conteined in the three former words, Let vs ſ
                     •
                  arch. That is to ſay, let vs diligently inquire after, ſeeke, and labour to find out. The ſecond is couched in the next wordes, And trie our waies. That is, let vs proue our thoughts, our words & workes, after that by diligent and due ſearching we haue found them out. The third is comprehended in the laſt words, And turne again vnto the Lord. That is, after exact inquiry & faithfull examination, let vs relinquiſh and abandon all that is amiſſe, repenting of it, and relenting for it, and let vs come home againe vnto our father, and turne backe vnto his waies, from which we haue gone aſtray like ſtragling ſheepe. Then inſtructions are many, both excellent and profitable.
            
               Doct. 1.
               For ſo much as the holy Ghoſt

doth in the fore-front of this exhortation aduertiſe vs to ſearch out our waies: I conclude and gather, that this is a duty neceſſary to bee performed of euery ſinner that deſireth to make a ſound conue
                  •
               ſion of his ſinnes. Becauſe it is a dutie ſo much neglected, I wil vſe ſome arguments to incite and perſwade you to the practiſe of it. In the firſt place, conſider that it is not man but GOD which commandeth vs to make this ſearch.2. Tim. 3. 16. For the whole Scripture (whereof this ſentence is a part) is giuen by inſpiration from God, and the holy men of God, (whereof this Prophet was not the laſt, nor yet the leaſ
                  •
               ) did all of them ſpeake and preach as they were carried and directed by the ſpirit of God.2. Pet. 1. 21. Homage belongeth to a King, honour to a father, and obedience to a maiſter. God is our King, our Father, our Lord & Maiſter.
                  Iam. 4. 12. He is the onely law-giuer, that is onely able to ſaue and deſtroy. He exhorteth vs to ſearch our waies:

therefore as we reſpect his grace, & feare his anger, as we would not be reputed & regarded as diſloyal ſubiects, diſobedient children, rebellious and refractary ſeruants, let vs in al humility of heart, and ſincerity of ſoule and conſcience ſubmit and obey. Secondly, wee ſhal not know our waies, what they are, and whither they lead, vnleſſe we take ſome paines in ſearching of them out. A Prince cannot know the ſtate of his kingdom, a phiſitian cannot diſcern the conſtitution and habit of a mans body, without ſome good & cōpetent ſearch and inquiſition: ſo no man can iudge of the condition and ſtate of his ſoule and body, & know the caſe and quality of the kingdom of his heart, except by ſearching he doe labour to attaine thereunto. He that knoweth not his waies, cannot examine them: how then ſhall he be able to reuert and turne from them if they be not good? On the contrarie, our ſearching of them is a very good furtherance & preparatiue to

our triall of them, and turning from them; like the needle, which prepares a way for the threed, which followeth it. For as a man perceiuing himſelfe to be wounded or any way diſeaſed, is moued to ſeeke about for a remedie: euen ſo when a ſinner by ranſacking his life and heart, findeth out his ſpirituall wounds and diſeaſes, hee is by the grace of God prepared & prouoked to ſeeke for cure, and to be deliuered of his grieuances.
            Thirdly, he that intends to build, will ſearch the foundation, whether the ground be ſound or ſandy, whether faſt or falſe. Saluation is a faire and goodly building. Now he that builds it vpon ignorant conceits, & blind preſumptions, deceiueth himſelfe, and diſhonoureth his Sauiour: therefore it is good for a man to ſearch himſelfe, & lay a firme foundation; the toppe will fare the better for the bottome. If the groundworke bee not ſtable, the building cannot ſtand: and where there is no

ſure ſearching, there can be no ſure working. Moreour, he that deſireth a plentifull Crop, muſt view his ſeed, and ſearch it for Chaffe, Cockell, and other noxious and infeſtant ſeeds: ſo he, that deſireth to be fruitfull in good works, muſt ſearch himſelfe for the ſeeds of ſin, which ingendreth nothing but ſtinking weedes.
            A diſcreete and faithfull Magiſtrate will ſearch his kingdome, for treacherous, rebellious, and other pernitious perſons; ſpecially if hee haue had certaine intelligence of them:
                  Reuel. 1. 6 ſo wee that are made Kings and ſpirituall Magiſtrates by Ieſus Chriſt, ſhould ſearch all the corners of our kingdome for our ſins, which lurke within vs like traitors, and are ready to pull the crowne from our heades, and ſnatch the ſcepter out of our hands, yea and blowe vp the whole Parliamēt of our ſoules. God hath giuen a man reaſon to be as a Prince to rule him, it being ruled by the line of his Lawe: the ſupreame

faculties of the ſoule, be the Peeres or Nobles: the ſenſes are the guard and attendants: the outward part are as the Commons: and our Sins, & ſinfull Affections, are traitours, rebells, and as factious and infectious perſons, which diſturbe the peace of the Common-wealth, and being deſperate and irreconciliable enimies vnto the State, doe ſtriue to diſmount the Prince from her Throne, and vtterly to ruinate and ſubuert the kingdome, which God by his holy ſpirit hath begun to plant within vs. Wherefore like politique and faithfull Princes, it behoueth vs to make ſearch in all the parts of our kingdomes, and as it were with Hoe and Crie to purſue our enemies, that by ſearc
                  •
               ing hauing found them out, they may be brought to their triall, and at the barre of Conſcience 
                  •
               eceiue ſentence as they haue deſerued.
            Finally, the ſearching of our waies is a meanes to preuent the iudgements of God▪ For when men will

not ſearch themſelues, then God ſearcheth them out by croſſes and afflictions. When men forget to ſearch their waies, then God doth oftentimes put them in minde of this dutie by his rods, and leadeth them (as it were) by the lip. When men run headlong on an end in irregular and wretched courſes, neuer thinking of their way, hee doth ſometimes thruſt them forward into deſperate and irrecouerable caſualties & calamities, yea many times to the loſſe of their deareſt liues: as the diuell did violently driue the the Gadarens ſwine into the ſea.
                  Mar. 5. 13 Sometimes hee thruſts them into the mire of affliction, and maketh them to ſtumble and fall vpon ſome ſtone in their way, or pricketh their feete with the thorne of ſome ſharp and grieuous croſſe, and ſo puts them in minde of their way, and teacheth them to think of their vngodly courſes. When men ſuffer Sathan to ride them, as the Aſſe did Balaam,
               Num. 22.
                and to abuſe them to Gods

diſhonour, then God dooth often cauſe his Angell (as I may ſpeake) to ſtand in their way with the naked ſword of aduerſitie, and ſo hindreth their enormious proceedings. Therefore it is a point of chriſtian wiſedome, and wiſe chriſtianitie, to cal our ſelues in time to a reckning, and to make a mature and faithfull inquiſition and diſquiſition of all our waies. Search your ſelues (ſaith Zephany) euen ſearch you,
               
                  Zep. 
                  
                     •
                  .1
                     •
                  . 
               O nation not worthy to be loued, before the decree come forth, and yee be as chaffe that paſſeth in a day, and before the fierce wrath of the Lord come vpon you.
            
            The conſideration of theſe things ſerueth to conuince and condemne the common cuſtome of moſt men,Vſe. 1.
                who walk on ſecurely in ignorance and other vngodlineſſe, and either ſildome or neuer take true notice of their waies; as if a man did not greatly care whither hee trauells, or how hee trauells, whether right or wrong, whether in dirt or drie waies, by light or night, ſo

that he do trauell. Yea many are ſo farre from ſearching their waies themſelues, as that they w
                  •
               l not willingly ſuffer others; like the fooliſh and vnpatien
                  •
                Pa
                  ••
               ent, which will not lette the S
                  •
               rgeon ſearche his woundes; or to the man that hath ſtolen goods about him, who cannot abide to heare of ſearching. If the Miniſter ſhal ſet opē their gates of craft and cunning carriage, and ſhall cut downe or breake open theſe thi
                  •
               k and 
                  •
               igh hedges of their deepe hypocriſie, whereby they hide their waies (as much as may be) from the eyes of men, and ſhall by that meanes or any other diſcouer their waies, and make them ſee the filthines of their ſteps, then they ſtamp▪ they ſtorm, they ſtrike priuily with their teeth like Bores, and they bite like ſerpents: and if their counſell ſerued, and the times permitted, they would openly ſhewe their ma
                  •
               ice, and vnchaine their hatred. All which conuinceth them of gri
                  •
               u
                  •
               us impen
                  •
               tencie and carnall

ſecuritie. Is it not ſtrange that men ſhould ſearch & cenſure other men, and forget themſelues? Is it not ſtrange that all men naturally ſhuld affect, & delight in ſearching, ſome for riches, ſome for renowne, one for profites, an other for pleaſures, a third ſort for promotion, and yet few, or almoſt none in compariſon, ſhould ſearch after their waies, that if right, they might mend their pace and haſte an ende; if wrong, they might in time retire, & fetch a ſtraiter compaſſe vnto newe Ieruſalem, where there is renowne without enuie, promotiō without pride, wealth and no woe, pleaſures but no paines, yea all the good that either thought can thinke, or will can wiſh? Moreouer, is it not ſtrange that men ſhould bee blowne euery way with the blaſt of an earthly Prince, as to turne Turke at his command, or to buckle and bende the kneee to his pleaſure in any thing; like the bird called Cepphos, which is carried euery way with the winde, and yet to

ſtand like ſtockes at Gods command, to mooue nothing at all, or at the leaſt not to remoue? Is it not ſtrange that many, which dare no more withſtand the word of a king, then the ſhippe,
                  Act. 27. 15. that Paul was in, could (antophthalmein) outlooke or withſtand the ſtormie winde Euroclydon,
               antipiptete yet are nothing afraid with browes of braſſe to outface and reſiſt, yea to ruſh againſt the Spirit of GOD in the miniſtery of his Prophets,
                  Act. 7. 51. as Saint Steuen ſaid the rebellious Iewes did. A King ſaith to his ſubiect,For the breach of euery commandement and exhortation is eternal death ſearch, or thou dieſt for it: he ſearcheth. The King of Kings ſaith to all his ſubiects, ſearch or yee die, yea the death of ſoule and body: verie few regard what he ſaith, as if either he ieſted with them, or as thogh the mouth of his mercie were ſo wide, that it both could and would ſwallow vp his iuſtice for a little of their lip-labour, in a fit of ſickneſſe, or when they are to ſhake handes with the worlde; which argueth a fearefull diſtemper in their ſoules,

euen a ſpirituall Apoplexy, which hath depriued them of all true ſenſe and motion, as if they were poſſeſſed with the ſpirits of thoſe, whom Iſaiah ſaith,
                  Iſa. 28. 1
                     •
                  
                had made a couenant with Death, and an agreement with hell: or at the leaſt, caſt in the ſame mould with many deſolute and vngracious youths, who hauing exceeding kinde and affectionate parents or friendes, doe play vpon them in hope of pardon, abuſing their leuitie to the ſatisfaction of their owne Iuſt, preſuming vpon their milde & gentle diſpoſition.
                  
                     Ʋſe 2. Gal. 1. 4. Rom. 12. 2
            
            But we (beloued) being redeemed out of the world, muſt not faſhion our ſelues vnto the world. Wouldſt thou know thy ſelfe? then ſearch thy ſelfe. Wouldſt thou try thy waies? then ſearch thy waies. The Iuſtice cannot examine a fellon, till hee be found. A man cannot weigh a thing in the ballance, except he haue the thing. Wouldſt thou repent of thy ſinnes and turne from them? then labour to know them, ſtriue to finde

them out.
                  Mat. 8. 9. Shall the Centurion in the Goſpell (being a man vnder the authoritie of an other, and hauing ſouldiers vnder himſelfe) command one to goe, and he goeth: an other to come, and he commeth: an other to doe this or that, and he doeth it? And ſhal the Lord, (who is ouer all, and vnder none) commaund vs to doe this or that, and ſhall we refuſe? Shall he bid vs ſearch? or ſhall hee ſay by his Embaſſadour, Let vs ſearch, and ſhall wee not ſearch? Know ye not,
                  Math. 12 50. 1. Theſſ. 4. 3. that he, which doeth the wil of God, is the brother, the ſiſter, yea and the mother of Chriſt Ieſus? Chriſt himſelfe did ſpeake it. But as the Apoſtle ſaith, this is the will of God, euen your ſanstification: ſo ſay I, this is the wil of God, euen the ſearching of your waies. God doth will it, then let not vs nill it. God doth affect it, therefore let vs effect it. Shall the wicked hunt after the godlye as a Partrich vpon the mountaines?2. Sam. 26 7. 2. Shall wicked Saul ſeeke, for Dauid to kill kim, ſo ſoone

as he had intelligence whe
                  •
               e he had hid himſelfe, notwithſtanding the Lord had forbidden murther? Shall cruel Herod bid the wiſe men ſearch diligently for our Lorde with a ſecret intention to m
                  •
               rther him?
                  Math. 2. 8 and ſh
                  •
               ll not wee ſeeke and ſearch diligently for our ſinnes, that we might ſac
                  •
               ifice & ſlaughter them,2. King. 25 as Iohn did the Prieſts of Baal? They had no commaun
                  •
               emen
                  •
               , we are 
                  •
               omma
                  •
               nded. T
                  •
               ey were forbidden, (I ſpeake not o
                  •
                
               Iehu) wee are bidden and exhorted. He which defireth to haue ei
                  •
               her good Bees, or good by his B
                  •
               es, muſt ſearch their Hiues, for ſpiders, waſpes, drones, and miſe: So if we would haue the graces of God to floriſh and ſwarm within vs, we muſt ſearch the Hiue of our hearts for ſinnes, which are as waſpes and ſpiders. Bruſh down the ſpinner-webs of couetouſneſſe: kill the drones of lazineſſe: driue away infidelitie & inordinate cares, which robbe God of his honour: (which ſhould be performed in the

temple of our ſpirits) and troubleth the ſpirit of God, which as a Bee worketh within vs, building, breeding & refining. If the king ſhould not view and ſearch his Ports, neither by himſelfe nor by his Miniſters, they might come to be as well harbours for Pyrates, as hauens for honeſt Merchants: ſo if we wil not ſearch and ſuruey our hearts, they wil be rather hog-ſties for ſinne & Sathan, then houſes for the holy Ghoſt. If the chanell of the hauen bee not ſometimes ſearcht, and if ſtraight paſſages amōgſt Syres and Sands be not ſounded and well obſerued, there will bee many ſhipwrackes and loſſes, which with wiſdome and labour might haue bene preuented: euen ſo, if wee doe not ſearch our hearts, and ſound them with the line of Gods lawe, and the plummet of his word, with a faithfull heart, a painefull hand, and a diligent care, and if we doe not obſerue and note our courſe and compaſſe, all our rodes, & all our waies,

the ſhippe of our conſcience will be ſo torne and crazed, that it will eyther not at all, or very hardly bee brought into the hauen. Let vs therfore, as we reſpect the voyce of the cryer, as wee regard the fauour of God, as wee either tender our welfare, or feare the ſhipwracke of conſciences, yea the euerlaſting loſſe of our ſoules and bodies: let vs in the feare of God, make conſcience of this duty. There is no dallying with edged tooles, there is no ieſting with God. Be not deceiued, God is not mocked, neither will hee be abuſed.
                  Gal. 6. 7 And ſo much for this firſt leſſon: a ſecond followeth.
            It is not ſufficient for vs to ſearch our waies,Doct. 2.
                but wee muſt ſearch them narrowly. For the word Search, ſignifieth to ſearch by vncouering and making things naked, that are ſecret & hidden; as if a man ſhould ſearch for golde, in the mine, being in the bowells of the earth, where there is much earth, but little golde oare. Thereby ſhewing, that ſinne is crept

into corners, and lieth cloſe in the marow, and lurketh like a ſerpent in the bones, and that our waies (being many) are not eaſily diſcerned; like the way of a bird in the aire, of a fiſh in the water, or a moule in the earth. This made Dauid cry out in the 19. Pſalme,
                  Pſ. 19. 12. 
               Who can vnderſtand his faults? clenſe mee from my ſecret ſinnes. And Salomon ſaith,
                  Ec. 7. 31. that God made man righteous, but they haue found out Many Inuentions; euen ſo many deuiſes, & ſo many waies, as exceed in number the haires of their heads, and the ſtarres of the heauen. Therfore hee that would know and try his waies aright, and repent as hee ought, muſt very diligently ſearch and view them, prying into all the corners of his heart, and obſeruing all the courſes of his life. There be foure ſtrong reaſons, which ſhould moue vs to performe this duty. Firſt, mans heart is a mine of deceit, and a ſea of ſubtilty, and therefore vnleſſe he dig deepe into it, and diue low, or ſound it to the bottome, he is

very like to beguile himſelfe, thinking all is wel, when nothing is wel. Many mens heartes are like many Quag-mires, which are rotten ground within, and yet ſeeme ſolid earth aboue: and like the painted ſepulchres,
                  Matt. 23. 17. which our Sauiour ſpeakes of, faire without, but foule within; therefore if we looke but on the outſide of our hearts, we may be deceiued. Secondly, the times are ſo corrupt and vicious, and ſinne is growne ſo ſhameleſſe (like a ſtrumpet) and yet ſo ſubtill (like a ſerpent or ſophiſter) as that if we ſearch not very circumſpectly and iudiciouſly, we ſhall paſſe by many vices, which lie cloſe couered vnder the names of vertues; like ſome young hunters that bauke the hare, thinking they ſaw nothing but a clot. Couetouſneſſe is counted good husbandrie: drunkenneſſe goes for good fellowſhip: pride is counted cleanlineſſe: Machiauilianiſme is reputed policie: vſury of many is thought but thrift: painting of faces is pleaded

for: Plaies (though laſciuious) are defended: ſwaggering and ſwearing are made the markes of noble ſpirits: yea what ſin is ſo vile, which is not eyther made of or minſed? yea there be many works that men doe, which are good as concerning their outward ſubſtance, and glorious in appearance, and yet euill in the doer, being done without faith and for ſiniſter reſpects, and therefore abhominable in the eies of God; ſomething like the fruite which groweth neare to the Dead Sea,
               Mare m
                     •
                  rtuum. which being ripe, maketh a faire ſhew, but within is full of cinders or aſhes, as ſome do write. Wherefore if wee ſearch but ſuperficially and not throughly, we ſhall take and embrace euill for good, as Ixion did the cloud for Iuno. And becauſe ſinne is become ſo wily, as that it preſents it ſelfe vnto vs in the habit of the harmleſſe ſheepe, beeing in heart a wolfe, we muſt deſire God to open our eyes, and take away the web of ignorance. For if we want

the eye of the mind (which is knowledge) as Izhak wanted the eyes of his body: ſurely,Gen. 27.
                as he beſtowed his bleſſing vpon the younger in ſtead of the elder, vppon Iacob in ſtead of Eſau, ſo wee ſhall ſet our heart amiſſe, and beſtow our bleſſing wrong, taking vice for vertue, becauſe it comes diſguiſed.
            Thirdly, we had need ſearch our waies very ſurely, becauſe the ſeede of all ſinnes is ſowen in our hearts & there hath taken roote, and ſhall not till wee die be altogether conſumed. Now if our hearts be polluted, our waies cannot bee pure. For if the fountaine be bitter, the brooke cannot be very ſweete: and if the roote be corrupted, the branches fare the worſe. When men call to minde the murther of Caine, the churliſhnes of Nabal, the vnnaturall ambition of Abſolon, the wickedneſſe of Haman, the cruelty of Herod, the malice of the Iewes, the treaſon of Iudas, the blaſphemies of Iulian, & the barbaritie of thoſe ſauage Romaniſts that

would haue blowne vp the Parliament houſe,
                  An. 1605. they do condemne and accuſe them to the pit of hell from whence they came. Beloued, there is in vs by nature an inclination vnto all theſe ſinnes, and a thouſand other; therefore we muſt obſerue our waies very narrowly, leaſt wee ſhould be ouertaken, or if we finde pollution in them, that wee may in time redreſſe them. If a king knew certainly that there were traytours in all the quarters of his kingdome, which plotted his death and the deſtruction of his Kingdome, hee would bee very wary how or where he walked, and he would be as induſtrious in ſearching out his enemies. If a man knew the
                  •
               e were ſome in his houſe that would (if they could) cut his throate and robbe him, he would be very circumſpect. If a Cittie had certaine intelligence that there were ſome in the towne, that would either fire it ouer theyr heads, or betray it (if it were poſsible) to their enemies, ſurely they would not be ſecure, but would vſe

all meanes poſsible to finde them out. Verily (beloued) we are peſtered with enemies. Our waies are many, our workes are many, and not one of all theſe, no not the beſt, but it is polluted with ſome ſinne or other. So many ſinnes as a man hath, ſo many enemies he hath to the ſaluation of his ſoule:
                  Ro. 6. 23. for the waies of ſinne is death. But our hearts, our heads, our hands, yea all the powers of our ſoules, are tainted with ſinnes, all which conſpire againſt vs with Sathan, to worke the eternall deſtruction of our ſoules & bodies. Therfore it ſtands vs vpō to vſe all diligence to find thē out.
            Fourthly, wee are by God commaunded to keepe our hearts With all diligence,
               
                  Pro. 4. 23 which wee can neuer doe, vnleſſe we view them throughly, and ſearch our waies with exceeding care. How can a Gouernor of a Cittie keepe and defend it in the time of warre, when the enemies do begirt it, vnles he haue a narrow eye vnto all the in-rodes and out-rodes

of his ſouldiers, and to the behauiour of the townes-men. So we ſhal neuer defende the Caſtles of our ſoules, and preſerue them from battery, and being taken, hauing ſo many enemies within vs, without vs; before and behinde, yea on euery ſide, vnleſſe we doe well obſerue the in-rodes of our ſenſes, the out-rodes of our affections, the flight of our thoughtes, the cries of our conſciences, the workes of our handes, and the waies of our feete, Otherwiſe we may as ſoone keepe a foe to moleſt vs, as a friend to maintaine vs: a Iudas to betray vs, as a Ioſeph to befriend vs: a falſe-hearted Dalila, as a faithfull Ionathan. Wherefore (brethren) as we either reſpect the glory of God, or deſire our own peace and proſperitie, let vs make conſcience of this dutie. Shal many men take paines to commit wickedneſſe,
                  Ier. 9. 5. and ſhall not wee take paines to pleaſe God by dooing of his will?1. Pet. 2. 15. But as Peter ſaith, This is the will of God, that by well doing

yee may put to ſilence the ignorance of fooliſh men. So I ſay, this is the will of God, that by diligent ſearching of your waies, ye may be prepared to repent of your ignorance, and to forſake all your follies, and ſo to ſtop the mouth of your accuſing conſciences, and ſilence thoſe that condemne your profeſſion for your notorious vices. Know ye not that all the duties of Chriſtianitie muſt bee performed with zeale and diligence? Hee that requires a ſound conuerſion, cannot away with ſlack and ſlothfull ſearching. Wee muſt ſtriue to enter in at the ſtrait gate,
                  Mat. 7. 13 if wee will be partakers of heauenly glorie: euen ſo wee muſt ſtriue to finde out our waies, if we deſire eyther to walke aright in the way of life, or to change our waies if they tend to death.
                  Prou. 27. 23. Muſt men (as Salomon aduiſeth) bee diligent to know the ſtate of their flockes, and muſt they take heede to their heards? and doth it beſeeme vs to neglect the knowledge of our waies, and to be careleſſe

in keeping of our hearts? Shall we roll euery ſtone, and vſe the vtmoſt meanes to raiſe our ſelues in this world; and ſhall wee not vſe this firſt meanes, that wee may be reclaimed to God in this world, and may bee raiſed by him in the worlde to come? No pardon, no peace: no penitencie, no pardon: no repentance, no remiſſion. And doe we thinke to repent of our waies before wee know them? And is it poſsible to know them without faithfull ſearching of them? What is the cauſe men turne ſo much, and returne ſo little?Mouent non pro mouent. What is the reaſon, that men moue ſo faſt, but moue not forward? Surely, one reaſon is, becauſe they do not vnderſtand their ſtate aright, which no man can attaine vnto, without accurate and faithfull ſearching of his waies. Hee that would know the cauſe why his corne thriueth not, why his vines flouriſh not, and why his trees proſper not, muſt ſearch diligently for weedes, for ſuperfluous branches, and other annoyances.

So he that would know, why hee groweth not in grace, and thriueth not in knowledge: why he doth either goe backward, as the ſhadow did in the diall of Ahaz,
               
                  Iſa. 38. 8. Ioſ. 10. 13 Pſa. 19. 5. or ſtand ſtill as Ioſhuas, ſunne did, and not goe forwardes as Dauids did, which commeth forth as a bridegrooms out of his chamber, and roioyceeh like a mighty man to run his race, hee muſt diligently ranſacke his heart, and ſearch his waies, and ſo he ſhall perceiue the reaſon, and diſcerne the lets. Therefore (beloued) as wee deſire the grounds of our harts ſhould bee fertill, the vine of Gods graces ſhould ſpread, and the tree of our ſoules ſhould flouriſh: as wee deſire the peace of conſcience, and that we ſhould returne to God, and God to vs, let vs with all fidelitie, ſearch and finde out our waies. For though it be no cauſe to worke it, no merit to deſerue it, yet is it by the bleſsing of God, a notable furtherance and preparation; euen the firſt ſtone towards our ſpirituall building, and

the firſt ſtep to the true conuerſion of our hearts and mindes vnto God. And this ſhall ſuffice for the firſt branch of the Prophets exhortation. The ſecond followeth. And trie our waies.
               Doct. 3.
                The originall worde of that which is tranſlated (Trie) ſignifieth to ſearch out, trie, or examine to the ground or bottom of a thing. Whence I conclude, that wee ought to the vtmoſt examine and proue all our waies▪ whether they be foule or faire, right or wrong. And here I will firſt ſhewe why wee ought to make this triall, and then by what. For the firſt; this triall is a meanes of thankfulneſſe. For if after ſerious examination, wee doe finde them good, we ſhall be ſtirred vp to magnifie the name of God, for directing our 
                  •
               eete aright in the paths of his precepts, and for preſeruing vs from falling downe and wandring out. If we finde them euill, yet then we ſhall be prouoked to praiſe him for ſparing of vs, and not taking vs away in our ſins, as we did deſerue,

A ſeruant or child cannot but commend his maiſters, and his father
                  •
                leuitie, that with patience doth bear his offences, and forbeare to puniſh him, as he hath tranſgreſſed. So we, that are the ſonnes and ſeruants of the Lord, cannot (if there bee but one graine of grace within vs) but extoll his loue and long-ſuffring towards vs, in bearing with our ſinnes, and ſparing of his iudgements, farre otherwiſe, then by triall of our waies, we finde that wee could either merit or expect. And as the man, that conſidereth by day what daungers hee did eſcape by darke, is occaſioned to giue thankes to God for preſeruing of him: ſo when we ſhall duly conſider, how near we were to the pit of deſtruction, by reaſon of our ſinnes, and yet how fauourable God hath bene vnto vs (euen then when we could not ſee to walke aright) as that hee did not confound vs in our waies, wee are occaſioned and prouoked alſo to glorifie the name of God for

moderating his iuſtice towards vs▪
            
            Secondly, the true triall of our waies will be a meanes to further our ſeeking of God, and his grace. For when a man after triall perceiueth his tickle eſtate by ſinne, hee is prepared (if not prouoked) to ſeeke out for ſafe deliuerance. As a man perceiuing the danger of his diſeaſe ſeeketh to the skilfull Phiſitian for a remedie: ſo when a man by diligent and faithfull ſearching and examination of his waies, ſhall diſcerne his defectes, and the daungerous diſeaſes of his ſoule, hee is incited to ſeeke to Chriſt the only true Phiſitian of our ſoules for cure. And as the ſwallow perceiuing her ſelfe almoſt blinde, preſently ſeeketh out the hearbe Celandine, and the Hart feeling himſelfe ſhot with arrow, doth (as ſome ſay) by & by run to the hearb Ditany, or Dictandor: ſo when a man findes himſelfe by trial almoſt blind with ſinne, and his ſoule ſtricken with the dartes of iniquitie, he is prepared

(if not perſwaded) to ſeeke out to Chriſt our Celandine, our Dictander, yea our Panacaea, which healeth all our ſpirituall maladies and diſeaſes; the Plethory of pride, th
                  •
                Conſumption of enuy, the Dropſie of Couetouſneſſe, the Phrenſie of anger, the Crampe of fearefulneſſe, the Lethargie of forgetfulneſſe, the Apoplexy of a dead and flinty ſpirite. Furthermore, as the King of ſome countrey, ſeeing the multititude of his enemies, both forrein and domeſticall, and perceiuing his inabilitie to withſtand or ouercome them (as it were) conſtrained to ſeeke for helpe to his neighbors abroad: ſo when the true Chriſtian man by trying of his heart and waies, ſhall perceiue his enemies to be both mighty and many, and himſelfe vnſufficient to conquer and ſubdue them, he is mooued to ſeeke abroad to his neighbour and elder brother Chriſt Ieſus, that ſo by the vertue of his death, and operation of his ſpirite, they may bee quelled

and ſubdued.
            Thirdly, this triall is a meanes to prepare a man for the worke of repentance, & returning from finne. Alſo the phiſitian by one receit prepares a way for an other: and as the Carpenter or Ioyner by one of his tooles procureth a way for an other: ſo the Phiſitian of our ſoules, and the great Carpenter of our ſpirituall building, by cauſing vs to proue our waies, prepareth vs to redreſſe them, and fitteth vs for further workes. The traueller perceiuing himſelfe to be out of his right way, doth preſently bethinke with himſelfe, how hee may come into it againe: ſo we that are trauellers and wayfaring men, perceiuing by true triall, that wee are not in our right way, are therevpon forthwith diſquieted, and moued to goe backe againe or ſearch it out. When a bird perceiues the daunger of the ſnare or net, ſhe ſeekes to flye away: ſo when the childe of God ſeeth what damage hee is like to ſuſtaine by

reaſon of his ſinfull courſes, which hee hath found out by faithfull examination, and what a net of vengāce he is like to haue caſt ouer him, hee dooth ſeeke to ſcape and get away.
            Fourthly, God hath two fannes: the one of his lawe, the other of his iudgements. God hath two fires: one of his worde, an other of his wrath. Hee that would not be fanned with the fan of his iudgements, muſ
                  •
                fanne himſelfe with the fanne of his law: and hee that would not bee burnt vppe with the fire of his wrath, muſt proue himſelfe in time with the fire of his word. Hee that trieth his waies, whether they bee good or euill, is very like to eſcape all danger: whereas he that ploddeth on, and neuer regardeth them, is like to ſtumble on the ſtones of vengeance, & fall vpon the ſtakes of Gods indignation, which are euery where laid and ſet in thoſe waies, which are not ſtrait and good.
                  Pro. 16. 2. & 21. 2. To conclude this firſt point, All the waies of man
               
(ſaith Salomon) are cleane and right in his owne eyes:
                  Pro. 30. 12 and there is (as Agur affirmeth) a generation that are pure in their owne conceit, and yet there is no man liuing voide of ſinne. For as there is no mettall without ſome droſſe, and no body without ſome corruptiō:
                  Eccl 7. 22 ſo there is no ſoule without ſome ſinne, and no man ſo pure who hath not ſom pollution in him. Wherefore, ſeeing men are naturally giuen to ſooth vp themſelues, & to thinke better of their eſtate then reaſon requireth (for by nature the whole frame of our heartes is Onely euill continually,
               
                  Gen. 6. 5. and grace in this life doth but waſte and weaken nature, and not wholly conſume it) it is a thing both conuenient,
                  Rom. 7. 18. 23. commendable, and neceſſary to try our ſelues to the vtmoſt; as alſo all our waies, leaſt we doe deceiue our ſelues, thinking our condition ſafe and ſound, being in deede and truth (whatſoeuer in appearance) corrupt and wretched; like a fuzball (it may bee) which ſeemeth ſolid, but beeing broken or

trod vpon, doth ſtraightway vaniſh like a leame of lightning. And thus much cōcerning the reaſons which ſhould make vs try our waies. It remaineth now to ſhew by what wee ought to make our triall. For if a man meaſure with a wrong wand, and weigh with falſe weights, or a deceitfull ballance, hee ſhall delude himſelfe, and make but bad worke. If thou wouldeſt try thy waies by humane learning, it cannot truly tell thee what the nature and deſert of ſinne is in all reſpects: yea it maketh that ſometimes a vertue, which God eſteemeth but a vice. Secondly, if a man will bee tried by his companions, vndoubtedly (if they weare the cogniſance of the world, and bee of her ſtamping) they will perſwade him his ſtate is good, and that hee is a right good companion, though his caſe in deed be very vile and lamentable. If thou conſult with thine own fleſh, it will make thee beleeue all is well. It, like an vnruly iade cannot indure the reignes; and like many

malecontent and froward malefactours, cannot away with triall; therefore if it be iudge, it will neuer be condemned. If we will be tried by the church of Rome, ſhe wil teach vs that many mortall ſinnes are but veniall and trifles: ſhe will perſwade vs that murthering of Princes, rebellion, equiuocating (o
                  •
                lying) and many other horrible ſinnes, are in ſome caſe lawfull and laudable. Fiftly, if wee will try our waies by the waies of the world, & her children, then wee ſhall approue that as good which God de
                  •
               eſteth as moſt wicked, & condemne that as euil, which is very good and acceptable in the ſight of God. For the world is blind, and her iudgement is corrupt and partiall: her ſcoales are falſe, and her weights vnequall. Whence it is, that vertue oftentimes walkes on foote vpon the ground, when vice dooth ride vpon the horſe, and is reiected when that is receiued. Yea wee ſee the world like an Alcumiſt, hath made a vice of vertue, & turned vice

into a vertue; ſo as that the profeſsion of vertue, is reputed ignominious, and derided of the world; therefore ſhe can be no competent iudge. Sixtly, if wee will try our eſtate by the Diuell, Who is a lyar,
               
                  Ioh. 8. 44. hee will eyther perſwade vs that our caſe is deſperate, when yet there is hope in reſpect of Gods mercy, and Chriſts merits: or elſe he will whiſper in our eares, that all is well, when in truth our condition is very pitifull, and with teares to be deplored. And this Lullabee hee ſingeth vſually to the witch, till ſhe come to the ſtake, and to the carnall man, till hee come to his graue, and ſo rockes them faſt a ſleepe in the cradle of ſenſuall ſecurity. He ſpeakes all for his owne aduantage, and therefore his ſentence is to bee reiected and exploded. By what then muſt wee trie our waies? euen by the commandements and ordinances of the Lord. For they declare vnto vs the will of God, and ſhew vs what wee are to will, and what to nill: what to loue,

and what to leaue: what to perform, and what to paſſe by. Theſe will teach vs, when and howe to walke: when we are to ſit, & when to ſtand: when to reſt, and when to riſe and run. Theſe will guide vs aright, and ſhew vs when wee are wrong. For the ſtatutes of the Lord are right, & his commandements giue light vnto the eyes.
               
                  Pſal. 19. 8. 11. Pſal. 119. 104, 105. Pſal. 119. 144, 151. By them are his ſeruants made circumspect, and purchaſe vnderſtanding. Thy word (ſaith Dauid) is a lanterne vnto my feete, and a light vnto my paths, the righteouſneſſe of thy teſtimonies is euerlaſting, and all thy commandements are true. Gods precepts muſt be our practiſe▪ and his law muſt bee the line of our obedience. His word muſt bee the rule of our workes, and the determiner of all our waies. All is not gold which gliſters: all coine that hath Caeſars image vpon it, is not currant, but ſometimes counterfet: neither is all good corne, that ſo ſeemeth. Wee muſt therefore take vnto vs the Touch-ſtone of Gods word, and

the Fanne of his law, and make our triall by them; and ſo wee ſhall diſcerne which is gold, & which is gilded copper; which is of Gods owne ſtamping▪ and which hath come from the Mint-houſe of our fleſh, and from the forge of the diuell, and which is good and cleane wheate, and which corrupt and chaffie.
            The conſideration of theſe points,
                  Ʋſe 1.
                teacheth vs in the firſt place, to bee carefull to know and vnderſtand all the commandements of God, legall, and Euangelicall; becauſe by theſe we muſt prooue our waies, as malefactours are tried by the Law.
                  Pſal. 119. 15. 18. 
               Dauid ſaith, I wil meditate in thy precepts, and conſider thy waies. Open my eyes that I may ſee the wonders of thy Law,
               
                  Pſal. 119. 24, 64, 73 
               and teach me thy ſtatutes. Thy testimonies are my delight, and my counſellers. Giue me vnderſtāding, that I may learn thy commandements. Shall we labour to know the lawes of men, & to 
                  ••
               
               derſtand the ſecrets of nature? and ſhall wee not labour to learne Go
                  ••
                law, and to vnderſtand the ſecr
                  •
               t
                  •
               
               
thereof? Shall we get ſtones to trie our golde, whether it be pure mettall, or but baſe? and ſhall we haue ſcales and weights to proue whether it bee light or weightie? And ſhall we not get the knowledge of Gods worde, that wee may proue our waies? It will ſhew vs their nature, and is able to ſound our hearts to the bottome. Therefore all ignorant perſons are farre frō the performance of this weightie dutie.
            
               Vſe. 2.
               Secondly, the conſideration of theſe thinges, ſerueth to conuince and condemne the multitude of negligence and frowardneſſe. Some cannot trie their waies, becauſe they want the eye of vnderſtanding, and the true touchſtone of of all truth and falſhood, of vice and vertue: therefore though they ſometimes attempt to trie theyr waies, yet becauſe their eyes are out, and geſſe by groping, as Iſaac did in an other matter, they are vſuallye (if not alwayes) deceiued,

as well (or rather worſe) then hee.
            Some againe will not make this triall; like many men that haue run long & much on the ſcore, & cannot endure to heare of a reckoning. Thirdly, there are ſome that dare not view the Lawe,Occultum quatiente auimo tortore flagellū, Iuuen. it ſeemes vexed with the gripes of a guiltie conſcience, and poſſeſſed with the ſpirit of ſlauiſh feare; like the Elephant, who being guiltie to his owne deformitie, cannot abide to ſee his face in faire water: and like ſlaues, that being afraide of the whip, cannot endure to haue theyr offences ſcanned, or themſelues examined. Finally, ſome will indeede trie their waies, but not throughly, onely coldly and ouerly: and ſome will trie one way, but not an other: ſome, but not all. Whereas the Prophet exhorteth vs to make an exact and perfect triall of all, and not of ſome onely, and therefore he ſaith; Let vs trie our wayes,
               Vſe. 3.
                and not way, or ſome of them.
            
               Wherefore (brethren) let vs vſe all care and conſcience in this dutie. Let vs learne to knowe Gods will, and labour to vnderſtand his commaundements, and withall, let vs faithfully try All our waies, ſo neare as is poſſible by them. Wouldeſt thou ſee the face of thy ſoule? then behold it in the Glaſſe of Gods lawe, and thou ſhalt eaſily perceiue whether it be faire or foule, whether pale or freſh? Wouldeſt thou diſcerne the bottome of thy heart, whether it be cleare and grauelly, or muddie and clammy? ſound it with the long line of Gods lawe, & with the weightie plummet of his precepts, and thou ſhalt obtaine thy deſire. Wouldeſt thou know the condition of thy waies? then meaſure them with the met-wand of his word, and examine them by the old and auncient way of the faithfull Patrairkes and Prophets, chalked out in the ſacred ſcriptures. Wouldeſt thou turne out of by-pathes, and walke aright, and with an euen

foote? then view thy waies with diligence. I haue conſidered my waies (ſaith Dauid) and turned my feete vnto thy testimonies. Surely,
                  Pſ. 119. 59. that man which proueth his waies aright, is in the high way to heauen, and in a faire forwardneſſe, to make a ſound conuerſion. Now hee proueth his waies aright, that doth it ſincerely, cheerefully, diligently, maturely, conſtantly, and in conſcience of Gods commaundement, deſiring pardon in the name of Chriſt, for the imperfection of his worke, and ſtriuing daily to amend it. And thus much for this third Doctrine.Doct. 4.
                A fourth followeth. In that Ieremy ſaith, Let VS ſearch and trie our waies. I gather firſt, that no place or priuiledge, no calling or diſcent whatſoeuer, can exempt a man from the performance of this dutie. Theſe were Iſraelites, the ſeede of Abraham, men of diuers ages & degrees, and himſelfe a Prophet. The yoke of Gods commaundements is lai
                  •
                vpon euery necke. And why ſhould

not gold be tried as well as meaner mettall?
            
               Doct. 5.
               2. I conclude againe, that pouertie, penury, croſſes and calamities muſt not ſo diſmay vs, as that wee doe forget, or ſhould thinke it too late to ſearche and examine our waies, as if God had vtterly caſt vs off. Theſe people were in extreame diſtreſſe.
                  Lam. 1. 1. 3. Lam. 2. 2, 11, 12, 20, 
                     •
                  1. 
               Ieruſalem was become a tributary. Iudah was carried away captiue. All the habitions of Iacob were deſtroied. Their children and ſucklinges ſwooned in the ſtreetes, and periſhed in their mothers boſom through hunger. The women were conſtrained to eate their owne children. The olde men lay in the ſtreetes, the young men and virgins were ſlaine with the ſword.
                  Lam. 4. 4. The tongue of the ſucking childe claue to the roofe of his mouth for thirſt.5. They that were brought vp in ſcarlet, embraced the dung.10. The hands of the pittifull women, did ſeethe their owne children for meate. They

dranke their water for money,
                  Lam, 5. 4, 5, 12, 14. and their neckes were vnder perſecution. Their Princes were hanged vp, and their Elders were diſgraced. All the pallaces of Iſrael were conſumed.
                  Lam. 2. 5, 15. 
               Ieruſalem was hiſſed at. All their enemies barked againſt them. The Temple of the Lord was prophaned.
                  Lam. 3. 46 Lam. 2. 7, 20. Lam. 4. 16 The Prophets were ſlaine in the ſanctuary. No mercie was ſhewed to the Elders, and no reuerence giuen to the Prieſtes. Yet notwithſtanding all this their miſerie, the Prophet exhorts them to ſearche and trie theyr wayes, and to returne vnto the Lorde; thereby ſhewing, that there was hope of recouerie, and no time paſt, to ranſacke and reforme themſelues. For the Lorde is rich in loue, the doore of his grace, and the bowels of his mercie, are neuer ſhut vp againſt the penitent.
                  Pſ. 145. 9. Pſ. 89. 32, 33. His mercie is ouer all his workes, and hee will not alway chide, neither is his loue remoued from his children, when hee

doth viſit their tranſgreſsiō with the rod, & their iniquitie with ſtrokes. Therefore no affliction (how grieuous ſoeuer) muſt daunt our ſpirits, and dull the edge of our courages, and make vs abſtaine from the performance of theſe workes, as if all labour herein were ſpent in vaine.
            
               Doct. 6.
               3. Furthermore, hence I gather, that euen thoſe which are actually conuerted & regenerated, had need to ſearch and trie their waies, and may very wel be exhorted therevnto. The Prophet was a holy man of God, not onely by vertue of his ſpeciall calling, by being a Prophet ſanctified and ſet apart for the ſeruice of God, but alſo in reſpect of his generall calling; for without doubt he was the child of God, and ſo no queſtion were ſome of thoſe, to whom he ſpeaketh. The Romanes and Corinthians were many of them truly ſanctified,
                  Rom. 1. 7. 1 Cor. 1. 2 Rom. 15. 14. 15. yet Paul beſtoweth many exhortations vpon them, and ſome not much vnlike to this. There is no riuer without

ſome mud,1. Ioh. 1. 8 no way without ſo
                  •
               e mire, dirt or duſt: ſo there is no man without ſome corruption, and no mans way voyde of all vncleaneneſſe; therefore euery man (how good ſoeuer) had neede to ſearch himſelfe and proue his waies. Furthermore, as there is no ground ſo fat, which may not ſometimes bee wel watered with a ſhowre of rain: ſo there is no mans heart ſo fertill, but may abide the ſweet and wholſome dewe of heauenly exhortations. Is there any vine without ſome ſuperfluous ſprig, or any tree without a water-branch? ſo there is no vine in Gods vineyard, no plant in all his Orch-yard here vppon the earth, but hath his fault.1. Ki. 8. 46 
               For there is no man (as Salomon affirmeth) that ſinneth not. Now godly exhortations are as pruning kniues to lop off the ſuperfluous braunches of ſinne, and as the riuer Nilus is to part of Aegypt, ſo theſe muſt be as manure to fatten, and as water to moyſten the barren and drie grounds of our

hearts. Which things no doubt ſhall be effected by them, if it pleaſe the Spirit of God to open the pores of of our ſoules to receiue them in, and the bleſſed Sonne of righteouſneſſe to ſhine vpon vs with the beames of his loue, and to warme vs with the heate of his grace. Wherefore we ought with all reuerence and obedience, both heare, and beare the word of exhortation.
            
               Doct. 7.
               Laſtly, from this word (vs) I conclude, from the Prophets example, who includeth himſelfe in this exhortation, that it is fit and commendable in the Miniſter (though hee ſtand in the roome of Chriſt) ſometimes to include himſelfe in his exhortations.2. Cor 5. 20 Though it be lawfull to ſay with Dauid, Examine your owne heart:
                  Pſal. 4. 4. and with Paul, Let euery man examine himſelfe; yet it is neither vnlawfull, nor vncommendable for vs to ſay alſo with Ieremy; Let vs ſearch and examine our waies. For firſt, Miniſters are way-faring men as well as others; ſecondly, they are ſubiect

to erring as well as other men.
                  Iam. 5. 17. 
               Helias was (as Iames ſaith) ſubiect to ſuch paſſions, as other of Gods children are. Peter ſinned, as other pro
                  •
               eſſors did. Thirdly, by this meanes, their exhortations will be more forcible; ſeeing they perſwade them to do no worſe, then they eyther would, or ſhould doe themſelues. Laſtly, ſhall the wicked ſay to a man, Come with vs, caſt in thy lot among vs,
               
                  Prou 1. 11. 14. Prou. 7. 18 Pſ. 64. 5. 
               wee will lay waite for blood? Shall the harlot ſay, Let vs take our pleaſure in dalliance? Shall vngodly men exhort and incourage one an other to commit wickedneſſe, and ſhall not the godly Miniſter animate & exhort himſelfe with others, to doe that which is commanded of God, commendable among men, and comfortable to the conſcience? Hee that ſpeaketh not vnto himſelfe, as well as to an other, is eyther like a clocke, that tells the time for others; or like a marke in the way, which rotteth it ſelf, whiles it ſtands to direct others. Therefore, as Iacob ſet party-coloured

rods before the ſheep,
                  Gen. 30. 37, 38, 39. that they might bring forth young of party colour, and ſo they did: ſo let all Miniſters ſet before their eyes the practiſe of this Prophet, that they may walke in his ſteps, and do as he hath done before them. And thus much for this ſeuenth inſtruction.
            
               Doct. 8.
               Moreouer, though the Prophet knew full well that God had ordeined and ordered all things in an eternall and immutable decree, and therefore had eternally determined who ſhould ſearch and try their waies and turne to God, and who ſhould not; yet he doth exhort them all indifferently to the performance of this duty. Gods counſell muſt not make them lazie, his decree muſt not make them doe nothing, or keep the Prophet from preaching to thē. For as he hath decreed the end, ſo he hath determined the meanes & way thereunto. As hee hath ordeined a mans ſaluation, ſo hath he ſubordeined his conuerſion, calling, and iuſtification. As he hath eternally ſet

downe, who ſhall turne vnto him, ſo he hath eternally ſet downe, that hee ſhall ſearch and examine his waies. God did meane that Paradice ſhould be a fatte and fruitefull place, and therefore he prouided a riuer to water it,
                  Gen. 2. 10 which went out of Eden. God had decreed that the wals of Iericho ſhould be caſt downe, and ſo withall, for the effecting of his purpoſe, he did appoint that ſeuen Prieſts ſhould ſounde ſeuen trumpets,
                  Ioſh 6. 4▪ 3 and that all the people ſhould ſhout very loude, and ſo the walls ſhould fall flat downe. So God hath decreed that his Church ſhuld be a faire and fruitfull Garden: and to this purpoſe he hath appointed, that it ſhoulde bee watered with wholſome exhortations, and hath appointed his miniſters to keepe and dreſſe it. God hath from all eternitie purpoſed that the gates of hell, and walles of ſinne, ſhould in ſome be flung from their hinges, and ſhaken to the ground: and to effect his purpoſe, hee hath commanded

               
                  •
               is Prophets and Miniſters to ſound out the 
                  •
               rumpet of his law and goſpel, at the ſound whereof he raiſeth the dead f
                  •
               om the graue of ſinne, and dri
                  •
               eth downe (when and in whom he pl
                  •
               aſe
                  •
               h) the 
                  •
               owers of pride, the bulwarks of concupiſence, the caſtles of iniq
                  •
               i
                  •
               y, & ſorely ſhaketh (if not ſhiuereth) all the muniments and foretreſſes of the diuell.
            
               
                  Ʋſe 1.
               Firſt therefore, let all Gods Miniſte
                  •
               s, with this holy Prophet, remember to performe their office, notwithſtanding the immutabilitie of Gods eternall counſell.
            
               Vſe 2.
               Secondly, let all men be careful to vſe the meanes, as wel as they are deſirous to attaine vnto the end; for otherwiſe they may iuſtly feare the wo
                  •
               ſt. For the holy Ghoſt faith, that the ſonnes of Eli did not obey their fathers voice,1. Sam. 2. 25. 
               Becauſe the Lord would ſlay them Therefore, 
                  •
               f we ſha
                  •
               l contemne the counſell of the Prophet, it is to bee f
                  •
               ared, that God hath a purpoſe to take vs away in our ſins.
            
               Thirdly,
                  Ʋſe. 3.
                all thoſe prophane and godles wretches, are to be condemned, that caſt off all care of religion, and liue like monſters in the world. It is (they ſay) booteleſſe for them to ſearch, to try, to ſtriue to ſerue the Lord, conſide
                  •
               ing that their death or life is in the decree of God ſet down without poſſibility of alteration. This which they ſay, is both falſe & fooliſh: but it is an ill neede that wil grow on no ground. Fooliſh it is; for if they ſpeake the truth, they may as well expect to liue, and yet abſtaine from me
                  ••
               e & drinke. And it is as falſe as fooliſh; For as God hath decreed life and found repentance, ſo hee hath decreed faith, obedience, ſearching and examination of our waies. The holy Ghoſt teacheth, that Promotion commeth neither 
               
                  Pſ. 75. 6. 
               from the Eaſt, nor from the Weſt, nor from the South b
                     •
                  t 
               1. Chro. 2
                     •
                  . 12. 
               from the Lord: ſo he ſheweth that the way to riſe with comfort, is to honour God, to waite vpon him, and not to ſwer
                  •
               e from his waies. For 1. Sam. 
                  
                     •
                  .30. God will honour

thoſe that honour him, and wil 
                  Pſ. 37. 34 exalt thoſe that attende vpon him and keepe his way.
                  Act. 27. 22, 23, 31, 34, 43. 
               Paul aſſuredly knew that none of thoſe, that were in the ſhip with him ſhould periſh, yet hee did exhort them to receiue th
                  •
               ir meate, and told the Centurion and his ſouldiers, that if the ſhip-men ſtaied not in the ſhippe, they themſelus ſhould periſh: and when the ſouldiers afterwards were purpoſed to kill the priſoners, the Centurion moued by God, hindered their intent, & ſo all were preſerued. Therefore let no man thinke it needeleſſe to conuert, if God haue decreed his ſaluation, or labor loſt to ſearch and proue his waies, becauſe of the conſtant nature of Gods eternall counſell: but rather let him therefore vſe theſe meanes, that ſo hee may both ſhewe himſelfe ſubmiſsiue to this voyce of God, and gather aſſurance to himſel
                  •
               e, that hee is one of thoſe, whom God hath decreed to receiue to mercy. Doe wee thinke that the Prophet would haue exhorted vs to

doe it, if it had beene needleſſe? Are Gods commandements idle and vnprofitable? He that will liue, muſt labour: hee that deſireth health, muſt exerciſe his ioynts: he that would be learned, muſt vſe his wi
                  •
               s, and ſtudy: ſo hee that will bee ſaued, muſt repent: and he that would repent, muſt ſearch and trie his waies.
                  Pſ. 119. 9 If a young man would redreſſe his way, hee muſt look vnto it according to Gods word: and ſo if a young man would know whether his way bee good or euill, hee muſt examine it by his word. He that deſireth to know the diſpoſition of his friend, muſt trie him: ſo he that deſireth to know the affections of his hart, and the nature of his waies, muſt proue them, that he may doe with them,
                  Exod 4. 3. as Moſes did with his rod, which while it was a rod, hee kept it in his hand, and vſed it familiarly, but when it prooued a ſerpent, he ranne from it. He which neglecteth the meanes, barreth himſelfe of the end. Hee that will not worke in ſummer, is likely to ſtarue

in winter. To proceed, Let vs ſearch and try OVR waies.
            
            
               Doct. 9.
               Forſomuch as Ieremy requireth that wee ſhould ſearch and try our owne waies, I gather, that our principall and ſpeciall care and diligence muſt bee in learning to knowe our ſelues, and labouring to diſcerne our own courſes▪ He doth not ſay, ſearch thy neighbours way, but thine own: hee ſaith not, let vs try the waies of the Aſſyrians, Aegyptians, or Aethiopians, but let vs try our waies. So Dauid ſaith,
                  Pſal. 4. 4. Zeph. 2. 1. 
               Examine your owne heart vpon your hed▪ Zephaniah ſaith, Search your ſelues: and Paul ſaith, Let euery man examine himſelfe.
               1. Cor. 11. 28 2. Cor. 13. 15. And againe, Proue your ſelues whether yoe are in the faith; examine your ſelues: know yee not your ſelues, how that Ieſus Chriſt is in you, e
                     •
                  cept ye be reprobates? The ſaying is, Noſce te ipſum▪ Know thy ſelfe. And the Apoſtle ſaith,
                  Gal. 4. 4, 5 
               Let ouery man proue his owne worke, for euery man ſhall beare his owne burthen. Euerie ſoule muſt anſwere for his owne ſin.2. Cor. 5. 10. 
               Euery man muſt receiue the things

which are done in his owne body. It is wiſedome therefore for euery man to ſearch and examine his owne waies. Who can know thy waies ſo well as thy ſelfe? Who will bee ſo faithfull to thee as thy ſelfe? Egomet ſum proximus mihi: euery man is neereſt to himſelfe. Amor a ſeipſo, loue beginnes with a mans ſelfe: how can hee be faithfull to another, that is careleſſe of himſelfe? With what face can a man offer to take a moa
                  •
               e out of his brothers eye, hauing a great beame in his owne? How dareſt thou counſell they neighbour to ſearch and try his waies, and nothing regardeſt thine owne? What haſt thou to doe to take the word of exhortation into thy mouth, ſeeing thou hateſt to bee reformed, and haſt caſt the word of exhortation behinde thy backe? Why doeſt thou meddle with other m
                  •
               ns maladies, if thou neglect thine owne? Phiſitian, firſt learne to cure thy ſelfe.
            
               If a man lay but a very li
                  •
               tle obiect cloſe to his eye, it will ſo take vp his ſight, as that he ſhall not ſee many things a farre off: ſo if we would ſet our owne waies before our eies, and view them as we ought to doe, wee ſhould not bee ſo curious and cunning in ſearching other mens, If a mans houſe be on fire, as well (or rather ill) as his neighbours, queſtionleſſe he will not be ſo carefull for his neighbours, as that hee will be careleſſe of his owne. Our ſoules are on fire with ſinne: why then ſhould any man neglect himſelfe, and forget to quench his own, and beſtowe all his paines (if any at all) in ſlaking of his neighbours? Seeing our waies are as foule and as vneuen as our neighbours, why ſhould not our chiefeſt care bee to repaire & make ſtraight our owne, vnleſſe we had rather ſee our neighboures ſhooes cleaner then our owne? Is it vnſeemly for a Prince to be skilfull in the ſtate of forraine kingdomes, and either negligent or

ignorant of his owne? And is it ſeemely for vs to ſearch and examine the conditions of other men, and neuer to diſcuſſe our ſelues, and ſearch our owne? Euery man hath a Common-wealth within him, le
                  •
                him be moſt conuerſant and occupied in his owne. It is no point of good husbandrie for a man to acquaint himſelfe with his neighbors groundes, goods, corne or cattell, and to know neither the nature, the names, nor the number of his owne: therefo
                  •
               e Salomon ſaith,
                  Pro. 27. 23. 
               Bee diligent to knowe the ſtate of thy (thine owne) flocke, and not thy neighbours. Euen ſo, it is neither Chriſtian thrift, nor wiſedome to bee curious in prying into other mens waies, and laborious in iudging them, and to be obliuious or ignorant of our owne; and therefore Ieremy ſaith, Let vs ſearch and trie our (euen our owne) waies, euery man his owne waies by himſelfe. As euery ſhepheard lookes to his owne ſheepe, euery marriner to his

owne maſt, euery founder to his owne mettall: ſo let euery man looke to his owne waies. The wiſe virgins were carefull for their owne lampe
                  •
               : ſo let vs looke to our owne profeſſions. The Bee trims her owne h
                  •
               ue: ſo let vs dreſſe our own hearts. The bird frequenteth her owne neaſt. The Cony keepeth her owne burrow.
                  Pro. 31. 27 The good huſwife mindeth her owne houſe, and carrieth it about with her like a ſnaile: ſo we muſt haunt our owne hearts, and haue greateſt reſpect, and a moſt watchfull eye to our owne waies. The good heardſman chiefly ſearcheth his owne flockes. The good husbandman doth moſt of all ſea
                  •
               ch and trie the qualitie and nature of his owne ſoile: ſo we muſt chi
                  •
               fly husband, ſearch and examine our owne ſoules, our own affections, our owne workes, and our own waies. The Apoſtle ſaith, that hee that prouideth not for his owne,1. Tim. 5. 8 
               denieth the faith, and is worſe then an Infidell. So it may be truly

ſaide of him that dooh not ſearch and proue his owne waies, that hee dooth denie obedience vnto God, and is in a wretched condition, not able to prooue himſel
                     •
                  e better then a Pagan, ſetting aſide his outward profeſsion, and name of a Chriſtian, which ſtands him in no more ſtead, then for a ranke beggar to bee reputed rich; or for a man to bee intituled Emperour of all the world, and yet to want a houſe to ſhroud his head. Here then comes to be condemned the common cuſtome of many curious and captious perſons, that forget themſelues. & buſie themſelues in ſearching and examining their neighbours.
                  Pro. 7. 11. 
               Salomon ſaith of the harlo
                  •
               , that ſhe is bab
                     •
                  ing and loud and her feete cannot abide in her houſe. So theſe men delight in babling of other mens ſinnes, they are loud and ſhril in ſounding out the faults of others
                  •
               , and in cenſuring and taxing their waies, but they paſſe by themſelues, they loue not to tarrie within the doores of their owne

hearts. They will ſearch others to the quicke, and paſſe their verdict on their waies to the higheſt ſtraine of the Law, but in the meane time they meddle not with themſelues, or make but a very par
                  •
               iall triall. Theſe men like crowes, are beſt at eaſe, when they are feeding their corrupt humours vpon the carrion of other mens ſins, or like the fleſh-flie, that alway delights to ſit vpon the ſoare. I taxe not the lawful ſearching and examination of other mens waies, made by the lawfull Magiſtrate, the godly Miniſter, the honeſt Maiſter, and religious parent, or of any other, that keepeth himſelfe within the liſts and limits of his calling. Onely this I ſay, let curious inquiſition bee abandoned: and let him that ſearcheth and trieth the waies of other men, be mindfull of his owne; leſt hee proue no better (at the beſt) then either the lanthorne, which beareth a light for others to ſee by:Caprificus. or the wilde fig-tree, which (as they ſay) giueth that to others,

which it hath not it ſelfe. So let him take heede, leſt hee be an occaſion and helpe to others for to repent by diſcouering their waies vnto them, & yet be through his own default the deſtruction of himſelfe, in that he did not diſcouer and ponder his owne. Thus much concerning the two former branches of the Prophets exhortation, which I beſeech you (brethren) be mindefull of. Shall the Oxe know his owner,
                  Iſa. 1.
                     •
                  . and the Aſſe his maſters crib, and ſhall wee be ignorant of our waies, and not know our ſelues? If wee would not, then we muſt ſearch and try them. Wouldſt thou haue the veſſell of thine heart clenſed of the lees of ſinne?
                  Ezek. 36. 25. As thou muſt get it rinſed with the clenſing water of Gods Spirit, ſo thou muſt ſearch and examine it thy ſelfe; or otherwiſe thou wilt not thinke it is ſo full of dregges and corruption as it is, and ſo will bee more ſecure then is meete.
            I proceed now to the third brāch,Doct. 10.
               
               
               And let vs turne againe vnto the Lord.
               Doct. 10.
                Whence I gather theſe two Doctrines. Firſt, that ſinnes ſets a man out of his right way, and makes him wander from the Lord: for hee that will haue fellowſhippe and fauour with God, is exhorted to turn from his ſinnes. Sinne doth vntune the ſtrings of the heart, and puts the limmes of the ſoule out of ioynt. It makes one ſtray like a ſheepe, and leades one from God to the diuell; from life to death, from heauen to hell. Therfore, though it ſometimes bring hony with it in the mouth, like a Bee, yet it neuer is without a ſting in the taile. For that which Salomon ſaith of the harlot, is m
                  •
               ſt true of ſin. Though it be as ſoft as oyle in the beginning, and as ſweete as the hony combe to the taſte of the ſinner,
                  Pro. 5. 4. 5. yet the end thereof is bitter as worme wood, and as ſharpe as a two edged ſword, the feete thereof goe downe to death, and the ſteps take hold on hell: it cauſeth many to fall downe wounded,Pro
                     •
                  . 26.
                and ſlaieth

the mightie, Wherfore then ſhould men delight in ſinne, and embrace the boſome of iniquitie?
            Secondly,Doct. 11.
                and ſo to conclude this text, from theſe words of the Prophet, I am taught to teach you, That it is not ſufficient for a man onely to ſearch and trie his waies, but he muſt alſo turne from them (if he find them wrong) and ſeriouſly repent himſelfe of them. For therefore we ſearch and trie them, that diſcerning them to be euill, we may forſake them. The ende of fiſhing is not angling, but taking; the ende of fowling, is catching; the ende of plowing is not working, but ſowing: ſo the ende of ſearching and prouing our waies, is, that we may repaire them, and and returne to God. Therefore when the wiſe man had ſaide,
                  Pro. 4. 26 27. 
               Ponder the path of thy feete: hee addeth immediately, And let all thy waies be ordered aright, turn not to the right hand, nor to the left, but remoue thy foot from euill. As the Seſsions and Aſsiſes are helde for the repreſsing of

enormities and iniuries, and for the ſuppreſsing of irregular and vicious perſons: ſo we hold this Aſsiſes in our ſoules, for the arraigning, enditing, examining, iudging and condemning of our ſinnes, that dying vnto ſinne, we may liue vnto God with peace of conſcience, and tranquilitie of minde. Secondly, if we doe onely ſearch and examine our waies, and proceed no further, we ſhal make our ſelues more inexcuſable, & encreaſe our condemnation. For if after the performance of theſe things, we ſhall perceiue our waies to bee our owne, and not the waies of God, and wil yet content our ſelues, and not ſeeke to mend them, we ſhall the more diſpleaſe his Maieſtie, we ſhal aggrauate our puniſhment, and make our ſelues more guiltie of our owne deſtructions. For it is not ſo much the cōmitting of ſin which condemns the ſinner, as the continuing in it, without conuerſion from it, being ſeene and knowne. If a man were fallen into

deepe dungeon or pit, & would not ſeeke to come forth, when he might be deliuered if he ſought in time, he makes himſelfe guiltie of his owne death. If a man by ſearching of his wounds, did perceiue the preſent and future daunger of them, and yet would hide them, and vſe no means to haue them cured, he may thanke himſelfe for his preſent paine, and future periſhing. If a man did either ſee or foreſee ſome ignominy, ruine or calamity would befall him, and yet would take no paines to remoue or preuent it, hee ſhould ſhew himſelfe vnwiſe, and careleſſe of his good. Beloued, what man ſoeuer ſhal examin & ſearch his waies, ſhal finde himſelfe to be in a dungeon of iniquitie by his nature,Sinne inuironeth or hemmeth a man about. Heb. 12. 1. he ſhal perceiue himſelfe to be inuironed with ſinne on euery ſide, he ſhall ſee his ſoule polluted with the leproſie of ſinne, and wounded with many deadly wounds: and he ſhall (if hee looke to the fruite and effect of them) plainely ſee, that nothing belongs

vnto him (by reaſon of the filthineſſe of his waies) but euerlaſting ſhame and confuſion. Therfore i
                  •
                hee will not ſeeke abroade for d
                  •
               liuerance in time, if the worſt doe fall (and ſurely no other can be with reaſon looked for of him) hee may thanke himſelfe, and ſay, that hee hath periſhed through his owne default. He ſaw the ſnare, and would not flie away: he perceiued the daunger, and would not ſeeke to preuent it: hee doth wittingly caſt himſelfe into the fire of Gods wrath, and runne vpon the pike of his owne deſtruction: ſhewing alſo, that he neither loued God, nor hated ſinne. He is a very ſtrange traueller, who profeſſeth that hee doth in earneſt purpoſe to go the next and neareſt way to London, and yet perceiuing himſelfe to bee out of his way, and ſeeing the right way, doth for all tha
                  •
                keepe on in a cleane contrarie way: Will not all men ſay, that he is either phrantique or fooliſh? So then if we would not

be reputed worſe then mad, when by the ſearching and triall of our waies, we find our ſelues to erre, let vs either turne into the right path, or elſe let vs not profeſſe that we intend to goe to Heauen.
            Wherefore (I pray you) doth Dauid ſpeake in this ſort, I thought I will take heede vnto my waies?
                  Pſ. 39. 1. Why doth he take this hede? euen that hee might Not ſinne with his tongue. Euen ſo, wherefore muſt men, or doe men ſearch and conſider their waies? ſurely, that they may turne from the euill of them vnto the Lorde. Had Paul no reſt in his ſpi
                  •
               it, when he was in Troa
                     •
                  ,
               2. Cor. 2. 13. becauſe hee found not his brother Titus there, but preſently departed and went away?In vtram
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   aurem 
                     •••
                  mire. and is it fit that any man ſhould be rechleſſe and at quiet with himſelfe, when after inquiſition and examination of his waies, hee findeth not his elder brother Chriſt Ieſus in them, but onely ſinne and ſinfulneſſe, and when hee cannot ſay, as Paul ſaith

of himſelfe to the Romanes,
                  Rom. 7. 23 
               I ſee an other lawe in my members, rebelling againſt the law of my minde: but more truly (it may bee) as Peter ſaide to Simon Magus,
               
                  Act. 8. 21. 23. 
               Thine heart is not right in the ſight of God, I ſee that thou art in the gall of bitterneſſe, and in the bond of iniquitie? Is there not therefore cauſe ſufficient to make them mooue one foote further, and to adde turning to their ſearching?
            The end of the firſt Sermon.
         
         
            
            THE SECONDE SERMON.
            The Text: Let vs turne againe.
            
               I Am now come to ſpeake of this laſt dutie, whervnto we are exhorted by the Prophet. And here I wil ſhew who muſt turn, from what they muſt turne, to whom they muſt turne, in what and wherin they muſt turne, when they muſt turne, how they muſt turne, and why they muſt turne. Of theſe ſeuen points I meane to ſpeake in order, briefly, and with perſpicuitie.
            
               
               Firſt point. Who muſt turne.For the firſt, Let vs turne againe. The Prophet ſpeaks directly to the Iſraelites, men, women, young, old, &c. And his ſpeech alſo belongs vnto vs.
                  Rom. 15. 4 
               For whatſoeuer things are written aforetime, are written for our learning. From whence I conclude, that Whoſoeuer would not die but liue, muſt turne, and returne; whether he be Iew or Gentile, regenerate, or vnregenerate, Paſtour or people, noble or ignoble, rich or poore, old or young, of what ſexe, condition, or calling ſo euer he be. For firſt, There is no reſpect of perſons with God,
               
                  Rom. 2. 6. 11. but hee Will reward euery man accordind to his workes. With him neither circumciſion nor vncircumciſion auaile any thing, but a new creature. Secondly, God is an abſolute Lord ouer all men whatſoeuer, therefore all men are bound to keep his commandements, among which this is one, and not the meaneſt, as may appeare by the practiſe of the Prophets, who doe often and earneſtly vrge this dutie. The

Apoſtle Paul ſaith,
                  Act. 17. 30 
               that God dooth now command: All men euery where to change their mindes:1. Cor. 7. 19. and teacheth the Corinthians, that circumciſion is nothing, and vncircumciſion is nothing, but the keeping of the commandements of God. Thirdly,2. Cor. 5. 27. all men without exception of any ſauing Chriſt, who knew no ſinne, are by nat
                  •
               r
                  •
                
               deed in ſinnes, the children of wrath,
               
                  Eph. 2. 1, 3, 12. 
               without God, and aliants from the common-wealth of Iſrael; therefore if they meane to liue, they had neede to turne. Yea euen the moſt faithfull ſeruants of God, are not onely ſubiect to goe aſtray, but doe daily erre and offend, and therefore they alſo muſt repent and turne. Fourthly, men of all ſorts and ſexes, deſire the comforts of this life, and euerlaſting happineſſe in the lif
                  •
                to come, therefore all of them muſt looke to their waies and turne. Otherwiſe they muſt looke for none, and if any befall them, they are rather banes vnto them then ben
                  •
               fites, ſo long as they liue in their ſinnes, without true repentance.

               Oh (ſaith God) that my people had harkened vnto mee,
               
                  Pſ. 81. 13, 14, 16. 
               and Iſrael had walked in my waies: I would ſoone haue humbled their enemies, and turned their hand againſt their aduerſaries: I would haue fed them with the fat of wheate.
               
                  Iſa. 16. 19 
               Take away (ſaith the Lord) the euill of your works from before mine eye, ceaſe to doe euill, learne to doe will: If ye conſent and obey, yee ſhall eate the good things of the land; but if ye refuſe and be re
                     •
                  ellious, yee ſhall be deuoured with the ſword.
               
                  Re. 22. 14. 
               Bleſſed are they (ſaith the Angell to Iohn) that doe his commandements (whereof this is one) that their right may bee in the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the Citie. Fiftly, not onely olde men, but young men alſo muſt amend & turne. The prophet ſpeaks to young men as well as to old. Dauid ſaith,
                  Pſ. 119. 9. Ecc. 12. 1. 
               Wherewith ſhal a young man redres his way? Salomon ſaith, Remember now thy Creator in the daies of thy youth, whiles the euil daies come not, nor the yeares approach, wherein thou ſhalt ſay, I haue no pleaſure in them. Quod

noua teſta capit, inueterata ſapit. A veſſell ſauours longeſt of that liquor, wherewith it is firſt ſeaſoned. Therfore the Spirit of Wiſedome ſaith, Teach a childe in the trade of his way,
               
                  Pro. 22. 6. 
               and w
                     •
                  en hee is olde hee ſhall not depart from it. Hee that will haue his horſe ſeruiceable when hee is olde, muſt breake him whilſt he is young. Hee that will haue a ſtreight tree, muſt ſtreighten it when it is tender. If thou wouldſt bee fit to ſerue God when thou art old, invre thy ſelfe to his ſeruice whiles thou art young. If thou deſireſt to bee a farre and ſtraight tree in thy crooked daies, turne from thy crookedneſſe betimes and ſtreighten thy ſelfe in thy youth. The Lord required a ſacrifice,
                  Leu. 2. 14. in which was offered eares of corne, dried by the fire, and wheate beaten out of the greene eares.
                  Gene. 4. 4. 
               Abel brought for an offring vnto God of the firſt fruites, and fat of his ſheepe: ſo wee muſt giue God the greene eares of our yeares, the prim-roſe of our age, the firſt fruits

of our life, and the fat of our daies. He that would haue God kinde vnto him when he is old, let him turne vnto him whiles he is yong. It is vnſeemely for a man to giue his youth vnto Sathan, and to keepe his olde rotten bones and feebled ſpirits for God. The Lord diſliketh that men ſhould bring him lame, torne, and ſicke thinges for offrings: yea hee ſaith,
                  Mal. 1. 13, 14. 
               Curſed be the deceiuer, which hath in his flocke a male, and voweth, and ſacrificeth vnto the Lord a corrupt thing. Sixtly, all men haue ſoules as well as bodies: therefore all men muſt be carefull for them, as well as for theſe; yea rather more carefull, becauſe the ſoule is the more excellent and more diuine and noble part of man. Agu
                     •
                  
                ſhewed himſelfe regardfull of both in his praier, when he ſaith,
                  Pro. 30. 7, 8. 
               Two things haue I required of thee: denie me them not before I die. Remoue farre from mee vanitie and lies: here appeareth the care of his ſoule. Feede me with foode conuenient for me; here he ſheweth the honeſt care hee

had of both ſoule and body. Foode makes for the good of the bodie: conuenient foode makes for the good o
                  •
                both. He that carketh for his bodie, and careth not for his ſoule, maketh a God of his belly, and reſembleth the Phariſies,
                  Matt. 23. 23. who were diligent in tithing of mint and anniſe, but omitted the weightier things of the Law, as faith and mercy. Now wherein can our care for the wealth and weale of our ſoules more eaſily appeare, then in our true repentance and vnfeined conuerſion? Hee that ſaith he hath care of the health of his ſoule, and will not turne to God, dooth as if a man beeing ready to periſh in the water, ſhould profeſſe that hee would gladly liue, and yet wil vſe no meanes, or take no paines to come out. All men doe wiſh the welfare of their friendes. And art thou not thine owne friend?Ve quaerae patriae comm
                     •
                  dae quiſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſuae. It thou be ſo, then art thou bound to conuert. Nature teacheth euery man to ſeeke the good of his own country: ſo grace will teach a man, if hee

haue but one droppe thereof in his heart, to ſeeke the proſperitie of that common-wealth & country which is within himſelfe. Now the proſperitie of any country conſiſteth in freedome from euills, and the fruition of good things. And whoſoeuer turneth truly, ſhall bee deliuered from the greateſt euills, and ſhall inioy the greateſt good, euen God, who is goodneſſe it ſelfe, who with the ſtrength of his arme, and by the power of his grace, will fetch them out of Aegipt, the land of ſpirituall ſeruitude, and deliuer them from thraldome vnder Pharoah and the Aegiptians, from bondage vnder Satan and ſinne, and will conduct them ſafely through the wilde wilderneſſe of this wretched worlde, into celeſtiall Canaan, whither our elder brother Chriſt Ieſus is gone before vs, to prepare manſions for vs. Seuenthly, euerie man complaines that the worlde is naught, therefore euery man to ſtay this complaint, muſt amend & conuert.

If euerie complainer woulde turne from his ſinnes vnto GOD, the world would bee good. The world is not naught, but the people in the worlde: as a goodly Citie may haue godleſſe Citizens, a faire houſe may haue a foule inhabitant, and a good Landlorde may haue bad tenants. There is no reaſon for a man to complaine of the world, till hee haue forſaken the ſinnes committed in the world. Hee that exclames againſt the world before hee doth renounce the faſhions of worldlings, diſcouers the skirtes of his mother, and defileth his owne neſt. If euery one will needes accuſe the world as naught, let them firſt reuoult from the world, and ſhake hands with the worlde: let them come out of the world, as the Iſraelites came out of Aegipt, and as all true Iſraelites are commaunded to come out of Weſterne Babylon,
                  Reu. 13▪4. and then let them not ſpare to cenſure and condemne the worlde. Firſt turne from thine owne naughtineſſe,

and then ſay the worlde is naught, and that the wiſedome of the world is enmity to God. Moreouer, euery man was in Adam created according to the image of God: and euery man by Adam was depriued of this image: neither is it repaired in any man, nor any man reſtored to it, till he doe conuert, and repent: and then the Holy Ghoſt beginnes to graue and draw it vppon the tables of hearts, and faces of our ſoules. But almoſt euery man will ſay, that he doth deſire the reparation of this revnited image within him: and without doubt if a man could with theſe fleſhly eies behold this image,
                  Mat. 17. 3, 4. as Peter beheld Moſes and Elias with Chriſt vppon the mount, it would exceedingly moue him, as that ſight did Peter; it is ſo faire and louely to behold, ſo as that if his heart were not made of marble, it would ſo fill it with delight, and ſo rauiſh his ſoule with the loue thereof, that as Peter ſaid vpon that glorious ſight, Maſter, it is good for

vs to be here, ſo he would wiſh from his heart, to be partaker of it, and thinke no price too coſtly for it. For it is as a mirrour, wherin a man may in part beholde the f
                  ••
               e of the inuiſible God, and a glaſle wherein wee may ſee the countenance and colour of our firſt eſtate. If any therfore luſt (as he doth profeſſe) to bee partaker of this glorious Image conſiſting in holineſſe and righteouſneſſe of heart and hand,
                  Eph. 4. 24 let him turne his feete from the wayes of ſinne, into the wayes of God, and he ſhall not faile of that which he ſaith he doth long after.Nulla ſalus bello, pacem te poſcimus omnes. To conclude this point, all men couet peace, therfore let them all conuert. Wouldeſt thou haue true peace of conſcience? thou fayeſt thou wouldeſt. Then I ſay vnto thee, turne. For There is no peace (ſaith God) vnto the wicked, who doe not turne.
                  Iſ. 57. 21. Wouldeſt thou be at peace with thine enemies? then turne:
                  Pro. 16. 7. for When the waies of man pleaſe the Lord, hee will make alſo his enemies at peace with

him. And without doubt there is no peace comparable to that peace and amitie which is among the faithfull: ſo that if all that ſeeme to deſire peace, would repent & turne, the Lion would become a Lambe; and the Wolfe a ſheepe, all cruell conditions would be caſt away, and the whole world would bee at perfect peace within it ſelfe, both for outward agreement, and inward affection. For the vnion of the Saints in firme & indiſſoluble. The Prince of the ayre muſt blowe exceeding hard, if he made any great commotion then in the world. If all men amongſt vs would ſeriouſly turne to God, the worlde would ſuffer a very great and admirable alteration. For both the wicked ſhould renounce their wickedneſſe, and the godly would not ſtumble and fall ſo oft as they now doe; many occaſions, ſcandalls, tentations, and allurements beeing remoued by the conuerſion of their neighbours. Then we might indeede be wel called

the people of God, and the annointed of the Lorde: our lande might be truly called, the Land of righteouſneſſe, yea and the Land of the liuing: then ſhould we ſee the beautie of Sion, and the proſperitie of Ieruſalem, otherwiſe then now we can. Euery man will ſay that hee dooth affect and deſire theſe things, therefore let euery man turne to the Lorde, or elſe bee ſilent.
            Thus much concerning the firſt point, Who muſt turne? euen euery man that deſireth the grace of God in this world, and euerlaſting glory in the world to come. For hee rewardeth euery one according to his worke.
               
                  Pſ. 62. 12 Pſ. 92. 9. 
               All the workers of iniquitie (that will not turne) ſhall bee deſtroyed. Hee powreth contempt (euen) vpon Princes,
               
                  Pſ. 10. 40. Rom. 2. 9. 10. which will not turne vnto him. Tribulation and anguiſh ſhall be vpon the ſoule of euery man that doth euill: of the Iew firſt, and alſo of the Grecian: but to euery man that doth good (euen to euery man

that turneth vnto God) ſhall be glory, and honour, and peace.
            
            
               2. Point. From what men muſt turne.The ſecond thing to bee conſidered, is, From what we muſt turne. Which, though it be not expreſly ſet downe, yet it is implyed in the word Turne. For whoſoeuer turneth, muſt needes turne from ſomething, either from ſome perſon, or ſome place, or from ſomething elſe. What are wee then to turne from? Surely, from Sathan, from the world, from the waies of the wicked, and from all our ſinnes. Wee muſt turne from whatſoeuer thing may either keepe vs, or drawe vs from God and his wayes. We muſt auoyde euery thing that may diſturbe the peace of conſcience, and hinder the ſaluation of our ſoules.
            Whatſoeuer thing may cauſe vs to diſpleaſe the Lord, and may prouoke his wrath againſt vs, muſt bee forſaken of vs. The Marriner muſt beware of rockes, and the traueller of croſſe-paths, and

by-waies. So wee that would ſaile with the ſhip of our conſciences, to the hauen of euerlaſting happines, and would come to new Ieruſalem in due ſeaſon: that is, when the ſunne of this life doth ſet, & the euening of our daies is ſhut vp, we muſt beware of the foreſaide euills; for they are as rockes in our rode, and doe either moleſt vs in our way, or ſeeke to leade vs out. Shall we delight in the diuel, & dance after his pipe? Know yee not that he compaſſeth the earth too and fro,
                  Iob. 1. 7. 1. Pet. 
                  
                     •
                  .8. and walketh about like a ramping and roaring Lion, ſeeking whom he may deuoure? Wee ſhould rather hide our ſelues from him, and deſire the Lord to pa
                  •
               e his clawes, and breake his teeth. Know yee not that he wrought our downefell at the firſt, and daily ſeeketh the diſhonour of God, the diſgrace of the truth, and the deſolation of the Church? Hee is the prince of darknes, the god of this world, the bli
                  •
               
               der of mens minds, the accuſer of the faithfull, the father of lies, a ſinner

from the beginning of the world,
                  Ioh. 8. 44. 1. Ioh. 3. 8. a ſworne enemie to Gods glorie, and the architect & firſt motour of mans miſerie. Let vs therefore flie from him, as a bird from the fowler, when ſhee ſpies him. And what is the world (I pray you) but a Theater of vanitie, a mirrour of madneſſe, an ocean of ſome iniquity, a labyrinth of errour, a gulfe of euills, a moone of inconſtancie, a wheele of turning, a ſhop of deceit, and a ſpectacle of vngodlineſſe? Why ſhoulde any man therfore wed himſelfe vnto the world, and not ſeeke to be diuorced from her? Or if hee be already free, wherefore ſhould he be enamoured with her? If ſhee dote vpon thee, and ſ
                  •
               nd meſſengers to to thee, as Aho
                  
                     •
                  ibah is charged by the Lord to haue dealt with the Aſſyrians:
                  Ezek. 23. 16. if ſhe be ſo ſhameleſſe as to wooe thee, as the Harlot which Salomon ſpeakes of,
                  Pro. 7. 13. with a brazē face intiſed the fooliſh young man; yet be not thou perſwaded by her: let not thine heart decline to her waies, and wander not

in her pathes. If the world caſt her eyes vpon thee,
                  Gen. 39. 7, as Potiphars wife did vpon Ioſeph; and if ſhe tempt thee to commit adultery with her, as ſhe did Ioſeph; if ſhee ſay to thee,
                  Pro. 7. 18. as Salomons Harlot doth to that foole, Come, let vs take our fill of loue, and our pleaſure in daliance: if thou be daily ſued vnto by her, as Ioſeph was by his Miſtris; yet as he denied her requeſt vnto the end, and ſaid,
                  Gen. 39. 9, 10, 12. 
               How can I doe this great wickedneſſe, and ſinne a gainst God? ſo do thou repell the darts of her amorous language, 
                  •
               nd like an adder ſtop thine eares at her alluring incantations. Rather let her haue thy garment, and be content to be accuſed falſely, and condemned to the priſon, as Ioſeph was, then that by condeſcending to her vnlawfull ſuit, thou ſhouldeſt diſpleaſe or diuorce thy ſelfe from God, or breake thy promiſe plighted to him in thy Baptiſme, of puritie and Penelopes conſtant fidelity. The world is ſomthing like the fooliſh woman, the wiſe man ſpeakes of,
                  Pro. 9. 16. which ſaith to

the fooliſh paſſenger, come hither: but ſhee ſetteth her gueſts in the depth of hell. By her two naked and painted breaſts of profites and pleaſures, ſhee uſeth thouſands to commit, fornication with her: but as the holy Ghoſt ſaith of thoſe which are intrapt with the craft of the ſubtill Harlot,
                  Pro. 7. 21, 22, 23. ſo we may truly ſay of them that are ſeduced with the worlde; They follow her, as an oxe that goeth to the ſlaughter, and as a foole that goeth to the ſtocks for corection (who goe on cheerfully, not knowing their future miſery) and as a bird that haſteth to the ſnare, being ignorant of the fowlers policy. The voyce of the world is like the fowlers call, which cauſeth the bird to bee caught: and her allurements are like the baite which hideth the hooke, that is the bane of the fiſh. And when ſhe is moſt iocund and obſequious, then ſhee is moſt pernicious and dangerous: as the ſtilleſt waters are the deepeſt and moſt deceitfull. If therfore the world ſhall come forth to

meete vs, as Iael did to Siſera,
               
                  Iud. 4. 18. and ſhall ſay to any of vs as ſhee did to him, Turne in, turne in to me, be not afraid: let vs beware that ſhe doe not couer vs with the mantle of ſecuritie, and take heede leſt ſhee beguile vs with the milke of her pleaſures, and the butter of her profites, thogh ſet before vs in a lordly diſh,
                  Iud. 5. 25. as ſhee ſet hers; leſt yeelding to her with bold credulitie, as Siſera did to Iael, we be ſtricken through the temples (as it were) of our ſoules with her magicall enchantments,
                  Iud. 4. 27. as the temples of his head were ſtricken thorough by a naile in her hand, and ſo we die as he did. For her houſe is the way vnto the graue,
                     Pro. 7. 10. 27. which goeth downe to the chambers of death, as the wiſe man ſpeaketh of the woman of whoriſh behauiour. So then, albeit the wicked intiſemēts of the world bee pleaſant in the beginning, yet are they bitterneſſe in the latter ending: and like the booke that Iohn was commanded to eate,
                  Reu. 10. 9 ſweete in the mouth, but bitter in the mawe:

and ſo hurtfull to the ſtomack of the ſoule, as that if a man doe not caſt them vp, it is no more poſſible for him to liue, either the life of grace or of glorie, then it is for that man to liue the life of na
                  •
               ure, who hath ſwallowed downe pills of poiſon, hee dranke with ſugar. Let vs therefore take heed of her charmes, and turne frō her.1. Ioh. 2. 15 
               Loue not this world (ſaith Iohn) nor the things that are in this world. If any man loue this world, the loue of the Father is not in him. No man can ſerue God and Mammon.
                  Mat. 6. 24 Wee muſt leaue the world, and the world muſt leaue vs; therefore why ſhould wee fixe our loue vpon the world, or bend our loue vnto the world? Whereas all other creatures haue but foure muſcles to turn their eyes round about,O
                     •
                   homini ſu
                     ••
                  l
                     •
                  me d
                     •
                  dit. God hath giuen man a fiſt to pull vp his eyes, from t
                  •
               e earth to heauen. And whereas all other creatures bow downwards to look to the earth from whence they roſe, and to which they muſt return, God hath fitted man a bodie, that

hee might behold the heauen, the place of happineſſe, and the Paradice of perpetuall pleaſures. Wee are redeemed from the worlde; let vs therefore ſo liue in the world, as by our liues wee may declare that wee are not of the worlde. For as much as our inhearitance is in the heauens, let vs haue one foote there fixed, where our inheritance is. We treade vppon the earth with our feete, therefore let not our hearts be interred in it, but let vs trample vpon earthly things. Though we liue in the world, yet let vs not be polluted of the world: but as the Swan ſwims in the water, but is not drowned of the water, ſo we muſt liue in the world, as a ſhip floateth aloft vpon the ſea, or a bird vpon the water, and wee muſt take heede that the loue of the world doe not leake into our hearts, leſt wee make ſhipwracke of our faith, and breake in peeces the veſſells of our conſciences. An
                  •
                
               
                  •
               f any do leake in, we muſt pumpe it out with ſpeeds, by true

repentance, and ſeeke to ſtoppe the paſſage. The Mowle liues in the earth, and yet receiueth no hurt at all, neither to her fleſh, nor to her coate. So wee that liue in the world in the midſt of a crooked generation, ſhould like pilgrimes, ſo alienate our affections from it, as that wee may receiue no damage by it, neither in our hearts within, nor in our profeſsion and practiſe without: but as a ſtone being caſt into the dirt, will ſtill remaine a ſtone: ſo thogh we which are liuing ſtones,
               1. Pet. 2, 5. doe liue in the world, which is full of the dirt of ſinne, and puddles of iniquitie, yet let vs remaine as wee are made by grace, liuing ſtones of Gods ſpirituall Temple. To this ende, let vs turne from the worlde with our heartes, let vs beware of her witch-craft and ſorcerie, let vs not turne in vnto her at her call, let vs not drinke of the cuppe of her fornications: and finally, let vs ſeeke the kingdome of God,
                  Mat. 6. 33 Col. 3. 1. & the things that are aboue: and let vs haue

our conuerſation in the heauens, where our common-wealth and kingdome, our head and husband is,
                  Pet. 3. 21 and will bee vntill the time that all things be reſtored which God hath ſpo
                     •
                  en by the mouth of all his holy Prophets ſince the world began.
            
            Thirdly, we muſt turne from the waies of the wicked. This the Spirit of wiſedome teacheth vs, when he ſaith: My ſonne, walke not thou in the way with ſinners:
                  Pro. 1. 15. 
               refraine thy foote from their path.
               
                  Pro. 4. 14, 1
                     •
                  
                  ▪ 
                  Pro. 2. 15. 
               Enter not into the way of the wicked, and walke not in the way of euill men. Auoyd it, goe not by it: turne from it, and paſſe by. For their Waies are crooke
                     •
                  . The way of the wicked is as darkneſſe.
               
                  Pro. 4. 19 Pſal. 1. 6. 
               The way of the wicked ſhall periſh. If thou wouldeſt not walke in a crooked path, an obſcure and darke lane, and in a way that ſhall come to naught, yea in a way that leadeth from heauen to hel, and from life to death, then thou muſt decline and turne from the waies of the wicked. God dooth command thee to turne from them:

In the name of God I doe beſeech thee to turne from them. Be not diſobedient vnto his voyce. Hee that obeyeth him,
                  Pro. 1. 33 ſhall dwell ſafely, and be quiet from feare of euill. But thoſe, that ſtoppe their eares at his voyce, and will not obey his word in the miniſterie of his Prophets, do fall vpon the ſworde of vengeance. As when God cried, they would not heare,
                  Zach. 7. 11, 12, 13 but pulled away their ſhoulder, and made their harts hard as an adamant: ſo they ſhall crie, and he will not heare. Wee all know that it is the will of God, that wee ſhould forſake the waies of the wicked, who are his enemies. But that ſeruant (ſaith Chriſt) that knew his maisters will,
                     Luk. 12. 47. and prepared not himſelf▪ neither aid according to his will, ſhall be beaten with many ſtripes: with many moe then hee that knoweth not his will, and doth it not. Can a man be in a mill, and not be mealy? Can a man be in a ſhewer of raine, and not be wet? Can a man ſtand long vpon a quag-mire, and not ſinke?

And is it poſsible for a man to walk in the waies of the wicked, which are full of the mire of wickedneſſe, and dirt of iniquitie, and not to bee polluted? Or i
                  •
                it like, that he ſhall not ſinke into the pit of perdition, if hee ſhall ſtand in the way of ſinners, and refuſe to come out? No wiſe man, eſpecially no honeſt man will delight in the courſes of ſlaues and traitours: but the wicked are ſlaues. Firſt, they are ſlaues of the diuell: for hee That committeth ſin, is of the Diuell,
               1. Ioh. 3. 8. 2. Pet. 2. 19. 
               & of whom ſoeuer a man is ouercome, euen vnto the ſame he is in bondage. Now, what ſlaues are they, that are in ſlauerie vnder a very ſlaue? Secondly, they are the ſlaues of ſinne. For Whoſoeuer committeth ſinne is the ſeruant of ſinne.
               
                  Ioh. 8. 34 Pro. 19. 28. Pro. 4. 16. Ioh. 20. 12 But the wicked drinke iniquitie, as fiſhes doe the water. Their mouth (ſaith Salomon) ſwalloweth vp iniquitie. They cannot ſleepe, except they haue done euill. Wickedneſſe (as Zophar ſaith) is ſweete in his mouth, hee hides it vnder his tongue, and will

not forſake it. Therefore he cannot but commit ſinne, and that with greedineſſe, and with full conſent of heart. Now he that is the ſeruant of ſinne, and a ſlaue to his owne concupiſcence, is in ſeruitide vnder the diuels baſtard, yea and ſtrumpet alſo, and in thraldome vnder his owne mortall and vnplacable enemie.
            Thirdly, the wicked are the ſlaues of the world. For their profeſsion is pinned vpon her ſleeue.Ter. Eunuch. As Dorus in the Comedie denied the truth, (which before hee did profeſſe) when Phaedreae bad him: ſo the wicked man at the worlds commaund, is ready to ſay, and vnſay, to profeſſe or deny any thing, how groſſe or euill ſoeuer; he makes the world his God. Furthermore, they are very traitours and rebells vnto God. They are enemies to his crowne and dignitie: they robbe him of his honour: they rebell againſt his lawes: they trample vpon his commaundements: they breake downe

the pale of his precepts: they teare his titles with their tongues:
                  Pſ. 37, 12. and they practiſe againſt his loyall and obedient ſubiects. Doth it therefore beſeeme any honeſt & liberall minded man to walke in their waies, and to runne in their races? They cannot ſuredly do it without great blemiſhing of their owne loyalty, and iniury to the glory of God. Furthermore,
                  Prou. 15. 9 Pro. 21. 27. 
               The way of the wicked is (as Salomon ſaith) an abhomination to the Lord. If his ſacrifice be an abhomination vnto him, and if his verie praier bee vnacceptable to him, his waies (which are ſimply euill) muſt needs be very offenſiue in his ſight. Now then, were it not horrible impietie for a man either to ſet his feete in his waies, or not to remoue them and depart away with ſpeede, if they be already in them?1. Tim. 5. 22. 
               Paul forbiddeth vs to bee partakers of other mens ſinnes. But he that walketh in the waies of the wicked, cannot but tranſgreſſe this commaundement. He that runneth their courſes, is a

ſcandall vnto them, an occaſion to harden their hearts, and to hinder their conuerſion, & ſheweth plainly that they were all caſt in one mould, and are all (euen he as well as they) ſeruants to one Lord. But hee which turneth from them, ſheweth his hatred of them, and is a furtherance to help forward their conuerſion alſo. For as when one ſheepe breakes away from the drouer, ſhee is an occaſion to mooue many other to followe her: ſo when one man breaketh away from the diuell, who driues men to their ſlaughter, he giueth an occaſion to many that ſee him, to depart in like ſort. One bird perceiuing the fowlers wiles, by flying away, is a motiue to her fellowes being in the ſame danger to doe the like: ſo one man by leauing the waies of the wicked, and ſo eſcaping the danger prepared for him, occaſioneth the wicked alſo that behold him, to take their flight from ſinne, and to flie from the wiles of the diuell. To conclude this third point,

God commandeth vs to aske for the old way,
                  Iere. 6. 16. and to walke therein. Now if wee muſt walke in the olde way, which is the good way, and we ſhall find reſt for our ſoules, then we muſt leaue all new waies, which are euill waies, or elſe wee ſhall finde paines for our ſoules. God commandeth vs to Walke in tho way of good men,
                     Pro. 2. 20. and to keep the waies of the righteous: it followeth therefore that we muſt turne from the waies of the wicked.
                  Pro. 4. 18. 19. For their waies are contrary; 
                  •
               he one ſhineth as the light, the other is as darkneſſe: the one is of God, the other of Satan: the one is of the way of loue, and leadeth vnto life, the other is the way of luſt, and leadeth vnto death: the one is the way of Gods children, the other of the diuells. In the one we muſt goe, as Iſrael requeſted Sihon to let them paſſe thorow his country, ſaying:
                  Num. 27. 22. 
               Let mee goe through thy Land: wee will 
                     〈◊〉
                   turne aſide unto the fiel
                     •
                  s, nor into the vineyards, neither drinke of the waters of the wells: we will goe by the kings way, vntill

we be past thy Country. The way of the godly, is the Kings hie way to heauen: we muſt goe along in it till we haue paſſed through this vale of miſerie, without declining from it on any ſide. We muſt not breake into the fields of couetouſneſſe, nor into the vineyards of vaine delights, neither muſt wee drinke of the waters of ſinfull pleaſures, or pleaſing ſinnes. But as the Iſraelite promiſed to goe by the hie way, and to turne neither vnto the right hand, nor to the left:
                  Deu. 2. 27. ſo wee muſt keepe our way without wandring out; therefore it followeth, that wee muſt abandon, and turne from the waies of the wicked. For how glorious and faire ſoeuer they ſeeme in ſhew,
                  Pſal. 1. 6. 2 King. 9. 30. 33. they ſhall vaniſh and come to nought; like the painted face of Iezabel, & the colors of the Rainbow. Fourthly, we muſt turne from our owne ſinnes;
                  Zach. 1. 4. originall and actuall, of what name or nature ſoeuer, in what place, at what time, and vpon what occaſion ſo euer done, whether by commiſsion of

euill, or omiſſion of good. For firſt, our ſinnes are the workes of the diuell, as our goodneſſe is the gift of God. Our originall corruption (which as a reproſie hath polluted all our parts and poores) is the f
                  •
               end of ſinne, and the very ſpawne of the diuell, whereof he doth beget children according to his owne Image. From it all our actuall tranſgreſsions (how barbarous and exorbitant ſoeuer they be) do proceed and iſſue, as the riuers doe from the ſea,
                  Eccleſ. 1. 7 and as light doth from the ſunne, or as wormes doe from a loathſome carrion. Secondly, our ſinnes doe pollute, and deforme vs. As a Ringworme doth disfigure the face:
                  Ezek. 14 11. ſo ſinne doth deforme the ſoule. As a Canker doth conſume the fleſh, as ruſt doth eate the yron, as duſt and chaffe doe corrupt the corne, and as firre veſſels do corrupt good wine: ſo ſinne doth defile our ſoules, and corrupt our conſciences, and miſſhape our affections. Thirdly, ſinne is very bitter and pernitious. The

life of any ſin affected, is the death of the ſinner infected. It is of a viperous diſpoſition: the birth of ſin, is the death of the ſinner. It is like the worme Midas, which eates the Beane, wherein it is bred: and the Moath, that conſumes the cloth, in which ſhe receiued her life. Sinne is not much vnlike vnto the louers of Aholilah,
               Ezek. 23.
                who when they had bruiſed the breaſts of her virginitie, and powred their whordomes vpon her, dealt cruelly with her, and ſlew her with the ſword: ſo ſinne ſhall breed the ſorrowe of all ſuch as dote vpon it, and delight to commit adulterie with it. And as the Lord threatned Aholilah,
               
                  Ezek. 23. 25. that her louers, with whom ſhe wilfully defiled her ſelfe, ſhould cut off her noſe and eares: ſo ſinne (without ſpeciall mercie) ſhall not onely deforme our ſelues, but ſtrippe vs and leaue vs naked for the iudgements of God to ſeaze vpon. Therefore as Paul ſhooke the viper from his hand,
                  Act. 28. 5. ſo let vs caſt away ſinne from

our hearts. As hee was carefull to preſerue his life from thoſe bloudie votaries,
                  Act. 23. 17. who had vowed his death: ſo let vs bee carefull to defend our ſelues from ſinne, which worketh the deſtruction of our ſoules. Wherfore was Adam exiled out of Paradiſe, but for his ſinne? Why was the olde worlde drowned with water, but for their ſinne? Why was Sodom burnt with fire and brimſtone, but for ſinne? Pauls ſinfull zeale made him a perſecutor. Sinne made Abſolom ambitious, Haman malicious, Nabal a churle, and Iudas a traytour. Sinne cauſed Korah and his company to be ſwallowed vp of the earth:
                  Num. 16. 32. Exod. 14. 28. Leuit. 10. 2. Pſal. 107. 34. Pro. 28. 2 ſinne made Pharaoh and his people to be conſumed by the water: ſinne occaſioned Nadab and Abihu to be deuoured with fire: ſinne cauſed Her
                     •
                  d to be eaten with wormes. God turneth a fruitefull land into barronneſſe, for the wickedneſſe of them that dwell therein. And the Spirit of wiſedome ſaith, that For the tranſgreſſion of the Land, there are many

Princes thereof: that is, many and no ſmall alterations in the ſtate. Our ſinnes are the cauſe of our ſorrowes, and our wickedneſſe is the worker of all our wretchedneſſe. It is the cauſe of all diſorder and diſſention, in Church, in Common-wealth, and Family. Yea, it oftentimes is the cauſe, why the ſinner is puniſhed by committing of other ſinnes;
                  Rom. 1. 24 28. therefore Paul ſaith, that God gaue the Heathen (for their wickedneſſe) vp to their harts luſts, and deliuered them ouer to a reprobate minde, to commit very feareful and odious enormities.Plin. nat. Hiſt. l. 8. cap. 23.
                Sinne is like the Serpent Amphisbaena, which hath (as it were) two heads, one before, an other behinde at the taile, as if ſhee were not hurtfull enough to caſt her poyſon at one mouth only. Sinne woundeth at both endes: in the one it wounds the ſoule by poyſoning and infecting it: and in the other, it wounds both ſoule and body, by deſtroying them, without the Antidote, or counter-poyſon of the

meritorious bloud of that true brazen ſerpent Chriſt Ieſus. Sinne (as it were) out of two mouthes ſpitteth forth her venime, whereby ſhe both hurteth our hearts, and expoſeth vs to the fire of Gods dreadfull indignation. Fourthly, ſinne is very ſubtil like a ſerpent, & all (like a witch) to work our woe. It is like the Hyaena,
               Plin hiſt. nat. hiſt. l. 8. cap. 30
                which (as Pliny recordeth) is ſaid to vomit like a man, therby to train dogges to come vnto him, and then will deuoure them. Sometimes it will weepe with the Crocodile, ſometimes it will be muſicall with the Syren, but all to deſtroy. It begins ſometimes with a ſong like a Gnat, but it endeth with byting. Pliny ſayeth that the Hyaena will change his eies into a thouſand colours:Plin. ibid. ſo ſinne will make many faces.
            The Beiuers haire is ſofter then the downe of feathers, yet is he dangerous with his teeth. For (as Pliny writeth) he will gnaw trees with his teeth, is if they were cut with axes:

and if he catch hold of any ioynt in a man, he will not leaue till he haue knapped the bone aſunder. So ſin doth oftentimes very much delight the ſinner, as being very ſoft to the touch, and pleaſant to the taſte, and yet it is but a painted Iezabel, a diſguiſed harlot, and a ſweetned poyſon; it gnawnes the conſcience, and bites the ſoule to the bone. It is greene like the boxe tree, but the ſeed is poyſon.
            
               Plin. ibid.The hurtfull ſerpents are ordinarily of the colour of the harmles earth: ſo ſinne ſometimes doth ſeeme a vertue, and is ſo eſteemed of ſome that are bad-ſighted, or grown to deſperate impietie, Which ſpeake good of euill,
               
                  Iſ. 5. 20. 
               and euill of good: which put darkneſſe for light, and light: for darkneſſe: that put bitter for ſweete, and ſweete for ſowre. Sinne hath ſo diſtempered their taſtes, and bewitched their eyes. If ſinne were not exceeding ſubtill, and the ſinner made by ſinne exceeding ſimple, Salomon would not ſay, There

is a way that ſeemeth right vnto man,
               
                  Pro. 16. 25. 
               but the iſſue thereof are the waies of death. Neither would any hypocrites bee ſo impudent, as to ſay without bluſhing (if at all) with thoſe in Iſaih: Stand apart,
               
                  Iſ. 65. 5. 
               come not neare vnto me: for I am more holy th
                     •
                  n thou. If ſinne had not bene very deceitfull, would the Valentinian heretiques haue condemned all others as groſſe and earthly, and haue called themſelues onely Ghoſtly? Would the Arrians haue called the true Chriſtians, that profeſ
                  •
               ed the faith of the holy Trinitie, ſometime Ambroſians, ſometimes Iohannites, and ſometimes Homouſians, allowing themſelues onely (ſomething like our Papiſts) to be called Catholiques? Would the Browniſts which are ſprung out of the aſhes of the Donatiſts, condemne our Miniſtrie, our Churches, and aſſemblies, as Antichriſtian? Could widowes houſes be deuoured through the pretext of long praiers? Could vice wander in the

habit of vertue? or would any but a dogge, returne like a dogge to his vomit, if ſinne were not very deceitfull, but did appeare vnto all men as it is in it ſelfe? Conſidering therefore (beloued) the malicious ſubtiltie, and the ſubtill malice of ſinne vnto mankinde, let vs not onely bewiſe to diſcerne it, but carefull alſo to flie from it, and eſchew it. Hee that foſtereth ſin, fauoureth a falſe and perfidious enemie, and doth as Ioaſh did,2. Ki. 12. 20. Rom. 6. 13 who entertained ſeruants, which ſlew him. Let no man therefore (I ſay) bee the ſeruant of ſinne. Giue not your members as weapons of vnrighteouſneſſe vnto ſin. Liſten not vnto it, leaſt by liſtning vnto it, as Eue did vnto the ſerpent, ye make your ſelues, as ſhee did her ſelfe, a pray to the diuell. Fiftly, vnleſſe a man do purpoſe, and with a conſtant determination of minde, and reſolution of ſpirit, doe labour to leaue his ſinnes, and to ſtand againſt the ſtreame of his ſinfull affections, he doth ſhew himſelfe deſtitute

of the feare of God,
                  Pro. 8. 13 
               which is to hate euill: and altogether vnlike to God, who is holy; yea euen holineſſe it ſelfe: and he doth moreouer, make himſelfe vnmeete to aske forgiueneſſe of his ſins. For with what face dare hee deſire of God to forgiue him his ſinne, that makes no conſcience of committing ſinne? How dare he deſire God to turne his iudgements from him, ſeeing he doth not ſeriouſly himſelfe purpoſe, and accordingly ſtudy to turne from his ſinnes, which doe not onely deſerue the iudgments of God, but are alſo a match to giue fire vnto his wrath, or as bellowes to blow it vp? Yea, it is a very manifeſt argument, that hee, which will not turne from his ſinne, doth not ſincerely, & with an honeſt heart deſire the pardon of ſinne. For no man will thinke that he doth hartily deſire the peace and pardon of his neighbour, who commeth creeping to him for it, and yet in the meane time, dooth either ſecretly practiſe againſt him, or at the

leaſt dooth not purpoſe to forbeare the practiſe of thoſe things, which makes the 
                  •
               arre betwixt them. Hee doth only dally with him, and abuſe him. Six
                  •
               ly, let vs remember that there is a day of death, and a day of iudgment, in which euery man muſt an
                  •
               were for his facts; Caine for his murther, Iſmael for his mocking, Nahal for his drunkenneſſe, Abſolon for his ambition, Achitophel for his wicked counſell, Haman for his hautineſſe, Herod for his pride, Iudw for his treaſon, Iulian for his blaſphemies, and euery ſinner for his ſinnes. For the bookes, wherein all mens actions are (as it were) recorded, ſhal be opened,
                  Reu. 20. 12 and euery man ſhall be iudged of thoſe things whic
                  •
                are regiſtred in the bookes (of Gods knowledge, and mans conſcience) according to their works.2. Cor. 5. 10. And euery man without exception ſhall receiue the things which are done in his body, according to that hee hath done, whether it bee good or euill. The riches of Laban, the wealth

of Nabal, the wiſedome of Achitophel, the beauty of Abſolon, the crown of Saul, the ſtrength of Lamech, the kingdomes of Nebuchadnezar, the eloquence of Tertullus, the miter of Caiaphas will than ſtand them in no ſtead at all. For the Lord is no accepter of perſons: he hath prepared Tophet of olde for wicked princes:
                  Act. 10. 34 Iſa. 30 33 Iude. 15. and hee will rebuke the vngodly of all their wicked deedes. Now, as death dooth leaue them, ſo the laſt iudgement ſhall find them. If therefore wee would either fit our ſelues for death, or frame our ſelues to the laſt iudgement, let vs abandon our ſinnes, and iudge our ſelues. If wee will accuſe and condemne our ſins, and execute them, as Ioſiah did the prieſts of the high places,2 King. 22. 20. Heb. 9. 27 Mat. 25. 41. wee ſhall not neede to feare the terrour of death, which is appointed for all, nor the ſentence of the iudge, which ſhall onely be pronounced againſt the wicked. Laſtly, I ſay wee muſt turne from all our ſinnes, and not from ſome onely. For ſo is the will

of God.
                  Ezek. 11. 31. 
               Caſt away from you all your tranſgreſſion: for why will yee dis O houſe of Iſrael? Euery ſinne diſpleaſeth God,
                  Rom. 6. 23 and deſerueth death: euery ſin doth ſtaine the ſoule and wound the conſcience.
                  Prou 6. 27. 28. It is not poſſible for a man to carry fire in his boſome, and his clothes not bee burnt: and impoſſible for him to goe vppon coales, and his feete not be ſcorched: ſo is it impoſsible to fauour any ſin, and not to be infected. As euery enemie is dangerous, and as the leaſt drop of poiſon is hurtfull, and the leaſt plague-ſore infectious; ſo the ſmalleſt ſinne wil ſmart: the leaſt offence is pernicious, peſtilent & infectious. Secondly, we vowed to God in our baptiſme, that we would turn from all our ſinnes, and from all the workes of the diuell. Hee that will not keep touch with God, muſt neuer looke that God will keep touch with him. For his promiſe of pardon belongs onely vnto penitent perſons. And therefore he ſaith, If the wicked will returne from all his ſins,
               
                  Ezek. 18. 21.
               
               hee ſhall ſurely liue, and ſhall not die. Thir
                  •
               ly, the Lorde in expreſſe tearmes forbiddeth not onely greater, but a
                  •
               ſo ſmaller ſinnes. He doth not onely condemne drunkennes,
                  Iſai. 5. 22. but hee doth alſo pronounce a woe vnto them, that are mighty to drinke wine, and are ſtrong to powre in ſtrong drinke. Saint Peter doth not onely r
                  •
               quire vs to forbeare drunkenneſſe,1. Pet. 4. 3 but alſo drinkings. Saint Paul doth not on
                  •
               ly forbid vs filthines,
                  Ephe 5. 4. but fooliſh talking. The Lord commandeth the wicked to forſake their very imaginations.
                  Iſai. 55. 7. Chriſt telleth vs that we muſt giue account of euery idle word.1. Pet. 2. 1. 
               Peter warneth vs to lay aſide all malitiouſneſſe, and all guile, and all euill ſpeaking.
                  Pſal. 101. 3, 4. 
               Dauid ſaith, I will ſet no wicked thing before mine eyes: A froward heart ſhall depart from me, I will know none euill. And according to this his reſolution hee ſaith againe,
                  Pſal. 119. 101, 128, 133. 
               I haue refrained my feete from euery euill way, and do hate all falſe waies. And deſireth God to let none iniquitie to haue dominion ouer

him. The Lord hateth all our ſins, Chriſt hath ſuffered for all our ſins, therefore let vs abandon them all. If we entertaine but one, we open a caſemen
                  •
                for another, and animate the diuell to ſally a freſh vppon vs:Plin. nat. hiſt. li. 8. c. 25.
                who like a Crocodile flieth if hee be reſiſted, but if we yeeld vnto him in the leaſt ſinne, hee will very falſely aſſault vs, and ſeeke to ſwallow vs vp.1. Theſſ. 5. 22. Iude. 23. Muſt wee abſtaine from all appearance of euill? Muſt wee hate the very garment, which is ſpott
                  •
               d by the fleſh? Then good reaſon haue wee to abſtaine from all things that are meerely euill in themſelues, and to deteſt the fleſh,
                  Gal. 5. 17. which defiles the man, and luſteth againſt the Spirit. Shall kings fight againſt their quarrellous & deſpit
                  •
               ful enemies, which onely ſeeke to depriue them of their earthly kingdomes, and ſhall not we contend and war againſt our fleſhly luſts,1. Pet. 2. 11 which fight againſt our ſoules, and ſeek to defeat vs of our heauenly kingdome? Will euery man by the vertue of his nature (like Chari
                  
                     •
                  us
               
in the Comedie) proue euery way before they will periſh,Omnia exo periri cerium eſt priù
                     •
                  , quā pereo. Ter. Anar. or loſe their liues in this world: and ſhall not wee take any paines to eſcape eternall paines, and to ſaue our ſoules in the world to come? Shall Chriſt lament, yea and die for our ſinnes, and ſhall we make our ſelues mery with them, as many doe? Or rather ſhall we not mourne for them, and ſeeke to bee deliuered from them? Shall Dauids eyes guſh out with riuers of water,
                  Pſal. 119. 136. becauſe other men kept not Gods law? and doth it beſeeme vs to be drie cheeked, and not lament for our owne ſinnes, whereby wee haue broken his law, and battered the caſtles of our owne conſciences? Shall Ieremy wiſh that his head were full of water,
                  Ier. 9. 1. and his eyes a fountaine of teares, that he might weepe day and night for the ſlaine of the daughter of his people? and ſhall wee neuer lament & weepe for our ſinnes, which diſpleaſe our friend, and pleaſe our foe: which did once ſlay our ſoules, and doe daily wring them, & would

conſume them v
                  •
               terly,
                  Eph. 2. 5. if the Lord, who hath reſtored them to life in Chriſt, did not guard them by his grace? Doe we not ſee what an antipathy there is amongſt the creatures? One of them by a ſecret inſtinct of nature doth hate and perſecute another.Homo hominilupus. Nay, doe wee not ſee that many men are as wolues each to other? Wherefore then ſhould we not perſecute and hate our ſinnes, ſeeing that they be our mortall enemies, and will neue
                  •
                become our friends? The fiſh called Lepus, is (as ſome write) poiſo
                  •
                to a man, and man to him.
                  Pro. 1. 11, 12. Sinne is poiſon vnto vs, ſo let vs be as poiſon vnto it. Shall t
                  •
               e wicked lay wait for blood, and ſwallow the innocent vppe like a graue? and ſhal not we ſeeke to mortifie our ſi
                  •
               nes which are noxious vnto vs, and offenſiue vnto God?
                  Col. 3. 5. 
               Mortifie therefore your members which are on earth, fornication, vncleanneſſe, the inordinate affection, euill concupiſcence, and couetouſneſſe, which is idolatry. If wee will not mortifie them,

they will mortifie vs, If we will not part from them, God will part from vs. Surely (ſaith Dauia) God will wound the head of his enemies,
               
                  Pſ. 68. 21. 
               and the hairie pate of him that walketh in his ſinnes. Shall Dauid hate the deſperate enemies of God,
                  Pſ. 139. 21 and earneſtly contend with thoſe that riſe vp againſt him: and ſhall not wee hate ſinne, which makes men hatefull vnto God, and haters of God? Shall not we earneſtly contend againſt our ſins, which do both riſe vp againſt vs, and make vs alſo take vppe armes againſt the Lord?
                  Pro. 11. 15 H
                  ••
               e that hateth ſuert
                  ••
               hippe (ſaith Salomon) is ſure: but hee that hateth ſinne is ſurer. For if it bee a a righ
                  •
                h
                  •
               tred, it is an infallible demonſtration
                  •
                of our loue to God, and of the g
                  •
               atious operation of his Spirit within vs, and the ready way to ſcape the greateſt euill. If it be the badge of a man predeſtined to glorie, to contemne a vile perſon,
                  Pſa. 15. 4, then he which deſpiſeth ſinne, which makes men vile & deſpiſeable, may aſſure himſelfe of glory, if he do deſpiſe

it for the vileneſſe of it, and for that it is derogatorie to the glory of God. Wouldſt thou therefore be ſure of the mercy of God to the ſaluation of thy ſoule! then turne from thy ſinnes and hate them. For hee that confeſſeth his ſinnes and doth forſake them,
                     Pro. 28. 13 ſhall finde mercy. What life more ioyfull can a man wiſh to leade, whilſt hee lines in this world, then in this life to be aſſured of an euerlaſting ioyfull li
                  •
               e in the world to come? What greater pleaſure can a man take and taſte of in a world of wo
                  •
               , then to beleeue and know that vnſpeakable and perpetuall pleaſures are prepared for him in a world of weale? What ſweeter ſweetneſſe, and more pleaſing pleaſure can a man in this life feele and enioy vpon the earth below, then in beeing certainly perſwaded in his conſcience, that he ſhall be partaker of the ſweete and amiable communion of the Lord in the life to come alo
                  •
               t in the heauens? What greater comfort can comfortleſſe wretches

(as all men are by nature) receiue of the God of comfort, then by his word to bee ſurely certified of eternall comforts? What greater glorie can a mortall man bee glad of, and more truly glory of in his inglorious vale of miſerie, then that hee is by the King of glory ſecured, and by the word of his own mouth aſſured of immortall glorie in his glorious kingdome vpon his high and holy mountaine? With what ſweeter mercy can a miſerable ſinner bee refreſhed in his ſoule, then of the God of mercy to receiue a promiſe of the euerlaſting mercy? But God doth promiſe life & libertie,
                  Pro. 28. 13 Eze. 18. 21 health and happineſſe, to euery man that will forſake his ſinnes. Neither doth he onely promiſe vs (if we doe turne from our ſinnes) felicitie in the heauens, but alſo peace and proſperitie vpon the earth. Therefore Dauid ſaith: What man is he that deſireth life,
               
                  Pſal. 34. 12. 14. 
               and loueth long daies to ſee good? Let him eſchew euil, and doe good, &c. And the Lord by Ieremy ſaith, Amend

your waies,
               
                  Ier. 7. 3. 
               and your workes, and I will let you dwell in this place. Whenſoeuer the Iſraelites truely repented of their ſinnes, then GOD changed his frowning countenance and ſmiled vpon them: but when they prouoked him by their ſinnes, then he turned their eſtates, and oftentimes gaue them vp vnto their enemies.
                  Iſai. 59. 2. Ier. 5. 25. So that our ſinnes doe make a diuorcement betweene vs and Gods benefits. Let vs therefore like valiant princes labou
                  •
                to ſubdue them. When ſinnes begin to die, then the ſinner beginnes to liue. Let not ſinne reigne within vs: let it not defile vs.
                  Mark. 12. 15. But as our Sauior ouerthrew the tables of the mony changers, and caſt out thoſe that profaned the temple by marchandizing in it: ſo let vs his ſeruants ſcourge out our ſins out of the temple of our hearts,
                  Ez. 28. 26. and let vs labour to ouerturne and conquer them. The Lord ſaith, that his pleople ſhall dwell in ſafetie, when hee hath executed his iudgements vpon all their enemies:

ſo we ſhall liue in peace when our ſinnes are executed▪ and put vnto the ſworde. And when we haue ouermaſtered one ſinne, then wee muſt ſet vppon another; like the Ichneumon, which (as Pliny writeth) hauing ouercome one enemie,Hiſt. nat. l. 8. c. 24.
                prepareth himſelfe to combat with another. Let vs neuer be content till we haue gotten the victory of them all; being like minded to Alexander th great,Nil actum credens cùm quid ſupereſſe
                     •
                   agendum. who (as Lucane recordeth) thought nothing done, whiles any thing remained vndone. Hee that turneth from all his ſinnes, and laboureth to ſubdue them all, dooth ſhew himſelfe a true conuert, a prince of ſpirit, and an vtter enemy to the kingdome of Sathan. Wee all deſire to eſcape all outward dangers, and to haue our bodies free from wormes, b
                  •
               les, botches, and all other deformities of body; wherefore ſhould we not then be as carefull to anoyd the dangers and dangerous diſeaſes, deformities and enormities of our ſoules? The leaſt

bodily diſeaſe is ſhunned, why ſhould wee not then feare and preuent the leaſt ſpirituall diſeaſe? Many ſands (though ſmall) will ſinke a ſhippe, as ſoone as a fewe great milſtones: ſo many ſinnes (though little in compariſon of other) will deſtroy our ſoules as well as a fewe great ones. Foxes are enemies to ſheepe as well as wolues, though not ſo dangerous: ſo ſmaller ſinnes are enemies vnto our ſoules, as well as the greater Chriſt will haue both the great and the little Foxes taken,
                  Gant. 2. 15 for (he ſaith) both deſtroy the vines: ſo let vs take and turne from all our ſinnes, little and great: for all are noyſome to the vineyard of our heartes, and hinder our ſpirituall growth. Kill them all, and the vines of Gods graces ſhall flouriſh and abound within vs. And though one ſinne be ſometimes c
                  •••
               rary to another, as couetouſneſſe and prodigalitie, and looke diuerſe wayes, as Sampſons foxes,
                  Iudg. 15. 4. 5. yet are they ioyned in their tailes with a firebrand of

vengeance in the midſt, wherewith (without ſpeciall care) they wil fire mens ſoules, as Sampſons Foxes did the Philiſtines come. Wouldeſt thou not offend thine heauenly Father that did create thee, that doth preſerue thee, & that hath beſtowed his only ſonne vpon thee? then forſake thy ſinnes. A gracious childe forbeareth all thinges which are offenſiue to his father. Wouldeſt thou eſcape the whirl-winde of Gods wrath? then flie from ſinne. Wouldeſt thou bee deliuered of an intollerable burthen? then caſt away thy ſinnes, which are a burthen to thy ſoule, and will otherwiſe preſſe thee downe to hell. Thoſe which are vexed with the Night-mare,Incubus. feele, (as it were) a mountain vpon them, and wiſh earneſtly to haue it remoued. But there is more oddes betweene the weight of ſinne, and that weight which they ſuppoſe they feele, then there is betwixt a mountaine and a mole-hill. Wouldeſt thou not bee iudged of thoſe in the

ende of this world, whom now perhaps thou dooſt contemne, yea and condemne? Wouldeſt thou not haue thy religious wife to iudge thee, that hath laine in thy boſome, thy gracious childe that hath come out of thy loynes, thy ſeruant which hath bene at thy becke, wouldeſt thou not (I ſay) be one day iudged of theſe? then iudge thy ſelfe, and turne from thy ſinnes. For the Saints ſhall iudge the worlde, yea and the wicked Angels.
               1. Cor. 6. 2, 3. Wouldeſt thou haue the holy Angels ſing a ſong for thee in the heauens,
                  Iudg. 5. 24 Lu. 15. 10. as Deborah did for Iael? then turne from thy ſinnes: for there is ioy in heauen at the conuerſion of a ſinner. And ſtrike a naile (as it were) through the temples of thy ſinnes, as ſhe did one indeede through her enemies. Wherefore did Iohn the Baptiſt begin his miniſtery,
                  Math. 3. 2 Math. 4. 17. with Repent: and our Sauiour, with Amend your liues? And why are the Apoſtles ſo frequent and earneſt in dehorting vs from ſinne, if this dutie of turning from it were

not of very great importance? Doſt thou thinke that God is not able to be reuenged of thee? Is he not the Lord of Hoſtes,Dominae
                     •
                   exercituum. Iob. 
                  
                     •
                  5. 6. Heb. 12. 29. Heb. 10. 31. Ezek. 3. 19. and an Eſſence as well infinite in power as in time? And what is man but a worme, an impotent and ſilly wretch? Doeſt thou imagine, that he will not puniſh thee? God is a conſuming fire: and it is a fearefull thing to fall into his hands. The Lord hath ſaid, That if the wicked turne not (vppon the Prophets warning) from his wickedneſſe, nor from his wicked way, he ſhall die in his inquitie. Doeſt thou hope to hide thy ſinnes from his ſight?
                  Pro. 5. 21 
               The waies of a man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondere
                     •
                  h all his paths. Thou vnderſtandeſt my thought a farre off,
               
                  Pſal. 139. 2, 4. Iob. 42. 2. (ſaith Dauid) and there is not a word in my tongue, but lo
                     •
                   thou knoweſt it wholly, O Lord. Doeſt thou thinke with thy cunning and cloſe behauiour, either to deceiue him, or to ſhift him off?
                  Iob. 5. 13. Pſal 7. 9. 
               Hee trieth the wiſe in their craftineſſe: hee trieth the heart and the reines. His eyes are as a

flame of fire which doe pearce into all the corners of the heart. He can tell when thou draweſt neare vnto him with thy lips, but keepeſt thy loue for an other. Yea, but thy birth or beautie, wealth or wiſedome will preuaile with him. Be not deceiued. For God ſeeth not as man ſeeth:
               1. Sam. 16 7. Ier. 17. 10. Pro. 24. 12. 
               for man looketh vpon the outward appearance: but the Lorde beholdeth the heart. I the Lord ſearch the heart, and trie the reines: but why? euen to giue euery man according to his waies. He will (ſaith Salomon) recompence euery man according to his works. Though hand ioyne in hand,
                     Pro. 11. 10. 27. the wicked ſhall not be vnpuniſhed. And whoſoeuer followeth euill, ſeeketh his owne death.
            
            God reſpecteth neither ſtrength nor ſtature, neither face nor faſhion, nor any other circumſtance in the perſon of any man. Yea, rather theſe will aggrauate thy puniſhments, and augment thy paines, if thou wilt not forſake thy ſinnes, becauſe thou haſt not vſed them to

the honour of God, that did honor thee with them.
            We ſee now (beloued) that there is no ſafetie in continuing in our ſinnes; let vs therefore turne from them. And as there is is irreconciliable hoſtilitie betweene the Ichneumon, and the ſerpent Aſpi
                     •
                  , between the Dolphin and the Crocodile:Plin Hiſt. nat lib. ca. 24. 25.
                as God doth hath the diuell, with an euerlaſting hatred: ſo let there bee perpetuall combating betweene vs and our ſinnes: let vs abhor them, and ſtriue againſt them, till God by death, as by a ſword, ſtrike off the head of ſinne, and vtterly demoliſh it, as Ezekiah did the brazen ſerpent.2. Kin. 18. 4. It is a godly flight, to take the wings of the mourning, and to flie from ſinne: it is a good turning to turne from vngodlineſſe:2. Ki. 18. 7. it is a lawfull rebellion to rebell againſt the tyrant Sinne, as the good king Hezekiah did againſt the king of Aſhur, and would not ſerue him. This is the only tirant, which a man may lawfully ſtabbe, and kill. For

For ſinne is a meere vſurper:We are bidden to kill ſinne. all her lawes are wr
                  •
               tten in blood as Dracoes was, and ſhee rewardeth all her vaſſalls with death. Therefore howſoeuer wee haue in times paſt giuen our ſelues vnto ſin,
                  Re. 17. 13 as the ten kings were foretolde to giue their power to the beaſt, yet let vs now reuolt and turne from it, as they ſhoulde from the whore of Babylon: and let vs make it deſolate and deſtroy it, as they ſhall do that purple whore. For (as Peter ſaith) It is ſufficient for vs that wee haue ſpent the time past of our life after the luſt of the Gentiles,
               1. Pet. 4. 3 
               wal
                     •
                  ing in wantonneſſe luſts, dr
                     •
                  nkenn
                     •
                  ſſe, in gluttony, drinkings, and in abhominable idolatries.
               
                  Ro. 13. 12. 
               The night is paſt (ſaith Paul) and the day is at hand: let vs therefore caſt away the works of darkneſſe, and let vs put on the armou
                     •
                   of light, ſo that we wa
                     •
                  ke honeſtly as in the day: not in gluttony and drunkenne
                     ••
                  e, neither in chambring and wantonneſſe, nor in ſtrife and enuie.
            
            Thus then wee haue ſeene from what we muſt turne. Firſt, from Sathan:

for hee dooth either aſſaults vs with violence to deuour vs,
                  Ʋid. Pim. hiſt. nat. li. 10. c. 73.
                like a Lion: or elſe with ſubtiltie, like a Leopard. And if at any time hee pleaſe our corrupt humors, or make faire as if he would doe vs good, it is but in policie; like Herod▪
                that pretended to worſhip Chriſt, but intended to kill him: or like Dauus in the comedie, whom Simo ſaith,Ter. Audr. did ſtudie rather to croſſe him, then to pleaſe his ſonne. So Sathan by ſatiſfying our ſinfull luſts, dooth rather ſeeke to diſpleaſe God, and to exaſperate him againſt vs, then indeede to pleaſe vs. When hee comes vnto thee, with I will giue thee: it is onely with a minde to get thee. When hee dooth transforme himſelfe into an Angel of light, it is but to dec
                  •
               iue thee; as hee did ſometime appeare in the ſhape of Samuel to Saul the king, but not with any purpoſe to doe him good.1. Sam. 28 When he doth ſalute a man, it is onely (as Iudas dealt with his Maſter) to betray him: or like Ioab, who ſpake courteouſly to

               Amaſa and tooke him by the beard to kiſſe him,
                  Sam. 20. 9, 10. but ſuddenly ſlew him with a ſword. Therefore wee haue good cauſe to take heed of him, and to turne from him. Secondly, wee muſt turne from the world: which (like the whore of Babylon) is indeed arrayed in purple and skarlet,
                  Reu. 17. 4. and guilded with golde, and beſet with pearles and precious ſtones, yet is ſhe with all, the ſinke of ſinne, and a notorious harlot, alluring all men to commit fornication with her, and to goe a whoring after her from God. Thirdly, from the waies of the wicked: for they lead vs to the houſe of woe, and bring vs to the pit o
                  •
                perdition, into which many fall, but out of which none doe come, none can come. Fourthly, from all our ſinnes, both great and 
                  •
               mall. For al
                  •
                are the works and inſtruments of the diuel. They are all deceitfull, like a broken too
                  •
               h, and a ſliding foote. They are all of an imperious diſpoſition, like the bramble,
                  Iud 9. 15. that delighted to be king: or like to Crocodiles, that

take themſelues to be kings (as Plinie writeth) in the riuer Nilus,
               Plin nat. hiſt. l 8. c. 25.
                as if it were their pecular Kingdome. Finally, they are all enemies to our chriſtian race; like ſtones in our ſhooes, thornes in our legges, moats in our eyes, flints in our way, or not vnlike to the fiſh called Remora: which, though it bee not very great,Plin. l. 9. c. 25.
                yet cleauing to the keele of a ſhippe vnder water, dooth (as ſome report) cauſe her to goe more ſlowly: and doth oftentimes make her to ſtay, as Trebius Niger affirmeth.
            Thus much for the ſecond point.3. point. To whom we muſt turne. The third followeth now to be conſidered, namely to whom wee muſt turne. The Prophet exhorts vs to turne vnto Iehouah: who is by the Graecians tearmed (Kurios:) by the Latines Dominus: and by vs accordingly called Lord. Firſt in reſpect of creation: ſecondly, in regard of gubernation & preſeruation: thirdly, in reſpect of redemption: fourthly, in regard of abſolute poſſeſſion. For by him wee are created and redeemed:

by him wee are daily gouerned and conſerued: and of him we are poſſeſſed: wee are a part of his poſſeſſions,
                  Act. 17. 28 a part of his goods, in him we liue and moue, and haue our being: of him we hold our liues and lands; himſelfe being an abſolute and eternall ſubſtance, or nature, ha
                  •
               ing life, and being onely of himſelfe, as the word Iehouah ſh
                  •
               weth.
            Now, we are to turne from our ſinnes to him The reaſons are many. Firſt▪ from him we haue wandered, and him we do by our ſinnes principally offend. Let the ſtraying ſheepe returne to their owne ſheepheard. Let the ſeruant that hath tranſgreſſed his maiſ
                  •
               ers will, in running from him, retire to his owne maiſter, and not to an other man. Paul ſent 
                  
                     ••
                  eſimus to his own maiſter Philemon,
               
                  Philem. 12 
               
                  •
               rom whom hee did vnlawfu
                  •
               ly depart. The prodigall ſonne returned to his owne father.
            Secondly, God is the fountaine

both of our being, and well being:
                  Luk. 15. 20. Luk. 1. 16. 1. Cor. 4. 7 Iam. 1. 17 of our doing, and wel doing? of our life & liberty. Yea; What haſt thou, that thou haſt not receiued of him? Euery good giuing (ſaith Iames) and euery perfect gift is from aboue, and and commeth downe from the Father of lights. Thirdly, he is the onely law-giuer,
                  Iam. 4. 12 which is able to ſaue and to deſtroy. He alone can pardon ſinne: therefore he ſaith, I,
               
                  Mar. 
                  
                     •
                  .7. Iſ. 43. 25. 
               euen I am he that putteth away thine iniquities. He alone can heale our ſoules, and kill our ſinnes: therefore he ſaith,
                  Hoſ. 13. 9 & 14. 5. Reuel. 3. 18. Ezek. 36. 26. 
               In mee is thine helpe: and againe, I will heale their rebellion. Hee hath golde, and rayment, & eye-ſalue for the ſoule. He hath a new heart to giue vs, and cleane water to purge vs. He onely can chaunge our mindes, and make vs to turne vnto him. Therefore the Church prayeth in this wiſe:
                  Cant. 1. 3. 
               Draw me: wee will runne after thee. Ephraim ſaith, Conuert thou me,
               
                  Ier. 31. 18 
               and I ſhall bee conuerted. And Ieremy prayeth in behalfe of the people,
                  L
                        ••
                     . 5. 21 Phil. 2. 13 
               Turne thou vs vnto thee, O Lord, and we ſhalbe turned.
               
It is he that worketh in vs, both the will and the deede. Hee is our onely Ariadne, that can helpe vs out of the labyrinth of ſinne. It is hee onely that ſtretcheth forth his hand to ſuccour vs, when wee are readie to ſinke into the water of wickedneſſe, and to be drowned in the floods of iniquitie,
                  Mat. 14. 31. as Chriſt did vnto Peter, when walking vpon the water, he began to ſinke into it. Yea, he is ſo abſolute able (being God omnipotent) to performe all theſe things, as that we cannot at the leaſt ſort diſtruſt his ſufficiencie, without horrible iniurie done vnto him.
            As he was able to ouerwhelme the world with water, and to hinder the building of Babel: ſo he is able to ſubuert the world of our vices, to drowne them with the water of his holy Spirit, and to ſtay the building of ſpiritual Babell, made within vs by Sathan, the onely Architect of all our enormious buildings. As hee was able to riue the rockes,

and to preſerue Daniel in the Lions Denne: ſo is he able to rend our ſtonie hearts, and to defend vs from that cruell Lion, which ſeeketh to prey vpon our ſoules. As he was of power to open the priſon doores, and to fetch Peter with his fellowes out, and at an other time, to vnlooſe the bands, wherewith Paul and Sila
                     •
                  
                with their fellow priſoners, were tied and bound: ſo hee is as wel able to fetch vs out of the priſon of ſin, and to breake the bolts, and vntie the bands of iniquitie. As he was able to driue out diuels, and to cure all diſeaſes: ſo he can (if he will) expell all vncleane ſpirites, that haue takē vp their lodging in our hearts, as the ſpirite of pride, enuie, contention, couetouſneſſe, drunkenneſſe, d
                  •
               zzineſſe, vncl
                  •
               anneſſe; hee is able to binde the ſtrong man Satan, and to caſt him out of vs, and to cure all the diſeaſes of the ſoule. He hath a ſalue for euery ſore, and a medicine for euery maladie. There is neither ſore nor ſickneſſe, but hee

can remedie, if hee pleaſe. Wherefore wee haue good reaſon to turne vnto him, to ſeeke vnto him. The Lizardes ſeeke for Calaminth when they are wounded, beeing an hearb very excellent againſt the byting of ſerpents.
            
               Plin. nat. hiſt. l. 8. c. 27.
               The Storke feeling himſelfe amiſſe, goeth to the herbe Organ for a remedie. The Rauen perceiuing himſelfe poyſoned with the Chameleon, flyeth to the Lawrell, and with it extinguiſheth the venome: ſo when we are wounded or poyſoned with ſinne, and bitten by the ſerpent Sathan, we ought to goe to the Lord: hee is our Calaminth, our Organ, and our Lawrell. Qui fecit, reficere poteſt: he that made vs, can renue vs: he that formed vs, can as well reforme vs: hee that made the ſoule, can as eaſily mend the ſoule. The waues of the Sea (ſaith the Pſalmiſt) are mightie,
               
                  Pſ. 93. 4 
               but the Lord on high is more mightie: ſo indeede the waues of ſinne are loude and mightie,
                  Iſ. 1. 18. but the Lord by his might

can ſtill them. It is good therefore to turne vnto him.
            Fourthly, God is not onely able to conuert and cure vs, but very readie to doe it, if we ſeeke vnto him, and willing to receiue vs if wee return vnto him. For the Lord (ſaith Dauid) is full of compaſſion and mercie,
                     Pſal. 103. 8. 9. ſlowe to anger, and of great kindneſſe. He will not alway chi
                     •
                  e, neither keepe his anger for euer. The father of the Prodigall ſonne, ſeeing his ſon a far off, re
                  •
               urning home vnto him, pittied him, and ran (not goe) vnto him,
                  Luk. 15. 20 and fell vpon his necke and kiſſed him. Dauid ſheweth the admirable affection of God, to a repentant ſinner, when hee ſaith after this ſort: I thought I wil confeſſe againſt my ſelf my wickednes vnto the Lord,
                     Pſ. 32.
                        •
                     . and 
                     •
                  hou forgaueſt the puniſhment of my ſinne. If the Lord be ſo readie to receiue a 
                  •••
               eſſing ſinner, ſhall we thinke hee will reiect a conuerting ſinner, one that doth not onely confeſſe his ſinne in truth, but in truth alſo turne from it, and returne to him?
            
               This argument Ioel vſeth to perſwade the Iſraelites to repent.
                  Ioel 2. 13. 
               Turne (ſaith he) vnto the Lord your God, for he is gracious, and mercifu
                     •
                  l, ſl
                     •
                  w to anger, and of great kindneſſe. So then the mercie of God ſhould be ſo far from making vs carnally ſecure, as that indeede it ſhould rather prouoke and incite vs to rowze vp our ſelues, and to turne againe vnto him.
            Fiftly, hee is not onely by nature louing, but he hath alſo made vs of his loue very gracious promiſes. Hezekiah by the ſpeciall motion of the holy Ghoſt,2. Chro. 30 9 Iſ. 
                  
                     •
                  5. 7. Zach. 1. 3. Iſ. 
                  
                     •
                  4. 26. ſaith: The Lorde your God will not turne his face from you, if ye conuert vnto him. And Eſay ſaith: Let the wicked forſake his waies, and returne vnto the Lord, and he will haue mercie vpon him. Now God is conſtant in his word, and faithfull in his promiſes, and will performe the wordes of his Prophets.
                  Pſ. 86. 15. The Lord (ſaith Dauid) is great in truth. Verbum eius ab intentione non diſſentit, quia veritas est: nec factum à verbo,

quia virius est: his word diſſenteth not from his intention, becauſe he is Veritie: Nor his workes from his word, becauſe he is Ʋertue. Thou wil
                  •
                beleeue thy faithful friend, and wilt thou not beleeue the God of Faith? he condemneth breaking of promiſe in men, therefore ſurely he will not breake his promiſe made with man.
            Sixtly, wee are commaunded to turne vnto God.
                  Iſ 55. 7. 
               Let the wicked returne vnto the Lord.
               
                  Ioel 
                  
                     •
                  .12. Zach. 1.
                     •
                  . Iob. 
                  
                     •
                  5. 14 Pro. 1
                     •
                  . 16 Hoſ 12. 6. 
               Turne you vnto me (ſaith the Lord.) The commandements of God are not to bee neglected. Diſobedience to them is death: but, Hee that keepeth the commaundement, keepeth his owne ſoule. But this is one commaundement of God, that we turne vnto him.
            Laſtly, wee haue the example of the Saints to direct vs. Dauid, Ioſiah, the Niniuites, & Paul. The exa
                  •
               ple of the Saints in good things, ſhould be vnto vs (as the cloude and pillar of fire was vnto the Iſraelites) to goe before vs, and to direct vs into celeſtiall

               Canaan. Imitation is the diſeaſe of the Engliſh Nation; therefore if wee will needes imitate and follow, let vs follow the beſt. Wee are forbidden to followe the faſhions of the world,
                  Rom. 12. 2. but not to follow the foote-ſteps of the Saints. Thus much concerning this third point.
         
         
            The third Sermon.
            
               4. point. In what we muſt turne.THe fourth is In what, and wherein we muſt turne. Which, becauſe it hath affinitie with the ſecond, I will the more ſpeedily diſpatch. We muſt turne to the Lord, in our hearts, mindes, wills, workes, and waies. As the Prieſts clenſed all the houſe of the Lord,2. Chr. 
                  
                     •
                  9 and the altar of burnt offerings, with all the veſſells thereof, and the ſhew-bread table with all the veſſells thereof: ſo we muſt clenſe our hearts & hands, and all our waies from the filthines of our ſinnes. As they went into the inner parts of Gods houſe to clenſe it, and brought out all the vncleanneſſe

that they found: ſo wee muſt enter into the bottome of our hearts, and ſeeke into all the winding corners of our waies to dreſſe them, & wee muſt ſweepe out all the duſt of ſinne, and ſhouell away all the dirt of wickedneſſe. And as the Leuites hurled that vncleanneſſe into the riuer Kidron: ſo ought we to caſt and condemne all our ſinnes into the pit of hell, fr
                  •
               m whence they came. God requireth an alteration in the whole man,
                  Prou. 23. 17. 19. 
               O thou my ſonne (ſaith the Lord) heare, and hee wiſe, guide thine heart in the way. Againe, Let not thine heart be enuious againſt ſinners.
               
                  Ier. 4. 14. 
               O Ieruſalem (ſaith the Prophet) waſh thine heart from wickedneſſe. Here wee ſee that God requireth a turning in the heart; and with good reaſon. For the heart commaundeth both the hand and the tongue. Of the aboundance of the heart, the tongue ſpeaketh. Hee that will haue a cleane ſtreame, muſt purge the fountaine. Hee that will haue good hearbes, muſt weede his garden. Secondly,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
we muſt turne to God in our heads. Wee muſt 
                  •
               e wiſe, but the throne of wiſedome is the head. God will haue a change in our heads:
                  Pro. 12. 2. for a man of wicked imaginations, he wil condemne, ſaith Salomon. Thirdly, hee will haue an alteration in our words.
                  Eph. 4. 29 Col 3. 8. We muſt be full of bleſſing, and beware of curſing: our ſpeech muſt be ſeaſoned with the words of grace. Fourthly, wee muſt turne to God in reſpect of our companions. Ther
                  •
               fore Paul ſaith, Eate not with any brother,
               1 Cor. 5. 11. Pro. 23. 20 
               that is a fornicatour a railer, or couetous. And Salomon ſaith, Keepe not company with drunkards, nor glu
                     •
                  tons. B
                  •
               rds of one feather will flie together. If thy companions be vicious, it may iuſtly bee feared that thou art not vertuous.Plin. nat. hiſt. 
                     ••
                   
                  10. c. 
                     
                        •
                     4.
                The Spider and the Serpent cannot agree: the Thoes & the Lions doe 
                  •
               ouly iarre: the bird Aeguthus doth ſo much abhorre another bird called Anchus, that as ſome affi
                  •
               me, their blood will not mingle together. As Salolomon ſaith accordingly, that A wicked

man is an abhomination (not abhominable) vnto the iust,
               
                  Pro. 29. 27. 
               and hee that is vpright in his way, is an abh
                     •
                  mination to the wicked. Therefore, he that delighteth himſelf with a wicked mās company, ſheweth himſelfe either verie wicked, or very weake. Hee that will turne vnto GOD, muſt change his companions, and hate with Dauid the aſſembly of the euil:
                  Pſ. 26. 4, 5 he muſt, not company with the wicked, and haunt with vaine perſons, but muſt bee (as Dauid was) a companion of a
                  •
               l them,
                  Pſal. 119. 63. that feare God and keepe hi
                  •
                precepts. Fiftly, wee moſt turne to God in the workes of our hands,
                  Ion 3. 8. Zach. 1. 4. Ps;a. 
                  
                     •
                  6, 6. Iam. 4. 8. Pro. 4.
                     •
                  6, 27. and in the waies of our feete. Dauid ſ
                  •
               ith; I will waſh mine hands in innocency O Lord. The wiſe man ſaith, Let all thy waies be ordered aright, remooue thy foote from euill. Laſtly, wee muſt turne to the Lord here vpon earth. The earth muſt be the place of our turning. He that will come to heauen, muſt beginne his race vpon the earth. He that will will not turne to God vppon the

earth, muſt neuer looke to be receiued into heauen. Hee that will not ſet open the gates of his heart here vpon earth for the King of glory to come in the King of glory will not ſet open heauen-gates for him to enter in, when hee ſhall be taken from the earth. And thus much for this fourth point.
            
               5. point. When we muſt turne.The fift is, when wee muſt turne. Hee which turneth, muſt turne in ſomething: and ſo hee muſt turne in ſome time. Wee muſt turne to the Lord without delay. Delay breeds danger. So ſoone as wee haue ſearched and tried our waies, wee muſt turne vnto the Lord. We muſt in no wiſe deferre our conuerſion. For firſt, the Lord ſeemeth to bee (as it were) in trauell, till wee relinquiſh our ſinnes and turne vnto him.
                  Prou. 1. 22, 23. Prou. 6 9. 
               O ye fooliſh (ſaith Wiſedome) how long wil ye loue fooliſhneſſe: turne ye at my correction How long (ſaith God) wi
                     •
                  t thou ſleepe, O ſluggard? When wilt thou ariſe out of thy ſleepe?
               
                  Ier. 4. 14. 
               O Ieruſalem (ſaith the Lord) how long ſhall thy wicked

thoughtes remaine within thee?
               
                  Ier. 13. 27 
               Woe vnto thee, O Ieruſalem, wilt thou not be made cleane? when ſhall it once bee? How long wilt thou goe aſtray,
               
                  Ier. 31. 22 
               O thou rebellious daughter. Therefore to deliuer the Lorde out of his paines, let vs turne vnto him, and repent with ſpeede.
            Secondly, the ſeruice of the Lord is perfect freedome.
                  Iob. 36. 11 And as Elihu ſaith, If men will ſerue him, they ſhall ende their daies in proſperitie and their yeares in pleaſures. Therefore the ſooner we enter into his ſeruice, the ſooner wee ſhall be free from men, yea free-deniſons of new Ieruſalem. And this is not till wee repent and turne vnto him, and 
                  •
               hen it is.
            Thirdly, it is a very abſurd and diſorderly courſe, for any man to take a noble mans liuery, and to weare his recogniſance, and yet in the meane time to ſerue his enemie. Beloued, the profeſſion of pietie is (as it were) the Lordes cloath, and Baptiſme is his badge. Shall wee weare his cloath, & beare his badge?

ſhall wee enter into his houſe, and eate his meate, and in the meane while, ſerue our loſtes and fulfill the fancie of our fleſh, which is an enemie to God and godlineſſe? If wee account this courſe vnreaſonable, as in deede it is, then hauing ſet our feete within the territories of the Church,1. Tim. 3. 15. which is the houſe of God, and hauing taken of him his liuerie and recogniſance, let vs now ceaſe to ſerue his enemies and truly turne vnto him. The longer wee ſtay, the more vnreaſonable wee ſhewe our ſelues to be, and the more iniurious we are to him.
            Fourthly, God doth often withdrawe the outward ſig
                  •
               es of his fauour from them which wander from him 
                  ••
               d forget to turne againe
                  •
                y
                  •
               a though they bee his deere children. There
                  •
               ore hee ſaith,
                  Pſ. 89. 31, 32. that if they breake his ſ
                  •
               atues▪ hee will then viſite their tranſgreſſion with rods, and ſo he doth vſually. As wee therefore feare Gods correction, and dread his rods, let vs beware of

ſinning againſt him: and if wee be ouertaken at anytime, as who is not? let vs without delay repent and recouer our ſelues. A good childe hauing iniuſtly vexed his father, will not be quiet till they be reconciled againe.
            Fiftly, when wee liue in ſinne, and haſten not to turne from it vnto God, then we diſtemper our conſciences. Were it not then better to returne with ſpeede, then either to dull or diſquiet them? What is more intollerable then a diſturbed conſcience?
                  Pro. 18. 14 
               The ſpirit of a man will ſuſtaine his infirmity: but a wounded ſpirit who can beare it? An euill conſcience is a mans priſon, his Iailer, his accuſer, his Iudge, yea and executioner alſo. Though a man could diſſemble his griefe and ſeeme to laugh,
                  Pro. 14. 13 yet euen in that laughing the heart is ſorrowfull. And though the countenance doe not alway bewray the anguiſh and agony of the minde perplexed, yet The heart knoweth the bitterneſſe of his ſoule.
               
                  Pro. 14. 10
            
            
               Now then, were it not better for a man with ſpeede to turne, then by delay to purchaſe and procure that to be his foe, which hee ought to make his ſureſt friend, and deeme a daily delight?
                  Pro. 15. 15. 13. 
               For a good conſcience is a continuall feast, and a ioyfull heart (which is not without the other) maketh a cheerfull countenance.
            
            Sixtly, though God haue pardoned all the ſinnes of his children by his decree, promiſe, and merits of his ſonne: yet he doth not actually apply this pardon to their faith and feeling, till they do turne vnto him. For though I doe forgiue my brother, though hee doe not aske forgiueneſſe, yet (I thinke) I need not alway tell him ſo, till he doe aske: ſo, though God did indeede pardon our ſinnes in his decree, and in the purpoſe of his heart, yet doth he neuer ſeale the pardon actually vnto vs, till we turne vnto him, and deſire it. The father of the Prodigall ſonne did not goe to meete his ſonne, till

his ſonne had firſt determined to returne vnto him.
            Seuenthly, there is a day of grace, a day of ſaluation, a time wherein God will be found. Therefore Eſay counſelleth vs to ſeeke the Lorde whiles he may be found,
                  Iſ. 55. 6. and to call vpon whileſt hee is neare. And Wiſedome ſaith,Pro. 1. 28. 29. 
               They ſhall ſeeke mee early, but they ſhall not fin
                     •
                  e mee, becauſe they hated knowledge, and did not chuſe the feare of the Lord. Beloued, this is the day of ſalu
                  •
               tion, this is the day of obt
                  •
               ining preſent grace, and future glory, yet the trumpet or the Goſpell is ſounded amongſt vs, yet the Lorde like a Nurſe, holdeth out his naked breaſtes vnto vs, yet wee heare his voice 
                  •
               inging in our eares, Awake, thou that ſleepest,
               
                  Eph. 5. 14 
               and ſtand vp from the dead, and Chriſt ſhall giue thee light. Let vs therefore redeeme the time, and ſerue the ſeaſon. Take the tide which ſtayes for no man, and ſtrike the Iron, whiles it is hote: it is yet ſommer, winter will come: it is yet light, but night

draweth on, the Sun ſe
                  •
               meth to deſcend, the ſhadowes are long.
                  Iam. 4. 8. 
               Draw neere to God, and he will draw neere to you.
               
                  Gal. 6. 10. 
               To day if ye heare his voyce harden not your hearts. And as Paul ſaith, While wee haue time let vs doe good to all men. So I ſay, while we haue time, let vs doe this good vnto our ſelues, let vs leaue our ſinnes, and turne to God. He that hath a long iourny to goe, and but a little time to finiſh it in (as wee haue) will take the day before him, and ſet foote forward betimes.
            Eightly, let the enſample of the Saints be conſidered. Dauid was no ſooner admoniſhed by Nathan, but hee preſently repented, Peter no ſooner conſidered his hainous offence, but hee did relent. The Prodigall ſonne feeling his ſmart, forthwith reſolued to turne home vnto his Father. The Niniuites hearing the ſhort, but ſharpe Sermon of P
                  •
               ophet Ionah, beleeued God and repent
                  •
               d: yea their King did immediately vppon his intelligence,

by proclamation comm
                  •
               nd euery man to turne from his euill way. And God ſawe their workes, that they turned from their euill waie
                     •
                  .
               
                  Ion. 3. 5, 8, 10. The good Iewes, hauing heard their ſinnes diſcouered by Peter, were preſently pricked in their heartes (as if his wordes had beene ſwordes) and cried out vnto Peter and the other Apoſtles,
                  Act. 2.
                     •
                  7, 38, 41. 
               Men and brethren, what ſhall we doe? Then Peter ſaide, Amend your liues and be baptized. And as the Scripture ſaith, they receiued his wordes gladly. Here are hearers indeede: happie teachers, happy bearers, worthy of our imitation. But our hearers for the moſt parte, are like braſſe and yron, their heartes are made of marble, inſomuch that wee may (in ſome ſort) ſay with the Prophet: The bellowes are burnt,
               
                  Ier. 6. 29. 
               the leade is conſumed in the fire, the Founder melteth in vaine: our oyle is waſted, our labour ſpent vppon them is loſt wee light a

candle to the walles, and ſpeake to the ſtones: for they will not forgoe their droſſe, & part from their ſins. But the word of the Lord ſhall not returne voyd,
                  Iſ. 55. 11. but ſhall accompliſh that which he will, and ſhal proſper in the thing whereto hee ſent it. It muſt be the ſauour of life vnto life by his grace to ſome, and the ſauour of death vnto death, by their corruption to others. The ſunne doth whiten flaxe, but blacke the face: and fire will ſtiffen clay, but ſoften waxe. But I returne from whence I haue digreſſed.
            To conclude this point; Samuel, and Timothy, and Ioſeph began to ſerue the Lord in their tender yeres. Shall wee giue the ſtrength of our dayes vnto Sathan, and keeepe our rotten bones and withered age for God? Will any man entertaine a ſeruant that ſeekes vnto him in his olde age, but refuſed his ſeruice all his life before, though hee was by many meſſengers deſired?
            
               Can a man be happy to ſoone? Can a man bee holy too ſoone? Young diuells ſildome make olde Saintes. Though ſound repentance bee neuer too late, yet late repentance is ſ
                  •
               ldome or neuer ſound. Hee that hopes to finde mercie, as the theefe did at the laſt gaſpe, though hee liue lewdly all his life time, may as well by ſpurring of his Aſſe, looke that hee ſhoulde ſpeake, becauſe Balaams Aſſe did ſo on a time. Euery man with Pamphilus deſires to bee rid of his feare with as much ſpeede as may bee.Ter, And. quàm primùm hoc me 
                     •
                  ihera me
                     •
                  u. What greater feare can any man bee poſſeſt with, then, the f
                  •
               are of d
                  •
               mnation, from which no man can before his conuerſion aſſure himſelfe to bee freed? If a thorne bee in our foote, or a moate in our e
                  •
               e, without delay wee ſeeke to pull it out. Why then ſhuld wee not bee as diligent to haue our ſinnes pluckt ou
                  •
                of our hearts, ſeeing they are as thornes and moates vnto our ſoules? If any thing diſquiet vs, wee doe preſently ſeeke to remoue

it. There is no quietneſſe in ſinne, no peace in ſinning. Therefore as Paul wiſheth the Gala
                  •
               ians. Woulde to God they were euen cut off,
               
                  Gal. 5. 12. 
               which doe diſquie
                     •
                   you: ſo let vs now wiſh & labour that our ſinnes may be deſtroyed, for they do diſtemper and diſquiet vs. The Elephant hauing ſwallowed downe a Lizard,Plin. nat. hiſt. 
                     ••
                  . 8. c. 
                     •
                  . goeth ſtraightway to a wilde Oliue for a remedie. The Hinde feeling himſelfe poiſoned with ſome venemous weede, goeth without delay to the Artichoke for cure. Men are verie ready to ſend or to runne to the Phiſi
                  •
               ian or the Chirurgeon for the d
                  •
               ſeaſes and wounds, which can only kill the body: why then ſhould wee not be as ready to ſeeke to God for the cure of the diſeaſes and wounds of the ſoule, which if they be not cured and repented of, will k
                  •
               ll both ſoule and body? We all deſire that GOD ſhould turne to vs with ſpeede, when he frowneth vpon vs, and ſpeakes roughly to vs, as Ioſeph did to his brethren: wee

would not that hee ſhould hide the light of the Sunne, or holde vp the water in the cloudes long from vs: we would not haue him vnkind vnto vs a moment: wherefore then ſhoulde wee be vnkinde vnto him, why ſhould we any time neglect his ſeruice, or reiect his worde? Why ſhould we prorogue the time of turning to him? Can wee be too ſoone in his court? too ſoone in his loue? too ſoone in his ſeruice? If wee cannot (as indeede wee cannot) then let vs with ſpeed make haſte vnto him. The longer we tarry, the more vnfit wee make our ſelues to turne. For Cenſuetudo peccand
                     •
                   tollit ſenſum peccati, A cuſtome in ſinning, takes away the ſenſe of ſinne: and when men become ſenceleſſe, they proue ſenſuall and ſottiſh, feeling no miſerie, & therefore affecting no change. And this ſhall ſuffice for the fift point.
            The ſixt to be conſidered is,6. point. How men muſt turn
                     •
                  
                how we muſt turne to God. For, that any good worke may bee well done,

and ſo accepted of God, it muſt bee done in due manner. Ahab and Iudas repented after a faſhion, but it was not the right faſhion. Many men make many turnings, but they bee not good and gracious.Bona non bonè Splendida peccata. The wicked doe many good thinges, but none well: and therefore their goodly workes are but goodly ſinnes. Laſtly, the wicked doe not onely wi
                  •
               ked things, but they haue withall a guiſe in doing them wickedly▪
               
                  Pſal. 59. 5. Pro. 2. 15. 
               Dauid ſpeaketh of ſome that tranſgreſſe maliciouſly. The wiſe man maketh mention of ſome that are Iewd in their paths.
                  Pro. 10. 23 
               Salomon ſaith; It is a paſtime to a foole to doe (not that onely which is wicked, but to doe it alſo) wickedly. The ſacrifice of the wicked (ſaith he) is an abhomination to the Lord:
               
                  Pro. 21. 27 
               how much more when hee bringeth it with a Wicked Minde.
               
                  Iude. 15. Iſa. 32. 6. The wicked as Enoch ſheweth, doe not only commit wicked actions, but they doe them wickedly.
            Conſidering therefore that the wicked haue a cuſtome or faſhion

in their working,Malum ma
                     •
                  è. not onely to doe a ſinfull action, but ſometimes alſo (if not alway) to doe it ſinfully, wee on the contrary are taught, not onely to ſee that all the works we do be good, but that they be withall well, and not wickedly done, as many vſe to do, and ſo marre that by the manner, which was good for the matter. To come then to the point in hand. Wee muſt not onely turne to the Lord, but we muſt turn handſomely and holily. If Ahab had turned as he ought to haue done, hee ſhould neuer haue beene reiected. That wee therefore turne aright from euerie euill vnto the Lord, we muſt obſerue theſe rules that follow. Firſt, wee muſt turne in faith. For, Whatſoeuer is not of faith, is ſinne.
               
                  Ro. 14. 23 Wee muſt beleeue that our turning is both good in it ſelfe, and good in vs, yea and for vs; yet not for any merit in it, but by the meere mercy of God, that doth in loue accept it, and of his mercie promiſe life and proſperitie, if wee will turne. Secondly, we muſt turne

in the name of Chriſt.
                  Col. 3. 17. 
               Whatſoeuer y
                     •
                   doe (ſaith Paul) whether in word or deede, doe all in the name of the Lord Ieſus. If wee would haue God accept and approue our conuerſion, wee muſt conuert in the name of Chriſt. If a man behold the Rain-bow, or the Sun being ready to ſet through a groue of trees, the trees will ſeeme brighter then otherwiſe they doe: and if a man looke through a blew glaſſe, all that hee ſeeth will ſeeme blew; ſo if the Lord behold our conuerting to him, in or through the righteouſneſſe of Chriſt, he will accept of it, nothing regarding the weakneſſe of it, as being hidden (is it were) from his eyes in the blood of Chriſt.
                  Hoſ. 12. 6. Thirdly, wee muſt turne to God in conſciencence of his commandement, euen becauſe hee dooth commaund vs to turne vnto him. Fourthy, we muſt turne in ſinceritie & vprighteouſneſſe of heart: for if wee t
                  •
               rne in ſhew, and not in truth, wee make a mocke of God: like thoſe of whom God ſaith, This

people draw neere vnto mee with their lippes, but their heartes are farre from mee. If we condemne ſinne with our tongues, and take pleaſure in it in our hearts, wee make our ſelues abhominable to the Lord,
                  Heb. 4. 13 before whoſe ſight all things lie bare and naked. Therefore Dauid ſaith,
                  Pſ. 
                  
                     •
                  6. 18. 
               If I regard wickednes in my heart, the L
                     •
                  rd will not heare me. Let vs 
                  •
               herefore (beloued) turne with the heart, heartily and ſincerely. Caſt aſide (ſaith Peter) all deceit and hypocriſies.
               1. Pet. 2. 1 Pro. 1
                     •
                  . 22. 
               They that deale truly (ſaith Solomon) are Gods delight: ſo they that turne truly do pleaſe him at the heart. Ioſiah is ſ
                  •
               id to haue turned to the Lord,2. King. 23 25. 
               With all his heart, with all his ſoule and with all his might according to the Law of Moſes. W
                  •
               e cannot deceiue th
                  •
                Lord.
                  Ier. 17. 9, 10. For though the heart b
                  •
               e deceitfull and wick
                  •
               d aboue all things, yet the Lord doeth ſearch it out and ſee it, and rewardeth euery man according to the fruit of his workes. Now a man may know whether he turne 
                  ••
               ncerely, or but in ſhew and ſuperficially,

by theſe three notes of true turning. Firſt, if hee turne to God, becauſe hee loueth him, and for his loue feareth to diſpleaſe him, and not ſo much for feare of puniſhment, as the reprobate vſe to doe. Secondly, if he turne, becauſe he deteſteth ſin as an enemy to the glory of God, and to the ſaluation of his owne ſoule, and therefore laboureth with heart and hand againſt all his ſinnes without exception. Thirdly, if he turne not like the old Iſraelites, of whome the Pſalmiſt ſaith, that when God ſlew them, they returned and ſought him early: but they flattered him with their mouth,
                  Pſ. 
                  
                     •
                  8. 34, 36, 37. for their heart was not vpright with him, therefore (as many with vs vſe to do after their ſolemne proteſtations of their repentance in the extreamitie of ſome ſickneſſe) they fell againe to their old byas, and ſtarted aſide like a deceitfull bow. Fiftly, wee muſt turne to the Lord cheerefully,1 Chron. 28. 9. and willingly. Dauid commands his ſon Salomon to ſerue his God with a

perfit heart, and with a willing mind. As we muſt turne ſincerely without ſimulation, ſo wee muſt turne cheerefully, not heauily, willingly: not as by conſtraint.2. Cor. 9. 7. 1. Pet. 5. 2. As God loueth a cheerefull giuer, ſo hee loueth a cheerefull conuert. Feed the flock of God (ſaith Peter) caring for it not by conſtraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: ſo I ſay, turne to the Lord with care, and willingnes of mind, not as it were by compulſion or for feare: turn readily, not being mooued with hope of gaine, or credite with men, as many doe. If there be a willing mind and a cheerefull affection, it is accepted;2. Cor. 8. 12. yea a cōſtant & ſetled wil to turne, is of God accounted turning indeede. Now this alacrious and willing turning is perceiued two waies. Firſt, by ſpeedy turning. For cheerefulnes will be quicke, nimble, and ſpeedy, not ſluggiſh and lither.
                  Pſ. 119. 60. 
               Dauid ſaith; I made haſte & delaied not to keep thy commandements; ſo we to ſhew our ſelues alacrious conuerts, muſt turne without delay.Plin. l. 10. c. 74.
                The Spider eſpying a Serpentlying vnder the ſhade of the tree where ſhe ſpinneth, maketh preſently vnto her and poiſoneth her: ſo we muſt deale with our

ſins. For if they bee but let alone awhile they will get ſhelter within vs, and wil not very eaſily be remoued; like the ſea-Dragon,Plin. li. 9. c. 27.
                which if he be let goe vpon the land, maketh with his ſnowt a hollow trough with admirable celeritie. Secondly, this cheereful turning is likewiſe very laborious. A willing mind makes a man very painefull. He that turnes vnto God cheerefully, wil ſtriue exceedingly againſt his corruptions, and labour to pleaſe God in all things.
                  Pro. 26. 13. Prou. 6. 10. Pro. 26. 14. He will not ſay with the ſluggard, there is a Lion in the way, a Lion is in the ſtreetes. He will not ſay, yet a little ſleep, a little ſlumber. The ſlouthfull man turneth vpon his bed as a doore vpon the hinges, but ſo doth not he. But hee makes haſte to his buſineſſe, and is very diligent and painefull in his workes. The wicked are actiue, liuely, forward, & induſtrious in working wickedneſſe, wherefore then ſhould not we be painefull and ready to do that which is good, as to turne from ſinne, and returne vnto God? Laſtly, wee muſt turne to the Lord daily. Wee muſt renew our repentance euery day.1. Theſ. 5. 16, 17 
               Reioyce euermore (ſaith Paul) and pray continually. So I ſay,

repent euermore, & return continually. For we do ſin daily, we tranſgreſſe continually, we offend euermore. So long as we liue vpō the earth, we ſhall not be free from ſinne, we cannot bee free from ſinning. Therefore we had need to repent and turne to God continually. Bleſſed are thoſe, which doe perſeuere in turning vnto the ende. There is no ſhame in turning to God, all the ſhame is in turning from him. And thus much concerning the ſixt point. It remaineth now to ſpeake of the ſeuenth, and the laſt, to wit:
            
               Wherefore we must turne.
               7. Point. Why wee muſt turne. For whoſoeuer worketh, muſt in reaſon propound the end of his worke vnto himſelfe. And he that will doe any good worke well, muſt doe it, not onely in a good maner, & by good means, but alſo to a good ende. The ende why wee muſt turne to the Lord, is double, ſupreme and ſubordinate, greater or leſſer. The maine and higheſt end of our turning, ought to be the glory of God. Therefore Paul ſaith: Whether y
                     •
                   eate,
               1. Cor. 10. 
               or drinke, or whatſoeuer elſe ye doe, 
                     •
                  oe all to the glory of God. The ſubordinate

and inferiour end is manifold. Firſt, that wee may ſhewe our ſelues of the number of Chriſts ſheepe, which muſt all be gathered together into one fold, and conuerted from their indirect and crooked waies. Secondly, that we may gather aſſurance to our ſelues of our eternall predeſtination, to perpetuall bleſſednes, and that we are out of the ranke of reprobates, whom God hath reiected, and prepared for the day of euill.
                  Pro. 16. 4. Thirdly, that we may adorne the profeſſion of Chriſtianitie, which wee haue taken vpon vs. Fourthly, that wee may ſtop the mouthes of Atheiſts, Papiſts, and all diſſolute and deſperate catiues, that take vpon them with open mouthes, to blaſpheme & bark againſt our religion, for the ſinnes and irregularities of the multitude amongſt vs. Fiftly, that we may allure men to the liking both of vs, and of our contemned profeſsion, and alſo to ſtir them to conuert, and glorifie God. Therefore our Sauiour ſaith,
                  Math. 5. 16. 1. Pet. 2. 11, 12. 
               Let your light ſo ſhine before men, that they may ſee your good workes, and glorifie your Father which is in heauē. And likewiſe Peter, Abſtain from

fleſhly luſts, and haue your couerſation honeſt among the Gentils, that they which ſpeake euil of you, as of euil doers, may by your good workes, which they ſhal ſee, glorifie God in the day of viſitation. This ſhall ſuffice for theſe ſeuen points, and for this doctrine of turning to the Lorde. Let vs now ſee how this doctrine may be applied for our vſe and benefit, and ſo we will conclude. The vſe is either of reprehenſion or exhortation.
            Firſt, the conſideratiō of theſe things,Vſe. 1.
                ſerueth to condemne al thoſe which refuſe to turne, but wil (notwithſtanding al admonitions) run on without repentance, to the diſhonour of God, the offence of his people, the griefe of their friends, and deſtruction of their owne ſoules.
                  Iſ. 5. 18. Theſe men (to vſe the words of the Prophet) doe draw iniquitie with cords of vanity, and ſinne as with ca
                  •
               tropes. Theſe mē (as the Lord ſpeaketh of the Iſraelites) are wiſe to the diuell,
                  Ier. 4. 22. Ier. 9. 5. Pſ. 52. 3. Pro. 14 9. but to doe well, they haue no knowledge. They take great paines to doe wickedly: and as Dauid ſaith of Doeg, they loue euil more then good. Theſe are the fooles that make but a mock of

ſinne. Theſe are they that eſteeme the Prophets words as wind, and their m
                  •
               
               nacies as mockes. Theſe like thoſe, of whom the Prophet Ieremy ſpeaketh,
                  Ier. 5. 3. haue made their faces harder then a ſtone, and haue refuſed to returne. A ſtone will be battered with an hammer, and worne in the end with continuall dropping; but theſe men will neither be bruſed with the hammer of the law, nor mollified with the oyly drops of the Goſpel, which are daily falling vpon them. Men they are not, but monſters, of a prodigious, luxurious, & rebellious diſpoſition; to whom belongeth eternall confuſion of face, which they cannot poſsibly eſcape without ſerious and ſound repentance of ſinne, and turning vnto God, before it be too late.Vſe. 2.
                Secondly, all thoſe are here to be reprehended, which deferre their conuerſion from day to day, like many bad pay-ma
                  •
               ſters. As Foelix ſaid to Paul, Goe thy way for this time,
               
                  Act. 24. 25. 
               and when I haue a conuenient time, I will call for thee: ſo they will turne, when they haue a conuenient time to turne in. They haue oxen to p
                  •
               oue, wiues to looke too, or dead to

burie, they cannot (nay they will not) come yet, they haue not leiſure to turne as yet. They can turne their religion with the weather-cocke, they can fit their profeſsion (as Millers doe their ſayles) for euery winde, how contrarie ſoeuer it be, they can turn any whither, but to God. Theſe men may indeed be aſhamed of their turning, & that with good cauſe: and that they may ſhame their former turnings, let them fire the wheele of their turning deuiſes, and returne to God. Otherwiſe they ſhewe themſelues to bee of the nature of the Moone,
                  Reu. 12. 2 whereon the Church doth ſet her feete, and to be the natural children of the world, which is made of turning mettall, and is conſtant in nothing but in inconſtancie, changing her face as often as the Chamaeleon dooth her colour.
            Thirdly, all thoſe are to be condemned,Vſe. 8.
                which wil leaue ſome of their ſins, but will not part from all. They will needes entertaine one at the leaſt,
                  Iam. 1. 21. Pro. 3. 31. as their darling. But Iames ſaith, Lay a part all filthineſſe. God forbiddeth vs to chooſe any of the waies of the wicked.

As there is no brooke ſo ſmall, no riuer ſo little, but will bring a man to the ſea, if hee will follow it: ſo there is no ſinne ſo ſmall, nor yet any of the wicked mās waies whatſoeuer, but if a man addict his heart vnto them & follow them to the end, they will leade 
                  •
                man to the pit of perdition, and to a wide & bottomleſſe gulfe of euerlaſting horrours, and horrible tortures.
            
               
                  Ʋſe 4.
               Fourthly, thoſe are conuinced of vnorderly turning, which turn from one ſinne vnto an other, and not from their ſinnes vnto God, as we are here exhorted. Some turne from their prodigalitie, to couetouſneſſe: ſome from fooliſh humility, to humble pride: ſome from ſottiſh ignorance, & leadenneſſe of ſpirit, to captious curioſity, and to a ſpirituall lunacie, being ready to run wilde with their owne light. What is this but with Aeſops fiſh to leap out of the frying pan into the fire,
                  Ier 4 1. to eſcape buſhes, & fall among brambles? But the Lord will haue vs turn to him. O Iſrael, if thou returne,
               
                  Iſa 44. 22 1. Theſ. 1. 9 
               returne vnto mee, ſaith the Lord. The Theſſalonians turned to God frō idols, to ſerue the liuing and true God.

When we relinquiſh one extreame, we muſt not run to the other, but we muſt keepe the meane.
            To conclude this text: wee all,
                  Ʋſe. 5.
                both old and young, rich and poore, high and low, wee are all (I ſay) taught and admoniſhed to repent of all our ſins,
                  Zach. 1. 4. Hoſ. 10. 12 and with ſpeed to turne vnto the Lord. Breake vp your fallow ground for it is time to ſeeke the Lord.
               
                  Ier. 4. 4. Bee circumciſed to the Lord, an
                  •
                take away the fore-skins of your hearts, leſt my wrath come 
                  •
               orth like fire, and burne, that none can quench it.
                  Pſ. 8
                     •
                  . 2, 3. How long will 
                  •
               ee iudge vniuſtly, and accept the perſons of the wicked? Do right to the poore and fatherleſſe, do iuſtice to the needy.
                  Pro. 1. 22. 
               O
                     •
                  e skornfull, how long will yee take pleaſure in skorning? O yee fooles,
                     Pro. 3.
                        •
                     7. how long will ye ha
                     •
                  e knowledge? Will not the Lord haue vs to with holde the good from th
                  •
                owners thereof, and ſhal we dare to withdraw or withhold our ſelues from him, whoſe goods we are in man
                  •
                reſpects? Hee that turneth not vnto God, withholdeth himſelfe from God, and locketh himſelfe vp in the diuells holde. Maiſt thou not ſay vnto thy neighbor,
                  Pro. 3. 28. 
               Goe, and come againe, and to morrow will I

giue thee, if thou now haue it? And wilt thou now denie the Lord, that comes vnto thee for his owne, which nowe thou haſt in thine handes to giue him, if thou liſt to part (if part) from it? We are forbidden to wrong & to rob our neighbor, yea (ſaith the Lord) the work-man
                     •
                   hire ſhall not abide with thee vnto the morning;
                  L
                        •
                     . 19. 13 meaning, without his conſent or leaue. And ſhall we preſume to rob the Lord, to wrong the Lord, or to deteine any thing from the Lord, though but for a night, without his leaue & licence? Thou art the Lord
                  •
               , then turne vnto him, delay no time, withhold not thy ſelfe a moment from him. Thou haſt no leaue, therefore leaue to loiter, and returne with ſpeed. Thou art happie thou haſt ſo good an owner, ſo kind a Maſter.1. Cor. 7. 5 
               Paul will not haue man and wife departe aſunder for a time, without mutuall conſent. And dareſt thou depart frō god without his leaue? Dareſt thou tarry away without his liking? Is there any ſafety, but vnder his wings? Was not Eue made a prey to the ſerpent, when ſhe was abſent from her husband? Is there any peace without

Gods pardon, or is there any pardon without mans penitency? In what a wretched condition is the malefactour apprehended & attached of high treaſon without the kings pardon? Is not his life a death, and his death a horrour? Paul would not giue place by ſubiectiō for an houre to the falſe brethren.
                  Gal. 2. 5. 14. So we ſhould not yeeld to the diuell a iot. And as ſoone as hee ſaw Peter play a trick of ſimulation, he did incontinently rebuke him: ſo wee ought preſently to reforme our waies, ſo ſoone as euer we doe perceiue that we tread awry, or wander out. Shall Paul trauell in birth,
                  Gal. 4. 19. vntill Chriſt bee formed in the Galatians, and they reſtored to him, and ſhall wee be careleſſe of our ſelues? ſhall not we be (as it wer
                  •
               ) in trauel and continuall torment till Chriſt be formed in vs,2. Cor. 13. 7. and we formed to him? Shall Paul pray that the Corinthians may do none euil, and ſhall not wee labour for our ſelues againſt all euill?2. Cor. 12. 21. Shall Paul be ready to bewaile thoſe, which hauing ſinned do not repent of their vncleannes, fornication, and wantonnes, and ſhall not wee lament, relent, and repent for our own

ſins? Do we not know that tribulation belongeth vnto thoſe, that will not turn vnto God? Aſhur ſhall be his king, becauſe they refuſed to conuert.
               
                  Hoſ 11. 5. Amos. 8. 4 
               Amos ſpeaketh of ſome that ſwallow vp the poore, which are the creatures of God as well as the rich.
                  Pro. 30. 14 And Agur ſaith; There is a generation, whoſe teeth are as ſwordes, and their iawes as kniues, (horrible and bloody mo
                  •
               ſters) to eate vp the afflicted out of the earth, and the poore from among men. Shal any men, can any men be 
                  •
               hus brutiſh, barbarous, and cruell hearted to their brethren, to their owne fleſh? and ſhall we do nothing vnto our ſinnes, which are the gangreues, and the plague-ſores of our ſoules, and vtter enemies to our peace and ſafety? ſhall wee let them alone, ſhall we ſtand ſtill, & ſuffer them to deſtroy vs?
                  Pſal. 137. 8, 9. 
               O daughter Babel, worthy to bee deſtroyed! And is not ſinne the daughter of the diuell, and the Babel of the ſoule, as worthy to bee deſtroyed? Bleſſed (ſaith the Pſalmiſt) ſhall hee be (not ſeeme, nor called) that taketh and daſheth thy children againſt the ſtones: euen ſo bleſſed ſhall that man be (I ſay bee) that daſheth his ſinnes in peeces,

and killeth the killing corruption of his heart, which like the fire ſaith not,Pro. 30. 15 Plin. l. 8. c. 25.
                
               It is enough: and like the Crocodile, will grow ſo long as it hath any life, vnleſſe it be both preſſed and oppreſſed. If Dauid crie out. Woe is vnto me,
               
                  Pſ. 120. 5. 
               that I remaine in Meſhek, and dwell in the tents of Kedar; haue not we cauſe to lamēt, that we remaine in our ſinnes, and for that not onely ſinne dwelleth in vs, but we alſo in ſinne: as it is to be feared, many of vs may truly ſay as much, if we did ſearch our ſelues narowly. Dauid could ſay: My ſoule hath too long dwelt with him that hateth peace.
               
                  Pſ. 120. 6. Wherefore then ſhould not we be wearie of our ſinnes, which are ſworne enemies to all true peace? Amos maketh mention of ſome, that deſire the Sabbath were gone,
                  Amos. 8. 5. 6. that they might ſell their corne deere, and falſifie their weights: yea, that they might buy the poore for ſiluer, and the needie for ſhooes. Their delay was as death vnto them. Shall any man make ſo much haſte for filthy lucre, and to worke heinous iniquitie, and ſhall wee linger the time, and deferre to do good, to turne from our ſinnes vnto God▪
               
               Dauid was grieued,
                  Pſ. 119. 158. becauſe he ſaw men that kept not the word of God: & ſhal not we be grieued for our ſelues, when wee breake the commaundements of God, and demonſtrate our griefe by our true turning vnto him? Muſt Ieruſalem mourn,
                  Ier. 7. 29. 30. becauſe the children of Iudah haue ſet their abhominations in the houſe of God, and ſhall we be ioyfull and careles, while our hearts, which are the houſes of the holy Ghoſt, are polluted with abhominable corruptions, whereof we haue not all of vs as yet truly repented, as our liues doe teſtifie? Yea, rather let vs repent, and turne againe vnto the Lord, and then we may indeed reioyce. Was Ieremie ſore vexed for the hurt of the daughter of his people?
                  Ier. 8. 21. Lam. 3. 48 Shall his eye caſt out riuers of water for her deſtruction? And ſhal not we lament for our owne hurt, for defacing of Gods image within vs, and for the many grieuous wounds of our ſoules? Muſt Chriſt be nayled to the Croſſe for thy ſinnes, and pearced with a ſpeare to the heart for thy wickedneſſe; and wilt not thou turne from them, and forſake them? Shal he grone,

and ſigh, and ſob, ſhall he ſweate water and bloud for thy ſinnes, and wilt thou yet delight in them, wilt thou not forſake and leaue them? knoweſt thou not that Chriſt bare our ſinnes vpon the Croſſe, that we ſhould die to ſinne,1. Pet. 2. 24. and liue in righteouſneſſe? Paul ſaith, that Chriſt gaue himſelfe for vs, that hee might redeem vs from all iniquitie, and purge vs to be a peculiar people vnto himſelfe, Zealous of good workes. Therefore,
                  Tit. 2. 14. to ſhew our ſelues to be the redeemed of Chriſt, we muſt turne from our ſinnes, and follow the workes of pietie and iuſtice. As there is no agreement betweene God and the Diuell, betweene Chriſt and Beliall,
               Plin. nat. hiſt. lib. 10. cap. 74.
                betweene light, and darkneſſe: as there is mortall enmitie betweene the Eagle and the Swan, betweene the Turtle and the Pyralis, betweene the Ichneumon and Waſpe, the Rauen and the Leriot, one of them iarring and warring with an other: ſo let there be no concord betwixt the
                  •
                and thy ſinnes, but as they contend againſt thy ſoule, ſo doe thou wage warre with them, and ceaſe not till thou haue gotten conqueſt ouer

them.1 Pet. 2. 2
                     •
                  . Turning from euill, and turning vnto God, be the two Cardines, or celeſtiall Poles of mans conuerſion. And as Peter ſaith of the faithfull in his time; that they were as ſheepe going aſtray, but are now returned vnthe Sheepheard and Biſhop of their ſoules: euen ſo, though ye haue bene in time paſt ſtraglers from the Lorde, and tranſgreſſours of his lawe, yet now repent of your ſinnes, and turne againe vnto him; ſo ſhall Sathan be grieued, his members ſilenced, the godly edified, your ſelues comforted, and God glorified; vnto whom be rendered all honour, praiſe and glory, in the Church, and of the Church, 
                  •
               or euer and euer. Amen.
            
            Trin-vni Deo Gloria.
            
         
      
   