
      
         
            
            
            ❀The whole booke of Pſalmes, collected into Engliſh Meter by Thomas Sternhold, I. Hopkins and others: cōferred with the Hebrue, with apt Notes to ſyng them withall. Faithfully peruſed and allowed accordyng to the Quenes Maieſties Iniunctions.
            ¶Very meete to be vſed of al ſortes of people priuately for their ſolace & comfort: laying apart al vngodly ſonges and Ballades, which read only to the noriſhing of vice & corrupting of youth.
            IAMES. V.
            ☜If any be afflicted let hym praye, and if any be mery, let hym ſyng Pſalmes.
            
            COLLOS. III.
            Let the word of God dwel in you in al wiſdō, teaching, and exhortyng one another in Pſalmes, Hymnes and ſpiritual ſonges, and ſing vnto the Lorde in your hartes.
            ¶Imprinted at London by Iohn Day.
            ¶Cum gratia & priuilegio, Regi
                  •
                Maieſtatis per ſeptennium. Anno 1565.
         
         
            
            
               
                  royal coat of arms
               
            
         
         
            
            ❀A Treatiſe made by Athanaſius the great, wherin is ſet forth, how, and in what maner ye may v
                  •
               e the Pſalmes according to the effect of the mynde, of gladnes, or ſorrow accordingly, whiche Pſalmes ye ſhall vſe for prayer, whiche for thankes geuyng, which for reherſall of gods wonderfull actes to the prayſe of his name. Alſo ye may ſee in them how God hath holpen his choſen people from tyme to tyme, and neuer forſaken them.
            
               THe whole Scripture vniuerſally, is as it were a diuine maiſtres, teachyng both vertue & true fayth: but the booke of Pſalmes hath ouer and beſides that in a maner an expreſſe Image of the ſtate and condition of ſoules. For as he which goeth to a king, compoſeth firſt his behauiour, and ſetteth in order his wordes, leaſt he ſhould be counted ruſticall & rude: ſo this diuine booke, firſt by choiſe of all motions, wher with the ſoule is affected, warneth, then frameth and inſtructeth by diuers formes of ſpeakyng, all ſuch as couet vertue, & deſyre to knowe the lyfe of the Sauiour. It is eaſye therefore for euerye man to fynde out in the Pſalmes, the motion and ſtate of his owne ſoule, and by that meanes, his owne fygure and proper erudition. Moreouer, with what wordes he may pleaſe God, and with what words he may correct himſelfe, and geue God thankes, leaſt if he ſpeake that thing whiche is not leafull, he fall into impietie. For not alone of deedes, but alſo of euery word muſt we geue accōpt before the Iudge. Wherfore if thou wylt pronounce any mā happy and bleſſed: thou haſt how and wherfore, and whom thou maiſt call happye in the Pſalmes, as you may ſee in the fyrſte Pſalme, 32. Pſalme. 41. Pſalme, 112. Pſalme. 119. Pſalme, and the. 128. Pſalme.
            If thou wylte complayne of the laying awayte of the Iewes againſt the Sauiour, ſaye the ſecond Pſalme.
            If thyne acquaintaunce perſecute thee, and many ryſe agaynſte thee, thou haſt the third Pſalme.
            If thou beyng troubled on this ſort, haſt called vpon the Lord, and becauſe he hath heard thee, thou wouldeſt geue hym thankes: ſyng the .4. Pſalme and the .115. Pſalme.
            If thou perceiueſt wayte to be layde for thee of euill willers, and deſireſt that thy prayer ſhould be heard, ſyng the .5. Pſalme.
            If thou feeleſt the threatnings of God, and therby perceiueſt thy ſelfe to be diſmayed, thou maiſt ſay the .6. Pſalme, and the .37. Pſalme.
            If any conſult or conſpire againſt thee, as Achitophel againſt Dauid, and ſome man tell in thee, ſyng the .7. Pſalme.
            When thou conſidereſt the grace of our Sauiour euery where ſpred abroade, & mankind reſtored vnto health, then if thou wilt talke to the Lord, ſyng the .8. Pſalme.
            If againe thou wilt ſyng of the wondrous workes of God, geuing God thankes, thou haſt the 8. Pſalme, and the 81. Pſalme.
            If thou wilt haue thine enemy ſtopped and driuen backe, and neuertheles the creature to be ſaued, not truſting in thy ſelfe, but in gods ſonne, ſay the, 9. Pſalme.
            If any man will make thee afrayd, thou with truſt in the Lord ſhalt ſing the .10. Pſalme
            If thou ſeeſt the pride and malice of many to abound, ſo that nothing (which is good and godly) is regarded amongſt men, fly thou vnto the Lord, and ſay the .11. Pſalme.
            If the lyinges in wayte of enemies continue ſtil, do not forget thy ſelfe as though the lord ſet nought by thee, but call vpon the Lord, ſinging the .26. Pſalme.
            If thou heare any man blaſpheming & ſpeakyng ill againſt gods prouidence: be not thou partaker of their wickednes, but flying vnto God, ſay the .14. Pſalme, and .53. Pſalme.
            If thou wilt know what ſort the lyfe of a Citezin of the kingdome of heauen is, ſyng the
15. Pſalme.
            
                If thou haſt neede of prayer for them which withſtand thee and compaſſe thy ſoule about ſyng the .17. pſalme, and 86. 89. and 142. Pſalme.
            If thou wilt know how Moyſes prayed, thou haſt the .96. Pſalme.
            If thou art eſcaped from enemies, and deliuered from them which perſecute thee, ſyng the
18. Pſalme.
            If thou marueleſt at the order of thinges created, and the grace of the deuine prouidence, ſyng the .19. 26. 27. Pſalmes.
            If thou ſeeſt any man troubled, comforte them, and praying for them, ſaye the wordes of the 20. Pſalme.
            If thou ſeeſt thy ſelfe kept of the Lord, and that thou proſpereſt, reioyce and ſyng the, 23. pſalme.
            If thyne enemies ruſh vpon thee, lyft vp thy ſoule to God, and ſay the .25. Pſalme, & thou ſhalt ſee them worke wickednes in vayne.
            If thyne enemies perſeuer and continue, and with bloudy handes ſeeke to ſeduce thee or kill thee, geue not iudgement vnto man, for all humayne thynges are ſuſpect. But requyryng God to be iudge, who is the onely Iudge, ſay the 26. Pſalme. and 35. 43. Pſalme.
            If thine enemies cruelly curſe thee, and multiply as it were an hoſt with deſpite: feare not no more then though thou were nothyng in daunger at al, and ſyng the 46. Pſalme.
            If agayne they be impudent, which lye in wayte, ſet thou nothing by them, but ſyng vnto the Lord that which is in the .47. Pſalme.
            If thou wylt know how thou ought to go vnto the lord, when thou wilt geue him thanks, plainly thou ſhalt vnderſtand and ſee in the 48. Pſalme.
            Furthermore, when thou renueſt thy houſe and ſoule, which receiueth the Lorde, and the ſenſible houſe in which thou bodily dwelleſt: geue thankes and ſay the 49. and 127. pſalme.
            If thou ſee thy kinſmen and frendes hate thee for the truth, leaue not of thy loue, neither feare ſuch aduerſaries, but thinke what is to come, and ſyng the 31. pſalme.
            If thou ſeeſt them that be chriſtened, deliuered from the corruptible birth, maruelyng at the deuine bounteouſnes, ſyng the .31. pſalme.
            If thou wilt ſing with the iuſt men, & remembring them which liue a right, ſing the 33. pſ.
            If thou haſt fallen amongeſt enemyes, and wiſelye eſcaped them, and fledde from their ſnares, and therfore wilt geue thankes, cal together the meeke, & ſyng wyth them the .34. pſal
            If thou ſee the wicked ſtriue to do miſchiefe, thinke not that ſinne is naturally in them, as certayne heretykes helde an opinion, but ſay the 36. pſalme.
            If thou ſee the euil worke vnrighteouſnes, and beare themſelues loftye againſt the lower ſort, and deſireſt to warne ſome therof, ſay the 37. pſalme.
            If thou haſte determined to take heede vnto thy ſelfe, and ſeeſt the aduerſarye lying in wayte, who is moſte earneſt agaynſt ſuche, and wouldeſt arme thy ſelfe againſt him, ſyng the
39. pſalme.
            If thou ſeeſt many poore men and beggars, and wouldeſt pitie thē, thou maieſt both trye them which are now pitied already, and exhort other to do the ſame, ſaying the 41. pſalme.
            If thou haſt a deſire toward God, and heareſt the enemies vpbraiding, let it not diſmaye thee, but vnderſtandyng the immortall fruite, whiche ſpringeth of thys deſire, comforte thy ſoule with hope towarde God, and with this relieue, and mitigate the griefes of lyfe, ſaying pſalme .42.
            If thou wylt oftē cal to remembrance the benefytes of God which he ſhewed to the fathers, bothe in the goyng oute of Egypte, and in the wylderneſſe, and howe God was good to them, but they were vnthankefull: thou haſt the 44. pſalme, and the .79. 80. 102. 106.
107. 114. pſalmes.
            If flying vnto God thou haſte eſcaped ſuche thynges as were ſpoken agaynſt thee, and wouldeſt geue thankes vnto God, and declare his liberalitie and goodnes towardes thee, thou haſt the 46. pſalme.
            If thou haſt ſynned, and beyng turned. falleſt to repentance, and wouldeſt obteyne mercy, thou haſt the wordes of confeſſion in the 51. pſalme.
            
                If thou haſt ſuffred a falſe accuſation before an euill king, and ſeeſt the enemye to boaſt: go aſide and ſay the .52. pſalme
            If any perſecute thee and quarell, willing to betray thee, like as the Phariſeis dyd Chriſt, and ſtraungers Dauid, abaſhe not thy ſelfe, but with truſt in the Lord, ſyng the 54. pſalme, & the .56. pſalme.
            If perſecution chaunce, and the perſecutor vnwares enter into the caue where thou arte hid, feare not, for thou haſt in this ſtrayte profitable wordes, both for comfort and forremembraunce of theſe thinges, in the 57. pſalme, and a 142.
            If he that lyeth in wayte of thee, haue commaunded to watch and beſet thy houſe, & thou haſt eſcaped, geue thankes vnto god, and in the tables of thy ſoule, graue the thyng, and ſay the 59. pſalme.
            If the enemies which trouble thee, vpbrayde thee, and with many wordes backbyte thee which ſeeme to be frendes, and in the exercyſe of this thy croſſe thou art ſomwhat weake: thou maieſt call vpon the ſame alſo ſaying the 4. pſalme.
            Againſt hypocrytes and ſuche as brag to a mans face, ſaye to conuert them withall, the
58. pſalme.
            If they ſharpely ruſh vpon thee and would catche thy ſoule, ſet againſt them thy ſubiection to Godward, and be of good comfort, for the fiercer they are, the more ſhall they be ſubiect vnto God, ſay thou the 62. pſalme.
            If to auoyde perſecution thou flee into the deſert, feare not as though thou were there alone and deſolate: but hauyng God, and in the dawning of the day ryſing to him, ſyng the 63. pſalme.
            If the enemies make thee afrayd and ceaſe not to ſowe deceytes, and ſearche alwayes againſt thee: although they bee neuer ſo many, ceaſe not for all that, for their nets ſhall be lyke ſhaftes of little children, if thou ſing the 64. 68. 70. 71. pſalmes.
            If thou wilt ſing of god and his prayſe, thou haſt the 65. pſalme.
            If thou wilt enſtructe anye man in the myſterye of the reſurrection, thou haſte the .80. pſalme.
            If thou aſke mercy of God, ſing the 67. pſalme.
            If thou ſeeſt the wicked proſper in peace, be not ſo offended that thou be moued, bnt ſaye the .73. pſalme.
            If god be angry with his people, thou haſt wordes wherewith thou maiſt comfort thee in the ſame, in the 74. pſalme.
            If thou thinkeſt expedient to confeſſe thee, ſyng the 71. 75. 92. 105. 106. 108. 111. 118. 136. and 138. pſalmes.
            If thou wilt rebuke a Gentile and an heretike, namely ſuche a one as knoweth not God, thou maiſt with intelligence ſyng and ſaye that whiche is in the 86. pſalme.
            If thenemies haue taken thy refuges, and thou art in great diſtres, althoughe thou arte troubled, yet diſpayre not, but praye, and if when thou crieſt thou arte hearde, geue thankes vnto God, ſaying that which is in the .77. pſalme.
            If the enemies hold on and continue breaking in, and defiling the houſe of god, and killing the ſainctes, and caſting their bodies to the foules of the ayre, feare not theyr crueltye, but ſuffring with them that ſuffer affliction, ſay the .79. pſalme.
            If thou wilt ſing to the Lord in ſolemnity, cal together the ſeruauntes of God, & ſyng the.
81. and the 95. pſalme.
            If the enemies be gathered together euery where, and threaten the houſe of the Lord, conſpiring againſt godlines, let not the multitude and power of them diſmay thee, thou haſt as it were an author of hope, the wordes which are in the .83. pſalme.
            If thou ſee the houſe of god and his euerlaſting tabernacles, and haſt a minde or affection toward them, as had the Apoſtle, ſay the 84. pſalme.
            If rancor be ſtinted and captiuitye releaſed, thou haſt to geue god thankes withall, the 85 pſalme, and a 116.
            If thou wilt knowe diſcorde of the catholike churche againſt diuiſions, and wouldeſt conuert
 them, thou maiſt ſay that which is in the .87. Pſalme.
            If thou wilt moue thy ſelf and other to true religion, and perſwade that the hope in God maketh not the ſoule aſhamed, but rather put away all feare, prayſe God, ſaying the .91. Pſal.
            If thou wilt ſing vpon the Sabboth, thou haſt the .92. Pſalme.
            If thou wilt geue thankes vpon the Sonday, thou haſt in the .13. Pſalme.
            If thou wylt geue thankes in the ſecond Saboth, ſyng the .95. Pſalme.
            If thou wilt ſing vpon the day of preparation, thou haſt a forme of prayſe in the .93. Pſal. and therfore a ſong of reioycyng ought to be ſong vnto god himſelfe.
            If there haue bene impriſonment, and the houſe waſted & builded agayne, ſing that which is in the, 96. Pſalme.
            If the land haue bene vexed of the enemies, and whiles the Lord ruleth and raygneth, it be at quiet, thou haſt to ſyng the .97. Pſalme.
            If thou wilt ſyng vpon the fourth Saboth, thou haſt the .94. pſalme, for then he beyng betrayed, began to reuenge death, and to tryumphe ouer the ſame.
            Therfore when thou readeſt the goſpel, and ſeeſt the Iewes conſulting againſt the Lord, and the Lord himſelf ſtanding boldly on our ſide againſt the deuil: ſyng that which is in the.
94. Pſalme, as is next before ſayd.
            If thou markeſt the prouidence of the Lord in all thinges, and the Lorde of the ſame, and wouldeſt inſtruct any with the fayth and obedience therof, when thou haſt perſwaded thē firſt to acknowledge, ſyng the .100. Pſalme.
            If thou knoweſt power in him to iudge, and that god iudgeth mingling iudgement with mercy, and haſt a deſyre to attayne vnto it, thou haſt for this purpoſe wordes in the .101. pſal.
            If becauſe of the imbecillity of our nature, thou art after the maner of a phiſition, irke & weary of the manifolde miſchiefes of thys lyfe, and wouldeſt comforte thy ſelfe: thou haſte the
102. Pſalme.
            Foraſmuche as it is meete and conuenient alwayes and in all thynges to geue GOD thankes, when thou wilt prayſe hym, thou haſt wherwith to exhort thy ſoule, the 103. Pſalme.
            If thou wilt prayſe god, and know how to prayſe him for any thing, and what wordes he that prayieth ought to vſe, thou haſt .113. 127. 146. 133. 147. 148. 149. 150. Pſalmes.
            If thou haſt faith, as the Lord hath ſaid, and beleueſt in thoſe things which thou ſpeakeſt when thou prayeſt, ſay the .96. Pſalme.
            If thou be captiuated with ſtraunge cogitations, and haſt perceyued thy ſelfe to be ledde out of the way, and art ſory therfore, ceaſe from henceforth, and ſtaying where thou perceiueſt thy ſelfe to ſynne, ſit and mourne alſo as the people did, ſaying the .137. Pſalme.
            If thou ſuppoſe temptations to bee for thy triall, geue thankes after the temptation vnto God, ſaying the .139. Pſalme.
            If thou art agayne caught of thine enemies, and wouldeſt be deliuered, ſay the 140. pſal.
            If thou wilt make thy prayers, ſay the .5. Pſalme, and the .141. 142. 143. 144. Pſalmes.
            If an enemy and tyrant be riſen vp againſt the people, feare thou no more then Dauid did Goliath, but with Dauid beleue and ſing the 144. Pſalme.
            If thou cal to remembraunce the goodnes of God toward thee and all men, and wouldeſt prayſe God, ſay the .85. Pſalme.
            If thou wilt ſyng vnto the lord, thou haſt to ſay in the 96. Pſalme, & in the 98. Pſalme.
            If thou (beyng but a meane man) peraduenture art ſet before thy brethren in ſome thing, puffe not vp thy ſelfe in pryde againſt them, but geue the praiſe to god, and ſing the 152. or the
151. pſalmes.
            If thou wilt ſyng obedieuce, thou haſt the 105. and the 106. 107. 111. 112. 113. 114. 115. 116.
117. 118. 119. 134. 145. 147. 148. 149. 150. pſalmes.
            If thou wilt ſing particularly of the ſauior, thou haſt of him in euery pſalme: but ſpecially in the .25. and the .110. Pſalme
            Such pſalmes as ſhewe hys lawfull generation of the father, and hys preſence, is the .11. Pſalme.
            Such as preache of the diuine croſſe, and how much lying in wayte he receyued for vs.
 and how great thinges he ſuffered, are the .2. pſalme, and the .119. pſalme.
            Such as ſignifye the lyinges in wayte of the Iewes, and the malice, and Iudas Iſcariothes betrayinges, are the .21. pſalme, and the .50. 72. pſalmes.
            Such as declare his kingdome, and power to iudge, and his preſence in the fleſhe, is the
16. pſalme.
            For declaration of hys glorious reſurrection in the fleſhe, read the .24. & the .47. pſalmes.
            For his aſcention into heauen, read the .93. pſalme .96. and the .98. the .99. pſalmes.
            Which if thou read, thou mayſt eſpye what benefites the Lorde beſtowed vpon vs by hys paſſion.
            To him be glory for euer.
            
               
                  ❧The vſe of the reſt of the pſalmes not comprehended in the former Table of Athanaſius.
               
                  IF thou wouldeſt prayſe God, becauſe he hath geuen vs a good prince, which will and doth puniſhe the enemies of Chriſtes religion, vſe the
21. Pſalme.
               If thou be perſecuted without a cauſe, if thou wouldeſt haue no affinitie with vice, nor with the vicious, vſe the .26. Pſalme.
               If thou wouldeſt not be wicked, if not accoūted as a malefactor: but wouldeſt haue thē puniſhed, and thy ſelf and ſuch other godly men defended from their tiranny, vſe the .28. Pſalme.
               If thou ſeeſt the nobilitie, the councell, the magiſtrates, and princes not geuen to religion, nor to the prayſing of God, vſe the .29. Pſalme.
               If thou deſireſt to be iuſt and vertuous, vſe the .33. Pſalme.
               If thou be afflicted with any ſickenes, and wouldeſt fayne lyue and ſee good dayes and Chriſtes glory to be encreaſed, vſe the .39. Pſalme.
               If thou be baniſhed for religion, and art almoſt in diſpayre of returnyng to the country, vſe the .42. Pſalme.
               If thou perceyue thy ſelfe forſaken of God, and therfore perſecuted for religion and vertues ſake, vſe the .44. Pſalme.
               If thou wouldeſt complayne of Doeg, of a wicked man, and wouldeſt haue him to bee rooted out, and thy ſelfe to haue proſperitie, vſe the .52. Pſalme.
               If thou wouldeſt be deliuered from thyne enemies whiche perſecute thee vnto death, vſe the .54. Pſalme.
               If thou wouldeſt haue the helpe of God agaynſt ſuch as perſecute thee without a cauſe, vſe the .59. Pſalme.
               If thou wouldeſt prepare thy ſelfe to fight agaynſt the Idumeans, or ſuch lyke enemies of Chriſt, vſe the .60. Pſalme.
               If thou wouldeſt haue Chriſt to come conquere and beate downe the Sirians, Idumeans, Aimnonites, Papiſtes, Antichriſtians, Nullifidians, Neutralles, and vngratious Pelagians, vſe the .68. Pſalme.
               If thou be perſwaded that Chriſt will come and puniſhe offenders, ayde the true worſhippers, and poure out the dregges of wine, and the vengeaunce of his cup, on the vngodly, vſe the .75. Pſalme.
               If thou neyther wouldeſt haue Idolatry, neither any lycentious luſtes rayne in Chriſtes common wealth, thou muſt geue God thankes, if thou be perſwaded, he both will and cā take them awaye, vſing the .81. Pſalme.
               If thou wouldeſt gladly know Chriſtes Churche, & how that Sion ſignifieth it, and how that the true religion ſhalbe delated and ſpred through the whole world, vſe the .87. pſalme.
               If thou goeſt to fight againſt the Idumeans, or any of Chriſtes enemies, whether they offend in maners, or in doctrine, and wouldeſt deſire God to geue the victory, vſe the .108. pſal.
               If thou wouldeſt liue a godly life, if yu wouldeſt repleniſh thy minde with godly preceptes, and therby obt
                     •
                  ine immortalitie, and eternall felicitie: Study diligently the .119. pſalme.
               
                   If thou be thruſt into a college, or into a pariſh, town or country, whoſe inhabitours are wicked, crafty, & malicious pickequarels, wouldeſt be deliuered frō thē, vſe the .120. pſalme.
               If thou wouldeſt haue the congregation of Chriſt to proſper, vſe the .122. pſalme.
               If thou wouldeſt be deliuered from contempt, infamy, and the deriſion of the wicked, vſe the .123. pſalme.
               When thou art deliuered out of priſon, captiuity, or any diſtres, in geuyng thankes to God, vſe the .124. pſalme.
               To vnderſtande the ſafety that thoſe are in, whiche are vnder the tuition of the Lorde, Iehoua, and how that the wicked ſhalbe puniſhed, conſider the .125. pſalme.
               If thou deſireſt to knowe the felicitie that he hath whiche reuerenceth God, and lyueth godly, the trāquilitie and peace of conſcience which he enioyeth in this life, and the vnſpeakable ioye in the lyfe to come, meditate diligently the .128. pſalme.
               To vnderſtande howe the good and godly are defended by the ayde of the Lord, and the wicked periſhe, conſider the .129. pſalme.
               If thou wouldeſt not be arrogant and proude, vſe the .131. Pſalme.
               If thou wouldeſt prayſe vnitie and concorde among brethren, vſe the .133. pſalme.
               To ſing prayſes to God for his mercies, vſe the .134. Pſalme.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Veni Creator.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  COme holy ghoſt eternal God, procedyng frō 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   aboue, both from the Father & the ſonne, the 
                     〈♫〉
                   God of peace & loue. Viſite our mindes & into vs, thy heauenly grace 
                     〈♫〉
                   inſpyre: that in all truth and godlines, we may haue true deſyre.
               
                  Thou art the very comforter, in all woe and diſtreſſe:
                  The heauenly gift of God moſt high, which no tonge can expreſſe.
                  The fountaine and the liuely ſpring, of ioye celeſtiall:
                  The fyre ſo bright, the loue ſo cleare, and vnction ſpirituall.
               
               
                  Thou in thy giftes art manifold, wherby Chriſts church doth ſtand:
                  In faythfull hartes writing thy lawe, the fynger of Gods hand.
                  According to thy promiſe made, thou geueſt ſpeech of grace:
                  That through thy helpe ye praiſe of God, may ſtand in euery place.
               
               
                  O holy ghoſt into our wittes, ſend downe thy heauenly light:
                  Kindle our hartes with feruent loue, to ſerue God day and night.
                  Strength and ſtabliſh all our weaknes, ſo feable and ſo frayle:
                  That neither fleſh, the world, nor deuill, agaynſt vs doe preuaile
               
               
                  Put backe our enmies far from vs, and graunt vs to obtaine:
                  Peace in our harts with god and mā, without grudge or diſdaine.
                  And graunt (O lord) that thou being, our leader and our guide:
                  We may eſchew the ſnares of ſinne, and from thee neuer ſlyde.
               
               
                  To vs ſuch plenty of thy grace, good Lord graunt we thee pray,
                  That thou maiſt be our comforter, at the laſt dreadfull day.
                  Of all ſtrife and diſſention, O Lord diſſolue the bandes:
                  And make the knots of peace & loue, throughout all chriſtē
                     ̄ landes.
               
               
                  
                  Graūt vs (O Lord) through thee to know, the father moſt of myght:
                  That of his deare beloued ſonne, we may attayne the ſight.
                  And that with perfect fayth alſo, we may acknowledge thee:
                  The ſpirit of them both alway, one God in perſons three.
               
               
                  Laude and prayſe be to the father, and to the Sonne equall:
                  And to the holy ſpirite alſo, one God coeternall.
                  And pray we that the onely ſonne, voucheſafe his ſprit to ſend:
                  To all that do profeſſe his name, vnto the worldes ende. Amen.
               
            
            
               Venite exultemus. Pſalme xcv.
               Syng thys as the Benedictus.
               
                  
                     O Come, and let vs now reioyce, and ſing vnto the Lord:
                  And to our onely ſauiour, alſo with one accorde.
                  O let vs come before his face, with inwarde reuerence:
                  Confeſſing all our former ſunnes, and that with diligence.
               
               
                  To thanke him for his benefites, alwaye diſtributyng,
                  Wherefore to him right ioyfully, in Pſalmes now let vs ſing.
                  And that becauſe that God alone, is Lord magnificent:
                  And eke aboue all other gods, a kyng omnipotent.
               
               
                  His people doth not he forſake, at any time or tyde:
                  And in his hand are all the coaſtes, of al the world ſo wyde.
                  And with his louing countenaunce, he looketh euery where:
                  And doth behold the tops of all, the mountaines far & neere.
               
               
                  The ſea and all that is therin, are his, for he them made:
                  And eke his hād hath facioned, ye earth which doth not fade,
                  O come therfore and worſhip him, and downe before him fall:
                  And let vs wepe before ye Lord, the which hath made vs al.
               
               
                  He is our God, our Lord and kyng, and we his people are:
                  His flocke and ſheepe of his paſture, on whō he taketh care.
                  This day if ye do heare his voyce, yet hearden not your hart:
                  As in the bitter murmuring, when ye were in deſerte.
               
               
                  Whiche thing was of their negligence, committed in the time,
                  Of trouble in the wildernes, a great and greuous crime.
                  Where as your fathers tempted me, and tryed euery way:
                  They proued me & ſaw my workes, what I could do or ſay.
               
               
                  Theſe forty yeares I haue bene greued, with this generation:
                  And euermore I ſaid they e
                        •
                     d, in their imagination.
                  Wherwith their harts wer fore combred, long time and many daies:
                  Wherfore I know aſſuredly, they haue not knowen my wayes.
               
               
                  
                  To whom I in mine anger ſwore, that they ſhould not be bleſt:
                  Nor ſee my ioy celeſtiall, nor enter in my reſt.
               
            
            
               Gloria patri.
               
                  All laud and prayſe be to the Lord, O that of might art moſt:
                  To God the father and the Sonne, and to the holy Ghoſt.
                  As it in the beginning was, for euer heretofore:
                  And is now at this preſent tyme, and ſhalbe euermore.
               
            
            
               The ſong of Saint Ambroſe, called Te deum.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  WE prayſe thee God, we knowledge thee, the 
                     〈♫〉
                   onely Lord to be, and as eternal father al the 
                     〈♫〉
                   earth doth worſhip thee. To thee al angels cry, the heauēs & all the 
                     〈♫〉
                   powers therin: To thee Cherub & Seraphin, to crie they do not linne.
               
                  O Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord, of Saboth Lord the God:
                  Through heaū & earth thy praiſe is ſpred, & glory al abrod.
                  Thapoſtles glorious company, yelde prayſes vnto thee:
                  The prophetes good ly felowſhip, prayſe thee continually.
               
               
                  The noble and victorious hoſt, of Martirs ſound thy prayſe:
                  The holy Church throughout the world doth knowledge thee alwayes,
                  Father of endles maieſtie, they do acknowledge thee:
                  Thy Chriſt, thine honorable, true and onely ſonne to be.
               
               
                  The holy Ghoſt the comforter, of glory thou art kyng,
                  O Chriſt, and of the father art, the ſonne euerlaſtyng.
                  When ſinfull mans decay in hand, thou tookeſt to reſtore:
                  To be encloſd in virgins womb, thou diddeſt not abhorre.
               
               
                  When thou hadſt ouercome of death, the ſharp & cruell might,
                  Thou heauēs kingdom didſt ſet ope, to ech beleuing wight.
                  
                      In glory of the father thou, dooſt ſit on Gods right hand:
                  We truſt that thou ſhalt come our iudge, our cauſe to vnderſtand.
               
               
                  Lord helpe thy ſeruāts whō thou haſt, bought wt thy precious bloud
                  And in eternall glory ſet them with thy ſaintes ſo good.
                  O Lord do thou thy people ſaue, bleſſe thine inheritaunce,
                  Lord gouerne them, and Lord do thou, for euer them aduaunce.
               
               
                  We magnifie thee day by day, and world without end,
                  Adore thy holy name (O Lord) Voucheſafe vs to defend
                  From ſinne this day. Haue mercy Lord, haue mercy on vs all:
                  And on vs (as we truſt in thee) Lord let thy mercy fall.
               
               
                  O Lord I haue repoſed all, my confidence in thee:
                  Put to confounding ſhame therefore Lord let me neuer be.
               
            
            
               ¶The ſong of the three Children, prayſing God, prouokyng all creatures to do the ſame.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  O Alye workes of god the Lord bles ye the 
                     〈♫〉
                   Lord, praiſe him & magnifie him for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Oye the aungels of the Lord, bles ye the Lord,
               prayſe him and magnifye him for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 3 3 O ye the ſtarry heauens hye, bleſſe ye the Lord,
               prayſe him and magnifye him for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 4 O ye waters aboue the ſkye, bles ye the Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 5 O ye the powers of the Lord, bles ye the Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 6 O ye the ſhining ſunne & moone, bles ye the Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 7 O ye the gliſtring ſtarres of heauē, bles ye the Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 8 O ye the ſhowers & dropping dew, bles ye ye Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 9 O ye the blowing windes of god, bles ye the Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 10 O ye the fire & warming heate, bles ye the Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Ye winter and the ſommer tyde, bles ye the Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 12 O ye the dewes & binding froſtes, bles ye the Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 13 O ye the froſt and chilling cold, bles ye the Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 14 O ye congeled iſe and ſnow, bles ye the Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 15 O ye ye nightes & lightſome dayes, bles ye the lord. &c
               
                  
                  
                     verse 16 O ye the darknes and the light, bles ye the Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 17 O ye the lightnings & the cloudes bles ye the lord. &c
               
                  
                     verse 18 O let the earth eke bles ye Lord, bles yea the Lord. &c
               
                  
                     verse 19 O ye the mountaines & the hils, bleſſe ye the lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 20 O al ye grene things on the earth, bles ye the lord. &c
               
                  
                     verse 21 O ye the euer ſpringing wels, bles ye the Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 22 O ye the ſeas and ye the flouds, bles ye the Lord &c.
               
                  
                     verse 23 Whales & al that in waters moue, bles ye the lord &c
               
                  
                     verse 24 O al ye flying foules of thayre, bles ye the Lord &c.
               
                  
                     verse 25 O al the beaſtes and cattel eke, bles ye the Lorde. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 26 O ye the children of mankind, bles ye the Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 27 Let Iſrael eke bleſſe the Lord, bles ye the Lord. &c
               
                  
                     verse 28 O ye the prieſtes of God the Lord, bles ye the lord. &c
               
                  
                     verse 29 O ye the ſeruantes of the Lord, bles ye the Lord &c.
               
                  
                     verse 30 Ye ſprites & ſoules of righteous mē, bleſſe ye ye lord &c
               
                  
                     verse 31 Ye holy and ye meeke of hart, bleſſe ye the Lord. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 32 O Ananias bles the Lord, bles thou the Lord,
               praiſe him and magnify him for euer.
               O Azarias bles the Lord, bles thou the Lord,
               praiſe him and magnify him for euer.
               And Miſael bles thou the Lord, bles thou the Lord,
               prayſe him and magnify hym for euer.
            
            
               ¶The ſong of Zacharias called Benedictus.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  THe onely lord of Iſrael be praiſed euermore: 
                     〈♫〉
                   for through his viſitation, and mercy kept in 
                     〈♫〉
                   ſtore, His peoplenow he hath redemde, that long hath bene in thral, 
                     〈♫〉
                   and ſpread abrode his ſauyng health, vpon his ſeruantes al.
               
                  
                  In Dauids houſe his ſeruant true, according to his mynde:
                  And alſo his annoynted king, as we in Scripture fynde.
                  As by his holy prophetes al, oft times he did declare:
                  The which were ſince ye world began, his way for to prepare
               
               
                  That we might be deliuered, from thoſe that make debate:
                  Our enemies and from the handes, of all that do vs hate.
                  The mercy which he promiſed, our fathers to fulfil:
                  And thinke vpon his couenant made, according to his wyl.
               
               
                  And alſo to performe the othe, which he before had ſworne:
                  To Abraham our father deare, for vs that were forlorne.
                  That he would geue himſelfe for vs, and vs frō bōdage bryng:
                  Out of the hands of al our foes, to ſerue our heauenly king.
               
               
                  And that without al maner feare, and eke in rightuouſnes:
                  And alſo for to leade our lyfe, in ſtedfaſt holines.
                  And yu (O child) which now art borne, and of the Lord elect:
                  Shalt be the prophet of the higheſt, his wayes for to dyrect.
               
               
                  For thou ſhalt go before his face, for to prepare his wayes:
                  And alſo for to teach his wil and pleaſure all thy dayes.
                  To geue them knowledge how that their, ſaluation is nere:
                  And that remiſſion of their ſins, is through his mercy mere.
               
               
                  Wherby the day ſpring from an hie, is come vs for to viſit:
                  And thoſe for to illuminate, which do in darkenes ſit.
                  To lighten thoſe that ſhadowed be, with death & eke oppreſt:
                  And alſo for to guide their feete, the way to peace and reſt.
               
            
            
               The ſong of bleſſed Mary, called Magnificat.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  MY ſoule doth magnify the Lord, my ſprite eke 
                     〈♫〉
                   euermore, reioyſeth in the lord my god, which 
                     〈♫〉
                   is my Sauior. And why? becauſe he did regard, & gaue reſpect vnto,
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   ſo baſe eſtate of his hadmaid, and let the mighty go.
               
                  For now behold al nations, and generations all:
                  From this tyme forth for euermore, ſhal me right bleſſed cal.
                  Becauſe he hath me magnifyed, which is the Lord of might:
                  Whoſe name be euer ſanctified, and prayſed day and night.
               
               
                  For with his mercy and his grace, all men he doth inflame:
                  Throughout al generations, to ſuch as feare his name.
                  He ſhewed ſtrength wt his great arme, & made ye proud to ſtart:
                  With al imaginations, that they bare in their hart.
               
               
                  He hath put downe the mighty ones, from their ſupernal ſeat:
                  And did exalt the meeke in hart, as he hath thought it meete
                  The hungry he repleniſhed, with al thyngs that were good:
                  And through his power he made ye rich, oft times to wāt their fode.
               
               
                  And calling to remembraunce, his mercy euery deale:
                  Hath holpen vp aſſiſtantly, his ſeruant Iſraell.
                  According to his promiſe made, to Abraham before:
                  And to his ſeede ſucceſſiuely, to ſtand for euermore.
               
            
            
               The ſong of Simeon called Nunc dimittis.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  O Lord becauſe my hartes deſire, hath wiſhed 
                     〈♫〉
                   long to ſee, my onely lord & ſauiour, thy ſon be 
                     〈♫〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ore I die, the ioy & health of al mankind, deſired long before, which 
                     〈♫〉
                   now is come into the world, of mercy bringing ſtore.
               
                  Thou ſuffereſt thy ſeruaunt now, in peace for to depart:
                  Accordyng to thy holy worde, which lighteneth my hart.
                  
                      Becauſe mine eyes which thou haſt made, to geue my body light:
                  Haue now behold thy ſauing health, which is the Lorde of myght
               
               
                  Whom thou mercifully haſt ſet, of thyne aboundant grace:
                  In open ſight and viſible, before all peoples face.
                  The Gentils to illuminate, and Sathan ouerquel:
                  And eke to be the glory of, thy people Iſrael.
               
            
            
               The Creede of Athanaſius.
               Norton.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  WHat man ſoeuer he be that, ſaluatiō wil attain 
                     〈♫〉
                   the catholike beliefe he muſt, before al things 
                     〈♫〉
                   retaine. Which faith vnles he holy kepe, and vndefiledly, without 
                     〈♫〉
                   al doubt eternally, he ſhal be ſure to dye.
               
                  The catholike beliefe is this, that God we worſhip one:
                  In Trinitie and Trinitie, in vnitie alone.
                  So as we neyther do confound, the perſons of the three:
                  Nor yet the ſubſtance whole of one, in ſunder parted bee.
               
               
                  One perſon of the father is, another of the Sonne:
                  An other perſon proper of, the holy ghoſt alone.
                  Of father, Sonne, and holy Ghoſt, but one the Godhed is:
                  Like glory coeternal eke, the maieſtie likewyſe.
               
               
                  Such as the father is, ſuch is the Sonne in ech degree:
                  And ſuch alſo we do beleue, the holy Ghoſt to bee.
                  Vncreate is the Father, and vncreate is the Sonne:
                  The holy ghoſt vncreate: ſo vncreate is ech one.
               
               
                  Incomprehenſible Father is, incomprehenſible Sonne:
                  And comprehenſible alſo is, the holy Ghoſt of none.
                  
                      The Father is eternal, and the Sonne eternall ſo:
                  And in lyke ſort eternal is, the holy ghoſt alſo.
               
               
                  And yet though we beleue, that eche of theſe eternals bee:
                  Yet there but one eternal is, and not eternals three.
                  As ne incomprehenſible we, ne yet vncreat three:
                  But one incomprehenſible one, vncreate holde to bee.
               
               
                  Almighty ſo the father is, the ſonne almighty ſo:
                  And in lyke ſort almighty is, the holy Ghoſt alſo.
                  And albeit that euery one, of theſe almighty bee:
                  yet there but one almighty is, and not almighties three.
               
               
                  The father God is, God the Sonne, God holy Ghoſt alſo:
                  yet are there not three Gods in al, but one God and no mo.
                  So like wiſe Lord the Father is, and Lord alſo the Sonne:
                  And lord the holy ghoſt, yet are there not thre lords but one.
               
               
                  For as we are compeld to graunt, by chriſtian veritie,
                  Eche of the perſons by hymfelfe, both God and Lord to be:
                  So catholike religion, forbiddeth vs alway:
                  That eyther gods be three, or yt there lordes be three to ſay.
               
               
                  Of none the father, is ne made, ne create, nor begot:
                  The Sonne is of the Father, not create ne made, but got.
                  The holy Ghoſt is of them both, the father and the Sonne:
                  He made, ne create, nor begot, but doth proceede alone.
               
               
                  So we one Father hold, not three, one Sonne alſo not three:
                  One holy Ghoſt alone, and not three holy Ghoſtes to bee.
                  None in this Trinitie before, nor after other is:
                  Ne greater any then the reſt, ne leſſer be likewiſe.
               
               
                  But euery one among themſelues, of all the perſons three:
                  Together coeternal al, and al coequal bee.
                  So vnitie in Trinitie, as ſaid it is before:
                  And Trinitie in vnitie, in all thynges we adore.
               
               
                  Therfore what man ſoeuer that, ſaluation wil attayne:
                  This faith touching the Trinitie, of force he muſt retayne.
                  And nedeful to eternal lyfe, it is that euery wight.
                  Of the incarnating of Chriſt, our Lord beleue aright.
               
               
                  For this the right faith is that we, beleue and eke beknow:
                  That Chriſt our lord ye ſon of God, is God and man alſo.
                  God of his fathers ſubſtance got, before the world began:
                  And of his mothers ſubſtance borne, in world a very man.
               
               
                  Both perfect god, and perfect man, in one one Ieſus Chriſt:
                  That doth of reaſonable ſoule, and humaine fleſh ſubſiſt.
                  
                      Touchyng hys Godhode, equal with his father God is he:
                  Touching his manhode lower then, his father in degree.
               
               
                  Who though he be both very God, and very man alſo:
                  yet is he but one Chriſt alone, and is not perſons two.
                  One, not by turning of Godhode, into the fleſh of man:
                  But by takyng manhode to God, this beyng one began.
               
               
                  All one, not by confounding of, the ſubſtance into one:
                  But onely by the vnitie, that is of one perſon.
                  For as the reaſonable ſoule, and fleſh but one man is:
                  So in one perſon God and man, is but one Chriſt lykewyſe.
               
               
                  Who ſuffred for to ſaue vs all, to hell he did deſcend:
                  The third day roſe agayne frō death, to heauen he did aſcēd.
                  He ſittes at the ryght hand of God, the almighty father there:
                  From thence to iudge the quicke & dead, againe he ſhal retire.
               
               
                  At whoſe returne all men ſhall riſe, with bodies new reſtorde:
                  And of their own workes they ſhal geue accōpt vnto ye lord.
                  And they into eternal lyfe ſhall go, that haue done wel:
                  Who haue done il, ſhal go into eternal fire to dwel.
               
               
                  This is the Catholike beliefe, who doth not faithfully
                  Beleue the ſame, without al dout, he ſaued cannot be.
                  To Father, Sonne, and holy ghoſt, al glory be therfore:
                  As in beginning was, is now, and ſhalbe euermore.
               
            
            
               The Lamentation of a ſynner.
               Marckant.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  O Lord turne not away thy face, frō him that 
                     〈♫〉
                   lieth proſtrate: Lamenting ſore his ſinful life 
                     〈♫〉
                   before thy mercy gate. Which gate thou openeſt wide to thoſe, yt do 
                     〈♫〉
                   lament their ſin: ſhut not yr gate againſt me lord, but let me enter in.
               
                  
                  And call me not to mine accomptes, howe I haue liued here:
                  For then I know right well (O Lord) how vile I ſhall appeare.
                  I nede not to confeſſe my lyfe, I am ſure thou canſt tell:
                  what I haue ben, and what I am, I know thou knoweſt it wel.
               
               
                  O Lord thou knoweſt what things be paſt, & eke the things that bee,
                  Thou knoweſt alſo what is to come, nothing is hid from thee.
                  Before ye heauēs & earth wer made, yu knoweſt what things wer thē,
                  As all things els that haue ben ſince, among the ſonnes of men.
               
               
                  And can the thinges that I haue done, be hidden from thee then?
                  Nay, nay, yu knoweſt thē all, O Lord, where they wer done & whē.
                  Wherfore with teares I come to thee, to begge and to entreate:
                  Euen as the child that hath done euill, and feareth to be beate.
               
               
                  So come I to thy mercy gate, where mercy doth abound:
                  Requiring mercy for my ſinne, to heale my deadly wounde,
                  O Lord I nede not to repeate, what I do begge or craue,
                  Thou knoweſt, O Lord, before I aſke, ye thing that I would haue.
               
               
                  Mercy, good Lord, mercy I aſke, this is the totall ſumme:
                  For mercy Lord is all my ſute, Lord let thy mercy come.
               
            
            
               The humble ſute of a ſinner.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  O Lord of whom I do depēd be hold my care. 
                     〈♫〉
                   full hart, & whē thy will & pleaſure is releaſe 
                     〈♫〉
                   me of my ſmart, yu ſeeſt my ſorowes what they are, my gref is knowne 
                     〈♫〉
                   to thee, and there is none that cā remoue, or take the ſame frō me.
               
                  But onely thou whoſe ayde I craue, whoſe mercy ſtil is preſt:
                  To eaſe all thoſe that come to thee for ſuccour and for reſt.
                  
                      And ſith thou ſeeſt my reſtles eyes, my teares & greuous grone.
                  Attēde vnto my ſute, O Lord, marck wel my plaint & mone.
               
               
                  For ſinne hath ſo incloſed me, and compaſt me about:
                  That I am now remediles, if mercy helpe not out.
                  For mortall man, cannot realeaſe, or mitigate this payne:
                  But euē thy Chriſt, my lord & god, which for my ſinnes was ſlaine.
               
               
                  Woſe bloudy woūdes are yet to ſee, though not with mortall eye:
                  yet doth thy ſaints behold them all, and ſo I truſt ſhall I.
                  Though ſinne doth hinder me a while, when thou ſhalt ſee it good:
                  I ſhall nioy the ſight of him, and ſee his woundes and bloud.
               
               
                  And as thine angels & thy ſaintes, do now behold the ſame:
                  So truſt I to poſſeſſe that place, with them to prayſe thy name.
                  But whiles I lyue here in this vale, where ſinners do frequent:
                  Aſſiſt me euer with thy grace, my ſinnes ſtill to lament.
               
               
                  Leaſt that I treade in ſinners trace, and geue them my conſent,
                  To dwell with them in wickednes, wherto nature is bent.
                  Onely thy grace muſt be my ſtay, leaſt that I fall down flat:
                  And beyng down, then of my ſelfe cannot recouer that.
               
               
                  Wherfore this is yet once agayne, my ſute and my requeſt:
                  To graunt me pardon for my ſinne, that I in thee may reſt.
                  Then ſhall my hart, my tong and voyce, be inſtruments of prayſe,
                  And in thy church & houſe of ſaints, ſing Pſalmes to thee alwaies.
               
            
            
               The Lordes Prayer, or Pater noſter.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  OVr father which in heauē art, lord halowd be 
                     〈♫〉
                   thy name, thy kingdom come, thy wil be done 
                     〈♫〉
                   in earth, euen as the ſame in heauē is. Geue vs, O Lord, our dayly 
                     〈♫〉
                   bread this day: As we forgeue our detters ſo, Forgeue our dettes
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   we pray. Into temptation leade vs not, From euill make vs free, 
                     〈♫〉
                   for kingdome, power and glory thine, both now and euer be.
            
            
               The .x. Commaundementes of Almighty God. Audi Iſrael. Exod. xx.
               N.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  HArke Iſraell, and what I ſay, geue hede to 
                     〈♫〉
                   vnderſtād. I am the Lord thy God ye brought 
                     〈♫〉
                   thee out of Egipt lād, euē frō the houſe wherin yu didſt in thraldō liue 
                     〈♫〉
                   a ſlaue: None other gods at all before my preſence ſhalt thou haue.
               
                  No maner grauen image ſhalt thou make at all to thee:
                  Nor any figure like by thee, ſhall counterfayted bee,
                  Of any thing in heauen aboue, nor in the earth below,
                  Nor in waters beneath the earth, to thē thou ſhalt not bow.
               
               
                  Nor ſhalt them ſerue. The Lord thy God, a ielous God am I,
                  That puniſh parentes faultes vnto the third and fourth degree,
                  Vpon their children that me hate: and mercy do diſplay,
                  To thouſandes of ſuch as me loue, and my preceptes obey.
               
               
                  The name thou of the Lord thy God, in vayne ſhalt neuer vſe:
                  For him that takes his name in vayne ye lord ſhal not excuſe.
                  Remember that thou holy kepe, the ſacred Saboth day:
                  Six dayes y• labour ſhalt, & do thy nedefull workes alway.
               
               
                  
                  The ſeuenth is ſet by the Lord, thy God to reſt vpon:
                  No worke then ſhalt thou do in it, ne thou nor yet thy ſonne,
                  Thy daughter, ſeruaūt, nor handmayd, thine Oxe, nor yet thine Aſſe:
                  Nor ſtraunger that within thy gates, hath his abiding place.
               
               
                  For in ſixe dayes God heauen, and earth, and all therin did make,
                  And after thoſe his reſt he did, vpon the ſeuenth day take.
                  Wherfore he bleſt the day that he, for reſting did ordayne,
                  And ſacred to him ſelfe alone appointed to remayne.
               
               
                  yeld honor to thy parentes, that prolongd thy dayes may be
                  Vpō the land, the which the Lord, thy God hath geuē thee.
                  Thou ſhalt not murther. Thou ſhalt not commit adultery:
                  Thou ſhalt not ſteale, nor witnes falſe, againſt thy neighbour be.
               
               
                  Thou ſhalt not couet houſe that to thy neighbour doth belōg,
                  Ne couet ſhalt in hauing of his wife, to do him wrong:
                  Nor his man ſeruaunt, nor his mayde, nor oxe, nor aſſe of his,
                  Nor any other thing that to thy neighbour proper is.
               
            
         
         
            
               Beatus vir. i.
               Thomas Sternhold.
               
                  ¶Whether it was Eſoras, or any other that gathered the Pſalmes into a booke: it ſemeth he did ſet this Pſalme firſt in maner of a Preface, to exhorte all godly men to ſtudy and meditate the heauenly wiſdome, for theffect hereof is, that they be bleſſed that geue them ſelues wholy all their lyfe to Gods law: And that the wicked contemners of god, though they ſeme for a while fortunate, yet at length ſhall come to miſerable deſtruction,
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THe mā is bleſt that hath not bēt, to wicked 
                     〈♫〉
                   rede his eare, nor led his life as ſinners do, 
                     〈♫〉
                   nor ſat in ſcorners chaire. 
                     verse 2 But in the law of god ye lord, doth ſet hys 
                     〈♫〉
                   whole delight, & in y• law doth exerciſe, him ſelfe both day and nyght.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3 He ſhal be like the tree that groweth, faſt by the riuer ſide:
               Which bringeth forth moſt pleaſaunt fruit in her due time & tyde.
               Whoſe leafe ſhall neuer fade nor fal, but floriſh ſtil and ſtand:
               Euen ſo al things ſhal proſper wel, that this man takes in hand.
               
                  
                     verse 4 So ſhal not the vngodly men, they ſhalbe nothing ſo:
               But as the duſt which frō the earth, the wyndes driue to and fro.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Therfore ſhall not the wicked men, in iudgement ſtand vpright:
               Nor yet the ſinners with the iuſt, ſhal come in place or ſight.
               
                  
                     verse 6 For why? the way of godly men, vnto the Lord is knowne:
               And eke the way of wicked mē ſhal quite be ouerthrowen.
            
            
               Quare fremuerunt gentes. Pſalme .ii. 
               T. S.
               
                  ¶Dauid reioyſeth, that notwithſtanding his enemies rage, and worldly power, yet god will continue his kingdome for euer, and aduaūce it euen to the formoſt, end of the world. And therfore he exhorteth kinges and rulers, that ſetting vayne glory a part, they would humble ſubmit them ſelues vnder gods yoke. Herein is ſign
                        ••
                     ed Chriſt and his kingdome.
               
               Syng this Pſalme as the firſt.
               
                  WHy did ye Gētils tumultes raiſe, what rage was in their braine?
               Why did the Iewiſh people muſe, ſeing al is but vayne?
               
                  
                     verse 2 The kings and rulers of the earth, conſpire, and are al bent
               Againſt the Lord and Chriſt his ſonne, which he among vs ſent.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Shal we be bound to them ſay they? let al their bondes be broke:
               And of their doctrine and their law, let vs reiect the yoke:
               
                  
                     verse 4 But he that in the heauen dwelleth, their doings wil deride:
               And make thē al as mocking ſtockes, through out ye world ſo wide.
               
                  
                     verse 5 For in his wrath the Lord wil ſay, to them vpon a day,
               And in his fury trouble them, and then the, Lord, wil ſay:
               
                  
                     verse 6 I haue anoynted him my king, vpon my holy hil:
               I wil therfore Lord preach thy lawes, and eke declare thy wil.
               
                  
                     verse 7 For in this wiſe the Lord him ſelf did ſay to me I wote:
               Thou art my deare and onely ſonne, to day I thee begot.
               
                  
                     verse 8 All people I wil geue to thee, as heires at thy requeſt:
               The ends and coaſtes of al the earth, by thee ſhal be poſſeſt.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Thou ſhalt them bruſe euen with a mace, as men vnder foote trode:
               And as the potters ſhardes ſhalt breake them with an yron rod.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Now ye, O Kings and rulers al, be wiſe therfore and learnde,
               By whom the matters of the world be iudged and diſcernde.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Se that ye ſerue the Lord aboue in trembling and in feare:
               Se that with reuerence ye reioyce, to him in like maner.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 12 Se that ye kiſſe and eke embrace his bleſſed ſonne I ſay:
               Leaſt in his wrath ye ſodenly periſh in the mid way.
               
                  
                     verse 13 If once his wrath neuer ſo ſmal, ſhal kindle in his breſt:
               Oh then al they that truſt in Chriſt, ſhal happy be and bleſt.
            
            
               Domine quid multiplicati. Pſalme .iii.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶Dauid being perſecuted, and driuen out of his kingdome by his owne ſonne Abſalon, was greatly tormented in minde for his ſinne againſt god: and therfore calleth vpon god, and waxeth holde through his promiſes, agaynſt the great terrors of his enemies: yea, and againſt death it ſelf, which he ſaw preſent before his eyes. Finally he reioyſeth for the good ſucceſſe and victory, that god gaue him and all the Church ouer his enemies.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  O Lord how are my foes increaſt, which vexe 
                     〈♫〉
                   me more and more? They kil my hart when 
                     〈♫〉
                   as they ſay: God can him not reſtore, but thou. O Lord, art my 
                     〈♫〉
                   defence, when I am hard beſtead, my worſhyp and myne honour 
                     〈♫〉
                   both, and thou holdſt vp my head.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Then with my voyce vpon the Lord, I did both cal and cry:
               And he out of his holy hill, did heare me by and by.
               
                  
                     verse 5 I layd me downe, and quietly I ſlept and roſe again:
               For why? I know aſſuredly the Lord wil me ſuſtaine.
               
                  
                     verse 6 If ten thouſand had hemde me in, I could not be afrayde:
               For thou art ſtil my Lord my God, my ſauiour & myne ayde.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Riſe vp therfore: ſaue me my God, for now on thee I call:
               For thou haſt broke the chekes & teeth, of theſe wicked mē al.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 8 Saluation onely doth belong to thee, O Lord, aboue:
               Thou dooſt beſtow vpon thy folke, thy bleſſing and thy loue.
            
            
               Cum inuocarem exaudiui. Pſalme .iiii.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶Whē Saul perſecuted Dauid, he called vpon God, truſting moſt aſſuredly in his promiſe, & therfore holdly reproueth his enemies, who by wilfull malice reſiſted his dominion. And finally preferreth the fauour of God before all worldly treaſures. Let vs lykewiſe learne to truſt in gods promiſes, when we are afflicted with any kinde of Croſſe, and ſo we ſhall neither feare our enemies, nor yet be ouer commen with tentations.
               
               Syng this as the firſt Pſalme
               
                  O God that art my righteouſnes, Lord heare me when I cal:
               Thou haſt ſet me at liberty, when I was bound & thral.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Haue mercy Lord therfore on me, and graūt me this requeſt:
               For vnto thee vnceſſantly, to cry I wil not reſt.
               
                  
                     verse 3 O mortall men, how long wil ye my glory thus deſpiſe?
               Why wander ye in vanitie, and folow after lyes?
               
                  
                     verse 4 Know ye that good & godly men, the lord doth take & chuſe:
               And whē to him I make my plaint, he doth me not refuſe.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Sinne not, but ſtād in awe therfore, examine wel your hart:
               And in your chamber quietly, ſee you your ſelues conuert.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Offer to God the ſacrifice, of righteouſnes I ſay:
               And loke that in the liuing lord, you put your truſt alway.
               
                  
                     verse 7 The greater ſort craue worldly goods & riches do embrace:
               But Lord graūt vs thy countenaunce, thy fauour and thy grace.
               
                  
                     verse 8 For thou therby ſhalt make my hart, more ioyful and more glad:
               Then they that of their corne & wine, ful great increaſe haue had.
               
                  
                     verse 9 In peace therfore lye down wil I, taking my reſt and ſlepe:
               For thou onely wilt me, O Lord, alone in ſafely kepe.
            
            
               Verba mea auribus percipe. Pſalme .v. 
               T.S
               
                  ¶Dauid hauing ſuffered great calamitie, as well by Doeg a Achitophel Saules flatterers, as by other infinite enemies, calleth to God for ſuccor, ſhewing how requiſite it is, that God ſhould puniſhe the malicious enuy of his aduerſaries. After beyng aſſured of proſperous ſucceſſe, he conceyueth comforte: concludyng, that when God ſhall deliuer hym, other alſo ſhall be partakers of the ſame mercies.
               
               Sing this as the third pſalme.
               INcline thine eares vnto my wordes, O Lord my plaint conſider:
               
                  
                     verse 2 And heare my voyce, my king my god, to thee I make my praier.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Heare me betime, Lord, tary not, for I wil haue reſpect:
               My prayer early in the morne to thee for to direct.
               
                  
                     verse 4 And I wil truſt through patience, in thee my God alone:
               That art not pleaſed with wickednes, & il with thee dwels none.
               
                  
                     verse 5 And in thy ſight ſhal neuer ſtand, theſe furious fooles, O Lord:
               Vaine workers of iniquitie, thou haſt alwayes abhord.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 6 The lyers and the flatterers, thou ſhalt deſtroy them then,
               And God will hate the bloud thirſty and the deceitful man.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Therfore wil I come to thy houſe, truſting vpon thy grace:
               And reuerently wil worſhip thee toward thine holy place.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Lord lead me in thy rightuouſnes, for to confound my foes:
               And eke the way that I ſhal walke, before my face diſcloſe.
               
                  
                     verse 9 For in their mouthes there is no truth, their hart is foule & vaine:
               
                  
                     verse 10 Their throte an open ſepulchre, their tonges do gloſe and fayne.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Deſtroy their falſe conſpiracies, that they may come to nought:
               
                  
                     verse 12 Subuert thē in their heapes of ſinne, which haue rebelliō wrought
               
                  
                     verse 13 But thoſe that put their truſt in thee, let them be glad alwayes:
               And rēder thākes for thy defenſe, and geue thy name the prayſe.
               
                  
                     verse 14 For thou with fauour wilt increaſe the iuſt & righteous ſtill:
               And with thy grace, as with a ſhild, defend him from all ill.
            
            
               i. Domine ne in furore tuo. Pſalme .vi.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶When Dauid by his ſinnes hath prouoked gods wrath, and now felt not onely his hand againſt him, but alſo conceiued the horrors of death euerlaſtyng: he deſired forgeuenes, bewayling that if god toke him awaye in his indignation, he ſhould lacke occaſion to prayſe him as he was wont to do whileſt he was amongeſt men. Then ſodenly feling gods mercy, he ſharpely rebuketh his enemies, whiche reioyſeth in his affliction.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  LOrde in thy wrath reproue me not thoughe I 
                     〈♫〉
                   deſerue thine ire: Ne yet correct me in thy rage, 
                     〈♫〉
                   O Lorde I thee deſire. For I am weake therfore, O Lorde, of 
                     〈♫〉
                   mercy me forbeare, and heale me Lord: for why, thou knoweſt my 
                     〈♫〉
                   bones do quake for feare.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3 My ſoule is troubled very ſore, and vexed vehemently,
               But Lord how long wilt thou delay, to cure my miſery?
               
                  
                     verse 4 Lord, tourne thee to thy wōted grace, my ſely ſoule vp take:
               Oh ſaue me not for my deſerts, but for thy mercies ſake.
               
                  
                     verse 5 For why? no man among the dead, remembreth thee one whit:
               Or who ſhal worſhip thee (O Lord) in the infernal pit?
               
                  
                     verse 6 So greuous is my plaint and mone, that I wax wondrous faint:
               Al the night long I waſh my bed, with teares of my complaint.
               
                  
                     verse 7 My ſight is dimme and waxeth old, with anguiſh of mine heart,
               For feare of thoſe that be my foes, and would my ſoule ſubuert.
               
                  
                     verse 8 But now away from me al ye that worke iniquitie,
               For why? the Lord hath hard the voyce, of my complaint & cry.
               
                  
                     verse 9 He heard not onely the requeſt, and prayer of my hart:
               But it receiued at my hand, and tooke it in good part.
               
                  
                     verse 10 And now my foes that vexed me, the Lord wil ſoone defame,
               And ſodenly confound thē al, to their rebuke and ſhame.
            
            
               Domine deus meus in te ſperaui. Pſalme .vii.
               T. S.
               
                  Dauid being falſely accuſed by Chus, one of Saules kinſmē, he calleth god to be his defēder, to whō he cōmendeth his innocencie: Firſt ſhewing that his conſcience did not accuſe him of any euill towardes Saule. Next, that it couched gods glory to award ſentence agaynſt the wicked. And ſo entring into the conſideratiō of gods mercyes and promiſes, he waxeth holde, and derideth the vayne enterpriſes of his enemyes, threatnyng that it ſhall fall on their owne neckes, that whiche they haue purpoſed for others.
               
               Sing this as the third pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O Lord my God, I put my truſt and confidence in thee:
               Saue me from thē that me purſue, and eke deliuer me.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Leaſt like a Lion he me teare and rent in pieces ſmal:
               While there is none to ſuccor me, and rid me out of thrall.
               
                  
                     verse 3 O Lord my God, if I haue done the thing that is not right:
               Or els if I be found in faut, or gilty in the ſight:
               
                  
                     verse 4 Or to my frend rewarded euil, or left him in diſtres,
               Which me purſued moſt cruelly, and hated me cauſeles:
               
                  
                     verse 5 Then let my foes purſue my ſoule, and eke my life down thruſt
               Vnto the earth, and alſo lay, myne honour in the duſt.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Stert vp, O Lord, now in thy wrath, and put my foes to payne:
               Performe thy kingdome promiſed to me which wrong ſuſtaine.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Thē ſhal great nations come to thee, and know thee by this thing:
               If thou declare for loue of thē, thy ſelfe as Lord and kyng.
               
                  
                     verse 8 And thou that art of al men iudge, O Lord, now iudge thou me
               According to my rightouſnes, and myne integritie.
               
                  
                  The ſeconde part.
                  
                     
                        verse 9 9 Lord ceaſe the hate of wicked men, and be the iuſt mans guide,
                  
                     
                        verse 10 By whom the ſecrets of al hearts, are ſearched and deſcride.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 I take my helpe to come of God, in al my grief and ſmart,
                  That doth preſerue all thoſe that be, of pure and perfect hart.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 The iuſt man and the wicked both, God iudgeth by his power:
                  So that he feleth his mighty hand, euen euery day and houre.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Except he chaunge his mind, I dye, for euen as he ſhould ſmit,
                  He whets his ſword, his bow he bēds, ayming where he may hit.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 And doth prepare his mortal dartes, his arrowes kene and ſharpe
                  For them that do me perſecute, whileſt he doth miſchief warpe.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 But loe, though he in trauel be, of his deuiliſh forecaſt,
                  And of his miſchief once cōceiued, yet brings forth nought at laſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 He digs a ditch, and delues it depe, in hope to hurt his brother:
                  But he ſhal fal into the pit, that he digde vp for other.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Thus wrong retorneth to the hurt of him in whom it bred,
                  And al the miſchief that he wrought ſhal fal vpon his head.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 I wil geue thankes to God therfore, that iudgeth righteouſly:
                  And with my ſong prayſe wil the name, of him, that is moſt hie.
               
            
            
               Domine Deus noſter. Pſalme .viij. 
               T.S
               
                  ¶The Prophet conſidering thexcellent liberalitie, and fatherly prouidence of God towardes man, whom he made as it were a god ouer all his workes: doth not onely geue great thankes, but is aſtoniſhed with thadmiration of the ſame, as one nothing able to compaſſe ſuch great mercyes, and ſo endeth.
               
               Syng this as the third Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O God our Lord how wonderful are thy workes euery where?
               Whoſe fame ſurmount in dignitie aboue the heauēs cleare.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Euē by the mouths of ſucking babes yu wilt cōfoūd thy foes:
               For in theſe babes thy might is ſene, thy graces they diſcloſe.
               
                  
                     verse 3 And when I ſee the heauēs high, the workes of thine own hand,
               The ſunne, the mone, and all the ſtarres in order as they ſtand:
               
                  
                     verse 4 What thing is man, Lord, thinke I then, that yu dooſt him remēber?
               Or what is mans poſteritie, that thou dooſt it conſider?
               
                  
                     verse 5 For thou haſt made him little leſſe then angels in degree:
               And thou haſt crowned him alſo with glory and dignitie.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Thou haſt preferd him to be Lord of al thy workes of wonder,
               And at his fete haſt ſet al things, that he ſhould kepe thē vnder.
               
                  
                     verse 7 As ſhepe and neat, and al beaſtes els that in the fieldes do fede:
               
                  
                     verse 8 Foules of the ayre, fiſh in the ſea, and al that therin brede.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Therfore muſt I ſay once again, O God, that art our Lord:
               How famous & how wōderful, are thy workes through ye world?
            
            
               
               Confitebor tibi domine. Pſalme .ix.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶After he had geuē thākes to god, for the ſundry victories that he had ſēt him againſt his enemies, & alſo proued by manifold experiēce, how ready god was at hand in all his troubles: 
                        •
                     e being now likewiſe in daunger of new enemyes, deſireth god to helpe him according to his wont, and deſtroy the malicious arrogancie of his aduerſaries.
               
               Syng this as the third Pſalme
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  WIth hart & mouth, vnto the Lord, wil I ſing laud and prayſe:
               And ſpeake of al thy wondrous workes & thē declare alwaies
               
                  
                     verse 2 I wil be glad and much reioyce in thee, O God, moſt hie,
               And make my ſonges extoll thy name aboue the ſtarry ſkye.
               
                  
                     verse 3 For that my foes are driuen backe, and turned vnto flight:
               They fal down, flat and are deſtroyd by thy great force & myght
               Thou haſt reuenged al my wrong, my grief and al my grudge:
               
                  
                     verse 4 Thou dooſt wt iuſtice heare my cauſe, moſt like a righteous iudge.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Thou dooſt rebuke the Heathē folke, and wicked ſo confound:
               That afterward, the memory of them cannot be found
               
                  
                     verse 6 My foe, thou haſt made good diſpatch, & all our townes deſtroyed:
               thou haſt their fame wt thē defaced, through al the world ſo wide.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Know thou that he which is aboue, for euermore ſhal raigne:
               And in the ſeat of equity true iudgement wil maintayne.
               
                  
                     verse 8 With iuſtice he wil kepe and guide, the world and euery wight:
               And ſo wil yelde with equitie, to euery man his right.
               
                  
                     verse 9 He is protector of the poore, what time they be oppreſt:
               He is in al aduerſitie their refuge and their reſt.
               
                  
                     verse 10 All they that know thy holy name, therfore ſhal truſt in thee:
               For thok forſakeſt not their ſute, in their neceſſitie.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Sing Pſalmes therfore vnto the Lord, that dwelleth in Sion hil:
               Publiſh among al nations, his noble actes and will.
               
                  
                     verse 12 For he is mindful of the bloud of thoſe that be oppreſt:
               Forgetting not th' afflicted hart, that ſeekes to him for reſt.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Haue mercy Lord on me poore wretch, whoſe enmies ſtil remaine:
                  Which from the gates of death are wont to rayſe me vp agayne.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 In Sion that I might ſet forth, thy prayſe with hart and voyce:
                  And that in thy ſaluation (Lord) my ſoule might ſtil reioyce.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 The heathen ſticke faſt in the pit, that they them ſelues preparde:
                  And in the net that they did ſet, their own fete faſt are ſnarde.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 God ſhe wes his iudgemēts, which wer good for euery mā to mark
                  When as ye ſe the wicked man lye trapt in his own warke.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 17 The wicked and the ſinfull men go down to hel for euer:
                  And all the people of the world, that God wil not remember.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 But ſure the Lord wil not forget the poore mans grief and payne:
                  The pacient people neuer looke for helpe of God in vayne.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 O Lord ariſe leaſt men preuayle that be of worldly myght:
                  And let the Heathen folke receyue their iudgement in thy ſight.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Lord ſtrike ſuch terror, feare and dread into the harts of them:
                  That they may know aſſuredly, they be but mortal men.
               
            
            
               Vt quid domine. Pſalme .x. 
               T.S
               
                  ¶He complayneth of the fraud, rapine, tyranny, and of all kindes of wrong, whiche worldly men vſe, aſſigning the cauſe therof, whiche was, that wicked men beyng as it were dronken with worldy proſperitie, and therfore ſetting a part all feare and reuerence towardes god, thinke they may do all thinges without controlyng. Therfore he calleth vpon god to ſende ſome remedy theſe deſperate euils. And at length comforteth him ſelfe with hope of delyueraunce.
               
               Sing this as the third Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  WHat is the cauſe that thou (O Lord) art now ſo far from thine?
               And kepeſt cloſe thy coūtenaūce frō vs this troublous time?
               
                  
                     verse 2 The poore doth periſh by the proud and wicked mēs deſire:
               Let them be taken in the craft that they them ſelues conſpire.
               
                  
                     verse 3 For in the luſt of his own hart the vngodly doth delyte:
               So doth the wicked prayſe him ſelf, and doth the Lord deſpite.
               
                  
                     verse 4 He is ſo proud that right and wrong, he ſetteth al apart:
               Nay, nay, there is no God (ſayth he) for thus he thinkes in heart.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Becauſe his wayes do proſper ſtil, he doth thy lawes neglect:
               And with a blaſt doth puffe againſt, ſuch as would him correct.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Tuſh, tuſh (ſaith he) I haue no dread, leaſt mine eſtate ſhould chāge:
               And why? for al aduerſity to him is very ſtraunge.
               
                  
                     verse 7 His mouth is ful of curſednes, of fraud, deceyte, and guile:
               Vnder his to ung doth miſchief ſit, & trauel al the while,
               
                  
                     verse 8 He lieth hid in wayes and holes, to ſlay the innocent:
               Againſt the poore that paſſe him by, his cruel eyes are bēt.
               
                  
                     verse 9 And like a Lion priuily lieth lurkyng in his den:
               If he may ſnare them in his net, to ſpoile poore ſimple mē.
               
                  
                     verse 10 And for the nonce ful craftly, he croucheth down I ſay:
               
                  
                     verse 11 So ar great heapes of pore mē made, by his ſtrōg power, hys pray.
               
                  
                     verse 12 Tuſh, God forgetteth this (ſayth he) therfore may I behold:
               His countenaunce is caſt aſide, he doth it not behold.
               
                  
                     verse 13 Ariſe (O Lord) O God in whom the poore mans hope doth reſt:
               Lift vp thy hand, forget not Lord, the poore that be oppreſt.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 14 What blaſphemy is this to thee? Lord dooſt thou not abhorre it?
               To heare the wicked in their harts ſay, tuſh thou careſt not for it?
               
                  
                     verse 15 But thou ſeeſt al thys wyckednes, and wel dooſt vnderſtand:
               
                  
                     verse 16 That frendles and poore fatherles, are left into thy hand.
               
                  
                     verse 17 Of wicked and malitious men, then breake the power for euer:
               That they with their iniquitie, may periſh altogether.
               
                  
                     verse 18 The Lord ſhal raygne for euermore, as kyng and God alone:
               And he wil chaſe the Heathen folke, out of his land eche one.
               
                  
                     verse 19 Thou heareſt (O lord) the poore mās plaint, their praiers & requeſt:
               Their harts thou wilt cōfirme vntil, thine eares to heare be preſt
               
                  
                     verse 20 To iudge the poore and fatherles, and helpe them to their right,
               That they may be no more oppreſt, with men of worldly might.
            
            
               In Domino confido, Pſalme .xi. 
               T.S
               
                  ¶This Pſalme conteyneth two partes. In the firſt Dauid ſheweth how hard aſſaults of tēptations he ſuſtayned, and in how great anguiſh of mynde he was, when Saule dyd perſecute him. Then next he reioyſeth that God ſent him ſuccor in his neceſſitie, declaring hys iuſtice, as wel in gouerning the good and the wicked men, as the whole world.
               
               Syng this as the third Pſalme
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  I Truſt in God,  how dare ye then, ſay thus my ſoule vntil:
               Flee hence as faſt as any foule, and hide you in your hil?
               
                  
                     verse 2 Behold ye wicked bēd their bowes, & make their arrowes preſt
               to ſhote in ſecret & to hurt ye ſoūd & harmles breſt.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Of worldly hope al ſtayes wer ſhrūke, & clerely brought to nought
               Alas the iuſt and rightuous man, what euil hath he wrought?
               
                  
                     verse 4 But he that in his temple is, moſt holy and moſt hye:
               And in the heauens hath his ſeat, of royal maieſtye:
               The poore and ſimple mans eſtate, conſidereth in his mynde:
               And ſearcheth out ful narowly, the maners of mankynde.
               
                  
                     verse 5 And with a chereful countenance, the righteous man wil vſe:
               But in his hart he doth abhorre, al ſuch as miſchief muſe.
               
                  
                     verse 6 And on the ſinners caſteth ſnares, as thicke as any rayne:
               Fire & brimſtone, & whirlwindes thick, apointed for their payne.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Ye ſee then how a righteous God, doth righteouſnes embrace:
               And to the iuſt and vpright men, ſhewes forth his pleaſant face.
            
            
               Saluum me fac Deus. Pſalme .xii.
               T. S
               
                  ¶The prophet learning the miſerable eſtate of the people, and the decay of all good order, deſireth God ſpedely to ſend ſuccor to his children: Then cōforting himſelfe and others, with the aſſurance of gods helpe: he commendeth the conſtant veritie that God obſerueth in keping his promiſes, concluding that when all orders are moſt corrupted, then wyl God delyuer his.
               
               Sing this as the third Pſalme.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 1 
                  HElpe Lord,  for good and godly men, do periſh and decay:
               And faith & truth frō worldly men, is parted cleane away.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Who ſo doth wt his neighbour talk, his talk is al but vaine:
               For euery man bethinketh how, to flatter, lye and faine.
               
                  
                     verse 3 But flatteryng and deceitful lippes, and tonges that be ſo ſtout:
               to ſpeak proud words & make great brags, y• lord ſoone cut thē out.
               
                  
                     verse 4 For they ſay ſtil, we wil preuayle, our tonges ſhal vs extol:
               our tongs are ours, we ought to ſpeak, what lord ſhal vs controll?
               
                  
                     verse 5 But for the great complaint and cry, of poore and men oppreſt:
               Ariſe wil I now (ſaith the lord) and them reſtore to reſt.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Gods worde is lyke to ſiluer pure, that from the earth is tride:
               And hath no leſſe then ſeuen tymes, in fyre bene purifide.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Now ſince thy promiſe is to helpe, Lord keepe thy promiſe then:
               And ſaue vs now and euermore, from this il kind of men.
               
                  
                     verse 8 For now the wicked world is full of miſchiefes manifold:
               When vanitie with mortal men, ſo highly is extold.
            
            
               Vſquequo domine. Pſalme. xiii,
               T. S
               
                  ¶Dauid, as it were ouercommen with ſundry and new afflictions, flyeth to God, as hys onely refuge, and ſo at the length being encouraged through gods promiſes, he conceiueth moſt ſure confidence againſt the extreame horrors of death.
               
               Sing this as the third pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  HOw long wilt yu forget me Lord,  ſhal I neuer be remembred?
               How lōg wilt yu thy viſage hide, as though yu were offēded?
               
                  
                     verse 2 In hart & mynde how long ſhal I with care tormented be?
               How longe eke ſhal my deadly foe, thus triumphe ouer me?
               
                  
                     verse 3 Behold me now (my Lord) my God, and heare me ſore oppreſt:
               Lighten mine eyes leaſt that I ſleepe, as one by death poſſeſt.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Leaſt thus mine enemy ſay to me, behold I do preuayle:
               Leaſt they alſo that hate my ſoule, reioyce to ſee me quayle.
               
                  
                     verse 5 But for thy mercies and goodnes, my hope ſhal neuer ſtart:
               In thy reliefe and ſauyng health, right glad ſhal bee my hart.
               
                  
                     verse 6 I wil geue thankes vnto the Lord, and praiſes to him ſyng:
               Becauſe he hath heard my requeſt, and graunted my wiſhyng.
            
            
               Dixit inſipiens. pſalme .xiiii.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶He deſcribeth the p
                        •
                     ruerſe nature of men, which were ſo growen to licentiouſnes, that god was brought to vtter contempt for the which thing although he was greatly greued: yet being perſuaded that God would ſend ſome preſent remedy, he comforteth hymſelf and others.
               
               
                   
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  THere is no God as foliſh men, affirme in their 
                     〈♫〉
                   mad mode: their drifts are al corrupt & vayne 
                     〈♫〉
                   not one of them doth good. The Lorde beheld from heauen hit, the 
                     〈♫〉
                   whole race of mankynde, and ſaw not one that ſought in deede, the 
                     〈♫〉
                   liuing God to finde.
               
                  
                     verse 3 They went all wyde & were corrupt, and truly there was none:
               That in the world did any good: I ſay there was not one.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Is all their iudgement ſo far loſt, that all worke miſchief ſtil:
               Eating my people euē as bread, not one to ſeeke Gods wil?
               
                  
                     verse 5 When they thus rage, then ſodenly, great feare on them ſhal fal:
               For god doth loue the righteous men, and wil maintain them al.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Ye mocke the doinges of the poore, to their reproche and ſhame.
               Becauſe they put their truſt in God, and cal vpon his name.
               
                  
                     verse 7 But who ſhal geue thy people health, & when wilt thou fulfil:
               The promiſe made to Iſrael, from out of Sion hil?
               
                  
                     verse 8 Euen when thou ſhalt reſtore agayne, ſuch as were captiues lad:
               Then Iacob ſhal therin reioyce, and Iſrael ſhal be glad.
            
            
               Domine quis habitabit. Pſalme .xv.
               T. S
               
                  ¶This Pſalme teacheth on what condition God did chuſe the Iewes for his peculiar people, and wherfore he placed his Temple among them, which was to thentent, that they be lyuing vprightly & godlye, might witnes that they were his ſpecial and holy people.
               
               Sing this as the third pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O Lord within thy Tabernacle,  who ſhal inhabite ſtil?
               Or whom wilt thou receyue to dwel, in thy moſt holy hil?
               
                  
                     verse 2 The mā whoſe life is vncorrupt, whoſe works ar iuſt & ſtreit
               Whoſe hart doth think ye very truth, whoſe tong ſpeakes no deceit.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3 Nor to his neighbour doth none il, in body, goods, or name:
               Nor willingly doth moue falſe tales, which might empeyr ye ſame
               
                  
                     verse 4 That in his hart regardeth not, malitious wycked men:
               But thoſe that loue and feare the Lord, he maketh much of them.
               
                  
                     verse 5 His oth and al his promiſes, that kepeth faithfully:
               Although he make his couenant ſo, that he doth loſe therby:
               
                  
                     verse 6 That putteth not to vſury, his money and his coyne:
               Ne for to hurt the innocent, doth brybe or els purloyne.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Who ſo doth al things as you ſee, that here is to be done:
               Shal neuer periſh in this world, nor in the world to come.
            
            
               Conſerua me domine. Pſalme .xvi.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶Dauid prayeth to God for ſuccour, not for his workes, but for his faythes ſake, proteſtyng that he hateth al Idolatry, taking God onely for his comfort and felicity: who ſuffreth hys to lacke nothyng.
               
               Syng this as the .xiiii. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  LOrd kepe me,  for I truſt in thee, and do confeſſe in deede:
               Thou art my God, & of my goods, O lord, yu haſt no neede.
               
                  
                     verse 2 I geue my goodnes to the ſaints, that in the world do dwel.
               And namely to the faithful flocke, in vertue that excel.
               
                  
                     verse 3 They ſhal heape ſorowes on their heds, which rū as they wer mad
               To offer to the Idols Gods, alas it is to bad.
               
                  
                     verse 4 As for their bloudy ſacrifice, and offrings of that ſort:
               I wil not touch, nor yet therof my lips ſhal make report.
               
                  
                     verse 5 For why? the Lord the portion is, of mine inheritaunce:
               And thou art he that dooſt maintain, my rent, my lot, my chaūce.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The place wherin my lot did fal, in beauty did excel:
               Myne heritage aſſignd to me, doth pleaſe me wondrous wel.
               
                  
                     verse 7 I thanke the Lord that cauſed me, to vnderſtand the right:
               For by his meanes my ſecret thoughts, do teach me euery nyght.
               
                  
                     verse 8 I ſet the Lord ſtil in my ſight, and truſt him ouer al:
               For he doth ſtand on my right hand, therfore I ſhal not fal.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Wherfore my hart and tonge alſo, doth both reioyce together:
               My fleſh and body reſt in hope, when I this thing conſider.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Thou wilt not leaue my ſoule in graue, for Lord thou loueſt me.
               Nor yet wil geue thine holy one, corruption for to ſee.
               
                  
                     verse 11 But wilt teach me the way to lyfe, for al treaſures and 
                     ••
                  ore
               Of perfect ioy are in thy face, and power for euermore.
            
            
               Exaudi domine iuſtitiam meam. Pſalme .xvii.
               T. S
               
                  ¶Here he complayneth vnto God of the cruel pride and arrogancy of Saule and the reſt of his enmies, who thus raged without any cauſe geuē on his part: therfore he deſireth God to reuenge his innocency and deliuer hym. This Pſalme ought diligentlye to be noted of ſuch as receiue euil, for wel doyng.
               
               
               Syng this as the xiiii. Pſalme
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O Lord geue eare to my iuſt cauſe, attend when I complaine,
               and heare ye praier yt I put forth,  with lips that do not fayne.
               
                  
                     verse 2 And let ye iudgemēt of my cauſe, procede alwaies from thee:
               And let thine eies behold and cleare, this my ſimplicitie.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Thou haſt wel tride me in the night, and yet couldſt nothing finde:
               That I haue ſpoken with my tonge, that was not in my mynde.
               
                  
                     verse 4 As from the workes of wicked men, and pathes peruerſe and il:
               For loue of thy moſt holy worde, I haue refrayned ſtil.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Then in thy pathes that be moſt pure, ſtay me (Lord) and preſerue:
               That from the way wherin I walke, my ſteps may neuer ſwerue
               
                  
                     verse 6 For I do cal to thee, O Lord, ſurely thou wilt me ayde:
               Thē heare my prayer & way right wel, the wordes yt I haue ſayd.
               
                  
                     verse 7 O thou the ſauiour of all them, that put their truſt in thee:
               Declare thy ſtrength on them yt ſpurne, againſt thy maieſtie.
               
                  
                     verse 8 O kepe me Lord as thou wouldſt kepe, the apple of thine eye:
               And vnder couert of thy wings, defend me ſecretly.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 9 From wicked men that trouble me, and daily me anoy:
                  And from my foes that go about, my ſoule for to deſtroy.
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Which wallow in their worldly wealth, ſo ful and eke ſo fat:
                  that in their pride they do not ſpare, to ſpeak they care not what
                  
                     
                        verse 11 They lie in wait where we ſhould paſſe, wt craft me to confound:
                  And muſing miſchief in their mindes, to caſt me to the ground.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Much like a Lion gredely, that would his pray embrace:
                  Or lurkyng like a Lions whelpe, within ſome ſecret place.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Vp Lord with haſt preuent my foe, and caſt him at thy feete:
                  Saue yu my ſoule frō the euil man, and wt thy ſword him ſmite:
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Deliuer me lord by thy power, out of theſe tirants hands:
                  Which now ſo long time raigned haue, & kepe vs in their bands.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 I meane frō worldly men to whō, al worldly goodes are rife:
                  That haue no hope nor part of ioy, but in this preſent life.
                  Thou of thy ſtore their bellies filſt, with pleaſures to their minde:
                  Their children haue inough & leaue, to theirs the reſt behind.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 But I ſhal with pure cōſcience, behold thy gratious face:
                  So when I wake, I ſhalbe ful, with thine image and grace.
               
            
            
               
               Diligam te domine. Pſalme .xviii.
               T. S
               
                  ¶This Pſalme is the fir
                        ••
                     e beginning of Dauids ſalutation and thankes geuing in the entring into his kingdome, wherein he extolleth, and praiſeth moſt highlye, the maruelous mercies and grace of God, who hath both preſerued and defended him: he ſetteth forth the image of Chriſtes kingdom, painted in his kingdome: that the faithful may be aſſured, that Chriſt ſhal alwaies conquere & ouercome by the vnſpeakeable power of his father, though al the whole world ſhould ſay there againſt.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  O God my ſtrēgth & fortitude, of force I muſt 
                     〈♫〉
                   loue thee: thou art my caſtle & defence in my 
                     〈♫〉
                   neceſſitie. My God, my rock, in whō I truſt, ye worker of my wealth 
                     〈♫〉
                   my refuge, buckler, and my ſhield, the horne of al my health.
               
                  
                     verse 3 When I ſing laud vnto the Lorde, moſt worthy to be ſerued:
               Then fro my foes I am right ſure, that I ſhalbe preſerued.
               
                  
                     verse 4 The panges of death did compaſſe me, and bound me euery where
               The flowing waues of wickednes, did put me in great feare.
               
                  
                     verse 5 The ſlie and ſuttle ſnares of hel, were round about me ſet:
               And for my death there was preparde, a deadly trapping net.
               
                  
                     verse 6 I thus beſet with paine and grief, did pray to God for grace:
               And he forth with did heare my plaint, out of his holy place.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Such is his power that in his wrath, he made the earth to quake:
               Yea the foundation of the mount, of Baſan for to ſhake.
               
                  
                     verse 8 And from his noſtrels came a ſmoke, when kindled was his ire:
               and from his mouth came kindled coales, of hote conſuming fyre.
               
                  
                     verse 9 The Lord deſcended from aboue, and bowde the heauens hie:
               And vnderneath his feete he caſt, the darknes of the ſkye.
               
                  
                     verse 10 On Cherubs, and on Cherubins, ful royally he rode:
               and on the wings of all the windes, came flying al abrode.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 11 And lyke a den moſt darke he made his denne and ſecret place:
                  With waters blacke and ayrie cloudes enuironed he was.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 12 But when the preſence of his face, in brightnes ſhal appeare:
                  thē cloudes cōſume, & in their ſtead, come hailes & coales of fyre.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Theſe firy dartes and thunderboltes, diſperſe thē here and there:
                  And with his often lightenings, he puttes them in great feare.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Lord at thy wrath and threatnings, and at thy chiding cheare:
                  The ſprings and the foundations, of al the world appeare.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 And frō aboue the Lord ſent downe, to fetch me from below:
                  and pluckt me out of waters great, that would me ouerflow.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 And me deliuerd from my foes, that would haue made me thral:
                  Yea from ſuch foes as were to ſtrong, for me to deale withal.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 They did preuent me to oppres, in tyme of my great grief:
                  But yet the Lord was my defence, my ſuccor and relief.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 He brought me forth in open place, where as I might be free:
                  And kept me ſafe, becauſe he had a fauour vnto me.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 And as I was an innocent, ſo did he me regard:
                  And to the cleannes of my hands, he gaue me my reward.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 For that I walked in his wayes, and in his pathes haue trod:
                  And haue not wauered wickedly, againſt my Lord my God.
               
               
                  The third part.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 But euermore I haue reſpect, to his law and decre:
                  His ſtatutes and commaundements, I caſt not out fro me.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 But pure and cleane and vncorrupt, appeard before his face:
                  And did refrayne from wickednes, and ſinne in any caſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 The Lord therfore wil me reward, as I haue done aright:
                  And to the cleannes of my handes, appearing in his ſight.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 For Lord with him that holy is, wilt thou be holy to:
                  and with ye good and vertuous mē, right vertuoſly wilt do,
                  
                     
                        verse 25 And to the louing and elect, thy loue thou wilt reſerue:
                  And thou wilt vſe the wicked men, as wicked men deſerue.
                  
                     
                        verse 26 For thou dooſt ſaue the ſimple folk, in trouble whē they lye:
                  And dooſt bring down y• countenance, of them that looke ful hye.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 The Lord wil light my candel ſo, that it ſhal ſhine ful bright:
                  The Lord my God wil make alſo, my darknes to be light.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 For by thy help an hoſt of men, diſcomfite Lord I ſhal:
                  By thee I ſcale and ouerleape, the ſtrength of any wal.
                  
                     
                        verse 29 Vnſpotted are the wayes of God, his word is purely tride:
                  He is a ſure defence to ſuch, as in his fayth abide.
                  
                     
                        verse 30 For who is God except the Lord? for other there is none:
                  Or els who is omnipotent, ſauing our God alone?
               
               
                  
                  The fourth part.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 The God that girdeth me with ſtrength, is he that I do meane:
                  That al the wayes wherin I walke, did euermore kepe cleane.
                  
                     
                        verse 32 That made my feete like to the Hartes, in ſwiftnes of my pace:
                  And for my ſurety brought me forth, into an open place.
                  
                     
                        verse 33 He did in order put my handes, to battayle and to fight:
                  To breake in ſunder barres of braſſe, he gaue my armes ye might.
                  
                     
                        verse 34 Thou reacheſt me thy ſauing health, thy right hand is my tower:
                  Thy loue and familiaritie, doth ſtil encreaſe my power.
                  
                     
                        verse 35 And vnder me thou makeſt playne, the way where I ſhould walk:
                  So that my feete ſhal neuer ſlip, nor ſtumble at a balke.
                  
                     
                        verse 36 And fierſly I purſue and take, my foes that me annoyde:
                  And from the field do not returne, til they be al deſtroyde.
                  
                     
                        verse 37 So I ſuppreſſe and wound my foes, that they can riſe no more:
                  For at my foote they fal down flat, I ſtrike them all ſo ſore.
                  
                     
                        verse 38 For thou dooſt gird me wt thy ſtrēgth, to war in ſuch a wyſe:
                  That they be al ſcattred abrode, that vp againſt me ryſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 39 Lord thou haſt put into my handes, my mortal enmies yoke:
                  and all my foes thou dooſt deuide, in ſunder with thy ſtroke.
                  
                     
                        verse 40 They cald for help, but none gaue eare, nor helpt them with relief:
                  Yea to the Lord they cald for helpe, yet heard he not their griefe.
               
               
                  The fyft part.
                  
                     
                        verse 41 And ſtil like duſt before the wind, I driue them vnder feete:
                  And ſweepe them out like filthy clay, that ſticketh in the ſtreete.
                  
                     
                        verse 42 Thou keepſt me from ſeditious folke, that ſtil in ſtrife be led:
                  and thou dooſt of the heathen folke, appoint me to be hed.
                  
                     
                        verse 43 A people ſtraunge to me vnknowen, and yet they ſhal me ſerue:
                  And at the firſt obey my worde, wheras myne owne wil ſwerue.
                  
                     
                        verse 44 I ſhalbe irckſome to mine owne, they wil not ſee my light.
                  But wander wide out of their wayes, and hide them out of ſight
                  
                     
                        verse 45 But bleſſed be the liuing Lord, moſt worthy of al prayſe:
                  That is my rocke and ſauing health, prayſed be he alwayes.
                  
                     
                        verse 46 For God it is that gaue me power, reuenged for to be:
                  And with his holy word ſubdude, the people vnto me.
                  
                     
                        verse 47 And fro my foe me deliuerd, and ſet me hygher then thoſe:
                  That cruel and vngodly were, and vp againſt me roſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 48 And for this cauſe (O Lord my God) to thee geue thankes I ſhal:
                  and ſing out prayſes to thy name, among the gentils al.
                  
                     
                        verse 49 That gaueſt great proſperity, vnto the king I ſay:
                  To Dauid thine annoynted king, and to his ſeede for ay.
               
            
            
               
               Coeli enarrant gloriam dei. pſalme .xix.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶To the intent he might moue the faithful to a deper conſideration of gods glory, he fetteth before their eyes the moſt exquiſite workemanſhip of the heauens, with their proportion and ornaments. And afterward calleth them to the law wherin God hath reueled him ſelfe more familiarly to his choſen people. The which peculiar grace by commēdyng the law, he ſetteth forth more at large, and at the end, he concludeth with a prayer.
               
               Sing this as the .xiiii Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THe heauens and the firmament,  do wondrouſly declare:
               The glory of God omnipotent, his workes & what they are.
               
                  
                     verse 2 The wondrous workes of God appear, by euery daies ſucces
               The nights which likewiſe their race rū, ye ſelf ſame things expres
               
                  
                     verse 3 There is no lāguage, tong, or ſpeach, where their ſoūd is not herd:
               
                  
                     verse 4 In al the earth and coſtes therof, their knowledge is conferd.
               In them the Lord made for the ſunne, a place of great renome:
               
                  
                     verse 5 Who like a bridegrome redy trimde, doth from his chamber come.
               And as a valiaunt champion, who for to get a pryſe:
               With ioy doth haſt to take in hand, ſome noble enterpryſe,
               
                  
                     verse 6 And al the ſky from end to end, he compaſſeth about:
               Nothing can hide it from his heat, but he will find it out.
               
                  
                     verse 7 How perfect is the law of God? how is his couenaunt ſure?
               Conuerting ſoules and making wyſe, the ſimple and obſcure?
               
                  
                     verse 8 Iuſt are the Lordes commaundements, & glad both hart & mynde:
               His precept pure, and geueth lyght, to eyes that be ful blynde.
               
                  
                     verse 9 The feare of God is excellent, and doth indure for euer:
               The iudgements of the Lord are trne, and righteous altogether
               
                  
                     verse 10 And more to be embraſt alwayes, then fined gold (I ſay:)
               The hony and the hony combe, are not ſo ſweete as they.
               
                  
                     verse 11 By them thy ſeruant is fore warnd, to haue God in regard:
               and in performance of the ſame, there ſhal be great reward.
               
                  
                     verse 12 But lord what earthly mā doth know, the errours of his life?
               Then clēſe my ſoule frō ſecret ſynnes, which are in me moſt ryfe.
               
                  
                     verse 13 And kepe me that preſumptuous ſinnes, preuayle not ouer mee:
               And then ſhal I be innocent, and great offences flee.
               
                  
                     verse 14 Accept my mouth and eke my hart, my wordes & thoughts ech one.
               For my redeiner and my ſtrength, O Lord thou art alone.
            
            
               Exaudiat te dominus. Pſalme .xx.
               T. S
               
                  ¶A prayer of the people vnto God: that it would pleaſe him to heare their king, and receiue his ſacrifice, which he offred before 
                        •
                     e wente to battle againſte the Ammonites, declaring how that the Heathē put their truſt in horſes and chariots, but they truſt onely in ye name of the Lord their god. Wherfore the other ſhal fall, but the Lorde wyll ſaue the kyng and hys people.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 1 
                  IN trouble and aduerſitie, the Lord God heare thee ſtil:
               The maieſtie of Iacobs God, defend thee from al il.
               
                  
                     verse 2 And ſend thee frō his holy place, his helpe at euery nede:
               And ſo in Siō ſtabliſh thee, & make thee ſtrong in dede.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Remembring wel the ſacrifice, that now to him is done:
               And ſo receyue right thankfully, thy burnt offrings echone.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Accordyng to thy hartes deſire, the Lord graunt vnto thee:
               And al thy counſel and deuyſe, ful wel performe may hee.
               
                  
                     verse 5 We ſhal reioyce when thou vs ſaueſt, and our banners diſplay:
               Vnto the Lord which thy requeſts, fulfilled hath alway.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The Lord wil his annointed ſaue, I know wel by his grace:
               And ſend him health by his right hād, out of his holy place.
               
                  
                     verse 7 In charets ſome put confidence, and ſome in horſes truſt:
               But we remember God our Lord, that kepeth promiſe iuſt.
               
                  
                     verse 8 They fal down flat, but we do ryſe, and ſtand vp ſtedfaſtly:
               
                  
                     verse 9 Now ſaue & help vs Lord and king, on thee when we do cry.
            
            
               Domine in virtute. Pſalme .xxi.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶Dauid in the parſon of the people prayſeth God for the victory which he gaue them againſt the Sirians and Ammonites. 1. Sam. x.xi. wherein he had the riche crowne of the king of Ammon, ſet vppon his head. ii. Sam. xii. and was indued with the manifold beleſſinges of God, and contrariwiſe his enemies deſtroyed.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  O Lord how ioyful is ye king, in thy ſtrēgth, 
                     〈♫〉
                   & thy power: how vehemently doth he re- 
                     〈♫〉
                   ioyce, in thee his Sauior? For thou haſt geuen vnto him his god. 
                     〈♫〉
                   ly hartes deſyre: to him nothing haſt yu denide of that he did require
               
                  
                     verse 3 Thou didſt preuent him with thy gifts, and bleſſings manifold:
               And thou haſt ſet vpon his head, a crowne of perfect gold.
               
                  
                     verse 4 And when he aſked lyfe of thee, therof thou madeſt him ſure:
               To haue long life, yea ſuch a lyfe, as euer ſhould indure.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 5 Great is his glory by thy helpe, thy benefite and ayde:
               Great worſhip and great honor both, thou haſt vpon him layde.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Thou wilt geue him felicitie, that neuer ſhal decay:
               And with thy chereful countenance wilt comfort him alway.
               
                  
                     verse 7 For why? the king doth ſtrongly truſt, in god for to preuayle:
               Therfore his goodnes and his grace, wil not that he ſhal quaile.
               
                  
                     verse 8 But let thine enmies feele thy force, and thoſe that thee withſtād:
               Find out thy foes, and let them feele, the power of thy right hād.
               
                  
                     verse 9 And like an ouen burne them (Lord) in firy flame and fume:
               Thine anget ſhal deſtroy them all, and fire ſhal them conſume.
               
                  
                     verse 10 And thou wilt roote out of the earth, their fruite y• ſhould increase,
               And from the number of thy folke, their ſeede ſhal end and ceaſe.
               
                  
                     verse 11 For why? much miſchief did they muſe, againſt thine holy name:
               Yet did they fayle and had no power, for to performe the ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 12 But as a marke thou ſhalt them ſet, in a moſt open place:
               And charge thy vow ſtrings redily, againſt thine enmies face.
               
                  
                     verse 13 Be thou exalted lord therfore, in thy ſtrength euery hower:
               So ſhal we ſing right ſolempnly, prayſing thy might and power.
            
            
               Deus deus meus reſpice. pſalme .xxii.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶Dauid complaineth himſelf to be brought into ſuch extremities that he is like a man deſperate and paſt al hope, after declareth wherof, he recouereth himſelf from the bottomles pit of temptations. And vnder his owne perſon, he ſetteth forth the ſignre of Chriſt, whom he did forſee in the ſpirit of prophecy. So this pſalme after two ſortes dothe declare that prophecy of Eſay: he was taken forth of pryſon and iudgement.
               
               Sing this as the .xxi. pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O God my God, wherfore dooſt thou, forſake me vtterly:
               and helpeſt not when I do make,  my great complaint & cry?
               
                  
                     verse 2 To thee my God euē al day long, I do both cry and cal:
               I ceaſe not all the nyght, and yet thou heareſt not at al.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Euen thou that in thy ſanctuary, and holy place dooſt dwel:
               Thou art the comfort and the ioy, and glory of Iſrael.
               
                  
                     verse 4 And he in whom our fathers old, had al their hope for euer:
               and when they put their truſt in thee, ſo didſt thou them deliuer.
               
                  
                     verse 5 They were deliuerd for euer, when they called on thy name:
               And for the fayth they had in thee, they were not put to ſhame.
               
                  
                     verse 6 But I am now become a worme, more like then any man:
               An outcaſt whom the people ſcorne, with all the ſpite they can.
               
                  
                     verse 7 And me deſpiſe as they behold, me walking on the way:
               They gren, they mow, they nod their heds, & in this wiſe thei ſay
               
                  
                  
                     verse 8 This man did glory in the Lord, his fauour and his loue:
               Let him redeme and help hym now, his power if he wil proue.
               
                  
                     verse 9 But Lord out of my mothers wōbe, I came by thy requeſt:
               Thou didſt preſerue me ſtil in hope, whyle I did ſucke her breſt.
               
                  
                     verse 10 I was committed frō my birth, with thee to haue abode:
               Since I was in my mothers wōbe, thou haſt bene euer my God.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Then Lord depart not now frō me, in this my preſent griefe:
                  Since I haue none to be my helpe, my ſuccor and reliefe.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 So many bulles do compaſſe me, that be ful ſtrong of head:
                  Yea bulles ſo fat, as though they had, in Baſan field bene fed.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 They gape vpon me gredely, as though they would me ſlay:
                  Much lyke a Liō roryng out, and rampyng for his pray.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 But I drop downe lyke water ſhed, my ioyntes in ſunder breake:
                  My hart doth in my body melt, lyke waxe againſt the heate.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 And like a potſhard drieth my ſtrēgth, my tonge it cleaueth faſt
                  Vnto my iawes, and I am brought, to duſt of death at laſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 And many dogs do cōpaſſe me, and wicked counſel eke:
                  Conſpire againſt me curſedly, they pearce my handes and feete.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 I was tormented, ſo that I might all my bones haue told:
                  Yet ſtil vpon me they do looke, and ſtil they me behold.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 My garments they deuided eke, in partes amongſt them al:
                  And for my coate they did caſt lots, to whō it might befal.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Therfore I pray thee be not far, fro me at my great neede:
                  But rather ſith yu art my ſtrength, to helpe me Lord make ſpeede.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 And frō the ſword (Lord) ſaue my ſoule, by thy might & thy power:
                  And kepe my ſoule, thy darling deare, frō dogs y• would deuour,
               
               
                  The third part.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 And from the Liōs mouth that would, me al in ſunder ſhiuer:
                  And from the hornes of Vnicornes, Lord ſafely me deliuer.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 And I ſhal to my brethren al, thy maieſtie record:
                  and in thy church ſhal prayſe the name, of thee the liuing Lord.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Al ye that feare him praiſe ye Lord, thou ſeede of Iacob honor him:
                  and with al reuerence poſſible, thou ſeede of Iſrael worſhip hym.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 For he deſpiſeth not the poore, he tourneth not awry.
                  His countenaunce, when they do cal, but graunteth to theyr cry.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 Among the flocke that feare thee Lord, I wil therfore proclaime
                  Thy prayſe, & kepe my promiſe made, for ſetting forth thy name.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 26 The poore ſhal eate and be ſuffiſed, & thoſe that do their deuer
                  To know ye lord, ſhal praiſe his name, their harts ſhal liue for euer.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 Al coſtes of earth ſhal praiſe the Lorde, & turne to hym for grace:
                  The Heathen folke ſhal worſhip him, before his bleſſed face.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 The kingdome of the Heathen folke, the Lord ſhal haue therfore:
                  And he ſhalbe their gouernor, and king for euermore.
                  
                     
                        verse 29 The riche men of his godly giftes, ſhal fede, and taſte alſo:
                  And in his preſence worſhip him, & bow their knees ful low.
                  
                     
                        verse 30 And al that ſhal go down to duſt of lyfe by him muſt taſte:
                  My ſeed ſeel ſerue & praiſe his name, while any world ſhal laſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 My ſeed ſhal plainly ſhew to thē, that ſhalbe borne hereafter,
                  His iuſtice, and his rightuouſnes, & all his workes of wonder.
               
            
            
               
                  Dominus regit me. Pſalme .xxiij.
                  VV. VV.
                  
                     ¶Becauſe the Prophet had proued the great mercyes of God at diuers tymes, and in ſundry maners: he ga
                           •
                        hereth a certayne aſſuraunce, fully perſwadyng hym ſelfe that God wil continue the very ſame goodnes towardes hym for euer.
                  
                  Sing this as the .xxi. pſalme.
                  
                     
                        verse 1 
                     THe Lord is onely my ſupport, and he that doth me fede:
                  How can I then lacke any thyng,  wherof I ſtand in nede?
                  
                     
                        verse 2 He doth me fold in coats moſt ſafe, the tender graſſe faſt by:
                  And after driues me to the ſtreames, which runne moſt pleaſantly
                  
                     
                        verse 3 And when I fele my ſelfe nere loſt, then doth he me home take:
                  Conducting me in his right pathes, euē for his own names ſake.
                  
                     
                        verse 4 And though I wer euē at deathes dore, yet would I feare none ill:
                  For with thy rod & ſhepherdes crooke, I am comforted ſtil
                  
                     
                        verse 5 Thou haſt my table richly deckt, in deſpite of my fo:
                  Thou haſt my head with baulme refreſht, my cup doth ouerflo.
                  
                     
                        verse 6 And finally while breath doth laſt, thy grace ſhal me defend:
                  And in the houſe of God wil I my life for euer ſpend.
               
               
                  ¶Another by Thomas Sternhold.
                  
                     
                        verse 1 
                     MY ſhepehard is the lyuing Lord, nothing therfore I nede:
                  In paſtors fayre, with waters calme, he ſets me for to fede.
                  
                     
                        verse 2 He did conuert & glad my ſoule, & brought my mind in frame:
                  To walke in pathes of rightuouſnes, for his moſt holy name.
                  
                     
                        verse 3 yea though I walke in vale of death, yet wil I feare none il:
                  Thy rod, thy ſtaffe doth comfort me, and thou art with me ſtil.
                  
                     
                        verse 4 And in the preſence of my foes, my table thou ſhalt ſpred:
                  Thou ſhalt (O Lord) fil ful my cup, and eke annoynt my head.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 5 Through all my life thy fauour is, ſo franckly ſhewde to me:
                  That in thy houſe for euermore, my dwelling place ſhalbe.
               
            
            
               Domini eſt terra. pſalme .xxiiii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶Becauſe the grace of God was then to be vttered in the temple, more glorious then before it had ben in the tabernacle, Dauid geueth it a more glorious title, and with exclamation ſetteth forth the honor therof, ſtirring vs to the conſideration of the eternall manſions prepared for vs in the heauens: wherof this was a ſhadow and figure.
               
               Syng this as th x. xxi. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THe earth is al the Lordes, withal her ſtore and furniture:
               yea his is al the world,  and al that therin do indure.
               
                  
                     verse 2 For he hath faſtly founded it, aboue the ſea to ſtand:
               And laid a low the liquid flouds to flow beneath y• lād.
               
                  
                     verse 3 For who is he (O Lord) that ſhal, aſcend into thy hil?
               Or paſſe into thy holy place, there to continue ſtil?
               
                  
                     verse 4 Whoſe hāds ar harmles, & whoſe hart, no ſpot there doth defile,
               His ſoule not ſet on vanitie, who hath not ſworne no guile.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Him that is ſuch a one the Lord, ſhal place in bliſful plight:
               And God his God and ſauior, ſhal yelde to him his right.
               
                  
                     verse 6 This is the brode of trauelers, in ſeking of his grace:
               As Iacob did the Iſraelite, in that time of his race.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Ye princes open your gates, ſtand open the euerlaſting gate:
               For there ſhal enter in therby, the king of glorious ſtate.
               
                  
                     verse 8 What is the king of glorious? the ſtrong and mighty Lord:
               The mighty Lord, in battayles ſtout, and trial of the ſword.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Ye princes open your gates ſtand open, the euerlaſting gate
               For there ſhal enter in therby, the king of glorious ſtate.
               
                  
                     verse 10 What is this king of glorious, the Lord of hoſtes it is:
               The kingdome and the royalltie, of glorious ſtate is his.
            
            
               Ad te domine leuaui. Pſalme .xxv.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶The Prophet touched with the conſideration of his ſinnes, and alſo greued with the cruell malice of his enemies, prayeth to God moſt feruently to haue his ſinnes forgeuen, eſpecially ſuch as he had committed in his youth. He begynneth euery verſe accordyng to the Ebrue letters two or three except.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  I Lift mine hart to thee, my God & guide moſt 
                     〈♫〉
                   iuſt, now ſuffer me to take no ſhame, for in
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   thee do I truſt. Let not my foes reioyce, nor make a ſcorne of me, 
                     〈♫〉
                   and let them not be ouerthrowen that put their truſt in thee.
               But ſhame ſhal them befal, which harme them wrongfully:
               
                  
                     verse 3 Therfore thy pathes & thy rightwayes, vnto me Lord deſcry.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Direct me in thy truth, and teach me I thee pray:
               Thou art my God and ſauiour, on thee I wayt alway.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Thy mercyes manifold, I pray thee Lord remember:
               And eke thy pitie plentiful, for they haue ben for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Remember not the fautes, and fraylty of my youth:
               Remember not how ignoraunt, I haue ben of thy truth:
               Nor after my deſerts, let me thy mercy find,
               But of thine own beningnity, Lord haue me in thy mynd.
               
                  
                     verse 7 His mercy is ful ſwete, his truth a perfect guide
               Therfore the Lord wil ſinners teach, & ſuch as go aſide.
               
                  
                     verse 8 The humble he wil teach, his preceptes for to kepe:
               He wil direct in al his wayes the lowly and the meke,
               
                  
                     verse 9 For al the wayes of God, are truth & mercy both,
               To them that kepe his teſtament, the witnes of his troth.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Now for thy holy name, O Lord I thee intreat,
                  To graunt me pardō for my ſinne, for it is wōdrous great.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Who ſo doth feare the Lord, the Lord doth him direct.
                  To lead his life in ſuch away, as he doth beſt accept.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 His ſoule ſhal euermore, in goodnes dwel and ſtand,
                  His ſede and his poſterity, inherite ſhal the land.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Al thoſe that feare the Lord, know his ſecret intent:
                  And vnto them he doth declare, his wil and teſtament.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Mine eyes and eke my hart, to him I wil aduaunce:
                  That pluckt my feete out of the ſnare, of ſinne & ignorance.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 With mercy me behold, to thee I make my mone:
                  For I am poore and deſolate, and comfortles alone.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 16 The troubles of mine hart, are multiplied in dede:
                  Bring me out of this miſery, neceſſity and nede.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Behold my pouerty, mine anguiſh and my payne
                  Remit my ſinne & mine offence, & make me cleane agayne.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 O Lord behold my foes, how they do ſtil increaſe:
                  Purſuing me wt deadly hate, that faine would liue in peace.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Preſerue and kepe my ſoule, and eke deliuer me:
                  And let me not be ouerthrowen, becauſe I truſt in the.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Let my ſimple purenes, me from mine enmies ſhend:
                  Becauſe I looke as one of thine, that yu ſhouldſt me defend.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Deliuer Lord thy folke, and ſend them ſome relief:
                  I meane thy choſen Iſrael, from al their paine and grief.
               
            
            
               Iudica me domine. Pſalme .xxvi.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶Dauid oppreſſed with many iniuries, findyng no helpe in the world, called for ayde from God: and aſſured of his integritie towards Saul, deſireth God to be his iudge, and to defend his innocency, cauſeles afflicted. Finally he maketh mention of his ſacrifice whiche he will offer for his deliueraunce, and deſireth to be in the company of the faythfull in the congregation of God, whiche he was baniſhed by Saule, promiſing integritie of lyfe, and open prayſes and thankes geuyng.
               
               Sing this as the .xviii. pſal.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  LOrd be my iudge,  & thou ſhalt ſe, my pathes be right & plaine:
               I truſt in god, & hope that he, wil ſtrēgth me to remaine,
               
                  
                     verse 2 Proue me my God I thee deſire, my wayes to ſearch & try:
               As men do proue their gold with fire, my reaynes and hart eſpie.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Thy goodnes layd before my face, I durſt be bold alwayes:
               For of thy truth I treade the trace, and wil do al my dayes.
               
                  
                     verse 4 I do not luſt to haunt or vſe, with men whoſe dedes are vayne:
               To come in houſe I do refuſe, with the deceitful trayne.
               
                  
                     verse 5 I much abhorre the wicked ſort, their dedes I do deſpiſe:
               I do not once to them reſort, that hurtful things deuiſe:
               
                  
                     verse 6 My hands I waſh, and do procede in workes that walke vpright:
               Then to thy alter I make ſpede, to offer there in ſight.
               
                  
                     verse 7 That I may ſpeake & preach the prayſe, that doth belong to thee:
               And ſo declare how wondrous wayes, thou haſt ben good to me.
               
                  
                     verse 8 O Lord thy houſe I loue moſt deare, to me it doth excel:
               I haue delight & would be nere, whereas thy grace doth dwel.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Oh ſhut not vp my ſoule with thē, in ſinne that take theyr fil:
               Nor yet my life amōgſt thoſe mē, that ſeke much bloud to ſpil.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Whoſe hāds are heapt with craft & guile, their life therof is ful:
               And their right hand wt wrēch & wile, for bribes doth pluck & pul.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 11 But I in righteouſnes entend, my time and dayes to ſerue:
               Haue mercy Lord and me defend, ſo that I do not ſwerue.
               
                  
                     verse 12 My fote is ſtayd for al aſſayes, it ſtandeth wel and right:
               Wherfore to God wil I geue praiſe, in al the peoples ſight.
            
            
               Dominus illuminatio. Pſalme .xxvi.
               I H.
               
                  ¶Dauid maketh this Pſalme beyng deliuered from great perils as appeareth by the prayſes and thankes geuing annexed: Wherein we may ſee the conſtant fayth of Dauid againſt the aſſaultes of al enemies, and alſo thend wherfore he deſireth to lyue and to be deliuered, one ly to worſhip God in his congregation. Hereby he promiſeth him ſelfe aſſuraunce, though father and mother forſake him, he teacheth this to be the onely way, to ſee the good thinges in the lande of the lyuing, and after hys example he exhorteth to fayth and to attende vpon the Lorde.
               
               Sing this as the .xviii. pſal,
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THe Lord is both my health & light, ſhal mā make me diſmaide?
               Sith god doth geue me ſtrēgth & might, why ſhuld I be afraid
               
                  
                     verse 2 While ye my foes wt al their ſtrēgth, begin with me to brawle:
               And thinke to eate me vp at length, thē ſelues haue caught the fal.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Though they in campe againſt me lye, my hart is not afraid:
               In battel pight if they wil try, I truſt in God for ayde.
               
                  
                     verse 4 One thing of God I do require, that he wil not deny:
               For which I pray and wil deſire, til he to me apply.
               
                  
                     verse 5 That I within his holy place, my lyfe throughout may dwell?
               To ſee the beauty of his face, and vew his temple wel.
               
                  
                     verse 6 In tyme of dread he ſhal me hide, within his place moſt pure:
               And kepe me ſecret by his ſyde, as on a rocke moſt ſure.
               
                  
                     verse 7 At lēgth I know the Lordes good grace, ſhal make me ſtrōg & ſtout
               My foes to foyle & cleane deface, that compaſſe me about.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Therfore within his houſe wil I geue ſacrifice of prayſe:
               With Pſalmes & ſonges I wil apply, to laud the Lord alwayes.
               
                  The ſeconde part.
                  
                     
                        verse 9 Lord heare the voyce of my requeſt, for which to thee I cal:
                  Haue mercy (Lord) on me oppreſt, and ſend me helpe with al.
                  
                     
                        verse 10 My hart doth knowledge vnto thee, I ſue to haue thy grace:
                  Then ſeke my face ſayſt thou to me, Lord I wil ſeke thy face.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 In wrath turne not thy ſelf away, nor ſuffer me to ſlyde:
                  Thou art my helpe ſtil to this day, be ſtil my God and guide.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 My parentes both their ſonne forſooke, and caſt me of at large:
                  And then the Lord him ſelf yet tooke, of me the cure and charge.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Teach me (O God) the way to thee, and lead me on forth right:
                  For feare of ſuch as watch for me, to trap me if they might.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 14 Do not betake me to the wil, of them that be my foes:
                  For they ſurmiſe agaynſt me ſtil, falſe witnes to depoſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 My hart would faint, but that in me, this hope he fixed faſt:
                  The Lord gods good grace ſhal it ſe, in life that ay ſhal laſt
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Truſt ſtil in God, whoſe whole thou art, his wil abide thou muſt:
                  And he ſhal eaſe and ſtrength thy hart, if thou in him do truſt.
               
            
            
               Ad te domine clamabo. Pſalme .xxviii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶Being in great feare and penſiuenes to ſee God diſhonored by the wicked men, he deſireth to be rid of them, and crieth for vengeaunce againſt them, and at length aſſureth him ſelfe, that God hath herd his prayer, vnto whoſe tuition he commendeth all the faithfull.
               
               Syng this as the .xxi. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THou art O Lord my ſtrength & ſtay,  the ſuccor which I craue:
               Neglect me not, leaſt I be like, to them that go to grane.
               
                  
                     verse 2 The voyce of thy ſuppliant heare, that vnto thee doth cry
               When I lift vp my hands vnto, thy holy arke moſt hye.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Repute not me among the ſort, of wicked and peruert:
               That ſpeake right fayre vnto theyr frēds, & thinke ful il in hart.
               
                  
                     verse 4 According to their handy worke, as they deſerue in dede:
               And after their inuentions, let them receiue their mede.
               
                  
                     verse 5 For they regard nothing Gods workes, his law, ne yet his lore:
               Therfore wil he them and their ſede, deſtroy for euermore.
               
                  
                     verse 6 To render thankes vnto the Lord, how great a cauſe haue I:
               My voyce, my prayer, & my complaint, that heard ſo willingly.
               
                  
                     verse 7 He is my ſhield and fortitude, my buckeler in diſtreſſe:
               My hope, my helpe, my hartes relief, my ſong ſhal him confeſſe.
               
                  
                     verse 8 He is our ſtrength and our defence, our enmies to reſiſt:
               The health and the ſaluation, of his elect by Chriſt.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Thy people and thine heritage, Lord bleſſe, guide, and preſerue:
               Increaſe thē Lord, & rule their harts, that they may neuer ſwerue.
            
            
               Afferte domino. pſalme .xxix.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶An excellent Pſalme, wherein the Prophete exhorteth the very princes and rulers of the worlde, whiche otherwiſe for the moſt part thinke there is no God, at the leaſt to feare him for the thunders and tempeſtes, for feare wherat all creatures tremble. And though there by God threatneth ſinners, yet is he alwayes mercyful to his, and moueth them therby to prayſe his name.
               
               Syng this as the xxi. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  GEue to the Lord,  ye potentates, ye rulers of the world,
               Geue ye all prayſe, honor & ſtrength, vnto the lyuing Lord.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Geue honor to his holy name, and honor him alone:
               Worſhip him in his maieſty, within his holy throne.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3 His voyce doth rule the waters al, euē as him ſelf doth pleaſe:
               He doth prepare the thunder clappes, and gouernes al the ſeaſe.
               
                  
                     verse 4 The voyce of God is of great force, and wondrous excellent:
               It is moſt mighty in effect, and much magnificent.
               
                  
                     verse 5 The voyce of God, doth rent & breake, the cedre trees ſo long:
               The Cedre trees of Libanus, which are moſt hye and ſtrong.
               
                  
                     verse 6 And makes them leape like as a calf, or els the Vnicorne:
               Not onely trees but moūtaines great, wheron the trees ar borne.
               
                  
                     verse 7 His voyce deuideth flames of fire, and ſhakes the wildernes:
               
                  
                     verse 8 It makes the deſert quake for feare, that called is Cades.
               
                  
                     verse 9 It makes the Hindes for feare to calue, & makes the couert plaine,
               Then in his temple euery man, his glory doth proclaime.
               
                  
                     verse 10 The Lord was ſet aboue the flouds, ruling the raging ſea:
               So ſhal he raygne, as Lord and kyng, for euer and for aye.
               
                  
                     verse 11 The Lord wil geue his people power, in vertue to increaſe:
               The Lord wil bleſſe his choſen folke, with euerlaſting peace.
            
            
               Exaltab
                     •
                   te domine. Pſalme .xxx.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶When Dauid ſhould haue dedicated his houſe to the Lord, he fell ſo extreme ſicke, that he was without all hope of life, and therfore after his recouery, he rendreth thankes to God, exhorting others to the like, & to learne by his example, that God is rather merciful thē ſeuere and rigorous towardes his children, and alſo that the fall from proſperitie is ſodeyne. This done, he retourneth to prayer, promiſing to prayſe God for euer.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  ALl laud and prayſe, with hart and voyce (O Lord) 
                     〈♫〉
                   I geue to thee: whiche didſt not make my foes 
                     〈♫〉
                   reioyce, but haſt exalted me. O Lorde my God to thee I cryde, 
                     〈♫〉
                   in all my payne and grief, thou gaueſt an eare, and didſt prouide 
                     〈♫〉
                   to eaſe me with relief.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3 Of thy good wil thou haſt cald back, my ſoule from hell to ſaue
               Thou didſt reuiue whē ſtrēgth did lacke, & kept me frō the graue.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Sing prayſe ye ſaints that proue & ſe, the goodnes of the Lord:
               In memory of his maieſty, reioyce with one accord.
               
                  
                     verse 5 For why? his anger but a ſpace, doth laſt and flake agayne
               But in his fauor and his grace, alwayes doth life remayne.
               Though gripes of grief, & panges ful ſore, ſhal lodg with vs al night:
               The Lord to ioy ſhal vs reſtore, before the day be light.
               
                  
                     verse 6 When I enioyd the world at wil, thus would I boaſt and ſay
               Tuſh, I am ſure to feele none il, this wealth ſhal not decay.
               
                  
                     verse 7 For thou (O Lord) of thy good grace, hadſt ſent me ſtrēgth & ayde
               But whē thou turnd away thy face, my mind was ſore diſmayd.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Wherfore agayne yet did I cry, to thee, O Lord of might:
               My God with plaints I did apply, and prayd both day & night.
               
                  
                     verse 9 What gayn is in my bloud ſayd I, if death deſtroy my dayes?
               Doth duſt declare thy maieſty, or yet thy truth doth prayſe?
               
                  
                     verse 10 Wherfore my God ſome pity take, O Lord, I thee deſire
               Do not this ſimple ſoule forſake, of helpe I thee require.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Then didſt thou turne my grief and wo, vnto a chereful voyce
               The mourning weede thou tookſt me fro, & madſt me to reioyce.
               
                  
                     verse 12 Wherfore my ſoule vnceſſantly, ſhal ſing vnto thy prayſe
               My Lord my God, to thee will I, geue laud & thankes alwayes.
            
            
               In te domine ſperaui. Pſalme .xxxi. 1.
               Hop.
               
                  ¶Dauid deliuered from ſome great daunger, in the deſerte of Maon or els where, firſt he rehearſeth what meditation he had by the power of faith when death was before his eyes, his enemyes beyng ready to take him: then he adioyneth the fauour of God alwayes to be ready to thoſe that feare him. Finally he exhorteth all the faithful to truſt in God and to loue him, bycauſe he preſerueth and ſtrengthneth them, as they may ſee by his example.
               
               Syng this as the. 18. Pſalme
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O Lord I put my truſt in thee,  let nothing worke me ſhame
               As thou art iuſt deliuer me, and ſet me quite from blame.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Heare me (O lord) & that anone, to help me make good ſpede.
               Be thou my rocke, and houſe of ſtone, my fence in tyme of nede.
               
                  
                     verse 3 For why? as ſtones thy ſtrēgth is tride, thou art my fort and tower
               For thy names ſake be thou my guide, & lead me in thy power.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Pluck forth my feete, & breake ye ſnare, which they for me haue laid
               Thou art my ſtrēgth, and al my care, is for thy might and ayd.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Into thy handes Lord I commit, my ſpirit which is thy dew
               For why? thou haſt redemed it (O Lord) thou God moſt true.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 6 I hate ſuch folke as wil not part, from things that he abhord,
               When they on trifles ſet their hart, my truſt is in the Lord.
               
                  
                     verse 7 For I will in thy mercy ioy, I ſe it doth excel
               Thou ſeeſt whē ought would me annoy, & knoweſt my ſoul ful wel.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Thou haſt not left me in their hand, that would me ouercharge:
               But thou haſt ſet me out of band to walke abrod at large.
               
                  The ſecond parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 9 9 Great grife (O Lord) doth me aſſayle, ſome pyty on me take:
                  Mine eyes waxe dim, my might doth fayle, my wōbe for wo doth ake
                  
                     
                        verse 10 My life is worne for grief & payne, my yeares in wo are paſt:
                  My ſtrēgth is gone, & through diſdaine, my bones corrupt & waſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Among my foes I am a ſcorne, my frendes are all diſmayd:
                  My neighbours and my kinſmen borne, to ſe me are afrayd.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 As men once dead are out of mind, ſo am I now forgot:
                  As ſmal effect in me they find, as in a broken pot.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 I hard the brags of al the route, their threates my mind did fray:
                  How they conſpird and went about, to take my life away.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 But, Lord, I truſt in thee for ayde, not to be ouer trod:
                  For I confes and ſtil haue ſayd, thou art my Lord and God.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 The length of al my life and age, O Lord, is in thy hand:
                  Defend me frō the wrathes and rage, of thē that me withſtand.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 To me thy ſeruaunt (Lord) expreſſe, and ſhew thy ioyful face:
                  And ſaue me Lord, for thy goodnes, thy mercy and thy grace.
               
               
                  The third part.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Lord let me not be put to blame, for that on thee I call:
                  But let the wicked beare their ſhame, and in the graue to fal.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Oh how great good haſt thou in ſtore, layd vp ful ſafe for them:
                  That feare and truſt in thee therfore, before the ſonnes of men.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Thy preſence ſhal thē fence & guid, from al proud bragges & wrōgs
                  Within thy place thou ſhalt thē hide, from al the ſtrife of toungs.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Thankes to the Lord that hath declard, on me his grace ſo far:
                  Me to defend with watch and ward, as in a town of war.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Thus did I ſay both day and night, when I was ſore oppreſt:
                  Loe, I was cleane caſt out of ſight, yet hardſt thou my requeſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Ye ſaints, loue ye the Lord I ſay, the faithfull he doth guide:
                  And to the proud he wil repay, according to their pride.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Be ſtrong, and God ſhal ſtay your hart, be bold and haue a luſt
                  For ſure the Lord wil take your part, ſith ye on him do truſt.
               
            
            
               
               Beati quorum remiſsi ſunt. Pſalme .xxxii.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶David puniſhed with greuous ſicknes for his ſinnes, counteth them happy to whom God doth not imputs theyr tranſgreſſions. And after that he had confeſſed his ſ
                        •
                     nnes and obteined pardon, he exhorteth the wicked men to lyue godly, and the good to reioyce.
               
               Syng this as the .xxx. Pſalme
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THe mā is bleſt,  whoſe wickednes, ye Lord hath cleane remitted:
               And he whoſe ſinne & wretchednes, is hid & alſo couered.
               
                  
                     verse 2 And bleſt is he to whom the Lord, imputeth not his ſinne:
               Which in his hart hath hid no guile, nor fraude is found therin.
               
                  
                     verse 3 For whilſt that I kept cloſe my ſinne, in ſilence and conſtraynt:
               My bones did weare & waſt away, with dayly mone & plaint.
               
                  
                     verse 4 For night and day thy hand on me, ſo greuous was and ſmert:
               That al my bloud and humours moyſt, to drynes did conuert.
               
                  
                     verse 5 I did therfore confes my fault, and al my ſinnes diſcouer:
               The thou (O Lord) didſt me forgeue, & al my ſinnes paſſe ouer.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The humble man ſhal pray therfore, and ſeke thee in due time:
               So that the floudes of waters great, ſhal haue no power on him.
               
                  
                     verse 7 When trouble and aduerſitie, do compaſſe me about:
               Thou art my refuge and my ioy, & thou dooſt rid me out.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Come hither & I ſhal thee teach, how yu ſhalt walk a right:
               And wil thee guide as I my ſelf, haue learnde by proofe & ſight.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Be not ſo rude and ignoraunt, as is the horſe and mule:
               Whoſe mouth wt out a rayne or bit, from harme thou cāſt not rule.
               
                  
                     verse 10 The wicked man ſhal manifold ſorowes and griefs ſuſtayne:
               But vnto him that truſtes in God, his goodnes ſhal remaine.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Be mery therfore in the Lord, ye iuſt lift vp your voyce:
               And ye of pure and perfect hart, be glad and eke reioyce.
            
            
               Exultate iuſti in domino. Pſalme .xxxiii.
               IH.
               
                  ¶He exhorteth good men to prayſe God, for that he hath not onely created all thinges, and by his prouidence gouerneth the ſame: but alſo is faithfull in his promiſes. He vnderſtandeth mans hart, and ſcattereth the counſell of the wicked. So that no man cā be preſerued by any creature or mans ſtrength: but they that put theyr confidence in his mercy, ſhal be preſerued from all aduecſitie.
               
               Syng this as the .xxx. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  YE rightuous in the Lord reioyce,  it is a ſemely ſight:
               That vpright mē wt thākful voice, ſhuld praiſe ye god of might
               
                  
                     verse 2 Praiſe ye ye lord wt harp & ſong, in Pſalmes & pleaſāt things:
               With lute and inſtrumēt among, that ſoundeth with ten ſtrings.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Sing to the Lord a ſong moſt new, with courage geue him prayſe:
               
                  
                     verse 4 For why? his word is euer true, his workes and al his wayes.
               
                  
                     verse 5 To iudgment, equity, and right, he hath a great good wil:
               And with his giftes he doth delight, the earth throughout of fil.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 6 For by the word of God alone, the heauens al were wrought:
               Their hoſtes & powers euery chone, his breath to paſſe hath brought.
               
                  
                     verse 7 The waters great-gathered hath he, on heapes within the ſhore:
               And hid them in the depth to be, as in an houſe of ſtore.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Al men on earth both leaſt and moſt, feare God and kepe his law:
               Ye that inhabite in ech coſt, dread him and ſtand in awe.
               
                  
                     verse 9 What he commaunded wrought it was, at once with preſēt ſpede:
               what he doth wil is brought to paſſe, with ful effect in dede.
               
                  
                     verse 10 The counſels of the nations rude, the Lord doth driue to nought,
               He doth defeate the multitude, of their deuiſe and thought.
               
                  
                     verse 11 But his decres continew ſtil, they neuer ſlake or ſwage:
               The motions of his mind and wil, take place in euery age.
               
                  The ſeconde part.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 And bleſt are they to whom the Lord, as God & guide is knowen:
                  whom he doth choſe of mere accord, to take them as his own.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 The Lord from heauen caſt his ſight, on men mortal by birth:
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Conſidering from his ſeat of might, the dwelles of the earth.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 The lord I ſay, whoſe hād hath wrought, mās hart & doth it frame
                  For he alone doth know the thought, & working of the ſame.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 A king that truſteth in his hoſt, ſhal nought preuaile at length:
                  The man that of his might doth boaſt, ſhal fal for al his ſtrēgth.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 The troupes of horſemē eke ſhal fail, their ſturdy ſtedes ſhal ſterue:
                  The ſtrength of horſe ſhal not preuayle, the rider to preſerue.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 But loo, the eyes of God entend, and watch to aide the iuſt:
                  With ſuch as feare him to offend, and on his goodnes truſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 That he of death and all diſtres, may ſet their ſoule from dread:
                  And if that dearth the land oppreſſe, in hunger them to feade.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Wherfore our ſoule doth ſtil depend, on God our ſtrēgth and ſtay:
                  He is the ſhield vs to defend, and driue al darts away.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Our ſoule in God hath ioy and game, reioyſing in his might:
                  For why? in his moſt holy name, we hope and much delight.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Therfore let thy goodnes (O Lord) ſtil preſent with vs bee:
                  As we alwayes with one accord, do only truſt in thee.
               
            
            
               Benedicam domino. Pſalme .xxxiiii.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶After Dauid had eſcaped Achis, accordyng as it is written in the. 1. Sam. 21. whome in this title he calleth Abimelech (whiche was a generall name to all the kynges of the Philiſtines) he prayſeth God for his deliueraūce, prouoking all others by his example to truſt in God to feare and ſerue him, who defendeth the godly with his aungels, and vtterly deſtroyeth the wicked in their ſinnes.
               
               Sing this as the .xxx Pſalme.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 1 
                  I Wil geue laud & honor both,  vnto the Lord alwayes:
               And eke my mouth for euermore, ſhal ſpeak vnto his praies
               
                  
                     verse 2 I do delite to laud the Lord, in ſoule and eke in voyce:
               That humble mē and mortified, may heare and ſo reioyce.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Therfore ſe that ye magnify, with me the liuing Lord:
               And let vs now exalt his name, together with one accord.
               
                  
                     verse 4 For I my ſelf beſought the Lord, he aunſwered me agayn:
               And me deliuered incontinent, from al my feare and pain.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Who ſo they be that him behold, ſhal ſe his lyght moſt cleare:
               Their countenaunce ſhal not be daſht, they nede it not to feare.
               
                  
                     verse 6 This ſely wretch for ſome relief, vnto the Lord did cal:
               Who did him heare without delay, and rid him out of thrall.
               
                  
                     verse 7 The angel of the Lord doth pitch, his tentes in euery place:
               To ſaue al ſuch as feare the Lord, that nothing them deface.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Taſt and conſider wel therfore, that God is good and iuſt:
               O happy man that maketh him, his onely ſtay and truſt.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Feare ye the Lord his holy ones, aboue al earthly thing:
               For they that feare the liuing Lord, are ſure to lacke nothing.
               
                  
                     verse 10 The Lyons ſhall be hongerbit, and pinde with famine much:
               But as for them that feare the Lord, no lacke ſhalbe to ſuch.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Come nere therfore my childrē deare, and to my wordes geue eare:
                  I ſhal you teach the perfit way, how you the Lord ſhould feare.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Who is that man that would liue long, and lead a bleſſed life?
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Se thou refrayne thy tong and lips, from al diſceit and ſtrife.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Turne backe thy face from doing il, and do the godly dede:
                  Inquire for peace and quietnes, and folow it with ſpede.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 For why? the eyes of God aboue, vpon the iuſt are bent:
                  His eares likewiſe do heare the plaint, of the poore innocent.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 But he doth frowne & bēd his browes, vpon the wicked trayne:
                  And cut away the memory, that ſhould of them remayne.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 But when the iuſt do call and cry, the Lord doth heare thē ſo:
                  That out of paine and miſery, forth with he lets thē go.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 The Lord is kynd and ſtraight at hand, to ſuch as be contrit:
                  He ſautes alſo the ſorowful, the meke and poore in ſpirit.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Ful many be the miſeries, that righteous men do ſuffer:
                  But out of al aduerſities, the Lord doth them deliuer.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 20 The Lord doth ſo preſerue and keepe, his very bones alway:
                  That not ſo much as one of them, doth periſh or decay.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 The ſinne ſhal ſlea the wicked mā, whiche he himſelf hath wrought
                  and ſuch as hate ye righteous mā, ſhal ſoone be brought to nought.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 But they that ſerue the liuing Lord, the Lord doth ſaue thē ſound:
                  and who that put their truſt in hym, nothyng ſhal thē confound.
               
            
            
               Iudice domine. pſalme .xxxv.
               I. H
               
                  ¶So long as Saule was enemy to Dauid, al y• had any authoritie vnder him, to flatter their king, did alſo moſt cruelly perſecute Dauid: againſt whom he prayeth God to plead & to auenge his cauſe, that they may be taken in their nets and ſnares, which they laid for hym, & his innoccēy may be declared. And y• the innocēt whiche taketh part we him, may reioyce & praiſe the name of the Lord that thus deliuereth his ſeruant. And ſo he promiſeth to ſpeake forth the iuſtice of the Lord, and to magnify his name al the dayes of his lyfe.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  LOrd pleade my cauſe agaynſt my foes, con- 
                     〈♫〉
                   found their force and myght: Fyght on my 
                     〈♫〉
                   part, againſt all thoſe, that ſeeke with me to fyght. Lay hand vp- 
                     〈♫〉
                   pon thy ſpeare and ſhield, thy ſelf in armour dreſſe: ſtand vp for me 
                     〈♫〉
                   and fight the field, to helpe me from diſtreſſe.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Gird on thy ſword and ſtop the way, my enmies to withſtand:
               That thou vnto my ſoule do ſay: lo I thy helpe at hand.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Confound them with rebuke and blame, that ſeke my ſoule to ſpil
               let thē turne backe & flye with ſhame, ye think to worke me il.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Let them diſperſe and flie abrode, as wind doth dryue the duſt:
               And that the aungel of our God, their might away may thruſt.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 6 Let al their wayes, be voyde of lyght, and ſlippry like to fal:
               And ſend thine aungel with thy might, to perſecute them al.
               
                  
                     verse 7 For why? without my fault they haue, in ſecret ſet their grin:
               And for no cauſe haue digd a cauſe, to take my ſoule therin.
               
                  
                     verse 8 When they think leaſt & haue no care, O Lord deſtroy them al:
               Let them be trapt in their owne ſnare, aud in their miſchief fal.
               
                  
                     verse 9 And let my ſoule, my hart and voyce, in God haue ioy and wealth:
               That in the lord I may reioyce, and in his ſauyng health.
               
                  
                     verse 10 And then my bones ſhal ſpeak and ſay, my partes ſhal al agree:
               O Lord though they do ſeme ful gay, what man is lik to thee?
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Thou dooſt defēd ye weake from thē, that are both ſtout and ſtrōg:
                  and rid the poore from wicked mē, that ſpoyle and do thē wrong.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 My cruel foes againſt me riſe, to witnes things vntrue:
                  And to accuſe me they deuiſe, of that I neuer knew.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Where I to them did owe good wil, they quit me with diſdayne:
                  That they ſhould pay my good with il, my ſoule doth ſore cōplain
                  
                     
                        verse 14 When they wer ſick I mournd therfore, and clad my ſelf in ſacke:
                  With faſting I did faint ful ſore, to pray I was not ſlacke.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 As they had bene my brethrē deare, I did my ſelf behaue:
                  As one that maketh woful cheare, about his mothers graue.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 But they at my diſeaſe did ioy, and gather on a rout:
                  Yea abiect ſlaues at me did toye, with mocks and checks ful ſtout.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 The belly gods and flattering trayne, that al good things deryde:
                  At me do grin with great diſdayne, and pluck their mouth aſyde.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Lord whē wilt thou amēd this geare, why dooſt thou ſtay & pauſe?
                  Oh rid my ſoule myne onely deare, out of theſe Lyons clawes.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 And then wil I geue thanks to thee, before thy church alwayſe:
                  And where as moſt of people be, there wil I ſhew they prayſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Let not my foes preuayle on me, which hate me for no fault:
                  Nor yet to winke or turne their eye, that cauſeles me aſſault.
               
               
                  The third part.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 O peace no word they thinke or ſay, their talke is al vntrue:
                  They ſtil conſult and would betray, al thoſe that peace enſue.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 With opē mouth they run at me, they gape, they laugh they fliere:
                  Wel, wel, ſay they, our eye doth ſee, ye thyng that we deſire.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 But Lord yu ſeeſt what waies they take, ſeaſe not this geare to mēd
                  Be not far of, nor me forſake, as men that fayle their frend.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 24 Awake, aryſe, and ſtirre abrode, defend me in my right:
                  Reuenge my cauſe my Lord my God, and aid me with they might
                  
                     
                        verse 25 According to they righteouſnes, my Lord God ſet me free:
                  and let not them their pride expreſſe, nor triumph ouer mee.
                  
                     
                        verse 26 Let not their harts reioyce & cry, there, there, this geare goeth trim
                  Nor geue them cauſe to ſay on hye, we haue our wil of hym.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 Confound thē with rebuke and ſhame, that ioy whē I do mourne:
                  and pay thē home with ſpite & blame, that brag at me with ſcorn.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 Let them be glad and eke reioyce, which loue mine vpright way:
                  and they al tymes with hart and voyce, ſhal prayſe ye lord & ſay:
                  
                     
                        verse 29 Great is the Lord, and doth excel, for why he doth delight:
                  To ſee his ſeruants proſper wel, that is his pleaſant ſight.
                  
                     
                        verse 30 Wherfore my tonge I wil apply, thy righteouſnes to prayſe:
                  Vnto the Lord my God wil I, ſing laudes wt thankes alwayes.
               
            
            
               Dixit iniuſtus. Pſalme .xxxvi.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶Dauid greuouſly vexed by the wicked, doth complaine of their malice & wickednes. Then he turneth to conſider the vnſpeakable goodnes of God toward al creatures. But ſpecially towards his children, that by fayth there of he may bee comforted and aſſured of his deliuerance by this ordinary courſe of gods worke, who in the ende deſtroyeth the wycked, and ſaueth the iuſt.
               
               Sing this as the. xxxv. pſal.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THe wicked wt his workes vniust,  doth thus perſuade his hart:
               That of ye Lord he hath no truſt, his feare is ſet apart.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Yet doth he ioy in his eſtate, to walk as he began:
               So long til he deſerue the hate of God and eke of man.
               
                  
                     verse 3 His words are wicked, vile, and naught, his tong no truth doth tel:
               Yet at no hand wil he be taught, which way he may do wel.
               
                  
                     verse 4 When he ſhould ſlepe, thē doth he muſe, his miſchief to fulfil:
               No wicked wayes doth he refuſe, nor nothing that is il.
               
                  
                     verse 5 But Lord thy goodnes doth aſcend, aboue the heauens hie:
               So doth thy truth it ſelf extend vnto the cloudy ſky.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Much more thē hils ſo high and ſteepe, thy iuſtice is expreſt:
               Thy iudgemēts like to ſeas moſt depe, thou ſaueſt both mā & beaſt
               
                  
                     verse 7 Thy mercy is aboue all things, O God it doth excel:
               In truſt wherof as in thy wings, the ſonnes of men ſhal dwel.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Within thy houſe they ſhal be fed, with plentye at their wil:
               Of al delight they ſhalbe ſped, and take therof their fil.
               
                  
                     verse 9 For why? the wel of lyfe ſo pure, did ouerflow from thee
               And in they light we are ful ſure, the laſtyng light to ſee.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 10 From ſuch as thee deſire and know, let not thy grace depart:
               Thy righteouſnes declare and ſhew, to men of vpright hart.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Let not the proud on me preuayle, O Lord of thy good grace:
               Nor let the wicked me aſſayle, to throw me out of place.
               
                  
                     verse 12 But they in their deuice ſhal fal, that wicked workes maintayne:
               They ſhalbe ouerthrown withal, and neuer ryſe agayne.
            
            
               Noli emulari. Pſalme .xxxvii.
               VV. VV.
               
                  ¶Becauſe the godly ſhould not wonder to ſee wicked men proſper in this world: the prophet ſheweth that all thinges ſhall be graunted according to their hartes deſire to them that loue and feare God, and they that do the cōtrary, although they ſeeme to floriſh for a time, ſhal at length periſh.
               
               Syng this as the. xxxv Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  CRudge not to ſee the wicked men,  in wealth to floriſh ſtil:
               Nor yet enuy ſuch as to il, haue bent and ſet their wil.
               
                  
                     verse 2 For as grene gras & floriſhing herbes, are cut & wither away
               So ſhal their great proſperity, ſoone paſſe, fade, and decay.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Truſt thou therfore in God alone, to do wel geue thy mynd:
               So ſhalt thou haue ye land as thyne, & there ſure foode ſhalt find.
               
                  
                     verse 4 In God ſet al thy harts delite, and loke what thou wouldſt haue:
               Or els canſt wiſh in al the world, thou needſt it not to craue.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Caſt both thy ſelfe and thyne affayres, on God with perfect truſt:
               And thou ſhalt ſee with patience, the effect both ſure and iuſt.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The perfect lyfe and godly name, he wil cleare as the light:
               So that ye ſunne euē at noone dayes, ſhal not ſhyne half ſo bright
               
                  
                     verse 7 Be ſtil therfore and ſtedfaſtly, on God ſee thou wait then:
               Not ſhrinking for ye proſperous ſtate, of leud and wicked men.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Shake of deſpite, enuy, and hate, at leaſt in any wyſe:
               Their wicked ſteps auoyd and fly, and folow not their guiſe.
               
                  
                     verse 9 For euery wicked man wil God, deſtroy both more and leſſe:
               But ſuch as truſt in him are ſure, the land for to poſſes.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Watch but a whyle and thou ſhalt ſee, no more the wycked trayn:
               No not ſo much as houſe or place, where once he dyd remayn.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 But merciful and humble men, enioy ſhal ſea and land:
                  In reſt and peace they ſhal reioyce, for nought ſhal thē withſtand
                  
                     
                        verse 12 The leud men and malitious, againſt the iuſt conſpyre:
                  They gnaſh their teeth at him, as mē, which do his bane deſyre.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 But while y• leud mē thus do think, the Lord laughes thē to ſcorne
                  for why he ſeeth their terme approch, whē they ſhal ſigh & morne.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 14 The wicked haue their ſword out drawn, their bow eke haue thei bent
                  To ouerthrow and kil ye poore, as they ye right way wēt.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 But ye ſame ſword ſhal yearſe their harts, which was to kil the iuſt
                  likewiſe the bow ſhal break to ſhiuers, wherin thei put their truſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Doubtles the iuſt mās poore eſtate, is better a great deale more:
                  Thē al theſe leud & worldy mens rich pompe and heaped ſtore.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 For be their power neuer ſo ſtrong, God wil it ouerthrow:
                  Where contrary he doth preſerue, the humble men and low.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 He ſeeth by his great prouidence, the good mens trade and way:
                  And wil geue them inheritaunce, which neuer ſhal decay.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 They ſhal not be diſcouraged, when ſome are hard beſted:
                  When other ſhal be hungerbit, they ſhal be clad and fed.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 For whoſoeuer wicked is, and enmy to the Lord:
                  ſhal quail, yea melt euē as lābs greaſe, or ſmoke that flyeth abrode.
               
               
                  The third part.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Behold the wicked boroweth much, and neuer paithe again:
                  Wheras the iuſt by liberal gifts, makes many glad and fain.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 For they, whom God doth bles, ſhal haue the land for heritage:
                  And they whom he doth curſe likewyſe, ſhal periſh in his rage.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 The lord the iuſt mans waies doth guide, & geues him good ſucces
                  To euery thing he takes in hand, he ſendeth good addres.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 Though that he fal, yet is he ſure, not vtterly to quayle:
                  Becauſe the lord ſtretches out his hand, at neede & doth not fayle.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 I haue bene yong and now am old, yet did I neuer ſee:
                  The iuſt man left, or els his ſede, to beg for miſery.
                  
                     
                        verse 26 But geues alwayes moſt liberally, and lendes where as is neede:
                  His children and poſteritie, receyue of God their meede.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 Flee vice therfore and wickednes, and vertue do embrace:
                  So God ſhal graunt thee long to haue, in earth a dwelling place
                  
                     
                        verse 28 For God ſo loueth equitie, and ſhewes to his ſuch grace:
                  That he preſerues thē euermore, but ſtroyes the wycked race.
                  
                     
                        verse 29 Where as ye good and godly men, inherite ſhal the land:
                  Hauing as Lordes al thing therin, in their own power and hand
                  
                     
                        verse 30 The iuſt mans mouth doth euer ſpeak, of matters wiſe and hye:
                  His tong doth talk to edify, with truth and equity.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 For in his hart the law of God, his Lord doth ſtil abide:
                  So that where euer he goes or walkes, his foote cā neuer flyde.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 32 The wicked like a rauenyng wolfe, the iuſt man doth beſet:
                  By all meanes ſeeking him to kil, if he fal in his net.
               
               
                  The fourth part.
                  
                     
                        verse 33 Though he ſhould fal into his handes, yet god would ſuccor ſend:
                  Though men againſt him ſentēce geue, god would him yet defēd.
                  
                     
                        verse 34 Waite thou on God, and kepe his way, he ſhal preſerue thee then:
                  The earth to rule, & thou ſhalt ſee, deſtroid theſe wicked men.
                  
                     
                        verse 35 The wicked haue I ſene moſt ſtrong, and placed in high degree:
                  Floriſhing in al wealth and ſtore, as doth the Laurel tree.
                  
                     
                        verse 36 But ſodenly he paſſed away, and lo he was quite gone:
                  thē I him ſoght, but could ſcarſe find, ye place wher dwelt ſuch one
                  
                     
                        verse 37 Marke and behold the perfite man how god doth him encreaſe:
                  For the iuſt man ſhal haue at length, great ioy with reſt & peace.
                  
                     
                        verse 38 As for tranſgreſſours wo to them, deſtroyd they ſhal al be:
                  God wil cut of their budding race, and riche poſteritie.
                  
                     
                        verse 39 But the ſaluation of the iuſt, doth come from God aboue:
                  Who in their trouble ſends thē ayde, of his mere grace, and loue.
                  
                     
                        verse 40 God doth them help, ſaue and deliuer, from leud men and vniuſt:
                  And ſtil wil ſaue them whilſt that they, in him do put their truſt.
               
            
            
               Domine ne in furore. Pſalme .xxxviii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶Dauid lying ſicke of ſome greuous 
                        •
                     iſeaſe, acknowlegeth himſelfe to be chaſtiſed of the lord for his ſinnes, and therfore prayeth God to turne away his wrath, he vttexeth ye greatnes of his griefe by many wordes and circumſtances, as wounded with the arrowes of Gods ire, forſaken of his frendes, euil entreated of his enemies, but in the end with firme confidence, be commendeth his cauſe to God, and hopeth for ſpedy helpe at his hand.
               
               Syng this as the. xxxv Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  PVt me not to rebuke O Lord, in thy prouoked ire:
               Ne in thy heauy wrath O lord, correct me I deſire.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Thine arrowes do ſticke faſt in me,  thy hand doth preſſe me ſore
               
                  
                     verse 3 And in my fleſh no health at al, appeareth any more
               And al this is by reaſon of, thy wrath that I am in:
               Nor any reſt is in my bones, by reaſon of my ſinne.
               
                  
                     verse 4 For loe, my wicked doings Lord, aboue my head are gone:
               As greater lode thē I can beare, they lye me ſore vpon.
               
                  
                     verse 5 My wounds ſtinck and are feſtred ſore, and lothſom is to ſee:
               Which al through mine own foliſhnes, betideth vnto mee.
               And I in careful wiſe am brought, in trouble and diſtres:
               
                  
                     verse 6 That I go wayling al the day, my doleful heauines.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 7 My loynes are fild with ſore diſeaſe, my fleſh hath no whole part:
               
                  
                     verse 8 I feble am and broken ſore, I rore for griefe of hart.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Thou knowſt Lord my deſire, my grones, are open in thy ſight:
               
                  
                     verse 10 my hart doth pāt, my ſtrēgth hath faild, my eies haue loſt their light
               
                  
                     verse 11 My louers and my wonted frends, ſtand looking on my wo:
               And eke my kinſmen far a way, are me departed fro.
               
                  
                     verse 12 They y• did ſeeke my life, laid ſnares, & they that ſought the way
               To do me hurt, ſpake lies, & thought on treaſon all the day.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 But as a deafe man I became, that connot heare at al:
                  
                     
                        verse 14 And as one dum that opens not, his mouth to ſpeake withal.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 For al my confidence O Lord, is wholy ſet on thee:
                  
                     
                        verse 16 O Lord yu Lord that art my God, thou ſhalt geue eare to mee.
                  This did I craue that they my foes, triumph not ouer mee:
                  
                     
                        verse 17 For when my foote did ſlip, then they, did ioy my fal to ſee.
                  And truely I poore wretch am ſet, in place a woful wight:
                  And eke my griefful heauines, is euer in my ſyght.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 For while that I my wickednes, in humble wyſe confeſſe:
                  And while I for my ſinful deedes, my ſorrowes do expreſſe:
                  
                     
                        verse 19 My foes do ſtil remayne aliue, and mighty are alſo:
                  And they that hate me wrongfully, in number hugely grow.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 They ſtand againſt me that my good, with euil do repay:
                  Becauſe that good and honeſt thinges, I do enſue alway.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Forſake me not O Lord my God, be thou not far away:
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Haſt me to helpe, my Lord my God, my ſafety and my ſtay.
               
            
            
               Dixi cuſtodiam. pſalme .xxxix.
               I. H
               
                  ¶Dauid vttereth with what great grief & bitternes of mind he was driuen to theſe outragious complaintes of his infirmities, for he confeſſeth that when he had determined ſilence, that he braſt forth yet into wordes that he would not, throughe the greatnes of his griefe. Then he re
                        •
                     erſeth certayne requeſtes which taſt of infirmitie of man, & mireth with them many prayers, but al to ſhewe a mynde wonderfully troubled, that it may plainly appeare how he did ſtriue mightely againſt death and deſperation.
               
               Sing this as the .xxxv. pſal.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  I Sayd I wil looke to my wayes,  for feare I ſhould go wrong:
               I wil take heede al tymes that I, offend not in my tong.
               
                  
                     verse 2 As with a bit I wil keepe faſt, my mouth wt force and might
               Not once to whiſper al the while, the wicked are in ſight.
               
                  
                     verse 3 I held my tonge and ſpake no word, but kept me cloſe and ſtil:
               Yea from good talke I did refrayne, but ſore againſt my wil.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 4 My hart waxt whote wtin my breſt, with muſtng thought, & doubt:
               Which did encreaſe, and ſtir the fyre, at laſt theſe words braſt out
               
                  
                     verse 5 Lord, number out my lyfe and dayes, which yet I haue not paſt:
               So that I may be certified, how long my lyfe ſhal laſt.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Lord thou haſt poynted out my life, in length much like a ſpan:
               Mine age is nothing vnto thee, ſo vayne is euery man.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Man walketh like a ſhade, and doth in vayne himſelfe annoy:
               In getting goods, and cannot tel, who ſhal the ſame enioy.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Now Lord ſith things this wiſe do frame, what helpe do I deſire?
               Of truth my helpe doth hang on thee, I nothing els require▪
               
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 9 From al the ſinnes that I haue done, Lord quite me out of hand:
                  And make me not a ſcorne to fooles, that nothing vnderſtand.
                  
                     
                        verse 10 I was as dumme, and to complayne, no trouble might me moue:
                  Becauſe I know it was thy worke, my patience for to proue.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Lord take from me thy ſcourge & plage, I can them not withſtand:
                  I faint and pine away for feare, of thy moſt heauy hand.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 When thou for ſin dooſt man rebuke, he waxeth wo and wan:
                  As doth a cloth ye mothes haue fret, ſo vayne a thing is man.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Lord heare my ſute & geue good heede, regard my teares that fal:
                  I ſoiourne like a ſtraunger here, as did my fathers al.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Oh ſpare a little geue me ſpace, my ſtrenght for to reſtore:
                  Before I go away from hence, and ſhal be ſene no more.
               
            
            
               Expectans expectaui. Pſalme .xl.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶Dauid deliuered from great daunger, doth magnify and prayſe the grace of God for his deliueraunce, and commendeth his prouidence towards al mankind. Then doth he promyſe to geue himſelf wholy to God ſeruice, and ſo declare how God is truely worſhipped. Afterward he geueth thankes and prayſeth God, and hauing complained of his enemies, with good courage, he calleth for ayde and ſuccour.
               
               Syng this as the. xxxv Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  I Wayted lōg and ſought the Lord, and patiently did beare,
               At length to me he did accord,  my voyce & cry to heare.
               
                  
                     verse 2 He pluckt me frō the lake ſo depe, out of the mire and clay
               And on a rocke he ſet my feete, and he did guide my way.
               
                  
                     verse 3 To me he taught a Pſalme of prayſe, which I muſt ſhew abrode:
               And ſing new ſongs of thanks alwayſe, vnto the Lord our God.
               
                  
                     verse 4 When al the folke theſe things ſhal ſee, as people much afrayde:
               Then they vnto the Lord wil flee, and truſt vpon his ayde.
               
                  
                     verse 5 O bleſt is he whoſe hope and hart, doth in the Lord remayne:
               That wt the proud doth take no part, nor ſuch as lye and fayne.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 6 For Lord my God thy wōdrous dedes, in greatnes far do paſſe:
               Thy fauour towardes vs exceedes, al things that euer was.
               
                  
                     verse 7 When I entend and do deuiſe, thy workes abroade to ſhew:
               To ſuch a ceckening they do ryſe, therof no end I know.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Burnt offrings thou delighteſt not in, I know thy whole deſire:
               With ſacrifice to purge their ſinne, thou dooſt no man require.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Meat offering and ſacrifice, thou wouldſt not haue at al:
               But thou O lord haſt open made, myne eares to heare withal.
               
                  
                     verse 10 But then ſayd I, behold and looke, I come a meane to be:
               For in the volume of thy booke, thus it is ſayd of me.
               
                  
                     verse 11 That I O god ſhould do thy mind, which thing doth like me wel:
               For in my hart thy law I find, faſt placed there to dwel.
               
                  
                     verse 12 Thy iuſtice and thy righteouſnes, in great reſortes I tel:
               behold my tong no time doth ceaſe, O Lord yu knoweſt ful wel.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 I haue not hid within my breſt, thy goodnes as by ſtealth:
                  But I declare and haue expreſt, thy truth and ſauyng health.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 I kepe not cloſe thy louing mind, that no man ſhould it know:
                  The truſt that in thy truth I find, to al the church I ſhew.
                  For I with miſchiefs many one, am ſore beſet about:
                  My ſinnes encreaſe and ſo come on, I cannot ſpy them out.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 For why in number they excede, the heares vpon my head:
                  My hart doth faint for very dread, that I almoſt am dead.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 With ſpede ſēd help and ſet me free, O lord I thee require:
                  Make haſt with ayde to ſuccor me, O Lord at my deſire.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Let thē ſuſtain rebuke and ſhame, that ſeke my ſoule to ſpil:
                  Driue back my foes and thē defaine, that wiſh and would me il.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 For their it feates do them diſcry, that would deface my name:
                  Alwayes at me they rayle and cry, fye on him, fye for ſhame.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Let them in thee haue ioy and wealth, that ſeke to thee alwayſe:
                  That thoſe that loue thy ſauing health, may ſay to god be prayſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 But as for me I am but poore, oppreſt and brought ful low:
                  Yet thou O lord wilt me reſtore, to health ful wel I know.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 For why thou art my hope and truſt, my refuge helpe and ſtay:
                  Wherfore my God as thou art iuſt, with me no tyme delay.
               
            
            
               Beatus qui intelligit. pſalme .xli.
               T. S.
               
                  
                  ¶Dauid being greuouſly afflicted, bleſſeth them that pity his caſe, & cōplaineth of the treaſon of his a wne frendes and familiars, as came to paſſe in Iudas. Ioh .xv. After he feelyng the great mercies of god, gently chaſtiſing him, and not ſuffring his enemies to triumphe againſt him, geueth moſt harty thankes vnto God.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  THe man is bleſt that careful is, the nedy to 
                     〈♫〉
                   conſider: for in ye ſeaſō perilous, the lord wil 
                     〈♫〉
                   hym deliuer. The Lord will make him ſafe and ſound and happy 
                     〈♫〉
                   in the land: And he will not deliuer him, into his enmies hand.
               
                  
                     verse 3 And in his bed when he lieth ſick, the lord wil him reſtore:
               And thou O Lord wilt turne to health, his ſicknes and hys ſore.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Then in my ſicknes thus ſay I, haue mercy Lord on mee:
               And heale my ſoule which is ful wo, that I offended thee.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Myne enemies wiſhed me il in hart, and thus of me did ſay:
               When ſhal he die that al his name, may vaniſh quite away?
               
                  
                     verse 6 And when they come to viſit me, they aſke if I do wel:
               But in their harts miſchief they hatch, and to their mates it tel.
               
                  
                     verse 7 They bite their lips & whiſper ſo, as though they wold me charm:
               And caſt their fetches how to trap me with ſome mortal harm.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Some greuous ſin hath brought him to this ſicknes, ſay thei plain
               He is ſo low that without doubt, riſe can he not agayne.
               
                  
                     verse 9 The man alſo that I did truſt, with me did vſe deceyte:
               Who at my table ate my bread, the ſame for me layd wayte.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Haue mercy Lord on me therfore, and let me preſerued:
               That I may render vnto them, the things they haue deſerued.
               
                  
                     verse 11 By this I know aſſuredly, to be beloued of thee:
               when that mine enmies haue no cauſe to triumph ouer mee.
               
                  
                     verse 12 But in my right thou haſt me kept, and maintained alway,
               And in thy preſēce place aſſignd, where I ſhal dwel for aye.
               
                  
                     verse 13 The Lord the God of Iſrael, be prayſed euermore:
               Euen ſo be it Lord wil I ſay, euen ſo be it therfore.
            
            
               
               Quemadmodum deſiderat. Pſalme .xlii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶The prophet greuouſly complaineth, that being letred by his perſecutours, he could not be preſent in the congregatiō of gods people: proteſting that although he was ſeparate in body frō them: yet his hart was thether affectioned. And laſt of al he ſheweth yt he was not ſo far ouercōmen wt theſe ſorowes & thoughts, but yt he cōtinually put his cōfidēce in ye Lord.
               
               Sing this as the .xxxv. pſal
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  LIke as ye hart doth breath & bray,  the welſprings to obtayne:
               So doth my ſoule deſire alway, with the Lord to remayne
               
                  
                     verse 2 My ſoule doth thirſt & wold draw nere, ye liuīg god of might:
               Oh when ſhal. I come & appeare, in preſence of his ſight?
               
                  
                     verse 3 The teares al times are my repaſt, which frō mine eyes do ſlide:
               When wicked men cry out ſo faſt, where now is god thy guide?
               
                  
                     verse 4 Alas what griefe is it to thinke, what fredome once I had?
               Therfore my ſoule as at pits brinke, is moſt heauy and ſad.
               When I did marche in good aray, furniſhed with my trayne:
               Vnto the temple was our way, with ſōgs & hartes moſt fayne.
               
                  
                     verse 5 My ſoule, why art thou ſad alwayes, & freatſt thus in my breſt?
               Truſt ſtil in God, for him to prayſe, I hold it euer beſt.
               By him haue I ſuccour at neede, againſt al payne and griefe:
               He is my God, which with al ſpeede, wil haſt to ſend reliefe.
               
                  
                     verse 6 And this my ſoule within me Lord, doth faint to think vpon:
               The land of Iordan, and record the little hil Hermon.
               
                  
                     verse 7 One griefe an other in doth cal, as cloudes burſt out theyr voyce:
               The flouddes of euil that do fal, run ouer me with noyce.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Yet I by day felt his goodnes, and helpe at al aſſayes:
               Likewiſe by night I did not ceaſe, the liuing God to prayſe.
               
                  
                     verse 9 I am perſuaded thus to ſay, to him with pure pretence:
               O lord thou art my guide and ſtay, my rock, and my defence.
               Why do I then in penſiuenes, hanging the head thus walke:
               while that mine enmie me oppres, and vexe me with their talk?
               
                  
                     verse 10 For why? thei perſe mine inward partes, with pangs to be abhord:
               whē they cry out wt ſtubburn harts, where is thy God, thy Lord?
               
                  
                     verse 11 So ſoone why dooſt yu faint & quail, my ſoule with paynes oppreſt?
               with thoughts why dooſt thy ſelf aſſayle, ſo ſore wythin my breſt?
               
                  
                     verse 12 Truſt in the Lord the God alwayes, and thou the tyme ſhalt ſee:
               To geue him thanks with laud & praiſe, for helth reſtord to thee.
            
            
               Iudica me deus. Pſalme .xliii.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶He prayeth to be deliuered from them which conſpire with Abſolon, to the ende he mighte ioyfully prayſe God, in his holy congregation.
               
               
                  
                  
                     verse 1 
                  IVdge and reuenge my cauſe (O Lord) from thē that euil be:
               From wicked and deceitſul mē, O Lord deliuer me.
               
                  
                     verse 2 For of my ſtrength yu art ye god, why putſt yu me thee fro?
               And why walke I ſo heauily, oppreſſed with my foe?
               
                  
                     verse 3 Send out thy light, and eke thy truth, and lead me with thy grace:
               Which may conduct me to thy hil, and to thy dwelling place.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Then ſhal I to the alter go, of God my ioy and chere:
               And on my harpe geue thanks to thee, O god my god moſt dere.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Why art thou then ſo ſad my ſoule? and fretſt thus in my breſt?
               Stil truſt in God, for him to prayſe, I hold it alwayes beſt.
               By him I haue deliuerance, againſt al paines and griefe:
               He is my God, which doth alwayes, at neede ſend me reliefe.
            
            
               Deus auribus noſtris. pſalme .xliiii.
               T. S.
               
                  A moſt earneſt prayer made in the name of the faythful, when they are afflicted by their enemies, for ſuſtanig the quarel of gods word, according to ye expoſitiō of S. Paule. Rom .viii.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  OVr eares haue heard our fathers tel, & reue- 
                     〈♫〉
                   rently record: the wondrous workes, ye yu haſt 
                     〈♫〉
                   done in alder time (O lord.) How yu didſt caſt ye gētils out, & ſtroidſt thē 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   wt ſtrōg hād, plātīg our fathers in their place & gaueſt to thē their lād.
               
                  
                     verse 3 They cōquerde not by ſword nor ſtrēgth, the land of thy beheſt:
               But by thy hand, thy arme & grace, becauſe yu louedſt them beſt.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Thou art my king O God that holpe, Iacob in ſundry wiſe.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Led with thy power we threw down ſuch, as did againſt vs riſe
               
                  
                     verse 6 I truſted not in bowe ne ſword, they could not ſaue me ſound:
               
                  
                     verse 7 Thou keepſt vs frō our enmies rage, thou didſt our foes confoūd.
               
                  
                     verse 8 And ſtil we boaſt of thee our God, and prayſe thy holy name:
               
                  
                     verse 9 Yet now thou goeſt not with our hoſt, but leaueſt vs to ſhame.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 10 Thou madſt vs flee before our foes, and ſo were ouer trode:
               Our enmies robd, & ſpoild our goods, whē we were ſparſt abrode.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Thou haſt vs geuen to our foes, as ſhepe for to be ſlayne:
               Amongſt the heathen euery where, ſcattred we do remaine.
               
                  
                     verse 12 The people thou haſt ſold like ſlaues, and as a thing of nought:
               For profite none thou hadſt therby, no gayn at al was ſought.
               
                  
                     verse 13 And to our neighbours thou haſt made, of vs a laughing ſtock:
               And thoſe that round about vs dwel, at vs do grinne and mock.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Thus we ſerue for none other vſe, but for a common talke:
                  They mock, they ſcorne, & nod their heds, wher euer they go or walk.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 I am a ſhamed continually, to heare theſe wicked men:
                  Yea ſo I bluſh, that all my face, with red is couered then.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 For why? we heare ſuch ſclāderous words, ſuch falſe report, & lies:
                  That death it is to ſe theyr wrōges, theyr threatnings, & their cries.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 For al this, we forgot not thee, nor yet thy couenant brake:
                  
                     
                        verse 18 We turne not back our harts frō thee, nor yet thy pathes forſake.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 yet thou haſt trod vs down to duſt, where dens of Dragons be:
                  And couered vs with ſhade of death, and great aduerſity.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 If we had our Gods name forgot, & helpe of Idols ſought:
                  
                     
                        verse 21 wold not god thē haue tride this out? for he doth know our thought
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Nay, nay, for thy names ſake, O lord, alwayes ar we ſlaine thus:
                  As ſhepe vnto the ſhambles ſent, right ſo they deale with vs.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Cp Lord: why ſlepeſt thou? awake, and leaue vs not for al?
                  
                     
                        verse 24 Why hydeſt thou thy countenance, and dooſt forget our thral
                  
                     
                        verse 25 For down to duſt, our ſoule is brought, & we now at laſt caſt:
                  Our belly like as it were glude, vnto the ground cleaues faſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 26 Riſe vp therfore for our defence, and helpe vs Lord at nede:
                  He thee beſech for thy goodnes, to reſcue vs with ſpede.
               
            
            
               Eructauit. Pſalme .xlv.
               I H.
               
                  ¶The maieſty of Salomon, his honor, ſtrēgth, beauty, riches, and power are praiſed, and alſo his mariage with the Egyptian bayng an heathen woman is bleſſed, if that ſhe can renounce her people, and the loue of her country, and geue her ſelfe wholy to her huſbande. Vnder the whiche figure, the wonderfull maieſty, and the encreaſe of the kyngdome of Chriſt, and the Churche his ſpouſe, now taken of the gentiles, is deſcribed.
               
               Sing this as the. xxv. pſal.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  MY hart doth take in hand, ſome godly ſong to ſing:
               The praiſe that I ſhal ſhew therin,  perteineth to the king.
               
                  
                     verse 2 My tongue ſhalbe as quick, his honor to endyte:
               As is the pen of any Scribe, that vſeth faſt to wryte.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3 O fayreſt of all men, thy ſpeach is pleaſant pure:
               For God hath bleſſed thee with gifts, for euer to endure.
               
                  
                     verse 4 About thee gird thy ſword, O prince of might elect:
               With honour, glory, and renoume, thy perſon pure is dect.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Go forth with godly ſpede, in mekenes, truth, and right:
               And thy right hād ſhal thee inſtruct, in workes of dreadful might.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Thine arrowes ſharpe and kene, theyr hartes ſo ſore ſhal ſting:
               That folke ſhal fal and knele to thee, yea, al thy foes, O king.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Thy royal ſeat, O Lord, for euer ſhal remayne:
               Becauſe the ſcepter of thy realme, doth righteouſnes mayntaine.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Becauſe thou loueſt the right, and dooſt the il deteſt:
               God, euen thy God, hath pointed thee, with ioy aboue the reſt.
               
                  
                     verse 9 With myrth, and ſauours ſwete, thy clothes are al beſprede:
               When thou dooſt from thy palace paſſe, therin to make thee glad.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Kinges daughters do attend, in fine and rich aray:
               At thy right hand, the quene doth ſtand, in gold, & garments gay.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 O daughter, take good hede, encline, and geue good eare:
                  Thou muſt forget thy kindred al, and fathers houſe moſt deare.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Then ſhal the king deſire, thy beauty fayre and trim:
                  For why? he is the Lord thy God, and thou muſt worſhip him.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 The daughters then of Tyre, with gifts ful rich to ſee:
                  And al the welthy of the land, ſhal make their ſute to thee.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 The daughter of the kyng, is glorious to behold:
                  Within his cloſet, ſhe doth ſit, al dect in beaten gold.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 In robes wel wrought with needle, with many a pleaſant thing:
                  With virgins fayre, on her to waight, ſhe cōmeth to the kyng.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Thus are they brought with ioy, and mirth on euery ſide:
                  Into the palace of the king, and there do they abide.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 In ſtede of parents left (O quene) the chaunge ſo ſtandes:
                  Thou ſhalt haue ſōnes, whō thou maiſt ſet, as princes in al lādes.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Wherfore thy holy name, al ages ſhal record:
                  The people ſhal geue thankes to thee, for euermore, O Lord.
               
            
            
               Deus noſter refugium. Pſalme .xlvi.I.
               Hop.
               
                  ¶A ſonge of thankes geuyng, for the deliueraunce of Ieruſalem, after Senacherib with hys army was driuen awaye, or ſome other lyke ſodayne, and maruelous deliueraunce, by the myghly hand of God. Wherby the Prophet commendyng this great benefite, doth exhort the faithfull, to geue them ſelues wholy into the hand of God, doubtyng nothing, but that vnder his protection, they ſhalbe ſafe agaynſt all the aſſaultes of their enemies.
               
               
                   
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  THe Lord is our defence and ayde, the ſtrength 
                     〈♫〉
                   wherby we ſtand: when we with wo are much 
                     〈♫〉
                   diſmayd, he is our helpe at hande. Though thearth remoue, we 
                     〈♫〉
                   wil not feare, though hilles ſo high and ſtepe: be thruſt and hurled 
                     〈♫〉
                   here and there, within the ſea ſo depe.
               
                  
                     verse 3 No, though the waues, do rage ſo ſore, that al the bankes it ſpils:
               And though it ouer flow the ſhore, & beat down mighty hils.
               
                  
                     verse 4 For one fayre floud, doth ſend abrod, his pleaſaunt ſtreames a pace:
               To freſh the citie of our God, and waſh his holy place.
               
                  
                     verse 5 In midſt of her the Lord doth dwel, ſhe can no whit decay:
               Al things agaynſt her that rebel, the Lord wil truly ſtay.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The Heathē folcke, the kingdomes feare, the people make a noyſe:
               The earth doth melt, & not appeare, whē god puts forth his voyce.
               
                  
                     verse 7 The Lord of hoſtes, doth take our part, to vs he hath an eye:
               Our hope of health, with al our hart, on Iacobs God doth lye.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Come, here, & ſe, with mind and thought, the working of our God:
               What wōders he himſelf hath wrought, throughout the earth abrod.
               
                  
                     verse 9 By him al warres are huſht, and gone, which coūtryes did cōſpire:
               Theyr bowes he brake, & ſpeares eche one, theyr Charets brēt wt fire.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Leaue of therfore (ſaith he) & know, I am a God moſt ſtout:
               Among the Heathen high & low, and al the earth throughout
               
                  
                     verse 11 The Lord of hoſtes doth vs defend, he is our ſtrength and tower:
               On Iacobs God, do we depend, and on his mighty power.
            
            
               
               Omnes gentes. Pſalme .xlvii.
               I H.
               
                  ¶The Prophete exhorteth all people, to the worſhyp of ye true and euer liuing Got, commendyng the mercyes of God, toward the poſteritie of Iacob: and after prophecieth of the kingdome of Chriſt in this tyme of the Goſpell.
               
               Syng this as the .xlv. Pſalme
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  YE people all in one accord,  clap handes, and eke reioyce:
               Be glad, & ſing vnto the Lord, wt ſwete & pleaſaūt voyce.
               
                  
                     verse 2 For high the Lord & dredful is, with wonders manifold:
               A mighty king he is truly, in al the earth extold.
               
                  
                     verse 3 The people ſhal he make to be, vnto our bondage thral:
               And vnderneath our feete he ſhal, the nacions make to fal,
               
                  
                     verse 4 For vs, the heritage he choſe, which we poſſes alone:
               The flouryng worſhip of Iacob, his welbeloued one.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Our God aſcended vp on hy, with ioy and pleaſaunt noyce:
               The Lord goeth vp aboue the ſky, with trompets royal voyce.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Sing prayſes to our God, ſing prayſe, ſing prayſes to our king:
               For God is king of al the earth, al ſkilful prayſes ſing.
               
                  
                     verse 7 God on the heathen raygnes, & ſits, vpon his holy throne:
               The princes of the people haue, them ioyned euery one.
               
                  
                     verse 8 To Abrahams people, for our God, which is exalted hye:
               Vs with a buckler doth defend, the earth continually.
            
            
               Magnus dominus. Pſalme .xlviii.
               
                  ¶A notable deliueraunce of Hieruſalem, from the handes of many kinges is mentioned, for the whiche thankes are geuen to God, and the eſtate of that Citie is prayſed, that hath god ſo preſently al all times ready to defend them: this Pſalme ſemeth to be made in the tyme of Achaz, Ioſaphat, Aſa, or Ezechia, for in their tymes chiefly, was the Citie by forayne Princes aſſaulted.
               
               Sing this as the. xlvi Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  GReat is the Lord,  & with great prayſe, to be aduaunced ſtil:
               Within the citie of our Lord, vpon his holy hil.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Mount Sion is a pleaſaunt place, it gladdeth al the land:
               The Citie of the mighty kyng, on her northſide doth ſtand.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Within the Pallaces therof, God is a refuge knowen:
               For loe, the kings were gathered, and together eke were gone?
               
                  
                     verse 4 But when they did behold it ſo, they wondred, and they were
               Aſtonied much and ſodenly, were driuen backe with feare.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Great terrour there on them did fal, for euery wo, they cry
               As doth a woman, when ſhe ſhal go trauaile by and by.
               
                  
                     verse 6 As thou with eſterne winde the ſhips, vpon the ſea dooſt breake:
               So they were ſtayd, and euen as, we heard our fathers ſpeake:
               
                  
                     verse 7 So in the citie of the Lord, we ſaw, as it was told:
               Yea, in the citie, which our Lord, for euer wil vphold.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 8 O Lord we wayt, and do attend, on thy good helpe and grace:
               For which we do al times attend, within thy holy place.
               
                  
                     verse 9 O Lord, according to thy name, for euer is thy prayſe:
               And thy right hand, O Lord, is ful, of rightuouſnes alwayes.
               Let, for thy iudgements, Sion mount, fulfilled be with ioyes:
               And eke of Iuda, graunt, O Lord, the daughter to reioyce.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Go, walke about al Syon hil, yea round about her go:
               And tel the towres, that therupon, are builded in a row.
               
                  
                     verse 11 And marke ye wel, her bulwarks al, behold her towers there:
               That ye may tel therof to them, that after ſhalbe here.
               
                  
                     verse 12 For this God is our God, our God, for euermore is he:
               Yea and vnto the death alſo, our guider ſhal he be.
            
            
               Audite haec omnes. Pſalme .xlix.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶The holy ghoſt calleth all men to the conſideration of mans lyfe, ſhewing, them not to be moſt happy, that are moſt wealthy, and therfore not to be feared: but contrarywiſe, he lyfteth vp our mindes, to conſider, how all things are ruled by Gods prouidence: who, as he iudgeth theſe worldlye miſers to euerlaſtyng tormentes: ſo doth he preſerue his, and will rewarde them in the day of the reſurrection. 1. Theſ. 1.
               
               Sing this as the .xiv. pſal.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AL people,  herken, and geue eare, to that, that I ſhal tel:
               Both high, & low, both rich, & poore, ye in ye world do dwel.
               
                  
                     verse 2 For why? my mouth ſhall make diſcourſe, of many thynges rightwiſe.
               In vnderſtāding ſhal my heart, his ſtudy excerciſe.
               
                  
                     verse 3 I wil incline mine eare to know, the parables ſo dark:
               And open al my doubtful ſpeech, in metre on my harp.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Why ſhould I feare afflictions, or any careful toyle:
               Or els my foes, which at my heeles, are preſt, my life to ſpoyle?
               
                  
                     verse 5 For as for ſuch, as riches haue, wherin theyr truſt is moſt:
               And they, which of their treaſures great, thē ſelues do brag, & boaſt:
               
                  
                     verse 6 There is not one of them that can, his brothers death red: me:
               Or that can geue a price to God, ſufficient for him.
               
                  
                     verse 7 It is to great a price to pay, none can therto attayne:
               
                  
                     verse 8 Or that he might his life prolong, or not in graue remaine.
               
                  
                     verse 9 They ſe wiſe men, as wel as fooles, ſubiect vnto deaths hands:
               And being ded, ſtraūgers poſſes, theyr goods, theyr rēts, theyr lāds.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Theyr care is, to build houſes fayre, and ſo determine ſure?
               To make their name right great in earth, for euer to endure.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Yet ſhal no man alwayes enioy, high honor, wealth and reſt:
               But ſhal at length taſte of deathes cup, as wel as ye brute beaſtes.
               
                  
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 And though they try their foliſh thoughts, to be moſt leud, & vaine:
                  Theyr children yet approue theyr talke, & in like ſinne remaine.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 As ſhepe into the fold are brought, ſo ſhal they into graue:
                  Death ſhal thē eate, and in that day, the iuſt ſhal Lordſhip haue.
                  Theyr image and theyr royal port, ſhal fade and quite decay:
                  When as from houſe, to pit they pas, with wo, and weale away.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 But God wil ſurely preſerue me, from death, and endles payne:
                  Becauſe he wil of his good grace, my ſoule receiue againe.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 If any man waxe wondrous rich, feare not, I ſay, therfore:
                  Although the glory of his houſe, increaſeth more and more.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 For when he dieth of al theſe things, nothing ſhal he receyue:
                  His glory wil not folow him, his pompe wil take her leaue.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Yet in this lyfe he takes himſelf, the happieſt vnder ſunne:
                  And others likewiſe flatter hym, ſaying, al is wel done.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 And preſuppoſe he liue as long, as did his fathers old:
                  Yet muſt he nedes at lēgth geue place, & be brought to deathes fold.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Thus man to honor God hath cald, yet doth he not conſider:
                  But like brute beaſt ſo doth he liue, which turne to duſt & pouder.
               
            
            
               
                  Deus deorum. pſalme .L.
                  VV. VV.
                  
                     ¶He prophecieth how God will call all nations by the Goſpell, and require no other Sacrifices of his people, but confeſſion of his benefites, & thankes geuing, and how he deteſteth all ſuch as ſeme zelous of ceremonies, and not of the pure word of god onely.
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                     THe mighty God, theternal hath thus ſpoke: 
                        〈♫〉
                      and al the world, he wil cal and prouoke: 
                        〈♫〉
                      euen from the Eaſt, and ſo forth to the Weſt, from toward Sion 
                        〈♫〉
                      which place him liketh beſt, God wil appeare in beauty moſt excellēt.
                  
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3 Our God wil come before that long time be ſpent:
                   Deuouring fire, ſhal go before his face
                  A great tempeſt, ſhal round about him trace.
                  
                     
                        verse 4 Then ſhal he cal, the earth and heauen bryght
                  To iudge his folke, with equity and ryght.
                  
                     
                        verse 5 Saying go to, and now my ſaintes aſſemble,
                  My peace they kepe, theyr gifts do not diſſemble.
                  
                     
                        verse 6 The heauens ſhal, declare his rightuouſnes,
                  For God is iudge, of al things more and les.
                  
                     
                        verse 7 Heare my people, for I wil now reueale
                  Liſt Iſrael, I wil thee nought conceale
                  Thy God, thy God, am I and wil not blame thee.
                  
                     
                        verse 8 For geuing not, al maner offrings to mee.
                  
                     
                        verse 9 I haue no nede, to take of thee at al:
                  Goates of thy fold, or calfe of thy ſtal.
                  
                     
                        verse 10 For al the beaſtes, are mine within the woods:
                  On thouſand hils, cattel are mine own goods.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 I know for mine, al birds that are on mountaines,
                  Al beaſts ar mine, which haūt the filds & foūtains.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Hungry if I were, I would not thee it tel,
                  For al is mine, that in the world doth dwel.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Eate I the fleſh, of great bulles or bullocks?
                  Or drinke the bloud, of Goates and of the flockes?
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Offer to God, prayſe & harty thankes geuyng
                  And pay thy vowes, vnto God euerliuing.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 Cal vpon me, when troubled thou ſhalt be:
                  Then wil I helpe, and thou ſhalt honor me.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 To the wicked, thus ſayth the eternal God:
                  Why dooſt thou preach, my lawes & heſtes abrod,
                  Seyng thou haſt them with thy mouth abuſed.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 And hateſt to be, by diſcipline reformed.
                  My wordes I ſay, thou dooſt reiect and hate.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 If that thou ſee, a thefe, as with thy mate
                  Thou runneſt with hym, and ſo your pray do ſeke,
                  And art al one, with baudes and ruffians eke.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 19 Thou geueſt thy ſelfe, to backbite and to ſclaunder,
                  And how thy toung, deceiueth it is a wonder.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Thou ſitteſt-muſing, thy brother how to blame
                  And how to put, thy mothers ſonne to ſhame.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Theſe things thou diddeſt, & whilſt I held my tong
                  Thou didſt me iudge, becauſe I ſtayed ſo long
                  Like to thy ſelfe, yet though I kepe long ſcilence
                  Once ſhal thou fele, of thy wronges iuſt recōpence.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Conſider this, ye that forget the Lord,
                  And feare not whē he threatneth with his word
                  Leaſt without helpe, I ſpoyle you as a pray.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 But he that thankes offereth prayſeth me aye,
                  Saith the Lord God, & he that walketh this trace
                  I wil him teach, Gods ſauing health to embrace.
               
               
                  An other of the ſame by .I. H.
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                     THe god of gods, the lord hath cald the earth 
                        〈♫〉
                      by name, frō wher the ſōne doth riſe vnto 
                        〈♫〉
                      the ſetting of the ſame. Frō Stō his faire place, his glory bright & 
                        〈♫〉
                      cleare, The perfect beuty of hys grace, from thence it did appeare.
                  
                     
                        verse 3 Our God ſhal come in haſt, to ſpeake he ſhal not doubt:
                  Before him ſhal the fire waſt, and tempeſt round about.
                  
                     
                        verse 4 The heauens from on hye, the earth below likewiſe:
                  He wil cal forth to iudge and try, his folke he doth deuiſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 5 Bring forth my ſaints (ſayth he) my faithfull flocke ſo deare:
                  Which are in hand and league with me, my law to loue & feare.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 6 And when theſe things are tride, the heauens ſhal record:
                  That God is iuſt, & al muſt byde, the iudgmēt of the Lord.
                  
                     
                        verse 7 My people O geue hede, Iſrael to thee I cry
                  I am thy God, thy helpe at nede, thou canſt it not deny.
                  
                     
                        verse 8 I do not ſay to thee, thy ſacrifice is ſlacke
                  Thou offreſt dayly vnto me, much more then I do lack.
                  
                     
                        verse 9 Thinkeſt thou that I do nede, thy cattel yong or old?
                  Or els ſo much deſire to fede, on goates out of thy fold?
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Nay, al the beaſts are mine, in woodes that eate theyr fils
                  And thouſāds more, of nete & kine, yt runne wild in the hils.
                  
                     The ſecond part.
                     
                        
                           verse 11 The birdes that build on hye, in hils and out of ſight
                     And beaſtes that in the field do lye, are ſubiect to my might.
                     
                        
                           verse 12 Then though I hungred ſore, what nede I ought of thine?
                     Sith that the earth with her great ſtore, & al therin is mine.
                     
                        
                           verse 13 To bulocks fleſh haue I ſuch mind, to eate it, dooſt thou think?
                     Or ſuch a ſwetenes do I find, the bloud of goats to drink?
                     
                        
                           verse 14 Geue to the Lord his prayſe, with thankes do him apply
                     And ſee thou pay thy vowes alwayes, vnto the God moſt hye.
                     
                        
                           verse 15 Then ſeke and cal to me, whē ought would worke the blame
                     And I wil ſure deliuer thee: that thou maiſt prayſe my name.
                     
                        
                           verse 16 But to the wicked trayne, which talke of God ech day
                     And yet theyr workes are foule & vaine, to thē the Lord wil ſay:
                     
                        
                           verse 17 With what a face dareſt thou, my word once ſpeake or name?
                     Why doth thy talke my law alow, thy dedes deny the ſame?
                     
                        
                           verse 18 Where as for to amend, thy life thou art ſo ſlacke
                     My word the which thou dooſt pretēd, is caſt behind thy backe.
                     
                        
                           verse 19 When thou a thefe dooſt ſee, by theft to liue in welth
                     With him thou runneſt & dooſt agre, likewiſe to thriue by ſtelth.
                     
                        
                           verse 20 When thou dooſt them behold, that wiues and maydes defile
                     Thou likeſt it wel, and waxeſt bold, to vſe that life moſt vile.
                     
                        
                           verse 21 Thy lippes thou dooſt apply, to ſclaunder and defame:
                     Thy tong is taught to craft and lye, and doth ſtil vſe the ſame
                     
                        
                           verse 22 Thou ſtudieſt co reuile, thy frends to thee ſo nere
                     With ſlaūder thou wouldſt nedes defile, thy mothers ſōne moſt deare.
                     
                        
                           verse 23 Hereat while I do winke, as though I did not ſee
                     Thou goeſt on ſtil, and ſo dooſt thinke, that I am like to thee.
                     
                        
                        
                           verse 24 But ſure I wil not let, to ſtrike when I begynne:
                     Thy faultes in ordre I wil ſet, and open al thy ſinne.
                     
                        
                           verse 25 Marke this I you require, that haue not God in mind:
                     Leaſt whē I plage you in mine ire, your help be far to find.
                     
                        
                           verse 26 He that doth geue to me, the ſacrifice of prayſe:
                     Doth pleaſe me wel, & he ſhal ſe, to walke in godly wayes.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  i. Miſerere mei deus. Pſalme .li.
                  VV .VV.
                  
                     ¶When Dauid was rebuked by the Prophet nathan for his great offences, he did not onely acknowledge the ſame to God, with proteſtation of his natural corruption and iniquirie: But alſo left a memorial therof to his poſteritie. Therfore firſt he deſireth God to forgeue his ſinnes, and renew in him his holy ſpirit: with promiſe that he wil not be vnmindfull of thoſe great graces. Finally fearing leaſt God would puniſh the whole Church for his faute: He requireth that he would rather increaſe his graces towards the ſame.
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                     O Lord conſider my diſtres, And now with 
                        〈♫〉
                      ſpede ſome pitie take: My ſinnes deface, my 
                        〈♫〉
                      fautes redreſſe, good Lord, for thy great mercyes ſake. Waſh me (O 
                        〈♫〉
                      Lord) and make me cleane, Frō this vniuſt and ſinful act: and purifie 
                        〈♫〉
                      yet once agayne, my haynous crime and bloudy fact.
                  
                     
                        verse 2 Remorſe and ſorow do conſtraine, me to acknowledge mine exces:
                  
                     
                        verse 3 My ſinne alas doth ſtil remaine, before my face without reles.
                  
                     
                        verse 4 For thee alone I haue offended, committing euel in thy ſight:
                  And if I were therfore condemned, yet were thy iudgmēt iuſt & right.
                  
                     
                        verse 5 It is to manifeſt alas, that firſt I was conceyued in ſinne:
                  Yea of my mother ſo borne was, & yet vile wretch remayne therin.
                  
                     
                        verse 6 Alſo behold Lord thou dooſt loue, the inward truth of a pure hart:
                  Therfore thy wiſdome frō aboue, thou haſt reueld me to conuert.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 7 If thou with Hiſſope purge this blot, I ſhalbe cleaner thē the glaſſe
                  And if yu waſh away my ſpot, the ſnow in whitenes ſhal I paſſe
                  
                     
                        verse 8 Therfore (O Lord) ſuch ioy me ſēd, that in wardly I may find grace
                  And y• my ſtrēgth may now amēd, which yu haſt ſwagd for my treſpas.
                  
                     
                        verse 9 Turne back thy face & frownig ire, for I haue felt inough thy hād:
                  And purge my ſinnes I thee deſire, which do in nūber paſſe the ſād.
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Make new my hart within my breſt, & frame it to thy holy wil:
                  Thy cōſtāt ſpirit in me let reſt, which may theſe raging enmies kil.
                  
                     The ſecond parte.
                     
                        
                           verse 11 Caſt me not (Lord) out from thy face, but ſpedely my torments end:
                     Take not frō me thy ſpirit & grace, which may frō dāgers me defēd.
                     
                        
                           verse 12 Reſtore me to thoſe ioyes again, which I was wōt in thee to find:
                     And let me thy fre ſpirit retain, which vnto thee may ſtirre my mind.
                     
                        
                           verse 13 Thus whē I ſhal thy mercies know, I ſhal inſtruct others therin
                     And mē that ar likewiſe brought low, by mine enſāple ſhal flee ſinne.
                     
                        
                           verse 14 O God that of my helth art Lord, forgeue me this my bloudy vice
                     My hart & toung ſhal thē accord, to ſing thy mercies and iuſtice.
                     
                        
                           verse 15 Touch thou my lips my tonge, vnty (O Lord) which art ye only kay
                     And thē my mouth ſhal teſtify, thy wōdrous works & praiſe alway.
                     
                        
                           verse 16 And as for outward ſacrifice, I would haue offred many one
                     But thou eſtemeſt thē of no price, & therin pleaſure takeſt yu none.
                     
                        
                           verse 17 The heauy hart the mynd oppreſt, O Lord thou neuer dooſt reiect
                     And to ſpeake truth it is the beſt, and of al ſacrifice the effect.
                     
                        
                           verse 18 Lord vnto Siō turne thy face, poure out thy mercyes on thy hil,
                     And on Ieruſalē thy grace, build vp the walles, and loue it ſtil.
                     
                        
                           verse 19 Thou ſhalt accept thē our offrings, of peace & righteouſnes, I ſay,
                     yea calues & many other things, vpon thine altar wil we lay.
                  
               
               
                  ¶An other of the ſame by.
                  T. N.
                  Sing this as the lamē
                     tation.
                  
                     HAue mercy on me, God, after thy great abounding grace:
                  After thy mercies multitude,  do thou my ſinnes deface.
                  Yet waſh me more frō myne offēce, & clenſe me frō my ſinne:
                  For I beknow my fautes, & ſtil my ſin is in mine eyne.
                  Agaynſt thee, thee alone, I haue offended in this caſe:
                  And euel haue I done before the preſence of thy face.
                  That in the things that thou dooſt ſay, vpright thou maiſt be tried.
                  And eke in iudgyng that the dome may paſſe vpon thy ſide.
                  
                      Behold in wickednes my kind, and ſhape I did receyue:
                  And loe, my ſinful mother eke, in ſin did me conceyue.
                  But Loe the truth in inward partes, is pleaſant vnto thee:
                  And ſecrets of thy wiſdome thou, reueled haſt to mee.
                  With Hyſope, Lord, be ſprincle me, I ſhalbe clenſed ſo:
                  yea waſh thou me, and ſo I ſhal, be whiter then the ſnow.
                  Of ioy & gladnes make thou me, to heare the pleaſing voyce:
                  That ſo the brooſed bones which yu, haſt brokē may reioyce.
                  From the beholding of my ſinnes, Lord turne away thy face:
                  And al my dedes of wickednes, do vtterly deface.
                  O God create in me a hart, vnſpotted in thy ſight:
                  And eke within my bowels Lord, renew a ſtable ſpirit.
                  Ne caſt me from thy ſight, nor take thy holy ſpirit away:
                  The comfort of thy ſauing helpe, geue me agayne I pray.
                  With thy free ſpirit eſtabliſh me, and I wil teach therfore
                  Sinners thy wayes, & wicked ſhal be turnd vnto thy lore.
                  
                     The ſeconde part.
                     O God that art God of my helth, from bloud deliuer mee:
                     That praiſes of thy righteouſnes, my tōg may ſing to thee.
                     My lips that yet faſt cloſed be, do thou, O Lord vnloſe:
                     The praiſes of thy maieſtie, my mouth ſhal ſo diſcloſe.
                     I would haue offred ſacrifice, if that had pleaſed thee:
                     But pleaſed wt burnt offrings: I know thou wilt not bee.
                     A troubled ſpirit is ſacrifice, deliteful in Gods eyes:
                     A broken & an humbled hart, God, thou wilt not deſpiſe.
                     In thy good wil deale gently Lord, to Sion, and with al:
                     Graunt that of thy Ieruſalem, vpreard may be the wal.
                     Burnt offrings, gifts and ſacrifice, of iuſtice in that day:
                     Thou ſhalt accept, & calues they ſhal, vpon thine altar lay.
                  
               
            
            
               Quid gloriaris. Pſalme .lii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶Dauid deſeribeth the arrogant tyranny of hys aduerſary Doeg, Saules chief ſhephearde, who by falſe ſurmyſes cauſed Achimeleco with the reſt of the Prieſtes to be ſlayne. Dauid prophecyeth his veſtruction, and encourageth the faythfull to put theyr confidence in God, whoſe iudgements are moſt ſharpe agaynſt his aduerſaries. And finally he rendreth thankes to God for hys delyueraunce. In this Pſalme is lyuely ſet foorth the kyngdome of Antichriſt.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  WHy dooſt thou tyraunt boaſt abrod, thy wicked workes
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   to prayſe? dooſt thou not know there is a God, whoſe mercies laſt 
                     〈♫〉
                   alwayes? Why doth thy mind yet ſtil deuiſe, ſuch wicked wiles to 
                     〈♫〉
                   warpe? Thy tong vntrue in forging lies, is like a raſour ſharpe.
               
                  
                     verse 3 On miſchief why ſetſt thou thy mynde, and wilt not walke vpright
               Thou haſt more luſt falſe tales to find, then bring ye truth to light
               
                  
                     verse 4 Thou dooſt delyte in fraud and guile, in miſchiefe bloud and wrōg:
               Thy lips haue learnd ye flattering ſtyle, O falſe deceitful tong.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Therfore ſhal God for euer cōfound, and pluck thee from thy place,
               Thy ſeede roote out frō of the ground, and ſo ſhal thee deface.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The iuſt when they behold thy fal, with feare wil prayſe the Lord:
               And in reproch of thee withal, cry out with one accord.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Behold the man which wold not take, the Lord for hys defence,
               But of his goods his God did make, and truſt his corrupt ſence.
               
                  
                     verse 8 But I an Oliue freſh and grene, ſhal ſpring and ſpred abrode:
               For why? my truſt al tymes hath bene, vpon the liuyng God.
               
                  
                     verse 9 For this therfore wil I geue prayſe, to thee with hart and voyce:
               I wil ſet forth thy name alwayes, wherin thy ſaints reioyce.
            
            
               Dixit inſipiens. Pſalme .liii.
               T. N.
               
                  ¶The Prophet deſcribeth the crooked nature, the cruelty and puniſhment of the wicked, whē they looke not for it, and deſyreth the deliueraunce of the godly that they maye reioyce together.
               
               Sing this as the. xlvi Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THe foliſh man in that which he,  within his hart hath ſayd:
               That there is any God at al, hath vtterly denide.
               
                  
                     verse 2 They are corrupt & they alſo, a hainous work haue wrought
               amōg them al there is not one, of good that worketh ought
               
                  
                     verse 3 The Lord lookt down on ſons of men, from heauen al abrode:
               To ſee if any were that would, be wiſe and ſeeke for God.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 4 They are gone al out of the way, they are corrupted al:
               There is not one doth any good, there is not one at al.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Do not al wicked workers know, that they do feede vpon
               My people as they feede on bread? the lord they cal not on.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Euen there they were afraid & ſtoode, with trembling and diſmayd
               Where as there was no cauſe at al, why they ſhould be afrayd.
               
                  
                     verse 7 For God his bones that thee beſieged, hath ſcattred al abrode:
               Thou haſt confounded them, for they reiected are of God.
               
                  
                     verse 8 O lord geue thou thy people health, and thou O Lord fulfil
               Thy promiſe made to Iſrael, from out of Sion hil.
               
                  
                     verse 9 When God his people ſhal reſtore, that erſt was captiue lad:
               Then Iacob ſhal therin reioyce, and Iſrael ſhal be glad.
            
            
               Deus in nomine. Pſalme .liiii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶Dauid brought into great daunger by reaſon of Ziphtins, calleth vpon the name of God to deſtroy his enemies, promiſing ſacrifice and free offrings for their deliueraunce.
               
               Sing this as the. xivi Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  GOd ſaue me for thy holy name,  and for thy goodnes ſake:
               Vnto the ſtrēgth Lord of the ſame, I do my cauſe betake.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Regard O Lord and geue an eare, to thee when I do pray:
               Bow down thy ſelf to me & heare, the words y• I do ſay.
               
                  
                     verse 3 For ſtraungers vp againſt me ryſe, and tyrauntes vexe me ſtil:
               Which haue not God before their eyes, they ſeeke my ſoule to ſpil
               
                  
                     verse 4 But loe my God doth geue me ayd, the Lord is ſtraight at hand:
               with thē by whom my ſoule is ſtayd, the Lord doth euer ſtand.
               
                  
                     verse 5 With plages repay agayne al thoſe, for me that lie in wayte:
               and with thy truth deſtroy my foes, with their own ſnare & baite
               
                  
                     verse 6 An offring of free hart and wil, that I to thee ſhal make:
               And prayſe thy name for therin ſtil, great comfort I do take.
               
                  
                     verse 7 O Lord at length do ſet me free, from them that craft conſpire:
               And now mine eye with ioy doth ſee, on them my harts deſire.
            
            
               Exaudi deus. pſalme .lv.
               I. H
               
                  ¶Dauid beyng in great heauines and diſtres, complaineth of the cruelty of Saule, & of the falſhod of his familiiar acquaintaunce, vttering moſt ardent affections to moue the Lord to pitie hym. After being aſſured of deliuerance, he ſetteth forth the grace of god as though he had already obtayned his requeſt.
               
               Syng this as the. xxxv Pſalm.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O God geue eare and do apply,  to heare me when I pray:
               And when it thee I cal and cry, hide not thy ſelfe away.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 2 Take hede to me, graunt my requeſt, and aunſwer me agayne:
               with plaints I pray ful ſore oppreſt, great grief doth me conſtrain
               
                  
                     verse 3 Becauſe my foes with threates & cries, oppres me through deſpight
               And ſo the wicked ſort likewiſe, to vexe me haue delyght.
               
                  
                     verse 4 For they in counſel do conſpire, to charge me with ſome il:
               So in their haſty wrath and ire, they do purſue me ſtil.
               
                  
                     verse 5 My hart doth faint for want of breath, it panteth in my breſt:
               The terrours and the bread of death, do worke me muche vnreſt.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Such dreadful feare on me doth fal, that I therwith do quake:
               Such horror whelmeth me with al, that I no ſhift can make.
               
                  
                     verse 7 But I do ſay, who wil geue me, the ſwift and pleaſaunt wings
               Of ſome fayre doue? that I may flee, and reſt me from theſe things
               
                  
                     verse 8 Lo then I would go far away, to fly I would not ceaſe:
               And I would hide my ſelf and ſtay, in ſome great wildernes.
               
                  
                     verse 9 I would be gone in al the haſt, and not abyde behynd:
               That I were quite and ouer paſt, theſe blaſtes of boyſtrous wind
               
                  
                     verse 10 Deuide them lord, and from them pul, their diueliſh double tong:
               For I haue ſpied their city ful, of rapine, ſtrife and wrong.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Which things, both night & day throughout, do cloſe her as a wal:
               In midſt of her is miſchief ſtout, and ſorrow eke withal.
               
                  
                     verse 12 Her priuy partes are wicked playne, her dedes are much to vile:
               And in the ſtreetes there doth remayne, al crafty fraud & guile.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 If that my foes did ſeeke my ſhame, I might it wel abyde:
                  From open enmies check and blame, ſome where I could me hide
                  
                     
                        verse 14 But thou it was my fellow dere, which frendſhip didſt pretend,
                  And didſt my ſecret counſel heare, as my familiar frend.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 With whom I had delight to talke, in ſecret and abrode:
                  And we together oft did walk within the houſe of God.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Let death in haſt vpon them fal, and ſen them quick to hel:
                  For miſchief rayneth in their hal, and parlour where they dwel.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 But I vnto my God do cry, to him for help I flee:
                  The Lord doth heare me by and by, and he doth ſuccour mee.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 At morning, noone, and euenyng tyde, vnto the Lord I pray:
                  Whē I ſo inſtantly haue cride, he doth not ſay me nay.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 To peace he ſhal reſtore me yet, though war be now at hand:
                  Although the number be ful great, that would againſt me ſtand.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 20 The Lord that firſt and laſt doth raign, both now and euermore:
                  Wil heare when I to hym complaine, and puniſh them ful ſore.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 For ſure there is no hope that they, to turne will ouce accord:
                  For why? they wil not God obey, nor do not feare the Lord.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Vpon their frēds they laid their hāds, which were in couenāt knit.
                  Of frendſhip to neglect the bands, they paſſe or care no whit.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 While they haue war within their hart, as butter are their words:
                  although his words wer ſmoth as oile, thei cut as ſharp as ſwords.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 Caſt thou thy care vpon the Lord, and he ſhal nouriſh thee:
                  For in no wiſe wil he accord, the iuſt in thral to ſee.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 But God ſhal caſt thē depe in pit, that thirſt for bloud alwayes:
                  He wil no guileful man permit, to liue out halfe hys dayes.
                  
                     
                        verse 26 Though ſuch be quite deſtroid and gone, in thee O Lord I truſt:
                  I ſhal depend thy grace vpon, with al my hart and luſt.
               
            
            
               Miſerere. pſalme .lvi.
               I. H.
               
                  Dauid being brought to Achis the king of Gath, 2. Sa. 21. 12. cōplaineth of his enmies demaū deth ſuccour, putteth his truſt in God, & his promiſes, & promiſeth to performe his vowes which he had taken vpon hym. Wherof this was the effect to prayſe God in his Church.
               
               Syng this as the Lamentation.
               
                  
                     verse 1 HAue mercy Lord on me I pray,  for man would me deuoure:
               He fyghteth with me day by day, & troubleth me ech houre.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Mine enemies daily enterpryſe, to ſwaldow me outryght:
               To fyght againſt me many ryſe, O thou moſt high of might.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Whē they would make me moſt afraid, with boaſt & brags of pryde:
               I truſt in thee alone for ayde, by thee will I abyde.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Gods promiſe I do mind and prayſe, O Lord I ſtick to thee:
               I do not care at al aſſayes, what fleſh can do to me.
               
                  
                     verse 5 What things I either did or ſpake, they wraſt thē at their wil:
               And al the counſel that they take, is how to work me il.
               
                  
                     verse 6 They al conſēt themſelues to hide, cloſe watch for me to lay:
               They ſpy my pathes & ſnares haue tride, to take my lyfe away.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Shal they thus ſcape on miſchief ſet? thou God on thē wilt frown:
               for in his wrath he doth not let, to throw whole kingdōs down
               
                  
                     verse 8 Thou ſeeſt how oft they make me flee, and on my teares dooſt looke
               Reſerue them in a glas by thee, and wryte them in thy booke:
               
                  
                     verse 9 When I do cal vpon thy name, my foes away do ſtart:
               I wel perceyue it by that ſame, that God doth take my part.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 10 I glory in the worde of God, to prayſe it I accorde:
               With ioy wil I declare abrode, the promyſe of the Lord.
               
                  
                     verse 11 I truſt in God and yet I ſay, as I afore began:
               The Lord he is my helpe and ſtay, I do not care for man.
               
                  
                     verse 12 I wil performe with hart ſo free, to god my vowes alwayſe:
               And I O Lord al times to thee, wil offer thankes and prayſe.
               
                  
                     verse 13 My ſoule from death thou dooſt defend, and kepe my feete vpright
               That I before thee may aſcend, with ſuch as lyue in light.
            
            
               Miſerere. Pſalme .lvii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶Dauid beyng in the deſert of Ziph, where the inhabitants did betray him, and at length in the ſame caue with Saule. Calleth moſt earneſtly vnto God with full confidence that he wil performe his promiſe and take his cauſe in hand: alſo that he wil ſhew his glory in the heauēs and the earth againſt his cruel enemies. Therfore doth he render laud and prayſe.
               
               Sing this as the. 44 Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  TAke pity for thy promiſe ſake,  haue mercy Lord on me:
               For why my ſoule doth her betake, vnto the helpe of thee.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Within the ſhadow of thy wings, I ſet my ſelfe ful faſt:
               Til miſchief malice & like things, be gone and ouer paſt.
               
                  
                     verse 3 I cal vpon the God moſt hye, to whom I ſticke and ſtand:
               I meane the God that wil ſtand by, the cauſe I haue in hand.
               
                  
                     verse 4 From heauen he hath ſent his ayde, to ſaue me from their ſpight:
               That to deuour me haue aſſayd, his mercy truth and might.
               
                  
                     verse 5 I lead my life with Lions fel, al ſet on wrath and ire.
               And with ſuch wicked men I dwel, that freat like flames of fyre:
               
                  
                     verse 6 Their teeth are ſpeares and arrowes lōg, as ſharp as I haue ſene:
               they wound & cut wt their quick tong, like ſwords & weapōs kene.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Set vp and ſhew they ſelf, O God, aboue the heauens bright:
               Exalt thy praiſe on earth abrode, thy maieſty and might.
               
                  
                     verse 8 They lay their net and do prepare, a priuy caue and pit:
               wherin they think my ſoule to ſnare, but they are fallen in it.
               
                  
                     verse 9 My hart is ſet to laud the Lord, in him to ioy alwayes.
               My hart I ſay doth wel accord, to ſyng his laud and prayſe.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Awake my ioy, awake I ſay, my lute, my harpe and ſtring,
               For I my ſelfe before the day, wil ryſe, reioyce and ſing.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Among the people I wil tel, the goodnes of my God:
               And ſhew his prayſe that doth excel, in Heathen lands abrode.
               
                  
                     verse 12 His mercy doth extend as far, as heauens al are hie:
               His truth is high as any ſtar, that ſtandeth in the ſky.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 13 Set forth and ſhew thy ſelf O God, aboue the heauens bright:
               Extol thy prayſe on earth abrode, thy maieſty and might.
            
            
               Si vere vtique. Pſalme .lviii.
               I. H.
               
                  He deſcribeth the malice of his enemies, the flatterers of Saule, who both ſecretly & openlye ſought his deſtruction, from whō he appealeth to gods iudgemennt, ſhewyng that the iuſt ſhal reioyce when they ſee the puniſhment of the wicked to the glory of God.
               
               Sing this as the. 68 Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  YE rulers that are put in truſt,  to iudge of wrong and right:
               be al your iudgemēts true & iuſt, not knowīg nede or might
               
                  
                     verse 2 Nay, in your harts ye marke & muſe, in miſchiefe to conſent:
               and where ye ſhould true iuſtice vſe, your hāds to brybes are bent.
               
                  
                     verse 3 This wicked ſort from their birth day, haue erred on thys wyſe:
               and from their mothers womb alway, haue vſed craft and lyes.
               
                  
                     verse 4 In them the poyſon and the breath of ſerpents do appeare:
               Yea lyke the adder that is deafe, and faſt doth ſtop his eare.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Becauſe he wil not heare the voyce, of one that charmeth wel:
               No though he were the chief of choyce, and did therin excel.
               
                  
                     verse 6 O God breake yu their teeth at once, within their mouth throughtout
               the tuſkes ye in their great chawbones, lyke Liōs whelpes hāg out.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Let them conſum away and waſt, as water renth forthright:
               The ſhafts that they do ſhoute in haſt, let thē be broke in flight.
               
                  
                     verse 8 As ſnailes do waſt within the ſhel, and vnto ſlime do runne:
               As one before his tyme that fel, and neuer ſaw the Sunne.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Before the thornes that now are yong, to buſhes big ſhal grow:
               The ſtormes of anger waxing ſtrong, ſhal take thē ere their know
               
                  
                     verse 10 The iuſt ſhal ioy, it doth thē good, that God doth vengeance take:
               and they ſhal waſh their fete in blond, of thē that hym forſake.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Thē ſhal the world ſhew forth & tel, that good m
                     ••
                   haue reward.
               And that a God in earth doth dwel, that iuſtice doth regard.
            
            
               Eripe me. pſalme .lix.
               I. H.
               
                  Dauid being in great daunger of Saule, who ſent to ſtay him in his bed, prayeth vnto god, declareth his innocency, and their fury, deſiring god to deſtroy al thoſe that ſin of malitious wickednes. Whom though he kepe a liue for a time to exerciſe his people, yet in the end vs wil conſume them in his wrath, that he may be known to be the god of Iacob to ye worldes end, for this he ſingeth prayſes to god aſſured of his mercies.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  SEnd ayd and ſaue me from my foes, O lord I pray to thee
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   defend and kepe me from all thoſe that riſe and ſtriue with me (O 
                     〈♫〉
                   Lord) preſerue me frō thoſe men, whoſe doings are not good, and 
                     〈♫〉
                   ſet me ſure and ſafe from them, that thurſteth after bloud.
               
                  
                     verse 3 For loe they wayte my ſouīe to take, they rage againſt me ſtil:
               yea for no fault that I did make, I neuer did them il.
               
                  
                     verse 4 They run and do them ſelues prepare, when I no whit offend:
               Ariſe and ſaue me from their ſnare, and ſee what they entend.
               
                  
                     verse 5 O Lord of hoſtes of Iſrael, ariſe and ſtrike al landes:
               And pity none that doth rebel, and in their miſchief ſtandes.
               
                  
                     verse 6 At night they ſtir and ſeke about, as hounds they houle and grēne:
               And al the city cleane throughout, from place to place they renne.
               
                  
                     verse 7 They ſpake of me with month alway, but in their lips wer ſwords
               they greed my deth & thē wold ſay, what? none doth hear our words.
               
                  
                     verse 8 But Lord thou haſt their wayes eſpide, and laught therat apace:
               The Heathē folk thou ſhalt deryde, and mock thē to their face.
               
                  
                     verse 9 The ſtrēgth that doth my foes withſtād, O Lord doth come of thee
               My God he is my help at hand, a fort of fence to mee.
               
                  
                     verse 10 The Lord to me doth ſhew his grace, in great aboundance ſtil:
               That I may ſee my foes in caſe, ſuch as my hart doth wil
               
                  
                     verse 11 Deſtroy them not at once O God, leaſt it from mind do fal:
               But with thy ſtrēgth driue thē abrode, and ſo conſume thē al.
               
                  
                     verse 12 For their il words and truthles tong, confound thē in theyr pryde:
               Their wicked othes wt lies and wrong, let al the world deride.
               
                  
                     verse 13 Couſume thē in thy wrath, O Lord, that naught of them remayn:
               that mē may know throughout ye world, ye Iacobs god doth raign
               
                  
                     verse 14 At euening they return apace, as dogs they grin and cry:
               Throughout y• ſtreetes in euery place, they run about and ſpy.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 15 They ſeeke about for meat I ſay, but let them not be fed:
               Nor find an houſe wherin they may, be bold to put their head.
               
                  
                     verse 16 But I wil ſhew thy ſtrēgth abrode, thy goodnes I wil prayſe:
               For thou art my defence and God, at nede in al aſſayes.
               
                  
                     verse 17 Thou art my ſtrēgth, thou haſt me ſtaid, O Lord I ſing to thee:
               Thou art my fort, my fence and ayd, a louing God to me:
            
            
               Deus repulſet pſalme .lx.
               I. H.
               
                  Dauid being king ouer Iudah, and hauing had many victories, ſheweth by euident ſignes y• God elected him king, aſſuring the people that God wil proſper them, if they approue the ſame. After he prayeth vnto God to finiſh that that he hath begon.
               
               Syng this as the. 59. Pſalm.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O Lord thou didſt vs cleane forſake,  and ſcattredſt vs abrode:
               ſuch great diſpleaſure yu didſt take, returne to vs O God.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Thy might did moue the land ſo ſore, that it in ſunder brake
               the hurt therof O Lord reſtore, for it doth bowe and quake
               
                  
                     verse 3 With heauy chaunce yu plageſt thus, the people that are thyne:
               And thou haſt geuen vnto vs a drink of deadly wyne.
               
                  
                     verse 4 But yet to ſuch as feare thy name, a token ſhal enſue:
               That they may triumph in the ſame, becauſe they word is true.
               
                  
                     verse 5 So that thy might may kepe & ſaue, thy folk that fauor thee:
               that they they help at hād we may haue, O Lord graūt this to mee.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The Lord did ſpeak frō his own place, this was his ioyful tale:
               I wil deuide Sichē by pace, and mete out Succothes vale.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Gilead is geuen to my hand, Manaſſes mine beſyde:
               Ephraim the ſtrēgth of al my land, my law doth Iuda guide.
               
                  
                     verse 8 In Moab I wil waſh my feete, ouer Edom throw my ſhoo:
               And thou Paleſtine oughtſt to ſeke, for fauour me vnto.
               
                  
                     verse 9 But who wil bring me at this tyde, vnto the citie ſtrong?
               Or who to Edom wil me guide, ſo that I go not wrong?
               
                  
                     verse 10 Wilt yu god which didſt forſake, thy folke, their land & coaſtes,
               Our wars in hād, yu wouldſt not take, nor walk amōg our hoſtes.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Geue ayd, O Lord, and vs releue, frō them that vs diſdayne.
               the help that hoſtes of men can geue, it is but al in vayne.
               
                  
                     verse 12 But through our god, we ſhal haue might, to take great thīgs in hād
               He wil tread down & put to flight, al thoſe that vs withſtand.
            
            
               Exaudi Deus. Pſalme .lxi.
               I. H.
               
                  Whether that he were in daunger of the Ammonites, or being purſued of Abſolon: Here be crtet
                        •
                      to be heard & deliuered, and confirmed in his kingdō, he promiſeth perpetuall praiſes.
               
               
                   
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  REgard (O Lord) for I complaine, and make my 
                     〈♫〉
                   ſute to thee, let not my words returne in vaine, 
                     〈♫〉
                   but geue an eare to me, frō of the coaſtes & vtmoſt partes of all the 
                     〈♫〉
                   earth abroad, in grief & anguiſh of my hart I cry to thee (O God.)
               
                  
                     verse 3 Vpon the rock of thy great power, my woful mynd repoſe:
               thou art my hope, my fort, and tower, my fence againſt my foes.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Within thy tent I luſt to dwel, for euer to indure:
               Vnder thy wings I know right wel, I ſhalbe ſafe & ſure.
               
                  
                     verse 5 The Lord doth my deſire regard, and doth fulfil the ſame:
               With goodly gifts wil he reward, al them that feare his name.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The king ſhal he in health maintain, and ſo prolong his dayes.
               That he from age to age ſhal raign, for euermore alwayes.
               
                  
                     verse 7 That he may haue a dwelling place, before the Lord for aye:
               O let thy mercy, truth and grace, defend him from decay.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Then ſhal I ſing for euer ſtil, with prayſe vnto thy name:
               That al my vowes I may fulfil, and daily pay the ſame.
            
            
               Nonne deo ſubiecta. pſalme .lxii.
               I. H.
               
                  Dauid declareth by his exāple, & by ye nature of god, ye he muſt truſt in god alone, & therunto exhorteth al people, ſeing ye al is vanity, & wtout god al goeth to nought, al & we ar alwaies taught ye God onely is of power to ſaue, & that he rewardeth mā according to bys workes.
               
               Sing this as the. 6
                     •
                   Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  MY ſoule to God ſhal geue good hede, and him alone entend:
               for why wy helth & hope to ſpede, doth whole on him depēd
               
                  
                     verse 2 For he alone is my defence, my rock, my health, my ayd:
               He is my ſtay that no pretence, ſhal make me much diſmayd.
               
                  
                     verse 3 O wicked folk how long wil, ye, vſe crafts? ſure ye muſt fal,
               For as a rotten hedge ye be, and like a tottering wal.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Whō god doth loue, ye ſeke alwayes, to put him to the wurſe:
               Ye loue to lie, with mouth ye praiſe, and yet your hart doth curſe.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Yet ſtil my ſoule doth whole depend, on God my chief deſire:
               From al il feates me to defend, none but him I require.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 6 He is my rock, my ſtrength, my tower, my health is of his grace:
               He doth ſupport me that no power, can moue me out of place.
               
                  
                     verse 7 God is my glory and my health, my ſoules deſire and luſt:
               My fort, my ſtrēgth, my ſtay, my wealth, God is mine only truſt
               
                  
                     verse 8 Oh haue your hope in him alway, ye folke with one accord:
               Poure out your harts to him and ſay, our truſt is in the Lord.
               
                  
                     verse 9 The ſonnes of men deceitful are, on balaunce but a ſleight:
               With things moſt vayne do thē cōpare, for they cā kepe no weight
               
                  
                     verse 10 Truſt not in wrong robbry, or ſtelth, let vayne delightes be gone:
               though goods wel got, flow in wc welth, ſet not your harts theron
               
                  
                     verse 11 The Lord long ſith one thing doth tel, which here to mind I cal.
               He ſpake it oft, I heard it wel, that god alone doth al.
               
                  
                     verse 12 And that thou Lord art good and kynde, thy mercy doth excede:
               So that al ſortes wyth thee ſhal find, according to their dede.
            
            
               Deus deus meus. pſalme .lxiii.
               T. S.
               
                  Dauid after he had bene in great daunger by Saule, in the deſerte Ziph, made this Pſalme: wherin he geueth thanks to God for his wonderful deliuerance, in whoſe mercies he truſted, euē in the midſt of his miſeries: prophecying the deſtruction of gods enemies, & contra rywiſe happenes to al them that truſt in the Lord. 1. Sam. iii
               
               Sing this as the. 44 Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O God my God,  I watch betyme to come to thee in haſt:
               For why? my ſoule and body both, doth thirſt of thee to taſt
               And in this barrē wildernes, where waters there are none:
               my fleſh is partcht for thought of thee, for thee I wiſh alone
               
                  
                     verse 2 That I might ſee yet once agayn, thy glory, ſtrength, and might:
               As I was wont it to behold, within thy temple bryght.
               
                  
                     verse 3 For why? thy mercies far ſurmount, this lyfe and wretched dayes:
               My lips therfore ſhal geue to thee, due honor, laude, and prayſe.
               
                  
                     verse 4 And whilſt I lyue, I wil not fayle, to worſhip thee alway:
               And in thy name I ſhal lift vp, my hands whē I do pray.
               
                  
                     verse 5 My ſoule is filled as with marow, which is both fat and ſwete:
               my mouth therfore, ſhal ſing ſuch ſōgs, as are for thee moſt mete.
               
                  
                     verse 6 When as in bed I think on thee, and eke al the night tyde:
               
                  
                     verse 7 For vnder couert of thy wings, thou art my ioyful guide.
               
                  
                     verse 8 My ſoule doth ſurely ſtick to thee, thy right hand is my power:
               
                  
                     verse 9 And thoſe that ſeke my ſoule to ſtroy, thē death ſhal ſone deuoure.
               
                  
                     verse 10 The ſword ſhal thē deuour echone, their carcaſes ſhal fede
               The hungry foxes which do run, their pray to ſeke at nede.
               
                  
                     verse 11 The king and al men ſhal reioyce, that do profes Gods word:
               For liers mouthes ſhal thē be ſtopt, which haue ye truth diſturbde
            
            
               
               Exaudi deus vocem meam. pſalme lxiiii.
               l. H
               
                  Dauid prayeth againſt the falſe reporters and ſlaunderere, he declareth their puniſhment & deſtruction, to the comfort of the iuſt, and the glory of God.
               
               Syng this as the. 18. Pſalm.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O Lord vnto my voyce geue eare,  with plaint when I do pray:
               and rid my life & ſoule from feare, of foes that threat to ſlay.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Defend me from that ſort of men, which in deceipts do lurke:
               And from the frowning face of them, that al il feates do worke.
               
                  
                     verse 3 who whet their tōgs as we haue ſene, mē whet & ſharp their ſwords
               Thei ſhoote abrode their arrowes kene, I mean moſt bitter words
               
                  
                     verse 4 With priuy ſleight ſhote thei their ſhaft, the vpright man to hit:
               The iuſt vnware to ſtrike by craft, they care or feare no whit.
               
                  
                     verse 5 A wicked worked haue they decreed, in counſel thus they cry:
               To vſe deceyt let vs not dread, what, who can it eſpy?
               
                  
                     verse 6 What wayes to hurt they talk & muſe, al times within their hart:
               They al cōſult what feates to vſe, ech doth inuent his part.
               
                  
                     verse 7 But yet al this ſhal not auayle, whē they think leaſt vpon:
               God with his dart ſhal ſure aſſayle, and wound thē euery one.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Their crafts & their il tōgs withal, ſhal work thēſelues ſuch blame:
               That they which then behold their fal, ſhal wonder at y• ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Thē al that ſee ſhal know right wel, that god ye thing hath wrought
               and prayſe his witty works & tel, what he to pas hath brought.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Yet ſhal the iuſt in God reioyce, ſtil truſting in his might:
               ſo ſhal they ioy with mind and voyce, whoſe hart is pure & right.
            
            
               Te decet hymnus. Pſalm .lxv.
               I. H.
               
                  A prayſe and thankeſgeuing vnto God by the faythful, who are ſignified by Sion and Ieruſalem, for the chuſinge, preſeruation and gouernance of them, and for plentifull bleſſings powred forth vpon all the earth.
               
               Sing this as the .xxx. pſal.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THy prayſe alone,  O lord doth raign, in Siō thyne own hil:
               their vowes to thee they do maintain, & their beheſts fulfil.
               
                  
                     verse 2 For that yu dooſt their prayer heare, and dooſt therto agree:
               Thy people al both far & neare, with truſt ſhal come to thee.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Our wicked life ſo far excedes, that we ſhould fal therin:
               But Lord forgeue our great miſdedes, and purge vs from our ſyn.
               
                  
                     verse 4 The man is bleſt whō thou dooſt chuſe, within thy court to dwel:
               Thy houſe and temple he ſhal vſe, with pleaſures, that excel.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Of thy great iuſtice heare vs God, our health of thee doth riſe:
               The hope of al the earth abrode, and the ſea coſtes likewiſe.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 6 With ſtrength thou art beſet about, and compaſt with thy power:
               thou makeſt ye mountains ſtrong & ſtout, to ſtand in euery ſhower.
               
                  
                     verse 7 The ſwelling ſeas thou dooſt aſſwage, & make their ſtreames ful ſtil
               Thou dooſt reſtrayne the peoples rage, and rule them at thy wil.
               
                  
                     verse 8 The folk that dwel ful far on earth, ſhal dread thy ſignes to ſee:
               which morne and euen in great mirth, do paſſe wt prayſe to thee.
               
                  
                     verse 9 When that the earth is chopt and dry, and thirſteth more and more.
               Then with thy drops thou dooſt apply, & much encreaſe her ſtore
               
                  
                     verse 10 The floud of God doth ouerſtow, and ſo doth cauſe to ſpring:
               The ſeede and corne which men do ſow, for he doth guide ye thing
               
                  
                     verse 11 With wete thou dooſt her furrowes fil, where by her clods do fal:
               Thy drops to her thou dooſt diſtil, and bles her frute withal.
               
                  
                     verse 12 Thou deckſt ye earth of thy good grace, with fayre & pleaſant crop:
               Thy cloudes diſtil her dew apace, great plenty they do drop.
               
                  
                     verse 13 Wherby the deſert ſhal begin, ful great encreaſe to bring:
               The little hils ſhal ioy therin, much frute in them ſhal ſpring.
               
                  
                     verse 14 In places playne the flock ſhe feede, and couer al the earth:
               The valies with corne ſhal ſo excede, that men ſhal ſing for mirth
            
            
               Iubilate deo omnis terra. pſalme .lxvi.
               I. H.
               
                  He prouoketh al men to prayſe the Lord and to conſider his workes, reherſing two thynges moſt wonderful. He ſetteth forth the power of God to affray the rebels, and ſheweth how God hath deliuered Iſrael from great bōdage and afflictiōs, he promiſeth to geue ſacrifice & prouoketh al men to heare what god hath done for him, and to praiſe his name.
               
               Syng this as the 68. Pſalm.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  YE men on earth in God reioyce, wt prayſe ſet forth his name
               Extol his might wt hart & voyce,  geue glory to the ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 2 How wōderful O Lord ſay ye, in al thy workes thou art
               thy foes for feare do ſeke to thee, ful ſore agaīſt their hart
               
                  
                     verse 3 Al men that dwel ye earth throughout, do prayſe the name of God:
               The laud therof the world about, is ſhewd and ſet abrode.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Al folk come forth behold & ſee, what things ye lord hath wrought:
               marke wel ye wōdrous works y• he, for man to pas hath brought.
               
                  
                     verse 5 He laid the ſea like heapes on hie, therin a way they had:
               On foote to pas both fayre and dry, wherof their harts wer glad.
               
                  
                     verse 6 His might doth rule ye world alway, his eyes al things behold:
               Al ſuch as would him diſobey, by him ſhal be controld.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Ye people geue vnto our God, due laud and thanks alwayes,
               With ioyful voyce declare abrode, and ſing vnto his prayſe.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 8 Which doth endue our ſoule with life, and it preſerue with al:
               He ſtayeth our fete, ſo that no ſtrife, can make vs ſlip or fal.
               
                  
                     verse 9 The Lord doth proue our dedes with fire, if that they wil abide:
               As workmen do when they deſire, to haue theyr metals tryde.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Although thou ſuffer vs ſo long, in priſon to be caſt:
               And there with chaines and fetters ſtrong, to lye in bondage faſt.
               
                  The ſeconde part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Although I ſay thou ſuffer men, on vs to ride and raygne:
                  Though we through fire and water ren, of very grief and payne.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Yet ſure thou dooſt of thy good grace, diſpoſe it to the beſt:
                  And bryng vs out into a place, to lyue in wealth and reſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Vnto thy houſe reſort wil I, to offer and to pray:
                  And there I wil my ſelfe apply, my vowes to thee to pay.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 The vowes that with my mouth I ſpake, in al my grief & ſmart:
                  The vowes I ſay which I did make, in dolor of my hart.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 Burnt offring I wil geue to thee, of Oxen fat and Rammes:
                  No other ſacrifice ſhalbe, of bullockes goates & lambes.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Come forth & harken here ful ſone, al ye that feare the Lord:
                  What he for my poore ſoule hath done, to you I wil record.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Ful oft I cal vpon his grace, this mouth to him doth cry:
                  And thou my tong make ſpede apace, to prayſe him by and by
                  
                     
                        verse 18 But if I fele my hart within, in wicked workes reioyce:
                  Or if I haue delite to ſinne, God wil not heare my voyce.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 But ſurely God my voyce hath heard, and what I do require:
                  My prayer he doth wel regarde, and graunteth my deſire.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Al prayſe to him that hath not put, nor caſt me out of mind:
                  Nor yet his mercy from me ſhut, which I do euer fynd.
               
            
            
               Deus miſereatur noſtri. Pſalme .lxvii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶A ſwete prayer for al the faithfull to obteyne the fauor of God, and to be lightened with his countenaunce, to thende that his way and iudgementes may be knowne throughout the earth. A reioyſing that God is the gouernour of all nations.
               
               Sing this as the .xxx. pſal.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  HAue mercy on vs, Lord, and graunt to vs thy grace:
               To ſhew to vs do thou accord,  the brightnes of thy face.
               
                  
                     verse 2 That al the earth may know, thy way to godly wealth:
               And al the natiōs on a row, may ſee thy ſauing health.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Let all the world, O God, geue praſe vnto thy name
               O let the people al abrod, extol and laud the ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Throughout the world ſo wide, let al reioyce with mirth
               For yu with truth & right dooſt guide, the natiōs of ye earth.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 5 Let al the world, O God, geue prayſe vnto thy name,
               Oh let the people al abrod, extol and laud the ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Then ſhal the earth encreaſe, great ſtore of frute ſhal fal,
               And then our God, the God of peace, ſhal bles vs eke wt al.
               God ſhal vs bles, I ſay, and then both farre and neare
               The folke throughout the earth alway, of him ſhal ſtand in feare.
            
            
               Exurgat deus. Pſalme .lxviii.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶In this Pſalme Dauid ſetteth forth as in a glaſſe, the wonderful mercies of God towardes his people, who by all meanes, & moſt ſtraunge ſortes declareth him: ſelfe to them. And therfore Gods church by reaſon of his promiſes, graces & victories, doth excell without compariſon all worldly thinges: he exhorteth therfore all men to prayſe God for euer.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  LEt god ariſe, & thē his foes, wil turne thēſelues to 
                     〈♫〉
                   flight: His enmies thē wil runne abrod, & ſcatter 
                     〈♫〉
                   out of ſight: and as the fire doth melt the waxe, and winde blow 
                     〈♫〉
                   ſmoke away: ſo in the preſence of the Lord, the wicked ſhal decay.
               
                  
                     verse 3 But righteous men before the Lord, ſhal hartely reioyce:
               They ſhalbe glad and mery al, and cheareful in their voyce.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Syng prayſe, ſing prayſe vnto the Lord, who rideth on the ſkye:
               Extol this name of Iah our God, and him do magnifye.
               
                  
                     verse 5 That ſame is he that is aboue, within his holy place,
               That father is of fatherles, and iudge of widowes caſe.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Houſes he geueth and iſſue both, vnto the comfortles:
               He bringeth bondmen out of thral, and rebels to diſtres.
               
                  
                     verse 7 When thou didſt march before thy folk, the Egyptiās from among
               And brought thē through ye wildernes, which was both wide & lōg:
               
                  
                     verse 8 Thearth did quake, ye ram pourde down, heard wer great claps of thūder
               The moūt Sinai ſhoke in ſuch ſort, as it wold cleaue a ſūder
               
                  
                  
                     verse 9 Thine heritage with drops of rayne, aboundantly was waſht
               And if ſo be it baren waxt, by thee it was refreſht.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Thy choſē flock doth there remayne, thou haſt prepard that place:
               And for the poore thou dooſt prouide, of thine eſpecial grace.
               
                  The ſeconde part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 God wil geue women cauſes iuſt, to magnifye his name:
                  When as his people triumphes make, & purchaſe brute and fame.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 For puiſſāt kings, for al their power, ſhal flee, and take the foyle
                  And womē which remaine at home, ſhal helpe to part the ſpoyle.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 And though you wer as black as pots, your hew ſhuld pas ye doue
                  Whoſe wings & fethers, ſeme to haue ſiluer and gold aboue.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 When in this land God ſhal triumph, ouer kings both hye, & low
                  Then ſhal it be like Salmon hil, as white as any ſnow.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 Though Baſan be a fruteful hil, and in heyght others pas,
                  Yet Sion Gods moſt holy hil, doth farre excel in grace.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Why brag ye thus, ye hils moſt high, and leape for pride together?
                  This hil of Sion God doth loue, and there wil dwel for euer.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Gods army is two millions, of warriours good and ſtrong,
                  The Lord alſo in Sinai, is preſent them among.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Thou didſt (O Lord) aſcend on high, and captiues led them al,
                  Which in times paſt thy choſen flocke, in priſon kept and thral.
                  Thou madſt them tribute for to pay, and ſuch as did repine
                  Thou didſt ſubdue, that they might dwel, in thy temple deuine.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Nowe prayſed be the Lord for that, he poures on vs ſuch grace
                  From day to day, he is the God, of our health and ſolace.
               
               
                  The third part.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 He is the God from whom alone, ſaluation commeth playne:
                  He is the God by whom we ſcape, al daungers, death and payne.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Thus God wil woūd his enemies hed, & breake the heary ſcalpe,
                  Of thoſe that in theyr wickednes, continually do walke.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 From Baſan wil I bring, ſayd he, my people and my ſhepe,
                  And al mine own as I haue done, from daunger of the depe.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 And make thē dip theyr fete in bloud, of thoſe that hate my name
                  And dogs ſhal haue their tongs embrud, with licking of the ſame.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 Al men may ſee how thou O God, thyne enmies dooſt deface:
                  And how thou goeſt as God and kyng, into thy holy place.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 The ſingers go before with ioy, the minſtrels folow after
                  And in the midſt the damſels play, with timbrel and with taber.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 26 Now in thy congregation, O Iſrael prayſe the Lord
                  And Iacobs whole poſterity, geue thankes with one accord.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 Their chief was litle Beniamin, but Iuda made theyr hoſt
                  With Zabulon and Neptalim, whiche dweld about the coaſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 As God hath geuen powre to thee ſo, Lord, make firme and ſure
                  The thing that thou haſt wrought in vs, for euer to endure.
                  
                     
                        verse 29 And in thy temples giftes wil we geue vnto thee O Lord,
                  For thine vnto Ieruſalme, ſure promiſe made by word.
               
               
                  The fourth part.
                  Yea and ſtraunge kinges to vs ſubdued, ſhal do like in thoſe dayes:
                  I meane to thee they ſhal preſent, theyr gifts of laud and prayſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 30 He ſhal deſtroy the ſpeare mēs rāks, theſe calues & bulles of myght
                  And cauſe them tribute pay, and daunt, al ſuch as loue to fight.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 Then ſhal the Lords of Egipt come, and preſents with them bring
                  The Mores moſt black ſhal ſtretch their hāds, vnto their lord & king.
                  
                     
                        verse 32 Therfore ye kingdomes of the earth, geue prayſe vnto the Lord
                  Sing Pſalmes to God with one conſent, thereto let al accord.
                  
                     
                        verse 33 Who though he ride and euer hath, aboue the heauens bryght
                  Yet by the feareful thunder claps, mē may wel know his might.
                  
                     
                        verse 34 Therfore the ſtrength of Iſrael, aſcribe to God on hye:
                  Whoſe myght and power doth far extend, aboue the cloudy ſkye.
                  
                     
                        verse 35 O God thy holynes and power, is dread for euermore:
                  The God of Iſrael geueth vs ſtrength, praiſed be God therfore.
               
            
            
               Saluum me fac domine. Pſalme .lxix.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶The complaintes, prayers, ferunt zeale, and greate anguiſhe of Dauid is ſet forth as a figure of Chriſt, and all his members: the malitious cruelty of thenemies, and theyr puniſhment, alſo where Iudas and ſuch traytours are accurſed. Then gathered he courage in his affliction and offereth prayſes vnto God, whiche are more acceptable then all Sacrifices: wherof all the afflicted may take comforte. Finally be doth prouoke all creatures to prayſes, prophecying of the kyngdome of Chriſt, and the buildyng of Iuda, where all the faythfull and theyr ſeede ſhall dwell for euer.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  SAue me, O God & that wt ſpede, the waters flow 
                     〈♫〉
                   ful faſt. So ni my ſoule do they procede, that I
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   am ſore agaſt. I ſticke ful depe in filthe and clay, wheras I fele no 
                     〈♫〉
                   ground: I fal into ſuch flouds, I ſay, that I am like be dround.
               
                  
                     verse 3 With crying oft I faint and quaile, my throte is horſe and drye:
               With loking vp my ſight doth faile, for helpe to God on hie.
               
                  
                     verse 4 My foes that giltles do oppres, my ſoule, with hate are led:
               In number ſure they are no les, then heares are on my hed.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Though for no cauſe they vexe me ſore, they proſper and are glad
               They do compel me to reſtore, the thinges I neuer had.
               
                  
                     verse 6 What I haue done for want of wit, thou Lord al times canſt tel:
               And al the ſame that I commit, to thee is knowne ful wel.
               
                  
                     verse 7 (O God) of hoſtes defend and ſtay, al thoſe that truſt in thee:
               Let no man doubt or ſhrinke away, for ought that chaunceth me.
               
                  
                     verse 8 It is for thee and for thy ſake, that I do beare this blame,
               In ſpite of thee they would me make, to hide my face for ſhame.
               
                  
                     verse 9 My mothers ſonnes my brethren al, forſake me on a row,
               And as a ſtraunger they me cal, my face they wil not know.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Vnto thy houſe ſuch zeale I beare, that it doth pine me much:
               Theyr cheks & taūts at thee to heare, my very hart doth grutch.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Though I do faſt my fleſh to chaſt, yea if I wepe and mone,
                  Yet in my teeth this geare is caſt, they pas not therupon.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 If I for grief and payne of hart, in ſackcloth vſe to walke,
                  Then they anone wil it peruert, therof they ieſt and talke.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Both hye and low and al the throng, that ſit within the gate,
                  They haue me euer in theyr tong, of me they talke and prate.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 The dronkardes which in wine delite, it is their chief paſtime,
                  To ſeke which way to worke me ſpite, of me they ſing and rime.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 But thee the while O Lord I pray, that when it pleaſeth thee:
                  For thy great truth thou wilt alway, ſēd down thine ayde to me.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Pluck thou my fete out of the myre, from drowning do me kepe
                  From ſuch as owe me wrath and ire, and from the waters depe.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Leaſt wt the waues I ſhould be drownd, & depth my ſoule deuoure:
                  And that the pit ſhould me confound, and ſhut me in her power.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 18 O Lord of hoſtes to me geue eare, as thou art good and kind,
                  And as thy mercy is moſt deare, Lord, haue me in thy mind.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 And do not from thy ſeruaunt hide, nor turne thy face away
                  I am oppreſt on euery ſide, in haſt geue eare I ſay.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 O Lord vnto my ſoule draw nye, the ſame with ayde repoſe
                  Becauſe of theyr great tyranny, acquite me from my foes.
               
               
                  The third part.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 That I abide rebuke and ſhame, thou knoweſt and thou canſt tel:
                  For thoſe that ſeke and worke the ſame, thou ſeeſt thē al ful wel.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Whē they with brags do breake my hart, I ſeke for helpe anone
                  But find no frends to eaſe my ſmart, to comfort me, not one.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 But in my meat they gaue me gal, to cruel for to thinke:
                  And gaue me in my thirſt withal, ſtrong vineger to drinke.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 Lord turne their table to a ſnare, to take themſelues therin
                  And when they thinke ful wel to fare, then trap them in the gin.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 And let their eyes be darke and blind, that they may nothing ſee:
                  Bow down theyr backe & do them bynd, in thraldome for to bee.
                  
                     
                        verse 26 Poure out thy wrath as hoate as fyre, that it on them may fal,
                  Let thy diſpleaſure in thine yre, take hold vpon them al.
                  As deſert drye theyr houſe diſgrace, their offring eke expel.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 That none therof poſſes their place, nor in their tents do dwel:
                  If thou dooſt ſtrike the man to tame, on him they lay ful ſore:
                  
                     
                        verse 28 And if that thou do woūde the ſame, they ſeke to hurt him more.
                  Then let them heape vp miſchief ſtil, ſith they are al peruert:
                  
                     
                        verse 29 That of thy fauour and good wil, they neuer haue no part.
                  And daſh them cleane, out of the booke, of life, of hope, of truſt:
                  That for their names they neuer looke, in number of the iuſt.
               
               
                  The fourth part.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 Though I, O Lord, with wo and grief, haue benful ſore oppreſt:
                  Thy helpe ſhal geue me ſuch relief, that al ſhal be redreſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 32 That I may geue thy name the prayſe, and ſhew it with a ſong:
                  I wil extol the ſame alwayes, with harty thankes among.
                  
                     
                        verse 33 Which is more pleaſant vnto thee (ſuch mind thy grace hath borne)
                  Thē either Oxe, or Calfe can be, that hath both hoofe and horne.
                  
                     
                        verse 34 when ſimple folke do this behold, it ſhal reioyce them ſure:
                  Al ye that ſeke the Lord, behold, your life for aye ſhal dure.
                  
                     
                        verse 35 For why? ye Lord of hoſts doth heare, the poore whē they cōplaine:
                  His priſuners are to him ful deare, he doth them not diſdaine.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 36 Wherfore the ſkie & earth below, the ſea with floud and ſtreame
                  His prayſe they ſhal declare and ſhow, with al that lyue in them.
                  
                     
                        verse 37 For ſure our God will Sion ſaue, and Iudaes cities build,
                  
                     
                        verse 38 Much folke poſſeſſion there ſhal haue, her ſtreates ſhal al be fild:
                  Her ſeruaunts ſede ſhal kepe the ſame, al ages out of mind:
                  
                     
                        verse 39 And there al they that loue his name, a dwelling place ſhal find.
               
            
            
               Deus in adiutorium. Pſalme .lxx.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶He prayeth to be right ſpedely deliuered, as in the .lx. Pſalms. Then he deſireth the ſhame of his enemies, and the ioyfull comfort of all thoſe that ſeke the Lord.
               
               Syng this as the. 72. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O God, to me take hede, of helpe I thee require
               (O Lord of hoſts) with haſt & ſpede,  help, help I thee deſire.
               
                  
                     verse 2 With ſhame confound them al, that ſeke my ſoule to ſpil,
               Rebuke thē backe with blame to fal, that thinke and wiſh me il.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Confound them that apply, and ſeke to worke me ſhame,
               And at my harme do laugh and cry, ſo, ſo there goeth the game.
               
                  
                     verse 4 But let them ioyfull be, in thee with ioy and welth,
               Which onely truſt and ſeke to thee, and to thy ſauing helth.
               
                  
                     verse 5 That they may ſay alwayes, in mirth and one accord,
               Al glory honor, laud and prayſe, be geuen to thee (O Lord.)
               
                  
                     verse 6 But I am weake and poore, come Lord thine ayde I lacke,
               Thou art my ſtay and help therfore, make ſpede & be not ſlacke.
            
            
               In te domine ſperaui. Pſalme .lxxi.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶He prayeth in fayth aſtabliſhed by the worde of the promiſe and confirmed by the worke of God, from hys youth, he deſireth nowe to be deliuered from the wicked and cruell man: (meanyng) hys ſonne Abſolon and his confederacy, and he promiſeth to be myndefull and thankefull for the ſame.
               
               Sing this as the. lxix pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  
                     MY Lord my God in al diſtres, my hope is whole in thee,
               Then let no ſhame my ſoule oppres,  nor once take hold on mee.
               
                  
                     verse 2 As thou art iuſt defend my Lord, and rid me out of dread
               Geue eare and to my ſuite accord, and ſend me helpe at nede.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Be thou my rocke to whom I may for ayde, al tymes reſort
               Thy promiſe is to helpe alway, thou art my fence and fort.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Saue me my God frō wicked men, & from theyr ſtrength & power,
               From folke vniuſt and eke from them, that cruelly deuour.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Thou art the ſtay wherin I truſt, thou Lord of hoſtes art he
               Yea from my youth I had a luſt, ſtil to depend on thee.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Thou haſt me kept euē from my birth, & I through thee was borne
               wherfore I wil thee prayſe with mirth, both euening and morne.
               
                  
                     verse 7 As to a monſter ſeldome ſene, much folke about me throng:
               But thou art now and ſtil haſt bene, my fence, and ayde ſo ſtrong.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 8 Wherfore my mouth no time ſhal lacke, thy glory and thy prayſe:
               and eke my tong ſhal not be ſlacke, to honor thee alwayſe.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Refuſe not me, O Lord, I ſay, when age my limmes doth take:
               and when my ſtrength doth waſt away, do not my ſoule forſake.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Among them ſelues my foes enquire, to take me through deceyt:
               and they agaynſt me do conſpire, that for my ſoule layd wayt.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Lay hand & take him now (they ſayd) for God from him is gone:
                  Diſpatch him quite, for to his ayde, I wis there commeth none.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Do not abſent thy ſelf away, (O Lord) when nede ſhalbe:
                  But that in time of grief thou may, in haſt geue helpe to me.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 With ſhame confound and ouerthrow, al thoſe that ſeke my life:
                  Oppres thē with rebukes alſo, that fayne would worke me ſtrife.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 But I wil patiently abyde, thy helpe in al aſſayes:
                  Stil more and more ech time & tide, I wil ſet forth thy prayſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 My mouth thy iuſtice ſhal record, that dayly helpe doth ſend:
                  But of thy benefites, O Lord, I know no compt nor end.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Yet wil I go and ſeke forth one, with thy good helpe (O God)
                  The ſauing health of thee alone, to ſhew and ſet abrod.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 For of my youth thou tookeſt the care, and dooſt inſtruct me ſtil:
                  Therfore thy wonders to declare, I haue great mind and wil.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 And as in youth from wanton rage, thou didſt me kepe and ſtay:
                  Forſake me not vnto mine age, and til my head be gray.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 That I thy ſtrēgth & might may ſhow, to them that now be here:
                  and that our ſede thy power may know, hereafter many a yere.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 O Lord thy iuſtice doth excede, thy doings al may ſee:
                  Thy workes are wonderful in dede, oh, who is lyke to thee?
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Thou madeſt me fele afflictions ſore, and yet thou didſt me ſaue:
                  yea thou didſt helpe and me reſtore, and tokeſt me from the graue.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 And thou mine honor dooſt encreaſe, my dignitie maintayne:
                  yea, thou dooſt make al grief to ceaſe, and comforts me agayne.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Therfore thy faithfulnes to prayſe, I wil both lute and ſyng:
                  My harpe ſhal ſound thy laud alwayes (O Iſraels holy kyng)
                  
                     
                        verse 24 My mouth wil ioy with pleaſant voyce, when I ſhal ſing to thee:
                  and eke my ſoule wil much reioyce, for thou haſt made me free.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 My tong thy vprightnes ſhal ſound, and ſpeake it dayly ſtil
                  For grief and ſhame do thē confound, that ſought to worke me ill.
               
            
            
               
               Deus iudicium tuum. Pſalme .lxxii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶He prayeth that the kingdome of God by Chriſte may come vnder the parſon of Salomon, vnder whom ſhall be ryghteouſnes, peace and felicitie, vnto whom all kynges, and all nations ſhall do homage, whoſe name and power ſhal indure for euer.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  LOrd geue thy iudgements to the king, therin 
                     〈♫〉
                   inſtruct hym wel: And with his ſonne that 
                     〈♫〉
                   Princely thyng, Lord let thy iuſtice dwel, that he may gouerne vp 
                     〈♫〉
                   ryghtly, and rule thy folke a ryght: and ſo defend through equitie, 
                     〈♫〉
                   the poore that haue no might.
               
                  
                     verse 3 And let the mountaines that are hye, vnto their folke geue peace,
               And eke let litle hils apply, in iuſtice to encreaſe.
               
                  
                     verse 4 That he may help the weake & poore, with aide, & make thē ſtrōg:
               And eke deſtroy for euermore, al thoſe that do them wrong.
               
                  
                     verse 5 And then from age to age ſhal they, regard and feare thy might:
               So long as ſunne doth ſhine by day, or els the moone by night
               
                  
                     verse 6 Lord make the king vnto the iuſt, like rain to fieldes new mowen
               And like to drops that lay the duſt, and freſh the land vnſowen.
               
                  
                     verse 7 The iuſt ſhal floriſh in his time, and al ſhalbe at peace
               Vntil the moone ſhal leaue to prime, waſt, chaūge, & to encreaſe.
               
                  
                     verse 8 He ſhalbe Lord of ſea and ſand, from ſhore to ſhore throughout:
               and from the flouds within the land, through al the earth about.
               
                  
                     verse 9 The people that in deſert dwel, ſhal knele to him ful thicke:
               and al his enmies that rebel, the earth and duſt ſhal licke.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Theyr Lordes of al the yles therby, great gifts to him ſhal bring
               The kings of Sabe and Arabie, geue many a coſtly thyng.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 11 Al kings ſhal ſeke with one accord, in his good grace to ſtand,
               And al the people of the world, ſhal ſerue him at his hand.
               
                  
                     verse 12 For he the nedy ſort doth ſaue, that vnto him do cal:
               And eke the ſimple folke that haue no helpe of man at al.
               
                  
                     verse 13 He taketh pity on the poore, that are with nede oppreſt,
               He doth preſerue them euermore, & bringes their ſoules to reſt.
               
                  
                     verse 14 He ſhal redeme theyr life from dread, frō fraud, frō wrōg, frō might
               And eke the bloud that they ſhal bleed, is precious in his ſight.
               
                  
                     verse 15 But he ſhal liue, and they ſhal bring, to him of Sabaes gold:
               He ſhalbe honored as a kyng, and dayly be extold.
               
                  
                     verse 16 The mighty mountaines of his land, of corne ſhal beare ſuch thrōg
               That it like Cedre trees ſhal ſtand, in Libanus ful long.
               
                  
                     verse 17 Theyr cities eke ful wel ſhal ſpede, the frutes therof ſhal pas,
               In plenty it ſhal far excede, and ſpring as grene as gras.
               
                  
                     verse 18 For euer they ſhal prayſe his name, while that the ſunne is light
               And thinke thē happy through y• ſame, al folk ſhal bles his might
               
                  
                     verse 19 Prayſe ye the Lord of hoſtes and ſing, to Iſraels God echone
               For he doth euery wondrous thing, yea he him ſelf alone.
               
                  
                     verse 20 And bleſſed be his holy name, al times eternally,
               That al the earth may prayſe the ſame, Amen, Amen ſay I.
            
            
               Quam bonus deus. Pſalme .lxxiii.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶The Prophet teacheth by his example, that neither the worldly proſperitie of the vngodly, nor yet the affliction of the good, ought to diſcourage Gods children: but rather ought to moue vs to conſider our fathers prouidence, & to cauſe vs to reuerence gods iudgements, for aſmuche as the wicked vaniſhe a waye lyke ſmoke, and the godly enter into lyfe euerlaſtyng, in hope wherof he reſigneth him ſelfe into Gods handes.
               
               Sing this as the .xliiii. pſal.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  HOw euer it be,  yet God is good, and kynd to Iſrael
               And to al ſuch as ſafely kepe, their conſciēce pure & wel▪
               
               
                  
                     verse 2 yet lyke a foole I almoſt ſlipt, my feete began to ſlyde
               And or I wiſt euē at a pinch, my ſteps a wrye gā glyde.
               
                  
                     verse 3 For when I ſaw ſuch fooliſh men, I grudged and did diſdayne
               That wicked mē al things ſhould haue, wtout turmoyle or payne
               
                  
                     verse 4 They neuer ſuffer panges nor grief, as if death ſhould them ſmite
               Theyr bodies are both ſtoute and ſtrong, and euer in good plyte.
               
                  
                     verse 5 And free from al aduerſity, when other men be ſhent,
               And with the reſt they take no part, of plague or puniſhment.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 6 Therfore preſumptio doth embrace, theyr neckes as doth a chayne
               And are euen wrapt as in a robe, with rapine and diſdayne.
               
                  
                     verse 7 They are ſo fed, that euen for fat, their eyes oft times out ſtart:
               And as for worldly goodes they haue, more thē cā wiſh their hart.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Theyr life is moſt licentious, boſtyng much of the wrong:
               Which they haue done to ſimple men, and euer pryde among.
               
                  
                     verse 9 The heauens and the liuing Lord, they ſpare not to blaſpheme:
               And prate they do on worldly things, no wight they do eſteme.
               
                  
                     verse 10 The people of god, oft times turn backe, to ſe their proſprous ſtate:
               And almoſt drinke the ſelf ſame cup, and folow the ſame rate.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 How can it be that God (ſay they) ſhould know and vnderſtand:
                  Theſe worldly things ſince wicked mē, be Lordes of ſea and land?
                  
                     
                        verse 12 For we may ſee how wicked men, in riches ſtil increaſe
                  Rewarded wel with worldly goodes, and lyue in reſt and peace.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Then why? do I from wickednes, my fantaſy refrayne
                  And waſh my hands with innocents, & clenſe my hart in vayne?
                  
                     
                        verse 14 And ſuffer ſcourges euery day, as ſubiect to al blame
                  And euery morning from my youth, ſuſteyne rebuke and ſhame?
                  
                     
                        verse 15 And I had almoſt ſayd as they, miſliking mine eſtate
                  But that I ſhould thy children iudge, as folk vnfortunate.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Then I bethought me how I might, this matter vnderſtand:
                  But yet the labor was to great, for me to take in hand.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Vntil the time I went into thy holy place and then
                  I vnderſtood right perfectly, the end of al theſe men.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 And namely how thou ſetteſt them, vpon a ſlippry place
                  And at thy pleaſure and thy wil, thou dooſt them al deface.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Then al men muſe at that ſtraunge ſight to ſee how ſodenly
                  They are deſtroyd, diſpatcht, conſumde, and dead ſo horribly.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Much lyke a dreame when one a wakth, ſo ſhal theyr welth decay:
                  Theyr famous names in al mens ſight, ſhal ebbe and pas away.
               
               
                  The third part.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Yet thus my hart was greued then, my mind was much oppreſt:
                  
                     
                        verse 22 So fond was I and ignoraunt, and in this poynt a beſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Yet neuertheles by my right hand, thou holdeſt me alwayes faſt
                  
                     
                        verse 24 And with thy counſel dooſt me guide, to glory at the laſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 What thing is there that I cā with, but thee in heauen aboue?
                  And in the earth there is nothing, like thee that I can loue.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 26 My fleſhe and eke my hart do fayle, but God doth fayle me neuer,
                  For of my hart God is the ſtrength, my portion eke for euer.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 And lo, al ſuch as thee forſake, thou ſhalt deſtroy echone,
                  And thoſe that truſt in any thing, ſauing in thee alone.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 Therfore wil I draw nere to God, and euer with him dwel
                  In God alone I put my truſt, his wonders wil I tel.
               
            
            
               Vt quid deus. Pſalme .lxxiiii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶The faithfull complayne of the deſtruction of the Church and true religion vnder the name of Sion and the altars deſtroyed: And truſting in the might & free mercyes of God, by his couenaunt they require helpe and ſuccor for the glory of Gods holy name, the ſaluation of hys poore afflicted ſeruauntes, and the confuſion of his proude enemies.
               
               Syng this as the .72. Pſalm.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  WHy art thou Lord ſo long from vs,  in al this daunger depe?
               Why doth thine anger kindle thus, at thine own paſtor ſhepe?
               
                  
                     verse 2 Lord cal thy people to thy thought, which haue ben thine ſo lōg
               The which yu haſt redemd & brought, frō bondage ſore & ſtrōg.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Haue mind therfore and thinke vpon, remember it ful wel
               Thy pleaſaūt place, thy moūt Siō, where thou waſt wōt to dwel.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Lift vp thy foote and come in haſt, and al thy foes deface,
               Which now at pleaſure rob and waſt, within thy holy place.
               
                  
                     verse 5 A mid thy congregations al, thine enemies roare, O God,
               They ſet as ſignes on euery wal, theyr banners ſplayd abrod.
               
                  
                     verse 6 As men with axes hew the trees, that on the hils do grow,
               So ſhine the bils and ſwords of theſe, within the temples now.
               
                  
                     verse 7 The ſelings ſawde, the carued bordes, the goodly grauen ſtones:
               With axes, hāmers, villes & ſwords, they beate thē down at once.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Thy places they conſume with flame, and eke in al this toyle,
               The houſe appointed to thy name, they race down to the ſoyle.
               
                  
                     verse 9 And thus they ſayd within theyr hart, diſpatch them out of hand,
               Then burnt they vp in euery part, Gods houſes through the lād.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Yet thou no ſigne of helpe dooſt ſend, our Prophets al are gone
               To tel when this our plage ſhould end, among vs there is none.
               
                  
                     verse 11 When wilt yu Lord once end this ſhame, & ceaſe thine enmies ſtrōg?
               Shal they alway blaſpheme thy name, & rayle on thee ſo long?
               
                  
                     verse 12 Why dooſt with draw thy hand a backe, and hide it in thy lappe,
               O plucke it out and be not ſlacke, to geue thy foes a rappe.
               
                  The ſeconde part.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 O God thou art my king and Lord, and euermore haſt bene,
                  Yea thy good grace throughout y• world, for our good help hath ſene.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 14 The ſeas that are ſo depe & dead, thy might did make them dry:
                  And thou didſt breake the ſerpents head, that be therin did dye.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 Yea thou didſt break y• heads ſo great, of whales that are ſo fel:
                  and gaueſt thē to the folkes to eate, that in the deſertes dwel.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 thou madeſt a ſpring wt ſtreames to riſe, frō rock both hard and hie
                  And eke thy hād doth make likewiſe, depe riuers to be dry.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Both day and eke the night are thine, by thee they were begun:
                  Thou ſetſt to ſerue vs with their ſhine, the light & eke the Sun.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Thou dooſt appoint the ends and coſtes, of al the earth about:
                  Both ſōmer heates, & winter froſts, thy hād hath found thē out
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Thinke on, O Lord, no tyme forget, thy foes that thee defame:
                  And how the foliſh folke are ſet, to rayle vpon thy name,
                  
                     
                        verse 20 O let no cruel beaſt deuour, thy Turtle that is true:
                  Forget not alwayes in thy power, the poore that much doo rue.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Regard thy couenant and behold, thy foes poſſes the land:
                  Al ſad & darke, for worne and old, our realm as now doth ſtand.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Let not the ſimple go away, with diſapointed ſhame:
                  But let the poore and nedy aye, geue prayſe vnto thy name.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Riſe Lord let be by thee maintaind, the cauſe yt is thyne owne:
                  Remember how that thou blaſphemd, art by the foliſh one.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 The voyce forget not of thy foes, for they preſuming hie:
                  Is more and more encreaſt of thoſe, that hate thee ſpitefully.
               
            
            
               Confitebimur tibi deus, Pſalme .lxxv.
               N
               
                  ¶The faithful do prayſe the name of the Lord, which ſhal come to iudge at y• tyme appointed, when the wycked ſhal be put to confuſion, and drinke the cup of his wrath, their prayer ſhal be abated, and the righteous ſhal be exalted to honor.
               
               Sing this as the .44. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  VNto thee God we wil geue thāks,  we wil geue thāks to thee:
               Fith thy name is ſo nere, declare thy wōdrous works wil we
               
                  
                     verse 2 I wil vprightly iudge when get, conuenient tyme I may:
               The earth is weak and al therin, but I her pillers ſtay.
               
                  
                     verse 3 I did to the mad people ſay, deale not ſo furiouſly:
               And vnto the vngodly ones, ſet not your hornes ſo hye.
               
                  
                     verse 4 I ſaid vnto them ſet not vp, your rayſed hornes on hye:
               And ſee that you do with ſtiffe neck, not ſpeake preſumptuouſly.
               
                  
                     verse 5 For neyther from the eaſtern part, nor from the weſtern ſyde:
               Nor from forſaken wildernes, protection doth procede.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 6 For why? the Lord our God he is, the righteous iudge alone:
               He putteth down the one, and ſets, another in the throne.
               
                  
                     verse 7 For why? a cup of mighty wine, is in the hand of God:
               And al the mighty wyne therin, himſelf doth powre abrode.
               
                  
                     verse 8 As for the lees and filthy dregs, that do remain of it.
               The wicked of the earth ſhal drink, and ſuck them euery whit.
               
                  
                     verse 9 But I wil talk of God I ſay, of Iacobs God therfore:
               And wil not ceaſe to celebrate, his prayſe for euermore.
               
                  
                     verse 10 In ſunder break the hornes of al, vngodly men wil I:
               But then the hornes of righteous men, ſhalbe exalted hye.
            
            
               Gloria patri.
               To father ſonne, and holy ghoſt, all glory be therfore:
               As in beginning was is now, and ſhall be euermore.
            
            
               In Iudea. pſalme .lxxvi.
               I. H.
               
                  This pſalme ſetteth forthe the power of God & care for the defence of his people in Ieruſalē, in y• deſtructiō of the army Senacherib, and exhorteth y• faithful to be thankful for the ſame.
               
               Syng this as the .69 Pſalm.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  TO al that now in Iury dwel,  the Lord is clerely known:
               His name is great in Iſrael, a people of his own.
               
                  
                     verse 2 At Salem, he his tents hath pight, to tary there a ſpace:
               In Sion eke he hath delight, to make his dwelling place.
               
                  
                     verse 3 And there he brake both ſtaffe & bow, the ſword, y• ſpeare, & ſhield:
               and brake the ray to ouerthrow, in battle on the field.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Thou art more worthy honour Lord, more might in thee doth lye:
               Then in the ſtrongeſt of the world, that rob on mountains hye.
               
                  
                     verse 5 But now y• proud ar ſpoild through thee, & thei are fallen on ſlepe:
               through mē of war no help can be, thēſelues they could not kepe.
               
                  
                     verse 6 At thy rebuke, O Iacobs God, when thou dooſt them reproue:
               as half in ſlepe their charets ſtode, no horſman once doth moue.
               
                  
                     verse 7 For thou art fearful Lord in dede, what man the corage hath:
               To bide thy ſight and doth not drede, whē yu art in thy wrath.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Whē yu dooſt make thy iudgemēts hard, frō heauē through y• ground
               Then al the earth ful ſore afraid, in ſilence ſhal be found.
               
                  
                     verse 9 And that when yu O God dooſt ſtand, in iudgemēt for to ſpeake:
               To ſaue thafflicted of the land, on earth that are ful weake.
               
                  
                     verse 10 The fury that in man doth raign, ſhal turne vnto thy prayſe:
               Hereafter Lord do thou reſtrain, their wrath & threates alwayes
               
                  
                  
                     verse 11 Make vowes & pay them to your God, ye folke that nigh hym be:
               Bring gifts al ye that dwel abrode, for dreadful ſure is he.
               
                  
                     verse 12 For he doth take both lyfe and might, from Princes great of birth:
               And ful of terrour is his ſight, to al the kings on earth.
            
            
               Voce mea ad dominum. Pſalme .lxxvii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶The prophet in the name of the church, reherſeth the greatnes of his affliction, and his greuous temptation, wherby he was driuen to this end to conſider his former conuerſation, and the continual courſe of gods workes in the preſeruation of his ſeruantes: and ſo he confirmeth his faith againſt theſe temptations.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  I With my voyce to God do cry, with hart 
                     〈♫〉
                   and harty cheare: my voyce to God I lift 
                     〈♫〉
                   on high, and he my ſute doth heare. In tyme of griefe I ſought to 
                     〈♫〉
                   God, by night no reſt I toke: but ſtretcht my hands to hym abrode, 
                     〈♫〉
                   my ſoule comfort forſoke.
               
                  
                     verse 3 When I to think on God entend, my trouble then is more:
               I ſpake, but could not make an end, my breath was ſtopt ſo ſore.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Thou holdſt mine eyes alwayes from reſt, that I alwayes awake:
               With feare am I ſo ſore oppreſt, my ſpeach doth me forſake.
               
                  
                     verse 5 The dayes of old in mind I caſt, and oft did thinke vpon:
               The tymes and ages that are paſt, ful many yeares agone.
               
                  
                     verse 6 By night my ſongs I cal to mind, once made thy prayſe to ſhew:
               And wt my hart much talk I find, my ſprits doth ſearch to know.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 7 Will God ſayd I, at once for al, caſt of his people thus?
               So that henceforth no tyme he ſhal, be frendly vnto vs.
               
                  
                     verse 8 What? is his goodnes cleane decayd, for euer and a day?
               Or is his promiſe now delayd, and doth his truth decay?
               
                  
                     verse 9 And wil the Lord our God forget, his mercies manifold?
               Or ſhal his wrath encreaſe ſo whote, his mercy to withhold?
               
                  
                     verse 10 At laſt I ſayd my weaknes is, the cauſe of this miſtruſt:
               Gods mighty hand can help al this, and change it when he luſt.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 I wil regard and think vpon, the working of the Lord:
                  Of al his wonders paſt and gone, I gladly wil record.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Yea, al his workes I wil declare, and what I dyd deuyſe:
                  To tel his factes I wil not ſpare, and eke his counſel wiſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Thy workes O Lord are al vpright, and holy abrode:
                  what one hath ſtrēgth to match y• might, of thee O Lord our God?
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Thou art a God that oft dooſt ſhew, thy wōders euery hower:
                  and ſo dooſt make the people know, thy vertue & thy power.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 And thine own folk thou didſt defēd, wt ſtrength & ſtretched arme:
                  The ſons of Iacob that diſcend, and Ioſephs ſede from harme.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 The waters Lord perceyued thee, the waters ſaw thee wel:
                  and they for feare aſide did flee, the depthes on tremblyng fel.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 The clouds that wer both thick & black, dyd rain ful plenteouſly:
                  The thunder in the ayre dyd crack, their ſhafts abrode dyd fly.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Thy thunder in the fyre was heard, the lightning from aboue:
                  With flaſhes great made men afraid, the earth did quake & moue.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Thy wayes within the ſea doth lye, thy path in waters depe:
                  Yet none can there thy ſteps eſpy, nor know thy pathe to kepe.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Thou leadeſt thy folke vpon the land, as ſhepe on euery ſyde:
                  through Moyſes & through Aarōs hād, yu didſt them ſafely guide
               
            
            
               Attendite populi. pſalme .lxxviii.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶He ſheweth howe God of his mercye choſe his churche of the poſteritie of Abraham, caſting in their teeth the ſtubburne rebellion of their fathers, that their children might not onely vnderſtand, that God of his free mercies made his couenaunt with their aunceſtors, but alſo ſeing them ſo malitious and peruerſe, might be aſhamed, and ſo turne wholy to God In this pſalm the holy ghoſt hath cōprehended as it were y• ſum of al gods benefits, to the intent the ignorāt & gros people might ſee in few words the effect of the whole hiſtories.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  ATtend my people to my law, and to my wordes incline:
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   My mouth ſhal ſpeake ſtraunge parables, and ſentences deuyne. 
                     〈♫〉
                   Which we our ſelues haue heard and learnd, euen of our fathers old, 
                     〈♫〉
                   and which for our inſtruction, our fathers haue vs told.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Becauſe we ſhould not kepe it cloſe, frō thē that ſhould come after:
               who ſhould gods power to their race praiſe, & al his workes of wōder
               
                  
                     verse 5 To Iacob he cōmaūdemēt gaue, how Iſrael ſhould liue:
               Willing our fathers ſhould the ſame, vnto their children geue.
               
                  
                     verse 6 That they and their poſteritie, that were not ſprong vp tho:
               Should haue the knowledge of the law, and teach their ſede alſo
               
                  
                     verse 7 That they may haue the better hope, in God that is aboue:
               And not forget to kepe his lawes, and his precepts in loue.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Not beyng as theyr fathers were, rebelling in gods ſight:
               and would not frame their wicked harts, to know their god aright.
               
                  
                     verse 9 How went the people of Ephraim, their neighbours for to ſpoyle:
               Shooting their darts the day of war, and yet they toke the foyle?
               
                  
                     verse 10 For why? they did not kepe with God, ye couenant that was made
               Nor yet would walke or lead their liues, according to hys trade.
               
                  
                     verse 11 But put into obliuion, his counſel and his wil:
               and al his workes moſt magnifique, which he declared ſtil.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 What wonders to our forefathers, did he himſelf diſcloſe:
                  In Egipt land within the field, that called is Thaneos.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 He did deuyde and cut the ſea, that they might paſſe at once:
                  And made the water ſtand as ſtil, as doth an heape of ſtones.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 He led them ſecret in a cloud, by day when it was bright:
                  And in the night when darke it was, with fire he gaue thē light.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 He brake the rockes in wildernes, and gaue the people drinke:
                  As plentiful as when the depes, do flow vp to the brinke.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 16 He drew out riuers out of rocks, that were both dry and hard:
                  Of ſuche a boundance that no floudes, to them might be compard,
                  
                     
                        verse 17 yet for all this, againſt the Lord, their ſinne they did increaſe.
                  And ſtyred him that is moſt hygh, to wrath in wildernes.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 They tēpted hym within their harts, lyke people of miſtruſt:
                  Requiring ſuch a kynd of meat, as ſerued to their luſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Saying with murmuration, in their vnfaythfulnes:
                  What? can this God prepare for vs, a feaſt in wildernes?
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Behold, he ſtrake the ſtony rock, and floudes forth with did flo:
                  But can he now geue to his folke, both biead and fleſſ alſo.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 When God heard this, he waxed wroth, with Iacob and his ſede:
                  So did his indignation, on Iſrael procede.
               
               
                  The third part
                  
                     
                        verse 22 22 Becauſe they did not faithfully, beleue and hope that he:
                  Could alwayes help and ſuccor them, in their neceſſitie.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Wherfore he did cōmaund y• clouds, forthwith they brake in ſūder:
                  
                     
                        verse 24 And raind down Manna for thē to eate, a foode of mickel wonder
                  
                     
                        verse 25 When earthly men with angels fode, were fed at their requeſt:
                  
                     
                        verse 26 He bad the eaſt wind blow away, and brought in the ſouth weſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 And rainde down fleſh, as thick as duſt, & foule, as thick as ſand:
                  
                     
                        verse 28 Which he did caſt amids the place where al the tents did ſtand.
                  
                     
                        verse 29 Then did they eate excedingly, and al men had their fils:
                  Yet more and more they did deſire, to ſerue their luſts and wils.
                  
                     
                        verse 30 But as the meat was in their mouthes, his wrath vpon them fel.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 And ſlew the floure of al their youth, and choyſe of Iſrael.
                  
                     
                        verse 32 Yet fel they to theyr wonted ſinne, and ſtil they did him greue:
                  For al the wonders that he wrought, they would him not beleue
                  
                     
                        verse 33 Their dayes therfore he ſhortened, and made their honor vayne:
                  Their yeres did waſt and pas away, with terrours & with payn
                  
                     
                        verse 34 But euer when he plaged thē, they ſought hym by and by:
                  
                     
                        verse 35 Remēbring thē he was their ſtrēgth, their help & God moſt hy.
                  
                     
                        verse 36 Though in their mouthes they did but gloſe, & flatter wt the Lord:
                  and with their tongs & in their harts, diſſembled euery word.
               
               
                  The fourth part.
                  
                     
                        verse 37 For why? their harts wer nothyng bēt, to hym nor to hys trade:
                  Nor yet to kepe or to perform, the couenant that was made.
                  
                     
                        verse 38 Yet was he ſtil ſo merciful, when they deſerued to dye:
                  That he forgaue them their miſdedes, and would not thē deſtroy
                  
                      Yea many a time he turned his wrath, and did himſelf aduiſe:
                  and would not ſuffer al his whole diſpleaſure to ariſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 39 Conſidering they were but fleſh, and euen as a wind:
                  that paſſeth away and cannot wel, returne by his own kind.
                  
                     
                        verse 40 How oftentimes in wildernes, did they their Lord prouoke?
                  How did they moue & ſtir theyr Lord, to plage thē with his ſtroke?
                  
                     
                        verse 41 Yet dyd they turn agayn to ſinne, and tempted God eftſone:
                  preſcribing to the holy Lord, what things they would haue done
                  
                     
                        verse 42 Not thinking of his hand & power, nor of the day when he:
                  Deliuered them out of the bonds, of the fierce enemy.
                  
                     
                        verse 43 Nor how he wrought his miracles, as they themſelues beheld:
                  In Egipt and the wonder that, he dyd in Zoan field.
                  
                     
                        verse 44 Nor how he turned by his power, their waters into bloud:
                  that no man might receyue his drink, at ryuer nor at floud.
                  
                     
                        verse 45 Nor how he ſent thē ſwarms of flies, which did them ſore annoy:
                  and fild their coūtries ful of frogs, which ſhuld their Lord deſtroy
               
               
                  The fyft part
                  
                     
                        verse 46 46 Nor how he did commit their fruites, vnto the Caterpiller,
                  and al the labour of their hands, he gaue to the graſhopper.
                  
                     
                        verse 47 With hailſtones he deſtroid their vines, ſo that they were al loſt:
                  and not ſo much as wild fig trees, but he conſumde with froſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 48 And yet with hailſtones once again, the Lord their cattle ſmote:
                  and al their flocks and heards like wiſe, wt thunderbolts ful hote.
                  
                     
                        verse 49 He caſt vpon them in his ire, and in his fury ſtrong:
                  Diſpleaſure, wrath, and euil ſpirites, to trouble them among.
                  
                     
                        verse 50 Then to his wrath he made away, and ſpared not the leaſt:
                  But gaue vnto the peſtilence, the man and eke the beaſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 51 He ſtrake alſo the firſt borne al, that vp in Egipt came:
                  and al the chief of men and beaſts, within the tents of Ham.
                  
                     
                        verse 52 But as for al his own deare folke, he did preſerue and kepe:
                  and caried them through wildernes, euen like a flock of ſhepe.
                  
                     
                        verse 53 Without al feare both ſafe and ſound, he brought them out of thral
                  Where as their foes with rage of ſea, were ouerwhelmed al.
                  
                     
                        verse 54 And brought thē out into the coſtes, of his own holy land:
                  Euen to the mount which he had got, by his ſtrong arme & hand.
                  
                     
                        verse 55 And there caſt out the Heathen folke, and did their land deuyde.
                  and in the tents he ſet their tribes, of Iſrael to abyde.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 56 Yet for al this their god moſt high, they ſtirred and tempted ſtil:
                  And would not kepe his teſtament, nor yet obey his wil.
                  
                     
                        verse 57 But as their fathers turned backe, euen ſo they went aſtray:
                  Much like a bow that would not bend, but ſlip & ſtart away.
               
               
                  The ſyxt part.
                  
                     
                        verse 58 And greued him with their hil altars, with offrings & wyth fyre:
                  And with theyr Idols vehemently, prouoked him to ire.
                  
                     
                        verse 59 Therwith his wrath began agayne, to kindle in his breſt:
                  The naughtines of Iſrael, he did ſo much deteſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 60 Then he forſoke the tabernacle, of Silo where he was:
                  Right conuerſant with earthly mē, euen as his dwellyng place.
                  
                     
                        verse 61 Then ſuffred he his might and power, in bōdage for to ſtand:
                  And gaue the honor of his Arke, into his enmies hand.
                  
                     
                        verse 62 And did commit them to the ſword, wroth with his heritage:
                  
                     
                        verse 63 The yong men were deuourd with fire, maydes had no mariage.
                  
                     
                        verse 64 And with the ſword the prieſts alſo, dyd periſh euery chone
                  And not a widow left a liue, their death for to bemone.
                  
                     
                        verse 65 And then the Lord began to wake, like one that ſlept a tyme:
                  Or lyke a valiant man of war, refreſhed after wyne.
                  
                     
                        verse 66 With Emerods in the hinder parts, he ſtrake his enmies al:
                  and put them then vnto a ſhame, that was perpetual.
                  
                     
                        verse 67 Then he the tent and Tabernacle, of Ioſeph did refuſe:
                  as for the trybe of Ephraim, he would in no wiſe chuſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 68 But choſe the tribe of Iehuda, where as they thought to dwel:
                  Euen the noble mount Sion, which he did loue ſo wel.
                  
                     
                        verse 69 Where as he did his temple build, both ſumptuouſly and ſure:
                  Like as the earth which he hath made, for euer to endure.
                  
                     
                        verse 70 Then choſe he Dauid him to ſerue, his people for to kepe:
                  Which he toke vp and brought away, euē from the folds of ſhepe.
                  
                     
                        verse 71 As he did follow the ewes with yong, the Lord did hym aduaunce
                  To fede his people of Iſrael, and his inheritaunce.
                  
                     
                        verse 72 Thus Dauid with a faithful hart, his flock and charge did fede:
                  and prudently with al his power, did gouerne them in dede.
               
            
            
               Deus venerunt gentes. Pſalme .lxxix.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶The Iſraelites complaine to God for the greate calamitie and oppreſſion that they ſuffred when Antiochus deſtroyed their temple and city Ieruſalem, deſiring gods ayd againſt his raging tyranny, leaſt gods name and religion ſhould be contemned among the Heathen, which ſhould ſee them thus forſaken and periſh.
               
               Syng this as the .77. Pſalme.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O Lord the Gentils do inuade,  thyne heritage to ſpoyle:
               Ieruſalem an heape is made, thy temple they defoyle.
               
                  
                     verse 2 The bodies of thy ſaints moſt dere, abrode to birdes thei caſt
               the fleſh of thē that do thee feare, the beaſts deuour and waſt
               
                  
                     verse 3 Their bloud throughout Ieruſalem, as water ſpilt they haue,
               So that there is not one of them, to lay their dead in graue.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Thus are we made a laughing ſtocke, almoſt the world throughout
               the enmies at vs ieſt and mocke, which dwel our coaſtes about.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Wilt thou O Lord thus in thine ire, againſt vs euer fume?
               and ſhew thy wrath as hote as fyre, thy folke for to conſume?
               
                  
                     verse 6 Vpon thoſe people poure the ſame, which did thee neuer know:
               al realmes which cal not on thy name, conſume and ouerthrow.
               
                  
                     verse 7 For they haue got the vpper hand, and Iacobs ſede deſtroyd:
               His habitation and hys land, they haue left waſt and voyd.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Beare not in mind our former faults, with ſpede ſome pity ſhew:
               and ayd vs Lord in al aſſaultes, for we are weake and low.
               
                  
                     verse 9 O God that geueſt al health and grace, on vs declare the ſame:
               Wey not our works, our ſinnes deface, for honor of thy name
               
                  
                     verse 10 Why ſhal the wicked ſtil alway, to vs as people dūme:
               In thy reproch reioyce and ſay, where is their God become?
               Require (O Lord) as thou ſeeſt good, before our eyes in ſight:
               Of al theſe folk thy ſeruants bloud, which they ſpilt in deſpight.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Receyue into thy ſight in haſt, the clamours, grief and wrong:
               Of ſuch as are in priſon caſt, ſuſtayning irons ſtrong.
               Thy force and ſtrength to celebrate, Lord ſet them out of band:
               Which vnto death are deſtinate, and in their enmies hand.
               
                  
                     verse 12 The nations which haue ben ſo bold, as to blaſpheme thy name:
               Into their laps with ſeuen fold, repay agayne the ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 13 So we thy folke thy paſture ſheepe, wil prayſe thee euermore:
               and teach al ages for to kepe, for thee lyke prayſe in ſtore.
            
            
               Qui regis Iſrael. pſalme .lxxx.
               I. H
               
                  A lamentable prayer to God to helpe the miſeries of the church, deſiring him to cōſider their firſt eſtate, when his fauour ſhined towardes them, to the entent that he myght finiſh that worke that he had begon.
               
               Syng this as the .67. pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THou herde that Iſrael dooſt kepe,  geue eare and take good hede
               which leadeſt Ioſeph like a ſhepe, & dooſt him watch & fede.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 2 Thou Lord I ſay, whoſe ſeat is ſet, on Cherubins ſo bright:
               Shew forth thy ſelf & do not let, ſend down thy beames of light
               
                  
                     verse 3 Before Ephraim and Beniamin, Manaſſes eke likewiſe:
               To ſhew thy power do thou begin, come help vs Lord aryſe.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Direct our harts vnto thy grace, conuert vs Lord to thee:
               Shew vs the brightnes of thy face, and then ful ſafe are wee.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Lord God of hoſtes of Iſrael, how long wilt thou I ſay:
               Againſt thy folk in anger ſwel, and wilt not heare them pray?
               
                  
                     verse 6 Thou dooſt thē fede wt ſorrowes depe, their bread wt teares thei eat
               And drinke the teares that they do wepe, in meaſure ful & great.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Thou haſt vs made a very ſtrife, to thoſe that dwel about:
               And that our foes do loue of life, they laugh and ieſt it out.
               
                  
                     verse 8 O take vs lord vnto thy grace, conuert our mindes to thee:
               Shew forth to vs thy ioyful face, and we ful ſafe ſhal bee.
               
                  
                     verse 9 From Egipt where it grew not wel, thou broughtſt a vyne ful dere
               The Heathē folke thou diddeſt expel, & then didſt plant it here.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Thou didſt prepare for it a place, and ſet her rootes ful faſt:
               That it did grow and ſpring apace, and fil the land at laſt.
               
                  
                     verse 11 The hils were couered round about, with ſhade that from it came:
               And eke the Ceders, high and ſtout, with braunches of the ſame
               
                  
                     verse 12 Why thē didſt thou her wal deſtroy? her hedge pluckt vp thou haſt:
               That al the folke that paſſe therby, the vyne may ſpoyle and waſt
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 The Bore out of the wood ſo wyld, doth dig and route it out:
                  The furious beaſts out of the field, deuour it al about.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 O Lord of hoſtes returne agayn, from heauen looke betyme:
                  Behold, and with thy help ſuſtayn, this poore vineyard of thine.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 Thy plant I ſay, thine Iſrael, whom thy right hand hath ſet:
                  The ſame which thou didſt loue ſo wel, O Lord do not forget.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 They lop and cut it down apace, they burn it eke with fyre:
                  And through the frowning of thy face, we periſh in thyne ire.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Let thy right hand be with thē now, whom thou haſt kept ſo long:
                  and with ye ſonne of man whom thou, to thee haſt made ſo ſtrong.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 And ſo when thou haſt ſet vs free, and ſaued vs from ſhame:
                  Then wil we neuer fal from thee, but cal vpon thy name.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 19 O lord of hoſtes through thy good grace, cōuert vs vnto thee:
                  Behold vs with a pleaſant face, and then ful ſafe are wee.
               
            
            
               Exultate Deo. pſalme .lxxxi.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶An exhortation to prayſe God both in hart and voyce for his benefites, and to worſhip hym onely: God condemneth their ingratitude, and ſheweth what great benefits they haue loſt thorow their owne malice.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  BE light & glad in God reioyce, which is our 
                     〈♫〉
                   ſtrēgth and ſtay: be ioyful & lift vp your voyce 
                     〈♫〉
                   to Iacobs God I ſay. Prepare your inſtrumēts moſt mete, ſome ioy- 
                     〈♫〉
                   ful Pſalme to ſyng, ſtrike vp with harpe and lute ſo ſwete, on euery 
                     〈♫〉
                   pleaſaunt ſtryng.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Blow as it were in the new moone, with trumpets of the beſt:
               As it is vſed to be done, at any ſolemne feaſt.
               
                  
                     verse 4 For this is vnto Iſrael, a ſtatute and a trade:
               A law that muſt be kept ful wel, which Iacobs god hath made.
               
                  
                     verse 5 This clauſe with Ioſeph was decreed, when he from Egipt came:
               That as a witnes al his ſede, ſhould ſtil obſerue the ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Whē God I ſay had ſo prepard, to bring him from that land:
               where as the ſpeach which he had heard, he did not vnderſtand.
               
                  
                     verse 7 I from his ſhoulders toke ſayth he, the burden cleane away:
               And from ye furnace quit him free, from burning brick of clay.
               
                  
                     verse 8 When thou in grief didſt cry and cal, I holpe thee by and by:
               And I did aunſwer thee withal, in thunder ſecretly.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 9 Yea at the waters of diſcord, I did thee tempt and proue:
               whereas the goodnes of the Lord, with muttering yu didſt moue:
               
                  
                     verse 10 Heare O my folke O Iſrael, and I aſſure it thee:
               Regard & marke my words ful wel, if thou wilt cleaue to mee.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Thou ſhalt no God in thee reſerue, of any land abrode:
                  Nor in no wiſe to bow or ſerue, a ſtraunge and forrayne God.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 I am the Lord thy God, and I from Egipt ſet thee free.
                  Then aſke of me aboundantly, and I wil geue it thee.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 And yet my people would not heare, my voyce when that I ſpake:
                  Nor Iſrael would not obey, but did me quite forſake.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Then did I leaue them to their wil, in hardnes of their hart:
                  To walke in their own coūſels ſtil, thēſelues they might peruert.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 O that my people would haue hard, the wordes that I did ſay:
                  And eke that Iſrael would regard, to walke within my way.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 How ſone would I cōfoūd their foes, & bring thē down fullow:
                  And turne my hand vpon al thoſe, that would them ouerthrow.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 And they that at the Lord do rage, as ſlaues ſhould ſeke him til:
                  But of his folke the time and age, ſhould floriſh euer ſtil:
                  
                     
                        verse 18 I would haue ſed them with the crop, and fineſt of the wheat:
                  and make the rock with hony drop, that they their fils ſhould eat
               
            
            
               Deus ſtetit in Synagoga Pſalme .lxxxii.
               I. H.
               
                  The prophet declaring god to be preſent amongſt the iudges & maieſtrates, reproueth their parciality and vnrighteouſnes, and exhorteth them to do iuſtice but ſeing no amendment, be deſireth god to vndertake the matter, and execute iuſtice himſelfe.
               
               Sing this as the .77 Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  AMid the preaſe wt men of might,  the Lord himſelf did ſtand:
               To plead the cauſe of truth & right, with iudges of y• land.
               
                  
                     verse 2 How long ſaid he wil you procede, falſ iudgemēt to award?
               and haue reſpect for loue of mede, the wicked to regard?
               
                  
                     verse 3 Wheras of due ye ſhould defend, the fatherles and weake:
               and when the poore man doth contend, in iudgemēt iuſtly ſpeake
               
                  
                     verse 4 If ye he wiſe defend the cauſe, of poore men in their right:
               And rid the nedy from the clawes, of tyrants force and might.
               
                  
                     verse 5 But nothing wil they know or learne, in vayne to them I talke:
               They wil not ſee or ought diſcerne, but ſtil in darknes walke.
               For lo, euē now the tyme is come, that al things fal to nought:
               And likewiſe lawes both al & ſome, for gayn ar ſold and bought.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 6 I had decred it in my ſyght, as Gods to take you al:
               and children to the moſt of might, for loue I did you cal.
               
                  
                     verse 7 But not withſtandyng ye ſhal dye, as men, and ſo decay:
               O tyraunts, I ſhal you deſtroy, and pluck you quyte away.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Vp Lord & let thy ſtrength be knowne, & iudge the world wt might:
               For why? al nations are thine own, to take them as thy right.
            
            
               Deus quis ſimilis. Pſalme .lxxxiii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶The people of Iſraell pray vnto the Lord to deliuer them from their enemies, both at home and farre of, whiche imagined nothing but their deſtruction: and they deſyre that all ſuch wicked people may, accordyng as God was accuſtomed, be ſtricken with the ſtormye tempeſtes of Gods wrath, that they may know that the Lord is moſt hye vpon the earth.
               
               Syng this as the .77. Pſalm.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  DO not,  O God, refrayne thy toung, in ſilence do not ſtay:
               Withhold not Lord thy ſelf ſo lōg, nor make no more delay.
               
                  
                     verse 2 For why? behold thy foes and ſee, how they do rage & cry,
               And thoſe y• beare an hate to the: hold vp their heads on hie.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Againſt thy folke they vſe diſceate, and craftly they enquire:
               For thine elect to lye in wayt, theyr councell doth conſpire
               
                  
                     verse 4 Come to ſayd they let vs expel, and plucke theſe folke away
               So that the name of Iſrael, may vtterly decay.
               
                  
                     verse 5 They al conſpire within theyr hart, how they may thee withſtand
               agaynſt the Lord to take a part, they are in league and band.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The tents of al the Edomites, the Iſmalites alſo
               The Hagarens and Moabites, with diuers othermore.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Gebal with Ammon, and like wiſe, doth Amalec conſpire:
               The Philiſtines againſt thee riſe, with them that dwel at Tyre.
               
                  
                     verse 8 And Aſſur eke is wel apayd, with them in league to be:
               And doth become a fence and ayde, to Lots poſterity.
               
                  
                     verse 9 As thou diddeſt to the Madianites, ſo ſerue them Lord echeone:
               as to Cicer and to Iabin, beſide the broke Kiſon.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Whom thou in Endor didſt deſtroy, & waſt thē through thy might
               That they like dung on earth did lye, and that in open ſight.
               
                  The ſeconde part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Make thē now & theyr Lords appeare, like Zeb and Oreb then
                  as Zebah and Zalmana were, the kinges of Madian.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Which ſayd let vs throughout the lād, in al the coſts abrod:
                  Poſſes and take into our hand, the fayre houſes of God.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Tourne thē, O God, wt ſtormes as faſt, as wheles that haue no ſtay
                  Or like as chaffe which men do caſt, with windes to fle away.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 14 Like as the fire, with rage and fume, the mighty foreſt ſpilles,
                  and as the flame doth quite conſume, the moūtaynes & the hilles:
                  
                     
                        verse 15 So let the tempeſt of thy wrath, vpon theyr neckes be layd:
                  and of thy ſtormy wind & ſhower, Lord make them al afrayd.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Lord bring them al I thee deſire, to ſuch rebuke and ſhame:
                  That it may cauſe them to enquire, and learne to ſeke thy name.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 And let them euermore dayly, to ſhame and ſclander fal
                  and in rebuke and obliquie, to periſh eke with al.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 That they may know and fele ful wel, that thou art called Lord:
                  and that alone thou dooſt excel, & raigne throughout the world.
               
            
            
               Quam dilecta tabernacula. Pſalme .lxxxiiii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶Dauid driuen forth of his country deſireth moſt ardētly to come againe to the Tabernacle of the Lord, and the aſſemble of the ſaintes, to prayſe God: pronouncyng them bleſſed that may ſo do. Then he prayſeth the courage of the people, that paſſe thorowe the wilderneſſe to aſſemble them ſelues in Sion. Finally with prayſe of this matter and confidence of gods goodnes be endeth the Pſalme.
               
               Sing this as the .67 Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  HOw pleaſaūt is thy dwelling place,  O Lord of hoſtes to me
               The Tabernacles of thy grace, how pleaſāt Lord they be.
               
                  
                     verse 2 My ſoule doth long ful ſore to go, into thy courts abrod
               My hart doth luſt, my fleſh alſo, in thee the liuing God.
               
                  
                     verse 3 The ſparowes find a roume to reſt, and ſaue them ſelues frō wrong
               And eke the ſwalow hath a neſt, wherin to kepe her yong.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Theſe birdes ful nigh thine alter may, haue place to ſit and ſing
               O Lord of hoſtes thou art I ſay, my God and eke my kyng.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Oh they be bleſſed that may dwel, within thy houſe alwayſe
               For they al times thy factes do tel, and euer geue thee prayſe.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Yea happy ſure like wiſe are they, whoſe ſtay and ſtrēgth thou art
               which to thy houſe do mind the way, and ſeke it in theyr hart.
               
                  
                     verse 7 As they go through the vale of teares, they dig vp fountaines ſtil:
               That as a ſpring it al appeares, and thou theyr pits dooſt fil.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Frō ſtrēgth to ſtrēgth they walke ful faſt, no fayntnes there ſhalbe
               and ſo the God of Gods at laſt, in Sion they do ſe.
               
                  
                     verse 9 O Lord of hoſtes, to me geue hede, and heare when I do pray
               and let it through thine eares procede, O Iacobs God I ſay.
               
                  
                     verse 10 O Lord our ſhield of thy good grace, regard and ſo draw nere
               Regard I ſay, behold the face, of thine annoynted dere.
               
                  
                     verse 11 For why? within thy courts one day, is better to abide:
               Then other where to kepe or ſtay, a thouſand dayes beſide.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 12 Much rather would I kepe a dore, within the houſe of God
               Then in the tents of wickednes, to ſettle mine abode.
               
                  
                     verse 13 For God the Lord, light and defence, wil grace and worſhip gyue:
               and no good thing ſhal he withold, from them that purely lyue.
               
                  
                     verse 14 O Lord of hoſtes, that man is bleſt, and happy ſure is hee,
               That is perſuaded in his breſt, to truſt al tymes in thee.
            
            
               Benedixiſti domine. Pſalme .lxxxv.
               I H.
               
                  ¶Becauſe God withdrew not hys rods from his Churche after the retorne from Babilon, firſt they put him in minde of theyr deliueraunce, to thentent that he ſhould not leaue the worke of his grace vnperfite: nexte they complayn of theyr long affliction: And thirdly they reioyce in hope of felicity promiſed, for their deliueraūce was a figure of Chriſts kyngdom, vnder whiche ſhould be perfite felicity.
               
               Sing this as the .81. pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THou haſt ben mercyful in dede,  O Lord vnto thy land,
               For thou reſtoredſt Iacobs ſede, frō thraldome out of band.
               
                  
                     verse 2 The wicked wayes that they wer in, yu didſt thē clean remit.
               and thou didſt hide thy peoples ſinne, ful cloſe thou coueredſt it.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Thine anger eke thou didſt aſſwage, that al thy wrath was gone,
               and ſo didſt tourne thee from thy rage, with them to be at one.
               
                  
                     verse 4 O God our health do now conuert, thy people vnto thee,
               Put al thy wrath from vs apart, and angry ceaſe to be.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Why? ſhal thine anger neuer end, but ſtil procede on vs,
               and ſhal thy wrath it ſelf extend, vpon al ages thus?
               
                  
                     verse 6 Wilt thou not rather tourne therfore, and quicken vs that we:
               and al thy folke may euermore, be glad and ioy in thee?
               
                  
                     verse 7 O Lord on vs do thou declare, thy goodnes to our welth
               Shew forth to vs and do not ſpare, thyne ayde & ſauing helth.
               
                  
                     verse 8 I wil harke, what God ſayth, for he ſpeaketh to his people peace
               and to his ſaints, that neuer they returne to foliſhnes.
               
                  
                     verse 9 For why? his health is ſtil at hand, to ſuch as him do feare:
               wherby great glory in our land, ſhal dwel, and floriſh there.
               
                  
                     verse 10 For truth and mercy there ſhal mete, in one to take their place:
               and peace alſo, iuſtice kis with grete, and there they ſhal imbrace.
               
                  
                     verse 11 As truth from earth ſhal ſpring a pace, and floriſh pleaſauntly:
               So righteouſnes ſhal ſhew her face, and looke from heauen hye
               
                  
                     verse 12 Yea, God him ſelfe ſhal take in hand, to geue vs ech good thing:
               and through y• coſtes of al our lād, the earth her frutes ſhal bring.
               
                  
                     verse 13 Before his face ſhal iuſtice go, much like a guide or ſtay:
               He ſhal direct his ſteps alſo, and kepe them in the way.
            
            
               
               Inclina domine aurem. Pſalme .lxxxvi.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶Dauid ſore afflicted and forſaken of all, prayeth feruently for deliueraunce: ſometymes rebearſing his miſeries, ſometymes the mercyes receyued, deſiryng alſo to be inſtructed of the Lord, that he may feare hym alſo and glorifie his name. He complayneth alſo of hys aduerſaries, and requireth to be deliuered from them.
               
               Syng this as the .81. Pſalm.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  LOrd bow thine eare to my requeſt,  and heare me by and by:
               With greuous payne & grief oppreſt, ful poore, & weake am I.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Preſerue my ſoule, becauſe my way, and doings holy bee.
               and ſaue thy ſeruaunt, O my Lord, that puts his truſt in thee.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Thy mercy Lord on me expreſſe, defend me eke with al:
               For through the day I do not ceaſe, on thee to cry and cal.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Cōfort (O Lord) thy ſeruaūts ſoule, that now with payne is pinde:
               For vnto thee Lord I extol, and lift my ſoule and mynde.
               
                  
                     verse 5 For thou art good and bountiful, thy gifts of grace are free:
               And eke thy mercy plentiful, to al that cal on thee.
               
                  
                     verse 6 O Lord likewiſe when I do pray, regard and geue an eare:
               Marke wel the wordes that I do ſay, and al my prayers heare.
               
                  
                     verse 7 In time when trouble doth me moue, to thee I do complayne:
               For why? I know and wel do proue, thou aunſwereſt me againe.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Among the Gods, O Lord, is none, with thee to be comparde:
               and none can do as thou alone, the like hath not bene hard.
               
                  
                     verse 9 The gentils and the people al, which thou didſt make and frame,
               Before thy face on knees wil fal, and glorify thy name.
               
                  
                     verse 10 For why? thou art ſo much of might, al power is thine owne:
               Thou workeſt wonders ſtil in ſight, for thou art God alone.
               
                  
                     verse 11 O teach me Lord thy way, and I ſhal in thy truth procede,
               O ioyne my hart to thee ſo nye, that it thy name may dread.
               
                  
                     verse 12 To thee my God wil I geue praiſe, with al my hart O Lord,
               and glorify thy name alwayes, for euer through the world.
               
                  
                     verse 13 For why? thy mercy ſhewed to me, is great and doth excel,
               Thou ſetſt my ſoule at liberty, out of the lower hel.
               
                  
                     verse 14 O Lord the proud agaynſt me riſe, and heapes of men of might,
               They ſeke my ſoule, and in no wiſe, wil haue thee in theyr ſight.
               
                  
                     verse 15 Thou Lord art merciful and meke, ful ſlacke and ſlow to wrath,
               Thy goodnes is ful great, and eke, thy truth no meaſure hath.
               
                  
                     verse 16 O tourne me Lord and mercy graunt, thy ſtrength to me apply,
               O helpe & ſaue thyne own ſeruaunt, thy handmayds ſonne am I.
               
                  
                     verse 17 On me ſome ſigne of fauour ſhew, that al my foes may ſee,
               And be aſhamde becauſe Lord thou dooſt helpe and comfort mee.
            
            
               
               Fundamenta eius. Pſalme .lxxxvii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶The holy ghoſt promiſeth that the condition of the Church, whiche was a miſery after the captiuity of Babilon, ſhould be reſtored to great excellēcy, ſo that there ſhould be nothing more comfortable, then to be nombred among the members therof.
               
               Sing this as the .81. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THat city ſhal ful wel endure,  her ground worke ſtil doth ſtay
               Vpon the holy hils ful ſure, it can no time time decay.
               
                  
                     verse 2 God loues the gates of Siō beſt, his grace doth there abide
               He loued them more then al the reſt, of Iacobs tents beſide.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Ful glorious things reported be, in Sion and abrod,
               Great things I ſay, are ſayd of thee, thou city of our God.
               
                  
                     verse 4 On Rahab I wil caſt an eye, and beare in mind the ſame,
               and Babilon ſhal eke apply, and learne to know my name.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Loe Paleſtine and Tyre alſo, with Ethiope like wiſe,
               a people old ful long ago, were borne and there did riſe.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Of Sion they ſhal ſay abrod, that diuers men of fame,
               Haue there ſprong vp, & the hye God, hath founded faſt the ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 7 In their recordes, to them it ſhal, through Gods deuiſe appere:
               Of ſyon that the chief of al, had his beginning there.
               
                  
                     verse 8 The trumpetters with ſuch as ſing, therin great plenty bee:
               My fountaynes and my pleaſaunt ſprings, are compaſt al in thee.
            
            
               Domine deus ſalutis Pſalme .lxxxviii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶A grieuous complaint of the faithful, ſore afflicted by ſicknes, perſecutiō & aduerſitie: being as it were left of God without any conſolation: yet he calleth on God by fayth, and ſtriueth againſt deſperation, complainyng him ſelfe to be forſaken of al yearthly helpe.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  LOrd God of health the hope & ſtay thou art alone 
                     〈♫〉
                   to me, I cal & cry throughout the day, and al the 
                     〈♫〉
                   night to thee. O let my prayers ſone aſcēd, vnto thy ſight on high, 
                     〈♫〉
                   encline thyne eare (O Lord entend) and herken to my cry.
               
               
                  
                     verse 3 For why? my ſoule with wo is fild, and doth in trouble dwel:
               My lyfe and breath almoſt doth yeld, and draweth nye to hel.
               
                  
                     verse 4 I am eſteemd as one of them, that in the pit do fal:
               And made as one, among thoſe men, that haue no ſtrength at al.
               
                  
                     verse 5 As one among the dead, and free, from things that heare remayne,
               It were more eaſy for me to be, with them the which are ſlayne.
               
                  
                     verse 6 As thoſe that lye in graue, I ſay, whom thou haſt cleane forgot,
               The which the hand hath cut away, and thou regardſt thē not.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Yea lyke to one, ſhut vp ful ſure, within the lower pit:
               In places darke, and al obſcure, and in the depth of it.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Thine anger, and thy wrath likewiſe, ful ſore on me doth lye:
               And al thy ſtormes agaynſt me ryſe, my ſoule to vexe and try.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Thou putteſt my frends, far of from me, & makſt them hate me ſore:
               I am ſhut vp in priſon faſt, and can come forth no more.
               
                  
                     verse 10 My ſight doth faile through grief and wo, I cal to thee (O God)
               Throughout the day, my handes alſo, to thee I ſtretch abrod.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Dooſt thou vnto the dead declare, thy wondrous workes of fame?
               Shal dead to life agayne repayre, and prayſe thee for the ſame?
               
                  
                     verse 12 Or ſhal thy louing kindnes, Lord, be preached in the graue?
               Or ſhal with them that are deſtroyd, thy truth her honor haue?
               
                  
                     verse 13 Shal they that lye, in darke ful low, of al thy wonders wot?
               Or there ſhal they thy iuſtice know, where al things are forgot?
               
                  
                     verse 14 But I, O Lord, to thee alway, do cry and cal apace:
               My prayer eke ere it be day, ſhal come before thy face.
               
                  
                     verse 15 Why dooſt thou Lord abhorre my ſoule, in grief that ſeketh thee?
               And now, O Lord, why dooſt thou hide, thy face away from me?
               
                  
                     verse 16 I am afflict as dying ſtil, from youth this many a yeare:
               Thy terrours which do vexe me il, with troubled mind I beare.
               
                  
                     verse 17 The furies of thy wrathful rage, ful ſore vpon me fal:
               Thy terrours eke, do not aſſwage, but me oppres with al.
               
                  
                     verse 18 Al day they compas me about, as water at the tyde:
               And al at once with ſtreames ful ſtoute, beſet me on ech ſyde.
               
                  
                     verse 19 Thou ſetteſt far from me my frends, and louers euery one
               Yea and mine old acquaintaunce al, out of my ſight are gone.
            
            
               Miſericordias domini. Pſalme .lxxxix.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶With many wordes doth the Prophet prayſe the name of God, for his Teſtament and couenaunt that he had made betwene him and his elect by Ieſu Chriſte the ſonne of Dauid: Then doth he complayne of the great ruyne, and deſolation of the kyngdome of Dauid, ſo that to the outwarde apperaunce, the promiſe was broken. Finally he prayeth to be deliuered from his afflictions, makyng mention of the ſhortnes of mans lyfe, and confirming hym ſelfe by Gods promiſes.
               
               Syng this as the .67. Pſalme.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 1 
                  TO ſing the mercies of the Lord,  my toung ſhal neuer ſpare:
               and with my mouth frō age to age, thy truth I wil declare.
               
                  
                     verse 2 For I haue ſayd that mercy ſhal, for euermore remayne:
               In that thou dooſt the heauens ſtay, thy truth appeareth playne.
               
                  
                     verse 3 To mine elect (ſayth God) I made, a couenant and beheſt,
               My ſeruant Dauid to perſwade, I ſwore and dyd proteſt.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Thy ſede for euer I wil ſtay, and ſtabliſh it ful faſt,
               and ſtil vphold thy throne alway, from age to age to laſt.
               
                  
                     verse 5 The heauens ſhew wt ioy & mirth, thy wondrous workes, O Lord,
               Thy ſaints within thy Church on earth, thy faith & truth record.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Who with the Lord is equal then, in al the cloudes abrod?
               among the ſonnes of al the Gods, what one is like our God?
               
                  
                     verse 7 God in aſſemble of the ſaynts, is greatly to be drad,
               and ouer al that dwel about, in terror to be had.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Lord God of hoſtes in al the world, what one is like to thee?
               On euery ſide moſt mighty Lord, thy truth is ſene to be.
               
                  
                     verse 9 The ragyng ſea by thyne aduice, thou ruleſt at thy wil,
               and when the waues therof ariſe, yu makſt thē calme & ſtil.
               
                  
                     verse 10 And Egipt thou lord haſt ſubdued, & thou haſt it deſtroyed:
               Yea thou thy foes wt mighty arme, haſt ſcattred al abrod.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 The heauēs are thine & ſtil haue ben, likewiſe y• earth & land
                  The world withal that is therin, thou foūdeſt wt thy hād.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Both North & South, wt Eaſt & Weſt, thy ſelf didſt make & frame,
                  Both Tabor mount and eke Hermō, reioyſe and prayſe thy name
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Thine arme is ſtrong and ful of power, al might therin doth lye,
                  The ſtrength of thy right hād ech houre, thou lifteſt vp on hye.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 In righteouſnes and equity, thou haſt thy ſeat and place,
                  Mercy and truth are ſtil with thee, and go before thy face.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 That folke is bleſt that knoweth aright, thy preſēt power, O God,
                  For in the fauour of thy ſight, they walke ful ſafe abrod.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 For in thy name, throughout the day, they ioy & much reioyce,
                  and through thy rightouſnes haue they a pleaſant fame & noyce.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 For why? their glory ſtrength and ayde, in thee alone doth lye:
                  Thy goodnes eke that hath vs ſtayde, ſhal lift our horne on hye.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 18 Our ſtrength, that doth defend vs wel, the Lord to vs doth bring:
                  The holy one of Iſrael, he is our guide and kyng.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Somtyme thy wil vnto thy ſaints, in viſions thou didſt ſhew:
                  and thus thē didſt thou ſay to them, thy mind to make thē know.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 A man of might haue I erect, your king and gyde to be:
                  and ſet vp him whom I elect, among the folke to me.
               
               
                  The third part.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 My ſeruaunt Dauid I appoint, whom I haue ſearched out,
                  and with my holy oyle anoynt, him king of al the route.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 For why? my hand is ready ſtil, with hym for to remayne,
                  and with mine arme alſo I wil, him ſtrengthen and ſuſtayne.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 The enmies ſhal not him oppres, they ſhal him not deuoure:
                  Ne yet the ſonnes of wickednes, of him ſhal haue no power.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 His foes likewiſe wil I deſtroy, before his face in ſight:
                  and thoſe that hate him I wil plage, & ſtrike thē with my might.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 My truth and mercy eke with al, ſhal ſtil vpon him lye:
                  And in my name his horne eke ſhal, be lifted vp on hye.
                  
                     
                        verse 26 His kingdome I wil ſet to be, vpon the ſea and ſand:
                  and eke the running floudes ſhal he, embrace with his right hād.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 He ſhal depend with al his hart on me, and thus ſhal ſay:
                  My father, and (my God thou art) my rocke of health and ſtay.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 As one firſt borne I wil him take, of al on earth that ſprings:
                  His might, and honour, I ſhal make, aboue al worldly kings.
                  
                     
                        verse 29 My mercy ſhalbe with him ſtil, as I my ſelfe haue told:
                  My faythful couenaunt to fulfil, my mercy I wil hold.
                  
                     
                        verse 30 And eke his ſede wil I ſuſtayne, for euer ſtrong and ſure:
                  So that his ſeat ſhal ſtil remayne, while heauen doth endure.
               
               
                  The fourth part.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 If that his ſonnes forſake my law, and ſo begin to ſwerue:
                  and of my iudgements haue none awe, nor wil not them obſerue.
                  
                     
                        verse 32 Or if thy do not vſe aright, my ſtatutes to them made:
                  and ſet al my commaundements light, and wil not kepe my trade.
                  
                     
                        verse 33 Then with the rod wil I begin, theyr doings to amend,
                  and ſo with ſcourging for theyr ſinne, when that they do offend.
                  
                     
                        verse 34 My mercy yet, and my goodnes, I wil not take him fro,
                  Nor handle him with craftines, and ſo my truth forgo.
                  
                     
                        verse 35 But ſure my couenaunt I wil hold, with al that I haue ſpoke,
                  No word the which my lips haue told, ſhal alter or be broke.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 36 Once ſwore I by mine holynes, and that performe wil I,
                  With Dauid I ſhal kepe promiſe, to him I wil not ly.
                  
                     
                        verse 37 His ſede for euermore ſhal rayne, and eke his throne of might,
                  as doth the ſunne it ſhal remayne, for euer in my ſight.
                  
                     
                        verse 38 And as the moone within the ſky, for euer ſtandeth faſt,
                  a faythful witnes from on hye, ſo ſhal his kyngdome laſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 39 But now (O Lord) thou dooſt reiect, & now thou chaungeſt cheare,
                  Yea thou art wroth with thine elect, thine own annointed deare.
                  
                     
                        verse 40 The couenāt which thy ſeruāt made, lord thou haſt quite vndone,
                  and downe vpon the ground alſo, haſt caſt his royal crown.
               
               
                  The fifte part.
                  
                     
                        verse 41 Thou pluckſt his hedges vp with might, his wals dooſt yu cōfoūd,
                  Thou beateſt eke his bulwarkes down, & breakſt thē to the groūd.
                  
                     
                        verse 42 That he is ſore deſtroyed and torne, of commers by throughout,
                  and ſo is made a mocke and ſcorne, to al that dwel about.
                  
                     
                        verse 43 Thou their right hand haſt lifted vp, that him ſo ſore annoy,
                  and al his foes that him deuour, loe thou haſt made to ioy.
                  
                     
                        verse 44 His ſwerds edge yu dooſt take away, that ſhould his foes wt ſtand,
                  To him in warre no victory, thou geueſt nor vpperhand.
                  
                     
                        verse 45 His glory thou dooſt alſo waſt, his throne, his ioy and myrth,
                  By thee is ouerthrowen and caſt, ful low vpon the erth.
                  
                     
                        verse 46 Thou haſt cut of and made ful ſhort, his youth and luſty dayes,
                  and rayſed of him an il report, with ſhame and great diſprayſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 47 How long away from me, O Lord, for euer wilt thou turne?
                  and ſhal thine anger ſtil alway, as fire conſume and burne?
                  
                     
                        verse 48 O cal to mind, remember then, my time conſumeth faſt,
                  why haſt thou made the ſonnes of mē, as things in vaine to waſt?
                  
                     
                        verse 49 What man is he that liueth here, and death ſhal neuer ſee?
                  Or from the hand of hel his ſoule, ſhal he deliuer free?
                  
                     
                        verse 50 Where is O Lord, thine old goodnes, ſo oft declared beforne:
                  which by thy truth and vprightnes, to Dauid thou haſt ſworne?
                  
                     
                        verse 51 The great rebukes to mind do cal, that on thy ſeruaunts ly,
                  The rayling of thy people al, borne in my breſt haue I.
                  
                     
                        verse 52 Wherwith O Lord thyne enmies, blaſphemed haue thy name,
                  The ſteps of thine annoynted one, they ceaſe not to defame.
                  
                     
                        verse 53 Al prayſe to thee, O Lord of hoſtes both now an eke for ay,
                  Through ſky and earth in al the coſtes. Amen, Amen, I ſay.
               
            
            
               
               Domine refugium. Pſalme .xc.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶Moſes in his prayer ſetteth before vs the eternal fauour of God towardes his, who are neither admoniſhed by the breuity of their lyfe, nor by his plages to be thankefull. Therfore Moſes prayeth God to turne theyr hartes, and continew his mercyes towardes them and theyr poſteritie for euer.
               
               Sing this as the .78. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THou Lord haſt ben our ſure defence, our place of eaſe and reſt:
               In al times paſt,  yea ſo lōg ſence, as cannot be expreſt.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Or there was made moūtane or hil, the earth or world abrod:
               From age to age and alwayes ſtil, for euer thou art God.
               
                  
                     verse 3 thou grindeſt man through grief & payne, to duſt or clay and then,
               and then thou ſayſt agayne returne, agayne ye ſonnes of men.
               
                  
                     verse 4 The laſtyng of a thouſand yeare, what is it in thy ſight?
               as yeſterday it doth appeare, or as a watch one nyght.
               
                  
                     verse 5 So ſone as thou dooſt ſcattre them, then is their lyfe and trade
               al as a ſlepe and like the graſſe, whoſe bewty ſone doth fade.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Which in the morning ſhines ful bright, but fadeth by and by:
               and is cut down, ere it be night, al withered dead and dry.
               
                  
                     verse 7 For through thine anger we conſume, our might is much decayd:
               and of thy feruent wrath and fume, we are ful ſore afrayd.
               
                  
                     verse 8 The wicked workes that we haue wrought, yu ſetſt before thine eye:
               Our priuy faults, yea eke our thought, thy coūtenaūce doth eſpye.
               
                  
                     verse 9 For through thy wrath our dayes do waſt, therof doth nought remaine:
               Our yeres cōſume as words or blaſt, & ar not called againe.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Our time is threſcore yeare and ten, that we do liue on mold:
               If one ſee foureſcore, ſurely then, we count him wondrous old.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Yet of this time the ſtrength and chief, the which we count vpon:
               Is nothing els but painful grief, and we as blaſtes are gone.
               
                  
                     verse 12 Who once doth know, what ſtrēgth is there, what might thine anger hath?
               Or in his hart, who doth y• feare, according to thy wrath?
               
                  
                     verse 13 Inſtruct vs Lord to know and try, how long our dayes remayne:
               That then we may our hartes apply, true wiſdome to attaine.
               
                  
                     verse 14 Retourne O Lord, how long wilt y•, fourth on in wrath procede?
               Shew fauour to thy ſeruaunts now, and helpe thē at their nede.
               
                  
                     verse 15 Refreſh vs with thy mercy ſone, and then our ioy ſhalbe:
               al times ſo long as lyfe doth laſt, in hart reioyce ſhal we,
               
                  
                     verse 16 As thou haſt plaged vs before, now alſo make vs glad:
               and for the yeares wherin ful ſore, affliction we haue had?
               
                  
                     verse 17 O let thy worke and power appeare, & on thy ſeruaunts lyght:
               and ſhew vnto their children deare, thy glory and thy might.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 18 Lord let thy grace and glory ſtand, on vs thy ſeruaunts thus,
               Confirme the workes we take in hand, Lord proſper them to vs.
            
            
               Qui habitat. Pſalme .xci.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶Here is deſcribed in what aſſurance he liueth that putteth his whole truſt in God, & cōmitteth him ſelfe wholly to his protection in al tēpraciōs, A promiſe of God to thoſe that loue him, know him, and truſt in him to deliuer them, and geue them immor
                        •••
                      glory.
               
               Syng this as the .69. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  HE that within the ſecret place,  of God moſt hie doth dwel:
               In ſhadow of the mightieſt grace, at reſt ſhal kepe him wel.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Thou art my hope, & my ſtrong hold, I to the Lord wil ſay:
               My God is he, in him wil I, my whole affiaunce ſtay.
               
                  
                     verse 3 He ſhal defend thee from the ſnare, the which the hunter layd:
               And from that deadly plage and care, wherof thou art afrayd.
               
                  
                     verse 4 And with his wings ſhal couer thee, and kepe thee ſafely there:
               His faith & truth thy fēce ſhalbe, as ſure as ſhield & ſpeare.
               
                  
                     verse 5 So that thou ſhalt not nede I ſay, to feare or be afflight:
               Of al the ſhafts that fly by day, nor terrours of the night.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Nor of the plage that priuily doth walke in darke ſo faſt:
               Nor yet of that which doth deſtroy, & at noone dayes doth waſt.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Yea at thy ſide as thou dooſt ſtand, a thouſand dead ſhalbe,
               Ten thouſand eke at thy right hand, and yet ſhalt thou be fre.
               
                  
                     verse 8 But thou ſhalt ſe it for thy part, thine eyes ſhal wel regard,
               That euen like to theyr deſert, the wicked haue reward.
               
                  
                     verse 9 For why? O Lord I onely luſt, to ſtay my hope on thee,
               and in the hyeſt I put my truſt, my ſure defence is hee.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Thou ſhalt not nede none il to feare, with thee it ſhal not mel,
               Nor yet the plage ſhal once come nere, thy houſe where yu dooſt dwel
               
                  
                     verse 11 For why? vnto his angels al, with charge commaundeth hee,
               That ſtil in al thy wayes they ſhal, preſerue and proſper thee.
               
                  
                     verse 12 And in their hands ſhal thee beare vp, ſtil wayting thee vpon
               So that thy foote ſhal neuer chaunce, to ſpurne at any ſtone.
               
                  
                     verse 13 Vpon the Lion thou ſhalt go, the adder fel and long,
               And tread vpon the Lions yong, with dragons ſtoute & ſtrong.
               
                  
                     verse 14 For that he truſteth vnto me, I wil diſpatch hym quite,
               and him defend becauſe that he, doth know my name a right.
               
                  
                     verse 15 When he for health on me doth cry, an aunſwere I wil gyue,
               and from his grief take him wil I, in glory for to lyue.
               
                  
                     verse 16 With length of yeres & dayes of welth, I wil fulfil his time,
               The goodnes of my ſauing helth, I wil declare to him.
            
            
               
               Bonum eſt confiteri. Pſalme .xcii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶This Pſalme was made to be ſong on the Saboth, to ſtirre vp the people to acknowledge God & to prayſe him in his workes: The Prophet reioyſeth therin. But the wicked is not able to cōſider, that the vngodly when he his moſt floriſhing, ſhall moſt ſpedely periſhe. In thend is diſcribed the felicity of the iuſt, planted in the houſe of God to prayſe the Lord.
               
               Syng this as the .88. Pſalm.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  IT is a thing,  both good and meete, to prayſe the higheſt Lord:
               and to thine name (O thou moſt hye,) to ſing in one accord.
               
                  
                     verse 2 To ſhew the kindnes of the Lord, betime ere day be light,
               and eke declare his truth abrod, when it doth draw to night.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Vpon ten ſtringed inſtrument, on lute and harpe ſo ſwete:
               With al the mirth you can inuent, of inſtruments moſt mete.
               
                  
                     verse 4 For thou haſt made me to reioyce, in things ſo wrought by thee:
               and I haue ioy, in hart and voyce, thy handy workes to ſee.
               
                  
                     verse 5 O Lord how glorious and how great, are al thy workes ſo ſtoute?
               So depely are thy counſels ſet, that none can try them out.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The man vnwiſe hath not the wit, this geare to pas to bring:
               and al ſuch fooles are nothing fit, to vnderſtand this thing.
               
                  
                     verse 7 When ſo the wicked at their wil, as gras do ſpring ful faſt:
               They when they floriſh in their il, for euer ſhalbe waſt.
               
                  
                     verse 8 But thou art mighty (Lord) moſt hie, yea thou dooſt rayne therfore:
               In euery tyme eternally, both now and euermore.
               
                  
                     verse 9 For why (O Lord) behold and ſee, behold thy foes I ſay:
               How al that worke iniquitie, ſhal periſh and decay.
               
                  
                     verse 10 But thou like as an Unicorne, ſhal lift my horne on hye.
               With freſh and new prepared oyle, thine oynted king am I
               
                  
                     verse 11 And of my foes before mine eyes, ſhalt ſee the fal and ſhame
               Of al that vp againſt me ryſe, mine eare ſhal heare y• ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 12 The iuſt ſhal floriſh vp on hye, as date trees bud and blow:
               And as the Ceders multiply, in Lybanus that grow.
               
                  
                     verse 13 For they are planted in the place, and dwelling of our God:
               within his courtes they ſpring apace, & floriſh al abrod.
               
                  
                     verse 14 And in their age much fruit ſhal bring, both fat & wel beſene:
               And pleaſaūtly both bud & ſpring, wt boughes & braunches grene.
               
                  
                     verse 15 To ſhew that God is good and iuſt, and vpright is his wil.
               He is my rocke, my hope, and truſt, in him there is none il.
            
            
               Dominus regnauit. Pſalme .xciii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶He prayſeth the power of God in the creation of the worlde, and beateth downe all people whiche lift them vp agaynſt his maieſtie, and prouoketh to conſider his promiſes.
               
               Syng this as the .77. Pſalme.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THe Lord as king aloft doth raign,  in glory goodly dight:
               and he to ſhew his ſtrēgth & main, hath girt himſelf wt might.
               
                  
                     verse 2 The Lord likewiſe the earth hath made, & ſhaped it ſo ſure:
               No might can make it moue or fade, at ſtay it doth endure.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Ere yt the world was made or wrought, thy ſeat was ſet before:
               Beyond al time that can be thought, thou haſt bene euermore.
               
                  
                     verse 4 The flouds (O Lord) the flouds do riſe, they rore and make a noyce:
               The floudes (I ſay) did enterpriſe, and lifted vp theyr voyce.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Yea, though y• ſtormes before in ſight, though ſeas do rage and ſwel:
               The Lord is ſtrong and more of might, for he on hye doth dwel.
               
                  
                     verse 6 And loke what promiſe he doth make, his houſhold to defend:
               For iuſt and true they ſhal it take, al tymes withouten end.
            
            
               Deus vltionum. pſalme .xciiii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶He prayeth vnto God againſt the violence and arrogancy of tyraunts. Then doth he comfort the afflicted by the good iſſue of their affections, as he felt in himſelf, and did ſee in others, and by the ruine of the wicked, whom the Lord wil deſtroy.
               
               Sing this as the .78 pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O Lord thou dooſt reuēge al wrong,  that office longes to thee:
               Sith vengeāce doth to thee belong, declare that al may ſee.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Set forth thy ſelf, for thou of right, ye erth dooſt iudge & gide:
               Reward the proud & men of might, accordyng to their pride.
               
                  
                     verse 3 How long ſhal wicked mē beare ſway, with lifting vp their voyce?
               How long ſhal wicked men I ſay, thus triumph and reioyce?
               
                  
                     verse 4 How long ſhal they with brags burſt out, & proudly prate their fil?
               Shal they reioyce which be ſo ſtout, whoſe workes are euer il?
               
                  
                     verse 5 Thy flock (O Lord) thine heritage, they ſpoyle and vexe ful ſore:
               againſt thy people they do rage, ſtill daily more and more.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The widowes which are comfortles, and ſtraungers they deſtroy:
               They ſlea the children fatherles, and none doth put them by.
               
                  
                     verse 7 And whē they take theſe things in hād, this talk they haue of thee:
               Can Iacobs God this vnderſtand? tuſh no he cannot ſee.
               
                  
                     verse 8 O folke vnwiſe & people rude, ſome knowledge now diſcerne:
               (ye fooles) among the multitude, at length begin to learne.
               
                  
                     verse 9 The lord which made y• eare of man, he nedes of right muſt heare:
               He made y• eyne, al things muſt then, before hys ſyght appeare.
               
                  
                     verse 10 The Lord doth al the world correct, and make them vnderſtand:
               Shal he not then your dedes detect, how can ye ſcape his hand?
               
                  
                  
                     verse 11 The lord doth know y• thoughts of mā, his hart he ſeeth ful playn:
               The Lord I ſay mēs thoughts doth frame, & findeth thē but vain
               
                  
                     verse 12 But Lord that man is happy ſure, whom thou dooſt kepe in aw:
               And through correction dooſt procure, to teach him in thy law.
               
                  
                     verse 13 Wherby he ſhal in quiet reſt, in tyme of trouble ſit:
               When wicked men ſhalbe ſuppreſt, and fal into the pit.
               
                  
                     verse 14 For ſure the Lord wyl not refuſe, hys people for to take:
               His heritage whom he dyd chuſe, he wil no tyme forſake.
               
                  
                     verse 15 Vntil that iudgement be decreed, to iuſtice to conuert:
               That al may follow her with ſpede, that are of vpright hart.
               
                  
                     verse 16 But who vpon my part ſhal ſtand, againſt the curſed trayne:
               Or who ſhal rid me from theyr hand, y• wicked works maintain?
               
                  
                     verse 17 Except the Lord had bene mine ayde, mine enemies to repel,
               My ſoule and life had now bene layd, almoſt as low as hel:
               
                  
                     verse 18 When I did ſay my fote doth ſlyde, and now am like to fal:
               Thy goodnes Lord did ſo prouyde, to ſtay me vp withal.
               
                  
                     verse 19 When with my ſelfe I muſed much, and could no comfort fynde:
               Then Lord thy goodnes did me touch, and that did eaſe my mind
               
                  
                     verse 20 Wilt thou enhaunt thy ſelf and draw, with wicked men to ſit?
               which with pretence inſtede of law, much miſchief do commit?
               
                  
                     verse 21 For they conſult againſt the life, of righteous men and good:
               and in their counſels they are ryfe, to ſhed the giltles blood
               
                  
                     verse 22 But yet the Lord he is to me, a ſtrong defence or locke:
               He is my God, to him I flee, he is my ſtrength and rocke.
               And he ſhal cauſe their miſchiefs al, themſelues for to annoy:
               and in their malice they ſhal fal, our God ſhal them deſtroy.
            
            
               Venite exultemus. pſalme .xcv.
               I. H.
               
                  An carneſt exhortation to prayſe God for the gouerment of the world, and the election of hys church. An admonition not to follow the rebellion of the oldfathers, that tempted God in the wildernes: For the which they might not enter into the land of promiſe.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  O Come let vs lift vp our voyce, and ſyng vn- 
                     〈♫〉
                   to the Lorde, in hym oure rocke of health
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   reioyce, let vs wyth one accord. Yea let vs come before hys face, to 
                     〈♫〉
                   geue hym thanks and prayſe, in ſyngyng Pſalmes vnto his grace, let 
                     〈♫〉
                   vs be glad alwayes.
               
                  
                     verse 3 For why? the Lord he is no doubt, a great and mighty God:
               A kyng aboue al gods throughout, in al the world abrode.
               
                  
                     verse 4 The ſecrets of the earth ſo depe, and corners of the land:
               The tops of hils that are ſo ſtepe, he hath them in his hand.
               
                  
                     verse 5 The ſea and waters al are his, for he the ſame hath wrought:
               The earth and al that therin is, his hand hath made of nought.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Come let vs bow and prayſe the Lord, before hym let vs fal:
               and knele to hym with one accord, the which hath made vs al.
               
                  
                     verse 7 For why? he is the Lord our God, for vs he doth prouyde?
               We are his folke, he doth vs fede, his ſhepe and he our guide.
               
                  
                     verse 8 To day if ye his voyce wil heare, then harden not your hart:
               as ye with grudging many a yeare, prouokte me in deſert.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Where as your fathers tempted me, my power for to proue:
               my wōdrous works whē they did ſee, yet ſtil they wold me moue
               
                  
                     verse 10 Twiſe twenty yeares they did me greue, and I to them did ſay:
               They erre in hart and not beleue, they haue not known my way.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Wherfore I ſware, whē that my wrath, was kindled in my breſt:
               That they ſhould neuer tread the path, to enter to my reſt.
            
            
               Cantate domino. Pſalme .xcvi.
               I. H.
               
                  An exhortation both to the Iewes and Gentils to praiſe god for hys mercy. And this ſpecially ought to be referred to the kingdom of Chriſt.
               
               Sing thys as the .77▪ pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  SYng ye with prayſe vnto the Lord,  new ſongs of ioy & mirth:
               Sing vnto hym with one accord, al people on the earth.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Yea ſing vnto the Lord I ſay, prayſe ye his holy name:
               Declare and ſhew from day to day, ſaluation by the ſame.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3 Among the heathen eke declare, his honor round about:
               To ſhew his wonders do not ſpare, in al the world throughout.
               
                  
                     verse 4 For why? the Lord is much of might, and worthy prayſe alway:
               and he is to be dread of right, aboue al Gods I ſay.
               
                  
                     verse 5 For al the gods of Heathen folke, are idols that wil fade:
               But yet our God he is the Lord, that hath the heauens made.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Al prayſe and honor eke do dwel, for aye before his face:
               Both power and might likewyſe excel, within his holy 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  
                     verse 7 Aſcribe vnto the Lord alway, ye people of the world:
               Al might and worſhip eke I ſay, aſcribe vnto the Lord.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Aſcribe vnto the Lord alſo, the glory of his name:
               And eke into his courtes do go: with giftes vnto the ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Fal down and worſhip ye the Lord, within his temple bright:
               Let al the people of the world, be fearful at hys ſyght.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Tel al the world, be not agaſt, the Lord doth raigne aboue:
               Yea, he hath ſet the earth ſo faſt, that it did neuer moue.
               
                  
                     verse 11 And that it is the Lord alone, that rules with princely might:
               To iudge the nations euery one, with equity and right.
               
                  
                     verse 12 The heauens ſhal great ioy begin: the earth ſhal eke reioyce:
               The ſea with al that is therin, ſhal ſhoote and make a noyce.
               
                  
                     verse 13 The field ſhal ioy, and euery thyng, that ſpringeth of the earth:
               The wood and euery tree ſhal ſyng, with gladnes and wt mirth.
               
                  
                     verse 14 Before the preſence of the Lord, and commyng of hys might:
               when he ſhal iuſtly iudge the world, and rule his folke wt right.
            
            
               Dominus regnauit. pſalme .xcvii.
               I. H
               
                  The prophet exhorteth al to reioyce for the comming of the kyngdome of Chriſt, dreadfull to the rebels and Idolaters, and ioyful to the iuſt, whom he exhorteth to innocency, to reioycing, and thankes geuyng.
               
               Sing this as the .9
                     •
                  . Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THe Lord doth raign where at y• earth, may ioy wt pleaſāt voyce
               and eke the yles wich ioyful mirth, may triūph and reioyce.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Both cloudes & darknes eke do ſwel, & round about him beat
               yea right and iuſtice euer dwel, and bide about hys ſeat.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Yea fyre and heat at once doth run, and go before his face:
               Which ſhal his foes and enmies burne, abrode in euery place.
               
                  
                     verse 4 His lightnes eke, ful bright did blaſe, and to the world appeare:
               wherat the earth did looke and gaſe, with dread and deadly feare.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 5 The hils like waxe did melt in ſight, and preſence of the Lord:
               they fled before that rulers might, which gideth al the world.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The heauens eke declare and ſhew, his iuſtice forth abrode:
               That al the world may ſee and know, the glory of our God.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Confuſion ſure ſhal come to ſuch, as worſhip Idoles vayne:
               and eke to thoſe that glory much, dome pictures to maintayne.
               
                  
                     verse 8 For al the Idols of the world, which they as gods did cal:
               Shal fele the power of the Lord, and down to him ſhal fal.
               
                  
                     verse 9 With ioy ſhal Sion heare this thing, and Iuda ſhal reioyce:
               For at thy iudgements they ſhal ſing, and make a pleaſant noyce.
               
                  
                     verse 10 That thou O Lord art ſet on hye, in al the earth abrode:
               And art exalted wondrouſly, aboue ech other God.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Al ye that loue the Lord do this, hate al thyng that is il:
               For he doth kepe the ſoules of his, from ſuch as would them ſpil.
               
                  
                     verse 12 And lyght doth ſpring vp to the iuſt, with pleaſure for his part:
               Great ioy, wt gladnes, mirth and luſt, to them of vpright hart.
               
                  
                     verse 13 Ye righteous in the Lord reioyce, his holines proclayme:
               Be thankful eke with hart and voyce, and mindful of the ſame.
            
            
               Cantate domino. Pſalme .xcviii.
               I. H.
               
                  An earneſt exhortation to al creatures to prayſe the Lord for his power, mercy, tidelity in the promiſe by Chriſt, by whom he hath communicated his ſaluation to al nations.
               
               Syng this as the .95. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O Sing ye now vnto the Lord,  a new and pleaſaunt ſong:
               for he hath wrought throughout y• world, his wōders great & ſtrōg
               wt his right hād ful worthely, he doth his foes deuour:
               And get himſelf the victory, with his own arme and power.
               
                  
                     verse 2 The lord doth make the people know, his ſauing helth and myght:
               The Lord doth eke his iuſtice ſhew, in al the Heathens ſight
               
                  
                     verse 3 His grace and truth to Iſrael, in mynd he doth record:
               That al the earth hath ſene right wel, the goodnes of the Lord.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Be glad in him with ioyful voyce, al people of the earth:
               Geue thankes to God, ſing and reioyce, to him with ioy & mirth.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Vpon the harpe vnto him ſing, geue thanks to hym with pſalmes:
               Reioyce before the Lord our king, with trumpets & with ſhalmes
               
                  
                     verse 6 Yea let the ſea with al therin, with ioy both rore and ſwel:
               The earth like wiſe let it begin, with al that therin dwel.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 7 And let the flouds reioyce their fils, and clap their hands apace:
               and eke the mountaynes and the hils, before the Lord his face.
               
                  
                     verse 8 For he ſhal come to iudge and try, the world and euery wight:
               and rule the people mightely, with iuſtice and with right.
            
            
               Dominus regnauit. pſalme .xcix.
               I. H.
               
                  He cōmendeth the power, equitie, and excellency of the kingdō of god by Chriſt, ouer ye Iew & Gētils, & prouoketh thē to magnify ye fame & to ſerue ye lord, following the example of the aunciēt fathers, Moyſes, Aarō, Samuel, who calling vpon God were hard in their prayers
               
               Sing this as the .95. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THe Lord doth raign although at it,  the people rage ful ſore:
               Yea he on Cherubin doth ſyt, though al ye world wold rore
               
                  
                     verse 2 The Lord that doth in Sion dwel, is high & wōdrous great:
               aboue al folke he doth excel, and he aloft is ſet.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Let al men prayſe thy mighty name, for it is feareful ſure:
               and let them magnify the ſame, that holy is and pure.
               
                  
                     verse 4 The princely power of our kyng, doth loue iudgement and ryght:
               thou rightly ruleſt euery thyng, in Iacob through thy might.
               
                  
                     verse 5 To prayſe the Lord our God deuyſe, al honour to hym do:
               His footeſtoole worſhip ye lykewyſe, for he is holy to.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Moyſes, Aaron, and Samuel, as prieſts on hym dyd cal:
               when they did pray he heard thē wel, and gaue thē aunſwer al.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Within the cloud to them he ſpake, then did they labour ſtil:
               to kepe ſuch lawes as he did make, and pointed them vntil.
               
                  
                     verse 8 O Lord our God thou didſt them heare, and aunſwerſt them again:
               Thy mercy did on them appeare, their dedes didſt not maintayn.
               
                  
                     verse 9 O laud and prayſe our God and Lord, within his holy hil:
               For why our God throughout the world, is holy euer ſtil.
            
            
               
                  2 Iubilate deo omnis terra. pſalme.
                  C.
                  
                     He exhorteth al to ſerue the lord who hath made vs, and enter into his courtes and aſſemblies to prayſe his name.
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                     AL people yt on earth do dwel, ſing to ye Lord with chereful 
                        〈♫〉
                      voice: him ſerue wt fear, his praiſe forth tel, come ye before him & reioice
                  
                     
                        verse 3 The Lord ye know is god in dede, wtout our ayde he did vs make:
                  We are his folke he doth vs fede, & for his ſhepe he doth vs take.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 4 Oh enter thē his gates wt praiſe approch with ioy, his courts vnto
                  praiſe, laud, and bles his name alwayes, for it is ſemely ſo to do.
                  
                     
                        verse 5 For why? the Lord our God is good, his mercy is for euer ſure:
                  His truth at al times firmly ſtood, and ſhal from age to age indure
               
               
                  Another of the ſame.
                  
                     
                        verse 1 IN God the lord be glad and light, praiſe him throughout the earth
                  Serue him & come before his ſight, with ſinging and with mirth
                  
                     
                        verse 2 Know that the Lord our God he is, he did vs make and kepe:
                  Not we our ſelues, for we are his, owne folke and paſture ſhepe.
                  
                     
                        verse 3 O go into his gates alwayes, geue thankes within the ſame:
                  Within his courts ſet forth his prayſe, and laud his holy name.
                  
                     
                        verse 4 For why the goodnes of the Lord, for euermore doth raigne:
                  from age to age throughout the world, his truth doth ſtil remain
               
            
            
               Miſericordiam & iudicium. pſalm .Ci.
               N.
               
                  ¶Dauid diſcrybeth what gouerhmēt he wil obſerue in his houſe and kingdome. He wil puniſh and correct by rotyng out the wick
                        •
                     d, and cheryſhing the godly perſons.
               
               Sing this as the .81 pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  I Mercy wil and iudgement ſing,  O Lord God vnto thee:
               and wiſely do in perfect way, vntil thou come to mee.
               
                  
                     verse 2 And in the midſt of my houſe walke, in purenes of my ſprite:
               
                  
                     verse 3 And I no kind of wicked thyng, wil ſet before my ſight.
               I hate their worke that fal away, it ſhal not cleaue to mee:
               
                  
                     verse 4 From me ſhal part the froward hart, none euil wil I ſee.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Him wil I ſtroy that ſlaundereth, his neighbour priuely:
               The lofty hart I cannot beare, nor hym that looketh hy.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Mine eyes ſhalbe on them within, the land that faithful be:
               In perfect way who worketh ſhal, be ſeruant vnto me:
               
                  
                     verse 7 I wil no guileful perſon haue, within my houſe to dwel:
               and in my preſence he ſhal not, remayne that lies doth tel.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Betimes I wil deſtroy euen al, the wicked of the land:
               That I may from Gods city cut, the wicked workers band.
            
            
               Domine exaudi orationem. pſalme .Cii.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶It ſemeth that this prayer was apointed to the faithful to pray in the captiuity of Babilon. A conſolatiō for the buildinge of the church: Wherof foloweth the praiſe of god to be publiſhed vnto al poſterityes The conuerſion of the Gentils: And the ſtability of the church
               
               Syng this as the .67. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O Heare my prayer Lord,  and let my crye come vnto thee:
               
                  
                     verse 2 in tyme of trouble do not hide, thy face away from mee:
               
                   Incline thine eares to me, make haſt, to heare me when I cal:
               
                  
                     verse 3 For as the ſmoke doth fade ſo do, my dayes cōſume and fal.
               
                  
                     verse 4 And as a harth, my bones are burnt, my hart is ſmittē dead:
               and withers as the graſſe, that I forget to eat my bread.
               
                  
                     verse 5 By reaſon of my groning voyce, my bones cleaue to my ſkin:
               
                  
                     verse 6 As Pellicane of wildernes, ſuch caſe now am I in.
               And as an Owle in deſert is, loe I am ſuch a one:
               
                  
                     verse 7 I watch, and as a Sparow, on the houſe top am alone.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Loe daily in reprochful wiſe, myne enmies do me ſcorne:
               And they y• do againſt me rage, againſt me they haue ſworne
               
                  
                     verse 9 Surely with aſhes as with bread, my hunger I haue fild:
               and mingled haue my drink wt teares, yt fro mine eies haue ſtild.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Becauſe of thy diſpleaſure Lord, thy wrath and thy diſdayn
               For thou haſt lifted me aloft, and caſt me down agayn.
               
                  
                     verse 11 The dayes where in I pas my life, are lyke the fleeting ſhade
               and I am withered like y• gras, that ſoone away doth fade.
               
                  
                     verse 12 But thou O Lord, for euer dooſt, remayne in ſtedy place:
               And thy remembrance euer doth, abyde from race to race.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Thou wilt ariſe, and mercy thou to Sion wilt extend:
                  The tyme of mercy, now the tyme, foreſet is come to end.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 For euen in the ſtones therof, thy ſeruants do delight:
                  and on the duſt therof they haue, compaſſion in their ſprite.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 Then ſhal y• heathen people feare, the Lords moſt holy name
                  and al the kings on earth ſhal dread, thy glory and thy fame
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Then whē the Lord the mighty god, agayn ſhal Sion reare:
                  and then when he moſt nobly in, hys glory ſhal appeare.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 To prayer of the deſolate, when he himſelf ſhal bend:
                  When he ſhal not diſdayn vnto, their prayer to attend.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 This ſhalbe written for the age, that after ſhal ſuccede:
                  The people yet vncreated, the Lords renome ſhal ſpred.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 For he from his hie ſanctuary, hath looked down below:
                  and out of heauē hath the Lord, beheld the earth alſo.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 That of y• morning captiue he, might heare the woful cry:
                  and that he might deliuer thoſe, that damned are to dye.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 That they in Sion may declare, the Lords moſt holy name:
                  And in Ieruſalē ſet forth, the prayſes of the ſame.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 22 Then when the people of the land, and kyndgdomes with accord:
                  Shall be aſſembled for to do, theyr ſeruyce to the Lord.
               
               
                  The third part
                  
                     
                        verse 23 My former force of ſtrength he hath, abated in the way:
                  and ſhorter he did cut my dayes, thus I therfore dyd ſay.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 My God in midſt of al my dayes, now take me not away:
                  Thy yeres endure eternally, from age to age for aye.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 Thou the foundations of y• earth, before all tyme haſt layd,
                  & lord y• heauēs are y• work, which thine own hāds haue made.
                  
                     
                        verse 26 Yea they ſhal periſh and decay, but thou ſhalt tary ſtil:
                  and they ſhal al in time waxe old, euen as a garment wil.
                  Thou as a garment ſhalt thē change, & chaunged ſhal they bee
                  
                     
                        verse 27 But thou dooſt ſtil abide the ſame, thy yeres do neuer flee.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 The children of thy ſeruant ſhal, continually endure:
                  and in thy ſight their happy ſeede, for euer ſhal ſtand ſure.
               
            
            
               1 Benedic anima mea. pſalme .Ciii.
               T. S
               
                  This is a Pſalme moſt excellent, wherin the Prophet doth prouoke men and angels, and al creatures to prayſe the Lord for his fatherly mercies, and deliuerance of his people from al euils for his prouidence euer al things and the preſeruation of the faithful.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  MY ſoule geue laud vnto the Lord, my ſprite ſhall do the 
                     〈♫〉
                   ſame: and all the ſecrets of my hart praiſe ye his holy name. Geue 
                     〈♫〉
                   thanks to God for al his gifts, ſhew not thy ſelf vnkind, & ſuffer not 
                     〈♫〉
                   his benefites to ſlyp out of thy mynde.
               
                  
                     verse 3 That gaue thee pardon for thy faults, and thee reſtord again:
               For al thy weak and frayle diſeaſe, and heald thee of thy paine.
               
                  
                     verse 4 That did redeme thy life from death, frō which thou couldſt not flee
               His mercy and cōpaſſion both, he did extend to thee.
               
                  
                     verse 5 That fild with goodnes thy deſire, and did prolong thy youth:
               Like as the Egle caſteth her vil, wherby her age renueth.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The Lord with iuſtice doth repay, al ſuch as be oppreſt:
               So that their ſuffrings & their wrōgs, are turned to the beſt.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 7 His wayes & his cōmaundements, to Moyſes he did ſhew:
               His counſels and his valiant actes, the Iſraelites did know.
               
                  
                     verse 8 The Lord is kind and merciful, when ſinners do hym greue:
               The ſloweſt to conceyue a wrath, and redieſt to forgeue.
               
                  
                     verse 9 He chides not vs continually, though we be ful of ſtryfe:
               Nor kepes our faultes in memory, for al our ſinful lyfe.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Nor yet according to our ſinnes, the Lord doth vs regard:
               Nor after our iniquities, he doth not vs reward.
               
                  
                     verse 11 But as the ſpace is wondrous great, twixt heauen and earth aboue
               So is his goodnes much more large, to them that do hym loue.
               
                  
                     verse 12 God doth remoue our ſinnes from vs, and our offences al:
               as far as is the ſunne riſing, ful diſtant from his fal.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 And looke what pitie parents deare, vnto their children beare:
                  Like pitie beares the Lord to ſuch, as worſhip him in feare:
                  
                     
                        verse 14 The Lord yt made vs knoweth our ſhape, our mould & faſhion iuſt:
                  how weake and frayle our nature is, and how we be but duſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 And how the tyme of mortal men, is lyke the withering hay:
                  Or like the floure right fayre in field, that fades ful ſoone away.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Whoſe gloſſe & beauty ſtormy winds, do vtterly diſgrace:
                  and make that after their aſſaults, ſuch bloſſoms haue no place.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 But yet the goodnes of the Lord, with his ſhal euer ſtand:
                  their childrens children do receyue his righteouſnes at hand.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 I meane which kepe his couenant, with al their whole deſyre:
                  and not forget to do the thyng, that he doth them requyre.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 The heauēs hye are made the ſeat, and footeſtoole of the Lord:
                  And by his power imperial, he gouernes al the world.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Ye angels which are great in power, prayſe ye and bles the Lord:
                  Which to obey and do hys wyl, immediatly accord.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 ye noble hoſtes and miniſters, ceaſe not to land him ſtil:
                  Which ready are to execute, his pleaſure and hys wil.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 ye all his works in euery place, prayſe ye his holy name:
                  My hart, my mynd, and eke my ſoule, prayſe ye alſo the ſame.
               
            
            
               Benedic anima mea. pſalme .Ciiii.
               VV. K
               
                  An excellent Pſalme to prayſe God for the creation of the world, and the gouernaunce of the ſame by his maruelous prouidence: where in the Prophet prayeth againſt the wicked, who are occaſions that God diminiſheth his bleſſings.
               
               
                   
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  
                     MY ſoule praiſe the Lord, ſpeake good of hys 
                     〈♫〉
                   name: O Lord our great God, how dooſt thou 
                     〈♫〉
                   appeare, ſo paſſing in glory that great is thy fame: honour and ma- 
                     〈♫〉
                   ieſtie in thee ſhyne moſt cleare, with light as a robe thou haſt thee 
                     〈♫〉
                   beclad: wherby al the earth thy greatnes may ſee, the heauens in 
                     〈♫〉
                   ſuch ſort thou alſo haſt ſpred, that it to a curtayne compared may be.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Hys chamber beames lye, in the cloudes ful ſure,
               Which as his charet are made him to beare:
               And there with much ſwiftnes, his courſe doth endure
               Vpon the wings riding of wind in the ayre.
               
                  
                     verse 4 He maketh his ſprites, as heraldes to go:
               and lyghtnings to ſerue, we ſee alſo preſt,
               His wil to accompliſh they runne to and fro,
               To ſaue or conſume things as ſemeth hym beſt.
               
                  
                     verse 5 He groundeth the earth, ſo firmely and faſt,
               that it once to moue, none haue ſhal ſuch power.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The depe a fayre couering, for it made thou haſt,
               which by his owne nature, the hils would deuour.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 7 But at thy rebuke, the waters do flye:
               and ſo geue due place, thy word to obey.
               And at the voyce of thunder, ſo feareful they be,
               yt in their great raging, they haſt ſoone away
               
                  
                     verse 8 The mountains ful high, they then vp aſcend:
               If thou do but ſpeake, thy word they fulfil:
               So like wiſe the valleis, moſt quickly diſcend,
               where thou thē apointeſt, remain they do ſtil.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Their bonds haſt yu ſet, how far they ſhal run,
               So as in their rage, not that paſſe they can,
               For God hath appointed they ſhal not returne,
               the earth to deſtroy more, which made was for man.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 10 He ſendeth the ſprings, to ſtrong ſtreames and lakes:
                  which run do ful ſwift, among the huge hils:
                  
                     
                        verse 11 Where both ye wild aſſes, their thirſt oft times ſlakes,
                  and beaſtes of the mountains, therof drink their fils.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 By theſe pleaſant ſprings, or fountaynes ful fayre,
                  The foules of the ayre, abide ſhal and dwel:
                  Who moued by nature, to hoppe here and there,
                  among the grene braunches, their ſongs ſhal excel.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 The mountaynes to moyſt, the cloudes he doth vſe,
                  the earth with his workes, are wholy repleate:
                  
                     
                        verse 14 So as the brute cattle he doth not refuſe,
                  but graſſe doth prouide them, and herb for mās meat
                  
                     
                        verse 15 Yea bread, wyne, and oyle, he made for mans ſake,
                  His face to refreſh, and hart to make ſtrong:
                  
                     
                        verse 16 The Ceders of Liban, this great Lord dyd make,
                  which trees he doth nouriſh, that grow vp ſo long.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 In theſe may birds build, and make there their neſt:
                  In firre trees the ſtorkes remayn and abide:
                  
                     
                        verse 18 The hie hils are ſuccours, for wild goates to reſt,
                  And eke the rockes ſtony for conies to hyde.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 The moone then is ſet her ſeaſons to runne,
                  The dayes frō the nyghtes therby to diſcerne:
                  And by the diſcendyng alſo of the Sunne,
                  The cold from heat alway, therby we do learne.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 20 When darknes doth come, by Gods wil and power,
                  Then crepe forth do al, the beaſts of the wood.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 The Lions range roaring, theyr pray to deuour,
                  But yet it is thou (Lord) which giueſt them foode.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Aſſone as the ſunne is vp, they retyre,
                  To couch in their dennes, then are they ful fayne.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 That mā do his workes may, as right doth require,
                  Til night come and cal him, to take reſt agayne.
               
               
                  The third part.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 How ſondry (O Lord) are al thy workes found?
                  with wiſdome ful great, they are in dede wrought,
                  So that the whole world, of thy prayſe doth ſound,
                  and as for thy riches, they paſſe al mens thought.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 So is the great ſea, which large is and broad,
                  Where things y• crepe, ſwarme, & beaſts of ech ſort.
                  
                     
                        verse 26 There both mighty ſhips ſaile, and ſome lye at road:
                  The whale huge & m
                        •
                     ſtrous, there alſo doth ſport.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 Al things on thee wayt, thou dooſt them relieue,
                  And thou in due time, ful wel dooſt them fede.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 Now when it doth pleaſe thee, the ſame ſo to geue,
                  They gather ful gladly, thoſe things which they nede,
                  Thou openeſt thine hand, and they find ſuch grace,
                  That they with good things, are filled we ſee:
                  
                     
                        verse 29 But ſore are they troubled, if thou turne thy face:
                  For if thou their breath take, vile duſt thē they bee.
                  
                     
                        verse 30 Agayne when the ſpirit, from thee doth procede,
                  al things to appoint, and what ſhal inſue:
                  Then are they created, as thou haſt decreed,
                  and dooſt by thy goodnes, the dry earth renew.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 The prayſe of the Lord, for euer ſhal laſt,
                  Who may in his workes, by right wel reioyce.
                  
                     
                        verse 32 His looke can the earth make, to tremble ful faſt,
                  and likewiſe the mountains, to ſmoke at his voyce.
                  
                     
                        verse 33 To this Lord and God, ſing wil I alwayes,
                  So long as I lyue, my God prayſe wil I.
                  
                     
                        verse 34 Thē am I moſt certaine, my wordes ſhal him pleaſe,
                  I wil reioyce in him, to hym wil I cry.
                  
                     
                        verse 35 The ſinners, O Lord, conſume in thine ire,
                  and eke the peruerſe, them roote out with ſhame:
                  
                      But as for my ſoule, now let it ſtil deſire,
                  and ſay with the faithful, prayſe ye the Lords name.
               
            
            
               Confitemini domino. Pſalme .Cv.
               N.
               
                  ¶He prayſeth the ſingular goodnes of God, who hath of all the people of the world choſen a peculier people to hym ſelfe, and hauyng choſen them, neuer 
                        ••
                     aſeth to do them good, euen for his promiſe ſake.
               
               Syng this as the .95. Pſalm.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  GEue prayſes vnto God the Lord, and cal vpon his name:
               amōg y• people eke declare,  his workes, to ſpread his fame.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Sing ye vnto the Lord I ſay, and ſing vnto him prayſe,
               And talke of al the wōdrous works, y• he hath wrought alwayes.
               
                  
                     verse 3 In honor of his holy name, reioyſe with one accorde,
               and let the hart alſo reioyſe, of them that ſeke the Lord.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Seke ye the Lord, & ſeke the ſtrēgth, of his eternal might,
               and ſeke his face continually, and preſence of his ſight.
               
                  
                     verse 5 The wōdrous workes that he hath done, kepe ſtil in mindful hart,
               Ne let the iudgements of his mouth, out of your mind depart.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Ye that of faithful Abraham, his ſeruaunt are the ſede,
               Ye his elect, the children that of Iacob do procede.
               
                  
                     verse 7 For he, he onely is I ſay, the mighty Lord our God,
               and his moſt rightful iudgemēts are, through al the earth abrod.
               
                  
                     verse 8 His promiſe and his couenaunt, which he hath made to his:
               He hath remembred euermore, to thouſandes of degrees.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 9 The couenaunt which he hath made, with Abraham long ago,
                  and faythful oth which he hath ſworne, to Iſaac alſo.
                  
                     
                        verse 10 And did confirme the ſame for law, that Iacob ſhould obey,
                  and for eternal couenaunt, to Iſrael for ay.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 When thus he ſayd, loe I to you, al Canaan land wil geue,
                  The lot of your inheritaunce, wherin your ſede ſhal liue.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Although theyr number at that time, did very ſmal appeare,
                  Yea very ſmal, and in the land, they then but ſtraūgers were.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Whyle yet they walkt from land to land, without a ſure abode,
                  and while fro ſondry kingdomes they, did wander al abrod.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 And wrong at none oppreſſors hand, he ſuffred them to take,
                  But euen the great and mighty kings, reproued for theyr ſake.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 And thus he ſayd, touch ye not thoſe, that mine annoynted be,
                  Ne do the Prophetes any harme, that do pertayne to me.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 16 He cald a dearth vpon the land, of bread he ſtroyed the ſtore,
                  But he agaynſt their time of nede, had ſent a man before.
               
               
                  The third part.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Euen Ioſeph which had once ben ſold, in liue a ſlaue in wo,
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Whoſe feete they hurt in ſtocks, whoſe ſoule, the yron pearſt alſo.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Vntil the time came whē his cauſe, was knowen apparantly,
                  The mighty word of God the Lord, his faulties truth did try.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 The king ſent and deliuered him, from priſon where he was,
                  The ruler of the people then, did frely let him pas.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 And ouer al his houſe he made him Lord to beare the ſway,
                  and of his ſubſtaunce made him haue, the rule and al the ſtay.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 That he might to his wil inſtruct, the princes of his land,
                  and wiſdomes lore his auncient men, might teach to vnderſtand.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Then into the Egiptian land, came Iſrael alſo,
                  and Iacob in the land of Ham, did liue a ſtraunger tho.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 His people he excedingly, in number made to flow,
                  and ouer al theyr enemies, in ſtrength he made them grow.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 Whoſe hart he turnd that they with hate, his people did entreate,
                  and did his ſeruaunts wrongfully, abuſe with falſe deceit.
               
               
                  The fourth part.
                  
                     
                        verse 26 His faythful ſeruaunt Moſes then, and Aaron whom he choſe,
                  He did commaund to go to them, his meſſage to diſcloſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 The wondrous meſſage of his ſignes, among them they did ſhew,
                  and wonders in the land of Ham, then did they worke alſo.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 Darknes he ſent and, made it darke, in ſtede of brighter day
                  and vnto hys commiſſion, they did not diſobey.
                  
                     
                        verse 29 He turnd theyr waters into bloud, he did theyr fiſhes ſlay:
                  
                     
                        verse 30 Their lād brought frogs euē in ye place, where their kīg Pharao lay.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 He ſpake & at his voice there came, great ſwarmes of noyſom flies,
                  and al the quarters of theyr land, were fild with crauling life.
                  
                     
                        verse 32 He gaue them cold and ſtony hayle, in ſtede of milder rayn:
                  and firy flames within theyr land, he ſent vnto theyr payne.
                  
                     
                        verse 33 He ſmote theyr vines, & al theyr trees, wheron the figs did grow,
                  and al the trees within their coaſtes, down did he ouerthrow.
                  
                     
                        verse 34 He ſpake, then caterpillers did, and greſhoppers abound,
                  
                     
                        verse 35 Which ate the gras in al theyr ground, and frute of al theyr land.
               
               
                  The fifte part.
                  
                     
                        verse 36 The firſt begotten in theyr land, eke deadly did he ſmite,
                  yea the begynning and firſt frute, of al theyr ſtrength and might.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 37 With gold and ſiluer he them brought, from Egipt land to pas,
                  and in the number of their tribes, no feble one there was.
                  
                     
                        verse 38 Egipt was glad and ioyful then, when they did thence depart,
                  For terrour and the feare of them, was fallen vpon their hart.
                  
                     
                        verse 39 To ſhroud them from the parching heat, a cloud he did diſplay,
                  and fire he ſent to geue them light, when night had hid the day.
                  
                     
                        verse 40 They aſked and he cauſed quayles, to rayne at theyr requeſt,
                  and fully with the bread of heauen, theyr hunger he repreſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 41 He opened then the ſtony rock, and waters guſhed out,
                  and in the dry and parched groundes, like riuers ranne about.
                  
                     
                        verse 42 For of his holy couenaunt, ay mindful was he tho:
                  Which to hys ſeruaunt Abraham, he plighted long ago.
                  
                     
                        verse 43 He brought his people forth with mirth, and his elect with ioy:
                  Out of the cruel land, where they, had liued in great anoy.
                  
                     
                        verse 44 And of the Heathen men he gaue, to them the frutful lands,
                  The labors of the people eke, they tooke into theyr hands.
                  
                     
                        verse 45 That they his holy ſtatutes might, obſerue for euermore,
                  and faithfully obey his lawes, prayſe ye the Lord therfore.
               
            
            
               Confitemini domino. Pſalme .cvi.
               N.
               
                  ¶The people diſperſed vnder Antiochus do magnifie the goodnes of God among the iuſt and repentaunt: Deſiring to be brought agayne into the lande by Gods mercyfull viſitation. And after the manifolde meruayles of God wrought in their deliueraunc
                        •
                      forth of Egipt & the great ingratitude of the people rehearſed, they do pray and deſire to be gathered from among the Heathen to the entent they may prayſe the name of the God of Iſrael.
               
               Sing this as the .95. Pſalm.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  PRayſe ye the Lord,  for he is good, his mercy dures for ay.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Who can expreſſe his noble actes, or al his prayſe diſplay.
               
                  
                     verse 3 They bleſſed are that iudgement kepe, and iuſtly do alway:
               
                  
                     verse 4 With fauour of thy people, Lord, remember me I pray.
               And with thy ſauing health (O Lord) vouchſafe to viſite me:
               
                  
                     verse 5 That I the great felicitie, of thine elect may ſe.
               And with thy peoples ioy I may, a ioyful mind poſſes:
               and may with thine inheritaunce, a glorying hart expres.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Both we and eke our fathers al, haue ſinned euery one:
               We haue committed wickednes, and l
                     •
                  udly we haue done.
               
                  
                     verse 7 The wonders great which thou (O Lord) haſt done in Egipt land:
               Our fathers, though they ſaw them al, yet did not vnderſtand.
               Nor they thy mercyes multitude, did kep
                     •
                   in thankful mind:
               But at the ſea, yea the red ſea, rebelled moſt vnkind.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 8 Neuertheles he ſaued them, for honor of his name,
               That he might make his power knowne, & ſpred abrod wt fame.
               
                  
                     verse 9 The red ſea he did then rebuke, and forth with it was dryed:
               and as in wildernes, ſo through, the depe he did them guide.
               
                  
                     verse 10 He ſaued them from the cruel hand, of their deſpitful 
                     •
                  o,
               and from the enmies hand he did, deliuer them alſo.
               
                  The ſeconde part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 The waters theyr oppreſſors whelmd, not one was left alyue,
                  
                     
                        verse 12 Thē they beleued his wordes, & prayſe, in ſong they did him gyue.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 But by and by vnthankfully, his workes they cleane for gat:
                  and for his counſel and his wil, they did neglect to wayt.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 But luſted in the wildernes, with fond and gredy luſt,
                  and in the deſert tempted God, the ſtay of al theyr truſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 And then their wanton mindes deſire, he ſuffred them to haue,
                  But waſting leannes therewithal, into theyr ſoule he gaue.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Then, when they lodged in the tents, at Moſes they did grutch,
                  Aaron the holy of the Lord, ſo did they enuie much.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 Therfore the earth did open wyde, and Dathan did deuoure:
                  and al Abirams company, did couer in that houre.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 In their aſſembly kindled was, the whote conſuming fyre,
                  and waſting flame did thē burne vp, the wicked in his ire.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Vpon the hil of Horeb they, an idole calfe did frame,
                  and there the molten image they, did worſhip of the ſame.
                  Into the likenes of a calfe, that fedeth on the graſſe:
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Thus they their glory turnd and al, their honor did deface.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 And God theyr onely ſauiour, vnkindly they forgot,
                  Which many great & mighty things, in Egipt lād had wrought.
               
               
                  The third part.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 And in the land of Ham for thē, moſt wondrous workes had done,
                  and by the red ſea dreadful thyngs, performed long agone.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Therfore for their ſo ſhewing them, forgetful and vnkind,
                  To bryng deſtruction on them al, he purpoſd in his mynd.
                  Had not his choſen Moſes ſtood, before them in the breake:
                  To turne his wrath, leaſt he on thē, wt ſlaughter ſhould him wreke.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 They did deſpiſe the pleaſaunt land, that he beheight to geue:
                  yea and the workes that he had ſpoke, they did no whit beleue.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 But in their tents with grudging hart, they wickedly repynde,
                  Nor to the voyce of God the Lord, they gaue a harkning mind.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 26 Therfore agaynſt them lifted he, his ſtrong reuenging hand,
                  Them to deſtroy in wildernes, ere they ſhould ſee the land.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 And to deſtroy theyr ſede among, the nations with his rod,
                  and through the coūtreys of the world, to ſcatter them abrod.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 To Baal Peor then they did, and ioyne themſelues alſo,
                  and eate the offrings of the dead, ſo they forſoke him tho.
                  
                     
                        verse 29 Thus with theyr own inuentions, his wrath they did prouoke,
                  and in his ſo inkindly wrath, the plage vpon them broke.
                  
                     
                        verse 30 But Phineas ſtood vp with zeale, the ſinners vile to ſtay,
                  and iudgement he did execute, and then the plage did ſtay.
               
               
                  The fourth part.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 It was imputed vnto him, for righteouſnes that day,
                  and from thenceforth ſo compted is, from race to race for aye.
                  
                     
                        verse 32 At waters eke of Meribah, they did him angry make,
                  Yea ſo far fourth that Moſes was, then puniſht for theyr ſake.
                  
                     
                        verse 33 Becauſe they vext his ſpirit ſo ſore, that in impatient heat,
                  his lips ſpake vnaduiſedly, his feauor was ſo great.
                  
                     
                        verse 34 Nor as the Lord commaunded them, they ſlew the people tho.
                  
                     
                        verse 35 But were among the heathen mixt, and learned their workes alſo.
                  
                     
                        verse 36 And did theyr idols ſerue which were, theyr ruine and decay,
                  To feends their ſons and daughters they, did offer vp and ſtay.
                  
                     
                        verse 37 Yea with vnkindly murdryng knife, the giltles bloud they ſpilt:
                  
                     
                        verse 38 Yea theyr own ſons & daughters bloud, without al cauſe of gilt.
                  Whom they to Canaan Idols then, offred with wicked hand,
                  and ſo with bloud of innocents, defiled was the land.
                  
                     
                        verse 39 Thus wer thy ſtayned with the workes, of theyr own filthy way,
                  and with their own inuentions, a whoryng did they ſtray.
                  
                     
                        verse 40 Therfore agaynſt his people was, the Lords wrath kindled ſore,
                  and euen his own inheritaunce, therfore he did abhorre.
                  
                     
                        verse 41 Into the hands of heathen men, he gaue them for a pray,
                  and made theyr foes theyr Lords whō they, were forced to obey.
               
               
                  The fifte part.
                  
                     
                        verse 42 Yea and their hateful enemies, oppreſt them in the land,
                  And they were humbly made to ſtoope, as ſubiectes to theyr hād.
                  
                     
                        verse 43 Ful oftentimes from thral had he, deliuered them before,
                  But with theyr councels they to wrath, prouoked him euermore.
                  Therfore they by theyr wickednes, were brought ful low to ly,
                  
                     
                        verse 44 yet when he ſaw them in diſtres, he harkned to theyr cry.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 45 He cald to mind his couenaunt, which he to them had ſwore,
                  and by his mercyes multitude, repented him therfore.
                  
                     
                        verse 46 And fauour he them made to find, before the ſight of thoſe:
                  That led thē captiue frō their lād, when erſt they were their foes.
                  
                     
                        verse 47 Saue vs O Lord that art our God, ſaue vs O Lord we pray,
                  and from among the heathen folke, Lord gather vs away.
                  That we may ſpred the noble prayſe, of thy moſt holy name,
                  That we may glory in thy prayſe, and ſoundyng of thy fame.
                  
                     
                        verse 48 The Lord the God of Iſrael, be bleſt for euermore,
                  Let al the people ſay Amen, prayſe ye the Lord therfore.
               
            
            
               Confitemini domino. Pſalme .Cvii.
               VV. K.
               
                  ¶The Prophet extorteth all thoſe that are redemed by the Lord, and gathered vnto hym, to geue thankes for this mercif
                        •
                     l prouidence of God, gouerning all thinges at his good pleaſure, ſendyng good & euil, proſperitie and aduerſitie, to bryng men vnto hym. Therfore, as the righteous thereat reioyce, ſo ſhal the wicked haue their mouthes ſtopped.
               
               Sing this as the .9
                     •
                  . Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  GEue thankes vnto the Lord our God, for gratious is hee:
               And that his mercy hath none end, al mortal men may ſee.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Such as y• Lord redemed hath, wt thākes ſhould prayſe hys name,
               & ſhew how they frō foes wer freed, & how he wrought y• ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 3 He gathered them forth of the lands, that lay ſo far about:
               Frō Eaſt to Weſt, frō North to South, his hād did find thē out.
               
                  
                     verse 4 They wandred in the wildernes, and ſtrayed from the way,
               and found no citie where to dwel, that ſerue might for their ſtay.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Whoſe thirſt and honger was ſo great, in theſe deſertes ſo voyde:
               That fayntnes did thē ſore aſſault, and eke theyr ſoules anoyde.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Then did they cry in theyr diſtres, vnto the Lord for ayd:
               who did remoue theyr troubles ſtate, accordyng as they prayd.
               
                  
                     verse 7 And by that way which was moſt right, he led them like a guide:
               That they might to a citie go, and there alſo abide.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Let men therfore before the Lord, confes his goodnes then,
               and ſhew the wonders that he doth, before the ſonnes of men.
               
                  
                     verse 9 For he the empty ſoule ſuſtaynd, whom thirſt had made to faynt,
               The hungry ſoule with goodnes fed, and did thē eke acquaynt.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Such as do dwel in darknes depe, where they of death do wayt,
               Faſt boūd to taſt ſuch troublous ſtorms, as yron chaynes do threat.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 For that agaynſt the Lords own words, they ſought ſo to rebel,
                  Eſteming light his councels high, which do ſo far excel.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 12 But whē he humbled thē ful low, they then fel down with grief,
                  and none was foūd ſo much to help, wherby to get relief.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 Then did they cry in theyr diſtres, vnto the Lord for ayde,
                  who did remoue theyr troublous ſtate, according as they prayd.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 For he frō darknes out thē brought, & from deathes dredful ſhade,
                  Burſting with force the iron bandes, which did before thē lade.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 Let men therfore before the Lord, confes his kindnes then:
                  and ſhew the wonders that he doth, before the ſonnes of men.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 For he threw down theyr gates of bras, & brake thē wt ſtrōg hand,
                  The yron barres he ſmote in two, nothing could him withſtand.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 The fooliſh folke great plages do fele, and cannot from thē wend,
                  But heape on mo to thoſe they haue, becauſe they do offend.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Theyr ſoule ſomuch did loth al meat, that none they could abide,
                  wherby death had them almoſt caught, as they ful truly tride.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 Then did they cry in theyr diſtres, vnto the Lord for ayd:
                  who did remoue their troublous ſtate, according as they prayd.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 For he then ſent to them his word, which helth did ſone reſtore:
                  and brought them frō thoſe dāgers depe, wherin they wer before.
               
               
                  The third part.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 Let men therfore before the Lord, confes his kindnes then,
                  and ſhew the wonders that he doth, before the ſonnes of men.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 And let them offer ſacrifice, with thankes and alſo feare,
                  and ſpeake of al his wondrous workes with glad & ioyful cheare.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Such as in ſhips or brittel barkes, into the ſeas diſcend,
                  Theyr marchādiſe through feareful flouds, to cōpas and to end.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 Thoſe men are forced to behold, the Lords workes what they be,
                  and in the daungerous depe the ſame, moſt marueilous they ſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 For at his word, the ſtormy wind, ariſeth in a rage,
                  and ſtirreth vp the ſurges ſo, as nought can them aſſwage.
                  
                     
                        verse 26 Then are they lifted vp ſo high, the cloudes they ſeme to gayne,
                  and plunging down the depth vntil theyr ſoules cōſume wt payn.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 And like a drunkard to & fro, how here now there they reele,
                  as men with feare of wit bereft, or had of ſence no feele.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 Then did they cry in theyr diſtres, vnto the Lord for ayd,
                  Who did remoue theyr troublous ſtate, according as they prayd.
                  
                     
                        verse 29 For with his word the Lord doth make, the ſturdy ſtorme to ceaſe,
                  So yt the great waues frō theyr rage, are brought to reſt & peace.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 30 Then are men glad whē reſt is come, which they ſo much do craue:
                  and are by him in hauē brought, which they ſo faine would haue.
               
               
                  The fourth part.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 Let men therfore before the Lord, confes his kindnes then:
                  and ſhew the wonders that he doth, before the ſonnes of men.
                  
                     
                        verse 32 Let them in preſence of the folke, with prayſe extol his name,
                  and where the elders do conuent, let them there do the ſame.
                  
                     
                        verse 33 For running flouds to dry deſertes, he doth oft chaunge and turne:
                  and dryeth vp 
                        〈◊〉
                      it wer duſt, the ſpringing wel and bourne.
                  
                     
                        verse 34 A frutful land with pleaſures deckt, ful barren doth he make:
                  Whē on their ſinnes which dwel therin, he doth iuſt vēgeaūce take.
                  
                     
                        verse 35 Agayne the wildernes ful rude, he maketh frute to beare:
                  With pleaſaūt ſprings of water cleare, though none before wer there.
                  
                     
                        verse 36 Wherin ſuch hungry ſoules are ſet, as he doth frely chuſe,
                  That they a citie may them build, to dwel in for theyr vſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 37 That they may ſow their pleaſant land, & vineyardes alſo plant:
                  To yeld them frutes of ſuch increaſe, as none may ſeme to want.
                  
                     
                        verse 38 They multiply exceedingly, the Lord doth bles them ſo:
                  Who doth alſo their brute beaſts make, by nūbers great to grow.
                  
                     
                        verse 39 But when the faithful are low brought, by the oppreſſors ſtout:
                  and miniſh do through many plagues, that compas them about:
                  
                     
                        verse 40 Then doth he princes bring to ſhame, which did them ſo oppres,
                  and likewiſe cauſed them to erre, within the wildernes.
                  
                     
                        verse 41 But yet the poore he rayſeth vp, out of his troubles depe:
                  and oft times doth his trayne augmēt, much like a flocke of ſhepe.
                  
                     
                        verse 42 The righteous ſhal behold this ſight, and alſo much reioyce:
                  Wheras the wicked & peruerſe, with grief ſhal ſtop theyr voyce.
                  
                     
                        verse 43 But who is wiſe that now ful wel, he may theſe things record?
                  For certeinly ſuch ſhal perceyue, the kindnes of the Lord
               
            
            
               Paratum cor meum. Pſalme .Cviii.
               N.
               
                  ¶This Pſalm
                        •
                      is cōpoſed of two other Pſalmes before, the ſeuen & fifty, and the ſixty. The matter here cōteined, is, that Dauid geueth him ſelfe with hart & voyce to prayſe the Lord, and aſſureth him ſelfe of the promes of God, concerning his kyngdome ouer Iſraell, and his power agaynſt other nations, who though he ſeme for to forſake vs for a tyme, yet he alone in the end will caſt down
                        •
                      our enemyes.
               
               Syng this as the .95. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O God, my hart prepared is, and eke my toung is ſo,
               I wil aduaunce my voyce in ſong,  and geuing prayſe alſo.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Awake my viole and my harpe, ſwete melody to make,
               And in the morning I my ſelfe, right early wil awake.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 3 By me among the people, Lord, ſtil prayſed ſhalt thou bee,
               and I among the Heathen folke, wil ſing, O Lord, to thee.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Becauſe thy mercy, Lord is great, aboue the heauens hye,
               and eke thy truth doth reach the clouds, within the lofty ſkye.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Aboue the ſterry heauens high, exalt thy ſelfe, O God,
               and Lord diſplay vpon the earth, thy glory al abrod
               
                  
                     verse 6 That thy derely beloued may, be ſet at lyberty,
               Helpe, O my God, with thy right hand, and harken vnto me.
               
                  
                     verse 7 God in his holines hath ſpoke, wherfore my ioyes abound,
               Sichem I ſhal deuide, and mete, the vale of Sucoth ground.
               
                  
                     verse 8 And Gilead ſhal be mine own, Manaſſes mine ſhal be,
               My head ſtrength Ephraim, and law ſhal Iuda geue for me.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Moab my waſhpot, and my ſhoe, on Edom wil I throw,
               Vpon the land of Paleſtine, in triumph wil I go.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Who ſhal into the citie ſtrong, be guide to conduict me?
               Or who by whom to Edom land, conueyed ſhal I be?
               
                  
                     verse 11 Is it not thou, O God, which late hadſt vs forſaken quite?
               and thou O Lord, which with our hoſt, didſt not go forth to fight?
               
                  
                     verse 12 Geue vs, O Lord, thy ſauing ayde, when troubles doth aſſayle:
               For al the helpe of man is vayne, and can no whit auayle.
               
                  
                     verse 13 Through God we ſhal do valiant acts, and worthy of renown:
               He ſhal ſubdue our enemies, yea he ſhal treade them down.
            
            
               Deus laudem tuam. Pſalme .Cix.
               N.
               
                  ¶Dauid being falſely accuſed by flatterers vnto Saul, prayeth God to kepe him & to deſtroy his enemies. And vnder them he ſpeaketh of Iudas the traytour vnto Ieſus Chriſt, and of al the like enemyes of the children of God: And deſireth to be deliuered, that his enemyes may know the workes of God. Thē doth be promiſe to geue prayſes vnto God.
               
               Sing this as the .65. pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  IN ſpechles ſilence do not hold,  O God thy tong alwayes,
               O God, euen thou I ſay that art, the God of al my prayſe.
               
                  
                     verse 2 The wicked mouth & gileful mouth, on me diſcloſed be,
               and they with falſe and lying tong, haue ſpoken vnto me.
               
                  
                     verse 3 They did beſet me round about, with wordes of hateful ſpite:
               without al cauſe of my deſert, agaynſt me did they fight.
               
                  
                     verse 4 For my good wil they were my foes, but then gan I to pray:
               
                  
                     verse 5 My good with il, my frendlynes, with hate they did repay.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Set thou the wicked ouer him, to haue the vpper hand:
               at his right hand eke ſuffer thou, his hateful foe to ſtand.
               
                  
                     verse 7 When he is iudged, let him then condemned be therin:
               And let the prayer that he makes, be turned into ſinne.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 8 Few be his dayes, his charge alſo, let thou an other take,
               
                  
                     verse 9 His children let be fatherles, his wife a widow make.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Let his ofſpring be vagabounds, to beg and ſeke theyr bread,
               wandring out of the waſted place, where erſt they haue ben fed.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Let couetous extortioner, catch al his goods and ſtore,
               and let the ſtraungers ſpoyle the frutes, of al his toyle before.
               
                  
                     verse 12 Let there be none to pyty him, let there be none at al,
               That on his children fatherles, wil let theyr mercy fal.
               
                  The ſeconde part.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 And ſo let his poſterity, for euer be deſtroyd,
                  Their name out blotted in the age, that after ſhal ſuccede.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Let not his fathers wickednes, frō Gods remembraūce fal,
                  and let thou not his mothers ſinne, be done away at al.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 But in the preſence of the Lord, let them remayne for ay,
                  That frō the earth their memory, he may cut cleane away.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Sith mercy he forgat to ſhew, but did purſue with ſpite,
                  The troubled mā, & ſought to ſlay, the woful harted wight.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 As he did curſing loue, it ſhal betide vnto him ſo:
                  and as he did not bleſſing loue, it ſhalbe far him fro.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 As he with curſing clad him ſelfe, ſo it like water ſhal
                  Into his bowels, and like oyle, into his bones befal.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 As garment let it be to him, to couer him for ay,
                  and as a gyrdle wherwith he ſhal gyrded be alway.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 Lo let this ſame be from the Lord, the guerdon of my fo,
                  yea and of thoſe that euel ſpeake, againſt my ſoule alſo.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 But thou, O Lord that art my God, deale thou I ſay wt me:
                  after thy name deliuer me, for good thy mercyes be.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Becauſe in depth of great diſtres, I nedy am and poore,
                  and eke within my payned breſt, my hart is wounded ſore.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 Euen ſo do I depart away, as doth declining ſhade,
                  and as the graſhopper ſo I am ſhaken of and fade.
                  
                     
                        verse 24 With faſting long frō nedeful fode, enfebled are my knees:
                  and al her fatnes hath my fleſh, enforced ben to leeſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 And I alſo a vile reproch, to them was made to be:
                  and they that did vpō me looke, did ſhake their heds at me
                  
                     
                        verse 26 But thou O Lord that art my God, mine ayde & ſuccour be,
                  according to thy mercy Lord, ſaue and deliuer me.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 And they ſhal know therby, y• this lord is thy mighty hād,
                  and that yu thou haſt done it, Lord, ſo ſhal they vnderſtand.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 28 Although they curſe with ſpite, yet thou ſhalt bles wt louing voice,
                  They ſhal ariſe and come to ſhame, thy ſeruaunt ſhal reioyce.
                  
                     
                        verse 29 Let them be clothed al with ſhame, that enmyes are to me,
                  and with confuſion as a cloke, eke couerd let them be.
                  
                     
                        verse 30 But greatly I wil with my mouth, geue thankes vnto the Lord,
                  and I among the multitude, his prayſes wil record.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 For he with help at his right hand, wil ſtand the poore man by?
                  To ſaue him from the men that would, condemne his ſoule to dy.
               
            
            
               Dixit dominus domino. Pſalme .Cx.
               N.
               
                  ¶Dauid prophecieth of the power and euerlaſtyng kyngdome geuen to Chriſt & of his prieſthood, whiche ſhould put an end to the prieſthood of Leuy.
               
               Sing this ad the .68. Pſalm.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THe Lord did ſay vnto my Lord, ſit thou at my right hand,
               Til I haue made thy foes a ſtoole,  wheron thy feete ſhal ſtād.
               
                  
                     verse 2 The Lord ſhal out of Sion ſend, the ſcepter of thy might,
               Amid thy mortal foes be thou, the ruler in theyr ſight.
               And in the day on which they raygne, and power they ſhal ſee:
               
                  
                     verse 3 Then hereby frewil offrings ſhal, thy people offer thee.
               yea with a holy worſhipping, then ſhal they offer al,
               Thy birthes dew is the dew that doth, frō wōbe of morning fal.
               
                  
                     verse 4 The Lord hath ſworne & neuer wil, repent what he doth ſay,
               By thorder of Melchiſedech, thou art a prieſt for ay.
               
                  
                     verse 5 The Lord thy God on thy right hand, that ſtandeth for thy ſtay:
               Shal woūd for thee the ſtately kings, vpon his wrathful day.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The heathen he ſhal iudge and fil, the place with bodyes dead,
               and ouer diuers countreys ſhal, in ſonder ſmite the head.
               And he ſhal drinke out of the broke, that runneth in the way:
               Therfore he ſhal lift vp on hye, his royal head that day.
            
            
               Confitebor tibi domine. Pſalme .cxi.
               N.
               
                  ¶He geueth thankes to the Lord for his mercifull workes towardes his Churche, and declareth wherein true wiſedome and right knowledge conſiſteth.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  WIth hart I do accord to prayſe & laud the Lord 
                     〈♫〉
                   In preſence of the iuſt: For great his workes
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   are found. To ſearch them ſuch are bound, as do him loue and truſt. 
                     〈♫〉
                   His workes are glorious, alſo his righteouſnes, it doth endure for 
                     〈♫〉
                   euer, his wondrous workes he would, we ſtil remember ſhould, hys 
                     〈♫〉
                   mercy fayleth neuer.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Suche as do loue him beare, a portion full fayre.
               He hath vp for them laid, for this they ſhal wel finde,
               He will them haue in minde, and kepe them, as he ſayd,
               
                  
                     verse 6 For he did not diſdayne, his workes to ſhew them playne.
               By lightning and by thunders, when he the Heathens land:
               Did geue into their hand, where they beheld his wonders.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Of all his workes inſueth, both iudgement, right and truth.
               Wherto his ſtatutes tend: 
                     verse 8 They are decreed ſure.
               For euer to endure, whiche equitie doth end:
               Redemption he gaue, his people for to ſaue.
               
                  
                     verse 9 And hath alſo required, his promes not to fayle,
               But alwayes to preuaile, his holy name be feared.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Whoſo with hartful faine, true wiſdom wold attaine:
               The Lord feare and obey, ſuch as his lawes do kepe:
               ſhall knowledge haue ful depe, his praiſe ſhal laſt for aye.
            
            
               Beatus vir. pſalme .Cxii.
               VV. K.
               
                  ¶He praiſeth the felicitie of them that feare God, and condemneth the curſed ſtate of the con
                     
                        •
                     emners of God.
               
               Sing this as the Pater noſter.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THe man is bleſt that god doth feare,
               and that his lawes doth loue in dede:
               His ſede on earth God wil vpreare:
               
                   And bles ſuch as from hym procede,
               His houſe with good he wil fulfil:
               His rightouſnes endure ſhal ſtil
               
                  
                     verse 2 Vnto the righteous doth aryſe, ❧
               
               In trouble ioy, in darkenes lyght:
               Compaſſion is in his eyes,
               And mercy alwayes in his ſyght:
               
                  
                     verse 3 Yea, pitie moueth ſuch to lend:
               He doth by iudgement things expend. ❧
               
               
                  
                     verse 4 And furely ſuch ſhal neuer fayle,
               For in remembrance had is he:
               
                  
                     verse 5 No tidings il can make hym quayle,
               Who in the Lord ſure hope doth ſee.
               
                  
                     verse 6 His hart is firme, his feare is paſt:
               For he ſhal ſee his foes down caſt.
               
                  
                     verse 7 He did wel for the poore prouide, ❧
               
               his righteouſnes ſhal ſtil remayn,
               And hys eſtate with prayſe abyde,
               Though that the wicked man diſdayne,
               
                  
                     verse 8 Yea gnaſhe his teeth therat ſhal hee
               And ſo conſume hys ſtate to ſee.
            
            
               Laudate pueri. Pſalme .Cxiii.
               VV. K.
               
                  ¶An exhortation to prayſe the Lord for his prouidence in that, that contrary to the courſe of nature he worketh in his church.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  YE childrē which do ſerue the Lord, praiſe 
                     〈♫〉
                   ye his name with one accorde, yea bleſſed 
                     〈♫〉
                   be alwayes hys name: who from the ryſing of the ſunne, till it returne
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   where it begunne, is to be prayſed with great fame. The 
                     〈♫〉
                   Lord al peoples doth ſurmount, as for his glory we may count, 
                     〈♫〉
                   aboue the heauens hye to be: With God the Lord who may compare, 
                     〈♫〉
                   whoſe dwellings in the heauens are, of ſuche great power 
                     〈♫〉
                   and force is he.
               
                  
                     verse 6 He doth abaſe himſelf, we know,
               Thinges to beholde both here below
               And alſo in heauen aboue,
               
                  
                     verse 7 The nedy out of duſt to drawe,
               and eke the poore, which help none ſawe
               His onely mercy did him moue:
               
                  
                     verse 8 And ſo him ſet in high degre,
               with princes of great dignitie:
               That rule his people with great fame,
               
                  
                     verse 9 The barren he doth make to beare,
               And with great ioye her frute to reare:
               Therfore praiſe ye his holy name.
            
            
               In exitu Iſrael. pſalme .Cxiiii.
               VV. VV.
               
                  ¶How the Iſraelites were deliuered out of Egipt, and of the wonderfull miracles that God ſhewed at that tyme, which put vs in remembraunce of gods great mercies towardes hys children, and of our vnthankfulnes for the ſame.
               
               Syng this as the .67. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  WHen Iſrael by Gods addres,  from Pharos land was bent:
               and Iacobs houſe the ſtraungers left, & in the ſame train wēt
               
                  
                  
                     verse 2 In Iuda God his glory ſhewde, his holynes moſt bryght:
               So did the Iſraelites declare, his kingdom, power and myght.
               
                  
                     verse 3 The ſea it ſaw, and ſodenly, as all amaſde dyd flee,
               The roring ſtreames of Iordans floud, reculed backwardly.
               
                  
                     verse 4 As rammes afrayd, y• moūtains ſkipt, their ſtrength did thē forſake
               And as ye ſely trembling lambes, their toppes did beate and ſhake
               
                  
                     verse 5 What ayled the ſea, as all amaſde, ſo ſodenly to flee?
               Ye rollyng waues of Iordans floud, why ran ye backe wardly?
               
                  
                     verse 6 Why ſhoke ye hils as Rāmes afraid, why did your ſtrēgth ſo ſhake?
               Why did your tops as tremblyng lambs for feare quiuer & quake:
               
                  
                     verse 7 O earth cōfeſſe thy ſoueraign Lord, and dread his mighty hand:
               Before the face of Iacobs God, feare ye both ſea and land.
               
                  
                     verse 8 I mean y• god which frō hard rocks, doth cauſe many flouds apeare
               and from the ſtony flint doth make, guſh out ye fountaines cleare.
            
            
               Non nobis domine. pſalme .Cxv.
               N
               
                  ¶A prayer of the faythfull, oppreſſed by Idolatrous tirants, againſt whom they deſire that God would ſuccour thē:for aſmuch as there is no compariſon betwene him and their falſe GOD, or Idoles, truſting moſt conſtantly that God wil preſerue them in this their nede, ſeing that he hath adopted, and receaued them to his fauoure: promiſing finally, that they wil not be vnmindfull, of ſo great a benefite, if it would pleaſe God to heare their prayer, and delyuer them by his omnipotent power.
               
               Sing this as the .78. pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  NOt vnto vs Lord, not to vs, but to thy name geue prayſe:
               Both for the mercy and the truth,  that are in thee alwayes.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Why ſhal ye heathen ſcorners ſay, where is their god become?
               
                  
                     verse 3 Our God in he auen is, and what he wil, that hath he done.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Their Idols ſiluer are and gold, work of mens hands they bee:
               
                  
                     verse 5 They haue a mouth and do not ſpeake, and eyes and do not ſee.
               
                  
                     verse 6 And they haue eares ioynd to their heds, and do not heare at al:
               and noſes eke they formed haue, and do not ſmel withal.
               
                  
                     verse 7 And hands they haue and handle not, and feete and do not go:
               a throte they haue, yet through ye ſame, they make no ſoūd to blow
               
                  
                     verse 8 Thoſe that make them be like to thē, and thoſe whoſe truſt they be
               
                  
                     verse 9 O Iſrael truſt in the Lord, their help and ſhield is he.
               
                  
                     verse 10 O Aarons houſe truſt in the Lord, their helpe and ſhield is he:
               
                  
                     verse 11 Truſt ye the Lord that feare the Lord, their help and ſhield is he.
               
                  
                     verse 12 The Lord hath myndful bene of vs, and wil vs bleſſe alſo:
               On Iſraels and Aarons houſe, his bleſſyng he wil ſhew.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 13 Them that be fearers of the Lord, the Lord wil bleſſe them al
               Euen he wil bleſſe them euery one, the great and eke the ſmal.
               
                  
                     verse 14 To you I ſay the louyng Lord, wil multiply hys grace:
               To you aud to the children that, ſhal follow of your race.
               
                  
                     verse 15 Ye are the bleſſed of the Lord, euen of the Lord I ſay:
               Which both the heauen and the earth, hath made & ſet in ſtay.
               
                  
                     verse 16 The heauens, yea the heauens hye, belong vnto the Lord:
               The earth vnto the ſonnes of men, he gaue of free accord.
               
                  
                     verse 17 They that be dead do not with prayſe, ſet forth ye Lords renoume,
               Nor any that into the place, of ſilence do go downe:
               
                  
                     verse 18 But we wil praiſe the Lord our god, from henceforth and for ay:
               Sound ye the prayſes of the Lord, praiſe ye the Lord I ſay.
            
            
               Dilexi quoniam. pſalme .Cxvi.
               N
               
                  ¶Dauid being in great daunger of Sau
                        •
                     l in the deſert of Mammom, perceuing y• great and 
                        〈◊〉
                      loue of God toward him, magnyfyeth ſuch great mercies, and proteſteed that he wil be thankefull for the ſame.
               
               Sing this as the .94. Pſalm.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  I Loue the Lord, becauſe my voyce, aud prayer heard hath he:
               when in my dayes I cald on hym,  he bowed his eare to me.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Euen when the ſnares of cruel death, about beſet me round:
               when paines of hel me caught, & when I wo and ſorrow found.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Vpon the name of God my Lord, then did I cal and ſay:
               Deliuer thou my ſoule O Lord, I do thee humbly pray:
               
                  
                     verse 4 The Lord is very merciful, and iuſt he is alſo:
               and in our God compaſſion, doth plentifully flow.
               
                  
                     verse 5 The Lord in ſafety doth preſerue, all thoſe that ſymple be:
               I was in woful miſery, and he relieuedme.
               
                  
                     verse 6 And now my ſoule ſyth thou art ſafe, returne vnto thy reſt:
               For largely loe the Lord to thee, his bountie hath expreſt.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Becauſe thou haſt deliuered, my ſoule from deadly thral:
               My moiſted eine frō mourneful teares, my ſliding fete from fal:
               
                  
                     verse 8 Before the Lord I in the land, of lyfe wyl walke therfore:
               I did beleue, therfore I ſpake, for I was troubled ſore.
               
                  
                     verse 9 I ſayd in my diſtres and feare, that al men lyers be:
               what ſhal I pay the Lord for al, his benefites to me?
               
                  
                     verse 10 The holſome cup of ſauyng health, I thankfully wil take:
               and on the Lordes name I wil cal, when I my prayer make.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 11 I to the Lord wil pay the vowes, that I haue him be hight:
               yea, euen at this preſent time, in al his peoples ſight.
               
                  
                     verse 12 Right deare and precious in his ſight, the Lord doth ay eſteme:
               The death of al his holy ones, what euer men do deme.
               
                  
                     verse 13 Thy ſeruant Lord, thy ſeruant lo, I do my ſelf confes:
               Son of thy handmaid, thou haſt broke, the bondes of my diſtres.
               
                  
                     verse 14 And I wil offer vp to thee, a ſacrifice of prayſe:
               And I wil cal vpon the name, of God the Lord alwayes.
               
                  
                     verse 15 I to the Lord wil pay the vowes, that I haue him behight:
               yea euen at this preſent tyme, in al his peoples ſyght.
               
                  
                     verse 16 Yea in the courtes of Gods own houſe, and in the mids of thee:
               O thou Ieruſalem I ſay, wherfore the Lord prayſe yee.
            
            
               Laudate dominum. pſalme .Cxvii.
               N.
               
                  ¶He exhorteth the gentils to prayſe god, becauſe he hath accompliſhed as wel to them as the Iewes, the promiſe of life euerlaſtinge by Ieſus Chriſt.
               
               Sing this as the .98. pſalme.
               
                  O Al ye nations of the world,  prayſe ye the Lord alwayes:
               and al ye people euery where, ſet forth his noble prayſe.
               For great his kindnes is to vs, his truth endures for ay:
               wherfore prayſe ye the Lord our God, prayſe ye the Lord I ſay.
            
            
               Confitemini domin
                     •
                  . Pſalme .Cxviii.
               M.
               
                  ¶Dauid reiected of Saule and of the people, at the time appoynted obteined the kingdome, for the whiche he biddeth all them that feare the Lord, to be thankfull, and vnder his perſon, in al this was Chriſt liuely ſetforth, who ſhould be of his people reiected.
               
               Syng this as the .98 Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O Geue the thanks vnto the Lord,  for gratious is hee:
               Becauſe his mercy doth endure, for euer towards thee.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Let Iſrael confes and ſay, his mercy dures for ay:
               Now let the houſe of Aaron ſay, his mercy dures for ay.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Let al that feare the Lord our God, euen now confes and ſay:
               The mercy of the Lord our God, endureth ſtil for ay.
               
                  
                     verse 4 In trouble and in heauines, vnto the Lord I cride:
               Which louingly hard me at large, my ſute was not denide.
               
                  
                     verse 5 The Lord himſelf is on my ſyde, I wil not ſtand in doubt:
               Nor feare what man can do to me, when God ſtands me about.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The Lord doth take my part with thē, that helpe to ſuccour me:
               Therfore I ſhal ſee my deſire, vpon myne enemy.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Better it is to truſt in God, then in mans mortal ſede:
               Or to put confidence in kings, or prynces in our nede.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Al nations haue incloſed me, and compaſſed me round:
               But in the name of God ſhal I, myne enemies confound.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 9 They kept me in on euery ſyde, they kept me in I ſay,
               but through ye Lords moſt mighty name, I ſhal work their decay
               
                  
                     verse 10 They came about me al lyke bees, but yet in the Lordes name:
               I quēcht their thornes that were on fire, and wil deſtroy ye ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Thou haſt wyth force thruſt ſore at me, that I in dede myght fall:
               But through the Lord I found ſuch help, yt they wer vāquiſht al
               
                  
                     verse 12 The Lord is my defence & ſtrength, my ioy, my mirth, and ſong:
               He is become for me in deede, a ſauior moſt ſtrong.
               
                  
                     verse 13 The right hand of ye lord our God, doth bring to paſſe great things
               He cauſeth voyce of ioy and health, in rightrous mens dwellings
               
                  
                     verse 14 The right hād of the Lord doth bring, moſt mighty things to pas
               His hath the preeminence, his force is as it was.
               
                  
                     verse 15 I wil not dye but euer lyue, to vtter and declare:
               the lord his might & wōdrous power, his works & what they are
               
                  
                     verse 16 The Lord himſelf hath chaſtened, and hath corrected me:
               But hath not geuen me ouer yet, to death as ye may ſee.
               
                  
                     verse 17 Set open vnto me the gates, of truth and righteouſnes:
               That I may enter into them, the Lordes prayſe to confes.
               
                  
                     verse 18 This is the gate euen of the Lord, which ſhal not ſo be ſhut:
               But good and righteous men alway, ſhal enter into it.
               
                  
                     verse 19 I wil geue thankes to thee O Lord, becauſe thou haſt heard me:
               And art become moſt louingly, a ſauiour vnto me.
               
                  
                     verse 20 The ſtone which at this tyme among, the builders was refuſed:
               Is now become the corner ſtone, and chiefly to be vſed.
               
                  
                     verse 21 This was the mighty worke of God, this was the lords own fact
               and it is maruelous to behold, with eyes that noble act.
               
                  
                     verse 22 This is the ioyful day in dede, which God himſelf hath wrought:
               Let vs be glad and ioy therin, in hart, in mynd, and thought.
               
                  
                     verse 23 Now help me Lord and proſper vs, we wiſh with one accord:
               Bleſſed be he that comes to vs, in the name of the Lord.
               
                  
                     verse 24 God is the Lord that ſhewes vs light, bind ye therfore with cord:
               Your ſacrifice to the altar, and geue thankes to the Lord.
               
                  
                     verse 25 Thou art my God I wil confes, and render thanks to thee:
               thou art my God and I wil prayſe, thy mercy towardes mee.
               
                  
                     verse 26 O geue ye thanks vnto the Lord, for gratious is hee:
               Becauſe his mercy doth endure, for euer towardes thee.
            
            
               
               Beati immaculati. Pſalme .Cxix.
               VV. VV.
               
                  ¶In this Pſalm is contayned an exquiſite arte, & a wonderful vehemēcy in ſetting forth the praiſes of gods law: wherin y• prophet cannot ſatiſfy himſelf, nor ſufficiently expreſſe the affectiō which he beareth therūto: adding moreouer many notable complaintes & conſolations, wherfore it is mete that al the faithful haue it alway both in hart and mouth, and in the Ebrue euery viii. verſes beg in with one letter of the Alphabet.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  BLeſſed are they that perfect are, & pure in mind and hart: 
                     〈♫〉
                   whoſe liues & conuerſatiō, from gods lawes neuer ſtart. 2. Bleſſed are 
                     〈♫〉
                   they that geue themſelues, his ſtatutes to obſerue: ſekyng the Lord, 
                     〈♫〉
                   with al their hart, and neuer from him ſwerue.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Doubtles ſuch men go not aſtray, nor do no wicked thyng:
               which ſtedfaſtly walke, in hys pathes, without any wandryng.
               
                  
                     verse 4 It is thy wil and commaundement, that with attentiue heede:
               Thy noble and diuine precepts, we learne and kepe in deede,
               
                  
                     verse 5 Oh would to God it might thee pleaſe, my wayes ſo to addres:
               That I might both in hart and voyce, thy lawes kepe and confes
               
                  
                     verse 6 So ſhould no ſhame my lyfe attaynt, whilſt I thus ſet mine eyes:
               and bend my mynd alwayes to muſe, on thy ſacred decrees.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Then wil I prayſe with vpright hart, and magnify thy name:
               When I ſhal learn thy iudgements iuſt, and like wiſe proue ye ſame
               
                  
                     verse 8 And wholy wil I geue my ſelf, to kepe thy lawes moſt right:
               Forſake me not for euer Lord, but ſhew thy grace and might.
               
                  BETH The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 9 BY what meanes may a yōg mā beſt, his lyfe learne to amend?
                  If that he marke and kepe thy word, and therin his time ſpend
                  
                     
                        verse 10 Vnfaynedly I haue thee ſought, and thus ſekyng abyde:
                  Oh neuer ſuffer me O Lord, from thy precepts to ſlyde.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 11 Within my hart & ſecret thoughts, thy wordes I haue hyd ſtil:
                  That I might not at any time, offend thy godly wil.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 We magnify thy name O Lord, and prayſe thee euermore:
                  Thy ſtatutes of moſt worthy fame, O Lord teach me therfore.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 My lips haue neuer ceaſt to preach, and publiſh day and nyght:
                  The iudgemēts al which did procede, frō thy mouth ful of might.
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Thy teſtimonies and thy wayes, pleaſe me no les in dede:
                  then al ye treaſures of ye earth, which worldlings make their mede
                  
                     
                        verse 15 Of thy precepts I wil ſtil muſe, and therfore frame my talke:
                  As at a marke ſo wil I ayme, thy wayes how I may walke.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 My onely ioy ſhal be ſo fixed, and on thy lawes ſo ſet:
                  That nothyng can me ſo far blynd, that I thy words forget.
               
               
                  GIMEL The third part
                  
                     
                        verse 17 GRaunt to thy ſeruant now ſuch grace, as may my lyfe prolong:
                  Thy holy word then wil I kepe, both in my hart and tong.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 Mine eyes which were dim & ſhut vp, ſo open and make bright:
                  that of thy law & marueilous workes, I may haue y• cleare ſight.
                  
                     
                        verse 19 I am a ſtraunger in this earth, wandryng now here, now there:
                  Thy word therfore to me diſcloſe, my footeſteps for to cleare.
                  
                     
                        verse 20 My ſoule is rauiſhed with deſyre, and neuer is at reſt:
                  But ſeketh to know thy iudgemēts hye, & what may pleaſe thee beſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 21 The proud men and malicious, thou haſt deſtroyd echone:
                  and curſed are ſuch as do not, thy heſtes attend vpon.
                  
                     
                        verse 22 Lord turne me frō rebuke & ſhame, which wicked men conſpire:
                  For I haue kept thy couenants, with zeale as hoate as fyre.
                  
                     
                        verse 23 The princes great in counſel ſate, and did againſt me ſpeake:
                  but thē thy ſeruāt thought how he, thy ſtatutes might not breake
                  
                     
                        verse 24 For why thy couenants are my ioy, and my great harts ſolace:
                  They ſerue in ſtede of counſellers, my matters for to pas.
               
               
                  DALETH The .iiii. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 25 
                     I Am alas as brought to graue, and almoſt turnd to duſt:
                  Reſtore therfore my lyfe agayne, as thy promiſe is iuſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 26 My wayes whē I acknowledged, with mercy thou dydſt heare:
                  Here now eftſones and me inſtruct, thy lawes to loue and feare.
                  
                     
                        verse 27 Teach me once throughly for to know, thy precepts and thy lore:
                  Thy works then wil I meditate, and lay them vp in ſtore.
                  
                     
                        verse 28 My ſoule I feele ſo ſore oppreſt, that it melteth for griefe:
                  Accordyng to thy word therfore, haſt Lord to ſend reliefe.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 29 From lieng and deceitful lips, let thy grace me defend:
                  and that I may learn thee to loue, thy holy law me ſend.
                  
                     
                        verse 30 The way of truth both ſtraight & ſure, I haue choſen and found.
                  I ſet thy iudgement me before, which kepe me ſafe and ſound.
                  
                     
                        verse 31 Since then (O Lord) I forced my ſelf, thy couenants to embrace:
                  Let me therfore haue no rebuke, nor check in any caſe,
                  
                     
                        verse 32 Then wil I runne with ioyful cheare, where thy word doth me cal
                  when thou haſt ſet my hart at large, and rid me out of thral.
               
               
                  HE The fyft part.
                  
                     
                        verse 33 INſtruct me Lord in the right trade, of thy ſtatutes deuyne:
                  and it to kepe euen to the end, my hart wil I encline.
                  
                     
                        verse 34 Graunt me the knowledge of thy law, and I ſhal it obey:
                  With hart and mynd, and al my might, I wil it kepe I ſay.
                  
                     
                        verse 35 In the right path of thy precepts, guide me Lord I require:
                  None other pleaſure do I wiſh, nor greater thyng deſyre.
                  
                     
                        verse 36 Incline my hart thy lawes to kepe, and couenants to embrace:
                  And from al filthy auarice, Lord ſhield me with thy grace.
                  
                     
                        verse 37 From vayn deſires and worldly luſtes, turn back mine eyes & ſyght
                  Gene me the ſpirit of lyfe & power, to walk thy wayes aright.
                  
                     
                        verse 38 Confirme thy gratious promiſe Lord, which thou haſt made to mee
                  Which am thy ſeruant and do loue, and feare nothyng but thee.
                  
                     
                        verse 39 Reproch & ſhame which I ſo feare, from me (O Lord) expel:
                  For thou dooſt iudge with equity, & therin dooſt excel.
                  
                     
                        verse 40 Behold my harts deſyre is bent, thy lawes to kepe for ay:
                  Lord ſtrengthē me ſo with thy grace, that it perform I may.
               
               
                  VAV The ſyxt part.
                  
                     
                        verse 41 THy mercies great and manifold, let me obtayne O Lord:
                  Thy ſauing health let me enioy, according to thy word.
                  
                     
                        verse 42 So ſhal I ſtop ye ſlaundrous mouthes, of leud men and vniuſt:
                  For in thy faithful promiſes, ſtandes my comfort and truſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 43 The word of truth within my mouth, let euer ſtil be preſt:
                  For in thy iudgements wonderful, my hope doth ſtand and reſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 44 And while y• breath within my breſt, doth natural life preſerue:
                  Yea til this world ſhal be diſſolued, thy law wil I obſerue.
                  
                     
                        verse 45 So walk wil I as ſet at large, and made free from al drede:
                  Becauſe I ſought how for to kepe, thy precepts and thy rede.
                  
                     
                        verse 46 Thy noble actes I wil deſcribe, as things of moſt great fame:
                  Euē before kings I wil them blaſe, and ſhrink no whit for ſhame.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 47 I wil reioyce then to obey, thy worthy heſtes and wil:
                  which euermore I haue loued beſt, and ſo wil loue them ſtil.
                  
                     
                        verse 48 My hands wil I lyft to thy lawes, which I haue dearely ſought:
                  and practiſe thy commaundements, in wil, in dede, and thought.
               
               
                  ZAIN The .vii. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 49 THy promiſe which yu madeſt to me, thy ſeruant Lord remember
                  For therin haue I put my truſt, and confidence for euer.
                  
                     
                        verse 50 It is my comfort and my ioy, when troubles me aſſayle:
                  For were my life not by thy word, my life would ſoone me fayle.
                  
                     
                        verse 51 The proud & ſuch as God contemn, ſtil made of me a ſcorne:
                  yet would I not thy law forſake, as he that were forelorne
                  
                     
                        verse 52 But cald to mind (lord) thy great works, ſhewd to our fathers old:
                  Wherby I felt the ioy ſurmount, my grief an hundred fold.
                  
                     
                        verse 53 But yet alas for feare I quooke, ſeyng how wicked men:
                  thy law forſooke and did procure, thy iudgemēt who know whē?
                  
                     
                        verse 54 And as for me I framde my ſongs, thy ſtatutes to exalt:
                  When I among the ſtraungers dwelt, & thoughts gan me aſſalt.
                  
                     
                        verse 55 I thought vpon thy name, O Lord, by night when others ſlepe:
                  as for thy law alſo I kept, and euer wil it kepe.
                  
                     
                        verse 56 This grace I did obtayne becauſe, thy couenants ſwete and deare
                  I did embrace and alſo kepe, with reuerence and with feare.
               
               
                  HETH The .viii. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 57 O God which art my part and lot, my comfort, and my ſtay:
                  I haue decreed and promiſed, thy lawe to kepe alway.
                  
                     
                        verse 58 Myne earneſt hart dyd humbly ſue, in preſence of thy face:
                  as thou therfore haſt promiſed, Lord graunt me of thy grace,
                  
                     
                        verse 59 My lyfe I haue examined, and tryde my ſecret hart:
                  Which to thy ſtatutes cauſed me, my feete ſtraight to conuert.
                  
                     
                        verse 60 I did not ſtay nor linger long, as they that ſlouthful are:
                  But haſtely thy lawes to kepe, I did my ſelf beware.
                  
                     
                        verse 61 The cruel bandes of wicked men, haue made of me their pray:
                  yet would I not thy law forget, nor from thee go aſtray.
                  
                     
                        verse 62 Thy rightous iudgemēt ſhewd toward me, ſo great is and ſo hye:
                  That euen at midnight wil I ryſe, thy name to magnify.
                  
                     
                        verse 63 Companion am I to al them, which feare thee in their hart:
                  and neyther wil for loue nor dread, frō thy cōmaundements ſtart
                  
                     
                        verse 64 Thy mercies Lord moſt plentuouſly, do al the world fulfil:
                  Oh teach me how I may obey, thy ſtatutes and thy wil.
               
               
                  
                  TETH The .ix. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 65 ACcording to thy promiſe Lord, ſo haſt thou with me delt.
                  For of thy grace in ſundry ſortes, haue I thy ſeruant felt.
                  
                     
                        verse 66 Teach me to iudge alwayes aright, and geue me knowledg ſure:
                  For certenly beleue I do, that thy preceptes are pure.
                  
                     
                        verse 67 Yer thou didſt touch me with thy rod, I erred and went aſtray:
                  But now I kepe thy holy worde, and make it al my ſtay.
                  
                     
                        verse 68 Thou art both good and gratious, and geueſt moſt liberally:
                  Thy ordinaunces how to kepe, therfore (O lord) teach me.
                  
                     
                        verse 69 The proud & wicked men haue forged, agaynſt me many a lye.
                  yet thy commaundements ſtil obſerue, with al my hart wil I.
                  
                     
                        verse 70 Their harts are ſwoln wt worldly welth, as greaſe ſo ar they fat:
                  But in thy lawe do I delight, and nothing ſeeke but that.
                  
                     
                        verse 71 Oh happy time may I wel ſay when thou didſt me correct:
                  For as a guide to learn thy lawes, thy rods did me direct.
                  
                     
                        verse 72 So that to me thy word and lawe, is dearer manifold
                  Then thouſands great of ſiluer & gold, or ought that can be told:
               
               
                  IOD The .x. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 73 SEing thy hands haue made me lord, to be thy creature:
                  graūt knowledge likewiſe how to learn to put thy lawes in vre
                  
                     
                        verse 74 So they that feare thee ſhal reioyce, when euer they me ſee:
                  Becauſe I haue learned by thy word to put my truſt in thee.
                  
                     
                        verse 75 Whē wt thy rods the world is plagde, I know the cauſe is iuſt,
                  So when yu didſt correct me Lord, the cauſe iuſt nedes be muſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 76 Now of thy goodnes I thee pray, ſome comfort to me ſend:
                  as thou to me thy ſeruant heteſt, ſo from al il me ſhend.
                  
                     
                        verse 77 Thy tender mercies poure on me, and I ſhal ſurely liue:
                  For ioy and conſolation both, thy lawes to me doth geue.
                  
                     
                        verse 78 Confound y• proud, whoſe falſe pretence, is me for to deſtroy:
                  But as for me thy heſtes to know, I wil my ſelf employ.
                  
                     
                        verse 79 Who ſo with reuerence do thee feare, to me let them retyre:
                  and ſuch as do thy couenants know, and them alone deſyre.
                  
                     
                        verse 80 My hart without al wauering, let on thy lawes be bent:
                  That no confuſion come to me, wherby I ſhould be ſhent.
               
               
                  CAPH The, xi. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 81 MY ſoule doth faint & ceaſeth not, thy ſauing health to craue:
                  and for thy words ſake ſtil I truſt, my harts deſyre to haue.
                  
                     
                        verse 82 Myne eyes doth fayle wt looking for, thy word, and thus I ſay:
                  Oh when wilt thou me cōfort Lord, why dooſt yu thus delay?
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 83 As a ſkin bottel in the ſmoke, ſo am I partcht and dryde:
                  yet wil I not out of my hart, let thy commaundement ſiyde.
                  
                     
                        verse 84 Alas how long ſhal I yet lyue, before I ſee the houre:
                  That on my foes which me torment, thy vēgeance yu wilt power?
                  
                     
                        verse 85 Preſumptuous men haue digged pits, thinking to make me ſure:
                  Thus contrary agaynſt thy law, my hurt they do procure.
                  
                     
                        verse 86 But thy cōmaundements are al true, & cauſeles they me greue,
                  To thee therfore I do complayne, that thou mighteſt me releue.
                  
                     
                        verse 87 Almoſt they had me cleane deſtroyd, & brought me quite to groūd:
                  yet by thy ſtatutes I abode, and therin ſuccor found.
                  
                     
                        verse 88 Reſtore me, Lord, agayne to life, for thy mercies excel:
                  and ſo ſhal I thy couenaunts kepe, til death my life expel.
               
               
                  LAMED. The .xii. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 89 IN heauēs Lord wher thou dooſt dwel, thy word is ſtabliſht ſure:
                  and ſhal for al eternity, faſt grauen there indure.
                  
                     
                        verse 90 From age to age thy truth abides, as doth the earth witnes:
                  whoſe ground worke thou haſt laid ſo ſure, as no toūg cā expres.
                  
                     
                        verse 91 Euen to this day we may wel ſee, how al things perſeuere:
                  accordyng to thy ordinaunce, for al things thee reuere.
                  
                     
                        verse 92 Had it not ben that in thy law, my ſoule had comfort ſought:
                  Lōg time ere now in my diſtres, I had ben brought to nought.
                  
                     
                        verse 93 Therfore wil I thy precepts aye, in memory kepe faſt:
                  By them thou haſt my lyfe reſtord, when I was at laſt caſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 94 No wight to me can title make, for I am onely thyne:
                  Saue me therfore, for to thy lawes, myne eares & hart encline.
                  
                     
                        verse 95 The wicked men do ſeke my bane, and therto lye in wayt:
                  But I the while conſidered, thy notable workes and great.
                  
                     
                        verse 96 I ſee nothing in this wide world, at length which hath not end:
                  But thy commaundement and thy word, beyond al end extend.
               
               
                  MEM. The .xiii. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 97 WHat great deſire and feruent loue, do I beare to thy law?
                  al the day long my whole deuiſe, is onely on thy ſaw.
                  
                     
                        verse 98 Thy word hath taught me far to pas, my foes in policy:
                  For ſtil I kepe it as a thyng, of moſt excellency.
                  
                     
                        verse 99 My teachers which did me inſtruct, in knowledge I excel:
                  Becauſe I do thy couenaunts kepe, and them to others tel.
                  
                     
                        verse 100 In wiſedome I do pas alſo, the auncient men in dede:
                  and al becauſe to kepe thy lawes, I held it ay beſt rede.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 101 My fete I haue refrayned eke, from euery euil way,
                  Becauſe that I continually, thy word might kepe I ſay.
                  
                     
                        verse 102 I haue not ſwarued frō thy iudgemēts, nor yet ſhroonk any del,
                  For why? thou haſt taught me therby, to liue godly and wel.
                  
                     
                        verse 103 Oh Lord how ſwete vnto my taſt, find I thy wordes alway?
                  Doubtles no hony in my mouth, feele ought ſo ſwete I may.
                  
                     
                        verse 104 Thy lawes haue me ſuch wiſdome learnd, that vtterly I hate:
                  al wicked and vngodly wayes, in euery kind or rate.
               
               
                  NVN. The .xiiii. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 105 EVen es a lanterne to my fete, ſo doth thy word ſhine bright:
                  And to my pathes, where euer I go, it is a flaming light.
                  
                     
                        verse 106 I haue both ſworne & wil performe, moſt certeinly doubtles:
                  That I wil kepe thy iudgements iuſt, and them in life expres.
                  
                     
                        verse 107 Affliction hath me ſore oppreſſed, & brought me to deathes dore:
                  O Lord as thou haſt promiſed, ſo me to life reſtore.
                  
                     
                        verse 108 The offrings which with hart & voyce, moſt frākely I thee geue:
                  accept, and teach me how I may, after thy iudgements lyue.
                  
                     
                        verse 109 My ſoule is aye ſo in my hand, that daungers it aſſayle,
                  Yet do I not thy law forget, nor it to kepe wil fayle.
                  
                     
                        verse 110 Although the wicked layd theyr nets, to catch me at abray,
                  Yet did I not from thy precepts, once ſwerue or go aſtray.
                  
                     
                        verse 111 Thy law I haue ſo claymed alway, as mine own heritage:
                  and why? for therin I delite, and ſet my whole courage.
                  
                     
                        verse 112 For euermore I haue ben bent, thy ſtatutes to fulfil:
                  Euen ſo likewiſe vnto the end, I wil continue ſtil.
               
               
                  SAMECH. The .xv. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 113 THe crafty thoughts and double hart, I do alwayes deteſt:
                  But as for thy law and precepts, I loued them euer beſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 114 Thou art my hid and ſecret place, my ſhield of ſtrong defence:
                  Therfore haue I thy promiſes, lookt for with patience.
                  
                     
                        verse 115 Go to therfore ye wicked men, depart from me anone:
                  For the commaundemēts wil I kepe, of God my Lord alone.
                  
                     
                        verse 116 As thou haſt promiſed ſo perform, that death me not aſſayle:
                  Nor let my hope abuſe me ſo, that through diſtruſt I quayle.
                  
                     
                        verse 117 Vphold me and I ſhalbe ſafe, for ought they do or ſay:
                  and in thy ſtatutes pleaſure take, wil I both night and day.
                  
                     
                        verse 118 Thou haſt trode ſuch vnder thy fete, as do thy ſtatutes breake:
                  For nought auayleth theyr ſubtility, theyr counſel is but weake.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 119 Like droſſe thou caſts the wicked out, where euer they go or dwel:
                  Therfore can I as thy ſtatutes, loue nothing half ſo wel.
                  
                     
                        verse 120 My fleſh alas, is taken with feare, as though it were benomd:
                  For when I ſee thy iudgements, ſtrayt I am as one aſtound.
               
               
                  AIN. The .xvi. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 121 I Do the thing that lawful is, and geue to al men right:
                  Reſigne me not to thē that would, oppres me wt their might,
                  
                     
                        verse 122 But for thy ſeruaunt ſurty be, in that thing that is good:
                  That proud mē geue me not ye foyle, which rage as they wer wood.
                  
                     
                        verse 123 Mine eyes wt wayting are now blind, thy health ſo much I craue:
                  And eke thy righteous promiſe Lord, wherby thou wilt me ſaue.
                  
                     
                        verse 124 Intreate thy ſeruaunt louingly, and fauour to him ſhew:
                  Thy ſtatutes of moſt excellence, teach me alſo to know.
                  
                     
                        verse 125 Thy humble ſeruaunt, Lord I am, oh graunt me to vnderſtand:
                  How by thy ſtatutes I may know, beſt what to take in hand.
                  
                     
                        verse 126 It is now time (Lord) to begin, for truth is quyte decayd:
                  Thy law likewiſe they haue trāſgreſt, and none againſt thē ſayd.
                  
                     
                        verse 127 This is the cauſe wherfore I loue, thy lawes better then gold:
                  Or iewels fine which are eſtemd, moſt coſtly to be ſold.
                  
                     
                        verse 128 I thought thy precepts al moſt iuſt, and ſo them layd in ſtore:
                  Al crafty and malitious wayes, I do abhorre therfore.
               
               
                  PE. The .xvii. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 129 THy couenaunts are moſt wonderful, & ful of things profound:
                  My ſoule therfore doth kepe thē ſure, whē they ar tride & foūd.
                  
                     
                        verse 130 When mē firſt enter into thy wordes, they find a light moſt cleare:
                  and very idiots vnderſtand, when they it read or heare
                  
                     
                        verse 131 For ioy I haue both gaped & breathde, to know they cōmaūdemēt,
                  That I might guide my life therby, I ſought what thing it mēt.
                  
                     
                        verse 132 With mercy and compaſſion Lord, behold me from aboue:
                  As thou art wont to behold ſuch, as thy name feare and loue.
                  
                     
                        verse 133 Direct my foteſteps by thy word, that I thy wil may know:
                  and neuer let iniquity, thy ſeruaunt ouerthrow.
                  
                     
                        verse 134 Frō ſlaunderous toungs & deadly harms, preſerue & kepe me ſure:
                  Thy precepts then I wil obſerue, and put them eke in vre.
                  
                     
                        verse 135 Thy coūtenāce which doth ſurmoūt, the ſunne in his bright hew:
                  Let ſhine on me, and by thy law, teach me what to eſchew.
                  
                     
                        verse 136 Out of mine eyes great flouds guſh out, of dryery teares and fel:
                  when I behold how wicked men, thy law kepe neuer a del.
               
               
                  
                  ZADE. The .xviii. parte.
                  
                     
                        verse 137 137 IN euery poynt Lord yu art iuſt, the wicked though they grudge:
                  And whē thou dooſt ſētēce pronoūce, yu art a righteous iudge.
                  
                     
                        verse 138 To render right & fly from guile, are two chief points moſt hye:
                  and ſuch as thou haſt in thy law, commaunded vs ſtraytly.
                  
                     
                        verse 139 With zeale and wrath I am conſumde, and euen pyned away:
                  To ſee my foes thy wordes forget, for ought that I do may.
                  
                     
                        verse 140 So pure and perfect is they word, as any hart can deme:
                  and I thy ſeruaunt nothing more, do loue or yet eſteme.
                  
                     
                        verse 141 And though I be nothing ſet by, as one of baſe degree:
                  Yet do I not thy heſtes forget, nor ſhrinke away from thee.
                  
                     
                        verse 142 Thy righteouſnes (Lord) is moſt iuſt, for euer to endure:
                  alſo thy law is truth it ſelfe, moſt conſtant and moſt pure.
                  
                     
                        verse 143 Trouble & grief haue ſeaſed on me, & brought me wōdrous low:
                  yet do I ſtil of thy precepts, delight to heare and know.
                  
                     
                        verse 144 The righteouſnes of thy iudgements, do laſt for euermore:
                  Then teach them me, for euen in them, my life lieth vp in ſtore.
               
               
                  KOPH. The .xix. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 145 WIth fernēt hart I cald & cride, now aunſwere me (O Lord,)
                  That thy cōmaundemēt to obſerue, I may fully accord.
                  
                     
                        verse 146 To thee (my God) I make my ſute, wt moſt hūble requeſt:
                  Saue me therfore and I wil kepe, thy precept and thy heſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 147 To thee I cry, euen in the morne, before the day waxe light:
                  Becauſe that I haue in thy word, my confidence whole plight.
                  
                     
                        verse 148 Mine eyes preuēt the watch by night, and ere they cal I wake:
                  That by deuiſing of thy word, I might ſome comfort take.
                  
                     
                        verse 149 Incline thine eares to heare my voyce, and pity on me take:
                  as thou waſt wont ſo iudge me Lord, leaſt life me ſhould forſake.
                  
                     
                        verse 150 My foes draw nere and do procure, my death maliciouſly:
                  which from thy law are far gone back, and ſtrayd from it leudly.
                  
                     
                        verse 151 Therfore (O Lord) approch thou nere, for nede ſo doth requyre,
                  and al thy precepts true they are, then helpe I thee deſire.
                  
                     
                        verse 152 By thy cōmaundements I haue learnd, not now but long ago,
                  That they remayne for euermore, thou haſt them grounded ſo.
               
               
                  RESH. The .xx. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 153 MY trouble and affliction, conſider and behold:
                  Deliuer me, for of thy law, I euer take faſt hold.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 154 Defend my good and righteous cauſe, with ſpede me ſuccor ſend:
                  From death as thou haſt promiſed, Lord kepe me and defend.
                  
                     
                        verse 155 As for the wicked farre they are, from hauing health and grace,
                  wherby they might thy ſtatutes know, they enter not the trace.
                  
                     
                        verse 156 Great are they mercies Lord I graūt, what toung can thē attayne?
                  and as thou haſt me iudged ere now, ſo let me life obtayne.
                  
                     
                        verse 157 Though many men did trouble me, and perſecute moſt ſore,
                  yet from thy lawes I neuer ſhronke, nor went a wry therfore.
                  
                     
                        verse 158 And truth it is, for grief I dye, when I theſe traytors ſee:
                  Becauſe they kepe no whit thy word, nor yet ſeke to know thee.
                  
                     
                        verse 159 Behold, for I do loue thy lawes, with hart moſt glad and fayne,
                  as thou art good and gracious Lord, reſtore my life agayne.
                  
                     
                        verse 160 What thy word doth decree, muſt be, and ſo it hath bene euer,
                  Thy righteous iudgements are alſo, moſt true and decay neuer.
               
               
                  SCHIN. The .xxi. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 161 PRinces haue ſought by cruelty, cauſeles to make me crouch:
                  But al in vayne, for of thy word, the feare did my hart touch.
                  
                     
                        verse 162 And certeinly euen of thy word, I was more mery and glad,
                  Then he that of rich ſpoyles and pray, great ſtore & plenty had.
                  
                     
                        verse 163 As for al lyes and falſitie, I hate moſt and deteſt:
                  For why? thy holy law do I, aboue al things loue beſt.
                  
                     
                        verse 164 Seuen times a day I prayſe the Lord, ſinging with hart & voyce:
                  Thy rightuous actes and wonderful, ſo cauſe me to reioyſe.
                  
                     
                        verse 165 Great peace and reſt ſhal al ſuch haue, which do thy ſtatutes loue:
                  Nor daunger ſhal theyr quyet ſtate, impeire or once remoue.
                  
                     
                        verse 166 My onely health and comfort Lord, I looke for at thy hand:
                  And therfore haue I done thoſe things, which yu didſt me cōmand.
                  
                     
                        verse 167 Thy lawes haue ben my exerciſe, which my ſoule moſt deſired:
                  So much my loue to them was bent, that nought els I required.
                  
                     
                        verse 168 Thy ſtatutes & cōmaundements, I kept, thou knoweſt a right:
                  For al the things that I haue done, are preſent in thy ſight.
               
               
                  TAV. The .xxii. part.
                  
                     
                        verse 169 O Lord let my complaint and cry, before thy face appeare:
                  and as thou haſt me promiſe made, ſo teach me thee to feare.
                  
                     
                        verse 170 Myne humble ſupplication, toward thee let find acces:
                  and graunt me Lord deliueraunce, for ſo is thy promes.
                  
                     
                        verse 171 Then ſhal my lips thy prayſes ſpeake, after moſt ample ſort:
                  when thou thy ſtatutes haſt me taught, wherin ſtādeth al cōfort.
                  
                     
                     
                        verse 172 My tong ſhal ſing and preach thy word, and on this wiſe ſay ſhal
                  Gods famous actes and noble lawes, are iuſt and perfect al.
                  
                     
                        verse 173 Stretch out thy hand I thee beſech, and ſpedely me ſaue.
                  For thy cōmaundemēts to obſerue, choſē, O Lord, I haue.
                  
                     
                        verse 174 Of thee alone, Lord I craue helth, for other I know none,
                  and in thy law and nothyng els, I do delite alone.
                  
                     
                        verse 175 Graūt me therfore lōg dayes to liue, thy name to magnify:
                  and of thy iudgements merciful, let me thy fauour try.
                  
                     
                        verse 176 For I was loſt and went aſtray, much like a wandryng ſhepe:
                  Oh ſeke me, for I haue not fayled, thy commaundmentes to kepe.
               
            
            
               Ad dominum cum tribularer. Pſalme .Cxx.
               S. T.
               
                  ¶The prayer of Dauid beyng now baniſhed amonge the barbarious people of Arabia, by the falſe reportes of enuions flatterers. And therfore be lamenteth his long abode among thoſe infidels, who were geuen to all kynd of wickednes and contention.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  IN trouble and in thral, vnto the Lord I cal: 
                     〈♫〉
                   and he doth me cōfort: deliuer me (I ſay) frō 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   lyers lippes alway, and toung of falſe report.
               
                  
                     verse 4 What vantage, or what thyng
               Getſt thou thus for to ſtyng.
               Thou falſe and flattering lyer?
               
                  
                     verse 5 Thy toung doth hurt I wene
               No les then arrowes kene,
               Of whote conſuming fire.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Alas to long I ſlake,
               Within theſe tentes ſo blake,
               Which kedars are by name:
               By whom the flocke elect,
               And al of Iſaackes ſect,
               Are put to open ſhame.
               
                  
                     verse 7 With thē that peace did hate,
               I came a peace to make,
               And ſet a quyet lyfe:
               
                  
                     verse 8 But when my word was told,
               Cauſeles I was controld,
               By thē that would haue ſtryfe.
            
            
               Leuaui oculos meos. Pſalme .Cxxi.
               VV VV.
               
                  ¶The Prophet ſhewed by his own example that the faithfull ought to looke for all their ſuccour of God alone, who will gouerne and geue good ſucceſſe to al their godly enterpriſes.
               
               
                   
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  I Lift mine eyes to Sion hil, from whence I do attende, 
                     〈♫〉
                   that ſuccour God me ſend. The mighty God me ſuccour wil, which 
                     〈♫〉
                   heauen and earth framed, and al things therin named.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Thy foote from ſlip he wil preſerue,
               And wil thee ſafely kepe:
               For he wil neuer ſlepe.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Lo, he that doth Iſrael conſerue,
               No ſlepe at al can hym catch?
               But his eyes ſhal euer watch,
               
                  
                     verse 5 The Lord is thy warrant alway, ❧
               
               The Lord eke doth thee couer,
               As at thy right hand euer.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The ſunne ſhal not thee partch by day,
               Nor the moone not halfe ſo bryght.
               Shall with cold thee hurt by nyght. ❧
               
               
                  
                     verse 7 The Lord wil kepe thee from diſtres,
               And wil thy life ſure ſaue:
               And thou alſo ſhalt haue.
               
                  
                     verse 8 In al thy buſines good ſucceſſe,
               Where euer thou goeſt in or out,
               God wil thy thinges bryng about.
            
            
               Letatus ſum. Pſalme .Cxxii.
               VV. K.
               
                  ¶Dauid reioyſeth in y• name of the faithful, y• God hath accompliſhed his promes, & placed his Arke in Siō, for the which he geueth thākes, & prayeth for the proſperitie of the Church.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  I Did in hart reioyce, to heare the peoples 
                     〈♫〉
                   voyce, in offering ſo willingly: For let vs vp
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   ſay they, & in y• lords houſe pray, thus ſpake ye folk ful louīgly. Our fete 
                     〈♫〉
                   y• wādred wide, ſhal in thy gates abide, O yu Ieruſalē ful fayre: which 
                     〈♫〉
                   art ſo ſemely ſet, much like a citie net, ye like wherof is not els where.
               
                  
                     verse 4 The tribes with one accord,
               The tribes of God the Lord,
               Are thither bent their way to take:
               So God before did tel,
               That there his Iſrael,
               Their prayers ſhould together make.
               
                  
                     verse 5 For there are thrones erect,
               And that for this reſpect.
               To ſet forth iuſtice orderly. ❧
               
               Which thrones ryght to maintayne,
               To Dauids houſe perteyne,
               His folke to iudge accordingly.
               
                  
                     verse 6 To pray let vs not ceaſe
               For Ieruſalems peace
               Thy frends God proſper myghtely.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Peace be thy walles about, ❀
               And proſper thee throughout
               Thy places eke continually.
               
                  
                     verse 8 I wiſh thee proſperous ſtate
               For my poore brethrens ſake,
               That cōfort haue by meanes of thee. ❧
               
               
                  
                     verse 9 Gods houſe doth me allure,
               Thy wealth for to procure,
               So much alwayes as lyeth in mee.
            
            
               Ad te leuaui oculos. Pſalme .Cxxiii.
               T. S.
               
                  ¶A prayer of the faythfull, whiche are afflicted by the wicked worldlynges and contemners of God.
               
               Sing this as the .23. pſalme.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O Lord that heauen dooſt poſſes, I lift mine eyes to thee,  I lift mine eyes to thee,
               Euē as the ſeruaunt lifteth his, his mayſters hands to ſee.
               
                  
                     verse 2 As handmaids watch their maiſtres hāds, ſome grace for to atchiue,
               So we behold the Lord our God, til he do vs forgeue.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Lord graunt vs thy compaſſion, and mercy in thy ſight,
               For we be filled and ouer commen, with hatred and deſpight.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Our minds be ſtuffed with great rebuke, the rich & worldly wiſe
               Do make of vs their mocking ſtocke, the proud do vs deſpiſe.
            
            
               Niſi quia dominus. Pſalme .Cxxiiij.
               VV VV.
               
                  ¶The people of God, being deliuered out of a great daūger, acknowledge not to haue eſcaped by their own power, but through the fauour of God, & ſhew in how great peril they were.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  NOw Iſrael may ſay and that truly, If that the 
                     〈♫〉
                   Lorde had not our cauſe mainteind: If that the 
                     〈♫〉
                   Lord had not our right ſuſteynd: When al the world agaynſt vs furiouſly, 
                     〈♫〉
                   made their vprors, and ſayd we ſhould al dye.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Now long a go they had deuourd vs al:
               And ſwalowed quicke, for ought that we could deme,
               Such was theyr rage, as we might wel eſteme.
               
                  
                     verse 4 And as the flouddes, with mighty force do fal,
               So had they now, our life euen brought to thral.
               
                  
                     verse 5 The raging ſtreames, moſt proud in roring noyſe
               Had long a go, ouer whelmde vs in the depe,
               
                  
                     verse 6 But loued by God which doth vs ſafely kepe
               From bloudy teeth, and their moſt cruel voyce.
               Which as a pray to eate vs would reioyce.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Euen as the birde out of the foulers grenne
               Eſcapeth as way: right ſo it fareth with vs:
               
                   Broke are their nets, and we haue ſcaped thus.
               
                  
                     verse 8 God that made heauen, and earth, is our helpe then,
               His name hath ſaued vs from theſe wicked men.
            
            
               
                  Qui confidunt. Pſalme .Cxxv.
                  VV. K.
                  
                     ¶He deſcribeth the aſſuraunce of the faithfull in their afflictions, and deſireth their wealth, and the deſtruction of the wicked.
                  
                  
                     
                        〈♫〉
                     
                     SVch as in God the Lord do truſt, as moūt Sion 
                        〈♫〉
                      ſhal firmely ſtād, & be remoued at no hād, the Lord 
                        〈♫〉
                      wil coūt thē right & iuſt. So that they ſhalbe ſure, for euer to indure.
                  
                     
                        verse 2 As mighty mountaines huge & great,
                  Ieruſalem about do cloſe,
                  So wil the Lord be vnto thoſe
                  Who on his godly wil do wayt
                  Such are to him ſo deare
                  They neuer nede to feare: ❧
                  
                  
                     
                        verse 3 For though the righteous try doth he,
                  By making wicked men his rod,
                  Leaſt they through grief forſake theyr God,
                  It ſhal not as theyr lot ſtil be.
                  
                     
                        verse 4 Geue Lord to thoſe thy light,
                  Whoſe harts are true and right.
                  
                     
                        verse 5 But as for ſuch as turne a ſide, ❧
                  
                  By croked wayes which they out ſought
                  The Lord wil ſurely bring to nought
                  With workes they ſhal abyde,
                  But peace with Iſrael,
                  For euermore ſhal dwel.
               
               
                  Another of the ſame by. R. VV.
                  Sing this as the ten Cōmaundementes.
                  
                     THoſe that do put theyr cōfidēce,  vpon the Lord our God onely,
                  And flye to him for his defence, in al theyr nede & miſery,
                  
                      Their fayth is ſure, firme to endure, groūded on Chriſt ye corner ſtone,
                  Moued with no il but ſtādeth ſtil, ſtedfaſt like to the moūt Sion
                  And as about Hieruſalem, the mighty hils do it compas,
                  So that no enemies cōmeth them, to hurt that towne in any caſe
                  So God in dede in euery nede, his faithful people doth defend,
                  Stāding thē by aſſuredly, frō this time forth world without end.
                  Right wiſe and good is our Lord God, and wil not ſuffer certeinly:
                  The ſinners and vngodlyes rod, to tary vpon his family,
                  Leaſt they alſo from God ſhould go, falling to ſinne aud wickednes,
                  O lord defēd, world wtout end, thy chriſtē flock through thy goodnes.
                  O Lord do good to Chriſtians al, that ſtedfaſt in thy word abyde,
                  Such as willingly frō God fal, and to falſe doctrine dayly ſlide,
                  Such wil the Lord ſcatter abrod, wt Hipocrites throwen down to hel
                  God wil thē ſēd paynes wtout end, but Lord graūt peace to Iſrael.
                  Glory to God the father al might, and to the ſonne our Sauiour,
                  And to y• holy ghoſt whoſe light, ſhine in our harts & vs ſuccour.
                  That the right way from day to day, we may walke & him glorifie,
                  With harts deſire al that are here, worſhip the Lord & ſay. Amen.
               
            
            
               In conuertendo. Pſalme .Cxxvi.
               VV. K.
               
                  ¶This Pſalme was made after the returne of the people from Babylon, and ſheweth that the meane of theyr deliueraunce was weunderfull, after the ſeuentie yeares of captiuitie foreſpoken by Iere. 25. 12. and. 29. 10.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  WHen that the Lord agayne hys Sion had forth 
                     〈♫〉
                   brought, from bondage great, and alſo ſeruitude 
                     〈♫〉
                   extreme, his worke was ſuch, as did ſurmoūt mās hart & thought, 
                     〈♫〉
                   ſo that we were much like to thē yt vſe to dreame, our mouthes wer
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   with laughter filled thē, and eke our tōgues did ſhew vs ioyful mē.
               The Heathen folke, were forced then, this to confes,
               How that the Lord, for them alſo great things had done.
               
                  
                     verse 3 But much more we, and therfore can confes no les:
               Wherfore to ioy, we haue good cauſe as we begon.
               
                  
                     verse 4 O Lord, go forth, thou canſt our bondage end,
               As to deſertes, they flowyng riuers ſend.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Ful true it is, that they which ſow with teares in dede,
               a time wil come, when they ſhal reape in mirth and ioy.
               
                  
                     verse 6 They went and wept, in bearing of theyr precious ſede,
               For that theyr foes, ful often times did them annoy.
               But their returne, with ioy they ſhal ſure ſee,
               Their ſheaues home bring, and not impeired be.
            
            
               Niſi dominus. Pſalme .Cxxvii.
               VV. VV.
               
                  ¶It is not mans wit to labour but the free goodnes of God that geueth riches, preſerueth townes and countries, graunteth nouriſhement and children.
               
               Sing this as the Pater noſter.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  EXcept the Lord the houſe do make
               And therunto do ſet his hand
               What men do build it can not ſtand,
               Likewiſe in vayne men vndertake,
               Cities and holdes to watch and ward
               Except the Lord be their ſafegard.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Though ye riſe early in the morne,
               And ſo at night go late to bed,
               Fedyng ful hardly with browne bread
               yet were your labor loſt and worne ❧
               
               But they whom God doth loue and kepe
               Receyue al thynges with quiet ſlepe.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Therfore marke wel when euer ye ſee
               That men haue heyres to enioy theyr land
               It is the gift of Gods own hand
               For God him ſelfe doth multiply
               Of hys great liberality, ❧
               
               The bleſſyng of poſterity:
               
                  
                     verse 4 And when the children come to age
               They grow in ſtrength and actiuenes,
               
                   In perſon, and in comelines,
               So that a ſhaft ſhot with courage,
               Of one that hath a moſt ſtrong arme,
               Flyeth not ſo ſwift, nor doth lyke arme.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Oh wel is hym that hath his quiuer,
               Furniſhed with ſuch artilery:
               For when in peril he ſhalbe,
               Such one ſhal neuer ſhake nor ſhiuer,
               when that he pleadeth before the iudge:
               Againſt his foes which beare hym grudge.
            
            
               Beati omnes qui timent. pſalme .cxxviii.
               T. S
               
                  ¶He deſcribeth the proſperous eſtate of them that be maried in the feare of god, ioyning with al the promiſes of gods bleſſings to al them that lyue in this honorable eſtate, accordyng to his commaundements.
               
               Sing this as the .137. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BLeſſed art thou that feareſt God,  and walkeſt in hys way:
               
                  
                     verse 2 For of thy labor thou ſhalt eat, happy art thou I ſay.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Like fruiteful vynes on thy houſe ſides, ſo do thy wife ſpring out
               Thy childrē ſtand like Oliue plants, thy table round about.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Thus art thou bleſt that feareſt God, and he ſhal let thee ſee:
               
                  
                     verse 5 The promiſed Ieruſalem, and his felicitie.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Thou ſhalt thy childrens children ſee, to thy great ioyes encreaſe:
               And likewiſe grace on Iſrael, proſperity and peace.
            
            
               Sepe expugnauerunt pſalme .Cxxix.
               N
               
                  ¶He admoniſheth the church to reioyce, though it haue bene afflicted in al ages, for God wil deliuer it and the enemies, for al their glorious ſhew, ſhal ſodenly be deſtroyed.
               
               Syng this as the .137 Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  OFt they now Iſrael may ſay, me from my youth aſſayled,
               Oft they aſſailed me frō my youth,  yet neuer they preuayled
               
                  
                     verse 2 Vpon my back the plowers plowed, & forrowes long did caſt
               
                  
                     verse 3 The rightous lord hath cut the cordes, of wicked foes at laſt.
               
                  
                     verse 4 They that hate hym ſhal be ſhamed, and turned back alſo:
               
                  
                     verse 5 And made as graſſe vpon the houſe, which withereth ere it grow
               
                  
                     verse 6 Wherof the mower cannot fynd, inough to fil his hand:
               Nor he can fil hys lap that goeth, to gleane vpon the land.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Nor paſſers by pray God on them, to let his bleſſing fal:
               Nor ſay we bleſſe you in the name, of God the Lord at al.
            
            
               Deprofundis clamaui. pſalme .cxxx.
               VV. VV.
               
               
                  ¶An effectuons prayer of hym that for hys ſynnes had ſuſtayned great afflictions, and notwithſtanding he fully truſteth, and aſſureth himſelf to obtayne mercy and forgeuenes of hys ſinnes, and at length deliueraunce from al euils.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  LOrd to thee I make my mone, when daungers 
                     〈♫〉
                   me oppres: I cal, I ſigh, plain, & grone. 
                     〈♫〉
                   truſting to fynd reles. Heare now O lord my requeſt, for it is ful due 
                     〈♫〉
                   tyme: and let thyne eares aye be preſt, vnto this prayer mine.
               
                  
                     verse 3 O Lord our God if thou way, our ſinnes and them peruſe:
               Who ſhal then eſcape and ſay, I can my ſelf excuſe?
               
                  
                     verse 4 But Lord thou art merciful, and turneſt to vs thy grace:
               that we with harts moſt careful, ſhould feare before thy face.
               
                  
                     verse 5 In God I put my whole truſt, my ſoule wayteth on his wyl:
               For hys promiſe is moſt iuſt, and I hope therin ſtil.
               
                  
                     verse 6 My ſoule to God hath regard, wiſhyng for hym alway:
               More then they that watch and ward, to ſee the daunyng day.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Let Iſrael then boldly, in the Lord put hys truſt:
               He is that God of mercy, that hys delyuer muſt.
               
                  
                     verse 8 For he it is that muſt ſaue, Iſrael from hys ſinne:
               And al ſuch as ſurely haue their confidence in hym.
            
            
               Domine non eſt. pſalme .Cxxxi.
               M.
               
                  ¶Dauid charged with ambition and gredy deſyre to raygne, proteſteth his humilitie & modeſty before God, and teacheth al men what they ſhould do.
               
               Syng this as the 
                     •
                  amentation.
               
                  O Lord I am not puft in mynd, I haue no ſcorneful eye:
               I do not exercyſe my ſelfe, in thynges that he to hye.
               
                   But as a child that wayned is, euen from his mothers breſt:
               So haue I Lord behaued my ſelfe, in ſylence and in reſt.
               O Iſrael truſt in the Lord, let hym be all thy ſtay:
               From thys tyme for euermore, from age to age I ſay.
            
            
               Memento domine. pſalme .cxxxii.
               M
               
                  ¶The faythful grounding on Gods promiſe made vnto Dauid, deſireth that be would eſtabliſh the ſame, both as touchyng the poſterity and the buildyng of the temple, to pray there as was fore ſpoken.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  REmember Dauids troubles Lord, how to the 
                     〈♫〉
                   Lorde he ſwore: and vowd a vow to Iacobs 
                     〈♫〉
                   God, to kepe for euermore. I wyll not come within my houſe, nor 
                     〈♫〉
                   clyme vp to my bed: nor let my temples take theyr reſt, or the eyes 
                     〈♫〉
                   in my hed.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Til I haue found out for the Lord, a place to ſet theron:
               An houſe for Iacobs God to be, an habitation.
               
                  
                     verse 3 We heard of it at Ephrata, there did we heare this ſound
               and in y• fields & forreſts there, theſe voices firſt were foūd.
               
                  
                     verse 4 We wil aſſay and go in now, his tabernacle there:
               before his foteſtoole to fal down, vpō our knees in feare
               
                  
                     verse 5 Ariſe O Lord, aryſe I ſay, into thy reſtyng place:
               both thou & the ark of thy ſtrēgth, ye preſēce of thy grace
               
                  
                  
                     verse 9 Let al thy prieſtes be clothed Lord, with truth and righteouſnes:
               Let al thy ſaintes and holy men, ſyng al with ioyfulnes.
               
                  
                     verse 10 And for thy ſeruant Dauids ſake, refuſe not Lord I ſay:
               The face of thine annoynted Lord, or turne thy face away.
               
                  The ſecond part.
                  
                     
                        verse 11 The Lord to Dauid ſwore in truth, and wil not ſhrinke from it:
                  Saying: the frute of thy body, vpon thy ſeat ſhal ſit.
                  
                     
                        verse 12 And if thy ſonnes my couenaunt kepe, that I ſhal learne echone:
                  then ſhal their ſonnes for euer ſit, vpon thy princely throne.
                  
                     
                        verse 13 The Lord himſelf hath choſe Sion, and loues therin to dwel:
                  
                     
                        verse 14 Saying: this is my reſtyng place, I loue and lyke it wel.
                  
                     
                        verse 15 And I wyl bleſſe with great encreaſe, her vittayles euery where:
                  and I wil ſatiſfy with bread, the nedy that be there.
                  
                     
                        verse 16 Yea I wil deck and clothe her prieſts, with my ſaluation:
                  and al her ſaints ſhal ſyng for ioy, of my protection.
                  
                     
                        verse 17 There wil I ſurely make the horne of Dauid for to bud.
                  For I haue there ordaind for myne, a lanthorne bright and good.
                  
                     
                        verse 18 As for his enmies I wil cloth, with ſhame for euermore:
                  But I wil cauſe his crowne to ſhyne, more freſh then heretofore.
               
            
            
               Ecce quam bonum. pſal .cxxxiii.
               VV. VV
               
                  ¶This pſalme conteyneth the commendation of godly and brotherly amity which for the excellency therof is compared to the moſt precious oyle, wherwith the prieſtes onely and inſtruments of the tabernacle were annoynted. Exodus .xxx.
               
               Sing this as the .137 Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O How happy a thyng it is, and ioyful for to ſee:
               Brethren together for to hold, the band of amity?
               
                  
                     verse 2 It calth to mind y• ſwete perfume,  and yt coſtly oyntment:
               which on the ſacrificers hed, by Gods precept was ſpēt.
               It wet not Aarons head alone, but drentch his beard throughout:
               and finally it did run down, his rich attire about.
               
                  
                     verse 3 And as the lower ground doth drynke, the dew of Hermon hil,
               and Sion with hys ſiluer drops, the fields with frute doth fil:
               
                  
                     verse 4 Euen ſo the Lord doth poure on them, his bleſſings manyfold:
               Whoſe harts & mindes without al guile, this knot do kepe & hold
            
            
               Ecce nunc. pſalme .cxxxiiii.
               VV. K
               
                  ¶He exhorteth the Leuites that watch in the temple to prayſe the Lord.
               
               
                   
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  BEhold and haue regard, ye ſeruants of the 
                     〈♫〉
                   Lord: which in hys houſe by night do watch 
                     〈♫〉
                   prayſe hym wyth one accord.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Lyft vp your handes on hygh, vnto hys holy place:
               And geue the Lord his prayſes due, his benefites embrace.
               
                  
                     verse 3 For why? the Lord who did, both earth and heauen frame.
               Doth Sion bles and wil conſerue, for euermore the ſame.
            
            
               Laudate nomen. Pſalme .Cxxxv.
               M.
               
                  ¶He exhorteth al the faithful of what eſtate ſo euer they be, to prayſe God for his merueilous works, and ſpecially for his graces towardes his people, wherin he hath declared hys maieſty, to the confuſion of al Idolaters and their Idoles.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  O Prayſe the Lord prayſe hym, prayſe hym, 
                     〈♫〉
                   prayſe him with one accord: O praiſe him ſtil 
                     〈♫〉
                   all ye that be the ſeruauntes of the Lord. O prayſe hym ye that 
                     〈♫〉
                   ſtand and be, in the houſe of the Lord: ye of hys courte and of hys
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   houſe prayſe hym wyth one accord.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Prayſe ye the Lord for he is good, ſyng prayſes to hys name:
               It is a comely and good thyng, alwayes to do the ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 4 For why the Lord hath choſe Iacob, hys very owne you ſee:
               So hath he choſen Iſrael, his treaſure for to bee.
               
                  
                     verse 5 For this I know and am ryght ſure, the Lord is very great:
               He is in dede aboue al gods, moſt eaſy to intreat.
               
                  
                     verse 6 For whatſoeuer pleaſed him, al that ful wel he wrought:
               In heauen, in earth, and in y• ſea, which he hath framd of nought
               
                  
                     verse 7 He lifts vp clouds euen from the earth, he makes lightnings & rain
               he bringeth forth the winds alſo, he made nothyng in vayne.
               
                  
                     verse 8 He ſmote the firſt borne of ech thing, in Egipt that tooke reſt:
               he ſpared there no lyuyng thyng, the man nor yet the beaſt.
               
                  
                     verse 9 He hath in thee ſhewd wonders great, O Egipt voyde of vauntes,
               On Pharao thy curſed kyng, and hys ſeuere ſeruauntes.
               
                  
                     verse 10 He ſmote then many nations, and did great acts and thynges:
               He ſlew the great and mightieſt, and chiefeſt of their kings.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Sion kyng of the Ammorites, and Og kyng of Baſan,
               He ſlew alſo the kyngdomes all, that were of Canaan.
               
                  
                     verse 12 And gaue their land to Iſrael, an heritage we ſee:
               To Iſraell hys owne people, an heritage to bee.
               
                  
                     verse 13 Thy name O Lord ſhal ſtil endure, and thy memorial:
               Throughout al generations, that are or euer ſhal:
               
                  
                     verse 14 The Lord wil ſurely now auenge, hys people al in deede:
               and to hys ſeruauntes he wyll ſhew, fauour in tyme of neede.
               
                  
                     verse 15 The Idols of the heathen are made, in al their coſt and landes:
               Of ſyluer and of gold be they, the worke euen of mens handes.
               
                  
                     verse 16 They haue their mouths & cānot ſpeake, & eies that haue no ſight:
               
                  
                     verse 17 They haue eke eares yt heare nothing, their mouthes be breathles quite
               
                  
                     verse 18 Wherfore al thei are like to thē, that ſo doth ſet thē forth:
               and likewiſe thoſe that truſt in them, or think they be ought worth
               
                  
                     verse 19 O all ye houſe of Iſrael, ſee that ye praiſe the Lord:
               and ye that be of Aarons houſe, prayſe hym wyth one accord.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 20 And ye that be of Leuis houſe, praiſe ye likewyſe the Lord:
               and al that ſtand in awe of hym, praiſe him with one accord.
               
                  
                     verse 21 And out of Syon, ſound his prayſe, the great prayſe of the Lord:
               Which dwelleth in Ieruſalem, prayſe hym with one accord.
            
            
               Confitemini. pſalm .cxxxvi.
               N
               
                  A moſt earneſt exhortation to geue thanks vnto God for the creation and gouernance of all things which ſtandeth in in confeſſing that he geueth vs al of his mere liberalitie.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  PRaiſe ye the Lord for he is good, for his mercy endureth 
                     〈♫〉
                   for euer: geue prayſe vnto the god of gods 
                     〈♫〉
                   for his mercy endureth for euer. Geue prayſe vnto the lord of Lordes, 
                     〈♫〉
                   for his mercy endureth for euer: which only doth great wōders work, 
                     〈♫〉
                   for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Which by his wiſdom made y• heauēs, for his mercy endureth. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Which on the waters ſtretcht the earth, for his mercy endureth. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Which made great light to ſhine abrode, for his mercy endureth. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 8 As ſunne of rule the lightſome day, for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 9 The moone and ſtars to guide the night, for his mercy endureth &c.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Which ſmote Egipt with their firſt borne, for his mercy endu. &c
               
                  
                     verse 11 And Iſrael brought out from thē, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 12 With mighty hand & ſtretched arme, for his mercy endureth, &c.
               
                  
                     verse 13 Which cut the red ſea in two parts, for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 14 And Iſrael made pas there through, for his mercy endureth. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 15 And dround Pharao and his hoſt, for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 16 Through wildernes his people led, for hys mercy endureth. &c.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 17 He which did ſmite great noble kings, for hys mercy endu. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 18 And which hath ſlayne the mighty kings, for his mercy endu. &c.
               
                  
                     verse 19 As Sion king of the Amorites, for his mercy endureth for euer:
               
                  
                     verse 20 And Og the king of Baſan land, for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 21 And gaue their land for heritage, for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 22 Euen to his ſeruant Iſrael, for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 23 Remembred vs in baſe eſtate, for his mercy endureth for euer:
               
                  
                     verse 24 And from oppreſſors reſcued vs, for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 25 Which geueth foode vnto al fleſh, for his mercy endureth for euer.
               
                  
                     verse 26 Praiſe ye the God of heauē aboue, for his mercy endureth for euer
               
                  
                     verse 27 Geue thanks vnto the Lord of Lords, for his mercy endureth. &c.
            
            
               Super flumina in Babilonis. pſalm .cxxxvii.
               VV. VV.
               
                  ¶The people of god in their baniſhment, ſeyng gods true religion decay, lyued in great anguiſh and ſorrow of hart, the which grief the Caldeans did ſo litle pitye, that they rather increaſed the ſame daily with taunts, reproches, and blaſphemies againſt god, wherfore ye Iſraelites deſire god to puniſh the Edomites, who prouoked the Babilonians againſt thē (and moued by the ſpirit of god) prophecy the deſtruction of Babilō, where they wer handled ſo 
                        ••
                     rannouſly.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  WHen as we ſate in Babilon, the riuers round about 
                     〈♫〉
                   and in remembraunce of Sion, the teares for grief 
                     〈♫〉
                   braſt out. We hāgd our harps & inſtruments, the willow trees vpō, for 
                     〈♫〉
                   in that place men for their vſe, had planted many one.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Then they to whom we priſoners were, ſaid to vs tauntingly:
               Now let vs heare your Ebrue ſongs, and pleaſant melody.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Alas ſaid we, who can once frame, his ſorrowful hart to ſyng:
               The prayſes of our louing God, thus vnder a ſtraunge king?
               
                  
                  
                     verse 5 But yet if I Ieruſalem, out of my hart let ſlyde:
               Then let my fingers quite forget, the warblyng harpe to guyde.
               
                  
                     verse 6 And let my tong within my mouth, be tyde for euer faſt:
               If that I ioy before I ſee, thy ful deliuerance paſt.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Therfore (O Lord) remember now, the curſed noyſe and cry:
               That Edoms ſonnes againſt vs made, whē they razde our City.
               Remember Lord their cruel words, when as wyth one accord:
               they cride on ſack and raze their wals, in deſpite of their Lord.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Euen ſo ſhalt thou (O Babilon) at length to duſt be brought:
               and happy ſhal that man be cald, that our reuēge hath wrought.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Yea bleſſed ſhal that man be cald, that takes thy children yong:
               to daſh their bones againſt hard ſtones, which lie ye ſtreetes amōg.
            
            
               Confitebor tibi. pſalme .Cxxxviii.
               N
               
                  Dauid with great courage prayſeth the goodnes of god toward hym: which is ſo great, that it is known to forren princes, who ſhal prayſe the Lord together wyth hym. And he is aſſared to haue like comfort of god in the tyme following, as he hath had heretofore.
               
               Syng this as the .47. Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  THee wil I prayſe wt my whole hart,  my lord, my God, alwaies
               Euen in the preſēce of the Gods, I wil aduance thy prayſe
               
                  
                     verse 2 Toward thy holy temple I, wil looke and worſhip thee:
               and prayſed in my thankful mouth, thy holy name ſhal bee
               Euen for thy louyng kyndnes ſake, and for thy truth withal:
               For thou thy name haſt by thy word, aduaunced ouer al.
               
                  
                     verse 3 When I did cal, thou heardeſt me, and thou haſt made alſo:
               The power of encreaſed ſtrength, within my ſoule to grow.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Yea al the kings on earth they ſhal, geue prayſe to thee O Lord:
               For they of thy moſt holy mouth, haue heard the mighty word.
               
                  
                     verse 5 They of the wayes of God the Lord, in ſyngyng ſhal entreat:
               Becauſe the glory of the Lord, it is excedyng great.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The Lord is hye, and yet he doth, behold the lowly ſpirit:
               But he contemnyng knowes a far, the proud & lofty wight.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Although in midſt of trouble I, do walke yet ſhal I ſtand:
               Renued by thee O my Lord, thou wilt ſtretch out thy hand.
               Vpon the wrath of al my foes, and ſaued ſhal I bee:
               By thy right hand. The Lord God wil, performe his work to me
               
                  
                     verse 8 Thy mercy Lord endures for ay, Lord do me not forſake:
               Forſake me not y• am the worke, which thine own hād did make.
            
            
               
               Domine probaſti. pſalm .cxxxix.
               N
               
                  Dauid to clenſe his hart from al hipocriſy, ſheweth that there is nothyng ſo hyd, which god ſeeth not: which he confirmeth by the creation of man. After declaryng his zeale and feare of god, he proteſteth to be enemy to al them that comtemne god.
               
               Sing this as the .137 Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  O Lord thou haſt me tride & known,  my ſitting dooſt, thou know
               
                  
                     verse 2 and riſing eke, my thoughts a far, thou vnderſtandſt alſo.
               
                  
                     verse 3 My pathes yea and my lieng down, thou cōpaſſeſt alwayes.
               and by familiar cuſtome art, acquainted with my wayes.
               
                  
                     verse 4 No word is in my tonge O Lord, but known it is to thee:
               
                  
                     verse 5 thou me behind holdſt & before, thou layeſt thy hand on mee
               
                  
                     verse 6 To wonderful aboue my reach, Lord is thy cunning ſkil:
               It is ſo hye that I the ſame, cannot attayne vntil.
               
                  
                     verse 7 From ſight of thy al ſeing ſpirite, Lord whether ſhal I go?
               Or whether ſhal I flee away, thy preſence to ſcape fro?
               
                  
                     verse 8 To heauen if I mount aloft, lo thou art preſent there:
               In hel if I lye down below, euen there yu dooſt appeare.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Yea let me take the mornings wings, and let me go and hide,
               Euen there where are y• fartheſt parts, wher flowing ſe a doth ſlide:
               
                  
                     verse 10 Yea euen thether alſo ſhal, thy reachyng hand me guyde:
               and thy right hand ſhal hold me faſt, and make me to abyde.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Yea, if I ſay the darknes, ſhal, yet ſhroud me from thy ſight:
               Lo euen alſo the darkeſt nyght, about me ſhal be lyght.
               
                  
                     verse 12 Yea darknes hydeth not from thee, but night doth ſhyne as day:
               To thee the darknes and the lyght, are both alyke alway.
               
                  
                     verse 13 For thou poſſeſſed haſt my raynes, and thou haſt couered mee:
               Whē I within my mothers womb, encloſed was by thee.
               
                  
                     verse 14 Thee wil I prayſe, made fearfully, & wondrouſly I am:
               they workes are maruelous, right wel my ſoule doth know y• ſame
               
                  
                     verse 15 My bones they are not hid from thee, although in ſecret place,
               I haue bene made, and in the earth beneath I ſhapen was.
               
                  
                     verse 16 When I was formeles then thine eye ſaw me: for in thy booke
               were written al (nought was before) that after faſhion tooke.
               
                  
                     verse 17 The thoughts therfore of thee O God, how deare are they to mee?
               and of them al how paſſing great, the endles numbers be?
               
                  
                     verse 18 If I ſhould compt thē, loe their ſumme, more then the ſand I ſee:
               and whenſoeuer I awake, yet am I ſtil wyth thee.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 19 The wicked and the bloudy men, oh that thou wouldeſt ſlay:
               Euen thoſe O God to whom depart, depart from me I ſay.
               
                  
                     verse 20 Euen thoſe of thee O Lord my God, that ſpeake ful wickedly:
               Thoſe that are lifted vp in vayne, beyng enemies to thee.
               
                  
                     verse 21 Hate I not them that hate thee Lord, and that in earneſt wyſe?
               Contend not I againſt them al, againſt thee that aryſe:
               
                  
                     verse 22 I hate them with vnfayned hate, euen as my vtter foes:
               
                  
                     verse 23 Try me O God and know my hart, my thoughts proue & diſcloſe.
               
                  
                     verse 24 Conſider Lord if wickednes, in me there any be:
               and in thy way O God my guide, for euer lead thou me.
            
            
               Eripe me. Pſalme .Cxl.
               N
               
                  Dauid cōplayneth of the cruelty, falſhod, & iniuries of hys enemies, againſt which he prayeth vnto the Lord, and aſſureth hymſelf of his help and ſuccor. Wherfore he prouoketh the iuſt to prayſe hym and to aſſure themſelues of his tuition.
               
               Sing this as the Lamentation.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  LOrd ſaue me the euil man,  and form the cruel wight
               
                  
                     verse 2 Deliuer me, which euil do, imagine in their ſprit.
               
                  
                     verse 3 which make on me cōtinual war, their tongs lo they haue whet
               Like ſerpents, vnderneth their lips, is adders poyſon ſet.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Kepe me O Lord from wicked hands, preſerue me to abyde
               Free from the cruel man that meanes, to cauſe my ſteps to ſlyde.
               
                  
                     verse 5 The proud haue layd a ſnare for me, and they haue ſpred a net:
               with cordes in my path way, and gins for me eke haue they ſet.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Therfore I ſayd vnto the Lord, thou art my God alone:
               Heare me O Lord, oh heare the voyce, wherwith I pray & mone.
               
                  
                     verse 7 O Lord my God thou onely art, the ſtrēgth that ſaueth mee:
               My head in day of battle hath, bene couerd ſtil by thee.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Let not O Lord the wycked haue, the end of his deſyre:
               Performe not hys wycked thought leaſt, with pride be ſet on fire.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Of them that compas me about, the chiefeſt of them al:
               Lord let the miſchief of their lippes, vpon themſelues befal.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Let coales fal on them, let hym caſt them in conſuming flame,
               and in depe pits, ſo as they may, not riſe out of the ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 11 For no backbiter ſhal on earth, be ſet in ſtable plight:
               and euil to deſtruction ſtil, ſhal hunt the cruel wyght.
               
                  
                     verse 12 I know the Lord thafflicted wyl reuenge, and iudge the poore:
               
                  
                     verse 13 The iuſt ſhal prayſe thy name, iuſt ſhal, dwel with thee euermore.
            
            
               
               Domine clamaui. pſalme .cxli.
               N
               
                  Dauid beyng greuouſly perſecuted vnder Saule, onely flyeth vnto God to bane ſuccour, deſiryng hym to bridle his affections, that he may patiently abyde, til god take vengeaunce of hys enemies.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  O Lord vpon thee do I cal, Lord haſt thee 
                     〈♫〉
                   vnto me: and harken Lord vnto my voyce, 
                     〈♫〉
                   when I do cry to thee. 2 As inſence let my prayers be, directed in thine 
                     〈♫〉
                   eyes, & the vplifting of my handes, as euenyng ſacrifice.
               
                  
                     verse 3 My Lord for guiding of my mouth, ſet thou a watch before:
               and alſo of my mouing lips, O Lord kepe thou the dore.
               
                  
                     verse 4 That I ſhould wicked works commit, inclyne thou not my hart:
               With il men of their delicates, Lord let me eat no part.
               
                  
                     verse 5 But let the righteous ſmite me Lord, for that is good for me:
               Let hym reproue me, and the ſame, a precious oyle ſhalbe.
               Such ſmityng ſhal not breake my hed, the tyme ſhal ſhortly fal:
               when I ſhal in their miſery, make prayers for them al.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Then when in ſtony places down, their iudges ſhal be caſt:
               Then ſhal they heare my words, for thē they haue a pleaſaunt taſt.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Our bones about the graues mouth, lo ſcattred are they found:
               as he that heweth wood, or he, that diggeth vp the ground.
               
                  
                     verse 8 But O my Lord my God, myne eyes do looke vp vnto thee:
               In thee is al my truſt, let not, my ſoule forſaken hee.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Which they haue layd to catch me in, Lord keepe me from the ſnare:
               and from the ſuttle grennes of them, that wycked workers are.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 10 The wicked into theyr own nets, together let them fal,
               while I do by thy helpe eſcape, the daungers of them al.
            
            
               Voce mea ad. Pſalme .Cxlij.
               N.
               
                  ¶Dauid neither aſt onied with feare, nor caried wt anger, nor forced by deſperation, would kil Saule, but with a quiet mind, directed his earneſt prayer vnto God who did preſerue him.
               
               Sing this as the .14. pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BEfore the Lord God with my voyce,  I did ſend out my cry:
               and with my ſtreamed voice vnto the Lord God prayed I.
               
                  
                     verse 2 My meditation in his ſight, to poure I did not ſpare,
               and in the preſence of the Lord, my trouble did declare.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Although perplexed were my ſpirit, my path was knowen to thee:
               In way where I did walke, a ſnare they ſlyly layd for mee.
               
                  
                     verse 4 I lookt & vewd on my right hand, but none there would me know,
               al refuge fayled me, and for my ſoule none cared tho.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Then cried I Lord to thee & ſayd, my hope thou onely art,
               Thou in the land of lyuing art, my portion and my part.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Harke to my cry, for I am brought ful low: deliuer me
               From them that do me perſecute, for me to ſtrong they be.
               
                  
                     verse 7 That I may prayſe thy name, my ſoule, from priſō Lord bring out,
               when thou art good to me the iuſt, ſhal preaſe me round about.
            
            
               Domine exaudi. Pſalme .Cxliij.
               N.
               
                  ¶An earneſt prayer for remiſſion of ſinnes, acknowledging that the enemies did cruelly perſecute him by Gods iuſt iudgement. He deſireth to be reſtored to grace, to be gouerned by his holy ſpirit, that he may ſpend the reſt of his life in the true feare and ſeruice of God.
               
               Syng this as the .141 Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  LOrd heare my prayer,  harke ye plaint that I do make to thee:
               Lord in thy natiue truth, and in thy iuſtice aunſwer mee.
               
                  
                     verse 2 In iudgement with thy ſeruaunt Lord, oh enter not at al:
               For iuſtified be in thy ſight, not one that liueth ſhal.
               
                  
                     verse 3 The enmy hath purſued my ſoule, my life to ground hath throwne,
               and layd me in the dark, like them, that dead are long agone.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Within me in perplexitie, was my accombred ſpirit,
               and in me was a troubled hart, amaſed and afflight.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Yet I record time paſt, in al thy workes I meditate:
               yea in the workes I meditate, that thy hands haue creat.
               
                  
                     verse 6 To thee O Lord my God, loe I do ſtretch my crauing hāds,
               My ſoule deſireth after thee, as do the thirſty lands.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Heare me with ſpede, my ſpirit doth faile, hide not thy face me fro,
               Els ſhal I be like them that down, into the pit to go.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 8 Let me thy louing kindnes in, the morning heare & know,
               For in thee is my truſt, ſhew me the way that I ſhal got.
               
                  
                     verse 9 For I lift vp my ſoule to thee, O Lord deliuer mee:
               From al mine enemies, for I haue hidden me with thee.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Teach me to do thy wil, for thou, thou art my God I ſay:
               Let thy good ſpirit vnto the land, of mercy me conuey.
               
                  
                     verse 11 For thy names ſake wt quikning grace, a liue do thou me make,
               and out of trouble bring my ſoule, euen for thy iuſtice ſake.
               
                  
                     verse 12 And for thy mercy ſlay my foes, O Lord deſtroy them al,
               That do oppreſſe my ſoule, for I thy ſeruaunt am, and ſhal.
            
            
               Benedictus dominuus. Pſalme .Cxliiij.
               N.
               
                  ¶Dauid prayſeth y• Lord we great affectiō & humility for his kingdom reſtored, & for his victories obtained, yet calling for helpe, & the deſtructiō of the wicked 
                        •
                     promiſing to acknowledge the ſame with ſongs of prayſes, & declareth wherin the felicity of any people conſiſteth.
               
               Syng this as the .141 Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  BLeſt be the Lord my ſtrēgth that doth,  inſtruct my hād to fight
               The Lord that doth my fingers frame, to battel by his might.
               
                  
                     verse 2 He is my goodnes fort and tower, deliuerer and ſhield:
               In him I truſt my people he, ſubdues to me to yeld.
               
                  
                     verse 3 O Lord what thing is mā, that him, thou holdeſt ſo in price?
               Or ſon of man that vpon him, thou thinkeſt in ſuch wiſe?
               
                  
                     verse 4 Man is but like to vanity, ſo pas his dayes to end:
               
                  
                     verse 5 As fleting ſhade. Bow down O Lord, thy heauēs & diſcend.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The mountaines touch, & they ſhal ſmoke, caſt forth thy lightning flame,
               And ſcatter thē, thine arrowes ſhote, cōſume thē wt the ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Send down thy hand euen from aboue, O Lord deliuer mee,
               Take me frō waters great, frō hand of ſtraungers make me free.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Whoſe ſubtle mouth of vanity, and fondnes doth entreat,
               and their right hand is a right hand, of falſhod and deceit.
               
                  
                     verse 9 A new ſong I wil ſyng O God, and ſinging wil I bee,
               On viole and on inſtrument, ten ſtringed vnto thee.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Euen he it is that onely geues, deliueraunce to kings,
               Vnto his ſeruāt Dauid helpe, frō hurtful ſword he bryngs.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Frō ſtraūgers hād me ſaue & ſheld, whoſe mouth talkes vanity.
               and their right hand is a right hand, of guile and ſuttelty.
               
                  
                     verse 12 That our ſonnes may be as the plants, whō growing youth doth reare:
               Our daughters as carued cornerſtones, like to a palace fayre.
               
                  
                     verse 13 Our corners ful, and plenty may, with ſondry ſortes be found,
               Our ſhepe bring thouſāds, in our ſtrets, ten thouſāds may aboūd.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 14 Our Oxen be to labor ſtrong, that none do vs inuade:
               There be no going out, no cry, within our ſtretes be made.
               
                  
                     verse 15 The people bleſſed are yt with, ſuch bleſſings are ſo ſtord:
               yea bleſſed al the people are, whoſe God is God the Lord.
            
            
               Exaltabo te deus. Pſalme .Cxlv.
               N.
               
                  ¶This Pſalme was made when the kingdome of Dauid floriſhed. Wherein he deſcribeth the wonderful prouidence of God, as well in gouernyng man, as in preſeruyng all the reſt of his creatures. He prayſeth God for his iuſtice & mercy, but ſpecially for his louyng kindnes toward thoſe that cal vpon him, that feare him and loue hym.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  THee wil I laud my God and kyng, & bleſſe 
                     〈♫〉
                   thy name for aye: 2 For euer wil I prayſe 
                     〈♫〉
                   thy name and bleſſe the day by day. 3 Great is the Lord moſt worthy 
                     〈♫〉
                   prayſe, hys greatnes none can reach, 4 From race to race they 
                     〈♫〉
                   ſhal thy workes prayſe and thy power preach.
               
                  
                     verse 5 I of thy glorious maieſtie, the beauty wil record,
               and meditate vpon thy workes, moſt wonderful, O Lord.
               
                  
                     verse 6 And they ſhal of thy power, and of thy feareful actes declare,
               and I to publiſh al abrod, thy greatnes wil not ſpare.
               
                  
                     verse 7 And they into the mētion ſhal, breake of thy goodnes great:
               and I aloud thy righteouſnes, in ſinging ſhal repeat.
               
                  
                     verse 8 The Lord our God is gratious, and merciful alſo:
               Of great abounding mercy and to anger he is ſlow.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Yea good to al, and al his workes, his mercy doth excede:
               
                  
                     verse 10 Lo al thy works do praiſe thee lord, & doe thy honor ſpred
               
                  
                  
                     verse 11 Thy ſaints do bleſſe thee & they do, thy kingdomes glory ſhew:
               
                  
                     verse 12 And blaſe thy power, to cauſe the ſōnes of mē his power to know.
               And of his mighty kingdome eke, to ſpread the glorious praiſe:
               
                  
                     verse 13 Thy kingdome Lord a kingdome is, that doth endure alwayes.
               And thy dominion through ech age, endures without decay:
               
                  
                     verse 14 The Lord vpholdeth them that fal, the ſliding he doth ſtay.
               
                  
                     verse 15 The eyes of al do wayt on thee, thou dooſt them al releue: and thou to ech ſuffiſing foode, in ſeaſon due dooſt geue.
               
                  
                     verse 16 Thou openeſt thy plentuous hand, and bounteouſly dooſt fil,
               al things whatſoeuer doth lyue, with gifts of thy good wil.
               
                  
                     verse 17 The Lord is iuſt in al his wayes, his workes are holy al:
               
                  
                     verse 18 Nere al he his that cal on him, in truth that on him cal.
               
                  
                     verse 19 He the deſires which they require, that feare him wil fulfil:
               and he wil heare thē whē they cry, & ſaue them al he wil.
               
                  
                     verse 20 The Lord preſerues al thoſe to him, that bear a louing hart:
               But he them al that wicked are, wil vtterly ſubuert.
               
                  
                     verse 21 My thākful mouth ſhal gladly ſpeake, the praiſes of ye Lord,
               al fleſh to prayſe his holy name, for euer ſhal accord.
            
            
               Lauda anima mea. Pſalme .Cxlvi.
               I. H.
               
                  ¶Dauid ſhewing the great deſire, he had to prayſe God, teacheth that none ſhould put theyr truſt in men, but in God alone: who is almighty and deliuereth thafflicted, nouriſheth the poore, ſetteth priſoners at libertie, comforteth the ſatherles, widowes, and the ſtraūgers, and rangneth kyng for euer.
               
               Sing this as the .2 137 Pſalme.
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  MY ſoule prayſe thou the Lord alwayes,  my God I wil cōfes:
               While breath & life prolōg my daies, my tōg no time ſhal ceaſe
               Truſt not in worldly princes thē, though they abound in wealth:
               Nor in the ſonnes of mortal mē, in whō there is no health.
               
                  
                     verse 2 For why their breath doth ſone depart, to earth anone they fal:
               and then the counſels of theyr hart, decay and periſh al.
               
                  
                     verse 3 O happy is that man, I ſay, whom Iacobs God doth ayde:
               and he whoſe hope doth not decay, but on the Lord is ſtayd.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Which made the earth & waters depe, the heauens hye wythal,
               which doth his word and promiſe kepe, in truth and euer ſhal.
               
                  
                     verse 5 With right alwayes doth he procede, for ſuch as ſuffer wrong,
               The poore and hungry he doth fede, and loſe the fetters ſtrong.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The Lord doth ſēd the blind theyr ſight, the lame to lims reſtore:
               The Lord I ſay, doth loue the right, and iuſt man euermore.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 7 He doth defend the fatherles, the ſtraungers ſad in hart.
               And quyt the widow frō diſtres, & il mens wayes ſubuert.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Thy Lord and God eternally, O Sion ſtil ſhal rayne,
               In tyme of al poſterity, for euer to remayne.
            
            
               Laudate dominum. Pſalme .Cxlvii.
               N.
               
                  ¶The Prophet prayſeth the bounty, wiſedome, power, ſuffice and prouidence of God vpon al his creatures. But ſpecially vpon his Church, which he gathereth together after their diſperſion, declaring his word, & iudgement ſo vnto them, as he hath done to no other people.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  PRaiſe ye the Lord, for it is good vnto our God to 
                     〈♫〉
                   ſyng: For it is pleaſaunt and to prayſe, it is a 
                     〈♫〉
                   comely thing. 2 The Lord his own Ieruſalem, he buildeth vp alone, 
                     〈♫〉
                   and the diſperſt of Iſrael, doth gather into one.
               
                  
                     verse 3 He heales the broken in their hart, theyr ſore vp doth he bynd:
               
                  
                     verse 4 He counts the nūber of the ſtarres, & names them in their kind.
               
                  
                     verse 5 Great is our Lord great is his power, his wiſedome infinit.
               
                  
                     verse 6 The Lord releues ye meke, & throwes to groūd the wicked wight.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Sing vnto God the Lord with prayſe, vnto the Lord reioyce:
               and to our God vpō the harpe, aduaunce your ſinging voyce.
               
                  
                     verse 8 He couers heauen with cloudes, & for the earth prepareth rayne:
               and on the mountaines he doth make, the gras to grow agayne.
               
                  
                     verse 9 He geues to beaſtes theyr foode, & to young rauens when they cry:
               
                  
                     verse 10 His pleaſure not in ſtrength of horſe, nor in mans legs dothly.
               
                  
                     verse 11 But in al thoſe that feare the Lord, the Lord hath hys delight,
               and ſuch as do attend vpon, his mercies ſhyning light.
               
                  
                     verse 12 O prayſe thy Lord Ieruſalem, thy God O Sion prayſe:
               
                  
                     verse 13 For he the barres hath forged ſtrōg, wherwith thy gate he ſtayes.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 14 Thy children he hath bleſt in the
                     •
                  , and in thy borders he:
               Doth ſettle peace, & with y• flower, of wheat he filleth thee.
               
                  
                     verse 15 And his commaundement vpon, the earth he ſendeth out,
               and eke the word with ſpedy courſe, & ſwyftly run about.
               
                  
                     verse 16 He geueth ſnow like wol, hore froſt, like aſhes doth he ſpred
               
                  
                     verse 17 Like morſels caſts hys iſe therof, the cold who can abide?
               
                  
                     verse 18 He ſendeth forth his mighty word, and melteth thē agayn,
               His wind he makes to blow, & thē, y• waters flow amayn:
               
                  
                     verse 19 The doctrine of his holy word, to Iacob doth he ſhew,
               his ſtatutes & his iudgments he, geues Iſrael to know.
               
                  
                     verse 20 With euery nation hath he not, ſo dealt, nor they haue knowne,
               his ſecret iudgements, ye therfore, prayſe ye the Lord alone.
            
            
               Laudate dominum. Pſalme .Cxlviij.
               I. P.
               
                  ¶He prouoketh al creatures to prayſe the Lord in heauē, in earth, & in all places, ſpecially for the power that he hath geuen to his people Iſrael, whō he hath taken ſo nere vnto hym.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  GEuelaud vnto the Lord, from heauē, that is ſo hye: Praiſe 
                     〈♫〉
                   him in dede and word, Aboue the ſtarry ſkie. And alſo ye, his angels 
                     〈♫〉
                   al, armies royal prayſe him with glee.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Prayſe him both mone & ſunne,
               Which are ſo cleare and bright,
               The ſame in you be done
               He gliſtring ſtars of light,
               
                  
                     verse 4 And eke no les,
               He heauens fayre,
               
                  
                     verse 5 And cloudes of the ayre,
               His laud expreſſe.
               
                  
                     verse 6 For at his word they were,
               Al formed as we ſe:
               At his voyce did appere
               Al things in theyr degre
               Which he ſet faſt
               To them he made
               A law and trade
               For ay to laſt.
               
                  
                     verse 7 Extol and prayſe Gods name,
               In earth ye Dragons fel
               Al depe do ye the ſame,
               For it becommeth you wel
               
                  
                     verse 8 Him magnify
               Fyre, hayle Iſe Snow,
               And ſtormes that blow
               At hys decree.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 9 The hils and mountaynes al,
               And trees that fruteful are:
               The Ceders great and tal:
               His worthy prayſe declare.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Beaſtes and cattel
               Hea birdes flying
               And wormes crepyng
               That on earth dwel.
               
                  
                     verse 11 Al kynges both more and les,
               With al theyr pompous trayne,
               Princes and al Iudges,
               That in the world remayne
               Exalte hys name.
               
                  
                     verse 12 Yong men and maydes
               Old men and babes,
               Do ye the ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 13 For his name ſhal we proue,
               To be moſt excellent
               Whoſe prayſe is farre aboue
               The earth and firmament.
               
                  
                     verse 14 For ſure he ſhal
               Exalte with bliſſe,
               The borne of hys
               And helpe them al
               His Saints al ſhal forth tel
               His prayſe and worthynes
               The children of Iſrael,
               Ech one both more and les.
               
                  
                     verse 15 And alſo they,
               That with good wil
               His wordes fulfil,
               And hym obey.
            
            
               Cantate dominum. Pſalme .Cxlix.
               N.
               
                  ¶An exhortation to the Churche to prayſe the Lord for his victory and conqueſt that he geueth his ſaintes agaynſt all mans power.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  SIng ye vnto the Lord our God, a new reioyſing ſong,
               and let the prayſe of him be herd, his holy ſaints among.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Let Iſrael reioyce, in hím, that made him of nothing:
               And let the ſede of Sion eke, be ioyful in theyr kyng.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Let them ſound prayſe with voyce of flute, vnto his holy name:
               and with the timbrel and the harpe, ſing prayſes of the ſame.
               
                  
                     verse 4 For why the Lord his pleaſure al, hath in his people ſet:
               and by deliueraunce he wil rayſe, the meke to glory great.
               
                  
                     verse 5 With glory and with honor now, let al the ſaintes reioyce:
               and now aloud vpon their beds, aduaunce their ſinging voyce.
               
                  
                     verse 6 And in their mouthes let be the actes, of God the mighty Lord:
               And in their handes eke let them beare, a double edged ſword.
               
                  
                     verse 7 To plague the Heathen & correct, the people with their handes.
               
                  
                     verse 8 To bynd theyr ſtately kings in chaines, their Lordes in yrō bādes.
               
                  
                     verse 9 To execute on them the dome, that written is before:
               This honor al his ſaints ſhal haue, prayſe ye the Lord therfore.
            
            
               Laudate dominum. Pſalme .CL.
               N.
               
                  ¶An exhortation to prayſe the Lord without ſeaſe by all maner of wayes, for all his mighty and wonderfull workes.
               
               
                  
                     verse 1 
                  YElde vnto God the mighty Lord, prayſe in his ſanctuarye:
               And prayſe him in y• firmamēt, y• ſhewes his power on hye.
               
                  
                  
                     verse 2 Aduaunce his name and prayſe him, in his mighty actes alwayes:
               according to his excellency, of greatnes geue him prayſe.
               
                  
                     verse 3 His prayſes with the princely noyſe, of ſounding trompet blow:
               Prayſe him vpon the viole and, vpon the harpe alſo.
               
                  
                     verse 4 Prayſe him with timbrel and with flute, orgaines and virginals:
               
                  
                     verse 5 With ſounding cimbals praiſe ye him, praiſe him wt loud cimbals.
               
                  
                     verse 6 What euer hath the benefite, of breathing praiſe the Lord:
               To prayſe the name of God the Lord, agree with one accord.
            
            ¶The ende of the Pſalmes of Dauid in metre.
         
         
            
               ¶An exhortation vnto the prayſe of God, to be ſong before Mornyng Prayer.
               T. Becon.
               Syng this an the .100 Pſalme.
               
                  PRayſe the Lord, O ye Gentils al,
               which hath brought you into his lyght,
               O praiſe him al people mortal, as it is moſt worthy & right.
               For he is ful determined, on vs to poure out his mercy:
               And the Lordes truth be ye aſſured, abideth perpetually:
               Glory be to God the father, and to Ieſus Chriſt his true ſonne:
               With the holy Ghoſt in like maner, now and at euery ſeaſon.
            
            
               ¶An exhortation vnto the prayſe of God to be ſong before Euening prayer.
               T. Be.
               
                  BEhold now geue hede ſuch as be,
               the Lordes ſeruaunts faithful and true,
               Come praiſe ye Lord euery degree, with ſuch ſongs as to him are due.
               O ye that ſtand in the Lordes houſe, euen in our own Gods manſion:
               Praiſe ye the Lord ſo bounteous, which worketh our ſaluation.
               Lift vp your hāds in his holy place, yea & that in the time of night:
               Praiſe y• Lord, which geueth al grace, for he is a Lord of great might:
               Thē ſhal ye Lord out of Siō, which made heauē & earth by his power:
               Geue to you, & your nation, his bleſſing, mercy and fauour.
               Glory be to God the father &c.
            
            
               ¶The .x. Commaundementes of almighty God.
               
                  ¶Exodus .xx. VV. VV.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  AEtend my people and geue eare, of ferly thyngs 
                     〈♫〉
                   I wil thee tel: ſee that my wordes in mynde
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   thou beare, and to my preceptes liſten wel.
               
                  
                     verse 1 I am thy Soueraine Lord and God,
               Which haue thee brought from careful thral
               And eke reclaimed from Pharos rod,
               Make thee no Gods on them to cal.
               
                  
                     verse 2 Nor facioned forme of any thing,
               In heauen, or earth to worſhip it:
               For I thy God by reuengyng,
               With greuous plagues this ſinne wil ſmit.
               
                  
                     verse 3 Take not in vayne his holy name, ❧
               
               Abuſe it not after thy wil:
               For ſo thou might ſone purchaſe blame,
               And in his wrath he would thee ſpil.
               
                  
                     verse 4 The Lord frō worke the ſeuenth day ceſt,
               And brought al things to perfect end:
               So thou and thyne that day take reſt,
               That to Gods heſtes ye may attend. ❧
               
               
                  
                     verse 5 Vnto thy parentes honor geue,
               As Gods commaundements do pretend,
               That thou long dayes, and good mayeſt lyue,
               In earth, where God a place doth lend.
               
                  
                     verse 6 Beware of murder, and cruel hate,
               
                  
                     verse 7 Al filthy fornication feare.
               
                  
                     verse 8 Se thou ſteale not in any rate.
               
                  
                     verse 9 Falſe witnes agaynſt no man beare.
               
                  
                     verse 10 Thy neighbours houſe wiſh not to haue, ❧
               
               His wife, or ought that he calth myne
               His field, his Oxe, his Aſſe, his ſlaue,
               Or any thing which is not thine.
            
            
               A Prayer.
               
                  Thy ſpirit of grace graunt vs (O Lord)
                  To kepe theſe lawes our hartes reſtore
                  And cauſe vs al with one accord
                  To magnify the name therfore.
               
               
                  
                      For of our ſelues no ſtrength we haue,
                  To kepe theſe lawes after thy wil:
                  Thy myght therfore (O Chriſt) we craue,
                  That we in thee may them fulfil
               
               
                  Lord for thy names ſake graunt vs this,
                  Thou art our ſtrength, oh Sauiour Chriſt:
                  Of thee to ſpede, how ſhould we mis,
                  In whom our treaſure doth conſiſt. ❧
                  
               
               
                  To thee for euermore be prayſe,
                  With thy father in reſpect:
                  and with thy holy ſpirit alwayes,
                  The comforter of thyne elect.
               
            
            
               ¶The Lordes Prayer.
               D. Cox.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  OVr father which in heauen art. And makſt vs al 
                     〈♫〉
                   one brotherhod, to cal vpon thee with one hart. 
                     〈♫〉
                   Our heauenly father and our God: graunt we pray not with lips 
                     〈♫〉
                   alone, but with the harts depe ſigh and grone.
               
                  Thy bleſſed name be ſanctified,
                  Thy holy word mought vs inflame
                  In holy lyfe for to abyde,
                  To magnifie thy holy name.
                  From al errours defend and kepe,
                  The litle flocke of thy poore ſhepe. ❧
                  
               
               
                  Thy kingdome come euen at this houre,
                  and henceforth euerlaſtyngly:
                  Thine holy ghoſt into vs poure:
                  With all his giftes moſt plenteouſly,
                  
                      From Sathans rage and filthy band,
                  Defend vs with thy mighty hand.
               
               
                  Thy wil be done with diligence,
                  Like as in heauen in earth alſo:
                  In trouble graunt vs pacience,
                  Thee to obey in wealth and wo,
                  Let not fleſh, bloud, or any il,
                  Preuayle agaynſt thy holy wil. ❧
                  
               
               
                  Geue vs this day our dayly bread,
                  And al other good giftes of thyne,
                  Kepe vs from warre and from bloudſhed:
                  Alſo from ſicknes, dearth and pine,
                  That we may lyue in quietnes,
                  Without al gredy carefulnes.
               
               
                  Forgeue vs our offences al,
                  Releue our careful conſcience, ❧
                  
                  As we forgeue both great and ſmal
                  Which vnto vs haue done offence
                  Prepare vs Lord for to ſerue thee
                  In perfect loue and vnity.
               
               
                  O Lord into temptation,
                  Lead vs not when the fiend doth rage,
                  To withſtand his inuaſion,
                  Geue power and ſtrength to euery age. ❧
                  
                  Arme and make ſtrong thy feble hoſt
                  With faith and with thy holy ghoſt.
               
               
                  O Lord from euel deliuer vs,
                  The dayes and tymes are daungerous
                  From euerlaſtyng death ſaue vs,
                  And in our laſt nede comfort vs,
                  A bleſſed end to vs bequeth
                  Into thy handes our ſoules receyue. ❧
                  
               
               
                  For thou (O Lord) art kyng of kyngs
                  And thou haſt power ouer al
                  Thy glory ſhineth in al thyngs:
                  In the wyde world vniuerſal.
                  Amen, let it be done (O Lord)
                  That we haue prayd with one accord.
               
            
            
               
               ¶The .xii. Articles of the Chriſtian Faith.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  AL my belief, and confidence, Is in the Lord of 
                     〈♫〉
                   might, the father which al things hath made the 
                     〈♫〉
                   day and eke the night, the heauens & the firmamēt, and alſo many 
                     〈♫〉
                   a ſtarre, the earth: and al that is therin, which paſſe mās reaſō far.
               
                  And in like maner I beleue, in Chriſt our Lord his ſonne:
                  Coequal with the deitie, and man in fleſh and bone.
                  Conceiued by the holy ghoſt, his word doth me aſſure:
                  and of his mother Mary borne, yet ſhe a Virgin pure.
               
               
                  Becauſe mankind to Sathan was, for ſinne in bōd and thral,
                  He came and offred vp him ſelfe, to death to ſaue vs al.
                  And ſuffring moſt greuous payne, then Pilate being iudge:
                  Was crucified on the cros, and therat did not grudge.
               
               
                  And ſo he died in the fleſh, but quickned in the ſpirite,
                  His body then was buried, as is our vſe and rite.
                  His ſpirit did after this deſcēd, into the lower parts,
                  To thē y• lōg in darknes wer, the true light of their harts.
               
               
                  And in the thyrd day of his death, he roſe to life agayne:
                  To thend he might be glorified, out of al grief and payne.
                  Aſcendyng to the heauens hye, to fit in glory ſtil:
                  On Gods right hād, his father deare, according to his wil.
               
               
                  Vntil the day of iudgmēt come, whē he ſhal come agayne:
                  With angels power, yet of that day, we al be vncertayn.
                  To iudge al people rightuouſly, whō he hath dearely bought,
                  The liuing & the dead alſo, which he hath made of nought.
               
               
                  
                      And in the holy ſpirit of God, my faith to ſatiſfy:
                  The third perſon in Trinity, beleue I ſtedfaſtly.
                  The holy & catholike church, that gods word doth maintaine:
                  and holy ſcripture doth alow, which Sathā doth diſdain.
               
               
                  And alſo I do truſt to haue, by Ieſu Chriſt his death:
                  Releaſe and pardon of my ſinnes, and that onely by faith.
                  What time al fleſh ſhal riſe again, before the Lord of might:
                  and ſee him wt their bodely eies, which now do geue thē light.
               
               
                  And then ſhal Chriſt our fauior, the ſhepe and Goates deuyde:
                  and geue life euerlaſtingly, to thoſe whom he hath tryde.
                  Which is the realme celeſtial, in glory for to reſt:
                  With al the holy company, of ſaints and Angels bleft.
               
               
                  Which ſerue the Lord omnipotent, obediently eche houre:
                  To whome be al dominion, and prayſe for euermore.
               
            
            
               ¶A prayer vnto the holy Ghoſt to be ſong before the Sermon.
               Syng this as the .11
                     •
                   Pſalme.
               
                  
                     COme holy ſprite the god of might, comforter of vs al:
                  teach vs to know thy word aright, yt we do neuer fal.
                  O holy Ghoſt viſite our coaſt, defend vs with thy ſhield
                  Againſt al ſinne and wickednes, Lord help vs win the field.
               
               
                  Lord kepe our Quene & her counſel, & geue them wil and might
                  To perſeuere in thy goſpel, which can put ſinne to flyght.
                  O Lord that geueſt thy holy word, ſend preachers plētuouſly:
                  That in the ſame we may accord, and therin lyue and dy.
               
               
                  O holy ſprite direct aright, the preachers of thy word:
                  that yu by them maiſt cut down ſin, as it were with a ſword.
                  Depart not from thoſe paſtors pure, but ayd them at al nede:
                  which breake to vs ye bread of life, wher on our ſoules do fede
               
               
                  O bleſſed ſpirit of truth kepe vs, in peace and vnitie:
                  Kepe vs from ſectes and errours al, and from al papiſtry.
                  Conuert al thoſe that are our foes, and bring thē to thy lyght:
                  that they and we may al agree, and prayſe thee day & night.
               
               
                  O Lord increaſe our faith in vs, and loue ſo to abound:
                  that man & wife be void of ſtrife, & neighbours about vs roūd.
                  In our time geue thy peace O Lord, to nations far & nye:
                  and teach thē al thy holy word, that we may ſing to thee.
               
               
                  
                      All Glory to the Trinitie, that is of myghtes moſt:
                  The lyuing Father and the Sonne, and eke the holy Ghoſt.
                  As it hath bene in al the tyme, that hath bene heretofore:
                  As it is now and ſo ſhalbe, hence forth for euermore.
               
            
            
               Da pacem Domine.
               E. G.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  GEue peace in theſe our dayes O Lord, great 
                     〈♫〉
                   daūgers are now at hand, thine enemies with 
                     〈♫〉
                   one accord, Chriſtes name in euery land: ſeeke to deface, roote out and 
                     〈♫〉
                   race, thy true ryght worſhyp in dede, be thou the ſtay, Lord we thee 
                     〈♫〉
                   pray, thou helpſt alone in all nede.
               
                  Geue vs that peace which we do lacke,
                  Through miſbelief and il life:
                  Thy word to offer thou dooſt not ſlacke,
                  Which we vnkindly gainſtriue.
                  With fyre and ſword, this healthfull word.
                  Some perſecute and oppreſſe:
                  Some with the mouth, confes the truth,
                  Without ſincere godlines.
               
               
                  Geue peace and vs thy ſpirite down ſend,
                  With grief and repentaunce true:
                  
                      Do pearce our harts our lyues to amend,
                  And by fayth Chriſt renue.
                  That feare and dread, warre and bloudſhed.
                  Through thy ſwete mercy and grace:
                  May from vs ſlyde, thy truth may byde,
                  And ſhyne in euery place.
               
            
            
               The complaint of a Synner who craueth of Chriſt to be kept vnder hys mercy.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  WHere rightuouſnes doth ſay, Lord for my ſinful 
                     〈♫〉
                   part: in wrath thou ſhouldſt me pay, vengeaunce 
                     〈♫〉
                   for my deſert: I can it not deny, but nedes I muſt confes, how 
                     〈♫〉
                   that cōtinually, thy lawes I do tranſgres: thy lawes I do tranſgres.
               
                  But if it be thy wil, with ſynners to contend:
                  Then all thy flock ſhal ſpil, and be loſt without end
                  For who lyueth here ſo ryght, that rightly he can ſay:
                  He ſynneth not in thy ſight, full oft and euery day?
               
               
                  Thy Scripture plain telth me, y• rightuous mā offēdeth
                  ſeuē times a day to thee, wheron thy wrath depēdeth.
                  So that the rightous man, doth walk in no ſuch path
                  But he falth now or than, in daunger of thy wrath.
               
               
                  Then ſince the caſe ſo ſtandes, y• euen the mā rightwiſe:
                  Faith oft in ſinful bands, wherby thy wrath may riſe.
                  Lord I that am vniuſt, and rightuouſnes none haue:
                  Whereto then ſhal I truſt, my ſinful ſoule to ſaue.
               
               
                  
                      But truly to that poſt, whereto I cleaue and ſhal:
                  Which is thy mercy moſt, Lord let thy mercy fal.
                  And mitigate thy moode, or els we periſh al:
                  The pryce of this thy bloud, wherin mercy I cal.
               
               
                  Thy ſcripture doth declare, no drop of bloud in thee:
                  but that thou didſt not ſpare, to ſhed ech drop for mee
                  Now let thoſe drops moſt ſwete, ſo moiſt my hart ſo dry
                  that I with ſin replete, may liue, and ſin may dye.
               
               
                  That beyng mortifye, this ſinne of mine in mee
                  I may be ſanctified, by grace of thyne in thee.
                  So that I neuer fal, into ſuch mortal ſinne:
                  That my foes infernal, reioyce my death therin.
               
               
                  But vouchſafe me to kepe, from thoſe infernal foes:
                  and from that lake ſo depe, wheras no mercy growes
                  And I ſhal ſing the ſongs, confirmed with the iuſt:
                  That vnto thee belongs, which art my onely truſt.
               
            
            
               The Lamentation.
               
                  ¶Through perfect repentance y• ſinner hath a ſure truſt in god that his ſinnes ſhalbe waſhed away in Chriſtes bloud.
               
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  O Lord in thee is al my truſt, geue eare vnto my 
                     〈♫〉
                   woful cry, refuſe me not that am vniuſt, but 
                     〈♫〉
                   bowing down thy heauenly eye, behold how I doo ſtil lament, my 
                     〈♫〉
                   ſynnes wherin I doo offend: O Lord for them ſhall I be ſhent, ſyth
 
                  
                     〈♫〉
                   thee to pleaſe I doo intend?
               
                  No no, not ſo thy wil is bent,
                  To deale with ſinners in thyne ire:
                  But whē in hart they ſhal repent,
                  thou graūtſt with ſpede their iuſt deſire
                  To thee therfore ſtil ſhal I cry,
                  To waſh away my ſinful cryme:
                  Thy bloud O Lord is not yet dry,
                  But that it may help me in time.
               
               
                  Haſt thee O Lord, haſt thee I ſay,
                  To poure on me the gifts on grace:
                  That when this life muſt flit away,
                  In heauē wt thee I may haue place.
                  Where thou dooſt raigne eternally,
                  with god which once did down thee ſēd
                  Where angels ſing continually,
                  To thee be prayſe world without end.
               
            
            
               A thankes geuyng after the receiuyng of the Lordes ſupper.
               
                  Syng this as the .37. Pſalme.
                  
                     THe Lord be thanked for his gifts and mercy euermore:
                  that he doth ſhew vnto his ſaints, to him be laud therfore.
                  Our tonges cannot ſo prayſe y• Lord, as he doth right deſerue:
                  Our hartes cannot of hym ſo thynke, as he doth vs preſerue
               
               
                  His benefites they be ſo great, to vs that be but ſynne:
                  That at our hands for recompence, there is no hope to win.
                  O ſynful fleſh that thou ſhouldſt haue, ſuch mercies of the Lord:
                  Thou dooſt deſerue more worthely, of hym to be abhord.
               
               
                  Nought els but ſinne and wretchednes, doth reſt within our harts:
                  And ſtubburnly againſt the Lord, we daily play our parts.
                  The ſunne aboue in firmament, that is to vs a light:
                  Doth ſhew it ſelf more cleane & pure, then we be in hys ſyght.
               
               
                  The heauens aboue and al therin, more holy are then we:
                  They ſerue the Lord in their eſtate, ech one in his degree.
                  
                      They do not ſtryue for maſterſhip, nor flacke their office ſet:
                  but feare the Lord and do his wil, hate is to them no let.
               
               
                  Alſo the earth and al therin, of God it is in aw:
                  It doth obſerue the formers wil, by ſkilful natures law.
                  The ſea and al that is therin, doth bend when God doth beck
                  The ſprites beneth do trēble al, & feare his wrathful check.
               
               
                  But we alas for whom al theſe, were made thē for to rule:
                  Do not ſo know or loue the Lord, as doth the Oxe or mult.
                  A ſaw he gaue for vs to know, what was his holy wil:
                  He would vs good, but we would not, auoid the thyng is il.
               
               
                  Not one of vs that ſeeketh out, the Lord of lyfe to pleaſe:
                  Nor do y• thing that might vs ioyne, our Chriſt & quiet eaſe.
                  Thus we are al his enemies, we can it not deny:
                  and he agayn of his good wil, would not that we ſhould dy
               
               
                  Therfore when remedy was none, to bryng vs vnto lyfe:
                  the ſonne of God our fleſh he toke, to mend our mortal ſtrife.
                  And al the law of God our Lord, he dyd it ful obey:
                  and for our ſins vpon the croſſe, hys bloud our dets did pay
               
               
                  And y• we ſhould not yet forget, what good he to vs wrought
                  A ſygne he left our eyes to tel, that he our bodies bought.
                  In bread & wyne here viſible, vnto thine eyes and taſt:
                  his mercies great thou maiſt record, if that his ſprite yu haſt.
               
               
                  As once the corn did liue & grow, and was cut down with ſithe
                  and threſhed out with many ſtripes, out frō his huſk to driue
                  And as the mil with violence, did teare it out ſo ſmal:
                  and made it lyke to earthly duſt, not ſparyng it at al.
               
               
                  And as the ouen with fyre whote, did cloſe it vp in heat:
                  and al this done that I haue ſaid, that it ſhould be our meat
                  So was the Lord in his ripe age, cut down by cruel death:
                  his ſoule he gaue in torments great, & yelded vp his breath.
               
               
                  Becauſe that he to vs might be, an euerlaſtyng bread:
                  with much reproch and trouble great, on earth his life he led
                  And as the grapes in pleaſant tyme, are preſſed very ſore:
                  and plucked down whē thei be ripe, not let to grow no more
               
               
                  Becauſe the iuyſe that in them is, as comfortable drinke:
                  He might receiue & ioyful be, whē ſorowes make vs ſhrink
                  
                      So chriſtes bloud out preſſed was, with nayles & eke with ſpeare:
                  The iuiſe wherof doth ſaue al thoſe, that rightly do him feare.
               
               
                  And as the cornes by vnitie, into one loafe is knit:
                  So is the Lord and his whole church, though he in heauen ſit.
                  As many grapes make but one wyne, ſo ſhould we be but one,
                  In fayth and loue, in Chriſt aboue, and vnto Chriſt alone.
               
               
                  Leading a lyfe without all ſtryfe, in quiet reſt and peace:
                  From enuy and from malice both, our hartes and tonges to ceaſe.
                  Which if we do, then ſhal we ſhew, that we his choſen be:
                  By faith in him to lead a lyfe, as alwayes willed he.
               
               
                  And that we may ſo do in dede, God ſend vs al his grace:
                  Then after death we ſhal be ſure, with hym to haue a place.
               
            
            
               Robert VViſedome.
               
                  
                     〈♫〉
                  
                  PReſerue vs Lord by thy dere word, frō Turk 
                     〈♫〉
                   and Pope defend vs Lord, which both would 
                     〈♫〉
                   thruſt out of his throne, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt thy deare ſonne.
               Lord Ieſus Chriſt ſhew forth thy might,
               That thou art Lord of Lordes by ryght:
               Thy poore afflicted flock defend,
               That they may prayſe thee without end.
               God holy Ghoſt our comfortor, ❧
               
               Be our Patrone, help, and ſuccor:
               Geue vs one mind, and perfect peace,
               All gifts of grace in vs encreaſe.
               Thou liuing God, in perſons three,
               Thy name be prayſed in vnitie.
               In all our nede ſo vs defend:
               That we may praiſe thee, world without end.
            
         
         
            
               
               ¶A forme of Prayer to be vſed in priuate houſes, euery morning and euenyng.
               ¶Mornyng prayer.
               
                  ALmighty God & moſt merciful father, we do not preſent our ſelues here before thy maieſty, truſting in our owne merites or worthines, but in thy manifold mercies, which haſt promiſed to heare our prayers, & graūt our requeſts, which we ſhal make to thee in y• name of thy beloued ſon Ieſus Chriſt our Lord: who hath alſo commaunded vs to aſſemble our ſelues together in his name, with ful aſſurance that he wil not onely be amōgſt vs, but alſo be our mediator and aduocate towards thy maieſtie, that we may obtayne all thinges which ſhal ſeme expedient to thy bleſſed wil for our neceſſities: therfore we beſech thee moſt merciful Father, to turne thy louyng countenance towardes vs, and impute not vnto vs our manifold ſinnes and offences, wherby we iuſtly deſerue thy wrath & ſharp puniſhment, but rather receyue vs to thy mercye for Ieſus Chriſtes ſake, accepting his death and paſſion as a iuſt recompence for all our offences, in whom onely thou art pleaſed, and through whom thou canſt not be offended with vs. And ſeyng that of thy great mercies we haue quietly paſſed this nyght, graunt (O heauenly Father) that we may beſtow this day wholy in thy ſeruice, ſo that al our thoughts words, and dedes, may redoūd to the glory of thy name, and good enſample to al men, who ſeyng our good workes, may glorify thee our heauenly father. And for as much as of thy mere fauour and 
                     •
                  oue, thou haſt not onely created vs to thyne own ſimilitude and lykenes, but alſo haſt choſen vs to be heyres with thy deare Sonne Ieſus Chriſt of that immortal kingdom which thou preparedſt for vs before the beginning of ye world, we beſech thee to encreaſe our faith & knowledge, and to lighten our harts with thy holy ſprite, that we may in y• mean tyme, liue in godly conuerſation and integrity of lyfe, knowyng that Idolaters, adulterers, couetous men, cōtentious perſons, drunkards, gluttons, and ſuch like, ſhal not inherite the kingdom of God.
               And becauſe thou haſt commaunded vs to pray one for an other, we do not onely make requeſt (O Lord) for our ſelues, and them that thou haſt already called to the true vnderdandyng of thy heauenlye wil: but for all people & nations of the world, who as they know by thy wonderful workes, that thou art God ouer al: ſo they may be inſtructed by thy holy ſpirit, to beleue in thee theyr onely Sauiour & redemer. But for as much as they cannot beleue except they heare, nor cannot heare, but by preachyng, and none can preache except they be
 ſent: therfore (O Lord) rayſe vp faithful diſtributers of thy miſteries, who ſettyng apart al worldly reſpects, may both in their lyfe & doctrine onely ſeeke thy glory. Contrarily confound Sathan, Antichriſt, with all hyrelinges, whome thou haſt already caſt of into a reprobate ſence, that they may not by ſectes, ſchiſmes, hereſies, and errours, diſquiete thy little flocke. And becauſe (O Lord) we be fallen into the latter dayes and daungerous tymes, wherein ignoraunce hath gotten the vpper hand, and Sathan by his miniſters ſeke by all meanes to quenche the light of thy Goſpell, we beſech thee to maintayne thy cauſe againſt thoſe rauenyng wolues, and ſtrengthen al thy ſeruants whom they keepe in priſon and bondage. Let not thy long ſuffryng be an occaſion, eyther to encreaſe their tiranny, or to diſcourage thy children, neyther yet let our ſynnes and wickednes be a hynderaunce to thy mercies, but with ſpeede (O Lord) conſider theſe great miſeries. For thy people Iſraell many tymes by their ſynnes prouoked thyne anger, and thou puniſhedſt them by thy iuſt iudgement, yet thoughe theyr ſynnes were neuer ſo greuous, if they once returned from theyr iniquity, thou receyuedſt them to mercy. We therefore moſt wretched ſynners, be wayle our manifolde ſynnes, and earneſtly repent vs for our former wyckednes and vngodly behauiour towardes thee: and where as we cannot of our ſelues purchaſe thy pardon, yet we humbly beſech thee for Ieſus Chriſtes ſake, to ſhew thy mercies vpon vs, and receyue vs againe to thy fauour. Graunt vs dere father theſe our requeſts and al other thynges neceſſary for vs, and thy whole church according to thy promiſe in Ieſus Chriſt our lord. In whoſe name we beſech thee as he hath taught vs, ſaying. Our father. &c.
            
            
               A prayer to be ſayd before meales.
               
                  ALl thynges depend vppon thy prouidence (O Lord) to receyue at thy hands due ſuſtenance in time conuenient, thou geueſt to them and they gather it, thou openeſt thy hande, and they are ſatiſfied with al good things. O heauenly father which art the fountayne & ful treaſure of al goodnes, we beſeche thee to ſhew thy mercies vpon vs thy children, & ſanctify theſe gyfts which we receyue of thy mercifull liberality, graunt vs grace to vſe them ſoberly and purely accordyng to thy bleſſed wyll, ſo that hereby we maye acknowledge thee to bee the author and geuer of all good things, and aboue al, that we may remember continually, to ſeeke the ſpirituall fo
                     ••
                  e of thy worde, wherwith our ſoules may be nouriſhed euerlaſtingly, through our ſauior Chriſt: who is the true bread of life,
 which came down from heauen, of whom whoſoeuer eateth, ſhal liue for euer, and raigne with him in glory world without end So be it.
            
            
               A thankes geuyng after meales.
               
                  LEt all nations magnify the Lord, let all people reioyce, in prayſing and extollyng hys great mercies. For his fatherly kyndnes is plentifully ſhewd forth vpon vs, and the truth of his promiſe endureth for euer.
               We render thankes vnto thee (O Lorde God) for the manifolde benefites, which we continually receiue at thy bountiful hand, not onely for that it hath pleaſed thee to frede vs, in this preſent lyfe, geuyng vnto vs all thinges neceſſary for the ſame: but eſpecially becauſe thou haſt of thy free mercies faſhioned vs a new, into an aſſured hope of a far better lyfe, the which thou haſt declared vnto vs by thy holy Goſpell. Therfore we humbly beſech thee (O heauenly father) that thou wilte not ſuffer our affections to bee ſo intangled or rooted in theſe earthly and corruptible thyngs, but that we may alwayes haue our myndes dyrected to thee on high, cōtinually watchyng for the cō
                  myng of our Lord and Sauiour Chriſt, what time he ſhal appeare for our ful redemption. To whome with thee and the holy Ghoſt, be all honour and glory, for euer and euer. So be it.
            
            
               Another thankes geuyng before meales.
               
                  ETernall and euerlyuing God, Father of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, who of thy moſt ſingular loue whiche thou beareſt to mankynde, haſt appointed to his ſuſtenaunce, not onely the frutes of the earth, but alſo the foules of the ayre, the beaſtes of the earth, and fiſhes of the ſea, and haſt commaunded thy benefits to be receyued, as from thy handes with thanks geuing, aſſuring thy children by the mouth of thy Apoſtle, that to the cleane al things are cleane, as the creatures which be ſanctif
                     •
                  d by thy word & by prayer: graunt vnto vs ſo moderately to vſe theſe thy giftes preſent, that the bodies being refreſhed, the ſoules may be more able to procede in all good workes, to the prayſe of thy holy name, through Ieſus Chriſte our Lord. So be it.
               Our Father which art in heauen. &c.
            
            
               Another.
               
                  THe eyes of all things do looke vp and truſt in thee (O Lord) thou geueſt them meat in due ſeaſon, thou openeſt thy hande,
 and filleſt with thy bleſſing euery liuing creature: good Lord bleſſe vs and al thy gifts, which we receiue of thy large liberality, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. So be it. Our father. &c.
            
            
               Another thankes geuing after meat.
               
                  GLory, praiſe, & honor be vnto thee, moſt mercifull and omnipotent father, who of thine infinite goodnes, haſt created man to to thine owne image and ſimilitude: who alſo haſt fed, and daily fedeſt of thy moſt bountiful hand all liuing creatures: graunt vnto vs, that as thou haſt nouriſhed theſe our mortal bodies with corporal foode, ſo thou wouldeſt repleniſhe our ſoules wyth the perfect knowledge of the liuely word of thy beloued ſonne Ieſus, to whō be praiſe, glory and honor for euer. So be it.
               ¶God ſaue the church vniuerſal, our Quene and Realme: God cō
                  fort all them that be comfortles. Lord increaſe our faith. O Lorde for Chriſt thy ſonnes ſake, be merciful to the cōmon wealthes, where thy Goſpel is truely preached, and harbor graunted to the afflicted members of Chriſtes body, and illuminate accordyng to thy good pleaſure al nations with the brightnes of thy word. So be it.
            
            
               ¶Another.
               
                  THe God of glory and peace, who hath created, redemed, & preſently fed vs, be bleſſed for euer and euer. So be it.
               ¶The God of all power, who hath called from death, that great paſtor of the ſhepe, our Lord Ieſus, comfort and defend the flock which he hath redemed by the bloud of the eternal teſtament, increaſe the number of true preachers: repres the rage of obſtinate tirants, mitigate & lightē the harts of the ignorant, relieue the paynes of ſuch as be afflicted, but eſpecially of thoſe y• ſuffer for ye teſtimony of his truth, & finally confound Sathā by the power of our lord Ieſus Chriſt. Amē
               
            
            
               Euening prayer.
               
                  O Lord God fatherr 
                     •••
                  rlaſting and ful of pitie, we acknowledge and confes, that we be not worthy to lift vp our eyes to heauen, muche les to preſent our ſelues before thy maieſtye, wyth confidence that thou wilt heare our prayers, and graunte oure requeſtes, if we conſider our owne deſeruynges: for our conſciences do accuſe vs, and our ſynnes witnes againſt vs, and we knowe that thou art an vpright iudge, whiche dooſt not iuſtifye the ſynners and wycked men, but puniſheſt the faults of al ſuch as tranſgreſſe thy commaundementes. Yet moſte mercifull father, ſince it hath pleaſed thee to commaunde vs to cal on thee in all our troubles and aduerſities,
 promiſing euen then to help vs, when we fele our ſelues (as it were) ſwalowed vp of death & deſperation, we vtterly renounce al worldly confidence, & flee to thy ſoueraign boūtie, as our onely ſtay & refuge: beſeching thee not to cal to remembraunce our manifold ſinnes & wickednes, wherby we continually prouoke thy wrath and indignation againſt vs: neither our negligence and vnkindnes, which haue neyther worthely eſtemed, nor in our liues ſufficiētly expreſſed the ſwete comfort of thy goſpel reueled vnto vs: but rather to accept the obedience and death of thy ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, who by offring vp his body in ſacrifice once for all, hath made a ſufficient recompence for all our ſynnes. Haue mercy therfore vppon vs (O Lord) and forgeue vs our offences. Teach vs by thy holy Spirite, that we may ryghtly waye them, and earneſtly repent for the ſame. And ſo much the rather (O Lord) becauſe that the reprobate and ſuch as thou haſt forſaken, cannot prayſe thee, nor cal vpon thy name, but the repenting hart, the ſorowful mynd, the conſcience oppreſſed, hungring and thirſting for thy grace, ſhal euer ſet forth thy prayſe and glory. And albeit we be but wormes and duſt, yet thou art our creator, and we be the worke of thy hands: yea, thou art our father, and we thy children, thou art our ſhepeheard, and we thy flocke, thou art our redemer, and we the people whom thou haſt bought: thou art our God, and we thyne inheritaunce. Correct vs not therfore in thyne anger (O Lord) neyther accordyng to our deſertes puniſh vs, but mercifully chaſtice vs wyth a fatherly affection, that all the world may know, that at what tyme ſoeuer a ſynner doth repent hym of hys ſinne from the bottome of his hart, thou wilt put away his wickednes out of thy remembraunce, as thou haſt promiſed by thy holy Prophet.
               Finally, for as much as it hath pleaſed thee to make the nyght for man to reſt in, as thou haſt ordayned hym the day to trauell, graunt (O deare father) that we may ſo take our bodily reſt, that our ſoules may continually watch, for the tyme that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt ſhal appeare for our deliueraunce out of this mortal lyfe, and in the mean ſeaſon that we, not ouercomen by any fantaſies, dreames, or other tēptations, may fully ſet our myndes vpon thee, loue thee, feare thee, and reſt in thee: furthermore, that our ſleepe be not exceſſiue or ouer much after the inſatiable deſires of our fleſh, but onely ſufficient to content our weake nature, that we may be better diſpoſed to lyue in all godly conuerſation to the glory of thy holy name, and profite of our brethren So be it.
            
            
               
               ¶A Godly prayer to be ſayd at al times.
               
                  HOnor and prayſe, be geuen to thee (O Lord God almighty) moſt deare father of heauē for al thy mercies & louing kindnes ſhewed vnto vs, in yt it hath pleaſed thy gratious goodnes frely and of thine owne accord, to elect and choſe vs to ſaluation before the beginning of the world, and euen lyke continual thankes be geuē to thee for creating vs after thine own image, for redeming vs with the precious bloud of thy deare ſonne, whē we were vtterly loſt, for ſanctifying vs with thy holy ſpirit in the reuelation & knowledge of thy holy word, for helping and ſuccoryng vs, in al our nedes and neceſſities, for ſauing vs from al daungers of body & ſoule, for comforting vs ſo fatherly in al our tribulatiōs, and perſecutiōs, for ſparing vs ſo long, and geuing vs ſo large a time of repētaunce. Theſe benefites (O moſt merciful father) like as we knowledge to haue receiued them of thy onely goodnes, euen ſo we beſech thee, for thy deare ſonne Ieſus Chriſtes ſake: to graūt vs alwayes thy holy ſpirit, wherby we may continually grow in thākfulnes towardes thee, to be led into al truth, and cōforted in al our aduerſities. O Lord, ſtrengthē our faith, kindle it more in feruentnes & loue towardes thee (& our neyghbours) for thy ſake. Suffer vs not moſt deare Father, to receyue thy word any more in vayne: but graunt vs alwayes the aſſiſtaūce of thy grace and holy ſpirit, that in hart word and dede we may ſanctify and do worſhip to thy name. Helpe to amplifie and increaſe 
                     〈…〉
                   and whatſoeuer thou ſendeſt, we may be hartly wel contēt with thy good pleaſure & wil: Let vs not lacke the thyng (O Father) without the which we cā not ſerue thee, but bleſſe thou ſo al the workes of our handes, that we may haue ſufficient, and not to be chargeable but rather helpeful vnto others: be merciful (O Lord) to our offences, & ſeing our det is great, which thou haſt forgeuē vs in Ieſus Chriſt, make vs to loue thee and our neighbours ſo much ye more. Be thou our father, our captaine and defender: in al temptations hold thou vs by thy merciful hand, that we may be deliuered from al inconueniences, and end our liues in the ſāctifying and honor of thy holy name through Ieſu Chriſt our Lord and onely Sauiour. So be it. Let thy mighty hand & out ſtretched arme (O Lord) be ſtil our defence, thy mercy and louyng kindnes in Ieſu Chriſt thy deare ſonne our ſaluation, thy true an holy word our inſtruction, thy grace and holy ſpirit our comfort and conſolation vnto the end and in the end. So be it.
               O Lord increaſe our faith.
            
            
               ¶A Confeſsion for al eſtates and times.
               
                  O Eternal God and moſt merciful father we confeſſe & acknowledge, here before thy diuine maieſtie, that wear miſerable ſinners,
 cōceiued and borne in ſinne and iniquity, ſo that in vs there is no goodnes. For the fleſh euermore rebelleth againſt the ſpirite, wherby we continually tranſgres thy holy precepts & cōmaundemēts, & ſo purchace to our ſelues through thy iuſt iudgemēt, death & dānation: Notwithſtanding (O heauēly father) for aſmuch as we are diſpleaſed with our ſelues for the ſinnes that we haue cōmitted agaynſt thee, & do vnfainedly repent vs of the ſame: we moſt humbly beſech thee, for Ieſus Chriſts ſake, to ſhew thy mercy vpon vs, to forgeue vs al our ſinnes, & to increaſe thy holy ſpirit in vs y•, we acknowledging frō the botom of our harts, our own vnrighteouſnes, may frō hēceforth not onely mortify our ſinful luſtes & affections, but alſo bring forth ſuch frutes, as may be agreable to thy moſt bleſſed wil, not for the worthines therof, but for y• merites of thy dearely beloued ſonne Ieſus Chriſt our onely ſauiour, whom yu haſt alredy geuē an oblatiō & offring for our ſinnes: & for whoſe ſake, we are certeinly perſwaded, y• thou wilt deny vs nothing, yt we ſhal aſke in his name, according to thy wil. For thy ſpirite doth aſſure our conſciēces, that thou art our merciful father, & ſo loueſt vs thy childrē through him, that nothing is able to remoue thy heauē
                  ly grace & fauour frō vs: to the thee therfore (O father) with the ſonne and the holy ghoſt be al honor & glory world without end. So be it.
            
            
               ¶A Prayer to be ſaid before a man begin his worke.
               
                  O Lord God moſt merciful father & Sauiour, ſeyng it hath pleaſed thee to cōmaūd vs to traueil, that we may releue our nede: we beſech thee of thy grace, ſo to bleſſe our labour, yt thy bleſſing may extend vnto vs, without the which we are not able to continue: & that this great fauor may be a witnes vnto vs of thy bountifulnes & aſſiſtāce, ſo that therby we may know the fatherly care that yu haſt ouer vs. Moreouer, O Lord, we beſech thee that thou wouldeſt ſtrengthē vs with thine holy ſpirit, that we may faithfully trauail in our eſtate and vocatiō without fraude or deceit: and that we may indeuour our ſelues to folow thine holy ordinaūces, rather thē to ſeke to ſatiſfy our gredy affectiōs or deſire to gayne. And if it pleaſe thee, O Lord, to proſper our labour, geue vs a minde alſo to helpe thē that haue nede, according to that abilitie that, thou of thy mercy ſhalt geue vs: and knowing that al good thinges come of thee, graunt that we may humble our ſelues to our neyghbours, and not by any meanes lift our ſelues vp aboue them, whiche haue not receyued ſo liberal a portion as of thy mercy thou haſt geuen vnto vs. And if it pleaſe thee to trye and exerciſe vs by greater pouertye, and neede, then our fleſhe woulde deſire that thou wouldeſt, yet, O Lorde, graunte vs grace to knowe
 that thou wilt nouriſh vs cōtinually through thy boūtiful liberality, that we be not ſo tempted that we fal into diſtruſt: but that we may paciently wayt til thou fil vs not onely wt corporal graces & benefites, but chiefly with thine heauenly and ſpiritual treaſures, to the intent that we may alwayes haue more ample occaſion to geue thee thākes, and ſo wholy to reſt vpon thy mercyes. Heare vs, O Lord of mercy, through Ieſus Chriſt thy ſonne our Lord. Amen.
            
            
               ¶A Prayer for the whole ſtate of Chriſtes Church.
               
                  ALmighty God and moſt merciful father, we hūbly ſubmit our ſelues, and fal down before thy maieſty, beſeching thee from the botom of our hartes, that this ſede of thy worde now ſowen amongſt vs, may take ſuch depe roote, that neither ye burning heat of perſecutiō cauſe it to wither, neither the thorny cares of this life do choke it, but that as ſede ſowen in good ground, it may bring forth thirty, ſixty, & an hundreth fold, as thy heauenly wiſdome hath appointed. And becauſe we haue nede continually to craue many things at thy hāds, we hūbly beſech thee (O heauenly father) to graunt vs thy holy ſpirit, to direct our petitiōs, that they may procede from ſuch a feruent mind, as may be agreable to thy moſt bleſſed wil. And ſeing that our infirmitie is able to doo nothing without thy helpe, & that thou art not ignoraunt with how many and great temptations, we poore wretches are on euery ſide encloſed and compaſſed: Let thy ſtrength, O Lord, ſuſtayne our weakenes, that we 
                     〈◊〉
                   defē
                  ded with the force of thy grace, may be ſafely perſerued agaynſt al aſſaultes of Sathan: who goeth about cōtinually like a roring Lion, ſeking to deuoure vs. Encreaſe our faith, O merciful father, that we do not ſwarue at any time from thy heauenly word: but augment in vs hope and loue, with a careful kepyng of al thy cōmaundements: that no hardnes of hart, no Ipocriſie, no concupiſcence of the eyes, nor inticements of the world, do draw vs away frō thy obedience. And ſeing we liue now in theſe moſt perilous times: let thy fatherly prouidence defend vs agaynſt the violence of al our enemyes, which do ſeke by almeanes to oppres thy truth. Furthermore for as much as by thy holy Apoſtle we be taught, to make our prayers & ſupplications for al men: We pray not onely for our ſelues here preſent, but beſech thee alſo, to reduce al ſuch as be yet ignoraūt, frō the miſerable captiuitie of blindnes and errour, to the pure vnderſtanding, and knowledge of thy heauenly truth: that we al with one conſent & vnitie of minds, may worſhip thee our onely God & ſauiour. And that al Paſtors, ſhepe heardes and Miniſters, to whom thou haſt committed the diſpenſation of thy holy word, and charge of thy choſen people, may both in their life and
 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   be found faithful, ſettyng onely before theyr eyes thy glory: and 
                     〈◊〉
                   by them al poore ſhepe, whiche wander and go aſtray, may be gathered & brought home to thy fold. Moreouer becauſe the harts of rulers are in thy handes, we beſech thee to direct, and gouerne the hartes of al kings, princes & maieſtrates, to whom thou haſt committed the ſword: eſpecially (O Lord) accordyng to our bounden duty we beſech thee to mainteine & encreaſe the honorable eſtate of ye Queenes maieſtie, and al her moſt noble counſellers, and maieſtrates, and al the whole body of this cōmune weale. Let thy fatherly fauor ſo preſerue them, & thy holy ſpirite ſo gouerne their hartes, that they may in ſuch ſorte execute their office, that thy religion may be purely maintayned, maners reformed, and ſin puniſhed, according to the preciſe rule of thy holy word. And for that we be al members of the miſtical body of Ieſus Chriſt, we make our requeſtes vnto thee (O heauenly father) for al ſuch as are afflicted with any kind of cros or tribulation, as warre, plague, famine, ſicknes, pouertie, impriſonment, perſecution, baniſhment, or any other kinde of the rods, whether it be calamitie of body, or vexation of minde: that it would pleaſe thee, to geue them patience and conſtancy, til thou ſend them ful deliueraunce of al theyr troubles. Roote out frō hence (O Lord) al rauening wolues, which, to fil theyr bellies, ſeke to deſtroy thy flocke. And ſhew thy great mercyes vpon thoſe our brethren in other coūtreis, which are perſecuted, caſt into priſon, & daily cōdēned to death for ye teſtimony of thy truth. And though they be vtterly deſtitute of al mās ayde, yet let thy ſwete comfort neuer depart from them: but ſo inflame their hartes with thy holy ſpirite, that they may boldly and cherefully abide ſuch trial, as thy godly wiſedome ſhal appoynt. So that at length as wel by theyr death, as by their life, the kingdō of thy dere ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, may increaſe & ſhine through al the world. In whoſe name we make our hūble peticiōs vnto thee as he hath taught vs. Our Father which art in heauen halowed by thy. &c.
            
            FINIS.
            
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧A Table both for the number of the whole Pſalmes, and alſo in what leafe, you may finde euery of them.
            
               Pſalme. A. Fol.
               30 ALl laude and prayſe. 49
               49 All people her. 59
               78 Attend my people to my. 106
               82 Amid the preaſe. 114
            
            
               B.
               81 Be light and glad. 113
               119 Bleſſed are they. 158
               128 Bleſſed art thou. 175
               134 Behold and haue. 178
               142 Before the Lord. 187
               144 Bleſt be the. 188
            
            
               D.
               83 Do not O God re. 15
            
            
               E.
               127 Except the Lord. 174
            
            
               G.
               29 Geue to the Lord ye. 48
               37 Grudge not to ſee. 58
               48 Great is the Lord. 70
               54 God ſaue me for thy. 80
               105 Geue prayſes vnto. 140
               107 Geue thankes vnto. 145
               148 Geue laud vnto. 192
            
            
               H.
               12 Helpe Lord, for. 32
               13 How loug wilt. 32
               51 Haue mercy on. 77
               56 Haue mercy Lord. 82
               67 Haue mercy on vs. 91
               73 How euer it be, yet. 100
               84 How pleaſaunt is. 116
               91 He that within. 125
            
            
               I.
               5 Incline thine eares. 25
               11 I truſt in God. 31
               20 In trouble and aduerſitie. 40
               25 I lift my hart. 44
               34 I wil geue laude. 54
               39 I ſayd I wil looke. 61
               40 I waited long and. 62
               43 Iudge and reuenge. 66
               77 I with my voyce. 105
               92 It is a thing both. 126
               100 In God the Lord. 133
               101 I mercy wil and. 133
               109 In ſpecheles ſcilence. 148
               116 I loue the Lord. 155
               120 In trouble and in. 168
               121 I lift mine eyes. 169
               122 I did in harte. 170
            
            
               L.
               6 Lord in thy wrath reproue me not. 26
               16 Lord kepe me for. 35
               26 Lord be my iudge. 46
               35 Lord plead my cauſe. 35
               42 Like as the hart. 65
               68 Let God ariſe. 92
               72 Lord geue thy iudg. 99
               86 Lord how thine eare. 104
               88 Lord God of health. 106
               130 Lord to thee I. 176
               140 Lord ſaue me. 185
               143 Lord heare my. 187
            
            
               M.
               23 My ſheperd is the. 43
               45 My hart doth now. 67
               62 My ſoule to God. 87
               71 My Lord, my God. 97
               103 My ſoule geue. 135
               104 My ſoule prayſe. 137
               146 My ſoule prayſe. 193
            
            
               N.
               115 Not vnto vs. 154
               124 Now Iſrael. 171
            
            
               O.
               3 O Lord how are my. 24
               4 O God that art my. 25
               7 O Lord my God. 27
               8 O God our Lord, how. 28
               15 O Lord within thy taber. 33
               17 O Lord geue eare. 35
               18 O God my ſtrength. 36
               21 O Lord how ioyful. 40
               22 O God my God. 41
               31 O Lord I put my. 50
               44 Our eares haue heard 66
               51 O Lord conſider my. 74
               55 O God geue eare. 80
               60 O Lord thou didſt. 86
               63 O God my God. 88
               64 O Lord vnto my voyce. 89
               70 O God to me take. 97
               79 O Lord the Gentils. 111
               94 O Lord thou dooſt. 12
               95 O come let vs. 128
               98 O ſing ye now. 131
               102 O heare my prayer 133
               108 O God my hart. 147
               117 O all the nations. 156
               118 O geue ye thankes. 136
               123 O Lorde that. 171
               
                  
109 Of this Iſraell. 175
               130 O Lorde I am not. 176
               133 O howe happy a. (*) 178
               135 O prayſe the Lorde. 179
               139 O Lorde thou haſte. 184
               141 O Lorde vpon thee. 186
            
            
               P. (*)
               38 Put me not to rebuke. 60
               106 Prayſe ye the Lorde. 142
               136 Prayſe ye the Lorde. 181
               147 Prayſe ye the Lorde. 191
            
            
               R. (*)
               61 Regarde O Lorde for. 87
               132 Remember Dauids. 177
            
            
               S.
               59 Sende ayde and ſaue. 84
               69 Saue O God. (*) 94
               96 Syng ye with. 129
               125 Such as in God. 172
            
            
               T.
               1 The man is bleſt. 22
               14 There is no God. (*) 33
               19 The heauens and the. 39
               24 The earth is all. 44
               27 The Lorde is both. 47
               28 Thou art O Lorde. 84
               32 The man is bleſt. 52
               36 The wicked with. (*) 57
               41 The man is bleſt. 46
               46 The Lorde is our. 69
               50 The myghty God. 72
               50 The God of Gods. 74
               53 The fooliſhe man. 79
               57 Take pitie for thy. (*) 83
               65 Thy prayſe alone. 89
               76 To all that nowe. 104
               80 Thou Lorde that Iſraell. 111
               85 Thou haſte bene. 117
               87 That Citie ſhall. 119
               89 To ſyng the mor. (*) 121
               90 Thou Lorde haſte. 124
               93 The Lorde as kynge. 127
               97The Lorde doth raygne. 130
               99 The Lorde doth raygne. 132
               110 The Lorde dyd. (*) 150
               112 The man is bleſt. 151
               125 Thoſe that doo put. 172
               138 Thee will I prayſe. 183
               145 Thee will I laude. 189
            
            
               V.
               75 Vnto the God we. 103
            
            
               W. (*)
               2 Why did the Gentiles. 23
               9 With hart and mouth. 29
               16 What is the cauſe. 35
               52 Why dooſt thou tyrant. 78
               74 Why art thou Lorde. 102
               111 With hart I doo. (*) 150
               114 When Iſraell by. 153
               126 When that the Lorde. 173
               137 When as we ſat in Babi. 182
            
            
               Y.
               33 Ye ryghteous in the. 52
               47 Ye people all. 70
               58 Ye rulers that. (*) 84
               66 Ye men on earth. 90
               113 Ye children, whiche. 152
               150 Yelde vnto the. 194
            
            
               ¶Theſe folowe after the Pſalmes.
               
                  PRayſe the Lorde ye.
                  Beholde nowe geue. (*)
                  Attende my people.
                  Our father whiche art.
                  All my belefe.
                  Come holy ſpirite. (*)
                  Geue peace in theſe.
                  Where ryghteouſnes doth.
                  O Lorde in thee is all my. (*)
                  Preſerue vs Lorde.
                  The Lorde be thanked.
                  ¶Alſo certayne Godly Prayers.
               
            
            
               ¶Theſe ye ſhall haue in the beginnyng of the Booke.
               
                  VEni creator ſpiritus.
                  Venite exultemus.
                  Te Deum laudamus. (*)
                  Benedicite.
                  Benedictus dominus.
                  Magnificat anima. (*)
                  Nunc dimittis.
                  The Lamentation of a.
                  The humble ſute of a ſinner.
                  Quicunque vult. (*)
                  The Pater noſter.
                  The ten Commaundementes.
               
            
         
         
            
               ❧Imprinted at London by Iohn Day, dwellyng ouer Alderſgate, beneath Saint Marrins.
            ¶Cum gratia & Priuilegio Regiae Maieſtatis, per ſeptennium.
            
         
      
   