
      
         
            
               
               
A DISCOVRSE Againſt Painting and Tincturing of WOMEN.
            
            Wherein the abominable ſinnes of
Murther and Poyſoning,
Pride and Ambition,
Adultery and Witchcraft,
are ſet foorth & diſcouered.
            
            
               Whereunto is added the Picture of a Picture, or, The Character of a Painted Woman.
            
            ¶ Imprinted at London for Edward Marchant. 1616.
            
         
         
            
               
A TREATISE AGAINST PAINTNG AND TINCTVRING OF MEN AND WOMEN:
            Againſt
Murther and Poyſoning:
               Pride and Ambition:
               Adulterie and Witchcraft.
            
            AND THE ROOTE OF ALL THESE, Diſobedience to the Miniſtery of the Word.
            
            
               WHEREVNTO IS ADDED The picture of a picture, or, the Character of a Painted Woman.
            
               By THOMAS TVKE, Miniſter of Gods Word at Saint Giles in the Fields.
            
            ROM. 6. The wages of ſinne is death.
            
               Quot vitia, tot venena. A deceitfull heart hath deceiued them: they conſider not that a lie is in their face.
            
               LONDON, Printed by Tho. Creed, and Barn. Allſope, for Edward Merchant dwelling in Pauls Church-yard, neere the Croſſe. 1616.
            
         
         
            
               
               AD NIGELLAM MAGIS RVBICVNDAM, QVAM verecundam ſummo candore.
               CRaſſa dies. Nec enim vergentis veſpera ſaecli
               Splendidius paſſa eſt emicuiſſe iubar.
               Ergo quòd vmbra ſumus, nihil eſt, fratres, ſed & vmbrae
               Vmbra eſt. Tum ſequitur, quod ſumus, vmbra ſumus.
               Scilicet hoc mirum: tibi derubuiſſerubore
               Frontem, ſic frontem, faemina, habes, nec hahes.
               Tincta extinctaiacent, minioquerubentia ſordent
               Lumina, labrae, genae, quae nec habes, & habes.
               Sola auris ſupereſt, audi, corrumpere noli,
               Vt probior fias, & quod habes, habeas.
               Eiuſdem.
            
            
               Curioſus & Curiaeſus.
               GEntlemen and Yeomen, in my opinion,
               From the Latin Miniū, comes our Engliſh Miniō.
               Who fearing leſt the Prouerb ſhold proue good,
               Still wear's two faces, but has left the hood.
               And truſt me la, her word's not worth two chips:
               For ſhee's a woman of polluted lips.
               Nath. Tuke.
            
            
               To women that paint themſelues.
               
                  A Lome wall and painted face are one;
                  For th'beauty of them both is quickly gone.
                  When the lome is fallen of, then lathes appeare,
                  So wrinkles in that face fro th'eye to th'eare.
                  The chaſteſt of your ſex contemne theſe arts,
                  And many that vſe them, haue rid in carts.
               
               Arthur Dowton.
            
            
               
                  
                  Infucatas.
                  
                     QUe pictas geritis facies, vos iure poteſtis
                  
                  
                     Dicere cum Flacco, puluis & vmbra ſumus.
               
               Iohannes Owen 
               lib. 1. epigram. 90.
            
            
               
                  ENcretata timet Fabulla nimbum
                  Ceruſſatatimet Sabella Solem.
               
               Martialis
               
                  lib. 2. epig. 41.
            
            
               Infucatas.
               
                  CLaudia de pictis olim Rufina Britannis,
                  Geſtabat pictas non tamen ipſa genas;
                  Claudia non pictos tam nacta Britanna parentes,
                  Picta ſuum perimit quâ fonet arte, decus.
                  Sic maribus quondam fuerat quae inſania turmis,
                  Faemineum vexat iam furibunda chorum.
               
               Iohan. Iefferie.
            
            
               To painted women.
               
                  STay women-Gallants, caſt an eye aſide,
                  See where a mirrour repreſents your pride.
                  Not that your fardingales fill too much roome,
                  Nor that your loftie tires you miſbecome:
                  Nor paps emboſſed layed forth to mens view:
                  (Though that be vaine too, if wiſe men ſay true)
                  But that ye haue renounc'd your natiue face,
                  Vnder a colour that paint adds a grace,
                  To your intiſing lookes. But iſt no ſinne,
                  When Vermeil bluſhes to belie your skinne?
                  Alas what comfort can your looking glaſſe
                  Yeeld you, fond creatures, when it comes to paſſe
                  
                     
That o're the paint is blurd, which makes you fret,
                  Or yee ſee nought elſe but a counterfet,
                  A ſhadow of your ſelfe? Why ſhould you ſeeme
                  Fairer then women? Men oft miſeſteeme
                  Your ſweeteſt beauties: for becauſe they know
                  Some of you are leſſe beauteous, then they ſhow.
                  And who would willingly her beauty ſaint,
                  Whoſe face ill-colour'd is clouded o're with paint?
                  If ye be faire, what need of new complexion?
                  If blacke, or wrinckled, learne what a confection
                  The firſt, that was a Moraliſt doth learne you;
                  Be vertuous, a bad face will nothing yerne you.
                  Who would be vgly in heauens piercing ſight,
                  To ſeeme faire to ſome mortall partiall wight?
                  Yet none ſo partiall, but he needes muſt ſee
                  Vpon your brow folly and vanitie
                  In their owne colours: and 'tis hard to find
                  A painted face ſort with a ſingle mind.
               
               Ed. Tylman.
            
            
               In fucum.
               
                  Natalem ſaciem pigmentis faemina tingit,
                  Emendare petens, quod Deus ipſe dedit.
                  Faemina fucatâ facie pictura videtur:
                  Neſcis an haec mulier ſit, vel imago ſui.
                  Uix puto dicatur facies fucata pudica;
                  Non fucus mendaxora pudicategit.
               
               Robertus Hall.
            
            
               Ad delicatiores faeminas pigmentis vtentes.
               
                  MAtronae (modò ſint piae, pudicae)
                  Utuntur proprijs, ſine arte, formis:
                  Qui verò color eſt adulterinus,
                  It verè color eſt adulterarum.
                  
                     
Quarum ſi numero pudet referri,
                  Quid tempus ſtudio precioſum iuant
                  Pingendi teritis? Quidora (Magni
                  Iehouae fabrieam) renuntiantes
                  Diuinae ſapientiae, ſceleſtae
                  Tanto corrigitis labore, ſumptu?
                  Tandem deſinite his ſtudere nugis,
                  Quarum vos pretium hoc habetis duum,
                  Vt pictae meretriculae audiatis.
               
               R. Iackſon.
            
            
               Offace and haire-deceits.
               
                  THey that leaue truth, do leaue the Lord:
                  For God is truth, and all accord. So ſaith Latimer in a certaine ſermon.
                  
                  But th'natiue colour of face and haire,
                  Is true and right, altho not faire.
                  But's falſe and wrong, that's died by art,
                  Worke of a lying, wanton hart.
                  Then 'tis a bad concluſion,
                  That followes this illuſion.
               
               
                  Againe:
                  
                     FVcus is paint, and fucus is deceit,
                  And fucus they vſe, that doe meane to cheat.
                  Me thinks the very name ſhould ſtirre vp ſhame,
                  And make it hatefull to each modeſt Dame.
                  Sure none, but ſuch, as take delight in guile,
                  Would pleaſe themſelues with ſuch a gariſh wile.
                  If truth the inwards held, and gouerned,
                  Falſhood could not ſo ſhine in white and red.
               
               T. T.
            
            
               
               De fuco.
               
                  GEllia habet faciem, facies Pallantidos ortae
                  Cui cedit, cedunt lilia miſta roſis.
                  Sanguine Sythonij quae nimbi vellera miſta,
                  Quae Tyrio tinctum murice ebur.
                  Cur talem perſona tegit? cur inuidet ora
                  Spectanda, optaret quae Venus eſſe ſua?
                  O ſimplex animi! quam non ſit Gellia ſimplex
                  Cernis, perſonâ quae tegitur duplici?
                  Primam ſi tollas perſonam, erit alterafucus
                  Non facies, vultus non erit, vlcus erit.
                  Lecythum habent malae; rugas oblimat aniles
                  Lomento, tragicâfece peruncta genas.
                  Creta, timet nimbum, ſolem ceruſſa. Secundam
                  Deme hanc perſonam; Tertia, larua mera eſt.
                  Larua, poetarum ſuperat quae monſtra, Chimaeras,
                  Empuſas, Furias, Gorgonas, Harpyias.
                  Quae verò faciem medicamine adulterat: illi
                  Mens & adultem erit. Frons animi indicium eſt.
               
               Tho. Farnaby.
            
            
               Ad Librum.
               
                  VAde, valéqueliber, ſoboles libertaparentis,
                  Ingenui proles ingenij, & genij.
                  Exis, mentiri & blandirineſcius exis.
                  Sic Domino liber es par, ſimiliſque tuo.
                  Euge liber, fuci expers, dilne fucum.
                  Fucus eat, pereat, téque vigente cadat.
                  Horreſcas obelis, in te omnis ſaeuiat vnguis,
                  Faemineâque licet dilacerêre manu.
                  Quicquiderit, linguae viris, viruſùé malignae:
                  Sorstua verae ſimplicitatis erit.
                  Perſta, inſta, damna in faciem vſque atque fucum,
                  Quos ſtringis, ſtringunt iſta, probiqué probant.
               
               Aegid. Baden.
            
            
               
               De fucaiis.
               
                  Non homopictus homo eſt, nec faemina faemina picta:
                  Anglum ſe pingas, illico Pictus erit.
               
               Robertus Felton.
            
            
               A painted woman to her loue, being about to go abroad for two or three daies from her.
               
                  Certe equo quae fueram, te diſcedente, puella,
                  Nempe reuerſuror facta videbor anus.
               
               Of the originall of painting the face.
               
                  DEſcribe what is faire painting of the face,
                  It is a thing proceedes from want of grace:
                  Which thing deformitie did firſt beget,
                  And is on earth the greateſt counterfet.
               
               T. Draiton.
            
            
               
                  De fuco.
                  FOrmoſam ceruſſa facit, tamen indicat eſſo
                  Deformem; rugas improba larua regit.
               
               
                  Ad fucatam.
                  O quàm te fieri puella vellem
                  Formoſam minus, aut magis pudicam.
               
               Ed. Tylman.
            
            
               Of tincturing the face.
               
                  To what may I a painted wench compare?
                  Shee's one diſguized, when her face is bare.
                  
                     
She is a ſickly woman alwaies dying.
                  Her color's gone, but more ſhe is a buying.
                  She is a rainebow, colours altogether,
                  She makes faire ſhew, and beares vs all faire weather:
                  And like a bow: ſhee's flexible to bend,
                  And is led in a ſtring by any friend.
                  She is Medea, who by likelihood
                  Can change old Aeſon into younger blood,
                  Which can old age in youthfull colours bury,
                  And make Proſerpine of an hagge, or furie,
                  Shee's a Phyſitian well skild in complexions,
                  The ſicke will ſoone looke well by her confections.
                  Shee's a falſe coyner, who on brazen face,
                  Or coper noſe can ſet a guilded grace.
                  And though ſhe doth an hood, like Ladies weare,
                  She beares two faces vnder't I dare ſweare.
                  When hoſts of women walke into the field,
                  She muſt the Ancient be, we all muſt yeeld.
                  For ſhe doth beare the colours all men know,
                  And flouriſheth with them, and makes a ſhow.
                  And to conclude, ſhee'le pleaſe men in all places:
                  For ſhee's a Mimique, and can make good faces.
               
               Tho. Draiton.
            
            
               Ad fucatam.
               
                  Tufacieque malâ, & mente es, fucata, malignâ,
                  Aut pudet, aut fucus poſſe pudere vetat.
               
               Aegit. Baden.
            
            
               
                  I haue thought it not vnmeet to ſet downe here what Du Bartas hath written of Iezebel to painted Dames in his fourth Booke of the 4. daies worke of the ſecond weeke, turned into Engliſh by I. Sylueſter.
               
                  But beſides all her ſumptuous equipage,
                  Much fitter for her ſtate, then for her age,
                  
                     
Cloſe in her cloſet with her beſt complexions,
                  Shee mends her faces wrinkle-full defections
                  Her cheeke ſhe cherries, and her eye ſhe cheeres,
                  And faines her fond as wench of fifteene yeeres,
                  Whether ſhe thought to ſnare the Dukes affection,
                  Or dazle with her pompous prides reflection
                  His daring eyes, as fowlers with a glaſſe
                  Make mounting larkes come downe to death apace:
                  Or were it that in death ſhe would be ſeene
                  As t'were interd in Tyrian pompe a Queene.
                  Chaſte Lady maides here muſt I ſpeake to you,
                  That with vile painting ſpoile your natiue hue.
                  Not to inflame younglings with wanton thirſt,
                  But to keepe faſhion with theſe times accurſt.
                  When one new tane in your ſeeme beauties ſnare,
                  That day and night to Hymen makes his prayer:
                  At length he eſpies (as who is it, but eſpies)
                  Your painted breaſts, your painted cheeks, and eyes:
                  His cake is dough, God dild you, he will none:
                  He leaues his ſuit, and thus he ſaith anon:
                  What ſhould I doe with ſuch a wanton wife,
                  Which night and day would cruciate my life
                  With Ieloux pangs? ſith euery way ſhee ſets
                  Her borowed ſnares, not her owne haires, for nets,
                  To catch her cuckows with looſe, light attires,
                  Opens the doore vnto all leaud deſires,
                  And with vile drugs adultering her face,
                  Cloſely allures the adulterers imbrace.
                  But iudge the beſt, ſuppoſe (ſaith he) I finde
                  My Lady chaſte in body and in minde;
                  As ſure I thinke): yet will ſhe me reſpect,
                  That dares diſgrace the eternall Architect?
                  That in her pride preſumes his worke to tax.
                  Of imperfection, to amend his tracts;
                  To helpe the colours, which his hand hath laid,
                  With her fraile fingers with foule durt be raid?
                  
                     
Shall I take her, that will ſpend all I haue,
                  And all her time in pranking proudly braue?
                  How did I dote? the golde vpon her head,
                  The lillies of her breaſt, the Roſie red
                  In either cheeke, and all her other riches,
                  Wherewith ſhe bleareth ſight, and ſenſe bewitches,
                  Is none of hers: it is but borrowed ſtuffe,
                  Or ſtolne, or bought, plaine counterfeit in proofe.
                  My glorious idoll, I did ſo adore,
                  Is but a vizard newly varniſhed ore
                  With ſpauling rheumes, hot fumes, and ceruſes,
                  Fo, fy, ſuch poiſons one would lothe to kiſſe,
                  I wed, at leaſt I ween, I wed a laſſe,
                  Young, freſh, and faire: but in a yeere and leſſe,
                  Or two at moſt, my louely, liuely bride,
                  Is turn'd a hagge, a fury by my ſide,
                  With hollow yellow teeth, or none perhaps,
                  With ſtinking breath, ſwart cheeks, & hanging chaps,
                  With wrinkled neck, and ſtooping, as ſhe goes,
                  With driueling mouth, and with a ſniueling noſe.
               
            
            
               
                  The Inuectiue of Doctor Andreas de Laguna, a Spaniard and Phyſition to Pope Iulios the third, againſt the painting of women, in his Annotations vpon Dioſcorides, li. 5. cap. 62.
               THe Ceruſe or white Lead, wherewith women vſe to paint themſelues was, without doubt, brought in vſe by the diuell, the capitall enemie of nature, therwith to tranſforme humane creatures, of faire, making them vgly, enormious and abominable. For certainly it is not to be beleeued, that any ſimple women

without a great inducement and inſtigation of the diuel, would euer leaue their natural and gracefull countenances, to ſeeke others that are ſuppoſitions and counterfeits, and ſhould goe vp and downe whited and ſiſed ouer with paintings laied one vpon another, in ſuch ſort: that a man might eaſily cut off a curd or cheeſe-cake from either of their cheekes. Amongſt which vnhappie creatures, there are many, who haue ſo betard their faces with theſe mixtures and ſlubberſauces, that they haue made their faces of a thouſand colours: that is to ſay: ſome as yellow as the marigold, others a darke greene, others blunket colour, others as of a deepe red died in the wooll. O deſperate madneſſe; O helliſh inuention, O diueliſh cuſtome: can there be any greater dotage or ſottiſhneſſe in the world, then for a woman in contempt of nature, (who like a kinde mother giueth to euery creature whatſoeuer is neceſſarie to it in its kind) to couer her naturall face, and that pure complexion which ſhee hath receiued, with ſtench of plaiſters & cataplaſmes. What ſhal God ſay to ſuch in the laſt Iudgement, when they ſhal appeare thus masked before him with theſe antifaces: Friends, I know you not, neither do I hold you for my creatures: for theſe are not the faces that I formed. Thus the vſe of this ceruſe, beſides the rotting of the teeth, and the vnſauourie breath which it cauſeth, being miniſtred in paintings, doth turne faire creatures into infernall Furies. Wherefore let all gentlewomen & honorable matrons, that make price of their honeſty and beauty, leaue theſe baſe arts to the commō ſtrumpets, of whom thy are fitteſt to be vſed, that by that filthines they may be known and noted. Yet do I not altogether miſlike, that honeſt women ſhould waſh themſelues, and ſeeke to make their faces ſmooth, but that they ſhould vſe the barly water, or the water of Lupines, or the iuyce of Lymons, and infinite other things, which Dioſcorides preſcribes as cleanely, and delicate

to cleare the face, and not goe continually with ranke ſmelles of ointments and plaiſters about them. Howbeit that you may not thinke that this vnhappie trade and practiſe of painting is altogether new and of late brought into the world, I will recount vnto you a ſtory, which Gallen alleageth in that little booke of his, which he intituleth, An exhortation to good arts. Phryne a famous harlot of Athens being preſent at a great feaſt or banquet, where euery one of the gueſts might by turnes command what he pleaſed to the reſt there inuited, ſhe ſeeing many women there that were painted with ceruſe, inioyned that they ſhould execute her command very ſeuerely, which was, that they ſhould bring a boule full of warme water, and that they ſhould all waſh their faces therein, which was done without gaine-ſaying, for that was the Law of the feaſt. Whereupon the faces of all the women there preſent appeared foulely deformed and ſtained ouer, the painting running downe their cheekes to their vtter ſhame and confuſion, and the horror of all that ſtood by, to whom they ſeemed and appeared as horrible monſters, onely Phryne appeared much more beautifull and faire then before: for albeit her life were not free from blame, yet was her beautie and comely grace, pure, naturall and without artifice, but God be thanked, ſaith he, our Ladies of Spaine are ſo faire of themſelues, that they haue no neede of any thing to cleere their complexions, but onely a little Orpin, and Soliman, or Mercury ſublimate.
               Now that you may know that hee flouteth his country-women, heare what he ſaith of this Soliman in his Annotation vpon the 69. chapter. The excellencie of this Mercurie ſublimate (ſaith he) is ſuch, that the women, who often paint themſelues with it, though they be very young, they preſently turne old with withered and wrinkeled faces like an Ape, and before age come vpon them, they tremble (poore wretches) as if they were ſicke of the ſtaggers, reeling, and ſull of quick-ſiluer, for ſo are they: for the Soliman and quicke-ſiluer differ onely in this, that the Soliman is the more coroſiue and byting; inſomuch that being applied to the face, it is true, that it eateth out the ſpots and

ſtaines of the face, but ſo, that with all, it drieth vp, and conſumeth the fleſh that is vnderneath, ſo that of force the poore skin ſhrinketh, as they ſpeake of the famous pantofle of an ancient ſquire called Petro Capata, which being often beſmeared ouer to make it blacke, and to giue it luſter, it ſhrunke and wrinkled, and became too ſhort for his foote. This harmē and inconuenience (although it be great, yet it might well be diſſembled, if others greater then this did not accompany it; ſuch as are, a ſtinking breath, the blackneſſe & corruption of the teeth which this Soliman ingendreth. For if quick ſiluer alone, applied onely to the ſoles of the feete, once or twiſe, and that in a ſmal quantitie, doth marre and deſtroy the teeth; what can be expected from the Soliman, which is without compariſon more powerfull and peniuatiue, and is applied more often, and in greater quantity to the very lips and cheekes? So that the infamous in conueniencies which reſult from this Mercurie Sublimate, might be ſomewhat the more tollerable, if they did ſticke and ſtay onely in them who vſe it, and did not deſcend to their of spring. For this infamy is like to originall ſinne, and goes from generation to generation, when as the child borne of them, before it be able to goe, doth ſhed his teeth one after another, as being corrupted and rotten, not through his fault, but by reaſon of the vitiouſneſſe and taint of the mother that painted her ſelfe, who, if ſhee loath and abhorre to heare this, let her forbeare to do the other.
               Tranſlated out of Spaniſh by Miſt.
Elizabeth Arnold.
            
         
         
            Errata.
            Page 4. Line 2. Reade, Worke of God. p. 12. l. 30. put out to labour. p. 15. l. 26. for waſt, r. woade. p. 18. l. 8. r. may not lie. p. 23. l. 31. r. to vſe all. p. 28. l. 24. r. bring on. p. 32. l. 33. r. And though. p. 34. l. 20. f. promiſe, r. praiſe. p. 37. l. 23. f. lie, r lit p. 38. l. 8. f. it, r. lie. p 44. l. 27. f. falſely, r. ſafely. p. 45. l. 1. r. and Machiuillian attempts. p. 47. l. 19. r. in exile. p. 49. l. 1. f fained, r. failed. p. 49. l. penult. r. cannot. p. 52. l. antepenult, r. Arichbertus. p. 53. l. 6. r. Claudius. p. 54. l. 33. f. Cold, r. Coulen. p. 55. l. 18. f. Naxlicus, r. Natholicus. p. 58. l. 5. f. commend, r. mend.
            
            
               Reliqua vel corrige, vel condona.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            OF PAINTING THE FACE.
            
               THough theſe times & places, in which we now liue, are ſtained with fouler faults, then this, of which I haue taken vpon me here to intreate, yet becauſe it was (as I ſuppoſe) neuer ſo common, as it is now amongſt vs, and ſeeing by conuiuence, or ſilence, it ſtil dilates it ſelfe, and now at length findeth ſome friends, which ſticke not in corners either to defend it, or to extenuate the vileneſſe of it, I haue therefore ſingled it out alone from many other vanities, againſt which many haue bent themſelues by word and writing, purpoſing to declare vnto the world what I am able to ſay againſt it, intreating all with iudgement to ponder what I write, and if they ſhall perceiue my reaſons ſound and good, to ioyne together with me in the perſecution and baniſhing of this euill from amongſt vs, of whom better things are looked for, and deſired. And I humbly beſeech Almighty God to direct my heart and hand, that I may thinke and write that which ſhall be pleaſing to him, and to proſper and bleſſe it vnto all that ſhall reade or heare it, that it may finde friendly entertainment in their hearts, & produce fruits anſwerable to it in their liues and practiſe.
            Saint Paul inſpired with the Spirit of Chriſt, giues a golden precept, to which if we will yeeld obedience, as wee

ſhould, we ſhall willingly abſtaine from this artificiall facing. Whatſoeuer things (ſaith hee) are true, Whatſoeuer 
               
                  Phil. 4. 8. 
               things are (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ) venerable, Whatſoeuer things are iuſt, Whatſoeuer things are (
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                chaſt or) pure, Whatſoeuer things are louely, Whatſoeuer things are of good report: if there be any vertue, and if there be any praiſe, thinke on theſe things. Theſe things hee would haue vs to delight in, and to doe: the contrary he would haue vs decline, and abandon. But a painted face is a falſe face, a true falſhood, not a true face. Illa pictura, ſaith S. Ambroſe, That picture, (or painting) is of corruption, and not comely, that painting is deceitfull, and 
               
                  Amb. Herameron. lib. 6. cap. 8. 
               not of ſimplicitie, that painting laſteth but a while, it is wiped off either with raine or ſweat: that painting deceiueth and beguileth, that it can neither pleaſe him, whom thou deſireſt to pleaſe, who perceiueth this pleaſing beauty to be none of thine, but borrowed: and thou doeſt alſo displeaſe thy maker, who ſeeth his worke to be defaced.
            
            Or is this painting venerable, or venerous and abominable rather? Do men of worth and iudgement reſpect and fauour it, as a thing honeſt, and worthy to be eſteemed? Did euer Patriarke, Prophet, Apoſtle, or Father of the Church approue it? Hath it not beene euer ſcorned of ſage and graue men? A painted face is not much vnlike an Idoll; it is not that, it would be taken for: and they, that make it, are like vnto it, and ſo are all they that doe delight therein, and worſhip it.
            Shall we ſay the painting of haire or face is iuſt? Doth the law of God require or fauour it? Or doth reaſon vncorrupted teach it? Or haue the lawes of any wiſe and vnderſtanding heads endured or enioyned it? Or rather is it not altogether iniurious? Sure there is a wrong done to God, whoſe workmanſhip they would ſeeme to mend, 
                  Hieron. cont. Heluid. Cited by P. Mar. loc. com. claſſ. 2. cap. 11. being diſcontented with it: S. Hierome ſaith, Haec ad ſpeculum pingitur, &c. Shee paints her ſelfe by a glaſſe, and to the contumely of her Creator laboureth to be fayrer, then ſhee was borne. And in an Epiſtle to Laeta concerning the inſtitution

of her Daughter, where hee relateth a ſtorie of a certaine woman grieuouſly ſmitten for painting of her daughter, he calleth thoſe that doe ſuch things, violaters of the Temple of Chriſt. Saint Origen likewiſe taxeth painted women by ſundry places of Scripture amongſt other 
                  Orig. tom. 2. hom. 4. things, for dawbing their liuing face with dead colours, and affirmeth, that they doe theſe things in contumeliam Creatoris, to the diſgrace of their Creator. Saint Ambroſe alſo thus writeth to the ſame effect: Thou art painted, 
               
                  Amb. Hex. l. 5. c. 8. Pictus esô homo, &c.
                
               O man, and painted of the Lord thy God. Thou haſt a good Artizan and Painter: doe not deface that good picture (non fuco, ſed veritate fulgentem) ſhining not with deceitfull ſtuffe, but but with true colours. O woman, thou defaceſt the picture, if thou dawbeſt thy countenance with materiall whiteneſſe, or a borrowed red. Tell me, if after one workman hath done, thou vſest the helpe of another to ouer-lay the worke of the former with his new deuiſes, doth he not take it in ill part, who ſees his worke to be diſguiſed? Doe not take away Gods picturing, and aſſume the picture of an harlot, becauſe it is written, Shall I take the members of Chriſt, and make them the members of an harlot? 1. Cor. 6. 15. God forbid. If any men adulterate the worke of God, he committeth a grieuous offence. For it is an hainous crime to thinke that man can paint thee better then God. It is a grieuous thing that God ſhould ſay of thee, I ſee not the image, I ſee not the countenance, which my ſelfe haue formed, I reiect that, which is not mine. Seeke him that hath painted thee, deale with him, take grace of him to whom thou haſt giuen a reward. What anſwere wilt thou make him? Of the ſame minde alſo is Tertuilian, who ſaith, that they ſinne againſt the Lord, which be spot their 
               
                  Tertul. de habitu muliebri. ca. 5. In illum delinquunt, &c.
                
               cheekes with red colours, and die their eyes. The workmanſhip of God ſurely doth displeaſe them. They blame and finde fault with the worke-maiſter of all things in themſelues. For they reprehend him, becauſe they mend his worke, becauſe they put vnto it, taking theſe additions from the aduerſarie Craftes-man, that is, the diuell. To all theſe auncient Doctors of the Church, I will adde the iudgement of a moderne Writer by name

               Danaeus, who ſaith, that fucus faciei, the painting of the face is 
               
                  Danaeus. Ethic. Chriſt. lib. 2. cap. 14 
               a deforming of the very worke in vs, and damnable. God then is iniured by this kinde of painting: now let vs ſee if man alſo be not wronged by it. Doubtleſſe theſe Painters are iniurious to themſelues and others. Saint Ambroſe, who tearmes theſe deuiſes torments rather then ornaments, thus ſomewhere writeth: Whiles ſhe ſtudies to pleaſe another, ſhee displeaſes her ſelfe. O woman, what truer Iudge of thy deformity 
               
                  Ambroſ. de Uirginibus, lib. 1. Dum alij ſtudet placere, &c.
                
               doe wee require, then thy ſelfe, who feareſt to be ſeene? If thou beeſt faire, why art thou hidden? Ifill-fauoured, why doeſt thou counterfet beauty, hauing no regard of thine owne conſcience, nor of another bodies errour? For he loues another, and thou wouldst pleaſe another. And thou wilt be angry, if he ſhould loue another, who yet doth learne by thee to commit adulterie. Mala magiſtraes iniuriae tuae, Thou art an euill teacher of thine owne wrong. It is iniuſtice with ſaigned ſhewes to endeauour to couſin others, labouring to make them thinke they be that they are not. S. Auſtine doth not ſticke to Aug. Ep. ad Poſſidium. In foeminà non poteſt non eſſe vitioſū, quod virum decipiat. ſay it is vicious. And if it be not iuſt to deceiue men with counterfet wares, much leſſe lawfull is it to deceiue them with a diſguiſed countenance. Beſides, this borrowed beautie doth ſometimes ſteale away the praiſe from that that is naturall. Yea, and becauſe this euill craft is ſo much in vſe, it comes to paſſe ſometimes, that they that vſe it not, are ſuſpected and ſaid to meddle with it. And whereas euery one ſhould be carefull of their name, they doe much wrong themſelues herein, that vſe ſuch Arts, cauſing thereby their modeſtie, humility, wiſedome, and continencie to bee called into queſtion, and ſuſpected. And what wrong doe they to themſelues in prouoking God againſt them, to puniſh them for their pride and vanity? Sir Thomas More, one not meanely learned, was wont to ſay of ſuch, that there were very many, which * S. Tho. More.
                purchaſed hell vnto themſelues in this life with that labour, with the one halfe whereof they might haue gayned heauen. Clemens Alexandrinus ſaith, They are not once,
               
               but thrice worthy to periſh, which dawbe their browes, and weare their chcekes with their painted ſtuffe. Saint Cyprian hath a 
                  Clem in Paedag l. 3. c. 2. Ter enim, non ſemel, dignet ſunt, quae pereant, &c.
                notable ſpeech full of ſting and terror, where hee thus writeth: If ſome cunning Painter ſhould ſet foorth the countenāce & ſhape of a woman, hauing ended his worke, another ſhould take vpon him, as being more skilfull, to reforme and mend it, the firſt workeman might iuſtly ſeeme to be wronged and offended: And doſt thou thinke (O woman) to ſcape vnpuniſhed, preſuming with the like audacious raſhneſſe to offend God? Doth 
               Cyprian. de diſcipl. & Hab. virgin. Si quis pingendi artifex, &c. 
               ſinceritie and trueth continue, when thoſe things, that are ſincere, are polluted with counterfeit colours, and thoſe things which are true, are changed into falſhood with deceitfull trickes? The Lord doth ſay, Thou art not able to make one haire white or blacke: and thou to put downe his ſaying wouldſt thou be ſtronger? By audacious iudeauour, and ſacrilegious contempt thou coloureſt 
               
                  Mat. 5. 36 
               thine haires: with an 
               He means, I thinke, they may iuſtly feare, that theſe counterfeit flames, or fire-like & yellowiſh haires, ſhall be puniſhed with the true flames of hell fire. 
               ill preſage of future things thou beginst with flaming haire, and offendeſt in thine head, that is, in the better part of thy body. Oh deteſtable act! feareſt thou not I pray thee, who art thus diſguized, leſt the workeman that made thee, ſhould not acknowledge thee; and leſt hee ſhould ſay, This is not my work, this is none of our image, thou haſt polluted thy skin with deceitfull art, thou haſt changed thine haire with a coumterfeit colour, thy face is falſiſied, thy ſhape is defiled, thy countenance is borrowed. Thou canſt not ſee God, hauing not the eyes that God hath made, but which the diuell hath marred. Thou haſt followed him, thou haſt imitated the red-ſhining and painted eyes of the Serpent, being trimmed vp in thine enemies faſhion, thou art to burne alſo in like manner with him. Ought not theſe things, I pray thee, to be conſidered of the ſeruants of God? Are they not to bee dreaded alwayes, both day and night? But to procced, Whatſoeuer things are pure, or chaſt, ſaith Saint Paul.
            
            Is that pure, or to bee deemed the fruite of a chaſte minde which is ſo common amongſt the impureſt of women, and altogether contemned of thoſe that 
                  Tertul. de habitu muliebri. ca. 8. are moſt graue and pious? Allthoſe things, ſaith Tertullian, are refuſed as idle, and enemies to chaſtitie. Vbi Deus

               eſt, ibi pudicitia: Where God is, there is chaſtitie, there is grauitie, the helper and companion of it. How then ſhall we practiſe chaſtitie without the inſtrument thereof, that is, without grauitie? And how ſhall we vſe grauitie for the ſeruice of chaſtitie, if there be not a certaine ſeuereneſſe both in the face, and in apparell, and in the whole man round about? Saint Hierome likewiſe thus writeth, Quid facit in facie Chriſtianae purpuriſſus, 
               
                  Hieron. ad Furiam de viduit. ſoruand. tom. 1. 
               &c. What makes this purple and white ſtuffe in the face of a Chriſtian women, the inflamers of youth, the nouriſhers of luſt, impudicae mentis indicia, and tokens of an vnchaſt ſoule? Clemens Alexandrinus makes this painting a ſigne of a ſicke ſoule: For as he (ſaith Clemens) that hath ſome ſalue 
               
                  Clem. Alex. in ſuo Paedagogo, li. 3. c. 2. Quemadmodum enim, &c.
                
               applied to him, or his eies annointed doth by the very ſight, giue cauſe to ſuſpect that he is diſeaſed: ſo paintings, tinctures, and affected dreſſings do ſignifie, that the ſoule is ſicke within. S. Ambroſe ſaith boldly, that (De adulterio vultus meditantur adulterium caſtitatis) by the adulterating of the countenance, they meditate the adulterating of chaſtity. But I may not pretermit an 
                  Ito fuci, &c. Ambroſ. de Virginibus, lib. 1. other ſpeech of Clemens, in yt place quoted already, where he ſaith, that the Egyptian Temples were faire and ſumptuous: but in ſtead of God, who was not to be found with in them, there was a Cat, a Crocodile, or ſome ſerpent of 
                  Clem. Alex. in Paed. l. 3. cap. 2. the country, or ſome other beaſt, beſeeming a coue or hole, or the mudde, and not a Temple; So (ſaith he) the women, which are exerciſed in frizling their haire, in annointing 
               Apnd Aegyptios templa, &c. 
               their chcekes, in painting their eyes, and dying their haire, and following other wantonneſſe with vnlawfull artes, doe ſeeme to me to draw on vnhappy louers: but if any man ſhall open the vaile of the Temple, I meane their dreſſing, colouring, dying, and thoſe things, that are plaiſtered on them, thinking to find true beautie, I wot well he will grow into a lothing and deteſtation. For he ſhall not find the image of God dwelling within: but inſtead thereof, a foraicatreſſe and adultreſſe occupy the temple of the ſoule: he ſhall diſcerne a painted Ape; and that ſeducing Serpent, through 
                     〈◊〉
                   deſire of glorie, doth poſſeſſe the ſoule, in ſtead of an hole, tranſforming women into whores, diſcharging the office of a bawd. And

that renowned and holy Biſhop of Millaine, whom before we cited, calleth this painting, which of women is ſo 
                  Ambroſ. Hex. l. 6. c. 8. much vſurped, Picturam Meretricis, the picture of an harlot. Plutarch alſo ſheweth, that Lycurgus baniſhed tincture out of Sparta, as a flatterer of the ſenſe, and forbad 
               Plutar. Lacon. Apotl. eg. 
               the City, to al that vſed the arts of painting, and tricking the body, becauſe euill arts corrupted mens maners. And the ſaid Author writeth, that women were at that time ſo chaſt, and ſo farre from the lightneſſe of thoſe that followed after, that the crime of adulterie with them, was counted a thing incredible. 
               Plutar. vhi ſupra. And as one ſaid to his gheſt, How could there be an adulterer in Sparta, where luxurie and painting (luxus & fucus) are decmed ignominious, and where ſhamefaſtneſſe, modeſtie and obedience domineere?
            
            But Saint Paul proceedeth; Whatſoeuer things (ſaith he) are louelie. Doth a painted face procure loue, or lothing 
               
                  Ambroſ. de offic. lib. 1. cap. 18. rather, if it bee perceiued? Nihil fucatum placet, Nothing counterfaited doth afford contentment, as Saint Ambroſe ſpeaketh. Who is pleaſed with counterfet mony, with counterfet friendſhip, with counterfet ſtuffe? Who loues hypocriſie in religion? And what is a woman painted, but a certaine kinde of hypocrite, reſembling that in ſhew, which ſhe is not truly? Is dece it and falſhood louely? And what is this artificiall facing, but a true deceit, or a deceitfull Auguſtin. ad Poſſidor. truth? Fucare effigiem figmentis adulterina fallacia eſt, quâ non dubito ipſos maritos ſe nolle decipi. To colour the face with artificiall deuiſes, to make it look more red or louely, is a counterfet and baſe deceit, ſaith Saint Auſten, with which I am perſwaded, husbands would not bee deceiued. And another ſaith, Quùm facies adulterino colore fucatur, os abomina bili faetore corrumpitur: when the face is Iun. de vilit. condit. humanae. painted with a falſe colour, it becomes an abomination. And if Lenocinia formarum, the painting of the face, and borrowing of complection ((non niſi proſtitutis & impudicis 
               Cypr. dediſc. & hab. virg. 
               foeminis congruunt) beſeeme none (as Saint Cyprian ſaith) but whores and diſhoneſt women, why ſhould any one

delight therein, as in things pleaſing, or worthy loue? Or if it be ſuch a louely thing, what reaſon had Saint Hierome to ſay, Erubeſcat mulier Chriſtiana, &c. Let a Chriſtian woman bluſh for ſhame, if ſhe force fauour, if ſhee take care of the 
               Hieron. ad Marceliam de exitu Leae. 
               fleſh vnto concupiſcence, in which they, which are, cannot pleaſe God; as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh? Or why ſhould he ſay, that dreſſings void of curioſities, became Chriſtian matrons, and forbid Laeta to colour her daughters haire, and to begin 
                  Rom. 8. 8. Matronas Christianas decet neglecta mundities. Hieron. 16. in her any thing of the flames of hell? No, no, theſe arts and actions are not to bee loued, but hated rather. Doubtleſſe nature and art are both good, and to be beloued: but the abuſe of both, or either, is euill, is of the diuell. And is not art abuſed, when it is made an organ and ſlaue to pride, wantonneſſe, and vanitie? And that I may ſpeake a little by digreſſion to her, that exerciſes her ſelfe in theſe vnlawfull and vnlouely arts; Tell me, how canſt thou deſire, that another ſhould not lothe thee, ſeeing thou lotheſt thine owne ſelfe? For as Peter Martyr ſpeakes out of Saint Ambroſe, They that ſeek by theſe deuices 
                  Martyr. loc. com. claſ. 2. cap. 11. to pleaſe others, do teſtifie, that they haue diſliked themſelues firſt. For had they not diſliked themſelues, and deſired ſomething in themſelues, Nonquaeſiuiſſent ſuas facies meliores fucis reddere, They would not haue ſought to haue mended their faces with painting. Their very brauerie, wherin they glory, bewraies their wants. Or doſt thou loue thy ſelfe artificiall, and like an Idoll, and loth or diſlike thy ſelfe naturall, and in thy natiue colours? O woman, great is thy pride and folly, fooliſh pride and proud folly. What folly is it to fall in loue with a picture? Quanta amentia est effigiem mutare naturae, picturam quaerere? What madneſſe is it (ſaith a forenamed Father) to change natures ſhape, and to ſeeke a picture? Doubtleſſe thou deſerueſt to be lothed of others, becauſe thou doſt loth thy ſelfe, and being diſpleaſed with the pleaſure of God, doeſt pleaſe thy ſelfe in that, that is diſpleaſing to him.
            But I haue digreſſed; The Apoſtle addeth, Whatſoeuer
               
               things are of good report. And in another place he ſaith, Prouide things honeſt in the ſight of all men. Say now, is this painting of good report? Doe all, or the wiſeſt, and 
                  Rom. 12. 17 honeſteſt of all account it honeſt? Diuers of the Fathers, as wee haue ſeene, haue condemned it in that name. It was ignominious in the daies of Lycurgus. Peter Martyr out of Saint Chryſoſtome ſaith, Magna voluptas eſt, &c. It is very pleaſing to ſee ſuch a face, as Pet. Mart. vbi ſupra. God created: whereas on the contrarie, a countenance (rubricâ & ceruſſâ plenus) full of red and white colours, otherwiſe then naturall, is diſallowed. Deformitie is no point of diſhoneſtie, Fucatio verò deprehenſaignominiâ ſemper notatur, but painting being diſcerned and knowne, is branded alwaies with reproch and infamie. Saint Hierome to Marcella ſaith, that thoſe women are matter of ſcandall to Chriſtian eies, Quaepurpuriſſo & quibuſdam fucis ora, oculoſque depingunt, which doe paint Hieron. de exitu Leae. their faces and eyes with certaine artificiall colours, Whoſe faces (ſaith he) being plaiſtered and deformed with too much brightneſſe, are counterfeits of Idols. And ſuch old women as vſe thoſe, and the like vanities, he calles in mocking, Trementes Uirgunculas, trembling girles. And vnto Furia hee ſaith, that this furniture 
                  Hieron. ad Fur. de vid. ſer. tom. 1. Ornatus iſte non Domini eſt.
                is not the Lords, this couering is of Antichriſt, Uelamen iſtud Antichriſti. Sure it is not for Chriſt, but rather againſt Chriſt, and ill beſeemes chaſt and godly Chriſtians, ſuting fitter with the fauourites and louers of that Mother of harlots, araied in purple and ſcarlet colours, and full of allurements. Platina writeth, that 
                  Reu. 17. 4. 5. 
               Paulus Secundus, Biſhop of Rome, vſed to paint himſelfe; a thing not much to be found fault with in ſuch a friend vnto the Whore, tho very ill beſeeming one, that counts himſelfe the Vicar of Chriſt. It ſeemes the Churches Head hath been once a painted one. But to returne, the Apoſtle would haue vs delight and thinke on thoſe things, that are of good account, and hee will

haue vs doe it in the ſight of all men, according as our Sauior ſaies, Let your light ſo ſhine before men, that they may ſee your good works. It is not enough to be good, but ſhe 
                  Mat. 5. 16. that is good, muſt ſeeme good: ſhe that is chaſt, muſt ſeeme chaſt: ſhee that is humble, muſt ſeeme humble: ſhee that is modeſt, muſt ſeeme to bee ſo, and not plaiſter her face, that ſhe cannot bluſh vpō any occaſiō (tho ſhe would) ſo as to be diſcerned of another. It is 
                  Tertul. de hab. mulieb. cap. 13. very pat, which Tertullian writeth; pudicit. Chriſtianae ſat. non eſt eſſe, ver. & videri: It is not enough for Chriſtian chaſtitie that it be, but that it be alſo ſeene. And good counſell, which he giues to Chriſtian women, Prodite vos, &c. Come forth now furniſhed with the medicaments and ornaments of the Apoſtles, taking from ſimplicitie brightnes, and from chaſtity redneſſe, your eyes painted with modeſtie, for an earing hauing the word of God, and the yoke of Chriſt for a chaine vnto your neeks. Subiect your head vnto your husbands, and yee ſhall make ſhew good enough. Aray your ſelues with the ſilke of honeſtie, the fine linnen of ſanctitie, with the purple of chaſtitie. Taliter pigmentatae Deum habebitis amatorem, Being ſo painted and tricked vp, ye ſhall haue God your louer.
            But Saint Paul hath not yet ended his ſpeech, If (ſaith he) there be any vertue. But dare any ſay it is a vertue, or act of vertue, to paint the face or haire? S. Ambroſe 
               
                  Ambr. Hexam. l. 6. ca 8. Gem Paedag. lib. 2. cap. 10. ſaith, Illa pictura vitij eſt, this painting is of vice, or vicious. And Clemens Alexandrinus commends one Caeus, who fitly deſcribed vertue and vice in two images. For, he made vertue ſtanding ſimplie clothed with a white-ſhining garment, and pure, adorned onely with baſhfulneſſe: but vice with ſuperfluous and changeable apparell, alieno colore exultantem; and glorying in borrowed colors. But that it may appeare plainely that this kind of painting and colouring is vicious, let vs inquire into the 
                  Tertul. de hab. mulieb. cap. 5. cauſes of it. Tertullian ſaith expreſly, it's from the diuell.

               For who (ſaith he) would teach to change the body, but he, that hath changed the ſoule of man through malice? Hee out of doubt hath ſtirred vp ſuch wits, that ſo he might after a ſort vs lay hands on God. That, which is naturall, is the worke of God; therefore that, which is counterfet, is of the diuell. Saint Cyprian likewiſe ſaith as much in effect, affirming, that the Apoſtaticall Angels taught women Cypr. de diſciplina & hab. Virg. to paint their eyes and checkes, and to alter their haire with counterfet colours, and as he ſaith, Expugnare omnem oris & capitis veritatem, to driue out all the truth of their face and head. If theſe things be of the diuell, God is little beholding to thoſe that vſe them. What a wickedneſſe is it (ſaith Tertullian) to bring in Satans deuiſes after Gods worke? Our ſeruants borrow nothing of our enemies: 
               Tertul ab. 
               Souldiers ask nothing of the enemie of their commander. And ſhal a Chriſtiā receiue help of that euil one? I wot not whether this name (Chriſtian) ſhould belong any longer to him. Erit enim eius, de cuius doctrinis inſtrui concupiſcit: For he ſhall be his, with whoſe inſtructions he longs to be inſtructed.
            
            And as the exterior Author of theſe deuiſes is euill, euen no other then the diuell: ſo the interior grounds thereof are alſo euill, as pride, wantonneſſe, and lacke of iudgement, or elſe rebellion of affections againſt iudgement. What a pride it is, that thou canſt not bee content to appeare in thine owne likeneſſe, and to ſeeme that to others, which thou art in thy ſelfe? The bird appeares in her owne feathers, the Peacocke ſhewes himſelfe in his owne colours, the ſheepe is ſeene in her owne fleece and likeneſſe, white or black; the tree hath her owne rinde, appeares in her owne bloſſomes and fruits; and ſhall it be horrible to a woman to ſeeme to be, as ſhe is indeed, diſpleaſing to her to appeare in her owne likeneſſe, her owne haire, her owne complexion? She was borne in her owne, nature would ſhew it ſelf in her proper colours: ſhe was not borne painted in this world (vnleſſe perhaps ſo, as

is expreſſed in the Prophet) neither ſhall ſhe riſe painted in the next world, and I thinke ſhe would be loth 
                  Ezeck. 6. die painted, why then ſhould ſhee liue painted, why ſhould ſhe loue it? Vtinam miſerrimus ego, &c. I would I poore wretch (ſaith Tertullian) might ſee in that day of Chriſtian exultation (An cum ceruſsà, & purpuriſſo, & croco, & cum illo ambitu capitis reſurgatis) Whether yee 
                  Tertul. de hab. mul. c. 7 ſhall riſe againe with your white, red, and yellowiſh paintings, and thoſe ſtrang dreſſings of your head, and whether the Angels ſhall lift you vp ſo pictured, to meet Chriſt. Hodie vos Deus, &c. O ye women, let God ſee you ſuch now, as he ſhall ſee yee then. Is not this alſo a point of pride by ſuch deceitful ſhifts to gaine the praiſes of men, and to deſire to bee reputed fairer, or younger, or better fauoured, then one is indeed? And doth not God hate pride, and reward humilitie? Doth he not reſiſt the proud, and giue grace to the humble? What a contempt of God is this, to preferre the worke of thine owne finger to the worke of God? What impietie is it to goe about to haue that thought 
                  Iames 4. 6. Gods, which is thine owne? What iniuſtice to conceale his worke, and oſtent thine owne, and indeed to ſpoile his with thine owne? Innocentius ſaith, An artificiall forme is drawne ouer, and the naturall face is painted, as 
               Inn. vbi ſup. 
               if the artifice of man exceeded the art of God. And is not this a tricke of a wanton, to vſe theſe arts to procure and tie the eies of people to thee, or to gaine ſome vnfortunate ſeruant? Is it not a fooliſh wilineſſe, and a certaine wily kind of folly by theſe lime-twiggs, theſe painted lime-twiggs, to labour to thinke or labour to catch a Wood-cocke, or a Wild-gooſe? Are theſe deuiſes allowed, as ſtales, or ſnares, to take men in them? Doſt thou deeme men as ſimple, as thoſe birds, that were deceiued by the Painters artifice, flying to grapes, that were but painted? Becauſe Lycoris pleaſes her ſelfe being painted, being otherwiſe as blacke, as an ouerripe

Mulberry, doth ſhe therefore thinke to gaine an husband, who knowes an ill face wel painted, is but as 
                  Martial. l. 1. epig. 73. Ceruſſata ſibi placet lyceris, quae nigrior eſt cadente more.
                a peece of counterfeit ſiluer, or as a faire carpet ouer an vnhandſome table? Tell me, Are all men borne rich, or noble (Though all theſe are borne men, yet all men are not borne theſe. Now ſhall hee, that is baſe and needie, and not yet promoued, nor made wealthie, make fare as if he were ſome noble or rich man? It were intolerable vanitie. Say, Is euery man truely vertuous and religious? No, no more then euery Angell is good and holy. Now ſhall he, that is profane and impious, make ſhew of pietie and true deuotion? Were it not damnable hypocriſie in him? If he be not, let him not ſeeme to be. For not being, his very ſeeming is a ſinne vnto him. And doſt thou thinke it lawfull for thee to make ſhewes of fauour and beauty, or of another complexion and temper, then thou art of, by thy dawbing, painting and borrowing, God and Nature, which is his Handmaid, hauing withheld beautie, or a louely complexion from thee? Vertue is one gift of God, and beautie is another: now as a man may not counterfeit vertue, being vicious: ſo he may not counterfeit beautie, being deſtitute of it. Doubtleſſe vnthankfulneſſe to God, hath a great ſtroke in this vngodly exerciſe. For were we thankfull to God, as indeed wee ſhould be, would we loth and deſpiſe his worke vpon vs, and loue our owne? Would we not care how wee corrupt and mangle his with ours? If we were thankful to him for our complexions and fauour, how meane ſo euer, we would humble our ſelues before him, and not goe about to cozen the world with our borrowed feathers, or ſhew our ſelues altogether vnpatient of his handy-worke, yea, wee would labour to ſupply the want of good outward parts by inward vertues, and by the offices of pietie, charitie, and humilitie; things, which (I feare me) are ſildome and little thought of amongſt

the Painters, who, if we may beleeue the ſpeeches of the world (and they ſay, Market-men vſe to ſpeake as the market goes) are too many of them, not much vnlike ill cloth of a good die; or to a Letter fairely written, and with good inke, but not without ſome falſe Engliſh, or ill contents.
            But let vs ſee how the Apoſtle ends his exhortation. If there be any praiſe (ſaith he) thinke on theſe things. Now is a painted face worthy to be praiſed? Is a borrowed beautie, or freſh-coloured haire with womens skill to be commended? Shall we beſtow our praiſes, on what we may not ſpend our loue? Shall wee laude that, that is not worthy one good looke? Shall that be praiſed that is vile, and vaine? Quidvanius, qhàm tingeregenas, vugerefaciem, &c. What more vaine, ſaith Innocentius, 
               Inn. ib. then to die the cheekes, and annoint the face? True it is, that God hath giuen a man oyle to make him haue a cheerefull countenance: but this is by refreſhing 
                  Pſa. 104. 15 and cheering the blood, and not by daubing or dying the countenance, which is to be diſcommended in all that vſe it, what euer they be. Fucation (ſaith Saint Chryſoſtome) being eſpied, is euer markt with ignominy. More ornament is not to be giuen to the bodie, then is profitable 
               
                  Chryſoſt. t. 2. hom. 31. in, Matth.
                
               for the ſoule, ſaith Saint Baſil the great; For to a generous man, and one truly worthie of this name, it were no leſſe reproch to be want only decked, or to take ſuperfluous care of 
               Baſil. de legend. li. Gentilium. 
               the bodie, then to be affected with ſome other note of diſgrace, and euill affection through ſlothfulneſſe. Conſider alſo the iudgement of Heathen men. Chius, a certaine old man, came vpon ſome buſineſſe of ſtate to Lacedemon, and hauing died his gray haires, he came before Archidamus, 
               
                  Aelian. lib. 8 de Var. hiſt.
                the Lacedemonian King, who ſeeing the old man diſguiſed, roſe vp, and ſaid, Quid hic ſani diceret, cuius non ſolùm animus, verùm etiam caput fucis contaminatum eſt? What good thing can this fellow ſay, whoſe not onely the heart, but head alſo is ſtained with deceit?

And ſo exploded, whatſoeuer he ſaid, reprehending his diſpoſition by the deceit, he vſed with his haire. Queſtionleſſe there is lacke of truth in the heart, when falſe haire is worne for deceit. Doubtleſſe falſhood is in his or her heart, whoſe face or haire is falſified to deceit. Falſhood vttered in the face, or haire, is firſt conceiued and coined in the heart. Wantonnes, pride and vanity are conceiued inwardly, before they are expreſſed outwardly. The hand doth but what the hart bids it. Of the abundance of the heart the mouth ſpeaketh, and the hand worketh. King Philip of Macedonie made one of Antipaters friends a Iudge; but vnderſtanding Plutarch. in Apotheg. that hee vſed to colour the haire of his head and beard, he diſplaced him, ſaying, He which would not be true in his haires, was not worthy to bee truſted in an office. Hee vſed deceit in dying his haire, whereof no great lucre could ariſe, doubtleſſe he will be much more deceitfull in the affaires of his office, where deceit ſometimes is very gainefull. The naturall forme and colour is not laid to a mans charge, but only that which is counterfet and aſcitious.
            Vtnatura dedit ſic omnis recta figura: Propert. Eleg. 19.
               
            
            Turpis Romano Belgicus ore color.
            Natures forme and fauour is right and good:
            But Belgick colours becoms no Roman blood: that is to ſay: The waſte of France, and ſuch painting ſtuffe, are diſgracefull in an Italian. If an old woman painted her ſelf, they vſed to ſay, Lecythum habet in malis, which is a certaine enigmaticall and biting by-word vſed againſt old wiues, that they cloked their wrinkles with their artificiall dawbings. Feſtus Pompeius ſaith, that common and baſe whores, called Schoenicole, vſed daubing of themſelues, tho with the vileſt ſtuffe. Diogenes ſaid to one that had annointed his haires, Caue ne capitis 
               
                  Laërt. lib. 6. 
               ſuaue ölentia vitae maleolentiam adducat, Beware thy ſweet head make not thy life ſtinke; ſo may it well be

ſaid to thoſe, that buy and borrow their fauour and their colour: beware leſt this borrowed grace bring yee not into diſgrace both with God and his children, and that the counterfetting of forme doe not deforme you. Surely the Lord did moſt terribly threaten the proud and wanton Dames of Iſrael for their pride, 
                  Iſaiah. 3. 16 Iſaiah 3. 9. Piſcat. in 2. Reg. cap. 9 verſ. 30. Pet. Mart. in 2. Reg. 9. 30. wantonneſſe and vanities. And may it not be ſaid of theſe painted faces, as the Lord ſaid of that people, The ſhew of their countenance doe witneſſe againſt them? Doubtleſſe this kind of fauour finds no fauour, no one word of praiſe in all the word of God. In Ieſabel, who painted her eyes is propounded (ſaith Piſcator) an enſample of a proud woman. Nec bona eſt eafacies, quaeiſta quaerit adiumenta. It is no good face (ſaith Martyr) which ſeekes theſe 
               
                  Hieron. in Ier. 4. 80. Sub figurâ mulieris adulterae loquitur. Caluin. in Ier. 4. 30. 
               helpes. Let vs in the meane while, conſider the impudencie of a wicked woman, who being in extreame danger, yet ſhewes no token of repentance, Imo vacat fuco, yea, ſhee beſtowes her time in painting of her face. And on the Prophet Ieremie, where mention is made of painting the face, or eyes, Saint Hierome in his Comments ſaith, He ſpeaketh vnder the figure of an adulterous woman. In like manner, Caluin 
               
                  Hieron. in Eze. 23. 40. Omnem adulterae habitum impleſti ſuper eis, &c. Maldonatus in hunc locum idem ait; Sicut meretrices, amatoribus ſuis. Clem. Alexandr. Paed. l. 3. c. 2. thus writing on the ſaid place, ſaith, that the Prophet hath reſpect to the furniture of whores, Becauſe the people was like an adulterous woman. And whores (ſaith he) to intiſe adulterers, are wont to paint their faces, and by ſuch allurements to entangle and catch men. And where as Ezekiel alſo doth once make mention of this painting. Saint Hierome (others likewiſe conſenting with him) ſaith vpon the ſame place, Thou haſt fulfilled all the habit of an adulterous woman. This painting therefore being no better entertained in the word of of God, and being (as we haue heard before) a worke of Satan, there is no reaſon at all why Chriſtian women ſhould be addicted to it. I would thinke women ſhould beware of the Serpent (who hath an oare in this boat, as Clemens ſheweth) ſeeing their mother

was beguiled with him of old, and that they al fare the worſe for him ſtill. Neither doe I reade, that euer any graue and diſcreet woman vſed theſe deceits. Some write of ſome barbarous people, which delight in painting their skinne. Saint Hierome writes, that Maximilla, Montanus his Prophatiſſe, a woman diuell-driuen, did vſe to paint. And there is alſo mention, in the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtorie, made of one Priſca, who practiſed the ſame arts. Caeſar likewiſe writes, that the Britanes 
                  Caeſar. lib. 5. belli Gallici.
                vſed to colour their faces with their Woad: but this was not out of pride, or wantouneſſe, but to ſtrike a terror in their enemies, with whom they were to fight. But me thinks Chriſtians ſhould not onely bee, but ſeeme ſo: the children of wiſedome ſhould not only be ſuch, but ſeeme ſuch: they that profeſſe modeſty and humilitie, or which haue promiſde it in their Baptiſme, ſhould not onely bee modeſt and humble, but appeare to be ſo by their ſhewes. And to vſe the words, I find in Peter Martyr: As Paul ſaid, There is a difference betwixt a married woman and a virgin: ſo may we ſay, 
               
                  Pet. Mart. loc. com. claſſ. 2. c. 11. 1. Cor. 7. 
               there ſhould bee a difference betweene the handmaidens of Chriſt, and the handmaides of the diuell. The handmaids of the diuell, becauſe they are vnchaſt, doe vſe theſe pictures: wherefore the handmaids of Chriſt ſhould flie from them, that they might ſhew themſelues to be vnlike to them. In goodſooth if Chriſtian women will ſo colour and paint themſelues, I pray you what doth a matrone differ from an harlot? I remember 
                  Amb. lib. 1. de oſſic. c. 18. Eſt etiam in ipſo, &c.
                Saint Ambroſe ſaith, that Inipſo motu, geſtu, inceſſu tenenda verecundia, modeſtie is to bee kept euen in the motion, geſture, and gate: and ſhall it be baniſhed out of the face? Habitus enim mentis in corporis ſtatu cernitur, For (ſaith he) the condition of the mind is diſcerned in the ſtate and behauior of the body. Without doubt then a deceitfull and effeminate face, is the enſigne of a deceitfull and effeminate heart. Ne dicalis vos habere animos pudicos, ſi habcatis oculosimpuaicos: Say not (ſaint Auguſt. de Chriſtiana ſide.
               
Saint Auſtin) that you haue modeſt and chaſt affections, if ye haue vnchaſt and wanton eyes: ſo I ſay, ſay not that thou haſt the heart of a chaſt and humble woman, if thou haſt the face and fauour of a proud dame, or wanton minion. And to vſe the words of Tertullian, How farre from our diſciplines and profeſſions, how vnworthy 
               
                  Tertul. de hab. mulieb. cap. 5. Quantulum &c.
                
               the name of Chriſtian is it, to haue a fained face, to whom all ſimplicitie is commended; to lie with the countenance, who may lie with their tongue; to deſire that, which is not granted, who ſhould abſtaine from that, which is not theirs; and to practiſe the making of ſhewes and faces, whoſe ſtudie is to be chaſt and modeſt? Theſe artes make thoſe that vſe them, too like the diuels, who though they bee Angels of darkneſſe, yet to worke ſome feate, they will now and then tranſforme themſelues into Angels of light: they are one thing, but to deceiue, they will ſeeme another. And in truth I wonder how they dare pray to God with ſuch impure faces? How ſhall they looke vp to God with a face, which he doth not owne? How can they begge Some kind of painting makes thē looke alwaies alike. Hieron. ad Fur. de vid. ſer. tom. 1. Quomodo flere poteſt pro pecc. Pſa. 66. 18. Iohn 9. 31. Calum. in 1. Pet. 3. pardon, when their ſinne cleaues vnto their faces, and * when they are not able for to bluſh? How can ſhee weepe for her ſinnes, ſaith Saint Hierom, when herteares will make furrowes in her face? With what confidence doth ſhe liſt vp her countenances to heauen, which her Maker acknowledges not? Youth is in vaine pretended, and girliſh age alleaged for excuſe: What hope is there that God will heare, whileſt her hart is ſet on vanitie and pride, on wantonneſſe and deceit. Dauid ſaith, If I regard iniquitie in mine heart, the Lord wil not heare me: We know (ſaith one in the Goſpell) God heareth not ſinners: but if any man be a worſhipper of God and doth his will, him he heareth. Doubtleſſe theſe curioſities are not things indifferent, as ſome imagine them to bee. It is well ſaid by Caluin ſomewhere, Too much fineneſſe and ſuperfluous brightneſſe, and finally, all exceſſe ariſeth out of the corruption of the heart. Moreouer, ambition, pride, luxurie, affectation, and ſuch like,
               
               are not (ſaith he) res mediae, things indifferent. But what need I throw water into the ſea, or ſet vp a candle in the Sunne? But by the doctrine and iudgement of Saint Paul, as is obſerued by Peter Martyr, men muſt beware not onely of euill, but abſtaine from all appearance 
               1. Theſ. 5. 22 Pet. Mart. loc. com. claſ. 2. c. 11. 
               of euill. In fucis autem adeò perſpicua eſt maliſpecies, vt negari non poſſit. But in theſe painting practiſes, the ſhew of euil is ſo perſpicuous, as it cannot be denied. Truly (ſaith he) in Gods Booke, this painting (ſtibium) is neuer taken in good part. And the greater the perſons be, that vſe theſe arts, the worſe it is. For, Omne animi vitium tantò conspectius in 
               Iuvenal. 
               ſe crimen habet, quanto maior, qui peccat habetur. The greater the man is, that ſinnes, the greater is his ſinne. It is more ſcandalous and hurtfull. And the more, that any man hath receiued of God, the more he owes vnto God. The higher a man is, the more humble hee 
                  I am. 4. & 1. Pet. 5. & Luke 18. ſhould bee. The greater hee is, the better hee ſhould bee. When high trees and ſteeples fall, there is much looking. And be men neuer ſo higher, yet there is one high, before whom, and vnder whom they muſt humble themſelues, and bewaile their pride and vanities, or elſe they muſt not looke to bee exalted of him. And if theſe borrowed faces, and painted locks bee ridiculous and odious in a woman, that is poore and baſe, as in a Kitchin-wench, or ſuch like, how much more diſcommendable is it in ſuch, as God hath aduanced? What poore thanks doe they pay him for thoſe benefits of wealth and greatneſſe, which without their merit, he hath conferred and caſt vpon them? Euen a little ſtaine is noted in fine Lawne, a little blot or blurre is diſcerned in white paper. Honourable and rich perſons ſtand as vpon hilles; all mens eies are on them: they ſhould be patterns of pietie, enſamples of vertue. For by their examples, they doe either much good, or much hurt. If it would pleaſe them to conſider what the Apoſtle ſaith vnto the Corinthes, I am

perſwaded they would not meddle with theſe vanities. Reade and weigh what is ſaid in 1. Cor. 7. 29. 30. 31. Surely they that abuſe the world, that abuſe their greatneſſe, that abuſe their wealth and wit, they loſe a bleſſing of the world, of their greatneſſe, wealth and wit. Theſe things are theirs, whileſt well vſed: but being abuſed, they are not theirs, but their enemies rather: they make not for them, but againſt them. Oh, how happy had it bin for them, if they had not known what wit, what wealth, what the world, what greatnes meant! A man muſt be poore in riches, little in greatneſſe, humble in honour, vertuous in beautie, meeke in authority, modeſt and not ſelfe-conceited in all his ornaments, elſe all is nothing, and he is nothing, or a certaine Some-thing, worſe then nothing. Thinke wee not that all Chriſtian women, how great ſoeuer, are bound to thoſe two ſpeeches of their Apoſtle Saint Paul? Whatſoeuer yee doe, doe all to the glorie of God. And againe: 1. Cor. 10. 31. 32. 
               Giue none offence, neither to the Iewes, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God. But doe they paint their faces, or die their haire to the glory of God? Is God honoured by theſe exerciſes, or diſgraced rather, as wee haue ſeene before? Saint Cyprian ſaith, Foeminae manus Deo inferunt, &c. Women lay hands on God, when they ſeeke (by ſuch counterfet deuiſes) to reforme and tranſfigure that, 
               Cypr. lib. de hab. Virg. 
               which he hath formed: Neſcientes quòdopus Dei eſt omne, quod naſcitur, Diaboli quodcunque mutatur: None knowing that that is Gods worke, which is borne and the diuels, whatſoeuer is changed. And doe they thinke, that this their painting is offenſiue vnto none. Some they diſpleaſe and grieue: others they poiſon by this ill enſample, which is as a match to giue fire to them that are as capable of it, as tinder, flax, or gun-powder: and beſides, they giue the enemie occaſion to diſgrace the Church, and that Goſpell of Ieſus, which wee profeſſe and boaſt of. Let vs all therefore remember that golden

rule, which the Apoſtle there doth giue vs, Which (as Hemingius ſpeaketh) Whoſoeuer doth willingly and wittingly 
               
                  Heming. in 1. Co. 10. 31. 
               violate, he without doubt diſhonoreth God, and is made guiltie of eternall anger, vntill he ſhall repent. But if the reſpect of men cannot preuaile, whoſe eyes are offended with ſuch vanities, yet let the reuerence of Gods holy Angels, that tend vpon you, diſſwade you from them. For they cannot but be offended, as oft as they ſhal ſee men peruert nature it ſelfe, and the order that God 
                  Bullinger. in 1. Cor. 11. hath appointed, and contumaciouſly to tread it vnder foot. And is not this the Ordinance of God, that euery man ſhould appeare in his owne likenes, euery woman be ſeene in her owne face? Is not this an inuerſion of nature, to diſſemble and hide the naturall viſage with an artificiall, and to offer one for another? Now ſhall we offend our good Angels, our keepers, our protectors, who can as ill endure a painted face, and counterfeit haire, as any man can endure a ſluttiſh face, or nittie locks? And why ſhould a man be ſo fond on beautie? Amplaſatis forma pudicitia: Modeſtie is ſufficient Propertius. beautie. Truly vertue is the beſt beautie, which is indeed ſo beautiful and bright, that were it to be ſeere with eies, it would draw and hold all mens eyes vnto it. A vertuous woman needs no borrowed, no bought complexion, none of theſe poyſons; for ſo Uictor cals them, when he ſaith, Quid agunt incorpope caſto ceruſſa, 
               Uictar ad Salmonem. 
               & minium, centumque venena colorum? What doe this white and red paint, and an hundred other poiſons of colours in an honeſt body? the time, labor and coſt, which thou waſteſt on theſe ſuperfluities, beſtow and ſpend in getting, keeping, and exerciſing vertue, which is euen beauties beautie: which (as Saint Ambroſe ſpeaketh) no age ſhall extinguiſh, no death can take away, 
               
                  Ambroſ. de Virgin. l. 1. 
               no ſickneſſe can corrupt. But this borrowed beauty is a vaniſhing beauty, or beautifull vanity; a little wet, a little ſwet, a little breath will marre it. Perhaps thou

wilt ſay, it is an ornament. An ornament? A torment it is, ſaith the ſaid Father: The true ornaments of Chriſtians (ſaith Saint Auſtin) are not only no counterfeit & lying painting, no nor ſo much as the pompe of gold or garments, but good 
               
                  Aug. ep. 73. ad Poſſid. Uerus ornatus Chriſtianorum, &c. Stob. Ser. 72 Stob. 16. Nazianz. cont. mul. Immodicè comptas.
                
               manners. An ornament (ſaith Crates) is that, which doth adorne: and that adorneth, which makes a woman more honeſt: (Tale vero praeſtant, non coceus) but painting (either of face or haire) performes not this: but thoſe things, which ſhew grauitie, moderation, and ſhamefaſtneſſe. Democritus likewiſe ſaid, that ſparingneſſe of ſpeech adorned a woman, and that the parcitie euen of an ornament is an ornament to her. I may not omit what Saint Gregorie Nazianzene hath written of the true ornaments of women, where hee ſaith: Anthos hen esti, &c. There is ſaith he) one flower to be loued of women, a good red, which is ſhamefaſtneſſe. This our Painter painteth. We will giue thee, if thou deſireſt, a ſecond: thou maieſt draw a palenes vnto thy beautie, ſpent with the labours of Chriſt with prayers, ſighes, and reſtleſſe night and day. Theſe are the medicines both of vnmarried and married people. Ho tropos eſti gun, &c. To tarry much at home, to conferre of Gods word, to ſet the maides their taskes, to bee delighted onely in their husband, to bind vp their lips, and not to ſtirre foorth a doores, theſe manners are precious things for women. So the prime of the Apoſtles, Paul and Peter, hauing ſhewne their diſlike of ſome things, which by 1. Tim. 2. 1. Pet. 3. ſome fooliſh women are made euen idols of, ſhew that the true ornaments of Chriſtian women, young and old, high and low, are ſhamefaſtneſſe, modeſtie, and good workes, together with the incorruption of a meeke and quiet ſpirit, which is of great account with God. On the contrarie, painting of the face, colouring of the browes, litting of the haire, and ſuch ſuperfluous curioſities, are abominations in his eyes. But thou wilt ſay, that the Apoſtle forbids not painting of the cheekes 
                  Theophylact. In ep. 1. ad Tim. cap. 2. or haire. It is true by name he doth not: but in effect he doth; and as Theophylactus ſpeaketh, If the Apoſtle forbid
               
               thoſe things that belong to wealth, then much more thoſe things, which with a certaine vnneceſſarie care and ſtudy, are compoſed onely for vaine trimming, as the dawbing of the cheekes and face, and ſome ointments put to the etes to make them beautifull, and the reſt of this rabble. But tell me one thing; for food and raiment, for ſtrength and health, for naturall fauour, forme and beautie, a man is bound to praiſe the Lord, and a good man will not forget to doe it: hut dare any wanton thanke God for her coloured haire, her borrowed beautie, her artificiall facing (I remember Saint Paul ſaith, In euery thing giue thanks. Now I demand of thee, If thou wilt giue thanks 1. The. 5. 18 in this thing (I demand againe, Why wilt thou liue in that ſtate, in which thou wouldeſt not die? Surely they forget death and thoſe daies of darknes, that are dead aliue in theſe toyes and vanities. A ſerious and ſad remembrance 2. Cor. 5. of death and of the iudgement, wherein euery one muſt receiue of the Lord according to that, he hath done in his body, whether it be good or euill, would deterre and keepe vs from theſe abuſes, and vaine expenſe of time (which is not ours, if we doe abuſe it) and would make vs thinke of better things, then theſe. It is worth the noting, which Iſidorus Clarius a moſt eloquent Preacher, as Stapleton calles him, ſaith in this argument; If ſome man (ſaith he) ſhould promiſe a woman, that, if ſhe would leaue of her painting and bodily 
               
                  Iſid. Clar. t. 1. orat. 53. Si quis mulieri cupiam polliceretur, &c.
                
               brauerie for a yeere, ſhee ſhould appeare for an hundred yeeres after the moſt beautifull of all women, that euer ſhould be, without doubt ſhe would moſt willingly accept the condition. Againe, if it ſhould be told her that ſhe hath leaue for one yeeres ſpace to allkinds of painting and colouring, and all manner of ornaments; but with that condition, that ſhe ſhould bee the vglieſt of all women all her life long after: there is no queſtion, but that ſhe would refuſe the offer of that yeeres brauerie for feare of enſuing deformitie. But all theſe things ſhall oome to paſſe, and thoſe things, which are of ſo much the more
               
               moment, by how much eternitte ſurpaſſeth a little time, and yet ſo ſluggiſh are they in a matter of ſo great importance. For it ſhall come to paſſe, that thoſe women, which in this life haue liued modeſtly, and without paintings, and idle ornaments, ſhall haue bodies bright as the Sunne, and that for euer: but ſuch as would needs appeare conſpicuous and beautifull (by borrowed brauerie) here, ſhall poſſeſſe eternall deformitie with the Diuell and his Angels. Caluin writing on theſe words of Hoſeah, Tollat ſeortationes ſuas a facie ſuàs: that is, Let her take away her whoredomes from her face, and her adulteries 
               
                  Hoſhea 2. 
               from betweene her breaſts, ſaith, What meaneth this? for women play not the whores with their face, nor breaſts. It is well knowne (ſaith he) that the Prophet alludes to the dreſſing of harlots: becauſe Whores, that they may alluremen, dres themſelues vp more coſtly, and paint their faces curiouſly, and garniſh their breaſts. Immodeſty therefore is ſeene as well in the face, as in the breaſts. Tremelius alſo and Iunius commenting vpon the ſaid Scripture, vnderſtand therby in like manner, Adulterinos fucos, paintings, and ſuch counterfeit deuiſes, by the which, (as one hath wel obſerued) 
                  Vid. Dictionar. Pauper. a Pet. Rodol. editum. p. 76 a woman doth not become more beautiful, ſed potius naturalis pulchritudinis aliquid ſubtrahit, but rather takes away ſomewhat from naturall fauour.
            Maſter Tho. Hudſon writing of a Painted woman, ſaith accordingly,
            She ſurely keepes her fault of ſex and nation,
            And beſt alloweth ſtill the laſt tranſlation.
            Much good time loſt, ſhe reſts her faces detter:
            For ſh'as made it worſe, ſtriuing to make it better.
            
               Holinſhed in his deſcription of Scotland, tells, how the Picts vſed to paint ouer their bodies: and ſome write, that Medea a notable Sorcereſſe deuiſed theſe arts: and ſure it is, that the Heathen and Infidels did firſt and moſt vſurp them: ſeeing therefore we haue caſt off 1. Cor. 6. 19. their Barbariſme & Infidelity, let vs alſo lay aſide their other vanities and adulterous deuiſes. But if for very

ſhame, let not theſe heatheniſh images be brought into the houſes of God. They doe ill become the bodies of Saints which are the Temples of the holy Ghoſt, but 1. Cor. 6. 19 the Congregation of Saints worſe, who are aſſembled in Gods houſe, not to ſhew vanitie, but to learne humilitie; not to draw down wanton eyes to themſelues, but to lift vp their eyes and harts vnto God; not to deale with vain and idle people, but with Ieſus Chriſt, whoſe holy eyes are offended with ſuch ſights. Maſter Barnabee Rich his complaint may heere not vnfitly bee inſerted, who thus ſomewhere writeth: You ſhall ſee (ſaith he) ſome women go ſo attired to the Church, that I am aſhamed to tell it alloud they are ſo bepainted, ſo beperriwigd, ſo bepowdered, ſo be perfumed, ſo be starched, ſo belaced, ſo be imbrodered, that I cannot tel what mental vertue they may haue, that they doe keepe inwardly to themſelues: but I am ſure to the outward ſhew, it is a hard matter in the Church it ſelfe to diſtinguiſh betweene a good woman and a bad. I would to God our painters would conſider what Saint Ierome writes (as Euſtoch. Epitaph. Paulae. ep. 27.) of Paula, who when he prayed her to ſpare her eies for the reading of the Goſpell, which ſhee marr'd with weeping for her ſinnes, returned this anſwere to the holy Father: Turpandaeſt facies, quam contra Dei praeceptum purpuriſſo, & ceruſſa, & ſtibio ſaepè depinxi: That face is to be fouled, which I haue often painted againſt Gods commandement. I muſt afflict my body, which I haue pampered with many pleaſures: long laughing muſt bee recompenſed with continuall weeping.
            
            I will end this preſent Treatiſe with the words of that golden-mouthed Teacher of the Greek Church, I meane Saint Chryſoſtome, who writeth much about this argument I haue in hand. His words, as many as concerne our purpoſe, I will turne as faithfully as I can, which yet by turning will looſe ſome grace, as wine being turned out of one veſſell into another. Thou haſt
               
(ſaith he) a wife too much louing the brauerie of the bodie, 
               
                  Chryſoſt. l. 2 hom. 31. in Mat. p. 228 Uxorem habes ornatum corporis, &c. Chryſoſtome excuſeth his ſpeech againſt women. Greater faults in men commonly, then in women. 
               painted, wantonizing daily in delights, giuen to babling. For though al theſe things cannot befall one woman, yet in our ſpeech we will faigne, that they haue all met together. But thou wilt ſay, Woy was it your pleaſure to ſpeake of women rather, then of men? Doubtleſſe there are men corrupter, then ſuch a woman. But becauſe gouernment is granted vnto men by nature, therfore we haue deſcribed a woman & not becauſe moe faults may be found in women, then in men. For you ſhall often finde among men many, which women neuer, or but very ſildome doe commit; as are murder, the euerſion of ſepulchres, and vnprofitable fighting with wild beaſts, and the like. Doe not therefore thinke that we doe theſe things in contempt of the ſex (let this be farre from me) but becauſe it is now more commodious to make our deſcription after this manner. Be it therefore, there is ſuch a woman, as we haue deſcribed, and her husband would reforme her by al his care and induſtry. By what meanes then ſhall he effect it? Namely, if he doe not command all things to her at once, but the more eaſie things, and thoſe things firſt, 
               How the husband is to redreſſe his wife. Painting of the face is an euil brauerie. 
               which ſhe doth ſeeme to care leſſe for. For if thou wouldſt mend all at firſt, thou ſhalt do nothing. Thou ſhalt not therefore bie and bie depriue her of her golden ornaments. Let her haue them a time, and vſe them. For that ſeemes to be a leſſer euill, then a painted and counterfeitface. Firſt therefore take away her painting, and do not that with terror and threats, but with a gentle and ſweet perſwaſion. Let her euer and anon heare 
               The huſband ſhold ſhew his delike of this painting. 
               thee ſay, that the painted faces of women doe diſpleaſe thee, and that they cauſe ſuch a lothing in thee, that thou canſt not indure them. Alleage alſo the iudgement of others, that are of thy mind: and tell her that that geare vſes to marre them, that are comely without it, that by this meanes thou mighteſt weede this euill out of her. In the meane while as yet, ſpeake not a word of hell, or heauen: but make her beleeue that it will glad 
               A painted face diſpleaſeth good men. 
               thine heart to ſee her with ſuch a face, as God hath made: but that a face corrupted and altered from it nature, and filled with artificiall reds and whites is commonly diſliked amongst
               
               good men. After thou haſt wrought her with theſe words, then ſpeake to her alſo of hell and heauen. Be not ſlacke to diſcourſe of theſe things, not once, but againe, and againe; not ſpitefullie or in anger, but with loue and pleaſantneſſe; ſometimes ſpeaking faire, and ſometimes turning away thine eyes with diſlike, and ſometimes againe making much of her. Doſt thou not ſee that painters, when they goe about to make a faire picture, doe 
               Husbands ſhould vſe all good meanes to reforme their wiues. 
               now apply theſe colours, and then others, wiping out the former? Be not thou more vnskilfull then painters. They being to paint the ſhape of the bodie on tables, do vſe ſo great paines and care; and is it not meet that wee ſhould trie all concluſions, vſe all meanes, when we deſire to make ſoules better! Si paulatim ſie animum vxoris tuae formaueris, &c. If by degrees thou ſhalt thus reforme thy wiues mind, thou ſhalt be the best painter, a faithfull ſeruant, an honeſt husbandman. With theſe 
               How an husband may proue a very good picturer. Holy ancient women vſed not to paint thē
                  ſelues. Tho they were not faire, yet they did not paint their faces. Painting of the face an inuention of Satan. Helpes againſt theſe vanities. Painting is deformitie. Chriſt delightes not in painted faces. 
               alſo, make often mention of illuſtrious women, which either haue excelled for beautie, or which haue not been ſo faire, as of Sarah, Rebecca, and the like. All which it is certaine haue condemned ſuch vanitie, which may appeare, in that Leah, the wife of the Patriarch Iacob, though ſhe was not faire, nor ſo well loued of her husband. And beſides bred among the Gentiles, did yet deuiſe no ſuch tricke, nor altered her naturall complexion, but conſtantly kept the lineaments of nature vncorrupted. And wilt thou, whoſe head is Chriſt, who art a beleeuer, wilt thou allow of the inuentions of Satan? wilt thou not remember that water, that was ſprinkled vpon thy face, nor the Sacrament, which beautified thy lips, nor the blood, which made red thy tongue? All which things if thou wouldeſt keepe in memorie, though thou louedſt brauerie very well, thou wouldeſt not dare, thou couldſt not indure to put any powder, or paint vpon thy face. Remember that thou art made fit for Chriſt, and thou wilt abominate this deformitie. For he ioyes not in theſe colours, but requireth a more noble branch, to wit,
               
               of the ſoule, which alſo he loueth greatly, and which is to bee greatly eſteemed, as the Prophet ſheweth, where he ſaith, and the King ſhall greatly deſire thy beautie. Let vs not therefore 
               
                  Pſal. 45. 11. Painting a ſuperfluity. 
               put any idle and ſuperfluous thing vpon vs. For there is nothing wanting vnto any of the workes of God, neither is there ought, which needes thy mending. No man preſumeth to put any thing to the image, which 
               A Simile ſhewing this painting to be a wrong to God. Painters neglect their ſoules. 
               is made according to the ſimilitude of a King: and if hee ſhall preſume, yet hee ſhall not ſcape vnpuniſhed. Thou addeſt therefore nothing to the workemanſhip of men; and doſt thou ſtriue to amend that, which God hath wrougth? Neither dost thou thinke of hellfire, nor feareſt the deſolation of thy ſoule, which then lies altogether neglected, when thou ſetteſt all thy minde, care and ſtudie on thy bodie. Why ſay I the ſoule is neglected, ſeeing that it falles out otherwiſe with the bodie, then thou wiſhedſt. Which hence appeareth. Becauſe whereas thou ſtudiest by this thing to ſeeme faire, in truth with this thou appeareſt deformed: by this thou thinkeſt to pleaſe thy husband, 
               It falles out otherwiſe with theſe painters, then they thinke. Painting marres the colour. 
               which in truth cauſeth him no little ſorrow: neither doth hee onely, but others alſo blame thee. Wouldeſt thou ſeeme a young woman? But that artifice doth bring an oldneſſe. Through this thou imagineſt, that thou mayeſt glorie, as being faire: but it workes thee no ſmall diſgrace. Thou maiſt 
               It may better tranſlate it, be aſhamed: for a painted face cā
                  not bluſh. Painting an offence of God. The Bellowes of iealouſie. The imitation of whores. 
               bluſh, when thou ſeeſt not onelie thine equals and friends, but thy maides and ſeruants, that are priuie to it, and much more, when thou ſeeſt thy ſelfe in a glaſſe. But why doe I heape vp ſo many of theſe things, paſſing by thoſe greater things? To wit, that thou offendeſt God, ouerthroweſt modeſtie, kindleſt the ſtame of iealouſie, and imitateſt proſtituted harlots. All
               
               which conſidering, contemne theſe diueliſh dreſſings, and vnprofitable arts, and leauing this beautie, indeed deformitie, get yee that beautie in your harts, which the Angels deſire, which God doth loue, which pleaſeth your husbands, that hauing liued here honourablie, yee may alſo obtaine future glorie. Unto the which I would we might come by the grace and mercie of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Amen. Thus farre Chryſoſtome.
            
            Trin-vni Deo Gloria.
         
      
      
         
            
            AN APPENDIX.
            ALL painting or colouring of the face is not of one kind, nor by one meane. The more artificiall and ſumptuous is by tincture, the skinne being died and ſtained with artificiall colours. This the wealthier ſort performe by the helpe of pearle. Were it not much better to beſtow this coſt on the poore, which are creatures and images of God, then on ſuch idle images and workes of their owne creation? O what thankfulneſſe doe they ſhew vnto him, that miſpend his gifts on things, he skornes to looke on! Vt quid die ligitis vanitatem, & quaeritis mendatium? Why loue they vanitie, and ſeeke after lies? for a painted face is a vanitie, and very lie.
            It is a point of pride to deſire by falſe deuiſes, to be reputed of others more excellent, then one is indeed. They therefore that paint or die their faces (as the maner is) are not able to cleare themſelues of pride, and the practiſe of it, which is a thing moſt odious to God and man.
            Pride may ſhew it ſelfe in rich apparell, but it doth ſingularly appeare in a painted face; becauſe they that paint, would haue that, which is artificiall and borrowed, taken to be naturall and proper.
            A painted face is a ſuperfluous face: it were well, if the world were well rid of all ſuch ſuperfluous creatures. I cannot thinke that God, who is the Lord of our time, doth allow vs to ſpend one houre of all our

time on ſuch a vanitie. And if he allow it not, we ſteale it, if we take it.
            This art is often vſed vpon Sunday, which is the Lords day: and ſo by this meanes that holy day is profaned, and God diſhonoured.
            They that practiſe theſe arts, doe often heare them reprooued by the Miniſters of Chriſt, who haue authoritie 
                  Heb. 13, 17. ouer them in the Lord, neither can they (I thinke) be ignorant how the Fathers and Doctors of the Church haue writ againſt theſe vanities. Now what is this but groſſe irreuerence, and diſobedience, when women, and wanton wagges reſiſt and contemne their iudgement and monitions; or elſe, to make themſelues wiſer then their maſters, and to bee wiſe in their owne eies, as if forſooth they knew better what were good, and what were euill, what became, and what miſ-became Chriſtian men and women, then the Church or the moſt holy and learned Paſtors and Teachers, Prieſts and Biſhops, that haue been, and are therein? But, Woe vnto thoſe, that are wiſe intheir owne eyes, and prudent in their owne ſight. 
               
                  Iſaiah 5. 21.
            
            They that paint or die their haire and faces, their necke and breaſts, doe either iudge they do well, and ſinne not; or elſe they know they doe euill, and yet do it, being tranſported by the corruption of their willes and affections; or otherwiſe they doe well, and ſinne not; or otherwiſe they doe it out of ignorance, not knowing that they doe euill. For the firſt, if they think and deeme it good, and not euill to vſe theſe arts, as the faſhion is, they receiue an errour, or falſe ground into their mindes. And how ſhall they repent of that, which they thinke is lawfull? How will they beg pardon of that, wherin they glorie, and which they think is good and not euil? And if they ſhal iudge that good, which indeed is euill, how ſhall they not alſo ſpeake good of euill? And how are they ſafe then (ſpecially

if they ſhall deſpiſe inſtruction) ſeeing the Lord denounceth, Woe vnto thoſe, that ſpeake good of euill, and euill of good, which put darkneſſe for light, and light for darkneſſe? Now without all queſtion the grounds of this colouring are pride, or wantonneſſe, or deceit, or ſomething that is ſinfull. And that, that is of the fleſh, is fleſh.
            For the ſecond, if they know they doe ill to paint, and yet vſe it, the greater is their ſinne; if they know they doe well not to paint, why then doe they not forbeare? To him that knoweth to doe good, and doth it not, to him it is ſinne, ſaith S. Iames. 
               
                  Iames 4. 17 He that ſinnes wittingly, ſinnes more willingly, and therefore ſinnes more heinouſly: and (as Saint Auſten ſpeaketh) The precept is violated with ſo much the more iniuſtice, 
               
                  Aug. lib. 14. de ciuit. dei c. 12. 
               by how much the more eaſily it might haue been obſerued. But he that knowes his dutie, may more eaſily doe it, then he that knowes it not. And if he know it, and addreſſe not himſelfe to doe it, he ſhall be beaten 
                  Luke 12. 47 with many ſtripes.
            For the third, if they vſe theſe arts, as not knowing that they doe euill, they are not yet wholly excuſed. For euen this ignorance is a ſinne, and deſerueth puniſhment in it ſelfe. But what if it be wilfull and affected ignorance? Haue they not heard? Haue they no meanes of knowing it to be a ſinne? So they not conſider, that the wiſeſt and holieſt of either ſex contemne and condemne ſuch vanities? Or are they not able to find out the reaſons, why they doe vſe them? See they not that pride, vaine-glorie, adulterous affections, and ſuch like, are the very motiues, that make them vſe them? Affected ignorance of that, which a man ought to know, is a two fold euill; one, that it is ignorance; the other, that it is affected. And the ſimple and vnaffected ignorance of ſuch things bee not ſo grieuous, yet in one reſpect it is more dangerous then when one ſins of knowledge. For he that ſinnes of ignorance, is farther

of frō repentance, then he that ſins of knowledge. For he that knowes his dutie, may more eaſily repent and leaue it, then either he that doth euill, and knowes not that he doth euill, or then he alſo that thinkes hee doth good, when he doth an euill, and ſo is ſo far from repenting of it, that he rather glories in it.
            They that vſe theſe arts, doe iudge it better, ſafer, and more laudable, either not to paint and die themſelues, or to paint and die themſelues. If they hold the former, why cleaue they to the practiſe of ſuch arts? Why chuſe they not the better? If they maintaine the latter, why are they loth to depart out of the world in that kind of brauery? Why doe they not condemne thoſe, that altogether abſtaine from ſuch arts? Or what be their reaſons of their opinion? For my part, I thinke none to be ſo groſſe, as to thinke it better, or ſo good.
            There are ſome, whoſe leaders ſeeme greatly to reſpect the ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church, and the Conflitutions called Apoſtolicall: but the Fathers, as may appeare by their writings, quoted in this Treatiſe, are altogether ſet againſt theſe arts and actions: and amongſt thoſe Canons, this rule is giuen, Noli depingere os tuum, quod fecit Deus, that is, Doe not paint thy face, which God hath made. Why then ſhould any 
                  Clem. conſtit. Apoſtol. l. 1. c. 9. that profeſſe themſelues the Diſciples of ſuch their guides, as magnifie theſe Ancients, giue themſelues to ſuch forbidden practiſes? But it is to be noted, that though among women, and men too, of ſundrie opinions in matters of religion, there are many differences and much diſcord, yet in the practiſe of pride and vanitie, there is great conſent and concord. The diuell is a moſt politicke and peſtilent enemie of man: Hee cares not much, tho the manners of a man be good, if his faith be nought; nor though his faith bee good, if his manners he wicked. And he knowes, that as pride

ſhut him out of heauen, ſo pride likewiſe will ſhut men vp in hell. Eraſmus telles a prittie tale of a company of 
                  Eraſ. Apot-Variè mixt. lib. 6. Vid. Galen. in exhortatione ad bonas artes.
                gallants, that were met at a banquet, al of them hauing their faces painted, vnleſſe one Phryne, the faireſt of thē. It was thus; Their maner was at their feaſts to make certaine ſports or ieaſts, and that whatſoeuer any of them began to doe, the reſt muſt all of them follow. Now Phryne waſht her face in a baſin of water: and becauſe her natural beauty was good, and her yeres freſh and flouriſhing, ſhe lookt nothing the worſer, but the better rather for it: whereas the reſt doing the like, becauſe they were al painted, they were al diſgraced. But (they ſay) ſome are now adaies both more cunning & more coſtly, then that their art ſhould be waſht away with a little water. This is to trifle away and deuoure time, not to redeeme it. This is not to buy time, but to ſell it for nought. This art is worſe then ignorance: this curioſity is more to be blamed; then careleſnes. And of them that vſe it, it may be ſaid, They loue the praiſe of men more, then the promiſe of God, who delights in plainneſſe, not in deceitfulnes; in verity, not in hypocriſie. The eie of purity and iuſtice cannot abide falſhood and counterfeiting, as not counterfet money, counterfet men, counterfet friends, counterfet wares, counterfet zeale, counterfet deuotion, ſo not counterfet greatnes, counterfet wealth, counterfet beautie. I would faine know what a man would haue counterfet, or what counterfet and baſe thing, hee would haue put vpon him, as true, naturall and proper. A friend, a wife, a child, a father, an horſe or dog, fire, water, meat, mony? What, nothing, nothing? Why thē beauty? would any be deceiued with art in ſtead of nature? No why then ſhold any deceiue another, if he wold not be deceiued by another Or why ſhold any ſtudy to get the praiſe of another by that, for the which, if hee did eſpie it, he would not beſlow his praiſe vpon another? And how ill is a man beholding

to himſelfe, when hee takes paines, and is at coſt to bring an ill name vpon himſelfe? For were he not vaine and deceitful within, he would not expreſſe and ſhew it without. And he that is falſe and deceitful in trifles, how can he bee truſted in matters of greater importance? But it is not enough for theſe dyars and painters to do euil, but they will alſo defend it, and to this purpoſe they bring the Pſalmiſt vpon the ſtage, as if he taught or allowed theſe arts. But wheras the Pſalmiſt ſaith, that God gaue men oyle to make the face ſhine, without doubt he meant it not by tincture or dying (for we may not make the holy Ghoſt to war with himſelfe) but ſome other way. For oyle is wholeſome to eate, it cheereth the hart, & a chearefull hart cauſeth a cheareful countenance. Beſides, oile is vſed for lights or lampes, which illuminate the eies, and ſo ſome expound it. And again, if the face be rubbed or annointed with it, it helpeth the natural color, becauſe it heateth and cheereth the bloud. Euſeb. ſaith, that oyle is phaidropoiòn, making the face of thoſe that are annointed with it, diathgête, càilampràn, bright & ſhining. With the 
               
                  Euſeb. lib. 4. demonſtrat. Euangel. Iacob. Ianſenius, in Pſal. 103. 17. Amb. de Eliâ, & iniu. cap. 10. Mat. 6. 17. Iohan. Wolp. in Pſal. 104. 15. hom. 34. Muſcul. in Pſa. 104. 15 Bellarm. in Pſal. 103. 17 
               anointing of oyle, wherwith the men of old time annointed their heads (ſaith Ianſſonius) they did procure vnto themſelues, and demonſtrate gladnes of mind: wherefore alſo the Lord, as witneſſeth Ambroſe, inuiting thoſe that faſt, to a cheerefulneſſe of ſpirit, ſaith, Annoint thine head with oyle. Wholphius likewiſe ſaith, It is the nature of oyle to warme the body, and to defend it againſt colds, & to refreſh the mēbers. Muſcul. writeth, that oyle was giuen to make the body bright and cheerefull, the vſe wherof was fitter for hot countries, then cold: & that God prepared the mitigation of oyle againſt the outward labefactation of the body: by the vſe whereof not only the clearenes of the skin might be preſerued or repaired, but alſo other burts and annoiances cured. Bellar. thus alſo writeth, That he might cheere vp the face with oyle, i. that mā might make his face cheerfull with oile brought forth by thee: for he gaue wine to cheer vp the
               
               heart: and he alſo gaue oyle, either to annoint and cleare the face, or elſe to eate, as Theodoretus teacheth, to wit, that being mingled among hearbes and pulſe, it might make the meat more pleaſing, and that man might make his face cheerefull in taſting of that meate; or that God might make the face of man cheerefull with oyle, whileſt he giueth him meate ſeaſoned with oyle. For the face appeareth clearer, when a man is nouriſhed with thoſe things, that haue a good reliſh or ſauor. 
               
                  Pet. Lumb. in Pſal. 103 17. Mol. in Pſa. 104, 15 
               Lombard according to S. Auſtin expounds it thus: That man might exbilarate, that is, cheere vp; his face, that is, his minde; with oyle, that is, with ſome grace of the holy Spirit, by which he is made to be gracious with others. Mollerus, and diuers others alſo not altogether diſliking, maketh the words to ſound thus, And wine, that maketh glad the heart of man, and his face to ſhine more then oyle. But whatſoeuer the interpreters ſpeake here of oyle, I finde in them no one ſillable for fucation or painting, which 
                  Chryſ. hom. 31. in Mat. * The horne of Stibium, which is a blacke and fuliginous medicine of the eies. Pined. in Iob 42. Merlinus, Mercer. & Piſcator on this place of Iob. Abr. Scultetu. in cap. 3. & 4. Ieſaiae p. 68. 69. Saint Chryſoſtome ſaith is a deformitie, a ſuperfluitie, and an inuention of the diuell. That which Diogenes ſometimes ſaid to a certaine youth too curiouſly dreſt, may bee fitly applied to any of our youths, that vſe theſe curious arts, If thou goeſt to men, all this is but in vaine, if vnto women, it is wicked.
            
            They are ill beholding to their wits, that would maintaine this kind of tincture lawfull, becauſe one of Iobs faire daughters was called Keren-happuk, * Conuſtiby: whereby was ſignified, not that ſhe was painted (for her naturall beautie was ſo perfect, that ſhee needed not): but that ſhe had, as Pineda with others noteth, not onely very faire eyes, but whatſoeuer alſo other women are wont to procure vnto themſelues by painting and medicines: who alſo ſheweth, it is not the leaſt praiſe of women, or commendation of their beautie, that they vſe not ſuch artificiall trimming of their bodies. Where the Hebrew. in the 3. of Eſay hath wandring, or rolling eyes, a man both learned, and godly,

ſaith, thas the Germane Interpreter hath Facie ceruſſatâ, a painted face, to vpbraid women with their painting or dying, wherewith they counterfeit redneſſe of their cheekes and lips, indeuouring to the contumely of God their maker, to be fairer then they were borne. But they will thus pleade, ſaith he, What euill is it, if by theſe arts I ſhall intice an husband 
               
                  Scultet. vbi ſupra. Anſ. 1 Ouid. 2. 
               to like me? To whom hee anſwereth two things. Firſt: Non pellicies niſi ſtolidum & vecordem, Thou ſhalt allure none, but a foole and dizzard. For what wiſe man will be wooed or wonne by pictures? Who that rightly feareth God, and is not miſerably tranſported by a ſpirituall furie, will beſtow his affection vpon the diuiſe of a fooliſh woman; which belongs indeed to the worke of the moſt wiſe Creator? But natiue beautie is his worke: but a ſcitious and aduſterine is her owne, or his rather, that taught her firſt to ſinne. Ouid ſpeaking Faſt. Forma placet, &c. of Lucretia ſaith, That forme and beautie pleaſeth, which is made by no art; it is indeed pleaſing both to God and man. Artificiall fauour and beautie becomes only artificial creatures, as ſtatues, images, & the like But if the heart were wel ſifted, as it is indeed ſeeme 
                  Ier. 17. 10. Pruden. an Hamariigen.
                to God, who doth ſearch the heart, and trie the reines, I feare it will be found, that our married Liſters lie and paint themſelues to content themſelues, their Fleſh, being diſcontented with that, they haue, and are. Nec 
               Cypr. de Bono Pudicitiae. 
               enim content a decore ingenuo mentitur faemina formam, ſaith Prudentius: that is, they counterfet beautie by their their arts, becauſe thy are not content with their own beautie, which they haue by nature. Now this ſollicitude (and vnquietneſſe) about beautie is an argument (ſaith Saint Cyprian) of an ill mind, and of deformitie. She is alway miſerable, that pleaſes not her ſelfe, as ſhe is. Why is the colour of the haire changed? What means this ſuffuſoation of her eies? Wherefore is the face by art altered into another forme? And after al this, why doth ſhe conſult with her looking glaſſe, but becauſe ſhe is afraid, leſt ſhe ſhould be ſhe, which ſhe is indeed?
            
            
               
But be it, ſaith the ſaid learned Writer; thou maieſt allure and draw on another, that is no foole, into the 
                  Anſ. 2. Scult. ib.
                net: but when he ſhall ſee himſelfe deceiued, and that there is nothing but a faire counterfet out-ſide (non fuci praemium iurgia feres, &c?) ſhall not thy painting and litting be rewarded with chiding and vnkindneſſe? Aſſuredly the gaines, that ſuch deceiuers get, being once diſcouered, (and lies it not long) they may put in their eyes, and ſee neuer a whit leſſe.
            But howſoeuer ſome may pretend they vſe theſe arts to get them husbands, with whom they meane to liue honeſtly in lawful wedlock, as they would make vs beleeue (tho not the leaſt euill ſhould bee done that the greateſt good might come thereof) yet are there a number, whom the earth is weary any longer to beare, which vſe theſe arts of purpoſe to win men to commit folly with them for luſt, or lucre ſake: whom wee may rightly call the Diuils Faire-ones, to whom belongeth the blackneſſe of darknes for euer, which in this eſtate they cannot poſſibly eſcape. Either they muſt repent, and burne theſe bellowes of concupiſcence, and caſt away theſe matches of carnalitie, theſe inſtruments of Juſt and vanitie, or themſelues muſt burne for euer in that lake, that burneth with fire and brimſtone, being vtterly caſt out of the ſight of God, and for euer.
            And all ye that are the daughters of God, and handmaidens of your Lord and Sauiour, that true-virginman, and eternal God, Chriſt Ieſus, pleaſe your Father, doe his will, and not the diuels: and follow your Lord, who hath gone before you in humilitie, modeſtie, chaſtity and all godly ſimplicitie. Haue before your eyes his bleſſed mother, and a certaine conuert of her ſex, and name and time: and think on Sarah, the mother of faithful women: who ſerued God their Father in al ſinceritie, wore their owne haire, appeared both at home and abroad in their owne colours, and abhorred all theſe immodeſt, wanton, proud and vaine deceits, the

inuentions of idle braines, and exerciſes of idle people, that are neuer leſſe idle, then when they bee moſt idle. Reade, and reade againe the ſayings of Bathſhebah, and the exhortations of Saint Paul, & Saint Peter. And for euer remember what was threatned to the 
                  Pro. 31. 1. Tim. 2. 1. Pet. 3. Sal. Geſner. In Eſa. c. 3. Doct. 1. proud wantons of your ſex in Iſrael by the Lord himſelfe in Eſay. On which a certaine learned Germane Doctor, ſometime principall Profeſſor of Theology in the Vniuerſitie of Wittenberg, commenting thus writeth, Obſeruent hîc mulieres, &c. Let women here learne not to pranke it with their haire and painted face, and allure men vnto luſt. And let them haue in their ſight the painted face of Iezabel, and her head curiouſly and immodeſtly dreſſed, the which dogges did deueure. Remember ye not, that are married, how he, that married you to your huſbands, in the day and houre of your marriage prayed vnto God for you in the prayers of the Church, vnto which yee ſaid, Amen, that ye might be followers of godly & holy matrons? who (I am ſure) all vnto one deteſt and deſpiſe theſe arts & actions, as abominations, as vnbeſeeming women profeſſing ſinceritie and godly pureneſſe; and becomming only light skirts, and proud & idlewomen that delight in nothing more then pride, and pranking and pleaſing of their fleſh. Now what ye praied for then, labour to performe alwaies after. Ye pray but ill, except ye be carefull to practiſe well. Deſires are not reſpected, when deeds are altogether neglected. Men and women too, will keepe ſtate, and ſtand vpon their points; why then ſhould Chriſtian men & women neglect their ſtate, and admit of things, that misbecome their calling? But as S. Ierome ſaith, Nec affectatae ſordes, nec exquiſitae munditiae conueniunt Chriſtiano, i. Neither affected ſlutterie, nor exquiſit brauery become a Chriſtian, whoſe true inward glory is but il matched with a falſe outward glaſſe.
            
            But a woman, that vſeth theſe arts, will ſay, if I were certaine that to paint or die my skin or haire were a ſinne, I would not doe it for all the world.
            
               
I anſwere, art thou ſure it is not a ſinne? Wilt thou doe a thing, that thou art not certaine thou mayeſt do? Sol. The rule preſcribed thee is this, Linque incertum, leaue that, whereof thou art not certaine. Doſt thou ſtand in doubt of this painting? Then forbeare it, leaue it, vſe it not. Vſe not that, for which thou haſt no faith, no ground for thy beliefe. Thou art ſure it is no ſinne not to paint, of this thou art out of all doubt, as thou haſt iuſt cauſe indeed. Then paint not thy ſelfe, but abſtaine, and ſo thou ſhalt doe well, and ſhalt find peace in thine heart. Adherre to this, thou art ſure of: and hold of thine hand from that, thou art not ſure of.
            Yea, but thou wilt ſay, If it be a ſinne, it is the tranſgreſſion of the Law: but what Law doth it tranſgreſſe? Ob.
            
            I anſwer, it is againſt the Law and order of nature, Sol. which produceth and appointeth euery creature to appeare in his owne perſonall forme, fauor, haire, skin and colour. And it is a manifeſt tranſgreſſion of the word of God, which is the Law and light of a godly man. For firſt, when pride of heart doth cauſe it, it is againſt that law, that forbids pride, and commands humilitie. Secondly, when an whoriſh or laſciuious humour doth produce it, it tranſgreſſeth the precept, which requires holineſſe and chaſtitie, and forbiddeth fornication, adulterie, and all vncleanneſſe. Thirdly, becauſe it is ſcandalous, and of ill report. therefore it is againſt the lawes, that forbid offences, and inioyne the meditation and purſuit of thoſe things, that are of a good report with men of vnderſtanding, and of the beſt report and repute in the Church of God. Fourthly, becauſe it is againſt the practiſe and preaching of the graueſt and ſoundeſt Doctors and Fathers of the Church, that either are now, or haue been heretofore, it is againſt the fifth Commandement, that ſaith, Honor
               
               thy father and thy mother; and againſt that ſpeech of the Apoſtle Saint Paul to the Hebrewes, ſaying, Obey them 
               
                  Heb. 13. 17. 
               that haue the rule ouer you, and ſubmit your ſelues. Fifthlie, becauſe they that vſe theſe arts, miſpend their time which God hath but lentthē, and that for no ſuch purpoſes; they are theeues, ſinning againſt that precept, that ſaith, Thou ſhalt not ſteale. Sixthly, becauſe ſillie women and fooliſh youthes, make themſelues wiſer and more ſubtill, then their teachers, that would perſwade them to leaue ſuch vanities (yea, theſe very ſame) refuſing to be inſtructed by them, they ſinne againſt God, who ſaith, Be not wiſe in thine owne eyes. And againe, The Prieſts lippes ſhall preſerue knowledge: and they, that is, the people, ſhall ſeeke the Law at his mouth, 
               
                  Prou. 3. 7. Mal. 2. 7. and not out of their owne braines. For he (and not they) is the meſſenger of the Lord of hoſts. Seuenthly, when people paint and die themſelues to deceiue their neighbors, or to intiſe a man or woman, to loue them, and marrie them, or to gaine their praiſes to their counterfeit beautie, as if it were true and naturall, this is againſt the law, that commaunds vpright dealing, and forbids deceit and falſhood. Yea finally, hee loues not God with all his heart, that would haue that affection or commendation, giuen to a picture, or peece of art, which is due to the worke of God, and his handmaide Nature, and which no man of vnderſtanding, and true deuotion would giue, if hee doe perceiue the fraud. Neither doth hee loue his neighbour, as himſelfe, nor do to his neighbour, as he would haue his neighbour doe to him, that goes about to deceiue and beguile his neighbour, making him beleeue by vaine flouriſhes and outward ſhewes that that is, which is not, and that that is not, which is indeed. Theſe things wee haue toucht already, and therefore thus I end mine anſwer.
            Yea, but mee thinkes, I heare ſome Spaniard ſay, that

               Leſſius, and other Theatines, his Fathers-Confeſſors, and the great Proctors of the Romiſh religion, do hold 
                  Fieri poteſt vt faeminae pigmentis ſine peccato vtantur 1. causâ tegendae alicuius maculae. 2. Si maritus iuleat vt vxorinter alias magis decora appareat. Leſſius de iuſtitia & iure, l. 4 cap. 4. fol. 802. Fingere maiorem pulchritudinem ornatu & fuco, licet ſit mendacium operis, noneſt peccatum mortale. Pet. Alagora in Compendio Manuales Nauarri, cap. 23. Numb. 19. ful. 257. it lawfull, that in Spaine, where the Sunne beame doth ſwart their women; it ſhould be permitted to them to paint, as a conciliation of loue between them and their husbands, and therefore hee will require it of her to giue contentment, and to winne her ſelfe fauour in other companie.
            Surely it is a doctrine that doth well enough become the Ieſuites, who as they are the great Maſters Sol. of lying, equiuocation, and mentall reſeruation, ſo doe See Maſter Perkins in his Refora med Catholike. chap. 21. Perkabid.
                they make no difficultie, to teach that it is lawfull to belie the face, and the complexion. Secondly, it well enough beſeemes the Church of Rome, who as ſhee is the Mother of ſpiritual fornications, magicke, ſorcerie and witchcraft. ſo hath God giuen her ouer to defile her ſelfe with corporall polutions and fornications, not onely to giue allowance to publike Stewes and Brothel-houſes, but that the Maſſe it ſelf (which is the maſter peece of the Papacie) ſhould be made the baude 
                  Hen. Steph. in Apolog. pro Herod. c. 15. fo. 179. to much vncleanneſſe, as is well knowne by their Maſſes at midnight, & their morning Matins before day. And therfore this old Romiſh Ieſabel, as ſhe hath painted her owne face with the faire ſhew of many goodly ceremonies, of antiquity and ſucceſſion, and multitude of her profeſſors, thereby to ſet the world at a gaze, ſo in this particular alſo ſhe doth tollerate the abuſes of her children. Thirdly, to husbands that require this obedience from their wiues, wee oppoſe the Apoſtles rule, who requireth children, ſeruants, and generally al

inferiours, to obey them, to whom they are in ſubiection onely in the Lord, that is, in thoſe things wherein 
                  Coloſ. 3. 18. Epheſ. 6. 1. the lawes of God and Nature may not be violated and infringed. And laſtly, whereas they require it of their wiues out of a carnall reſpect and ſenſualitie, the Apoſtle biddeth them to dwell with their wiues according to knowledge: and what greater point of prudence diſcretion 
                  Pet. 3. 7. and moderate affection can there bee, then for a man ſo to cohabite with his wife, as to haue a reſpectfull care of the children that are to bee borne of them, whoſe health, and ſtrength, and comlinaſſe of body, is by meanes of this painting greatly indangered and endamaged, the contagious effects which it breedeth in the mother, hereditarily deſcending vpon her child, and therefore is well compared by Doct. de Saguna, to originall ſinne, which propagateth it ſelfe by generation, to whoſe teſtimony I referre you, ſet downe heere in the beginning of this booke, a sone who out of his great experience, and the grounds of his art of Phiſick laboureth to dehort his countrie women of Spaine from this pargetting and rough-caſting of their faces by painting.
            Now becauſe this ſinne goeth not alone, but as it ſelfe is vſed to a prouocation and incitement to luſt, ſo luſt that it may accompliſh its deſire, will not ſticke to ſtoope to practiſe loue-potions by charmes and ſocerie, yea rather then faile, wil make its way by bloud; let me therefore touch a little vpon theſe neighbour ſinnes. As vnto the bodies of men diſeaſes are very dangerous, eſpecially if they be let run, and not withſtood in time, euen ſo are ſinnes vnto their ſoules. And as by obedience vnto God, and a vertuous conuerſation among men, peace and al good bleſſings from heauen may bee lookt for for godlineſſe (as the Apoſtle teacheth) is profitable vnto all things, hauing promiſe of the life, that now is, and of that which is to come:

ſo by diſobedience and wicked ſinning againſt God, his wrath was kindled, good things are hindred, and his iudgements, which are fearefull and intollerable, are moſt iuſtly procured. Vpon the wicked (ſaith Dauid) hee ſhall raine ſuaires, fire and brimſtone, and an horrible 
               
                  Pſal. 11. 6. 
               tempeſt; this ſhall bee the portion of their cup. But as ſome diſeaſed are more noxius and offenſiue to the body, then others: ſo ſome ſinnes are more foule and hainous then others, and will not let the Lord alone, but are euer crying in his eares for vengeance; and therefore ſhould be preuented with greater care, and purged with greater ſorrow and deprecation. It is that we are fallen into thoſe perillous times (prophecied of by Saint Paul) in which men ſhal be proud, vnthankfull, vnholy, traytors, ambitious, incontinent, 2. Tim. 3. 1. bloodie, deſpiſers of thoſe that are good, louers of pleaſures more then of God, hauing the forme of godlineſſe, but denying the power thereof. And with our eyes we ſee that true, which Eſay ſpeaketh; Let fauour 
               
                  Iſai. 26. 10. (ſaith he) bee ſhewed to the wicked, yet will hee not learne righteouſneſſe: in the land of vprightueſſe will be deale vniuſtly, and will not behold the maieſtie of the Lord. See wee not what the Lord hath done for this Nation, how hee hath planted his Church among vs, and giuen vs peace on all ſides round about vs? See we not how hee hath giuen vs his Goſpell and all his ordinances of ſaluation, and leaue to vſe them freely, openly, & falſely in all tranquilitie? See we not how hee hath bleſt vs with two ſuch noble and vertuous Princes, one moſt happily ſucceeding another, ſuch as in truth the whole world ſince the beginning of their reignes (which is now neere 60. yeeres) is not able to match in either ſex in all their Royall and Chriſtian indowments, and how hee hath protected them to this very day (ſometies in a manner miraculouſly) againſt the many, barbarous and diuelliſh treacheries, and trayterous

machiuelions and attempts of their wicked aduerſaries? See wee not with what eaſe and clemency their Gouernments haue continued, and what flouds of temporall fauours haue ſtreamed from the heauens by them vnto vs; ſo as that we may ſay with Dauid: The Lord is with vs: he hath prepared a table before vs, in the preſence of our enemies: hee hath annointed our heads with oyle, and our cuprunneth ouer? Pſalm. 23. 4. 5. And yet for all this, the wicked will not amend. but moſt horrible and tranſcendent villanies, moſt grieuous and foule enormities breake out among vs, to the diſhonour of God, the diſgrace of Religion, the ſhame of their Countrie, the griefe of their King, and of all good Chriſtian hearts, in ſo much, that if there were not amongſt vs thoſe, that mourned for theſe euils, which vngodly men reioyce to commit, and but that (thankes bee to God for it) there is an exact and iuſt proceeding againſt ali ſuch enormious perſons, wee might well haue feared ſome notable and fearefull iudgement had been neere vnto vs. Now all ſinnes deſerue ill with God, but ſome there are, that for their heinouſneſſe are ſaid to crie in the eares of the Lord, ſuch as is the ſinne of murder, as appeares by the ſpeech of God to Caine, after he had murdered his brother Abel. What haſt thou done, ſaith God? The voyce of thy brothers blood crieth vnto mee from the ground: Geneſis 4. 10. This ſinne was ſo fearefull to Dauid, as that with a carefull and penſiue heart he prayed againſt it vnto God, Deliuer mee from bloud guiltineſſe, O God, thou God of my ſaluation: Pſalm. 51. 14. And ſpeaking of bloody people, he ſaith, The Lord will abborre the bloody and deceitfull man: Pſalm. 5. 6. And againe: The bloodie and deceitfull man ſhall not liue out halfe his dayes: Geneſis 9. 5. And indeede the blood of the life of a man is ſo precious in Gods eye, as that hee telles Noah
               
and his ſonnes, that he will require the bloud of man at the hand both of man and beaſt. And to ſtay vs from this ſo vnnaturall a ſinne, beſides his commandement, that forbids it, he ſhewes that euen the praiers of murderers ſhall find no fauour with him, ſo long as their ſinne cleaues vnto them. When ye ſpread forth your hands, ſaith he, I will hide mine eyes from you: yea, when yee make many prayers, I will not heare: your 
                  Iſaiah 1. 15. hands are full of blood. And if we marke the dealings of God with murders, it wil appeare that very ſeldom, or neuer, they ſcape vnpuniſhed, but by one meanes or other, he finds them out, and meets with them, though it be by ſuffering them to murder themſelues. The firſt murderer in the world, Caine was not indeed kild by God: but hee was ſuffered to liue ſuch a life, in ſuch torments of conſcience and frightings, as if he had had an hell within him, wandring vp and downe like a vagabond vpon the earth, that whoſoeuer ſaw him, and was acquainted with the curſe of God, that went along with him, could not but bee terrified from committing murder. Abimelech out of ambition murdered 70. of his brethren, but after had his braine-pan crackt by a woman, and was kild out-right by one of 
                  Iudges 9. his owne men at his owne command. Cambyſes, the ſon of Cyrus ſhot a noble mans ſonne to the heart with an arrow wittingly, and made his owne brother to bee murdered priuily, and ſlue his ſiſter for reprouing him for that deede: but at laſt as hee was riding, hee fell downe vpon the point of his ſword, which had fallen out of the ſcabbard, and ſo was ſlaine. Caſſius and Brutus, that had helpt to murder Iulius Caeſar in the Senate, was afterwards murdered by themſelues. Phocas, that had like a barbarous traytor murdered Mauricius the Emperour his Maſter, was at laſt taken and put to a moſt cruell death. Hemichild murdered his Lord Albenius a King of Lombardie, as hee

was in bed. Roſimund his Queene hauing her hand in the ſaid murder: but the Lord was euen with them both. For ſhee thinking to haue poiſoned him after, made him drinke halfe her poyſon, which he feeling in his vaines preſently ſtaied his draught, and made her drinke vp the remainder, and ſo they died both together. Ethelbert King of the Eaſt-Angles vniuſtly and deceitfully murdered at the perſwaſion of Offa (the King of Mercia) his Queene; which Queene liued not a quarter of a yeere after, and in her death was ſo tormented, that ſhe bither tong (which ſhe had abuſed to the cauſing of that murther) in peeces with her teeth. Selimus, a Turkiſh Emperour murthered his father Baiazet by poyſon: but not many yeeres after, God tooke him into his hands, and ſmote him with a moſt lothſome and ſtinking diſeaſe, which ſpread ouer all his body, and at length kild him. Calippus that ſlue Dian, his familiar friend, and committed many other murders, afterwards liued an exile, and great neceſſities, and at length was kild himſelfe. And 2. Sa. 10. 10, for Dauid himſelfe, whoſe hand had been defiled with blood, the Lord (notwithſtanding his great repentance) did ſeuerely chaſten him. The Lord had threatned him ſaying, The ſword ſhall neuer depart from thine houſe: Behold, I wil raiſe vp euil againſt thee out of thine own houſe; and ſo indeed it came to paſſe. For one of his ſons killd another, and by his owne child hee had liked to haue loſt his kingdome. And as the Almightie God is iuſt in puniſhing of murders: ſo likewiſe his prouidence watcheth to diſcouer them, that murderers ſildome or neuer lie hid, but firſt or laſt they are diſcouered. It is ſtrange to conſider, how murders haue been detected, ſometimes by dogges, as that of Lothbroke the Dane, of Heſiode the Poet, and a certaine ſouldier of King Pyrrus, from whoſe dead body his dog could not be wonne, but fawning vpon the King, as deſirous

of his aide, the King commanded all his ſouldiers to come along by him by two and two in a ranke, till at length the murderers came, on whom the dog flew, as if hee would haue killed them, and turning to the King ran againe vpon them, whereupon they were examined, and forth with they confeſt the fact, and receiued their puniſhment. Somtimes they haue bin diſcouered by birds, as Beſſus (who had murdered his father) by Swallowes; whom when he heard to chatter, his guiltie conſcience wrought him to think that they ſaid in their gibberiſh, that Beſſus had kild his father: So that now no longer able to containe himſelfe, hee confeſt his villany, and was put to death for it. The murder of the Poet Ibycus was diſcouered by Cranes: and Luther ſpeakes of the murder of a certaine Germane, which was detected by Crowes: who alſo with Melancton ſaw a notable diſcouerie of a murder made by a young fellow at Iſenacum, who hauing kild his hoſt, and took from him all his money, began to make haſt away: but by the iudgement of God, and terrors of his owne conſcience, hee was ſo frighted and amazed, that he was not able to ſtirre one foot before hee was taken. A certaine Merchant trauelling to Paris, was in the way murdered by his man: now as the murder was a doing, a blind man being led by his dogge paſſed by, and hearing one grone, asked who it was? To whom the murtherer anſwered, It was a ſickeman going to eaſe himſelfe. But it ſo fell out after, that this treacherous fellow was in queſtion for the murder of his maſter: but he denied it: the blindman alſo was heard of, and brought to the murtherer, and twentie men were cauſed to ſpeake one after another, and ſtill the blind man was askt, if he knew their voyces: at laſt when the murtherer had ſpoken, he knew his voice, & ſaid, This is the man, which anſwered me on the mountaine. This courſe was often vſed, and ſtill the blind man

named the ſame, and neuer fained. Whereupon the Court condemned him to death, and before he died, he cōfeſt the fact. But what need we go ſo far for examples, euen this very yere in Lancaſhire was there a villanous murder ſtrangely diſcouered by a young boy: which ſtory, I hope, wil by ſome that exactly know it, hereafter be declared and publiſhed. In like maner alſo the murder of Sir Tho. Ouerburie in the Tower, though it lay hid ſome time, yet at length by the prouidence of heauen it is diſcouered. Diuers that haue been found guiltie of that cruell and moſt mercileſſe murder, haue bin condemned to death for the ſame and hangd; who though they would faine haue ſhifted of the fault, and pleaded, Not guiltie, as though they had bin innocent, yet it pleaſed God ſtill before their deaths to touch their hearts, that they did ingeniouſly confeſſe their fault, and did beg of God the pardon of it. This ſinne of murder is ſo grieuous, that it cries aloud and ſhrill, and will not leaue the Lord, till he haue diſcloſed it: many and admirable are the waies, wherby God hath diſcouered it: ſome I haue already ſet downe, and many other might be named, but that I meane not to be large. All which ſhould teach vs to deteſt and decline this ſinne, which ſhuts mens prayers out of heauen, and puls downe the iudgements of God vpon thē. And the greateſt mercy, that God vſes to ſhew to Murderers, which repent, is this, That he ſaues them as it were by death, and preſerues their ſoules from hell by deliuering vp their bodies into the hands of Magiſtrates, his Miniſters, to take away their liues from thē by law, as they haue taken away the liues of others againſt law. But among all the deuiſes of murderers, which are many, theſe Italian deuiſes by poiſoning are moſt vile and diueliſh, and they ſay, An Engliſhman Italianated is a diuell incarnated. If theſe arts ſhould come in once amongſt vs, who ſhal be ſecure? Here can a mā ſee who hurts him, & how ſhal a mā preuent the blow, if he

ſee not the arme that ſtrikes him? Yea here a man ſhal be made away vnder the pretext of friendſhip, yea, hee ſhall perhaps thank a man for that, that is made to deſtroy him, which hath death lapt vp in it, which thinks is ſent or giuen him as a tokan of loue vnto him. God deliuer vs from theſe euils, and ſtrengthen the hearts and hands of our Magiſtrates, to cut off all ſuch offenders without reſpect of perſons. But beſides this ſinne of blood, there are diuers others, which are acceſſaries thereunto; the very ſtaine of religion, and the bane of humane ſociety, as pride, ambition, witchcraft, whoredome, and the mother and nurſe of all diſobedience to the Miniſterie of the Word. Againſt euery of which I will ſpeake a little ſhewing ſome notable iudgements of God vpon ſundrie perſons, that haue therein offended.
            
               Of Pride and Ambition.
               ANd to begin with pride and ambition, ſins hatefull before God and man. Theſe things ſpoiled the Angels of their felicitie, and man of his immortalitie. They were bred in heauen, but they bring to hel. They were throwne out of heauen, and were neuer ſo fortunate as to find the way thither againe. They are the ſpoile of vertues, the ſource of vices, the roots of euils, the diſgraces of religion, by remedies they beget diſeaſes and by medecines maladies. The bountie of the ambitious is ſhewne to rich men, and their patience is for vanitie. When they are aduanced, they are proud and full of boſting, Non curant prodeſſe, ſed gloriantur praeeſſe, and they think themſelues better, becauſe they ſee themſelues greater, neither are they thankfull for thoſe degrees of honour, they haue attained to, but they are diſcontented for lacke of thoſe, they would attaine to. For their deſire lookes not backe from

whence they ſprang, but whither they gang. And it often fares with ambitious men, that haue great eſtates, as with ſuch, as weare their choates too long, which makes them, if they take not the better heed, to ſtumble, fall and hurt themſelues. But if men would wel weigh with themſelues the inſtabilitie of al earthly things, and conſider the iudgements of God vpon ambitious and proud people, whom for their very pride hee doth reſiſt, it would doubtleſſe abate their ſwelling ſpirits, and teach them to bee lowly-minded.
               
                  Tho. Rogers, Eſquire, of the Inſtabilitie of Fortune, written to the Earle of Hartford.
               
                  Boautie is like a faire, but fading flower.
                  Riches are like a bubble in a ſireame.
                  Great ſtrength is like a fortified Tower.
                  Honour is like a vaine, but pleaſing dreame.
                  We ſee the faireſt flowers ſoone fade away.
                  Bubbles doe quickly vaniſh like the wind.
                  Strong Towers are rent, and doe in time decay.
                  And dreames are but illuſions of the mind.
               
               Call but to mind the iudgements of God vpon the proud and ambitious, as on Lucifer and his fellows, our firſt parents, Abimelecke, Abſalon, Haman, Scnacherih, Nebuchadnezzar, Olofernes, Antiochus, Herod, Alladius, Apryes, Caligula, Domitian, Alexander, Timotheus the Athenian, Aiax, Capaneus: and but marke his dealings with the proud and hautie of the world, that neither know God nor man, neither themſelues nor others, and then ſhalt thou bee forced to confeſſe, that there is a God that abaſeth the proud, which (as Dauid ſaith. Pſalm. 119) are curſed, and erre from Gods commandements.
               
               And here I cannot but magnifie the wiſedome, and honourable proceeding of our State, in detecting and

purſuing malefactors of theſe our times, who hauing carried their leaud practiſes with a great deale of hautineſſe, of ſecreſie and ſecuritie, thought the world, Fortuna non arte regi, to bee guided by chance, not by any ſteddy courſe of diuine prouidence. But their puniſhment Claudian in Ruffin. hath cleared this doubt, abſoluitque deos, hath iuſtified God in his righteous dealing, ſo that all the world is ready to ſay with Dauid, verily there is a reward for the righteous: doubtleſſe there is a God that iudgeth the earth, Pſalm. 58. 10. One of the offenders hauing made a profitable vſe of her arraignement and conuiction, did confeſſe to the glorie of God, being truly humbled by hearty repentance, that ſhee was hainouſly guilty of the murther of Sir Thomas Ouerburie, 
                  Miſtris Turnor executed at Tiburne the 14. of Nouemb. 1615 and was iuſtly condemned for the ſame, deteſting her former life led in poperie, pride and ſenſualitie, and exhorting the aſſiſtants with much earneſtnes to leaue off their yellow bands, and of gariſh faſhions, the very inuentions of the diuell. I wiſh that her words might take impreſſion in thoſe that heard them, and her example ſerue others for inſtruction.
            
            
               Of Adulterie.
               I Am now come to ſpeake of whoredome, and to ſhew ſome of the iudgements of God againſt it. True it is, that marriage is honorable in al, and the bed vndefiled: but whoremongers and adulterers God wil iudge. God did ſeuerely chaſtiſe Dauid for his adultery. For the child ſo gotten he tooke away, and ſuffered his daughter Thamar to be rauiſhed by his ſonne Ammon, and his Concubines to be defiled by Abſalom his ſonne, that was ſo deare vnto him, Rodoaldus a King of Lombardy was ſlaine, as he was in the very act of adulterie. Olrichbertus, eldeſt ſonne to Lotharius, a King of France, died as he was embracing his whore. Luther ſomwhere ſpeaks

of a Noble man ſo ſenſuall and whoriſh, that he ſlucke not to ſay, that, If this life of pleaſure and harlot-hunting would laſt euer, he would not eare for heauen, or eternall life. But the filthy wretch died among his harlots, being ſtrucken with a ſudden ſtroke of Gods vengeance. Meſſelina, the wife of Claudicus the Emperour, was a woman of rare in continency. She fell at laſt in loue with one Silius, a faire young Gentleman, and that ſhe might marrie him (tho the Emperour her huſband was aliue) ſhe cauſed his wife Sillana to be diuorced, and ſo married him: for the which after the complaint and ſuite of the Nobles to the Emperour, ſhee was put to death. This ſin of adulterie was odious euen among the Heathen, as appeareth by the ſlorie of Abimeleck, Geneſ. 26. by the practiſe of the Turkes and Tartars, and of Aurelianus, who for terrour ſake, adiudged one of his Souldiers to a cruell death for adulterating his hoſtiſſe; as alſo by the law of Iulia, by which all adulterers were ſentenced to die; and by the words of Queene Hecuba in Euripides, who would haue it made a law, that euery wife ſhould die, that gaue her chaſtitie to another man. And how vnpleaſing this ſin is vnto God, any man may ſee, that reades the Lawes, he gaue vnto his people the Iewes, by the which adulterers were to bee put to death, or which conſiders what the Apoſtle writes in ſundry places, in which he ſheweth, that Whoremongers and adulterers ſhall not inherit the Kingdome of God, 1. Cor. 6. Gal. 5.
            
            
               Of Witchcraft.
               BVt there is yet another ſin behind, which is very ſacrilegious, and altogether derogatorie to the glory of God, and diſhonourable to all Chriſtian men, which is Witchcraft, or all thoſe curious arts and deuiſes, that are wrought by the Diuell, whether it bee ſuperſtitious diuination, or iugling, or

Incantation, in the doing whereof, euery witch is at a league with the diuell, open or ſecret, and doth wittingly and willingly vſe his helpe. This Saint Paul (Gal. 5.) numbers vp among the deeds of the fleſh, and threatneth them, that vſe it, with the loſſe of heauen. Almightie God (in Deut. 18. 10.) forbids all kinds of witches and witcheries, as abominations vnto him, and for the which he driue out the Nations out of Canaan, and in Leuit. 20. he bids, that a man or woman, that hath a familiar ſpirit, or that is a wizzard, bee put to death. And he is ſo bent againſt this helliſh ſinne, that he ſaith expreſſely (in Leuit. 20. 6.) that the ſoule, that turneth after ſuch, as haue familiar ſpirits, and after wizards, to goe a whoring after. I will euen ſet my face againſt that ſoule, and will cut him off from amongſt my people. But behold ſome of the iudgements of God vpon Magicians and Witches. Platina with others teſtifie that Pope Ione obtained the papacy by Magique: but after ſhe had been papeſſe ſome two yeeres, and a little more, ſhe (being thought an he) fell in trauell of a child in the open ſtreetes, as ſhee was going to the Church of Lateran, in which ſhee died? Bladud, the ſonne of Lud King of Brittaine, was giuen much to theſe blacke arts, and wrought wonders by them: at laſt he made himſelfe wings, and aſſaied to flie, but the diuell forſooke him in his iourney, ſo that falling downe he broke his necke. Plutarch ſpeakes of a notable witch, called Cleomedes, who being purſued by diuers that had had their children kild by him, hid himſelfe in a coffer, which when they came to ſearch vpon notice giuen them, they found not the murdering witch in it: for the diuell had carried him quicke away with him. A witch cald Cold in Lorraine would ſuffer piſtols to bee ſhot at him, and catch the bullets, as they were a comming: but at length one of his ſeruants being angry with him, ſo ſhot him with a piſtoll,

that he kild him? Benedict the 9, a Pope, and a Magitian, was (as ſome write) ſtrangled to death by the diuell in a Foreſt, whither he had retired to follow his coniuring exerciſes. Cornelius Aggrippa, a notable Magitian died but baſely. Simon Magus likewiſe periſhed in his ſlight, the diuell forſaking him at the word of S. Peter. Simon Pembroke, a figure-caſter of Saint Georges pariſh neere London, was preſented for a Coniurer, and being in Saint Sauiours Church, where he was warned to appeare, he was ſuddēly ſtrucken by the hand of God, and there died, and there being ſearcht, there were found about him diuers coniuring bookes, with a picture of a man of tinne, and much other traſh. And it is reported, that the inuenter of Magicke, Zeoraſtres, a King of Bactria, was burned to death by the diuel. And I pray you what got Saul by his witch-ſeeking? Was not his deſtructiō told him, which accordingly came to paſſe? And Buchanan telles vs, how Naxlicus, a Scotiſh King, was ſlaine euen by the man, whom hee had ſent vnto a witch, to inquire of the ſucceſſe of his affaires, and of the length of his life, the witch hauing afore told the fellow, that hee was the man that ſhould ſlay him▪ By all which we plainely ſee, that God is offended with theſe diuelliſh arts, and all that vſe them. How is it then to be lamented, that in this cleare light of the Goſpell, there ſhould be found amongſt vs (to the diſhonour of God, and of his Religion, and the infamie of our Nation) men that haue yeelded themſelues diſciples, Students and practicioners in theſe holliſh arts, which Saint Iohn calleth, the deepe things of Satan, Reuel. 1. 24. and haue fearefully proſtituted themſelues to become baſe inſtruments and vaſſals to act and accompliſh the heſts and commands of wicked ones, vpon whom, though the iuſtice of the State hath taken hold, as one W
                        •
                     ſton and Franklin, and hath made them publique ſpectacles of wrath to the terror

of others, yet conſidering the open ſignes of their true penitencie, we are to hope charitably of them, and to ſay of them, as S. Paul doth in another caſe, 1. Cor. 5. 5. that they were deliuered ouer vnto death, to the deſtruction of the fleſh, that their ſpirit might bee ſaued in the day of the Lord Ieſus. And I deſire all men by the mercies of God, to abhorre and forſake all ſuch vngodlineſſe, and to deucte themſelues vnto God alone, their Maker and Redeemer, ſtudying to ſerue him in righteouſneſſe and holines all the daies of their life. For obedience is better then ſacrifice, and to hearken then a the fat of Rammes. And the truth is, that all the plagues and iudgements, that euer came vpon the children of Iſrael, light vpon them for their rebellion againſt God, and their diſobedience to his word. And queſtionleſſe it is come to paſſe by the iuſt iudgement of God that theſe offenders, we haue ſpoken of, and haue lately ſeene cut of, were giuen ouer of God, and left vnto themſelues, becauſe they liſtened not vnto him, but were diſobedient vnto his word. O this diſobedience, it is as the ſinne of Witchcraft, and Idolatrie, it is in truth the mother and nurſe of all iniquitie. God hath two ſorts of iudgements; iudgements for men to keepe, and iudgements for men to beare: and God hath two ſorts of Miniſters; Miniſters of his Word, and Miniſters of his Sword: now it is iuſt with God that they, which will not keepe his iudgements; ſhould vndergo his iudgements, and that they that wil not be reformed by his word, ſhould be puniſhed and cut off with the ſword, and that ſuch as regard not the power and doctrine of Miniſters, ſhould feele to their ſmart, the authoritie and force of Magiſtrates.
               
                  THe great God of heauen and earth, euen the Father of our Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, be mercifull vnto vs, and forgiue vs our ſinnes, all our abominable and
                  
                  crying offences, keepe backe and remoue his iudgements from vs, continue his bleſſings amongſt vs, preſerue and proſper our noble King and all his kingdomes, detect and bring vnder all his enemies, and grant vs truth and peace and loue, through Ieſus Chriſt our Lord, Amen.
               
               Trin-vni Deo Gloria.
            
         
         
            THE PICTVR OF A PICTVR, OR, THE CHARACTER of a Painted woman.
            
               SHe is a creature, that had need to be twice defined; for ſhe is not that ſhe ſeemes. And though ſhee bee the creature of God, as ſhe is a woman, yet is ſhe her owne creatriſſe, as a picture. Indeed a plaine woman is but halfe a painted woman, who is both a ſubſtantiue and an adiectiue, and yet not of the neuter gender: but a feminine as well conſorting with a maſculiue, as Iuie with an Aſh. She loues grace ſo well, that ſhe will rather die, then lacke it. There is no truth with her to fauour, no bleſſing to beautie, no conſcience to contentment. A good face is her god: and her cheeke well died, is the idoll, ſhe doth ſo much adore. Too much loue of beautie, hath wrought her to loue painting: and her loue of painting hath transformed her into a picture. Now her

thoughts, affections, talke, ſtudie, worke, labour, and her very dreames are on it. Yet all this makes her but a cynamon tree, whoſe barke is better then her bodie; or a peece of guilded copper offered for current gold. She loues a true looking-glaſſe, but to commend age, wants and wrinkles, becauſe otherwiſe ſhe cannot ſee to lay her falſhood right. Her body is (I weene) of Gods making: and yet it is a queſtion; for many parts thereof ſhe made her ſelfe. View her well, and you'ill ſay her beautie's ſuch, as if ſhee had bought it with her pennie. And to pleaſe her in euery of her toies, would make her maide runne beſides her wits, if ſhe had any. Shee's euer amending, as a begger's a peecing, yet is ſhe for all that no good penitent. For ſhe loues not weeping. Teares and mourning would marre her making: and ſhe ſpends more time in powdring, pranking and painting, then in praying. Shee's more in her oyntments a great deale, then in her orizons. Her religion is not to liue wel, but die well. Her pietie is not to pray well, but to paint well. She loues confections better a great deale, then confeſſions, and delights in facing and feaſting more, then faſting. Religion is not in ſo great requeſt with her, as riches: nor wealth ſo much as worſhip. She neuer chides ſo heartilie, as when her box is to ſeeke, her powder's ſpilt, or her clothes ill ſet on. A good Bed-friend ſhee's commonly, delighting in ſheetes more, then in ſhooes, making long nights, and ſhort daies. All her infections are but to gaine affections; for ſhe had rather die, then liue & not pleaſe. Her lips ſhe laies with ſo freſh a red, as if ſhe ſang, Iohn come kiſſe me now. Yet it's not out of loue, excepting ſelf-loue, that ſhe ſo ſeekes to pleaſe, but for loue, nor from honeſty, but for honor: tis not piety, but praiſe that ſpurres her. She ſtudies to pleaſe others, but becauſe ſhe wold not be diſpleaſ'd her ſelf. And ſo ſhe may fulfil her own fancy, ſhe cares not who els ſhe doth befoole. A name ſhe preferres to nature, and makes more

account of fame, then faith. And though ſhee do affect ſingularity, yet ſhe loues plurality of faces. She is nothing like her ſelf, ſaue in this, that ſhe is not like her ſelf. She ſildō goes without a paire of faces, and ſhes furniſht with ſtuffe to make more if need be. She ſaies a good archer muſt haue 2. ſtrings to his bow, but ſhe hath hers bent both at once: yet you muſt not ſay, ſhe weares 2. faces vnder one hood; for that ſhe's left long ſince to t'hawks, & hath got her headgeare that pleaſes her better; not becauſe better, but nower. Her own ſweet face is the booke ſhe moſt lookes vpon; this ſhe reads ouer duly euery morning, ſpecially if ſhe be to ſhew her ſelf abroad that day: & as her eie or chābermaid teaches her, ſomtimes ſhe blots out pale, & writes red. The face ſhe makes i'th day, ſhe vſually marrs ith' night, & ſo its to make a new the nexr day. Her haire's ſildom her own, or if the ſubſtance, then not the ſhew, & her face likes her not, if not borrowed. And as for her head, thats dreſt, and hung about with toies & deuiſes, like the ſigne of a tauern, to draw on ſuch as ſee her. And ſomtimes is writtē on her forhead, as on the Dolfin at Cambridge in capital letters, è pithi, è àpithi, like or look of. Shes marriageable & 15. at a 
                  Drinke, or be gone, as the Perſians vſed to ſay at their drinkings, clap, and afterwards ſhe doth not liue, but long. And if ſhe ſuruiue her husband, his going is the cōming of her teares, and the going of her teares is the comming of another husband. 'Tis but in dock, out nettle. By that time her face is mēded, her ſorows ended. Thers no phyſick, ſhe ſo loues, as face phyſick: and but aſſure her ſhe'ſt ne're need other, whiles ſhe liues, and ſhee'l die for ioy. Rather then ſhe'il leaue her yellowbands, and giue ore her pride, ſhe wil not ſtick to deny that Miſtr. Turn. ſpake againſt them, whē ſhe died. Her deuotion is fine apparel deere bought, & a fine face lately borrowed, & newly ſet on. Theſe carry her to Church, and cleere her of Recuſancy. Once in ſhe vnpins her mask, and calls for her book, & now ſhe's ſet. And if ſhe haue any more deuotion, ſhee lifts vp a certain number of eies towards the Preacher,

riſes vp, ſtands a while, and lookes about her: then turning her eyes from beholding vanities (ſuch as ſhe her ſelfe brings with her) ſhe ſits downe, falles a nodding, meaſures out a nap by the hower-glaſſe, and awakes to ſay, Amen. She delights to ſee, and to be ſeene: for hee labours, more then halfe loſt, if no body ſhould looke vpon her. She takes a iourney now and then to viſit a friend, or ſea coſin: but ſhe neuer trauels more merrily, then when ſhees going to London, London, London hath her heart. The Exchange is the Temple of her Idols. In London ſhe buyes her head, her face, her faſhion. O London, thou art her Paradiſe, her Heauen, her All in all! If ſhe be vnmarried, ſhee deſires to bee miſtaken, that ſhe may be taken. If married to an Old man, ſhe is rather a Reede and a Racke vnto him, then a Staffe and a Chaire, a trouble rather then a friend, a corroſiue, not a comfort, a conſumption, not a counſellour. The vtmoſt reach of her Prouidence is but to be counted Louely, and her greateſt Enuy is at a fairer face in her next neighbour; this, if any thing, makes her haue ſore eyes. She is little within her ſelfe, and hath ſmall content of her owne; and therefore is ſtill ſeeking rather, then enioying. All is her owne, you ſee, and yet in truth nothing is her owne almoſt you ſee; not her head, her haire, her face, her breaſts, her ſent, nay, not her breath alwaies. She hath purchaſed lips, haire, hands and beautie more, then nature gaue her, and with theſe ſhe hopes to purchaſe loue. For in being beloued conſiſts her life; ſhe is a Fiſh, that would faine be taken; a Bird, that had rather a great deale be in the hand, then a buſh. Theſe purchaſes, ſhe vſes to make, are not of lands, but lookes; not of liues, but loues. Yet vſually the loue, ſhee meets with, is as changeable as her face, and will not tarry on her, though ſhe die for't She ſpends more in face-phiſicke and trifles, then in feeding the poore. And ſo ſhe may be admired her ſelfe,

ſhe cares not though all her neighbours round about her were counted Kitchinſtuffe A good huſwife takes not more pleaſure in dreſſing her garden with variety of hearbes and flowers, then in tricking her ſelfe with toyes and gauds. Here ſhe is coſtly, if any where. Tis her grace to be gay and gallant. And indeed like an Oſtrich, or bird of Paradiſe; her feathers are more worth then her body. The worſt peece about her is in the middeſt. For the Tailor, and her Chamber-maide, and her owne skill, euen theſe three, are the chiefeſt cauſes of all her perfections. Not truths, but ſhadowes of truths ſhee is furniſht with; with ſeeming truths, and with ſubſtantiall lies. Yet with all her faire ſhewes ſhe is but like a peece. of courſe cloth with a fine glaſſe, or fairo die; or as the herbe Molio, which carries a flowes, as white as ſnow, but is carried vpon a roote as blacke, as inke. Here firſt care in the morning is to make her a good face, and her laſt care in the euening is to haue her box, and all her implements ready againſt the next morning. She is ſo curious, and full of buſineſſe, that two ſuch in a houſe would keepe the nimbleſt-fingered girle in the Pariſh, ſhee liues in, from making her ſelfe one croſſe-cloth in a tweluemoneth. She is ſo deepe in loue with toyes, that without them ſhe is but halfe her ſelfe: and halfe ones ſelfe, you know, is not ones ſelfe. She looſes her ſelfe in her ſelfe, that ſhe may find her ſelfe in a Picture. Her trade is tinckturing, and her luſtre is her life. You kill her, if you will not let her die. The Hyacinth, or Heliotropium, followes not the Sunne more duly, then ſhe Vanitie.. Pride, which is accidentall to a woman, and hatefull to a vertuous woman, is eſſentiall to her. Her godlineſſe is not to doe wel, but to goe well. Her care is not to liue well, but to looke well. And yet if ſhe liue well, ſheell giue you leaue to chide her, if ſhe looke ill. She ſo affects the titles of illuſtrious and gracious, that ſhee carries them alwaies in print about

her. Her imagination is euer ſtirring, and keepes her mind in continuall motion, as fire doth the pot a playing, or as the weights doe the iacke in her kitchin. Her deuiſes follow her fanſie, as the motion of the Seaes doe the Moone. And nothing pleaſes her long, but that, which pleaſes her fanſies, with one of which ſhee driues out another, as boies doe pellets in Elderne gunnes. She thinkes 'tis falſe to ſay, that any woman liuing can be damned for theſe deuiſes: and it may be true ſhe thinkes. For ſo long as ſhe liues, ſhe cannot: but if ſhe die in them, there's the queſtion. Shee's euer buſie, yet neuer leſſe buſie, then when ſhe's beſt buſie. Shee's alwaies idle, yet neuer leſſe idle, then when ſhe is moſt idle. Once a yeere at leaſt ſhe would faine ſee London, tho when ſhe comes there, ſhe hath nothing to doe, but to learne a new faſhion, and to buy her a perwigge, powder, ointments, a feather, or to ſee a play. One of her beſt vertues is, that ſhe reſpects none, that paint: and the reward of her painting, is to be reſpected of none, that paint not. If ſhe be a Maiden, ſhee would faine be rid of that charge? If a Widdow, ſhee's but a counterfet relique; 'twere too groſſe ſuperſtition but to kiſſe or touch her. Old-age ſtill ſteales vpon her vnawares: which ſhe diſcernes not by increaſe of wiſedome, but of weakeneſſe, nor by her long-liuing, but by her need of dying. To conclude, whoſoeuer ſhe be, ſhee's but a Guilded Pill, compoſde of theſe two ingredients, defects of nature, and an artificiall ſeeming of ſupplie, tempered and made vp by pride and vanitie, and may wel be reckned among theſe creatures, that God neuer made. Her picture is now drawne out, and done.
            T. T.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   